No. 23 of 2016 

 

 

 

1 

 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD)  

(UNRE VISE D)  

 

FIRST  SESSION  

 

TUESDAY 09 AUGUST 2016  

 

 

 

 

 

 

2 

 

CONTE NTS  

 

QUESTIONS (Oral) 

MOTION 

BILL (Public) 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER 

ADJOURNMENT 

QUESTIONS (Written) 

 

 

 

3 

THE CABINET 

 

(Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

 

Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  

KCMG, QC  

Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 

Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 

Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External 

GCSK  

Communications 

Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon.  Ivan  Leslie  Collendavelloo,  GCSK, 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 

SC 

Utilities 

Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 

Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 

 

International Trade 

 

Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha, GCSK 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan, SC 

Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 

Education and Scientific Research 

Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Minister 

of 

Social 

Integration 

and  Economic 

Hon.  Marie  Joseph  Noël  Etienne  Ghislain 

Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation  

Empowerment 

Sinatambou 

Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 

Attorney General 

Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  

Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 

Hon. Santaram Baboo    

Minister of Arts and Culture 

Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  

Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 

Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 

Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 

Perraud 

Family Welfare 

Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain, GCSK 

Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 

Institutional Reforms  

 

4 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 

Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 

Institutions 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources,  Fisheries, 

Shipping and Outer Islands 

 
Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 

 
Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms, 

Cheong, MSK 

Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 

Disaster and Beach Management 

Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 

Minister  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and 

Training 

 

 

 

 

 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

 

Madam Speaker 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Deputy Speaker 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Clerk Assistant 

Gopall, Mr Navin  

Hansard Editor 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 23 of 2016 

 

Sitting of 09 August 2016 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 

 

7 

ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

RODRIGUES - FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE - OUTBREAK 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Minister of 

Agro-Industry and Food Security whether, in regard to the current outbreak of the Foot and 

Mouth disease, he will state –  

(a) 

the date of the first detected case of the disease in Rodrigues, indicating the 

number of cases thereof detected as at to date thereat and in mainland 

Mauritius respectively;  

(b) 

the containment measures taken as at to date;  

(c) 

if the causes thereof have been identified;  

(d) 

the expected impact thereof on our –  

(i) 

imports from Rodrigues, and  

(ii) 

exports to the European Union and elsewhere, and  

(e) 

if compensation to the cattle breeders and a “Plan de Relance” for cattle 

breeding will be forthcoming. 

Mr Seeruttun:   Madam  Speaker, let  me at  the very outset  thank the hon.  Leader of 

the Opposition for raising this issue, which is of national importance. 

Madam Speaker, Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD) is a severe, highly contagious viral 

disease of livestock with signiﬁcant economic impact. The disease affects cattle and swine as 

well as sheep, goats, and other cloven-hoofed ruminants. All species of deer are susceptible to 

FMD. 

In  a  susceptible  population,  morbidity  approaches  100%.  Intensively  reared  animals 

are more susceptible to the disease than traditional breeds. The disease is rarely fatal in adult 

animals  but  there is  often high mortality in  young animals  due to  myocarditis  or by lack of 

milk when the dam is infected by the disease. 

FMD  is  characterised  by  fever  and  blister-like  sores  on  the  tongue  and  lips,  in  the 

mouth, on the teats and between the hooves. The disease causes severe production losses and 

while the majority of affected animals recover, the disease often leaves them weakened and 

debilitated. 

 

8 

The organism which causes FMD is an aphthovirus. There are seven strains, each one 

requiring a speciﬁc vaccine strain to provide immunity to a vaccinated animal. 

The FMD virus may spread through any or all of the following - 

 

 

 

 

 

 

new animals carrying the virus may introduce the disease to a herd; 

contaminated pens, buildings or vehicles used to house and move  susceptible 

animals; 

contaminated materials such as hay, feed, water, milk or biologics; 

people  wearing  contaminated  clothes  or  footwear,  or  using  contaminated 

equipment;   

meat or other products, raw or improperly cooked food infected with the virus 

and fed to susceptible animals, and 

aerosol spread of virus from an infected property via air currents. 

Contingency planning for potential outbreaks includes the following - 

 

 

 

 

 

humane  destruction  of  all  infected,  recovered  and  FMD-susceptible  contact 

animals; 

appropriate disposal of carcasses and all animal products; 

surveillance and tracing of potentially infected or exposed livestock; 

strict quarantine and controls on movement of livestock, equipment, vehicles, 

and 

thorough  disinfection  of  premises  and  all  infected  materials  (including  cars 

and clothes) 

Measures that are recommended at the farm level include - 

  control over access to livestock by people and equipment; 

  control the introduction of new animals to existing stock; 

  maintain sanitation of livestock pens, buildings, vehicles and equipment; 

  monitor and report illnesses, and 

  appropriate disposal of manure and dead carcasses.   

Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  the  Division  of  Veterinary 

Services  of  my  Ministry  was  first  informed  of  the  suspected  cases  of  the  disease  by  the 

Veterinary Officers of Rodrigues on 19 July 2016. According to that report, a first suspected 

 

9 

case was detected on 07 July which was treated as an isolated case, followed by 18 cases on 

17 July, rising to 32 cases on 19 July. As at date, 500 cases have been reported in Rodrigues. 

With  regard  to  Mauritius,  6  cases  of  FMD  have  been  detected  in  the  consignment 

imported from Rodrigues on 01 August and kept at the Richelieu Quarantine Station. 6 other 

cases have been detected on one farm at Vallée des Prêtres from a consignment imported on 

15 July 2016. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (b) of the question, my Ministry has initiated the 

following containment measures to control the spread of the diseases in Mauritius - 

(i) 

a complete ban is being imposed on the importation of live animals and meat 

from Rodrigues; 

(ii) 

all  animals  imported  from  Rodrigues  in  the  last  consignment  of  01  August 

have been culled at Richelieu Quarantine Station; 

(iii) 

82 animals on a private farm at Vallée des Prêtres, including animals imported 

from Rodrigues on 15 July have been culled; 

(iv) 

strict control is being exercised at the airport for the seizure of any raw meat 

carried by passengers coming from Rodrigues; 

(v) 

a vaccination of all animals found in a radius of 3 kms of the localities where 

imported animals  from  Rodrigues  are being kept  will be effected  and 10,000 

doses of vaccines are being imported from Botswana Vaccine Institute for that 

purpose. These doses of vaccines will also be utilised in Rodrigues; 

(vi) 

a recommendation has been made to the Rodrigues Regional Assembly not to 

cull all animals and to resort to the vaccination of uninfected animals; 

(vii) 

the  different  farms  on  which  suspected  animals  are  kept  are  being  closely 

monitored to prevent the movement of animals to other places on the island; 

(viii)  breeders  have  been  advised  to  report  all  suspected  cases  to  the  DVS  for 

appropriate follow-up action. 

Madam Speaker, as regards part (c) of the question, the exact cause of transmission of 

the disease in Rodrigues is not known at this stage. It is suspected that the disease might have 

occurred through the introduction of infected meat  on the island by passengers traveling on 

 

10 

yachts. The results of the molecular diagnosis for phylogenetic analysis expected from France 

and South Africa will enlighten us on the source of the infectious agent of the disease. 

Madam  Speaker,  FMD  is  the  first  disease  for  which  the  Office  Internationale 

d’Epizooties (OIE) has established an official list of free countries and zones. Mauritius will 

take all the measures to be declared a FMD free country by the OIE. As such, import of live 

animals and meat from Rodrigues will have to be prohibited to prevent this source of virus to 

continue entering the country. 

As regards part (d)(i), a total of 7,470 animals was imported from Rodrigues in 2015 

and  3,460  for  the  period  January  to  July  in  2016.  With  the  proposed  ban  on  importation, 

farmers in Rodrigues will definitely suffer economic losses. 

As  regards  part  (d)(ii),  Mauritius  does  not  export  live  animals  or  meat  for 

consumption  to  Europe  but  does  re-export  around  100  horses  annually  to  the  European 

Market after going a quarantine period of three months in Mauritius. There is a risk that such 

exports may be banned, but the economic loss may not be very significant. 

Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  part  (e)  of  the  question,  a  compensation  will,  in 

principle,  be  paid  to  importers/breeders  whose  animals  have  been  culled.  This  is  a  current 

practice recommended by the OIE in the event that the Foot and Mouth disease has occurred 

in  a  country.  The  modalities  for  the  payment  are  being  worked  out  and  the  approval  of 

Government obtained before payment could be effected. 

As regards the “Plan de Relance”, a number of measures have been announced in the 

2016/2017  Budget  to  boost up the livestock sector. Furthermore, if a successful vaccination 

campaign is carried out both in Mauritius and Rodrigues, lesser animals will be culled and the 

present vaccinated animals will be preserved. 

Mr  Bérenger:      Madam  Speaker,  in  his  statement  yesterday,  which  I  read  carefully 

and the hon. Minister repeated that today, can I quote – 

 “On  19  July  2016,  the  Division  of  the  Veterinary  Services  of  my  Ministry  was 

notified by the Veterinary Officer of Rodrigues of an increasing number of sick cattle 

in the regions of (…)” 

And today, we are being provided with the additional information that the first detected case 

was on 07 July.  It is only 12 days later that the alarm was raised by the Veterinary Officer of 

Rodrigues and I understand that here also, in Mauritius, when the first case was detected, it 

 

11 

was treated as an isolated case.  So, can I ask the hon. Minister, is he satisfied that we have 

not  wasted time,  especially in  Rodrigues between, as  I  said,  07 July and 19 July 2016, still 

later  on  that  measures  were  taken?    Is  the  hon.  Minister  satisfied  that  no  time  was  unduly 

wasted both in Rodrigues and in Mauritius? 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, as I mentioned in my reply, it is only on 19 July that 

the Veterinary Officers of my Ministry were informed of the cases of sick cattle in Rodrigues 

and straightaway blood samples were taken and tests were carried out on 21, 22 and 23 July 

to see the source of the problem. I must say from the results obtained to the tests carried out 

on  the  three  days,  the  tests  were  negative  for  the  Foot  and  Mouth  Disease.  Following  the 

spread of the diseases in other regions of Rodrigues, two Veterinary Officers from Mauritius 

were sent to Rodrigues and other prélèvements were taken to carry out further tests. The tests 

that were carried on 29 July showed that the disease was really the one that we suspected and 

then we sent another sample to South Africa to confirm whether the Foot and Mouth Disease 

did exist in Rodrigues. But from clinical – what was being shown on the farm in terms of the 

spread being all over the places and also the fact that not only cattle, but also pigs and sheep 

were  being  affected,  the Veterinary  Officers  confirmed  that  this  disease  was  really  the  Foot 

and  Mouth  Disease,  but,    the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  said,  the  case  that  was  first 

notified dates to 07 July, but, at that time, no one in Rodrigues suspected that it could have 

been the Foot and Mouth Disease and that’s why they did not inform the Veterinary Officers 

in my Ministry. 

Mr Bérenger: The question was more direct. The Minister has just repeated a number 

of facts. My question was whether he and his advisers here, his officers, are satisfied that no 

time was wasted in Rodrigues or in Mauritius. But let us move on to what is really disturbing, 

more disturbing still, is in his reply what followed later on and how those infected cattle came 

to Mauritius. In his Statement yesterday, I see that the hon. Minister – and I think this is very 

serious – I quote at page 2 – 

 “In  the  meantime,  on  29  July  2016,  the  DVS  –  the  Veterinary  Services  here,  the 

officer  concerned  -  informed  the  Commission  of  Agriculture  in  Rodrigues  that,  in 

view of the continuous increase in the number of infected cattle, a restriction should 

be  imposed  on  the  exportation  of  cattle  to  Mauritius  and  the  embarkation  of  the 

consignment of cattle aboard the vessel MV ANNA expected to depart for Mauritius 

on  30  July  2016  should  not  be  authorised.  The  Commission  replied  that  the  request 

 

12 

for  the  ban  on  the  export  of  the  animals  would  be  considered  by  the  authorities  in 

Rodrigues.” 

Next paragraph – 

“On 01 August 2016, despite the request made by the DVS – Veterinary Officers here 

- not to ship any consignment of animals in Mauritius, the MV ANNA berthed in Port 

Louis  with  13 containers of animals  comprising  91 heads of cattle, 69 sheep and 75 

goats.” 

Can I ask the hon. Minister – this is very, very serious – has an enquiry been carried out to 

find out how this could happen, threatening mainland Mauritius after the trouble had got that 

far in Rodrigues? 

Mr Seeruttun: Again, Madam Speaker, as I said, at the moment that we were aware 

of  that  problem,  we  have  acted  promptly  and  we  have  made  a  request  to  the  Rodriguan 

authorities not to embark any cattle from Rodrigues to be sent over to Mauritius. Despite that, 

there  was  a  consignment  that  arrived  in  Mauritius  on  01 August;  in  fact,  that  was  already 

here. So, we took the decision to straightaway quarantine the animals. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  Will  the  Minister  please  answer  the  question  which  has  been 

asked! 

Mr  Seeruttun:  We  have  been  asking  the  authorities  in  Rodrigues:  ‘why  did  they 

allow the consignment to go ahead?’ But, so far, we have not had any reply from them as to 

who took the decision to allow the embarkation of those cattle to Mauritius? 

Mr Bérenger: Can I know the names of the officers here, whether it is the Minister 

himself – because this is the most serious matter – or his officers, which officer that directed 

Rodrigues to apply that ban and who replied on behalf of the Rodrigues Commission that it 

will be considered? 

Mr  Seeruttun:  The  Chief  Veterinary  of  my  Ministry  is  the  one  who  sent  that 

instruction to the Commissioner, Mr Félicité in Rodrigues. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger: Who signed that correspondence from their side, the Rodrigues’ side? 

Mr Seeruttun: That same Mr Félicité. 

 

13 

Mr  Bérenger:  Because  this  is  a  very  serious  matter!  Can  the  exchange  of 

correspondence from your officer to Rodrigues and from Rodrigues be tabled? 

Mr Seeruttun: I will do that, Madam Speaker. 

Mr  Bérenger:  But,  nevertheless,  à  la  décharge  de  Rodrigues  Commission,  if  I  can 

say  so,  are  you  satisfied,  hon.  Minister,  that  the  staffing  in  Rodrigues  was  and  is  adequate, 

because I understand that there is only one Veterinary Officer? Has there been a request in the 

recent past from the Rodrigues’ side for an increase in staff? 

Mr  Seeruttun:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  not  aware  whether  there  has  been  a  request 

from Rodrigues’ side in the past, but I know that there are two qualified Veterinary Officers in 

Rodrigues,  a  couple,  Mr  and  Mrs  Samoisi.  As  soon  as  I  have  been  made  aware  of  that 

problem,  I  have  asked  that  we  sent  our  team  from  here  to  support  and  give  them  a  helping 

hand to, at least, address the problem as promptly as possible. 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, I don’t want to pass judgment before we have all the 

facts, but I am sure the Rt. hon. Prime Minister himself must be aware - the Minister is - how 

serious  what  has  happened  is.  So,  will  consideration  be  given  to  enquiring  fully  into  that? 

With due respect to the Rodrigues Assembly, to autonomy and so on, but this has been a very 

serious breach of security as far as cattle is concerned. Therefore, a full-fledged, either Fact-

Finding Committee by somebody or people credible or even a Select Committee of the House 

to look into this whole matter and establish, as I said earlier on, whether we have wasted time 

dangerously  in  Rodrigues  and  in  Mauritius,  whether  what  happened  in  the  case  of  that  ban 

that was simply ignored and whether there have been requests for extra staffing in Rodrigues 

recently. 

Mr  Seeruttun:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  as  much  concerned  as  the  Leader  of  the 

Opposition with regard to this problem and we will do everything to look into the matter what 

happened  and  who  were  those  responsible  for  that  particular  consignment  that  was  sent  to 

Mauritius. 

Mr  Bérenger:  If  I  can  move  on,  Madam  Speaker,  to  the  containment  measures, 

especially  abattage,  killing  of  these  animals.  Can  we  know  in  Rodrigues,  what  is  the  total 

number of cattle that can be expected at this stage, unfortunately, to be culled? 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam  Speaker, as it is today, the whole island is infected with this 

problem  of  Foot  and  Mouth  Disease.  If  we  want  to  go  through  the  culling  of  the  animals, 

we’ll have to  cull all the animals,  but  the  culling  exercise is  done when  you  can contain it, 

 

14 

when it is localised, when it is in a specific area. But the fact that it is now island-wide, so the 

best option, according to the experts, those who are in that field, they are proposing that we 

only go and cull those who are really infected ones and the others be vaccinated so that we 

don’t  have  to  go  for  a  mass  killing  and  the  vaccination  will  have  to  be  carried  out  over  a 

period of time, up to  three  years, and then  we will  be able to  assess whether we have done 

away with that particular disease. 

Mr Bérenger: I am sure the hon. Minister has read - we are still talking about culling, 

abattage - carefully the shocking conditions apparently, according to Press reports, that this 

culling, this  abattage is taking place in  Rodrigues specifically.  Shocking! Has the Minister 

had  time  to  look  into  that  and  has  he  discussed  that  with  the  Rodrigues  Commission 

Authorities? 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, again, I too was very shocked by what I have read in 

the Press with regard to the way they are supposedly carrying out the culling exercise. I have 

talked to my colleague, the PPS from Rodrigues and I am also trying to get in touch with the 

authorities  in  Rodrigues.  We  have  not  had  any  confirmation  yet  as  to  whether  this  is  really 

being carried out in that particular way. 

Mr  Bérenger:  Shocking!  Madam  Speaker,  we  know  that  there  is  a  lot  of  abattage 

illégal  in  Mauritius  I  suppose,  in  Rodrigues  I  hope  not  but,  I  think  there  is.  How  is  that 

interfering  with  our  problem  now  in  Rodrigues  especially,  but  even  in  Mauritius?  This 

abattage illégal that has been going on for quite a while, how does it make our job here and 

in Rodrigues even more difficult? 

Mr Seeruttun: With regard to the abattage illégal, Madam Speaker, for some months 

now we have, at  the level  of the  Mauritius Meat Authority, set  up a squad to  go and  check 

whether this kind of exercise is being done by some people in a very inhumane way. So, we 

have already in place a squad that goes and ensures that this kind of practice be stopped the 

more so now that we have this problem in hand. In all the localities where we have a number 

of  animals  that  have  come  from  Rodrigues  where  there  could  be  the  possibility  of  that 

disease, we have asked for the Police to assist us to make sure that these breeders do not go 

and cull the animals on their own. 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, if I can move on to vaccination. Only this morning I 

read the statement from the Minister saying that we have not yet identified the specific cases 

that we have. Apparently, Madam Speaker, I tried to find out, the virus is genetically highly 

 

15 

variable, that is, you have all sorts of varieties, if I can call that, which limits the effectiveness 

of  vaccination.  This  means  that  foot-and-mouth  disease  vaccines  must  be highly  specific  to 

the strain involved. Vaccination only provides temporary immunity. So, can I know from the 

Minister  how  does  that  tally?  Apparently,  we  have  placed  orders  for  vaccines  and  yet  this 

morning the Minister says we have not yet identified the strain involved. 

Mr  Seeruttun:  In  fact,  Madam  Speaker,  there  are  seven  strains  with  regard  to  that 

particular  virus  and,  according  to  the  information  that  I  have  been  given,  there  is  not  one 

vaccine  that  can  address  all  the  different  strains  that  are  available.  So,  from  the  test  carried 

out in South Africa and the vaccine that we have in Africa, it can address only three types of 

viruses SAT-1, SAT-2 and SAT-3. That is why we have also been sending samples to France 

to make sure that we know specifically which strain is the one which is affecting our cattle 

here  so  that  the  vaccine  that  we  are  going  to  inject  is  going  to  be  effective.  But,  from  the 

advice  that  I  received  from  the  Vet  officers,  we  still  need  those  vaccines,  the  ones  that  we 

have ordered, some 10,000 doses, to, at least, do some preliminary precautionary measures. 

Mr Bérenger: I understand from what I heard, Madam Speaker, that we have not yet 

identified the causes of why this outbreak has taken place and reference has been made to the 

possibility that it is travellers that went through Rodrigues. Have we identified the countries 

in  the  region  where  foot-and-mouth  disease  prevails  at  present  and,  therefore,  to  find  out 

whether there have been visitors from overseas, from those countries? 

Mr  Seeruttun:  Usually,  Madam  Speaker,  our  zone,  the  Indian  Ocean  Zone,  is  free 

from foot-and-mouth disease. The only country which is close and is affected by the disease 

is South Africa and it is in certain regions of South Africa where we have this disease. As I 

mentioned earlier in my reply, the way that this disease could be introduced is either through 

direct contact or airborne or even through meat and meat products that are not well cooked. 

And,  we  have  a  very  strict  system  of  control  here  that  prevents  any  introduction  of  live  or 

meat and meat products from places where we have this type of disease.  

Now we know that in Rodrigues we have direct flights from Reunion Island, we have 

also  yachts  visiting  Rodrigues.  These  are  the  other  ways  and  means  how  this  could  be 

introduced. That is why we are trying to locate and identify the source of the disease and one 

way to determine that is through that strain that we are going to detect of the disease so as to 

know from which part of the world this disease comes from and probably through the visitors 

also. We will have an idea of knowing the source of that disease. 

 

16 

Mr Bérenger:  The last  part of my question relates to  compensation and  a  “Plan de 

Relance”. I congratulate the Rodrigues Regional Assembly because, from what I understand, 

they have already decided to compensate, as much as they can with their limited means, the 

breeders.  Will  the  Minister  take  on  board  that  this  is  not  just  Rodrigues  problem,  it  is  a 

national  problem.  From  what  I  understand,  the  whole  breeding  community  is  going  to  be 

devastated in Rodrigues.  

Apart from what the Rodrigues Regional Assembly has rightly decided to do in terms 

of  compensation,  will  the  Minister  agree  with  me  that  there  must  be  a  special  exceptional 

financial  help  from  Mauritius  as  a  Republic,  from  the  State,  Budget?  Therefore,  has  he 

discussed  with  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  already  what  special  effort,  what  gesture 

Mauritius,  through  the  Budget,  will  make  to  add  to  whatever  compensation  the  Rodrigues 

Regional Assembly decides upon; that Mauritius as a Republic makes a special effort in that 

case? 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, as I said, we are working on the modalities and we 

have to look at the ampleur of the problem. Definitely, I will be going to Cabinet on Friday to 

seek the approval of the Government with regard to the form of compensation that could be 

provided to all those affected by that problem. 

Mr Bérenger:  I think,  Madam  Speaker,  I heard the Minister say that  not  all cattle  - 

goats and so on - is going to be culled in Rodrigues as apparently it was considered or even 

decided at one point in time. Nevertheless, can I ask: has there been an assessment by us in 

Mauritius, by the Rodrigues Regional Assembly  on what impact all this is likely to have on 

this sector, on cattle breeding in Rodrigues, whether it will be completely devastated or not 

that  badly  damaged?  Has  there  been  that  assessment  and  also  in  Mauritius?  I  think  in 

Mauritius  it  will  be  very  much  more  limited  but,  especially  in  Rodrigues,  whether  that 

assessment because whatever “Plan de Relance” we talk about is in the light of the damage 

done. 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, definitely there is going to be a financial impact on 

the  breeders  of  Rodrigues  because,  as  I  said  in  my  reply,  last  year  itself  there  were  some 

7,470 animals that were exported to Mauritius. So, definitely the fact that we are going to put 

a ban on the importation of animals from Rodrigues, that is going to affect their revenue.  

Now, with regard to the cheptel itself, the fact that we are not proposing to go for the 

mass  culling  of  the  animals,  from  the  information  that  we  have,  those  animals  that  are 

 

17 

infected, especially the ones that are old enough do not die from that disease.  It is only the 

young ones that are affected.  Even those that are affected get recovered over time, after the 

incubation  period.    So,  that  is  why  we  are  saying  that  even  if  the  whole  island  is  now 

infected, it is not wise to go for mass culling and vaccination is the best option. That is where 

we feel also that it is going to limit the number of cases where we will have to go for culling.  

So,  therefore,  the  number  of  animals  that  we  have  to  put  down  will  be  less  than  what  we 

thought at the beginning. 

Mr Leopold: Unfortunately, Madam Speaker, viruses are one of the most dangerous 

micro-organisms which exist on earth.  As the hon. Leader of the Opposition has earlier said, 

viruses  mutate  as  well  and  that  makes  treatment  difficult.    I  would  like  to  ask  the  hon. 

Minister  what  his  Ministry  is  doing  for  the  ethical  killing  of  the  affected  animals?  In 

Rodrigues, after everything is under control, from that time, when is he going to lift the ban 

of  exportation  on  Rodrigues?    I  would  like  to  say  as  well  that  with  viruses,  it  may  take  21 

days  to  know  from  the  time  the  animals  get  affected  to  the  time  they  show  the  signs  and 

symptoms, that is why it makes it difficult as well to manage. 

Mr Seeruttun: According to work carried out it says that it takes about three years to 

have this infected zone free from that particular disease.  So, we will have to go through that 

vaccination exercise first.  It has to be carried out on a scheduled period and from there on, 

we will carry out analysis to see whether this disease is gone or not and it is then that we can 

only lift the ban. 

Madam Speaker: Last question, hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr  Bérenger:  Well,  Madam  Speaker,  I  would  like  to,  through  the  Minister,  put  it 

across  to  the  Government  and  to  our  Rodrigues  friend  that  cattle  breeding  in  Rodrigues  is 

widely  practised  and  it  has  a  vital  importance  in  the  social  life  of  Rodrigues.    Can 

Government  keep  that  in  mind  urgently  because  there  is  a  lot  of  religious,  social  and 

educational  activities  that  will  be  impacted  and  here,  in  Mauritius,  we  know  that  we  have 

imported  live  cattle  for  religious  occasions  like  for  the  forthcoming  Qurbani  festivity?  

Therefore,  can  I  appeal  to  Government  to  take  into  consideration  the  importance  of  cattle 

breeding for Rodriguan society in general and to see to it that it does not impact negatively on 

our religious activities here in Mauritius? 

Mr Seeruttun:  With regard to whether there is going to be a shortage or not of cattle 

for the forthcoming festivities, I don’t think so because from the stock that we have already in 

 

18 

place here, I have got confirmation that we have sufficient to make sure that there won’t be 

any shortage for the forthcoming Eid al-Adha festival. 

With regard to the social problems that could arise in Rodrigues, we are well aware of 

the specificity of Rodrigues and we will do our utmost to provide all the support necessary to 

the  Rodriguans  and  especially  to  the  breeders  in  Rodrigues  for  them  to  be  back  again  in 

business, in their daily activities of breeding and selling their cattle. 

Madam Speaker:  Time is over! The Table has been advised the PQ B/825 will now 

be replied by hon. Minister of Local Government.  Hon. Ganoo! 

REFERENDUM - LEGISLATION 

(No. B/826) Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked  the 

Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 

National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  matters  of  utmost  importance  relating  to 

public  interests  and  to  critical  amendments  pertaining  to  the  sovereignty  or  to  the 

Constitution of the Republic of Mauritius, he will state if consideration will be given for the 

introduction of proposed legislation to allow for the organization of referendums in relation 

thereto with a view to further consolidating the democratic process in Mauritius and to allow 

the increased participation of the population in the decision making process therefor. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  as  the  House  is  aware,  the  concept  of 

referendum  is  already  established in  our Constitution.  As a matter of fact,  section 47(3) of 

the Constitution provides that a Bill seeking to alter the provisions of section 1 or 57(2) of the 

Constitution shall not be passed by the Assembly unless - 

(a) 

the proposed Bill has, before its introduction in the Assembly, been submitted, 

by referendum, to the electorate of Mauritius and has been approved by the 

votes of not less than three quarters of the electorate, and 

(b) 

it is supported at the final voting in the Assembly by the votes of all the 

Members of the Assembly. 

Moreover, the concept of referendum in our law has been recognised by the Judicial 

Committee of the Privy Council as reflected in the case of the State v/s A. R. Khoyratty 2004 

PRV 59. 

 

19 

Madam  Speaker,  we  do  not  dispute  the  merit  of  referenda  as  a  complement  to  the 

system  of  representative  democracy.  Besides,  mention  has  been  made  of  referendum  in  the 

Government Programme 2015-2019. 

 

However,  we  believe  that  referenda  should  be  used  very  selectively  and  resorted  to 

only for major and highly controversial issues of national importance. 

 

Mauritius  being  a  Parliamentary  democracy,  elected  officials  have  the  duty  and 

legitimacy of making decisions for and on behalf of the people.  It  would not, therefore, be 

appropriate  to  impose  undue  limitations  on  the  elected  legislature.    Elected  representatives 

should be able to decide on behalf of the people as it would be impractical to consult citizens 

on a regular basis. Besides, this is what representative democracy is all about.  Some political 

theorists, like Edmund Burke believe that part of the duty of an elected representative is not 

simply to  communicate the views of the electorate, but also to use his own judgment in the 

exercise of the powers, even if his views are not reflective of those of the majority of voters.   

Madam  Speaker,  Mauritius  is  a  representative  democracy  and  this  is  a  model  of 

Government which allows for efficient ruling by elected representatives who are accountable 

to the people for their decisions.  Moreover, we do have in Mauritius all the preconditions for 

representative democracy to function effectively, that is, free and fair elections, protection of 

fundamental  rights  and  freedoms,  including  the  protection  of  freedom  of  expression,  and  a 

free and vibrant Press.  

 

We do, however, agree that there is a lot of merit in adopting a consultative approach 

on public policy making as we believe it is crucial in meeting the varied ideas and aspirations 

of  our  diverse  nation.    This  is  the  reason  why  my  Government  has  pledged  to  adopt  a 

genuinely decentralised and participative approach in decision making and in matters directly 

relating to the Constitution of the country and in all cases where the interest of the public at 

large is at stake. 

 

As a matter of fact, my Government has been undertaking wide consultations with all 

relevant stakeholders on all major policy proposals implemented so far and, as far as possible, 

their views have been taken on board.  

In the circumstances, it is not proposed to introduce, at this stage, legislation for the 

organisation of referenda. 

 

20 

However,  as  mentioned  in  the  Government  Programme  2015-2019,  should  the 

circumstances described therein arise, the need for introducing legislation accordingly would 

be considered. 

Mr  Ganoo:  In  fact,  the  purpose  of  this  question,  Madam  Speaker,  was  precisely  as 

has  been  mentioned  by  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  that  paragraph  257  of  the  Government 

Programme  does  mention  that  nationwide  referendums  will  be  held  on  matters  of  utmost 

importance  and  relating  to  public  interest.    So,  my  question  was,  whether  Government  has 

taken the decision to set out the legal framework for referendums to be held, in line with this 

proposal in the Government Programme? 

The Prime Minister:  As I said in the answer, not at this stage. 

ICTA - LAW PRACTITIONERS – FEES  

(No.  B/827)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 

Central) asked the Rt. hon.  Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for 

Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the law practitioners whose 

services  had  been  retained  by  the  Information  and  Communication  Technologies  Authority 

(ICTA) 

in 

the  Supreme  Court  case  of  Emtel  Limited  v.  The  Information  and 

Telecommunication Technologies Authority, Mauritius Telecom Limited and others, he will, 

for the benefit of the House, obtain from the ICTA, information as to the – 

(a) 

names thereof  

(b) 

fees – 

(i) 

agreed to be paid out thereto  

(ii) 

claimed, and  

(iii) 

paid out thereto as at to date, and  

(c) 

mode of selection thereof. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  Executive  Director  of 

the Information and Communication Technologies Authority that the Supreme Court case of 

Emtel  Limited  v/s  The  Information  and  Communication  Technologies  Authority,  Mauritius 

Telecom  Limited  and  Others  started  back  in  1996  with  a  ‘Mise  en  Demeure’  which  was 

served  on  the  then  Telecommunication  Authority  and  the  other  three  parties,  namely 

 

21 

Mauritius  Telecom  Limited,  Cellplus  and  the  Ministry  of  Technology,  Communication  and 

Innovation.  The case was subsequently lodged in 2000.   

However,  in  February  2016,  the  State  Law  Office  which  had  represented  the 

Authority and the Ministry of Technology, Communication and Innovation in the case for the 

past  16  years,  informed  the  Authority  that  it  would  not  be  appropriate  for  it  to  appear  on 

behalf of both the Authority and the Ministry in their case as the stand taken by each of these 

two parties might not necessarily be the same. 

In the circumstances, on 19 April 2016, with the ICT Board’s approval, the services 

of  two  law  practitioners,  namely,  Mr  Satyawan  Trilochun  and  Mr  Roshan  Rajroop  were 

retained by the Information and Communication Technologies Authority for this case against 

the payment of a legal fee of Rs19,198,436… 

(Interruptions) 

…and Rs461,150 to Mr S. Trilochun and Mr R. Rajroop, respectively. 

Subsequently, both practitioners claimed the agreed sums and payment was approved 

by the Information and Communication Technologies Board.  The fees paid as at date to Mr 

Trilochun  and  Mr  Rajroop,  after  tax  deduction  at  source,  are  Rs18,697,608  and  Rs449,120 

respectively. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Uteem:  I am shocked!  Answering to a written PQ on the 05 April, the Rt. hon. 

Prime  Minister  stated  that  the  same  gentleman,  Mr  Trilochun  had  received  Rs3  m.  from 

ICTA.  He is also legal adviser to RDA.  He is also Chairperson of the FIU appointed by hon. 

Bhadain. So, may I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister … 

(Interruptions) 

…why is it that this person, Mr Trilochun, has suddenly become the blue-eyed boy of this 

Government? 

(Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister:  I must say, Madam Speaker, that when I got the figures, I was 

shocked myself.  But I asked for explanation and I was given to understand that Mr Trilochun 

worked with a team of Barristers and the payment included fees for all of them. 

(Interruptions) 

22 

Mr Uteem:  Madam Speaker, Mr Trilochun was, according to the Roll, called to the 

 

Bar… 

(Interruptions) 

…on 02 October 2002.  He is not even eligible to be appointed as a senior Counsel and he is 

charging so many millions.  So, may I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether before 

the Board of ICTA approved those fees, since there are representatives from his Ministry on 

the  Board,  has  this  matter  been  taken  up  by  officers  of  his  Ministry  to  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 

Minister? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I can’t say.  I am not aware of this, but this figure only 

was disclosed to me when we asked for information when the question was put. 

Madam Speaker:  Yes, hon. Rutnah! 

Mr Rutnah:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister aware that 

in  big  cases,  in  the  past,  there  have  been  also  other  Chambers  and  one  particular  Chamber 

also which has claimed the Government to the tune of millions…. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order! Order, please! 

No interruptions! 

No interruptions, please! 

Hon. Baloomoody!   

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Baloomoody, please allow him to ask his question!  And allow the Rt. hon. Prime 

Minister to reply!  Finish your question! 

Mr  Rutnah:  Is  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  aware  that  in  the  past  one  particular 

Chamber  as  well  was  claiming  fees  to  the  tune  of  million  where  cases  were  litigated  at  the 

Supreme Court of Mauritius? 

(Interruptions) 

 

23 

The Prime Minister:  Well, there could have been, but I am not aware of the cases.  

So, I can’t answer in the positive. 

Madam Speaker, the decisions… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order, please! 

(Interruptions) 

No interruptions, please!  Hon. Members, hon. Baloomoody, please no interruptions!  The Rt. 

hon. Prime is giving his reply. Please, allow him to give his reply! 

Please, Rt. hon. Prime Minister! 

Hon. Rutnah! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The  Prime  Minister:    Madam  Speaker,  the  decision  to  retain  the  services  of  Mr 

Trilochun  and  Mr  Rajroop  was  the  prerogative  of  the  ICTA  Board  and  it  is  not  my  role  to 

interfere  in  their  internal  matters,  and  I  understand  that  Mr  Trilochun  was  already  the  legal 

adviser of ICTA at that time and was conversant with this complex case. 

Mr Bhagwan:  Will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister enquire and he will find it surprising 

himself, normally when you have a Chamber,  you have an office and all sorts of amenities, 

but the Chamber of that legal adviser is at his house?   

Official address! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Will the Rt. Prime Minister enquire? And that information is known by the ICTA Board and 

this Board should be sacked! 

The Prime Minister:  Well, if Chambers are to be found at his residence… 

…he must be having a very big house with plenty of space to have an excellent Chamber.  

(Interruptions) 

 

24 

Mr Baloomoody:  The Rt. hon. Prime Minister said that this gentleman is supposed 

to have a Chamber with several lawyers in his Chambers and he has claimed fees for all his 

lawyers.    May  he  table  the  list,  the  amount  paid  by  him  for  each  and  every  one  in  his 

Chambers which amounted to a total sum of Rs19 m.? 

The Prime Minister:  Well, we will try to get the information.   

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Since we are all very shocked so much 

as the Rt.  hon. Prime Minister, could  he just confirm  to  the House that this  was  an invoice 

that was sent out, but does the ICTA intend to pay for it or will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 

intervene and ensure that we are not further shocked by this being debited from the account 

of the ICTA to pay for this Bill? 

The Prime Minister:  Almost most of the fees have already been paid. 

There is only a little balance that is there! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Well, I get a note, ‘already paid’!. 

Madam Speaker:  Last question on this issue, hon. Jhugroo! 

Hon. Rutnah, please! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Shakeel Mohamed, no interruptions! 

Mr  Jhugroo:  After  having  heard  the  amount  paid  for  legal  services  today  and  also 

what happened in the past, would the Rt. hon. Prime Minister consider, as from now, to put a 

limit on all legal services in each and every Ministry and all parastatal bodies? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I wonder whether this can be done! 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

 

 

 

25 

POLICE OFFICERS –  OVERSEAS MISSIONS - EXPENDITURE 

(No.  B/828)  Dr.  R.  Sorefan  (Fourth  Member  for  La  Caverne  &  Phoenix)  asked 

the Rt. hon Prime Minister, Minister  of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and 

National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  Police  Officers  from  the  grade  of 

Superintendent  of  Police  to  that  of  Commissioner  of  Police,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the 

House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police – 

(a) 

(b) 

a list thereof, indicating in each case the posting thereof, and 

information as to the number of overseas missions undertaken by each one of 

them since January 2015 to date, indicating the – 

(i) 

(ii) 

countries visited and duration thereof; 

purposes thereof, and 

(iii) 

total costs thereof in terms of air tickets, per diem and any other 

allowances. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am tabling the information requested by the 

hon. Member. 

Dr. Sorefan: From the information that I have, some officers go for certain missions 

that are not relevant to their post. Will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister see to it or follow up with 

the  Commissioner  of  Police  that  the  right  person  goes  to  the  specific  mission  that  is 

advantageous to the Police Force and to the Mauritians in general? 

The Prime Minister: This is the prerogative of the Commissioner of Police and I do 

not indulge myself in these matters. 

CAMP CAROL, PEREYBERE & FOND DU SAC – DRAINS – CONSTRUCTION 

(No. B/829) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or) 

asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 

Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the construction of drains in 

the regions of Camp Carol, Pereybère and Fond du Sac, he will, for the benefit of the House, 

obtain from the National Development Unit, information as to if contracts have been awarded 

in respect thereof. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  further  to  the  reply  I  made  to  Parliamentary 

Question B/6 on 29 March 2016 in respect of Camp Carol and Pereybere, I am informed by 

the NDU that in respect of drain works at Camp Carol, Grand Bay, bids for the project were 

invited  on  02  May  2016  and  same  were  received  on  31  May  2016.    Evaluation  of  bids  has 

 

26 

already  been  undertaken  and  moreover,  in  line  with  provisions  of  the  Public  Procurement 

Act, a Letter of Notification was issued on 29 July 2016 to all bidders.  Provided there is no 

challenge, the Letter of Award will be issued to the successful bidder this week. 

In respect  of Pereybere, given that there were various consultations with the Central 

Procurement Board for finalising the bid documents, I am informed that bids were invited on 

07 July 2016. The closing date for receipt of bids has been fixed for 18 August 2016. 

The award of contract will be effected only after evaluation is carried out at the level 

of the Central Procurement Board and appropriate procedures followed.  The earliest that the 

award can be effected is early October 2016, provided there is no challenge. 

As regards Fond du Sac, further to the reply I made to Parliamentary Question B/207 

of 19 April 2016, I am informed that the evaluation exercise has been completed.  Moreover, 

the  Bid  Evaluation  Report  has  already  been  submitted  to  the  Department  Bid  Committee, 

which  has  subsequently  sought  advice  from  the  Procurement  Policy  Office  in  respect  of  a 

particular issue raised by the recommended bidder. 

On  the  basis  of  advice  to  be  tendered,  the  NDU  will  take  necessary  action  for  the 

award of the contract shortly. 

Mr Rughoobur:  Madam  Speaker, let me thank the Rt.  hon. Prime Minister and the 

NDU for the speed at which the contract has been awarded or will be awarded for the three 

regions.  Only  in  the  case  of  Fond  du  Sac,  works  are  not  expected  to  be  started  in  January. 

May I request the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to please advise the Disaster Management and Risk 

Reduction  Committee  to  make  a  follow-up  before  the  heavy  rainy  season,  which  will  be  in 

January,  to  ensure  that  all  precautions  are  taken  in  case  there  is  any  flood,  just  to  prevent 

casualties? 

The Prime Minister: Well, as I have already answered, all the precautions are being 

taken.  I don’t know what else can be done! 

DRUGS (SYNTHETIC) – ARRESTS & DEATHS 

(No.  B/830)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 

Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 

Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to synthetic drugs, 

he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as 

to, over the past two years, the number of – 

27 

 

(a) 

(b) 

arrests effected in connection therewith, and 

deaths registered as a result of consumption thereof, indicating in each case 

the age group thereof. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 

that, since 01 July 2014 to 04 August 2016, 306 persons were arrested in 314 alleged cases of 

synthetic drugs by Police. 

Out of the 314 cases – 

(i) 

in 22 cases, the accused have been fined; 

(ii) 

one case is awaiting court decision, and 

(iii) 

291 cases are still under enquiry. 

In  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  by  the  Commissioner  of  Police 

and the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life that no death has been recorded to have been 

caused  specifically  as  a  result  of  consumption  of  synthetic  drugs,  over  the  past  two  years.  

According to information available, 36 deaths occurred during the past two years as a result 

of drug abuse. 

However, there is no forensic evidence to the effect that the deaths have been caused 

by abuse of synthetic drugs. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Speaker, we are all utterly concerned and horrified by the 

alarming  situation  of  synthetic  drugs  in  Mauritius.  Therefore,  can  I  ask  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 

Minister if he may consider the request of placing the National Drug Observatory under the 

Prime Minister’s Office for more efficiency and control? 

The Prime Minister: The Prime Minister’s Office has already too much to do. 

Mr Mahomed: At its last sitting, Cabinet took note of the dangerous drug situation - 

the  words  used  in  the  Cabinet  decision  -  as  per  the  first  report  of  the  National  Drug 

Observatory, which was set up in November 2015. Now, this is being on the one hand.  On 

the other hand, the hon. Minister of Health and Quality of Life keeps on maintaining that… 

Madam Speaker: Ask your question! 

Mr Mahomed:  Is there any incoherence there?  Because the Minister of Health and 

Quality of Life keeps on saying that the drug situation is not alarming and that he has gone 

throughout his constituency and he has not found any single drug dealer in his constituency. 

 

28 

The Prime Minister: Well, what he has done or seen, I can’t answer for it. 

Dr. Joomaye: Madam Speaker, I would like to ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister if he 

could inquire from the Commissioner of Police if the Forensic Science Laboratory is properly 

equipped to identify new synthetic drugs in samples that they would come across. 

The  Prime  Minister:  That,  I  will  have  to  find  out,  but  I  must  say  that  none  of  the 

doctors who have been examining all these people who die as a result of consumption of drug 

has  been  able  to  come  to  a  conclusion  that  there  was,  in  any  of  these  cases,  death  due  to 

synthetic drug. So, the  Commissioner of Police  can’t say. To the question that was put  just 

now, I have been given a note.  The answer is yes. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Cabinet  has  taken  note  of  the  first  report  of  the  National  Drug 

Observatory recently. Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister if this report can be made public? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I have no objection; we can table it. 

Madam Speaker: It is not a question for the Rt. hon. Prime Minister. It is a question 

for the Minister of Health and Quality of Life.  Last question on this, hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.    One  of  the  main  problems  with  this 

synthetic  drug  is  that  a  lot  of  the  components  are  not  illegal.  Therefore,  it  is  not  within  the 

Schedule  to  the  Dangerous  Drugs  Act.    So,  may  I  know  from  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister 

whether  consideration  will  be  given,  after  working  with  experts  from  the  forensic 

laboratories,  to  amending  the  Schedule  to  the  Dangerous  Drugs  Act,  so  that  these  synthetic 

drugs do not fall through the net? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I understand this has already been done. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ameer Meea! 

(Interruptions) 

PRISONS - CLOSED CIRCUIT TELEVISION CAMERAS  

(No.  B/831)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 

Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 

Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Closed 

Circuit  Television  Cameras  installed  in  each  of  the  Prisons,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the 

House, obtain from the Commissioner of Prisons, information as to the number thereof which 

 

29 

are not operational or which are defective, indicating when remedial measures will be taken 

in relation thereto. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  Commissioner  of 

Prisons that there is a total of 1,158 Closed Circuit Television Cameras installed in the eight 

prisons.  Out of these, 85 are not operational as follows - 

(i) 

Beau Bassin Prison 

(ii) 

New Wing Prison 

 

 

 

 

-  

-  

5 out of 95 

1 out of 45 

(iii) 

Pirate Wing at Beau Bassin Prison 

-  

10 out of 67 

(iv) 

Eastern High Security Prison   

-  

69 out of 544 

Madam Speaker, with regard to the second part of the question, I am further informed 

by  the  Commissioner  of  Prisons  that  repair  works  have  already  started  in  respect  of  the 

defective  CCTV  cameras  at  the  Pirate  Wing  at  the  Beau  Bassin  Prison.    The  works  are 

expected to be completed within one week. 

 

As  regards  the  defective  cameras  at  Beau  Bassin  Prison,  New  Wing  Prison  and 

Eastern High Security Prison, I am informed that funds are being provided in the Budget for 

financial year 2016/2017 for the repair thereof.  Action will be initiated for the repair of the 

CCTV cameras as soon as the 2016-2017 Budget is approved. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Concerning  the  faulty  cameras,  now  we  are  being  informed  that 

they will be repaired soon. Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether these cameras were 

on warranty and, if not, how much will be the cost for the repairs for the cameras? 

The Prime Minister: How can I answer this? I have no idea. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody! 

Mr  Baloomoody:  Is  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  aware  that  in  Beau  Bassin  Prison 

there  are  95  cameras  out  of  which  probably  5  are  not  working?  But  there  is  no  qualified 

person  in  the  Camera  Room  to  watch  what  is  happening  in  these  95  cameras!  There  is  no 

qualified  person  in  this  room.  In  fact,  last  Thursday  a  drone  was  discovered  in  the  yard  of 

Beau Bassin Prison and nobody was aware of it, those who were watching the cameras! It is 

one  Prisons  Officer  who  was  walking  around  who  saw  the  drone  on  the  ground  of  Beau 

Bassin Prison.  

 

30 

The Prime Minister: Well, if there is  no qualified person over there,  I  will have to 

look into this. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

BARRACUDA VESSEL – OPERATION 

(No. B/832) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 

asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 

Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Barracuda  vessel,  he 

will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to 

– 

(a) 

the date of coming into operation thereof, indicating the – 

(i) 

distances covered as at to date, and  

(ii) 

activities in which it has been involved, and  

(b) 

if it is presently under repairs and, if so, indicate – 

 (i) 

since when, and  

(ii) 

the estimated cost of repairs thereof. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  in  regard  to  parts  (a)  (i)  and  (ii)  of  the 

question, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police that Coast Guard Ship Barracuda was 

commissioned  on  12  March  2015  and  came  into  operation  on  the  same  date.    Since  its 

coming  into  operation  up  to  04  August  2016,  the  vessel  has  covered  a  total  distance  of 

18,487.52 nautical  miles, that is, about  34,238.8 kilometres, in  39 sea sorties.  During these 

sorties, the vessel was involved in the following activities - 

(i) 

patrolling our coastal region and Exclusive Economic Zone; 

(ii) 

Search and Rescue Operations; 

(iii) 

supporting Outer Islands; 

(iv) 

joint operations with the Police Helicopter Squadron; 

(v) 

joint exercises with friendly foreign navies, and 

(vi) 

participation in the International Fleet Review held at Vishakhapatnam, India 

in February 2016. 

 

31 

Madam Speaker, as for part (b) of the question, I am informed by the Commissioner 

of Police that Coast Guard Ship Barracuda is fully operational, and not under repair. 

 

However,  I  am  informed  that  on  09  July  2016,  whilst  Coast  Guard  Ship  Barrucada 

was  on  surveillance  mission  in  the  vicinity  of  Rodrigues,  its  deck  plate  bulged  due  to 

excessive water pressure in one of the ballast tanks and water had to be pumped in the ship in 

order to maintain its balance.  After a minor repair in Rodrigues, the vessel returned to Port 

Louis Harbour on 11 July 2016. 

On  12  July  2016,  a  specialist  team  from  Garden  Reach  Shipbuilders  and  Engineers 

Limited, the builder of the ship, came to Mauritius for an inspection. The ship had to be dry-

docked for this purpose at Taylor Smith Ltd.  Assessment of structural integrity was carried 

out and essential underwater repairs were undertaken. 

The  entire  cost  of  dry  docking  and  repairs  amounting  to  22,700 USD,  was  borne  by 

Garden Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers Limited. 

Madam Speaker: Last question, hon. Baloomoody! 

POLICE OFFICERS – INTERDICTION 

(No. B/833) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 

asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 

Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Police Officers who are 

suspended from duty, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of 

Police, information as to the number thereof, indicating – 

(a) 

in each case the – 

(i) 

date of suspension, and  

(ii) 

rank thereof, and 

(b) 

the  actions  taken,  if  any,  to  ensure  that  their  cases  are  dealt  with  within  the 

least delay. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 

that there are 183 Police Officers who are under interdiction from exercise of their duties as 

at 05 August 2016. 

 

In  regard  to  parts  (a)  (i)  and  (ii)  of  the  question,  I  am  tabling  the  requested 

information. 

 

32 

Regarding  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  on  02  July  2015,  the 

Commissioner  of  Police  issued  a  circular  to  all  Divisional  Commanders  reiterating  the 

requirement for early completion of enquiries involving Police Officers.  For the purpose of 

monitoring  the  progress  of  these  enquiries,  the  Police  have  set  up  a  control  mechanism 

whereby Divisional Commanders have to submit a monthly return on the status of the cases. 

In  addition,  on  30  July  2015,  the  Master  and  Registrar  had  informed  that  all  cases 

involving  Police  Officers  and  which  had  been  lodged  before  the  various  Courts  would  be 

closely  monitored  and  appropriate  directives  had  already  been  conveyed  to  District 

Magistrates. 

Mr Baloomoody: Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, there are two types of cases 

where  Police  are  suspended,  one  is  where  they  are  involved  in  criminal  cases  and  another 

where  they  are  involved  in  administrative  faults.  The  Human  Rights  Commission  has 

stipulated that there should be an independent Commission presided by a Senior Magistrate, 

especially  to  look  into  those  cases  where  Police  Officers  have  committed  administrative 

faults.  

Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he will look into the matter seriously, 

because there are officers who have been suspended for years? I know of one Officer who has 

been suspended for more than eight years just because he did not hang the key - he was in the 

Transport  Department  -  on  the  keyboard  and  he  left  it  in  his  pocket,  and  he  has  been 

suspended for nine years. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Member, put your question! 

Mr  Baloomoody:  Will  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  consider  that,  in  administrative 

cases, to have a proper Commission chaired by  a Magistrate permanently to look into these 

matters administratively? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  before  this  question  was  put,  I,  myself,  was  really 

shocked  when  I  heard  the  number  of  Police  Officers;  before  that,  I  had  asked  the 

Commissioner  of  Police  because,  in  general  in  the  service,  there  are  so  many  people 

interdicted, getting full pay, not working for this country or at least for the service and they 

are getting their full pay, and I personally know myself that there are many cases where these 

people are working outside. So, they are far better off and their cases have been dragging on 

for years. I can’t see any justification in that. It’s outrageous! And this is why I had already 

talked to the Commissioner of Police that this should stop. 

 

33 

Well,  there  is  now,  I  understand,  an  Independent  Police  Complaints  Commission, 

which we have voted recently, will be set up, and I understand, will look into all these issues. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker,  we  are  going  to  do  everything  so  that  we  do  not  have  this  sort  of 

cases dragging on for years like this. 

Madam Speaker: Time is over!  Questions addressed to hon. Ministers!  The Table 

has been advised that PQ B/837 in regard to the setting up of an Executive Chauffeur Driven 

Taxi  Car  Service  addressed  to  the  hon.  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and 

External  Communications  will  now  be  replied  by  the  hon.  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure 

and Land Transport.   

PQ B/857, in regard to the proposed setting up of a high level committee to look into 

the  payment  of  universal  old  age  pension,  addressed  to  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and 

Economic  Development,  will  now  be  replied  by  the  hon.  Minister  of  Social  Solidarity, 

National Solidarity and Reform Institutions.  

Hon. Mahomed! 

RDA - MANAGING DIRECTOR - APPOINTMENT 

(No. B/834)  Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 

Central) asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to 

the  Road  Development  Authority,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  therefrom 

information,  as  to  if  a  Managing  Director  thereof  has  been  appointed  and,  if  so,  when, 

indicating the – 

(a) 

qualifications  of  the  incumbent  thereof,  indicating  the  date  on  which  he  was 

registered with the Council of Registered Professional Engineers of Mauritius, 

and 

(b) 

total  yearly package proposed thereto, indicating the difference in percentage 

thereof as compared to the former Managing Director thereof. 

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Road Development Authority that 

the post of General Manager is vacant since 14 August 2015. Two recruitment exercises were 

conducted  by  the  RDA  in  August  and  December  2015  to  fill  the  vacancy,  but  no  suitable 

candidate could be identified.  

 

34 

Madam  Speaker,  the  RDA  has  been  sustaining  Rs3  billion  of  overrun  over  the  last 

years.    As  we  are  aware,  two  major  projects  implemented  by  the  RDA,  namely:  the  Ring 

Road  and  Terre  Rouge/Verdun  Road  have  been  subject  to  severe  technical  faults  causing 

substantial overruns and inconveniences to the road users. 

Madam  Speaker,  in  view  of  the  vision  of  the  Government  to  modernise  the  road 

network  and  the  numerous  challenges  ahead  for  the  implementation  of  the  important  Road 

Decongestion  Programme,  the  National  Transport  Network  and  a  Mass  Transit  System,  the 

RDA  can  no  more  afford  to  operate  without  the  guidance  of  a  very  competent  and 

experienced person who can lead the institution to achieve the goals and objectives that have 

been set by the organisation. It is imperative that all projects undertaken by the RDA are of 

high quality, completed within the budgetary allocations and provided within deadlines. 

In  fact,  the  Board  of  the  RDA,  at  its  meeting  of  29  June  2016  decided  that  Dr.  Das 

Mootanah,  a  highly  qualified  Mauritian  Professional  Engineer  with  proven  track  record  in 

Project  Management,  be  offered  appointment  on  contract  basis  as  Officer-in-Charge  of  the 

RDA.  Dr.  Mootanah  is  a  highly  qualified  Mauritian  citizen  who  has  settled  in  the  United 

Kingdom  and  has  over  25  years  of  experience  into  Project  Management,  Strategic 

Management,  Risk  Management  in  complex  infrastructural  programmes.  He  has  been 

particularly  involved  in  high  profile  transport  and  construction  projects,  including  railways, 

highways and bridges.  

Dr. Das Mootanah is currently the Head of Risk for the £50 billion High Speed Rail 

Infrastructure Programme in UK.  He has expressed his interest to come back to Mauritius to 

put  his  experience  at  the  service  of  the  country  and  fulfil  the  requirements  for  eligibility 

under the Mauritian Diaspora Scheme.   

I am informed that Dr. Mootanah has accepted the offer of appointment made to him 

on  07  July  2016  and  will  join  the  RDA  in  mid-October  2016  in  view  of  his  current 

professional commitments. 

As regards part (a) of the question, I am informed that Dr. Mootanah, holds a BTech 

(Hons.)  in  Civil  Engineering,  MSc  in  Civil  Engineering  and  Project  Management,  PhD  in 

Project  Management  (Risk  &  Value)  and  he  became  a  Fellow  of  the  Institution  of  Civil 

Engineers (F.I.C.E) in the UK.  He registered with the Council of Professional Engineers in 

Mauritius on 01 June 2016.  

 

35 

As regards part (b) of the question, I am informed that considering his qualifications 

and extensive international experience and exposure, the RDA has, after consultation with the 

PRB, offered Dr. Mootanah a monthly salary package of Rs275,000 comprising a basic salary 

of Rs110,000 and a top-up allowance of Rs175,000 as an incentive to induce him to  accept 

the post.  

In  fact,  the total  yearly  package proposed to  Dr. Mootanah will amount  to  Rs3.4 m. 

and  is  139%  higher  than  the  yearly  package  as  per  PRB  Report  2016  drawn  by  the  last 

General Manager.  

Mr Mahomed: In Mauritius, an engineering graduate is not an engineer so long he is 

not registered with the Council of Registered Professional Engineers and we hear that he only 

has two months as from 01 June post registration.  Will be able to shoulder the responsibility 

that is being entrusted to him because he is fresh? 

Mr Bodha:  The problem,  Madam  Speaker, is  that according to  the Scheme of Duty 

for  a  General  Manager,  we  require  ten  years  of  post-registration  experience  in  Civil 

Engineering in Mauritius.  So, it means that anybody who is brilliant and is working outside 

in the UK, or in the US, or in Canada, or in Australia will never be able to become a General 

Manager because he will have to come here.  So, this is a lacuna in our system.  I think that if 

we really want to have Mauritian professionals or experts or consultants abroad who want to 

come to  Mauritius, we should  be able to  see to  it  that they are  registered where they  work.  

This gentleman now is at the British Rail and we asked him to come over. The British Rail 

did not want to give him the permission to leave.  They asked for even six months.  So, if we 

really want to have somebody to be able to guide the projects that we are going to launch in 

the  coming  months,  there  is  no  other  way  than  to  bring  expert  people.    I  have  always  said 

there are three things that we have to do: quality, deadline and budget.  There should be no 

overrun.  I am convinced that this gentleman will save us a lot of money. 

Mr  Mahomed:  As  per  the  reply  from  the  hon.  Minister,  the  gentleman  in  question 

seems to be very experienced in light rail. 

Mr Bodha: No, he has got other project experience, project management. 

Mr Mahomed: Project  management, whereas the core business of the RDA is road. 

Is  he  convinced  that  we  are  getting  a  fair  deal  with  this  gentleman  because  from  the 

experience that he has enlisted, it is more on the railway project? 

 

36 

Mr  Bodha:  This  gentleman  was  the  Olympic  Transport  Risk  and  Assurance  Lead 

Manager for the Olympic Games of  London in  2012.  He has worked in  Australia.  He has 

been in the construction industry.  Well, I can forward the extensive degree … 

(Interruptions) 

He has made publications in 25 international magazines and conference papers.   

Mr Bhagwan: Le ministre vient nous dire qu’il a eu un oiseau rare.  Let us wait and 

see! During the past, we have seen and we have witnessed - even in the House, we have been 

given replies where there have been conflicts  between Chairpersons,  qui se croient être des 

potentats  and  the  professionals  who  are  the  MD  of  either  State-owned  company  or 

Government or parastatal bodies.  Can the Minister give the guarantee to the House that the 

Chairperson he is having actually at the RDA will not be a barrière for that gentleman when 

he is appointed to start his work? 

Mr Bodha: I can give the assurance, Madam Speaker.  In fact, what we are going to 

do,  we  have  the  top  level  management  and  we  are  going  also  to  recruit  some  middle 

management people as regards to procurement because this is very important. We are going 

to launch ourselves in projects which are going to cost us hundreds of millions. As regards to 

supervision of work and compliance to what we require so that our projects are delivered on 

time with quality and respecting the budgets which have been allocated. 

Mr Rutnah: Is the Minister aware that in the Budget Speech of 2015/2016, the then 

Chancellor  of  Exchequer  made  provision  for  the  Mauritian  Diaspora  to  return  to  Mauritius 

and to work here with tax incentives … 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  No, interruptions, please! 

Mr Rutnah: … and whether the decision to recruit this gentleman who holds a PhD 

is not in line with the Budget Speech of 2015/2016 and also whether he has been given those 

tax incentives so that others could follow to come and serve the country? 

Mr  Bodha:  This  is  the  right  incentive,  Madam  Speaker.    This  gentleman  in  getting 

today Rs500,000 a month. We have explained to him that we really need his expertise and I 

think  for  family  reasons  also,  he  would  like  to  come  over  and  to  offer  his  services  to  his 

country. 

Madam Speaker:  Yes, hon. Osman Mahomed! 

 

37 

Mr  Mahomed:    Well,  I  have  nothing  against  the  gentleman.    I  am  sure  he  must  be 

very competent, but the hon. Minister, himself, has said that the scheme of service calls for 

ten years post registration and now we have recruited someone who has got two months post 

registration.    Had  we  relaxed  this  provision/criterion  more,  and  local  engineers,  although  I 

have no doubt about his willingness to serve the country, he would have qualified for a post? 

Mr Bodha:  He cannot be nominated as General Manager because of this lacuna. As 

no other person who is working outside Mauritius can be nominated as General Manager of 

the RDA.  That is why we have nominated him as Officer-in-Charge for the time being. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr  Jhugroo:    Madam  Speaker,  after  having  listened  to  my  friend,  hon.  Mahomed, 

who  is  looking  for  very  experienced  engineers  -  how  do  the  hon.  Minister  explain  with 

experienced engineers at the head of RDA, you have got the problem at Terre Rouge-Verdun 

road and the cracks of Ring Road?  How do the hon. Minister explain… 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bodha:   The only thing  I am  saying is  that  the RDA should be able to  play the 

role it has to play in the coming years because we are going to spend billions of rupees in our 

road  infrastructure,  with  the  Metro-Express  and  with  the  number  of  other  infrastructural 

projects. 

Madam Speaker:  Yes, last question! 

Mr  Mahomed:    The  hon.  Minister  has  just  explained  that,  because  of  what  the 

scheme of service is and the limitation imposed because of the scheme of service, they have 

had  no  other  choice  but  to  appoint  him  as  Officer-in-Charge  as  a  subterfuge  in  order  to  go 

around the legal problems.  Now, has he had this verified by the legal adviser of the RDA, Mr 

Trilochun and for that particular verification, did he charge millions as well? 

Mr  Bodha:    May  I  say  that,  so  far,  no  legal  commitment  has  been  given  to  Mr 

Trilochun!  I can assure the House. 

(Interruptions) 

And I am going to continue; none will be given!  I can re-assure the House on this.   

(Interruptions) 

 

38 

It is not a subterfuge, Madam Speaker.  It is that we have a scheme of duties.  We have gone 

to the PRB.  We requested the advice of the PRB whether this can be done and the advice that 

we had is that he could not be a General Manager, but he can be an Officer-In-Charge at the 

head of the Road Development Authority. 

Madam  Speaker:    The  Table  has  been  advised  that  the  following  PQs  have  been 

withdrawn; PQ Nos. B/864, B/869, B/870, and B/871. I suspend the sitting for one and a half 

hours. 

At 1.02 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 2.37 p.m. with Mr Deputy Speaker in Chair. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Mahomed! 

BUS SHELTERS – RENOVATION  

(No. B/835) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 

Central) asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to 

the  bus  shelters,  he  will  state  if  there  is  any  project  for  the  renovation  thereof  and,  if  so, 

indicate the – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

number thereof concerned therewith  

estimated costs thereof, and  

how same will be funded. 

Mr Bodha: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I wish to inform the House that there are around 

900 bus shelters islandwide. Many of these shelters are in a quite deplorable state. 

With  a  view  to  providing  a  safer,  reliable  and  more  comfortable  service  to  the 

travelling  public,  my  Ministry  has  come  up  with  a  policy  to  improve  public  transport  as  a 

whole.  This  includes  the  modernisation  of  the  bus  shelters  along  with  the  fleet  of  buses  in 

operation servicing the travelling public.  Smart bus routes have already been introduced, and 

bus shelters are being renovated all over the island to improve the transport landscape.  In the 

new  bus  shelters,  necessary  facilities  and  additional  amenities  are  being  provided  such  as  a 

passenger  information  system  which  will  enable  commuters  to  better  plan  their  journey.  

Commuters  will  thus  have  access  to  the  bus  service  time  schedules  through  special 

applications via their mobile phone. 

 

39 

In line with the new policy, a protocol on the modernisation of bus shelters has been 

worked  out  which  sets  the  guidelines  on  the  manner  to  deal  with  requests  for  new  bus 

shelters, the process for their construction and the specifications thereof.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, any bus shelter which is found to be anaesthetic, too small or 

no longer responding to the needs of the public will be renovated and replaced in accordance 

with the established Protocol.   

Since  May  2016,  applications  are  invited  from  interested  parties  by  way  of  a  press 

communiqué to  enlist  themselves as promoters/sponsors for the construction  of modern bus 

shelters. 

The  promoters  who  express  their  interest  for  constructing  and  renovating  the  bus 

shelters  have  to  obtain  the  approval  of  the  NTA  prior  to  effecting  the  works  as  per  the 

specifications set out in the Protocol.  

As  regards  part  (a)  of  the  question,  70  bus  shelters  have  already  been  renovated,  8 

more have been earmarked on the motorway M1 for construction and 15 in other regions.   

In  accordance  with  the  protocol,  an  agreement  is  signed  between  the  NTA  and  the 

promoter to  construct,  renovate and maintain bus shelters  at  no  cost  to  Government  against 

the right of commercial exploitation thereof. 

Madam Speaker, with your permission, I am tabling the list of new bus shelters to be 

constructed and the list of bus shelters already renovated. 

Mr Mahomed: Regarding the advertising part of it- because they will have the right 

to  display  advertising  panels  -  may  we  have  an  idea  how  much  they  recoup  from  there? 

Because Government is foregoing something in return. Had we invested in the renovation of 

the  bus  shelters,  we  would  have  had  the  right  for  the  advertising  purposes.  In  the  long  run, 

does it not make more sense for Government to do it itself? 

Mr Bodha: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I don’t think so. One of the new bus shelters is 

costing Rs500,000.  

(Interruptions) 

Rs500,000! So, if we were to renovate 900, that would be millions and then you will have to 

manage  it,  you  will  have  to  find  the  sponsors.  I  think  the  best  way  is  the  protocol  that  we 

have set. We have the bus shelters free of charge against advertising by sponsors. 

 

40 

Mr Mahomed:  If I get it correctly, following that process of Expression of Interest, 

was  that  promoter  appointed  to  renovate  those  70  shelters?  Is  that  correct  and  what  is  the 

name of the promoter? 

Mr  Bodha:  Well,  the  communiqué  was  issued  on  11  May.  A  request  has  been 

received by AV Express to cater for 42 bus shelters over the island and you have a number of 

other  companies.  They  have  to  go  by  the  protocol.  The  protocol  means  that  you  have  the 

guidelines by the TMRSU, the RDA, the NTA and also  as regards road  safety, the security 

and visibility. They also have to have a contract with the CEB and with the owner of the land. 

It should be a lease or it should be acquisition of land. It is not only setting up a bus shelter, 

in fact, all has to be done according to the protocol. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  The  new  bus  stop  which  has  been  constructed,  I  think,  by  a  specific 

promoter, c’était esthétique. Can I know from the hon. Minister whether he has set himself a 

target to achieve the whole island with regard to the new bus stands? 

Mr  Bodha:  The  idea  is  to  have  about  a  hundred  per  year,  at  least.  Now,  the  other 

possibilities  are  to  see  whether  with  the  new  urban  bus  terminals,  we  can  also  make  better 

provisions for the travellers. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, a last supplementary! 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  with  your  permission,  if  I  may  ask  the  hon. 

Minister, since year 2010, people living at Plein Bois are still waiting for the construction of 

two bus stops, may  I request  the hon. Minister to  do needful so that these bus stops can be 

constructed in the coming months? 

Mr Bodha: I will look into the matter. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mahomed! 

SCHOOLS – DRUG CONSUMPTION 

(No. B/836) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 

Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 

Scientific Research whether, in regard to the school population, she will state if her Ministry 

has recently assessed the percentage thereof who – 

(a) 

consume – 

(i) 

cannabis, and 

 

41 

(ii) 

synthetic drugs 

(b) 

carry weapons; 

(c) 

engage in sexual activities, and 

(d) 

had  attempted  suicide  and,  if  so,  give  an  overview  of  the  present  situation 

thereof in each case and, if not, indicate if consideration will be given for the 

carrying out of such an assessment. 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am informed that there are 35 

students from 21 secondary schools who have been reported to have been involved in cases 

related to cannabis over a two-year period starting from July 2014  to date. 

Over the same period of time, according to the Police, three students were involved in 

cases related to synthetic drugs. However, two of the three cases are still under investigation. 

In respect to part (b) of the question, no student has been reported carrying weapons 

as  such  by  zonal  directorates.  The  Police  has  also  informed  that  no  such  case  has  been 

reported at its level. 

As  regards  part  (c)  of  the  question,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  there  is  no  means  of 

assessing  whether  students  are  engaged  in  sexual  activities  or  not.  However,  6  cases  have 

been  reported  to  the  Ministry  and  these  pertain  mainly  to  inappropriate  behaviour,  des 

comportements  à  caractère  sexuel  inapproprié  in  three  primary  schools.  In  secondary 

schools, three cases of alleged sexual abuse have been reported. 

As  for  part  (d)  of  the  question,  as  per  our  records,  there  are  six  students  who  have 

attempted to commit suicide over the period July 2014 to date. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  would  like  to  highlight  that  the  above  figures  are  those 

reported  to  us  by  schools  or  by  competent  authorities  including  the  Police.  At  school  level, 

emphasis is laid on preventive measures through awareness and sensitisation campaigns with 

the  help  of  relevant  stakeholders  and  partners.  Schools  are  also  required  to  ensure  close 

follow-up  of  students  involved  in  such  behavioural  problems.  They  are  provided  with 

pastoral  care,  counselling  and  psychological  support  through  the  services  of  the  National 

Education Counselling Service. 

The Ministry has a structured mechanism with regard to monitoring and reporting of 

behavioural problems in schools. A close working partnership has been established with the 

Police  authorities,  namely  the  ADSU,  Brigade  pour  la  protection  des  mineurs,  the  Harm 

 

42 

Reduction Unit of the Ministry of Health and Quality of life, the Ministry of Gender Equality, 

the  Probation  and  Aftercare  Services,  the  CDU  as  well  as  NGOs  for  the  on  the  ground 

competence  and  with  the  view  to  sharing  information  and  evolving  strategies  towards 

addressing such problems in a proactive manner. The situation is being closely monitored and 

followed.  

A zero tolerance policy as well as strict control measures at all levels has been put in 

place.  Rectors  have  been  instructed  to  arrange  for  continuous  sensitisation  of  students  in 

collaboration with the Police and other stakeholders including PTA.  

Regular  inspections  of  the  school  premises,  leaving  no  room  for  any  abnormal 

activity,  close  supervision  in  the  vicinity  of  schools,  strict  control  and  access  to  laboratory 

facilities  at  school  and  greater  involvement  of  parental  community  in  the  fight  against  this 

phenomenon. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the need to provide an educational response to the impact of 

societal  and  technological  changes  on  the  behaviour  of  school  children  and  the  challenges 

inherent  to  adolescents  have  been  felt.  The  new  NCF  has  accordingly  made  provision  for 

better  preparing  and  equipping  our  students  through  the  inclusion  of  life  skills,  sexuality 

education and value-based education in the curriculum. 

In regard to cases of attempted suicides and students showing suicidal tendencies, the 

National  Education  Counselling  Service  ensures  close  follow-up  in  collaboration  with  Live 

Plus  of  the  Ministry  of  Social  Security.  Moreover,  Live  Plus  helps  in  carrying  out  suicide 

prevention workshops in schools and training of school staff at the level of the Student Care 

and Counselling Desk which have been set up in schools. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  wish  to  reassure  the  House  that  my  Ministry  is  closely 

monitoring  the  situation  and  is  taking  all  necessary  measures  to  ensure  safe  school 

environment for teaching and learning to take place in a most conducive manner. 

Mr Mahomed:  I thank the hon. Minister  for her reply. I came up with this question 

with all the items in there following a press report on the radio on 17 July this year whereby 

mention was made of a Youth Determinants Report conducted by the United Nations Office. 

So, I called up the office and they said they were not aware and to find out from the Ministry 

whether such report exists. So my question is: is the Ministry  – I believe it is not because it 

would  have  been  mentioned  in  the  report,  the  figures  in  that  report  are  much  higher  –  in 

possession of a report called Youth Determinants in Mauritius, 2015 version? 

 

43 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it is a fact that we do have cases, 

alleged cases of drug addiction or use of drug, but these alleged cases have to be confirmed 

by the Police. Very often, students are found with substances which are suspected to be drugs 

or  the  most  recent  synthetic  drugs,  but  these  have  to  be  confirmed.    We  normally  have  a 

protocol,  as  soon  as  any  student  is  detected  in  a  ‘strange’  state,  we,  first  of  all,  send  the 

student to the hospital, get the ADSU, send the substance found for forensic investigation and 

all,  but  we  do  not  have  exact  figures  and  even  the  figures  reported  to  us  by  the  zonal 

directorates have to be sent to the Police for confirmation. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: The hon. Minister is answering the question! 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  The  report  from  the  United  Nations!  I  am  not  aware  of 

that particular report, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody! 

Mr  Baloomoody:  With  regard  to  the  campaign  for  awareness,  can  I  ask  the  hon. 

Minister whether there is a protocol between the ADSU and the secondary schools both in the 

public and private sector because I have been informed by certain officers of the ADSU that 

they  don’t  have  access  to  certain  secondary  schools  when  they  want  to  sensitise  the  young 

especially with regard to synthetic drugs? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: In fact, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we do have a very close 

collaboration with the ADSU and other units in the Police Force. We have a Health and Anti-

Drug Unit  at  the level  of the Ministry. We work in  collaboration with  them  and the NGOs. 

However, we have to be very careful in seeing who are the people we allow into our schools. 

We have had cases of people coming to talk to students and explaining to the students how to 

prepare certain drugs. So, we have to be careful. ADSU officers are allowed in the colleges. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. May I know from the hon. Minister 

whether  she  is  satisfied  with  the  number  of  school  psychologists  who  are  at  present  at  her 

Ministry and who conduct regular meetings with students in schools and colleges to precisely 

sensitise these people and conduct investigation after they have fallen into drug addiction or 

violent behaviour? 

 

44 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  we  always  feel  that  there  is  a 

need for some extra manpower, but  we do have the psychologists. We do make request  for 

additional  staff  to  be  taken  on  board,  but  we  also  have  the  educational  social  workers  who 

link up between the schools and the families and report to the Ministry, work in collaboration 

with the psychologists and we have sufficient personnel at the Ministry at this moment.  We 

are also coming up with the special unit at the level of the PSSA with the amendments that 

are being brought to the PSSA Act where we will have psychologists attached to the PSSA to 

cater for the Private Secondary Schools as well. 

Mr  Ganoo:  Can  the  hon.  Minister  consider  the  possibility  of  having  yoga  taught  in 

our secondary institutions in view of the fact that this ancient mental, physical and spiritual 

practice is  now universal? The United Nations has decreed an  International  Yoga Day. Can 

this form part of the extra-curricular activities in all the secondary schools for the well-being 

of our adolescents? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  National  Curriculum 

Framework  is  being  worked  upon  and  we  are  introducing  life  skills  and  other  movement 

education and other subjects of the type to ensure that we have a holistic development of our 

children. 

The Deputy Speaker: Last supplementary, hon. Rutnah! 

Mr Rutnah: Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. Can the hon. Minister confirm that 

insofar  as  behavioural  problem  is  concerned  relating  to  drugs,  synthetic  drugs  and  sexual 

activities that all these are representation of only a fraction of children in schools and colleges 

and  that  there  is  no  need  to  demonise  all  children  who  are  frequenting  our  schools  and 

colleges and the majority are… 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: No interruptions, please! 

Mr Rutnah:… good citizens who are learning to shape the future of this country… 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Come with your question please, hon. Rutnah! 

(Interruptions) 

 

45 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, even if we have a single case of 

a child showing behavioural problems… 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Rutnah, listen to the answer you have asked! 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  It  is  a  concern  to  us.  So,  obviously,  we  will  try  our 

utmost to ensure that the school environment remains proper for our children. But, as the hon. 

Member  has  stated,  we  have  a  societal  problem  and  it  will  be  reflected  in  our  schools  to  a 

certain extent. 

HOTELS - EXECUTIVE TAXI CHAUFFEUR DRIVEN CAR SERVICE  

(No.  B/837)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 

asked  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications 

whether, in regard to the hotels, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Tourism 

Authority,  information  as  to  if  the  setting  up  of  an  Executive  Chauffeur  Driven  Taxi  Car 

Service  is  being  envisaged  for  implementation  thereat  and,  if  so,  indicate  if  consultations 

have been held with  all the stakeholders concerned therewith, including the Association des 

Hoteliers et Restaurateurs de l’Ile Maurice and the hotel taxi operators and, if not, why not. 

The  Minister  of  Public  infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  (Mr  N.  Bodha):  Mr 

Deputy Speaker, Sir, with your permission, I shall reply to this question. 

Following representations from hotel based taxis to the effect that they are deprived of 

work  opportunities  due  to  fierce  competition  from  outside  based  taxis,  contract  cars  and 

contract buses, an Inter-Ministerial Committee was set up under the Chair of the hon. Deputy 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications  to  look  into  the  matter 

and come up with appropriate recommendations. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the Committee had several meetings with the representatives 

of  hotel  based  taxis,  l’Association  des  Hoteliers  et  Restaurateurs  de  l’Ile  Maurice, 

Association  of  Inbound  Operators  of  Mauritius.  After  lengthy  discussions  with  all  the 

stakeholders  the  Committee  made  a  number  of  recommendations  which  were  approved  by 

Government.  One  of  these  pertains  to  contract  cars  with  an  engine  capacity  of  1950  cc  for 

petrol engines and 2500 cc for diesel engines to be Executive Taxi Car Chauffeur Driven. 

This measure aims at restricting access of contract cars and taxi operators from other 

base of operation to these hotels in conveying tourists or delegates of the MICE market who 

 

46 

are in need of taxi  services to  go on tour or to  conferences  and transfers from  hotels to  the 

airport and back. 

However, this exceptional measure was made to contract car with an engine capacity 

of  1950  cc  for  petrol  engines  and  2500  cc  for  diesel  engines  in  order  to  cater  for  a  niche 

market segment and to provide a luxury or premium chauffeur driven car service. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we are presently working on the specific guidelines for the 

implementation of this measure. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Since  this  is  a  Government  decision,  can  I  know  from  the  hon. 

Minister whether he has received further representations from either the hotel operators or the 

taxi union? 

Mr  Bodha:  Well,  there  have  been  many  representations.  But  we  have  not 

implemented this measure because we are still waiting  for the first  measures which include 

the  taxis  which  are  based  at  the  hotels  for  example,  a  desk.  We  are  implementing  all  the 

measures, first of all, in favour of the taxis which are based at the hotels and then gradually 

we will consider the other measures. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Since  I  know  there  is  a  deadline  for  this  taxi  desk  unit,  can  the 

Minister inform the House whether certain hotels have started implementing this Government 

decision and whether there have been representations? How many taxi desks are operational? 

Mr  Bodha:  Well,  I  don’t  have  the  answer  as  regards  the  hotels,  but  some  have 

implemented  it  in  hotels,  some  are  considering  the  implementation.    In  some  cases,  the 

owners  of  the  hotels  are  not  agreeable  to  this  measure  and  there  have  been  some 

representations.  What  we  have  said  is  that  the  Tourism  Authority  and  the  NTA  will  do 

everything to help and to see that we have a desk office in each and every hotel with above 

50 rooms. 

Mr Ramful: Can the hon. Minister also confirm that there have been representations 

from taxi owners based at Blue Lagoon Hotel at Blue Bay and whether he will take necessary 

measures? 

Mr  Bodha:  In  fact,  I  was  mentioning  Blue  Lagoon  because  the  demonstration  took 

place at Blue Lagoon in Blue Bay. I will take care of that. 

 

 

47 

REGIONAL TOURISM ORGANISATION OF SOUTHERN  

AFRICA- MAURITIUS MEMBERSHIP 

(No.  B/838)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 

asked  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications 

whether,  in  regard  to  the  Regional  Tourism  Organisation  of  Southern  Africa,  he  will  state 

since when Mauritius is a member thereof, indicating if Mauritius has decided to withdraw its 

membership therefrom and, if so, when, indicating the reasons therefor. 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  Regional  Tourism 

Organisation  of  Southern  Africa  (RETOSA)  is  a  regional  body  set  up  in  1998  under  the 

SADC Protocol on development of tourism to foster and coordinate tourism development and 

marketing within Southern Africa. 

Mauritius joined as a member of RETOSA since its creation in September 1998. As 

such,  Mauritius  has  always  been  up-to-date  with  its  membership  contribution  amounting  to 

approximately  Rs3.9  m.  annually  as  opposed  to  more  than  60  per  cent  of  other  RETOSA 

members who have not paid their contributions and this has been impacting negatively on the 

implementation of the marketing programmes of RETOSA.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it is also pertinent to highlight that there have not been any 

joint marketing activities between the MTPA and RETOSA since its inception. Moreover, in 

the past five years MTPA participated in only two meetings organised by RETOSA that was 

in the year 2013. 

Hence,  the  cost  involved  have  by  large  outweighed  the  benefits  of  joining  the 

organisation.  Accordingly,  a  policy  decision  was  taken  in  December  2015  for  Mauritius  to 

withdraw its membership from RETOSA as no tangible benefits were being derived. 

I  understand  that  there  may  be  attempts  to  reorganise,  restructure  and  reinvent 

RETOSA.  If  that  were  indeed  to  take  place,  Mauritius  could  reconsider  its  position  in  the 

future. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr Bérenger:  Can  I ask the hon. Deputy Prime Minister whether that decision  - he 

has said that a policy decision was taken on a given date  - was a Cabinet decision taken by 

the Cabinet of Mauritius, if not, who took the decision? 

 

48 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  Definitely,  the  Ministry  of  Tourism  and  External 

Communications took the decision, whether it was taken to Cabinet I don’t know. But it is in 

the Budget. 

Mr Bérenger: Well, I am sure the hon. Deputy Prime Minister realises the impact on 

SADC generally. They are very touchy and rightly so. When we are in SADC we are meant 

to be supportive, critical, but we can’t withdraw like that. It has, according to my information, 

impacted very negatively on SADC perception of Mauritius. 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Well, that may be so, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, but 60% 

of the members  are not  even paying their  fees to  RETOSA.   RETOSA has 15 members, of 

which nine of them are not paying, but Mauritius is paying and has been paying for the last 

18 years or so.  We got nothing back.  It is also taxpayers’ money, and I hope that this will be 

taken as a signal by SADC that they ought to see and get the organisation working properly.  

That  would  be  the  right  message  to  give  to  SADC,  because  there  had  been  attempts  in  the 

recent past to close down RETOSA and it was saved in extremis.  There is now some attempt 

-  whether  serious  or  not,  I  cannot  say  -  to  restructure  it.  Let  us  wait  and  see.    If  it  does 

restructure, we will join again. 

STC - LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS - PRICE 

(No.  B/839)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 

asked the Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection whether, in regard to the 

fall in the prices of Liquefied Petroleum Gas on the world market, he will, for the benefit of 

the  House,  obtain  from  the  State  Trading  Corporation,  information  as  to  the  total  savings 

made on account thereof, over the period 01 January 2015 to 29 July 2016. 

Mr Gungah: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, for the period January 2015 to December 2015, 

the STC did not make any savings on Liquefied Petroleum Gas, that is, LPG. 

On the contrary, LPG was subsidised to the tune of Rs90 m. by the Corporation. The 

price  of  LPG  on  the  world  market  is  very  volatile  and  it  fluctuates  every  month.  For  the 

period  January  to  July  2016,  the  CIF  price  of  LPG  has  been  in  the  range  of  USD416  to 

USD496 per metric tons.  Prior to the last revision in the retail price of LPG on 31 July 2016, 

the price was fixed at Rs330 per cylinder of 12 kg since March 2012. 

In order to breakeven at this price, the CIF price should have been USD451 per metric 

ton.  For the months of January, April, May and June 2016, the price was fixed at Rs330 per 

cylinder of 12 kg since March 2012.  For the months of January, April, May and June 2016, 

 

49 

the CIF price was higher than USD451 per metric ton, and this was reflected in the calculated 

cost  price,  which  was  above  Rs330  per  cylinder  of  12  kg.    As  for  the  remaining  months, 

February, March and July 2016, the CIF price was below the breakeven point of USD451 per 

metric ton and the cost price was lower than Rs330 per cylinder of 12 kg. 

Taking  into  account  the  evolution  of  the  CIF  price  on  the  world  market,  STC  made 

savings to the tune of Rs48 m. for the period January to June 2016, and it is expected that for 

the month of July, savings of Rs13 m. will be realised. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Can  the  Minister  let  us  know  if  the  Saudi  contract  price  of  January 

2015 and today has been compared? 

Mr  Gungah:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  Saudi  contract  price  is  not  the  reference 

price  that  we  use  in  the  price  structure  to  calculate  the  price  of  LPG.    In  fact,  the  Saudi 

contract price, just like we have the brent price for petroleum products; it is for LPG.  From 

the Saudi contract price, the FOB is calculated, and added to that, the premium, which gives 

the CIF price. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Can  the  Minister  circulate  the  figures  of  the  Saudi  contract  price?  

What were the figures in January 2015 and now? 

Mr Gungah: As I have said, in the price structure, we do not use the Saudi contract 

price.  It is the FOB price, that is, the FOB price is calculated from the Saudi contract price.  

In the price structure, it is the FOB price that is taken into consideration. 

Mr  Mahomed:  The  hon.  Minister,  in  his  reply,  mentioned  both  profitability  and 

subsidy. Will the current revision to Rs270 per bonbonne, is it subsidy or profitability, and if 

so, how much? 

Mr Gungah: As I said, for the period January to June 2016, there have been savings 

to the tune of Rs48 m. We are expecting that, in July, the savings will be Rs13 m., and that is 

the reason why we reduced the price of LPG from Rs330 to Rs270 for the cylinder of 12 kg. 

JOHN KENNEDY COLLEGE - GYMNASIUM - CONSTRUCTION 

(No.  B/840)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 

asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 

Research  whether, in  regard to  the new gymnasium  of the John Kennedy College, in  Beau 

Bassin, she will state – 

 

50 

(a) 

the  start  and  completion  dates  of  the  construction  thereof,  indicating  when 

same was handed over to her Ministry; 

(b) 

the cost thereof; 

(c) 

the name of the contractor thereof; 

(d) 

if immediate actions will be taken for the upgrading and the embellishment of 

the yard found in the vicinity thereof and, if so, when, and 

(e) 

if  the  clubs  of  the  region  will  be  allowed  to  make  use  thereof  after  school 

hours and, if so, indicate the conditions attached thereto. 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with a view to encouraging the 

practice of sports and leisure activities for the overall development of students, the Ministry 

has embarked on the construction  of gymnasiums, multi-purpose halls in secondary schools 

for the provision of quality infrastructure in a phased manner. 

In regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed that the start and completion dates 

of  the  multi-purpose  hall  at  John  Kennedy  College  were  04  September  2012  and  January 

2015  respectively.    The  practical  handing  over  of  the  multi-purpose  hall  was  done  on  10 

January 2015. 

In regard to part (b) of the question, the cost of works related to the new gymnasium 

amounts to Rs37,843,309. 

As regards part (c) of the question, the contract was awarded to Etude Dessin Calcul 

Conseil Co. Ltd.  I am informed that the cleaning and maintenance of the yard are done on a 

regularly basis and that the last cleaning exercise was carried out in July 2016. 

However, I am informed that the contractor has failed to clean the whole area of the 

school premises, particularly behind the new gymnasium up to the boundary wall.  The Zonal 

Directorate has already initiated action with a view of cleaning the remaining part and action 

as appropriate will be taken against the contractor.  In the future, cleaning of this particular 

part of the premises will be entrusted to the Zone Directorate. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, as regards part (e) of the question, I am informed that there is 

already a set of conditions and standard operating procedures for the use of the gymnasium 

after school hours. The management of these sports infrastructure facilities is effected at the 

level of Zone Directorates of my Ministry.  Any club of the region wishing to avail itself of 

 

51 

the  facilities  should  contact  the  Zone  Directorate.  I  am  tabling  a  copy  of  the  conditions  for 

renting of sport infrastructure in primary and secondary schools to the members of the public. 

Mr Bhagwan:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, can the Minister inform the House whether, 

apart from cleaning, there is any project for the total upgrading of the yard and not leave it as 

it is?  Because in summer especially, we may clean today and then in one week, it becomes 

the same.  So, is there any professional type of upgrading of the yard being contemplated? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  In  fact,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  yard  is  really  vast, 

and we are planning to get it upgraded, and maybe we can think of an embellishment project 

for the area. 

Mr Quirin: Peut-on savoir si le gymnase est opérationnel en ce moment? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: For the time being, it is being used by the school students 

only. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Ramano, next question! 

SCHOOLS - STAFF – AGGRESSIONS AGAINST 

(No.  B/841)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 

asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 

Research whether, in regard to the aggressions perpetrated within the school premises against 

academic and non-academic staff, she will state the number of reported cases thereof over the 

past two years, indicating the – 

(a) 

schools concerned therewith, and 

(b) 

measures that will be taken to prevent the recurrence of similar incidents. 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, at the outset, I need to say that 

my  Ministry  is  committed  towards  creating  a  safe  school  environment  conducive  to  proper 

teaching and learning. The security of our school personnel, both teaching and non-teaching, 

has been at the centre of our concern. 

However, some  cases of aggressions in  schools  have been deplored.   I am  informed 

that the cases reported fall in two categories, namely - 

(i) 

(ii) 

verbal abuse against members of the staff, and 

aggression against members of the staff by parents, students or other staff 

members or outsiders. 

 

52 

According to a survey conducted across the Zonal Directorates, there have been, from 

January 2014 to date, nine reported cases of verbal abuse against school staff on the school 

premises, and they concerned five primary and four secondary schools. 

With  regard  to  physical  aggression  against  staff,  15  cases  have  been  reported.    I  am 

tabling the list of schools where such aggressions have taken place. 

Out of the above cases reported by the Zonal Directorate, five cases of aggression have 

been reported to the Police over the same period of time. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  as  regards  part  (b)  of  the  question,  a  host  of  measures  has 

been  taken  by  my  Ministry  for  enhanced  security  of  the  school  personnel  and  this,  after 

discussions and consultations with the stakeholders concerned, particularly the unions. 

With regard to cases of aggressions against members of staff perpetrated by external 

parties,  CCTV  cameras  have  been  installed  in  most  secondary  schools;  daytime  security 

guards are also posted in 67 schools as at now and the list of schools is updated regularly in 

consultation with schools and unions. In addition, instructions have been given for the school 

gate to remain closed once school starts and as such there is stricter control regarding access 

to the school. 

The Ministry has, moreover, arranged with the Police Force for regular patrolling to 

enhance surveillance and vigilance in the vicinity of the schools. Insofar as measures taken at 

internal  level  are  concerned,  the  National  Educational  Counselling  Service  operating  under 

the  aegis  of  my  Ministry  and  which  comprises  a  team  of  educational  psychologists, 

educational  social  workers  assist  schools  in  the  promotion  of  the  psychological  and  social 

well-being of primary and secondary school children and their families through a wide range 

of integrated services, including psychological support, home visits and counselling.  

The Ministry has recently come up with a Student Behaviour Policy to guide Heads of 

schools and students on the need to foster an atmosphere that is conducive to learning in the 

schools. 

Moreover, the emotional and social well-being programme has been piloted in  eight 

primary schools to empower students to better cope with their emotions.  This project will be 

pursued. The National Curriculum Framework has on its part provided for inclusion of value-

based education and life skills in the curriculum. 

 

53 

In  secondary  schools,  members  of  the  Students  Council  and  Counselling  Desks  are 

being provided with adequate training in listing and counselling skills so as to better support 

the  students  facing  emotional,  family,  stress-related  and  other  psychological  problems.  In 

private  secondary  schools,  specifically  section  leaders  or  deans  are  appointed  with  their 

primary focus being on indiscipline issues among students.  

The structure of the PSSA is being reviewed and reinforced so as to cater for the posts 

of educational psychologist, educational social worker under the establishment of the PSSA 

so as to serve more effectively students of the private sector.  

To enable better sharing of information and monitoring of the situation, the Ministry 

has established an effective network in system with major stakeholders, namely, Brigade des 

Mineurs, the Child Development Unit, and the Probation and After-Care Services. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I must, however, add that it is equally essential to highlight 

the  role  and  responsibility  of  parents  in  the  schooling  of  their  children.  Their  contribution 

together with that of the PTA, Students Councils and school personnel have to be enlisted to 

sensitise  students  and  parents  and  avoid  occurrence  of  such  incidence  in  the  school 

environment.  

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Ramano! 

Mr  Ramano:  M.  le  président,  est-ce  que  je  peux  savoir  de  l’honorable  ministre  - 

certaines  PTAs  ou  encore  certaines  écoles  privées  ont  fait  appel  à  des  compagnies  privées 

pour  assurer  la  sécurité  à  l’intérieur  des  écoles  -  si  un  cahier  des  charges  a  été  établie  au 

niveau  de  son  ministère  pour  savoir  quelles  sont  les  responsabilités  de  ces  compagnies  de 

sécurité et est-ce qu’elle a un contrôle sur le personnel qui a été employé par ces compagnies 

de sécurité pour savoir s’ils sont aptes à travailler avec les enfants éventuellement? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  En  principe,  M.  le  président,  nous  avons  au  niveau  du 

système, des employés dans les collèges privés payés par la PSSA.  Et là, récemment, dans le 

dernier  exercice  qui  a  été  effectué  au  niveau  du  ministère  pour  le  Comprehensive  Grant 

Formula,  on  a  décidé  de  permettre  aux  écoles  d’embaucher  un  officier  additionnel  pour  la 

supervision  des  schools’  premises.    Mais  nous  n’avons  pas  de  contrôle  sur  les  Security 

Officers qui sont embauchés directement par les collèges privés. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Ramano, next question! 

 

 

54 

STATE LAND – ALLOCATION – POLICE INVESTIGATION 

(No.  B/842)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 

asked  the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  whether,  in  regard  to  the 

allocation of State land, he will state the number of cases thereof which have been referred to 

the Police for investigation as at to date, indicating the outcome thereof in each case. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun): Mr 

Deputy Speaker, Sir, since  I took  Office in  December 2014, 17 cases have been referred to 

the Police for investigation through the Land Fraud Squad. 

I am informed that out of these 17 cases - 

(a) 

10 are still under the investigation by the Police; 

(b) 

the  Director  of  Public  Prosecutions  (DPP)  has  advised  'No  further  action' 

regarding 5 cases, and 

(c) 

enquiries  have  been  completed  for  the  remaining  2  cases  and  have  been 

referred to the DPP for advice. 

Mr Ramano: Est-ce que l’honorable ministre est d’accord pour mettre à disposition 

de la Chambre la liste de tous les cas avec les noms spécifiques pour les cas où il n’y a pas eu 

de poursuite? 

Mr Soodhun:  Yes, Mr Deputy Speaker Sir, with pleasure I will circulate the list. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Aliphon, next question! 

HOSPITALS - PARKING FACILITIES 

(No.  B/843)  Mr  A.  Aliphon  (Third  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 

asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the hospital premises, 

he  will  state  if  he  is  aware  of  the  difficulties  faced  by  the  patients  and  the  relatives  and 

visitors thereof when attending thereto regarding the circulation and parking facilities thereat 

and, if so, indicate if consideration will be given for the advisability of reviewing the policy 

regarding parking facilities and introducing paid parking thereat. 

Mr  Gayan:    Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  this  issue  has  been  flagged  to  me  since  some 

time now. I would like to inform the House that my Ministry is considering the possibility of 

introducing paid parkings to alleviate the problem of parking within hospital premises.  The 

 

55 

project will, in the first instance, be implemented  at Dr. A. G. Jeetoo Hospital and, as from 

the end of this month, there will be 30 paid parking slots that would become operational. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Aliphon!  Hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

Dr.  Joomaye:    Thank  you.  I  would  like  to  ask  the  hon.  Minister  if  he  does  not  feel 

that the health sector being completely free in Mauritius and it is part of our Welfare State, 

making the access to free service payable would amount to starting  to  dismantle the Welfare 

State? 

Mr Gayan:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it must be made clear that the medical service is 

free,  parking  is  not  free.  And  I  must  also  say  that  in  the  designing  of  the  parking  areas, 

attention is  being paid to  somebody coming to  drop a patient  and that person will not  have 

anything to pay. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr  Jhugroo:    With  the  increasing  number  of  vehicles  in  the  country  year  by  year, 

will the hon. Minister consider to construct a multi-storey building for parking similarly with 

the introduction of paying parking? 

Mr  Gayan:    Well,  it  is  my  intention  as  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  to 

ensure that the number of people attending hospitals  decreases, but I know this is a problem 

that we can accommodate in some hospitals, not in all hospitals. But I think this idea of hon. 

Chief Whip is being considered for SSRN hospital. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed:  May we know from the hon. Minister the rationale behind starting to 

charge parking in public hospitals?  I leave it for the hon. Minister to say what is the rationale 

behind. 

Mr  Gayan:    Well,  the  reason  is  basically  that  the  parking  slots  in  the  hospitals  are 

designed for the staff working in the hospitals, for the ambulances and for other para-medical 

staff but, unfortunately, the reality is that many people who have a car use the parking in the 

hospitals as their private property; they go to work in the morning and then come and collect 

the car in the evening. So, there has to be some control over whether the parking slots in the 

hospitals  are  being  used  exclusively  for  the  purposes  of  the  hospitals  and  not  for  other 

purposes. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Oree, next question! 

 

56 

NTA – DECENTRALISATION  

(No.  B/844)  Mr  G.  Oree  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  North  &  Montagne 

Longue) asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to 

the  National  Transport  Authority,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  therefrom, 

information  as  to  if  consideration  will  be  given  for  the  advisability  of  decentralising  the 

services  offered  by  the  Authority  and  relocating  the  headquarters  thereof  with  a  view  to 

alleviating  the  difficulties  faced  by  people  attending  thereto  in  respect  of  parking  facilities 

and circulation in the free space adjoining the Headquarters thereof, at Cassis. 

Mr  Bodha:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  National  Transport  Authority  (NTA)  has  a 

workforce of 215 Officers at the Head Office at Cassis.  It operates the largest counter service 

in  Government  with  a  total  of  30  counters  running  daily  between  09h00  and  15h00.    It 

provides the following main services from its Headquarters - 

 

 

 

 

 

Collection of road tax and renewal of motor vehicle licences; 

Registration and transfer of ownership of vehicles; 

Applications for and issue of licences for vehicle operations; 

Issue of conductors licences, and  

Hearing of applications and disciplinary cases by the Authority. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am informed that during peak days, the Authority receives 

between 2,500 to 3,000 customers calling for renewal of licences and registration of vehicles 

transactions, while the average customer turn out is about 800 to 1,000 during off-peak days. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  with  a  view  to  rendering  its  services,  particularly  the 

payment of road tax and renewal of motor vehicle licences, more user friendly and accessible 

to  the  population,  the  NTA  has  entered  since  15  July  2005  into  an  agreement  with  the 

Mauritius Post  Ltd  which is  presently  providing  facilities for payment  of road tax on a six-

day basis through the 98 post offices around the island. 

Moreover, the NTA is having recourse to enhanced information technology to further 

reduce the need of the public to call physically at the Headquarters.   In this connection, the 

following measures are being envisaged – 

 

A  one-stop-shop  project  which  concerns  the  registration  of  sales  of  vehicles, 

thus taking over that responsibility from the Registrar General’s Department. 

 

 

 

57 

The  aim  of  this  project  is  to  reduce  time  and  inconvenience  caused  to 

members of the public wishing to undertake such transactions.   

With  the  introduction  of  the  one-stop-shop,  the  public  will  not  have  to  do 

agency  hopping  from  the  NTA  to  the  Registrar  General’s  Department  as  all 

the services will be provided at the NTA.  This will also bring a reduction in 

parking needs of vehicle owners. 

 

The upgrading and modernisation of its IT infrastructure with a view to further 

decentralise  its  services.    In  this  respect,  a  contract  for  consultancy  services 

has  been  awarded  to  Deloitte  Consultant  to  explore  such  possibilities  and  to 

make appropriate  

 

 

recommendations  relating  to  registration  and  transfer  of  vehicles  to  either 

authorised agents or to sub-offices in order to facilitate such transactions. 

We are also introducing e-payment services. 

We are contemplating the decentralisation of some services. This is being envisaged 

on a regional basis and the relocation of some services is being envisaged at the new urban 

terminal at Victoria with the renovation of the former stone building which housed the former 

RTLA. 

Another  study  by  the  PricewaterhouseCoopers  funded  by  the  Agence  Française  de 

Développement is being carried out for a restructure of the NTA to be more public friendly. 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  with  regard  to  the  location  of  the  NTA 

building, will the hon. Minister inform the House whether this building is being rented, who 

is the owner of this building and what amount is being paid for the area occupied by NTA? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: One question at a time! 

Mr Jhugroo: What area has been occupied and when the last tender has been carried 

out? 

Mr Bodha: Well, the National Transport Authority has rented the building at Cassis 

from  the  Mauritius  Secondary  Industries  since  January  2000.  The  monthly  rental  is 

Rs756,051,  exclusive  of  VAT.  The  building  has  a  total  floor  space  of  2,930  square  metres 

spread  over  two  floors.  In  fact,  the  problem  is  the  problem  of  access  and  the  problem  of 

parking.  So,  we  are  decentralising  some  of  the  services  and  relocating  the  NTA,  most 

probably at the urban terminal… 

 

Yes. 

58 

 (Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Don’t ask questions from a sitting position! Hon. Dr. Joomaye, 

next question! 

DRUGS (SYNTHETIC) – SENSITISATION CAMPAIGN 

(No.  B/845)  Dr.  Z.  Joomaye  (Second  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 

Souillac) asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the synthetic 

drugs, he will state the measures taken by his Ministry to – 

(a) 

curb the consumption thereof, and 

(b) 

create  awareness  regarding  the  potential  threats  to  the  health  of  the  users 

thereof. 

Mr  Gayan:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  with  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  the  House 

may wish to note that my Ministry is sparing no effort to curb the problem of synthetic drugs.  

In  fact,  a  multi-pronged  approach  focussing  on  prevention,  training,  strengthening  of 

legislations and surveillance has been adopted to address the problem. These include – 

(a) 

an  extensive  drug  prevention  campaign  launched  at  national  level  targeting 

young  students  of  secondary  schools,  as  prevention  remains  the  pillar  in  the 

fight against drugs use.  

I am informed that since April 2016, my Ministry has covered 101 private and 

public  secondary  schools  and  around  13,000  students  have  already  been 

sensitised  on  the  dangers  of  synthetic  drugs,  their  health,  the  social  and 

economic  consequences  of  abuse  of  synthetic  drugs.  This  campaign  will  be 

scaled up in  the near future to  cover all the students  of this  age  group in the 

island. 

(b) 

The  organisation  of  a  march  on  26  June  2016  to  raise  awareness  among  the 

public  in  general  about  the  dangers  of  illicit  drugs  including  synthetic  drugs. 

Some 1,000 persons, including youngsters, civil societies and religious bodies 

participated in the march. 

(c) 

The carrying out of sensitisation campaign targeting the community at large in 

Social Welfare Centres. 

 

59 

(d) 

The initiation of a sensitisation campaign, targeting the out of school youth as 

well as the world of world of work. The campaign will be again scaled up to 

reach maximum coverage.  

The  above  campaigns  are  complemented  by  ongoing  programmes  being 

conducted  on  the  radio  and  televisions  such  as  ”Priorité  Santé”,  “Hamari 

Sehat  Hamari  Zimmey”,  “3  minute  Radio  Programme”,  etc.    to  reach  the 

population at large. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  a  teenage  workshop  has  also  been  organised  recently  in  the 

context of the World Population Day. One of the objectives of the workshop was to sensitise 

the teenagers on the harm caused by illicit drugs including synthetic drugs.  

As  regards  treatment  and  rehabilitation  services,  apart  from  those  being  provided 

already,  an  Addictology  Unit  is  being  set  up  in  each  health  region  and  at  Brown  Sequard 

Mental Health Care Centre. 

The House may wish to note that necessary Training is being provided to medical and 

paramedical staff posted in all regional hospitals and at Brown Sequard Mental Health Care 

Centre to  enable them to  better manage synthetic drug users calling for treatment.  They  are 

being imparted with the necessary skills to provide such patients with secondary prevention 

with  a view to  prevent  them  from  relapsing. A new module on synthetic  drugs  will  also  be 

introduced shortly in the curriculum of all nursing and medical staff. 

My  Ministry  also  arranged  for 

the  UNODC 

to  provide 

training 

to 

the 

medical/paramedical staff as well as NGOs on substance abuse. The training was conducted 

two weeks ago. 

Regarding the legal framework, regulations – and I’ll be happy if hon. Uteem were to 

listen to this – have been made in September 2015 to include no new psychoactive substances 

(synthetic  drugs)  as  well  as  the  chemical  diversities  and  derivatives  under  appropriate 

schedules  under  the  Dangerous  Drugs  Act.    In  the  previous  regulation,  the  diversities  and 

derivatives were not covered, in the new schedule they have been covered. 

In  terms  of  surveillance,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  the  House  is  aware,  a  National  Drug 

Observatory was set up in November 2015. The role of the Observatory is to closely monitor 

the  drug  situation  in  the  country  and  provide  reliable  data  to  enable  the  various  authorities 

concerned to respond more proactively, efficiently and in a timely manner to this problem. I 

would be making a statement on the Drug Observatory later on. 

 

60 

Mr  Mohamed:  Mr  Deputy Speaker, Sir,  I  note  with  interest  what  the hon. Minister 

has  said  that  according  to  him  a  lot  was  accomplished  in  light  of  the  answer  which  he  has 

given,  following  his  remark  which  he  is  reported  to  have  made  on  29  June,  at  the 

Commission of Enquiry whereby synthetic drugs, il n’y a rien d’alarmant about it.  

Now, in spite of that, what I would like to understand from him is the following: all 

the measures that he has taken, up to now, how many people have died from synthetic drugs 

abuse or consommation since not a day goes by  that in spite of what he has said before the 

Drugs Commission of Enquiry… 

The Deputy Speaker: Come to the question! 

Mr Mohamed: That it was not alarmant, every single day that goes by or two other 

days, we find a young person has died because they have consumed drogue synthétique. So, 

how many? Does he have figures that he could give to us? 

Mr Gayan: Well, Mr Deputy Speaker, unfortunately, the hon. Member was not in the 

House when the Rt. hon. Prime Minister answered a question on this. In fact, there is a lot of 

exaggeration regarding synthetic drugs. In fact, to answer precisely to the question, we have 

no reported case based on scientific evidence directly attributable to synthetic drugs. 

No, no! 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

Mr Gayan: In fact, Mr Deputy Speaker… 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Silence, please! 

Mr Gayan: …I will be tabling the report to the National Drug Observatory. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mohamed! Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Gayan: And this is what the report is going to show. So, that’s why… 

Well, we… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

61 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mohamed! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Mohamed, I can’t hear the answer of the hon. Minister! 

Hon. Jhugroo, you as well! Please, hon. Minister continue! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Gayan:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  we  have  to  work  on  the  basis  of  evidence  and  the 

evidence that we work on is scientific evidence. On the basis of scientific evidence, we have 

no death directly attributable to synthetic drugs. 

Dr.  Joomaye:  When  we  talk  about  synthetic  drugs  the  most  used  synthetic  drug  is 

synthetic cannabis. I would like to know if the Central Laboratory of the hospital is equipped 

appropriately in reagents to be able to diagnose an intoxication by synthetic cannabis? 

Mr Gayan: I think the hon. Member must address a substantive question on that one. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ganoo! 

Mr  Ganoo:  Is the hon.  Minister aware of the fact  that the Superintendent  of Brown 

Sequard Hospital, Dr.  Valentina Sheik Hassan when she deponed before the Commission of 

Enquiry deponed to the following effect, that it was –  

«à partir de 2015 qu’il a eu une véritable explosion du nombre de patients admis 

à  l’hôpital  psychiatrique  Brown  Sequard  après  avoir  pris  de  la  drogue 

synthétique. » 

This is on record. This is what was the essence of the testimony of the Superintendent of the 

hospital of Brown Sequard before the Commission of Enquiry. How is this compatible with 

what the Minister has just said? 

Mr Gayan: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I will be tabling the report of the National Drug 

Observatory  and all these figures which  are based on official  data will be in  the report.  If  I 

refer to the hon. Member talking of explosion, of course, if from zero you have two, that is an 

explosion in terms of data. So, it is all a question of interpretation. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed: Yes, I would like to refer to my colleague, hon. Mohamed’s question, 

as at last Friday - Cabinet is supreme - Cabinet took note of the Drug Observatory Report to 

 

62 

assess the dangerous drug situation in the country. This is the word in Cabinet decision, but 

my question to the hon. Minister is as follows: who has the responsibility to implement all the 

recommendations  in  this  report  that  seeks  to  monitor  and  eradicate  the  dangerous  drug 

situation in this country? 

Mr Gayan: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the drug situation has been festering under the 

old regime and… 

this is why a Commission of Enquiry… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Silence, hon. Mohamed! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Gayan:… has been set up by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mohamed! Order!  

Mr Gayan: this is why…. 

The Deputy Speaker: Order! 

Hon. Mohamed!  

Silence! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Gayan: This is why in our electoral manifesto… 

(Interruptions) 

…in our electoral manifesto we did say… 

(Interruptions) 

 

63 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mohamed! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Gayan: Well, if you want to listen to the answer… 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Hon. Jhugroo! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Gayan:  They  allowed  the  drug  situation  to  become  so  bad  that  we  said  in  our 

election campaign that we need to set up a Commission of Enquiry on drugs… 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mohamed! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Gayan: and the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has done that! 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mohamed!  

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Mohamed! Please sit down hon. Minister. 

Mr Gayan: I am sorry! 

The Deputy Speaker: I know this is a passionate debate, you have asked the question 

and your hon. colleague has asked a question; have some respect, listen to the answer and if 

there needs to be a supplementary question I will give  you a supplementary question, but,  I 

want some silence, please! 

Hon. Gayan! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Gayan:  With  regard  to  the  Drug  Observatory,  I  will  be  tabling  the  report  and 

maybe hon. Mohamed can hold his fire until the report is presented. 

 

64 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  very  serious  and  reliable  ONGs,  those  who 

are on the field caring for these drug problems and taking care of the drug addicts every day, 

have  described  the  situation  very  alarming.  Can  the  Minister,  at  least,  inform  the  House 

when, at last, he will recognise the good job which is been done by the ONGs especially in 

this very delicate and important field of combating drugs? 

Mr Gayan: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the report which I will be tabling later has been 

prepared with the participation of the NGOs and they have all signed on the report. So, please 

wait for the report and then you will have a full picture. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ramano! 

Mr Ramano: Les patients concernés par les drogues synthétiques, qui sont admis au 

Brown  Sequard  Hospital,  sont  admis  ensemble  avec  les  patients  qui  souffrent  des  troubles 

mentaux.  Ma  question  est  celle-ci:  est-ce  qu’il  n’y  a  pas  lieu  d’un  point  de  vue  médical  de 

séparer ces deux types de patients? 

Mr Gayan: Well, as far as I know I do not think that that is the case. I think the two 

categories of patients are in different wards. 

(Interruptions) 

Well, if that is the case I will find out. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, last supplementary! 

Mr Mohamed: I apologise and yes, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, you are right. This does 

raise  passion  because  I  have  come  across,  like  everyone  here,  in  the  Press  where  you  find 

names of youngsters between the age of 18 to 21, 22, 23, 24 and 25 dying and their parents 

coming to say that they died because of the synthetic drugs it pains me. Now, does the hon. 

Minister consider it important to, at least, meet those parents and to explain to them that he is 

the one who believes that they are wrong in spite of having lived with their children, known 

what happened with their children about their consommation but the real reason is that it was 

something  else  having  to  do  with  pulmonary  oedema  and  lungs  issues  as  reasons  for  their 

death? Does he consider, maybe that will be good to face the music and meet those parents? 

(Interruptions) 

 

65 

Mr  Gayan:  I  face  the  music  every  day,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  not  only  in  this 

House but outside also. So, I am not afraid of meeting anyone. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Dr. Joomaye next question, please! 

SENIOR COUNSEL & SENIOR ATTORNEYS-AT-LAW – APPOINTMENT  

(No.  B/846)  Dr.  Z.  Joomaye  (Second  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 

Souillac)  asked  the  Attorney-General  whether,  in  regard  to  the  future  recommendations  for 

the appointment of Senior Counsel and Senior Attorneys-at-law, he will state if consideration 

will  be  given  for  proposed  amendments  to  be  introduced  to  the  Law  Practitioners  Act  to 

review the procedures applicable therefor. 

Mr Yerrigadoo: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir,… 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Rutnah! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Rutnah, stop interrupting. The hon. Attorney-General is answering his question! 

Mr Yerrigadoo: Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. The President of the Republic 

under recommendation of the hon. Chief Justice makes the appointment of Senior Counsels 

and  Senior  Attorneys.  This  is  provided  by  section  9A  of  the  Law  Practitioners  Act  which 

provides as follows –  

“(1)   The  President  of  the  Republic  may,  subject  to  subsection  (2)  and  on 

the recommendation of the Chief Justice, by Letters Patent, appoint - 

(a)  

a barrister to  be Senior  Counsel  for the Republic of Mauritius 

(SC); and  

(b)  

an attorney to be Senior Attorney for the Republic of Mauritius 

(SA).  

(2)   No barrister or attorney  shall be appointed pursuant  to  subsection  (1) 

unless he is, and has been, a barrister or an attorney of not less than 15 

years’ standing.” 

 

66 

Since  the  law  does  not  set  out  the  process  of  appointment  of  Senior  Counsel  and  Senior 

Attorney  in  detail,  my  office  requested  the  inputs  of  the  Judiciary  in  relation  to  this 

Parliamentary  Question  on  04  August.  I  have  been  informed  by  the  Acting  Deputy  Master 

and Registrar by way of letter dated 05 August 2016 that, and I quote –  

“(1)   Section 9A of the Law Practitioners Act provides for the appointment 

by  the  President  of  the  Republic  of  a  barrister  to  be  Senior  Counsel 

and  an  attorney  to  be  Senior  Attorney.  The  appointment  is  made  on 

recommendation of the Chief Justice and the barrister or attorney must 

be of not less than 15 years standing. 

(2)  

the practice has been for the hon.…” 

(Interruptions) 

If the hon. Leader of the Opposition would allow me… 

I am… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am giving to this House the input of the Judiciary; let’s have some 

respect for the Judiciary! 

And call the Leader of the Opposition to order! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Order! Order in the House! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Yerrigadoo: Will I be able to answer? 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Attorney General, please answer the question in a candid fashion, thank you! 

 

67 

Mr  Yerrigadoo:  I  am  giving  answer  and  the  input  of  the  Judiciary!  So,  I  will  go 

again –  

“(2)  

the practice has been for the hon. Chief Justice to consult relevant stakeholders 

including  hon.  Judges,  Senior  Counsels,  Senior  Attorneys  before  making  his 

recommendations to the President of the Republic; 

(3)  

the recommendations are those of the hon. Chief Justice; 

(4)  

the  introduction  of  any  proposed  amendments  is  within  the  province  of  the 

National Assembly in which the Judiciary has no say.” 

Government is mindful of and respects the independence of the Judiciary. Since this matter is 

one  which  pertains  of  a  legal  profession,  any  amendment  to  be  made  to  the  process  of 

appointment  of  Senior  Counsel  and  Senior  Attorney  will  be  made  after  consulting  the 

relevant stakeholders which are the hon. Chief Justice, the Mauritius Bar Association and the 

Law Society. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  The  power  to  appoint  Senior 

Counsel and Senior Attorney is through an Act of Parliament so it is Parliament who has to 

determine not the Judiciary. So, in other countries whether it is in Singapore or in England, 

law has evolved. It is no longer one person, one judge who decides who appoints under what 

criteria. May I ask the hon. Attorney-General, since this nomination of Senior Counsels and 

Senior  Attorneys  has  raised  passion  within  the  legal  profession,  whether  his  Ministry  is 

considering  independently  of  what  the  Chief  Justice  may  say  or  the  judges  may  say  -  as  a 

policy  matter,  this  Government  intends  to  come  forward  with  amendments  so  that  there  is 

transparency  and  objectivity  in  the  criteria  used  to  appoint  Senior  Counsels  and  Senior 

Attorneys in this country. 

Mr Yerrigadoo: I will take on board the suggestions of the hon. Member. 

Dr. Joomaye:  I would like to  know if, prior to  the proceeding for such  an exercise, 

the  entire  legal  profession  is  made  aware  that  there  will  be  an  exercise  of  nomination  of 

Senior Counsel and Senior Attorneys. 

Mr  Yerrigadoo:  I  have  not  been  provided  with  the  information,  but  I  suppose  that 

they don’t know. 

 

68 

Mr  Bhagwan:    I  don’t  know  if  the  Attorney  General’s  attention  has  been  drawn. 

Recently,  in  some  press  communiqué,  there  are  lots  of  cases  where  Barristers  of  long 

outstanding practice are not being considered for the appointment of Senior Counsel. 

Mr Yerrigadoo:  Unfortunately,  I have no say in  the matter.  I  have just detailed the 

process as it is. 

Dr.  Joomaye:  Would  the  Attorney  General  confirm  that  as  at  now  the  criteria  of 

seniority, experience and good conduct is not mandatory to be nominated Senior Counsel or 

Senior Attorney? 

Mr Yerrigadoo: I have stated in my reply with the inputs that have been provided to 

me,  but  unfortunately,  I  cannot  say  whether  these  are  criteria  or  not  since  it  is  the 

recommendation of the Chief Justice as the law currently stands. 

Mr Rutnah: Can the hon. Attorney General, at least, consider, as a matter of fairness 

and  all  reasonableness,  to  devise  a  system  whereby  an  advertisement  is  placed  so  that  all 

Counsel who have got at least 15 years standing and Attorneys can apply with credential in 

an application form to be considered, if that could be taken on board? 

Mr Yerrigadoo: I will consider same. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ganoo, a last supplementary! 

Mr  Ganoo:    Is  the  hon.  Attorney  General  aware  that  there  is  no  female  Senior 

Counsel at the moment; although he said he has no control over the nomination, but can he 

take good note of that? 

Mr Yerrigadoo: I am. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Sesungkur, next question, please! 

ISLETS -  DEVELOPMENT PROJECT  

(No.  B/847)  Mr  D.  Sesungkur  (First  Member  for  Montagne  Blanche  &  GRSE) 

asked  the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  whether,  in  regard  to  the 

islets,  he  will  state  the  policy  of  Government  concerning  the  use  thereof,  indicating  if  his 

Ministry  is  in  presence  of  any  application  for  the  implementation  of  hotel  development 

projects thereat and, if so, give details thereof. 

 

69 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands  (Mr S. Soodhun):  Mr 

Deputy Speaker, Sir, first of all, I would like to thank my hon. friend for asking this pertinent 

question. 

 I am informed that there are 35 islets which fall under the purview of my Ministry, 

including Ile aux Aigrettes which has been leased to the Mauritius Wildlife Foundation. 

Furthermore, two islets  namely,  île de la Passe,  is  managed by  the Ministry of Arts 

and Culture and Ilot Matapan is managed by the Beach Authority respectively. 

 The  policies  surrounding  the  use  of  the  above  islets  are  embodied  in  policy  EC4  – 

Conservation  of  islets  and  islands  of  the  Outline  Planning  Scheme,  Policy  ENV4  of  the 

National Development Strategy, the State Lands Act and the Pas Géométriques Act. 

 

Since  the  introduction  of  the  new  policy  framework  on  allocation  of  State  lands  in 

November  2015,  there  have  been  no  applications  received  at  my  Ministry  regarding  hotel 

development on any islet. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Sesungkur, next question! 

ECONOMIC RESTRUCTURING AND COMPETITIVENESS PROGRAMME - 

FUNDS DISBURSED 

(No.  B/848)  Mr  D.  Sesungkur  (First  Member  for  Montagne  Blanche  &  GRSE) 

asked  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  whether,  in  regard  to  the 

Economic Restructuring and Competitiveness Programme, he will state - 

(a) 

the amount of funds disbursed thereunder as at to date;  

(b) 

if a report has been presented on the efficacy thereof, and  

(c) 

the state of affairs thereof as at to date. 

Mr  Jugnauth:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir, 

the  Economic  Restructuring  and 

Competitiveness  Programme(ERCP)  was  set  up  in  2010  to  support  enterprises  that  were 

facing difficulties due to the Euro crisis.  The aim was to provide enterprises with transitional 

support based on a burden sharing principle which would enable them to bounce back from 

the financial decline.   

The  ERCP  was  renamed  as  the  Restructuring  Working  Group  (RWG)  under  the 

Finance and Audit (National Resilience Fund) Regulations 2012. 

 

70 

The  RWG  developed  financial  instruments  in  consultation  with  the  private  sector 

mainly commercial banks, leasing companies and other non-banking institutions.  

The  support  was  being  provided  on  the  basis  of  the  recommendations  of  an 

Independent Financial Analyst appointed by the RWG for each case.  

The instruments which were being used to support enterprises consisted of - 

 

 

 

 

 

Equity injection; 

Import loans; 

Corporate guarantees; 

Debentures, and 

Sale and leaseback of industrial properties. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with regard to part (a) of the question, I wish to inform the 

House that since the setting up of the RWG, 42 companies employing nearly 22,000 workers 

have been assisted through these instruments for a total amount of Rs2.72 billion. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed that a 

report  is  submitted  by  the  Independent  Financial  Analyst  in  each  case  after  making  a 

diagnosis of the financial difficulties being faced by the company, negotiating with banks and 

relevant parties and making appropriate recommendations for a turnaround situation. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, please switch off your mobile phone! 

Mr  Jugnauth:  Once  a  support  has  been  extended  to  a  company,  the  Independent 

Financial  Analyst  would  submit  a  report  on  a  quarterly  basis  for  monitoring  purposes  and 

appropriate corrective measures were taken where necessary.  

There is no overall report on the efficacy of the programme. However, I am informed 

that the status of the 42 companies assisted by the RWG is as follows – 

 

 

 

 

 

15  companies  have  successfully  restructured  and  settled  all  their  dues  to  the 

SIC; 

There have been four takeovers; 

13 remaining live cases; 

5 companies are currently under administration receivership, and 

5 companies have closed down. 

 

71 

The  programme  has  so  far  been  effective  in  saving  a  significant  number  of  jobs  and 

prevented quite a number of closures. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with regard to part (c) of the question, I wish to inform the 

House that with effect from December 2014, the RWG only meets on an ad hoc basis as and 

when  it  is  approached  by  a  company  in  difficulty.    The  RWG  only  acts  as  a  facilitator 

between the parties concerned to enable them to reach a consensus. 

The Deputy Speaker: Next question, hon. Sesungkur! 

EX-TEA DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY – EMPLOYEES – LAND LEASE 

(No.  B/849)  Mr  D.  Sesungkur  (First  Member  for  Montagne  Blanche  &  GRSE) 

asked  the  Minister  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Lease  of 

Agricultural  Land  Scheme  implemented  following  the  closure  of  the  ex-Tea  Development 

Authority, he will state – 

(a) 

the extent of land involved thereunder  

(b) 

the number of former employees of the defunct Authority who have obtained 

leases thereunder, indicating in each case, the  

(i) 

period of the lease, and  

(ii)  monthly rental per acre  

(c) 

if  consideration  will  be  given  for  the  sale  of  the  plots  of  land  involved 

thereunder to the leaseholders thereof, and  

(d) 

where matters stand in relation thereto. 

Mr Seeruttun: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am informed that following the closure of 

the  Tea  Development  Authority  on  30  June  1993,  the  area  of  land  in  the  ex-tea  belt  of  an 

extent  of  6,530  arpents  was  vested  in  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture  for  eventual  lease  to 

interested planters. 

With  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  the  Land  Use  Division  of  the  Ministry  was 

called upon, at that time, to draw lease agreements in favour of 2,950 lessees.  Unfortunately, 

no  record  is  available  at  the  Land  Use  Division  to  indicate  who  among  those  lessees  were 

former employees of the ex-TDA. 

 

72 

The  lease  agreement  is  normally  for  an  initial  period  of  7  years,  with  an  option  for 

renewal  for  further  periods  of  7  years  and  the  present  rental  fee  is  Rs1,000  per  arpent 

annually. 

Regarding  part  (c)  of  the  question,  the  State  Lands  Act  makes  no  provision  for  the 

sale of State agricultural land to lessees thereof.  

In  view  of  the  large  extent  of  State  land  involved,  that  is,  6,530  arpents,  which  are 

being exclusively used for food crop cultivation, it might not be advisable to sell those land to 

the actual beneficiaries as they may use the land for different purposes. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Sesungkur, next question! 

FOOD SECURITY FUND – FUNDS DISBURSED 

(No.  B/850)  Mr  D.  Sesungkur  (First  Member  for  Montagne  Blanche  &  GRSE) 

asked  the  Minister  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Food 

Security Fund, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to the – 

(a) 

total amount of funds disbursed therefrom for the purchase of equipment since 

January 2013 to date, and  

(b) 

number of beneficiaries thereof, indicating the sectors of activity in which it is 

engaged. 

Mr Seeruttun:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am informed that the Food Security Fund 

was set up in 2009 in the wake of the world food crisis in order to boost local production of 

food crops, meat and milk to enhance the level of food security in the country. 

In that context, numerous schemes were introduced to give the necessary facilities and 

incentives  to  the  farmers  and  breeders.  One  of  the  schemes  pertains  to  the  purchase  of 

equipment to modernise the production process for efficiency and productivity gains. 

Regarding  part  (a)  of  the  question,  the  total  sum  disbursed  for  the  purchase  of 

equipment for the period January 2013 to date is around Rs17.6 m. 

As regards part (b), the number of beneficiaries is as follows - 

(i) 

5 in the poultry sector; 

(ii) 

1 in the fishing sector; 

(iii) 

87 in the food crop sector, and 

 

(iv) 

20 in the livestock sector 

73 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr Bérenger:  Can I ask the hon. Minister whether this Food Security Fund is still in 

existence or has it been wrapped up, as all other special funds have been wrapped up, and if it 

is still in existence, what amount of money is still available under that fund? 

Mr Seeruttun:  It is no more now as a special fund.  It forms part of the budget of the 

Ministry with regard to the scheme that used to be under that Food Security Fund. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Gobin, next question! 

AIDS – INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE 

 (No.  B/851)  Mr  M.  Gobin  (First  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles &  Souillac) 

asked  the  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  whether,  in  regard  to  the  international 

assistance  for  response  to  AIDS,  he  will  state  if  Government  proposes  to  avail  itself  of  the 

United States “President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief” and, if so, indicate the actions 

he proposes to take in relation thereto. 

Mr Gayan:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am informed that Mauritius does not qualify 

for funding under the ‘President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief’ because - 

(i) 

Mauritius is not an under developed country, and  

(ii) 

it does not have epidemic levels of HIV/AIDS.  

As the House is aware, we have a low prevalence of HIV/AIDS in the country. 

The second part of the question, therefore, does not arise. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Gobin, next question! 

L’ESCALIER MARKET – SAVANNE DISTRICT COUNCIL  

(No.  B/852)  Mr  M.  Gobin  (First  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  &  Souillac) 

asked Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the l’Escalier Market, he will state 

if  he  has  received  representations  to  introduce  proposed  amendments  to  the  existing 

legislation to clarify the question as to if same is vested in the District Council of Grand Port 

or in that of Savanne and, if so, indicate the actions he proposes to take in relation thereto. 

Dr.  Husnoo:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  my  Ministry  has  not  received  any 

representation to bring amendments to the Local Government Act to clarify the question as to 

 

74 

whether  the  l’Escalier  Market  is  vested  in  the  District  Council  of  Grand  Port  or  in  that  of 

Savanne recently. 

However, in July 2014 the District Council of Savanne sought confirmation from my 

Ministry as to whether l’Escalier Market falls under its jurisdiction. 

Following  consultations  held  with  the  Electoral  Commissioner’s  Office  and  the 

Ministry  of  Housing  and  Lands  on  the  matter,  it  is  confirmed  that  the  l’Escalier  Market  is 

situated  in  the  Village  Council  area  of  l’Escalier  and  secondly,  the  Village  of  l’Escalier  is 

situated in the District Council of Savanne. 

I, therefore, do not propose to bring any amendment to the existing legislation on this 

matter. 

Mr Gobin:  Can the hon. Minister confirm  whether this ministerial confirmation  has 

been  transmitted  to  the  relevant  District  Council?  Because  I  am  informed  that,  as  at  now, 

there is a lingering doubt, especially with the inspectors of both District Councils, Grand Port 

and Savanne, as to the question of jurisdiction over the l’Escalier Market. 

Dr.  Husnoo:    Actually,  we  have  just  received  the  confirmation  from  the  Electoral 

Commissioner and the Ministry of Housing and Land recently.  So, I am going to make sure 

that we inform both Grand Port and Savanne about the latest. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Lepoigneur, next question! 

COROMANDEL – FOOTBALL PITCH - CONSTRUCTION 

(No. B/853)  Mr G. Lepoigneur (Fifth Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) 

asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the proposed construction of a 

football pitch, in Coromandel, he will state where matters stand, including the expected start 

and completion dates thereof. 

The  Minister  of  Business,  Enterprise  and  Cooperative  (Mr  S.  Bholah):    Mr 

Deputy Speaker, Sir, I will be replying to this question, with your permission.  

I wish to inform the House that the Ministry of Youth and Sports does not have any 

project for the construction of a football pitch at Coromandel. However, I am informed that 

the Municipal Council of Beau Bassin/Rose Hill is embarking on such a project in the region 

following  request  received  from  the  inhabitants  of  the  locality.  The  Municipal  Council 

though the Ministry of Local Government had even identified a plot of land of an extent of 

12,000 m2 for the implementation of the project.  

 

75 

The  plot  of  land  initially  identified  could  not  be  vested  in  the  Municipal  Council  of 

Beau Bassin/Rose Hill as the site forms part of land already vested in the Ministry of Agro-

Industry and Food Security for the implementation of the Field Operations, Regrouping and 

Irrigations Project by the Mauritius Cane Industry Authority. 

I  am  further  informed  that  the  Ministry  of  Local  Government  has  been  advised  to 

identify an alternative site for the project and as at date there has been no development on the 

matter. 

Mr Lepoigneur:  Can I know from the hon. Minister which alternative is he talking 

about?   

Mr  Bholah:    It  is  the  Ministry  of  Local  Government  which  has  been  advised  to 

identify an alternative site.  

CIVIL SERVICE BILL - INTRODUCTION 

(No. B/854) Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 

Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms, Minister of Environment, Sustainable 

Development,  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management  whether,  in  regard  to  the  proposed 

introduction of a Civil Service Bill, he will state – 

(a) 

when  same  will  be  introduced  in  the  House,  indicating  the  reasons  for  the 

delay in the introduction thereof, and  

(b) 

if consultations have been held with  all the stakeholders concerned therewith 

as at to date. 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong :  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I wish to inform the House that 

the  introduction  of  a  Public  Service  Bill  aligns  with  the  vision  of  this  Government  and  the 

Prime  Minister,  in  particular,  to  inter  alia,  enhance  and  sustain  public  trust  in  public 

institutions through an apolitical performance oriented and accountable Public Service.   

Thus,  in  view  of  the  high  importance  being  given  to  this  unprecedented  reform 

initiative and its implications in ensuring the delivery of quality public services, much care is 

being taken in the drafting of the Bill. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  following  Government’s  decision  to  introduce  a  Public 

Service  Bill,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  a  Task  Force  comprising  senior  Government 

officials  was  set  up  to  work  out  a  draft  Bill.    The  Task  Force  has  had  various  working 

sessions and consulted relevant law existing worldwide in the framing of the Bill and this was 

 

76 

a  time  consuming  exercise.  The  draft  Bill  is  now  being  examined  by  the  State  Law  Office.  

On  receipt  of  the  duly  vetted  version  of  the  Bill,  consultations  will  be  held  with  the 

stakeholders  concerned.  Subsequently,  the  draft  Bill  will  be  introduced  in  the  National 

Assembly with adjustment, if any. 

Mr Ganoo:  Can I ask the hon. Minister whether it shouldn’t have been more proper 

and  wiser  to  have  consultations  with  the  stakeholders  first  before  referring  the  Bill  to  the 

State Law Office? 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: I believe this is the way it has always been done.  The task 

force has been set up already and they are working on it now.  Maybe in the future we can 

think about it.  

Mr Ganoo:  Can I ask the hon. Minister also whether a code of conduct for Ministers 

will  be  attached  to  this  Public  Service  Bill  and  if  this  is  the  case,  will  the  hon.  Minister 

introduce this Bill to the House or will it be the Rt. hon. Prime Minister?  

Mr Wong Yen Cheong:   Section 14 (3) of the Bill  provides that the Prime Minister 

may, by  way of regulation, amend the Schedule, code of conduct  for Ministers and code of 

conduct for public officers and advisers. 

SECONDARY SCHOOLS – SYNTHETIC DRUGS  – SENSITISATION 

PROGRAMMES 

(No. B/855) Mr A. Ganoo  (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 

Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to synthetic drugs, he will state – 

(a) 

the  number  of  youngsters  under  25  years  old  who  have  reportedly  sought 

treatment of the side effects following consumption thereof, and  

(b) 

if he will consider the  advisability of liaising with  the Ministry of Education 

and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific Research to - 

(i) 

carry  out  sensitization  programmes  and  offer  counselling  in  relation 

thereto to the students of secondary institutions, and  

(ii) 

allow  the  Non-Governmental  Organisations  having  proven  track 

records  in  the  field  of  drugs  and  harm  reduction  to  carry  out 

sensitization  programmes  and  offer  counselling  in  relation  thereto  to 

the students of secondary institutions. 

 

77 

Mr  Gayan:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  with  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I  am 

informed  that  from  January  2015  to  date,  a  total  of  195  persons  have  sought  treatment  in 

public health institutions following the consumption of synthetic drugs. 

As  far  as  part  (b)  of  the  question  is  concerned,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  wish  to 

inform  the  House  that  there  already  exists  a  close  collaboration  between  the  Ministry  of 

Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific  Research  and  my 

Ministry, regarding sensitisation programmes on substance abuse.  

As  I  have  already  indicated  in  my  reply  to  PQ  B/845,  my  Ministry  has  launched  an 

extensive drug prevention campaign at  national  level  targeting  young students  of secondary 

schools  in  April  2016.    With  that  programme  about  13,000  students  have  already  been 

touched and this programme is going to be escalated so that we can reach as many students as 

possible.   

The question at part (b) (ii) does not concern my Ministry and should be addressed to 

the Ministry of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific Research, 

and to a previous PQ the hon. Minister has replied to that question as well. 

Mr  Ganoo:   The last part of the question relates also  to  the fact  that when the hon. 

Minister of Finance and Economic Development presented his Budget Speech, avait fait une 

fleur  vis-à-vis  the  NGOs,  applauded  the  good  work  they  are  doing.      So,  this  is  why  my 

question was whether the Ministry shouldn’t have recourse to the organisations with proven 

track record, of course, to help?  Because we are all repeating that this war against drugs is a 

national war; everybody has to give a helping hand. So, the NGOs could have been roped in 

to help the Ministry to sensitise our youth against this scourge of sythentic drugs. 

Mr  Gayan:  I  think  this  question  should  be  addressed  to  the  hon.  Minister  of 

Education, my colleague. What I can say, Mr Deputy Speaker, is that there are lots of NGOs 

involved in this, and they should be more geared towards providing pyschosocial support to 

all those who are already in that particular infernal situation. 

SAVANNE & BLACK RIVER – HOUSING UNITS - CONSTRUCTION 

(No. B/856) Mr A. Ganoo  (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  whether,  in  regard  to  the  National 

Housing Development Company Ltd., he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, 

information  as  to  the  number  of  house  seekers  presently  registered  therewith,  district-wise, 

indicating the – 

 

78 

(a) 

monthly earnings thereof in each case, and 

(b) 

number of housing units proposed to be built in the Savanne and Black River 

District, indicating the proposed location thereof. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands  (Mr S. Soodhun):  Mr 

Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am informed that there is presently 30,323 house seekers registered at 

the National Housing Development Co. Ltd.  Out of the 30,323 applicants – 

 

 

 

16,804 earn a monthly family income between Rs6,200 to Rs10,000; 

the monthly family income of 8,789 other applicants ranges from Rs10,001 to 

Rs15,000, and 

the  remaining  4,730  applicants  earn  a  monthly  family  income  between 

Rs15,001 to Rs20,000. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in regard to part (a) of the question, I am tabling herewith a 

list indicating on a district-wise basis the total number of house seekers presently registered at 

the  level  of  the  National  Housing  Development  Co  Ltd  together  with  the  range  of  their 

monthly earnings. 

In  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  the  National  Housing 

Development  Co  Ltd proposes to  construct  during the next  three  years some 1,200 housing 

units in the districts of Savanne and Black River as follows – 

 

   Locality 

1.  Souillac 

 

 

 

 

2.  Rivière des Anguilles 

3.  Chemin Grenier 

4.  Britannia 

5.  Surinam 

 

 

6.  Gros Cailloux 

7.  Cascavelle  

 

 

 

 

 

No. of Proposed Housing Units 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

247 

380 

  64 

185 

  86 

 

 

180 

 

 

 

  58 

Mr Ganoo: Did I hear the hon. Vice-Prime Minister saying that the figure was 30,000 

house seekers or 13,000? 

Mr Soodhun: It is 30,000. 

 

79 

Mr Mahomed: Paragraph 313 of the Budget Speech makes provision to  enlarge the 

income  ceiling  to  Rs20,000  instead  of  Rs10,000  previously.  Does  the  hon.  Vice-Prime 

Minister  expect  this  figure  of  30,000  demands  for  a  housing  unit  to  rise,  and  what  is  the 

strategy that is being envisaged at the level of NHDC to cater for these people? 

Mr  Soodhun:  In  fact,  when  there  are  30,000  applications,  it  does  to  mean  that  all 

applications are in line with the criteria of the Ministry of Housing and Lands.  So, there was 

a  lot  of  people  who  have  applied  because  we  have  raised  the  threshold.  Then,  we  have  to 

study case by  case. There are some people who  apply  and who  are owner of a land or of a 

house.  They are not eligible for that. 

Mr  Ueeem:  May  l  know  from  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  whether  any 

consideration will be given to reviewing the amount of deposit which a household must give 

to the NHDC to be eligible to get a house? I know that there is a revision for the threshold, 

the monthly income, but for the actual deposit, is there any revision of the criteria? 

Mr  Soodhun:  I  thank  my  hon.  Friend.    That  is  a  very  pertinent  question.  We  are 

looking into it because there is demand that people cannot afford to pay. 

Mr  Barbier:  With  regard  to  the  subsidy  on  each  housing  unit,  now  that  the 

Government  has  raised  up  the  limit  for  those  who  can  have  a  maximum  subsidy  from 

Rs10,000  to  Rs20,000,  will  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  inform  the  House  what  is  now 

going  to  be  the  subsidy  in  each  different  category  and  whether  the  figure  has  already  been 

worked out?  Will he inform the House accordingly? 

Mr  Soodhun:  Yes.    We  have  already  worked  out  the  subsidy.    For  people  earning 

under Rs10,000, it is Rs800,000, but it is not  going to be the same for people earning from 

Rs10,000 to Rs20,000. Definitely, it will be less than the people who are earning Rs10,000.  I  

am going to submit it to my colleagues. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ganoo, last supplementary! 

Mr  Ganoo:  Last  question,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker!  Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Vice-Prime 

Minister to see to it that the principle of first come, first served is respected, so that those who 

have registered earlier should be entitled to the units and not only on the criteria of those who 

can afford a higher deposit? 

Mr  Soodhun:  The  hon.  Member  can  rest  assured  that  it  will  be  first  come,  first 

served. This is always applied. 

 

80 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Uteem, next question! 

OLD AGE PENSION - HIGH LEVEL COMMITTEE – SETTING UP 

(No.  B/857)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 

Central) asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the 

proposed setting up of a high level committee to look into the payment of universal old age 

pension, he will state the proposed – 

(a) 

composition thereof, and 

(b) 

terms of reference thereof. 

The  Minister  of  Social  Security,  National  Solidarity  and  Reform  Institutions 

(Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo):  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  with  your  permission,  I  shall  answer  this 

Parliamentary Question. 

The  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  enunciated  in  his  Budget 

Speech  that,  in  view  of  an  ageing  population,  significant  pressure  is  being  exerted  on  the 

pension  system.  This  is  a  challenge  which  we  cannot  afford  to  ignore  as,  with  time,  the 

implication will be more complex and severe. The ratio of working population to the number 

of  pension  beneficiaries  will  be  decreasing  significantly  from  six  employees  to  support  a 

pensioner  to  only  three  employees  by  2030.  In  the  face  of  such  a  situation,  it  has  been 

decided that a High Level Committee be set up to – 

(i) 

examine  in-depth  the  existing  pension  system  and  understand  how  they  will 

behave or be impacted upon in the medium to long term; 

(ii) 

look  into  ways  and  means  to  improve  the  contributory  retirement  pension  of 

private sector employees, and 

(iii) 

advising on how best to ensure sustainability of our pension system. 

Taking  into  the  complexity  of  the  issue  at  stake,  the  High  Level  Committee  will  be 

composed  in  such  a  manner  that  it  will  be  fairly  representative  of  the  stakeholders  who  are 

knowledgeable  in  the  matter  and  who  can  surely  contribute  meaningfully  in  properly 

assessing the situation and formulating workable pension reform options. 

Mr  Uteem:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  this  High  Level  Committee  has  already  been 

announced  in  the  Budget.  Up  to  now,  not  only  this  High  Level  Committee  has  not  been 

constituted,  but  we  don’t  even  know  what  will  be  the  composition  of  that  High  Level 

 

81 

Committee. We don’t even know what  will be the precise terms of reference, and we don’t 

even know as, at today, what will be the time line for them to submit their report. 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: I have started consultation with officers at the level of my 

Ministry.    Now  I  will  have  to  take  it  with  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 

Development.  Shortly, the High Level Committee will be set up. 

Mr  Ganoo:  Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister,  since  she  has  just  given  to  the  House  the 

terms  of  reference  of  the  Committee,  whether  the  question  of  ciblage  will  be  also  on  the 

agenda of this Committee? 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Well,  we  will  have  to  look  at  all  aspects  of  the  pension 

system. I am sure the High level Committee will come up with appropriate deliberations. 

APOLLO BRAMWELL HOSPITAL – SALE 

(No.  B/858  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 

Central)  asked  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  whether,  in  regard  to  the 

sale of the hospital business of Apollo Bramwell to Omega Ark, he will – 

(a) 

table copy of the agreement signed in relation thereto, and 

(b) 

state – 

(i) 

the price thereof and 

(ii) 

how the proceeds thereof will be used. 

Mr Jugnauth: Mr Speaker Sir, an Asset Purchase Agreement in respect of the Apollo 

Bramwell  Hospital  was  signed  on  20  July  2016  between  NIC  Healthcare  Ltd,  the  Special 

Administrator  appointed  for  the  British  American  Hospitals  Enterprise  Ltd  and  Omega  Ark 

Healthcare Investments Ltd.  The Asset Purchase Agreement provides for the transfer of the 

hospital’s  business,  excluding  the  building  and  leasehold  land,  to  Omega  Ark  Healthcare 

Investments Ltd, subject to certain conditions being met. 

The  main  condition  relates  to  the  offer  of  new  contracts  of  employment  to  existing 

employees of the Apollo Bramwell Hospital. 

With regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed that, as per the confidentiality 

clause  contained  in  the  Asset  Purchase  Agreement,  a  copy  of  the  Agreement  cannot  be 

disclosed. 

 

82 

As  for  part  (b)(i),  the  price  for  the  hospital’s  business,  including  movable  assets  is 

USD 18 million payable as follows –  

 

 

 

USD 11 million on signature date of deed witnessing sale of assets; 

three instalments of USD 1 million at the end of each successive year 

following signature date, and 

two instalments of USD 2 million at the end of the fourth and fifth years. 

Regarding  part  (b)(ii),  the  proceeds  will  be  used  to  pay  amounts  due  in  respect  of 

outstanding  pension  contributions  of  employees;  bank  loans  taken  by  NIC  Healthcare  Ltd; 

other commitments secured on the hospital’s assets which must be repaid under the terms of 

the APA; and suppliers of the company. 

The  top  management  team  of  Omega  Ark  is  presently  in  Mauritius  with  a  view  to 

expediting the signature of the deed witnessing the transfer of assets. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. May I know from the hon. Minister 

of Finance and Economic Development what is the total amount payable? He has listed out 

the  amount  owed  in  pension  contributions,  bank  loans  and  other  commitments,  so  can  we 

have  the  total  figure  of  the  amount  that  is  owed  by  Apollo  Bramwell Hospital,  because  the 

proceeds will be used to repay first the amounts that he has just mentioned? 

Mr Jugnauth: Well, the amount that is owed by Apollo  Bramwell Hospital,  I think 

there  was  a  Parliamentary  Question  that  was  asked  by  the  hon.  Member  earlier  on.  I  don’t 

have the figure, but I remember I answered and I stated the exact amount that was owed and 

that would be recouped from this amount that is being paid by Omega Ark. 

Mr Bérenger:  Can  I put  the following question to the hon. Minister of Finance and 

Economic Development? On 03 May, in the context of the Private Notice Question, which I 

put  on  BAI  in  general,  the  Minister  for  Financial  Affairs  said  -  I  asked  whether  a  due 

diligence  has  been  carried  out  to  know  who  is  behind  that  offer  by  Omega  Ark  -  that  the 

question should be put to the Minister of Finance and Economic Development, and he added 

– 

“As to who is behind Omega Ark, I, personally, have not conducted any due diligence 

neither  has  my  Ministry.  The  question  could  be  put  to  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance 

and Economic Development. I believe they are people from England.” 

 

83 

So,  first  occasion  we  put  the  question  to  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 

Development, this time on 12 July, where my colleague, hon. Uteem, again asked whether a 

due diligence has been carried out on Omega Ark. And, the reply, which I am sure the hon. 

Minister  has  looked  into,  is  quite  remarkable.  The  reply  from  the  Minister  of  Finance  and 

Economic Development was –  

“Well,  I  definitely  presume  that  a  due  diligence  has  been  carried  out  by  the  team 

negotiating with the company.” 

Can  I  know  whether  he  presumes  the  same  or  whether  he  has  had  time  to  look  into 

that exercise because, to me, a so-called due diligence exercise was carried out by the one and 

only BDO and, according to me, it was not a due diligence exercise at all.  So, can we know 

whether  the  hon.  Minister  has  had  the  opportunity  to  check  on  that  and  whether  a  real  due 

diligence exercise will be carried out? 

Mr Jugnauth: Well, I am informed that, in fact, BDO had carried out a due diligence 

and  I  am  also  informed  that  BOI  also  had  carried  out  certain  enquiries  to  ascertain  those 

directors  of  the  company  and  the  incorporation  of  the  company.  I  understand  it  was 

incorporated  in  England.  I  am  also  informed  that  they  have  certain  checks  with  regard  to 

Interpol. 

Mr  Bérenger:  Is  the  hon.  Minister  aware  that,  in  fact,  they  were  incorporated  in 

England last year? They pretend to be a worldwide company with long experience and so on. 

Is he aware of it? It’s a very fishy transaction and it was registered in UK only last year! 

Mr Jugnauth: I don’t know about the date and year of incorporation but, this is what 

I  was  informed,  that  it  was  incorporated  in  England.  But,  of  course,  I  will  ask  other 

information with regard to the background of the incorporation and when was it incorporated 

and so on. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody! 

Mr  Baloomoody:  Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  with  regard  to  the  staff  of  Apollo 

Bramwell, will they continue to benefit the same terms and conditions of the actual contract 

and will their time of service be recognised by the new management company? 

Mr  Jugnauth:  Well,  I  am  informed  that  the  terms  and  conditions  that  are  being 

negotiated  right  now  are  not  less  favourable  to  what  they  were  before.  This  is  what  I  am 

being  told.  I know that  a number of  employees  have  already  signed the  new contract but,  I 

 

84 

also know that there are negotiations that are ongoing between the unions representing some 

employees  and  the  management.  I  also  know  that  the  Ministry  of  Labour  also  is  lending 

support to advise on the issue of the employment law. With regard to the years of service, I 

cannot say; I don’t know. But I can find out about that. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed: In the interest of transparency and to ensure that there is or has been a 

level  playing  field,  could  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development, 

following  the  reports  earlier  this  morning  in  the  Press,  that  there  have,  indeed,  been  offers 

made for the purchase of Apollo Bramwell Hospital that were higher than the one offered by 

Omega  Ark,  could  he  now,  at  least,  commit  to  this  House  that  he  will  carry  out  an 

investigation to find out what were the higher offers and bidders made and also explained to 

the House - and that is the final part - have all soumissionaires, all those who have bid, been 

given the possibility of making an offer for the management of this establishment or has this 

only  been  geared  or  directed  towards  only  one  of  the  soumissionaires  selected,  i.e.  Omega 

Ark?  

And  why  is  it,  therefore,  that  not  all  other  bidders  were  put  on  a  level  playing  field 

and given the opportunity of bidding for that particular purpose, that of managing? 

Mr  Jugnauth:  Well,  I  can  reassure  the  hon.  Member  that,  in  fact,  the  transaction 

adviser  had  considered  all  the  proposals  that  were  made  and  they  had  retained  three 

proposals, amongst others, Omega Ark, CIEL in association with Fortis and a South African 

company called Lenmed. And, according to the information that I have, Omega Ark was by 

far the best offer that they had. So, I take it they have done their comparative studies to find 

out and to recommend to the committee about Omega Ark. Well, this is what I have. 

Mr Bérenger: Can I know the name of the transaction adviser? 

Mr Jugnauth: Yes, it is BDO. 

Mr Bérenger: Do you find it normal that BDO is supposed to have carried out a due 

diligence  exercise  and  then  that  same  BDO  –  on  a  eu  BDO  à  toutes  les  sauces  -  that  is 

supposed to have carried out a due diligence exercise is appointed transaction adviser and has 

all sorts of transactions? 

(Interruptions) 

 

85 

Mr Jugnauth: Well, they were the transaction adviser, so I relied on the committee 

that was set up and that dealt with them at the level of the Ministry. Again, let me say from 

what  information  I  have  gathered,  that  the  difference  in  terms  of  the  offer  was  really  huge 

between the next best one. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea, last supplementary! 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  this  whole  transaction  is  very  fishy 

because the three companies who had bid, had bid on an expression of interest of the sale of 

the whole clinic with equipment, with staff and with everything and after that the rules of the 

game have been changed.  This is why this company has got the contract because at the first 

instance this was not the criteria.  So, will the hon. Minister consider the fact that now that all 

this has become very fishy, would he set up an enquiry on the whole transaction? 

Mr Jugnauth: No, I think the hon. Member is partly wrong and where you are wrong 

is  that  the  expression  of  interest  contains  six  options  and  that  all  those  who  had  made 

proposals were requested to make proposals with respect to all the options.  Now, one of the 

options was, of course, for the sale of the whole of the business, but there are other options 

with regard to – 

 

 

 

 

equity participation, management and outright acquisition; 

equity participation and outright acquisition of land and building; 

management contract and rental of land and building, and 

equity participation, and  management contract and rental of land and 

building, and so on. 

So, in the light of all these proposals that were received, I am told that a comparative study 

was done in order to make recommendations to the Committee. 

Mr Uteem:  On 03 May, the hon. Minister Bhadain stated that the contract would be 

signed in May for USD60 m.  Two months later, we are told that the first instalment is going 

to be only USD11 m. and the total value of the sale would be USD18 m. So, does that mean 

that  the  hospital  land  and  building  is  valued  more  than  USD42  m.  and  the  business  is  only 

USD18 m.?  In the light of all that we said in this House, would the hon. Minister of Finance 

and  Economic  Development  consider  to  have  an  independent  inquiry  to  see  whether  we 

should not have re-launched a new tender to get the best offer because, at the end of the day, 

it  is  taxpayers  who  are  going  to  pay  if  there  is  a  shortfall  in  the  amount  to  be  paid  in 

connection with BAI? 

 

86 

Mr  Jugnauth:  Well,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  have  said  that  the  expression  of 

interest contained numerous options.  That is one.   

Secondly, it was true that initially it was the intention of Government to sell the whole 

of the business, including the land and the building.  But then, at a certain stage, we decided 

to go for the sale of the business, excluding the land and the building.  Now, that is why we 

looked  at  the  other  options  with  regard  to  all  the  other  proposals  that  were  made  and, 

therefore, the comparison was done and we went for the best. 

Now, I must also say that initially when it was the intention to sell the whole of the 

business, there was only one company that made a formal proposal and that was Omega Ark. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Uteem, next question! 

STATE LAW OFFICERS & STATE ATTORNEYS-AT-LAW – PRIVATE 

PRACTICE 

(No.  B/859)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 

Central) asked the Attorney-General whether, in regard to the State Law Officers and State 

Attorneys-at-Law entitled to practise as barristers and attorneys-at-law respectively on behalf 

of any private party, he will state the names thereof, indicating the – 

(a) 

private parties for whom they are entitled to practise, and  

(b) 

date  on  which  they  received  the  written  authorisation  of  the  President  of  the 

Republic therefor. 

Mr Yerrigadoo:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir,  I thank the hon. Member  who is  also  my 

learned friend for the opportunity he has afforded me to set the record straight in  relation to 

this matter. 

The issue of Law Officers and State Attorneys being entitled to private practice is not 

a new one. In fact, that issue seems to arise every now and then and replies from myself and 

my predecessors had been consistent on the matter. For the record, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I 

will refer to the following answers to the following questions. 

In  reply  to  PQ  B/828  of  12  December  1978,  the  then  hon.  Attorney-General  and 

Minister of Justice highlighted that, and I quote – 

“I am aware, however, that some senior officers who are substantive holders of office 

in  the Ministry of Justice have since 1972 been  authorised by the Governor General 

 

87 

under  the  Law  Officers’  Ordinance  to  undertake  the  legal  advisory  work  of  some 

parastatal organisations in their capacity as lawyers and not in their official capacity. 

The  reason  for  the  authorisation  was  to  prevent  sensitive  information  from  being 

disclosed outside the public service.” 

With regard to  the fees  obtained by the law officers, the reply of the then Attorney-

General was, and I quote – 

“I  am  not  authorised  by  professional  ethics  to  enquire  from  lawyers  the  quantum  of 

fees they receive from those organisations which give them fees.” 

In reply to PQ A/24, the then Attorney-General and Minister of Justice on 31 October 

2000 stated, and I quote – 

“As  regards  part  (a)  of  the  question,  some  parastatal  bodies  entrust  their  advisory 

work  to  officers  of  the  Attorney-General’s  Office  through  a  Cabinet  decision.  His 

Excellency, the then Governor General has under section 17 of the Law Officers’ Act 

on  15  December  1982  authorised  Law  Officers  and  Crown  Attorneys  to  undertake 

such work. This  was further confirmed on 30 January 1995 by the then President of 

the Republic following the advice of the Prime Minister.” 

I have to clarify who are the parties for whom Law Officers and State Attorneys have 

been authorised to provide legal services in a private capacity under the Law Officers’ Act. 

Such parties, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, are restricted to  parastatal  and statutory bodies, such 

institutions or companies where Government has an interest and who, the Law Officers at the 

request of such entities or their parent Ministries agree to provide their services. I am tabling 

a list of all these entities. I will table a few lists in a minute. 

The above illustrates beyond doubt that this practice dates back to many decades and 

it is above board and has been approved at the highest level of the State. For the record, I also 

have  to  state  that  on  06  March  2003,  the  then  hon.  Prime  Minister,  who  is  also  the  present 

Prime Minister, sought from the President specific authorisation for the Solicitor General and 

other Law Officers and Attorneys in addition to their existing general authorisation to do so 

to represent the then newly created Independent Commission Against Corruption (ICAC) and 

Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU), the following terms, and I quote – 

“In pursuance of the Law Officers’ Act, the Solicitor General, Law Officers and State 

Attorneys  have  already  been  authorised  to  tender  legal  advice  and  to  appear  before 

Courts and other quasi-judicial bodies for parastatal bodies and in companies in which 

 

88 

Government has an interest. I now advise that you may be pleased to authorise State 

Attorneys,  Law  Officers  to  also  represent  the  Independent  Commission  Against 

Corruption  and  the  Financial  Intelligence  Unit  in  Court  as  and  when  requested  by 

these two institutions.” 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  above,  I  believe,  will  put  to  rest  those  inaccuracies  by 

certain persons, but have been refugees in certain quarters in certain newspapers, with regard 

to  the propriety of the Solicitor General,  previously acting as legal  adviser and  getting paid 

personally for his advisory work for the FIU.  

In that  regard, no  Law  Officer or State Attorney  can  be faulted or queried for being 

remunerated  personally  for  legal  advisory  and  litigation  work  done  by  him  as  a  lawyer  by 

virtue of the appropriate authority held under the Law Officers Act be stand as long ago as in 

1978, and I fully subscribe to the views of my predecessor. 

For the record, in  1995, the then Prime Minister and Attorney-General,  Sir Anerood 

Jugnauth,  QC,  sought  and  obtained  the  authorisation  of  the  President  again  as  regards  the 

names  and  in  1995,  it  was  for  reiterating  the  policy  and  special  permission  for  TEAFAC, 

Sugar  Investment  Trust  and  any  other  companies  that  the  State  has  an  interest  again  to 

undertake such work. 

As regards the names of the Law Officers and State Attorneys who tender such legal 

advice  and  who  appear  in  such  cases,  they  are  Law  Officers  generally  in  the  grade  of 

Solicitor General  to  Senior State Counsel  or State Attorneys who have between 10  years to 

34 years of experience, who are considered to be adequately knowledgeable and experienced 

to meet requirements of the statutory bodies and Government entities for legal advisory and 

litigation work. Again, I am tabling a list of the names of all these officers. 

Finally, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, following unwarranted and scurrilous attacks on my 

office,  with  regard  to  the  integrity  of  the  Solicitor  General,  Law  Officers,  including  other 

officers tasked with periodically reproducing new editions of Revised Laws of Mauritius, my 

Office, under my instructions, issued a communiqué which is of utmost relevance to the PQ, 

and I am tabling a copy of this communiqué. So, three things are being tabled: the list of the 

parastatal bodies and statutory bodies, the list of the law officers and a communiqué. 

The Deputy Speaker: I will allow only one supplementary question on this. Time is 

running out! 

 

89 

Mr  Uteem:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  need  only  one.  In  two  press  interviews,  the 

Rs19  m.  Counsel,  Mr  Trilochurn,  made  very  vile  attacks  against  officers  from  the  Law 

Revision Unit of the Attorney-General’s Office, even threatening to go to ICAC. So, I would 

like to know, apart from issuing a communiqué, what does the Attorney-General propose to 

do against this Rs19 m.  Counsel, who is throwing dirt at officers from his Ministry and the 

State Law Office. 

Mr Yerrigadoo: Well, it suffices, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, to read the last part of the 

communiqué and I’ll read it – 

“Furthermore,  the  Attorney  General  Office  and  the  law  officers  reserve  their 

right to initiate such action as they deem warranted during the allegations.” 

And I can… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

If  you  may,  please!    And  I  can  most  solemnly  say  to  this  House  that  I  will  not  allow,  as 

Attorney General, any mud or dirt whatsoever to be spread on my Office and that my office 

and my officers are strongly considering such action as may deem appropriate; in due course, 

the hon. Member shall see. 

The Deputy Speaker:  The Table has been advised that the following PQs have been 

withdrawn: PQ B/864, B/869, B/870, B/871.  Time is over! 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10(2) 

The Prime Minister: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I move that all the business on today’s 

Order Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodun) rose 

and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

 

 

 

 

90 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER 

NATIONAL DRUG OBSERVATORY – REPORT  

The Minister of Health and Quality of Life (Mr A. Gayan):  Mr Deputy Speaker, 

Sir, with your permission, I wish to inform the House that following a decision of Cabinet in 

September  last,  a  National  Drug  Observatory  was  set  up  under  the  aegis  of  my  Ministry  in 

November 2015.   

The  main  objective  of  the  National  Drug  Observatory  is  to  monitor  and  assess  the 

drug  situation  in  the  country  to  enable  the  collection,  dissemination,  analysis  and  data 

pertaining  to  the  prevalence  of  drug  and  to  devise  appropriate  strategies  to  deal  effectively 

with the problem of drug abuse in a pro-active, efficient and timely manner. 

The National Drug Observatory is chaired by the Director General, Health Services of 

my Ministry and comprises various stakeholders including Ministries, the Police and Prison 

Departments, the Forensic Science Laboratory, the Pharmaceutical Association of Mauritius, 

the Attorney General’s Office and representatives of the civil societies.  

Since  November  2015,  the  National  Drug  Observatory  has  had  several  meetings.  It 

has now produced its first report which has been validated by all the stakeholders concerned 

including Dr. Reshad Abdool, Independent Consultant at United Nations Office on Drugs and 

Crime (UNODC).  I am now tabling a copy of the report for the information I have. 

The Deputy Speaker:  I suspend the sitting for half an hour! 

At 4.31 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 5.08 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

PUBLIC BILL 

Second Reading 

THE APPROPRIATION (2016-2017) BILL 2016 (No. XVII of 2016) 

Order  read  for  resuming  adjourned  debate  on  the  Appropriation  (2016-2017)  Bill 

2016 (No. XVII of 2016). 

Question again proposed. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Soodhun! 

 

91 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun): 

Madam Speaker, first and foremost, allow me to congratulate my colleague, the Minister of 

Finance and Economic Development, hon. Pravind Jugnauth, for the visionary Budget he has 

presented in this House and for the bold measures he has proposed therein, having the socio-

economic  development  of  Mauritius  at  heart.    This  Budget  has  as  theme  “A  New  Era  for 

Development”.    This  is  a  clear  indication  that  the  Government  of  the  day  is  putting  in 

enormous  efforts  to  ensure  a  sustainable  economic  growth  for  the  social  well-being  of  the 

citizens of Mauritius, thus further positioning Mauritius as a real Welfare State. 

Madam  Speaker,  many  countries  are  witnessing  economic  recession  -  as  we  read 

every day in the newspapers - resulting in sluggish economic growth, mass unemployment, 

loss of jobs, stagnation of various key sectors, reduction in salaries  – I understand even in 

Comoros Islands, last time when the President came here, he was telling me that since six 

months the public officers have not been able to receive their salaries. Do you imagine, six 

months! - reduction in public expenditure and impoverishment of the population.   

It is against this acute economic downturn that hon. Pravind Jugnauth has been able 

to come up with a promising Budget which would uplift and enhance the quality of  life of 

our population through various social measures taken to eradicate absolute poverty. 

Madam Speaker, for us  - it is not a secret, I am not going to blame my young hon. 

brothers of the Labour Party - it is a fact that we have inherited a chaotic situation with the 

calamities left by the previous Government such as the Ring Road, the Terre Rouge/Verdun 

Road, the casino saga – billions of debt, the MBC saga with its significant indebtedness, the 

Bagatelle Dam  – billions and billions of money are still being spent,  we don’t know what 

will  be  the  result  and  without  forgetting  le  “fameux  Festival  des  Terres”  which  has 

benefitted only the close friends of the previous regime. “C’était, Madame, l’abus et l’usure 

du pouvoir”. 

It  is  only  now,  with  this  Budget  that  we  will  be  able  to  “remettre  le  pays  sur  les 

rails”. C’est maintenant ! 

(Interruptions) 

We  are  a  bit  late.  We  agree  with  that.  But  thanks  to  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  and  my 

colleague, the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development that there is now a new 

drive for development, Madam Speaker. 

 

92 

I  thank  God  Almighty  for  once  again  giving  me  the  opportunity  to  address  this 

Assembly.  I will not waste the time of my colleagues by repeating what others have already 

said or by delivering a speech which would suit the electoral Campaign. We will do it in two 

years’  time.  I  would  rather  concentrate  on  how  my  Ministry  would  be  involved  in  the 

implementation of the budgetary measures announced by my colleague and how best we can 

put  our  efforts  together  to  implement  these  measures.  It  is  now  that  all  my  colleagues  and 

myself have got  the opportunity, we have got  the tools.  I am  sure my colleagues will come 

forward in their Budget interventions of how we are going to implement it. Now, the country 

is  waiting for my colleagues and myself to  work hard in  order to  implement  what  has been 

proposed in this Budget, sinon li pou vine ene éléphant blanc. So, it is our duty as Ministers 

and PPS to come forward and see what has been offered to our Ministries. 

In the first instance, Madam Speaker, allow me to come to the measures advocated 

for  my  Ministry  and  let  me  start  with  the  measures  enunciated  for  the  low-cost  Housing 

Units.   

 

Shelter is a basic human need. A need we all share and one which is essential 

to a healthy and happy life. In Hindi we say it “roti, kapra aur makaan” This 

is what we have said in our last campaign. I remind hon. Rutnah, he was the 

one who was  everywhere.  I am  in  charge of  ‘makaan’. So, it is  my duty  to 

say  what  we  are  going  to  do  in  the  future  and  what  we  are  going  to  start 

immediately. This is what we have to do. As is mentioned, Madam Speaker, 

the housing policy will not only focus on the provisions of a decent housing 

unit, but also of a decent living environment.   

I  remember  having  explained  to  the  former  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 

Development  and  the  hon.  Prime  Minister  -  when  I  went  to  see  the  Housing  Units  -  that 

what they were doing is a crime to society. 

(Interruptions) 

They would leave it for us if we did not correct them in time! 

(Interruptions) 

No,  they  are  my  young  brothers;  they  are  not  to  be  blamed  for  that!  But  how  come  an 

NHDC  house  can  be  built  of  a  size  of  39  square  metres  with  only  one  bedroom  for  the 

whole family? 

 

93 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Soodhun: And then, you will say there are sexual problems. I have witnessed it. 

Let me tell you!  One bedroom… 

(Interruptions) 

No! 

Madam Speaker: No interruptions, please! 

Mr Soodhun: I can tell you it is not my way of doing things. I have seen it. If you 

want, I can show you the photos. There is only one bedroom and in the middle, they put un 

rideau.  On  one  side,  the  children  are  reading,  they  are  doing  their  biology  and  chemistry 

homework, on other side, it’s practising!  

(Interruptions) 

This  is  what  is  happening!  This  is  the  exact  situation  that  I  have  witnessed.  Who  is  to  be 

blamed? Are the parents to be blamed? I explained this to hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth and he 

said: “You know as from now, you stop it immediately!” 

Listen! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No interruptions, please! 

Mr Soodhun: Listen! It is very interesting; I am not telling a joke. You know it very 

well. There is a time for cracking jokes, but it is a reality. In fact, we correct it. In spite of 

the  fact  that  they  have  decided  to  build  a  housing  unit  of  39  square  metres,  I  personally, 

with the collaboration of the hon. Prime Minister and the then Minister of Finance, we have 

increased it.  What  we are doing now to  correct  it?  Housing units of moderate size of 50 

square metres will be constructed to accommodate at least 2 bedrooms and provisions for a 

third  bedroom  –  this  is  what  we  are  doing  –  and  provisions  of  necessary  social  and 

recreational  amenities  so  as  to  better  integrate  the  residents  within  these  Housing  Estates.  

C’est un projet intégré avec des jardins d’enfants et une salle polyvalente. So, this is what 

we are doing. Instead of doing 210, we are doing only 200 units.  

 

94 

(Interruptions) 

Decent houses! This is what we are doing. I will give the figures and you can check it. 

 

Construction  of  655  housing  units  and  provision  also  for  184  serviced  lots 

across the island have been completed and works are in progress now – at the 

time I am talking - for the construction of 645 housing units and provision of 

216 serviced lots which are expected to be completed early 2017. 

The construction works of 1225 housing units of 50 square metres under the Batch 

III  Programme  have  already  started.  The  Contract  for  works  on  three  sites  namely,  at 

Goodlands (Madame Azor  I  and  II)  and Cottage for the construction of 190 housing units 

have  already  been  awarded.  The  whole  project  is  expected  to  be  completed  by  the  end  of 

2017.  

My Ministry is also embarking on the construction of 1,000 housing units and on the 

provision of 100 serviced lots over 12 sites across the island. The contract for consultancy 

services for the construction of 700 housing units over five sites will be floated by the end 

of  August  2016.    To  this  end,  funds  to  the  tune  of  approximately  Rs1  billion  have  been 

provided  in  the  budget  of  my  Ministry.  This  is  what  I  said,  we  have  to  start.  There  is  a 

bottleneck,  there  is  bureaucracy  in  all  Ministries,  but  it  depends  on  the  Minister!    If  the 

Minister  sits  down  in  front  of  TV,  what  will  happen?  He  has  to  work  as  a  supervisor,  a 

foreman, then works will be done. And this is what I do.  

Furthermore, the income eligibility criteria… 

Li docter li sans certificat! Sinon li ène traitère ! 

(Interruptions) 

 (Interruptions) 

 Furthermore,  the  income  eligibility  criteria  for  an  NHDC  housing  unit  has  been 

raised,  as  you  are  aware,  from    10,000  to  20,000  rupees  –  this  is  what  this  Government  is 

doing  –  it  is  fixed  Rs6,200  and  Rs8,500    because  we  also  have  people  who  are  earning 

Rs20,000  and  they  are  in  a  difficult  situation.    Ils  ont  besoin  d’un  toit.    So,  to  enable 

additional families in need, as I mentioned,  to own a housing unit.  

A fundamental  responsibility of  any Government  is  to  protect  its vulnerable citizens 

from  the  state  of  being  homeless.    We  all  know  cases  where  families  have  fallen  behind  in 

their  monthly  payments  on  housing  loans  contracted  either  with  the  NHDC  or  MHC  and 

 

95 

where  it  has  become  difficult  for  the  families  to  catch  up  with  their  payments.    Many  such 

cases  have  been  referred  for  Sale  by  Levy,  my  colleague,  the  hon.  Deputy  Prime  Minister 

knows how many times he talks to me about these people, resulting in the loss of the housing 

unit.  

I  have  personally  looked  into  it  because  really  it  is  a  trauma.  I  met  many  of  these 

families and I wish to show my appreciation to the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic 

Development who, I can say, est quelqu’un qui a à cœur les pauvres and who has announced 

a  waiver  of  all  arrears  of  interest  on  loans  contracted  from  the  NHDC  and  the  MHC  by 

individuals  whose  monthly  income  does  not  exceed  Rs15,000  provided  that  the  capital 

amount outstanding  is duly repaid.   

(Interruptions) 

This  measure,  Madam  Speaker,  will  enable  the  families  who  have  purchased  their 

house from the NHDC to preserve their properties.  Let me tell  you how many people. The 

number of families which would benefit from this waiver is 3,388 – not one family - and the 

amount  to  be  waived  totals  approximately  to  Rs47  m..  Definitely,  we  are  just  helping  the 

people  who  do  not  have  arrears.  It  is  arrears  only  on  interest.  This  is  what  we  are  helping 

these people with. If not, we are not going to help these people and at the end of the day, this 

will  go  to  Sale  by  Levy.  So,  we  are  helping  all  these  people  because  this  is  not  from 

yesterday. It is from 10 years before. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker,  a  large  proportion  of  our  population  has  the  ability  to  fend  for  its 

own needs with just a little support. There are those who are able to build their own houses, 

improving them as time goes by in accordance with their needs and financial capacities.  

Madam Speaker, let me inform the House that to this effect, some 1900 families have 

benefitted from the Roof Slab Grant Scheme to complete the construction of their houses for 

which  an  amount  of  some  Rs110  m.  has  been  disbursed.  This  is  an  on-going  project  and 

funds to the tune of Rs110 m. have been earmarked for the forthcoming financial year to help 

these  people.  These  people  who  are  making  special  efforts  as  we  used  to  say  they  have 

reached the roof, so we give them this subsidy for the slab so that they can complete and we 

congratulate such people. We encourage such people by  giving this subsidy, as we can see, 

the result. 

 

96 

Also, to improve the living conditions of the inhabitants of NHDC housing estates and 

extend  durably  the  lifespan  of  the  buildings,  Government  is  maintaining  its  rehabilitation 

programme  in  these  housing  estates.  We  have  witnessed  the  existing  NHDC  in  such 

conditions that you can see the iron bars. 

(Interruptions) 

Yes,  there  is  a  problem  of  the  sewage  disposal.  You  can  have  the  first  floor  having 

leaks  of  sewage  and  all  the  other  floors  are  affected.  So,  what  do  we  do  in  such 

circumstances? It is not our doing. So, do we say it is not our problem, it is the problem of the 

former Government? No! We are a responsible Government. We are responsible people. And 

today  works  are  in  progress  in  some  50  housing  estates  which  involve  rehabilitation  of 

sewerage  disposal  systems  and  water  reticulation  networks,  roof  waterproofing  works, 

drainage works, structural remedial works and other associated works. An amount of Rs59 m. 

has  been  spent  and  a  further  amount  of  Rs155  m.  has  been  provided  for  financial  year 

2016/17. 

Madam  Speaker,  under  the  access  of  land  ownership  programme,  Government  is 

encouraging ex-CHA - people since 1960 are waiting - house owners to purchase the plot of 

State  Land  on  which  stand  their  houses.    In  this  context,  345  families  have,  during  the  last 

financial  year,  purchased  their  land.  In  one  year!  Government  has  also  provided  financial 

assistance in terms of legal and other charges to those families who do not have the means to 

purchase the land.  An amount of Rs224,000 has been disbursed to some 115 families and a 

provision of Rs1 million has been made in the current Budget also to help these people. They 

are old people and they don’t have the money to buy and to pay the notary. I am just talking 

to my friend hon. Ramano so that he could do some voluntary works. 

Hon. Ramano is going to help us in this context. 

(Interruptions) 

There  are  41  NHDC  housing  estates  where  a  Syndic  is  operational.  Syndic  was  out 

and as if the Government was just throwing the money. Nothing was done! Nothing! There 

was no control. There was not any improvement. So we have disbursed Rs16 m. rupees last 

year to reorganise the Syndic.  

Furthermore,  we  are  now  coming  with  the  sensitisation  campaigns  which  are  being 

regularly  carried  out  by  the  NHDC  to  encourage  the  residents  to  take  full  responsibility  of 

 

97 

their  assets  as  well  as  to  the  need  for  them  to  contribute  to  the  Syndic  fund.    Provision  of 

Rs16 m. has been made in the Budget 2016/17 to this end. 

Let me tell you something, many people are owners of these houses. So, they still wait 

if there is any leakage they wait for the NHDC to come and repair it. If there is any problem, 

for example of painting, we are not  going to tolerate now.  If  you are the owner  you are the 

same as the other people.  

So, you have to take the sole responsibility for any repair, anything that happens.  You 

are the owner; this belongs to you 100%.  We cannot continue spending money.  This is why 

we  are  going  to  repair  completely  and  then  finish.    We  are  taking  precaution  for  the  new 

houses.  Now, when we are going to build new houses, we have to put it in the contract - my 

friend will help me. There are some people who are paying completely now - Rs1.2 m. - and 

there are some who are paying 50%.  When they are the owner of the house, they have to take 

the responsibility.  I do not think that the Government of today or tomorrow will come and do 

it, because you are the owner. We are now coming with this policy, and we are going to put it 

on the contract. 

Yes, it is not normal. 

(Interruptions) 

I  once  again  seize  this  opportunity  to  thank  my  hon.  friend,  the  Minister  of  Finance  and 

Economic Development, for proposing fiscal incentives on the construction and purchase of 

new  apartments,  houses  or  purchase  of  land  for  residential  purposes,  thus  ensuring 

affordability of residential property. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  now  come  to  the  second  component  of  my  Ministry.  Too  often, 

there has  been  a perception  that the Ministry of  Housing and  Lands is  only concerned with 

the  housing  sector  and  with  the  provision  of  the  low  cost  housing  units  to  the  vulnerable 

community.  Allow me, please, to dispel this perception. 

My Ministry has played and continues to play a crucial role as a major stakeholder in 

land management.  Land is and will remain central to the development of our country and we 

must  use  all  modern  and  available  technologies  for  effective  and  efficient  land  information 

and administration. 

In  line  with  the  objective  set  by  the  Minister  of  Finance  for  increased  efficiency  in 

service delivery, my Ministry will put more focus on the two following systems - 

 

98 

(a) 

an efficient land planning system for effective management, use and release of 

land for development, and 

(b) 

to modernise of digital land information, cartographic services and surveying 

in a transparent and equitable manner for operational excellence. 

Madam  Speaker,  to  this  end,  my  Ministry  is  reviewing  the  National  Land 

Development  Strategy,  which  includes  the  drafting  of  the  Planning  legislation.    In  fact, 

Rs28.5  m.  have  been  earmarked  for  the  review  of  the  National  Development  Strategy  in 

2016/2017. 

The  update  of  the  National  Development  Strategy  will  consist  of  a  review  of  the 

policies  and  land  management  practices  of  the  different  stakeholders.  The  review  is 

expected  to  start  early  next  year.    Madam  Speaker,  the  revised  National  Development 

Strategy  will  identify  key  infrastructure  projects  and  will  translate  the  Government’s 

commitment  to  achieve  the  full  potential  of  selected  strategic  sites  in  the  country  up  to 

2040.  We are not working for only five years.  We are working for more. 

So, the National Development Strategy will also formulate - because we are sure we 

are going to stay until 2040/2050 - spatial policies for economic development, agricultural 

land  protection  and  social  facilities  as  well  as  conservation  with  a  view  to  be  sustainable 

and resilient.   Madam  Speaker, the main objectives of the National  Development  Strategy 

are to  reconcile the land use and transport strategies to  curb on urban expansion, optimise 

existing  and  projected  infrastructure  facilities  and  reduce  air  pollution  by  the  transport 

sector. 

The report will identify the institutional framework for implementation purposes. It 

will  provide  an  Action  Plan/Programme,  which  will  set  up  key 

indicators  for 

implementation  and  identify  major  public  and  private  stakeholders,  that  is,  relevant 

ministries, service providers, major landowners and the local authorities. 

The  other  component  of  the  review  which  is  being  addressed  in  a  separate 

consultancy,  is  the  review  of  the  existing  planning  legislation.    This  is  very  important.  It 

started last year and is due to be completed early next year. 

The main objectives are to consolidate under one main legislation the existing Town 

and  Country  Planning  Act  1954,  Planning  and  Development  Act  2004,  the  Morcellement 

Act 1990, as amended, and scattered legislations related to planning. So, these are facilities, 

 

99 

tools, garde-fous that we are putting in this Ministry.  This is a new type of institution that 

we can create, so that people can utilise it. 

The legislation will strengthen certain provisions where weaknesses in enforcement 

have been noted and will include, amongst others, the review of the permitting procedures, 

which have been referred to forcefully in this Budget Speech. The legislation provides for a 

National Planning Commission which would replace the Town and Country Planning Board 

and which will be more effective. 

The  Commission  will  coordinate  and  promote  an  integrated  land  use  and  transport 

planning  together  with  other  infrastructural  works  in  a  sustainable  manner.  It  will  be  the 

main  advisor  of  the  Government  in  land  use  matters  whilst  providing  guidance  to  both 

public and local authorities.   

The Commission  will also  have  a very active role in  plan preparation at  all spatial 

scales  and  in  the  apportionment  of  costs  related  to  development  contributions  for  master 

plans referred to in the Annex to the Budget 2016/2017.   

Madam Speaker, this brings me to another important provision in the new legislation.  

Several strategic areas cannot be opened up for development in view of lack of infrastructure 

as  several  projects  compete  for  limited  funds.    Opportunities  for  cost-sharing  with  the 

appropriate mechanisms for design, costing, acquisition, and implementation and funding are 

proposed in line with measures announced in the Annex to the Budget and will be managed 

by  the  Commission  and  its  relevant  statutory  committees,  thereby  ensuring  transparency, 

which is very important in use of funds, equity and good governance. 

Madam  Speaker,  once  the  National  Land  Development  Strategy  and  Planning 

legislation  assignments  are  completed,  my  Ministry  will  embark  on  the  review  of  the 

existing  planning  schemes  to  provide  an  updated  spatial  framework  for  development 

purposes, in line with the policies and strategies of the new National Development Strategy. 

Madam Speaker, I fully commend the Budget measures proposed by the Minister of 

Finance to streamline the procedures for the grant of permits - which we all know business 

people  are  complaining  and  even  simple  citizens  are  complaining  -  thus  avoiding 

unwarranted delays in the implementation of projects. We all know that the track record of 

our country is  very  good when  compared to  the  African continent.  Indeed, we occupy the 

first position from one year - not ten years back - as regards the Ease of Doing Business.  

However,  when  it  comes  to  the  issue  of  construction  permits,  we  are  number  two 

being overtaken by Mozambique, which promotes the filing of applications online. 

 

100 

It is new to the Ministry and, today, people should not come to the office, make the queue 

or go and see the messengers, giving them a tip to get same. This is something of the past. 

(Interruptions) 

I  am  sure  it  will  help  us  not  only  to  score  a  better  ranking  at  the  next  survey  but  it  will 

become a popular user-friendly measure.  

 

Madam  Speaker,  I  also  welcome  the  introduction  of  the  Regulatory  Sandbox 

License which is a novel concept and which is applied in only a few countries so far. This 

will allow companies and promoters to invest in  innovative projects which will encourage 

further investments in the economy. 

Madam Speaker, a number of measures has been introduced in the Budget to boost 

the construction, the real estate industry as well as infrastructural works.   

The  Property  Development  Scheme  (PDS)  has  been  amended,  so  there  is  now  no 

restriction on the maximum of land that can be put to development.  All the residential units 

within a PDS can now be sold to non-citizens.  

My  Ministry  will  contribute  to  the  introduction  of  an  affordable  new  mass  transit 

system which is a most laudable initiative. I am referring to the Metro Express which will 

take  off  the  roads,  automobile  dependent  transport,  reduce  traffic  congestion  and 

accompanying carbon emissions, and facilitate the movement of goods. At the same time, it 

will reduce traffic hazards and accidents.  

My Ministry will also participate planning-wise in the reconstruction of the Victoria 

Bus Terminal and other Bus Terminals with provision of a number of people-centered, uses 

and  activities  which  will  greatly  enhance  the  economic  vitality  of  the  city,  and  hence 

generate employment activities.  

Madam Speaker, let me now come to the third component of my Ministry.  As I stated 

earlier,  land  is  central  to  the  development  process.  My  Ministry  is  mandated  to  ensure  that 

there  is  proper  management  of  land,  including  State  land  which  falls  directly  under  my 

control. 

My  Ministry  has  come  up  with  a  new  Policy  Framework  for  the  first  time  for  the 

allocation  of  State  lands  with  well-defined  processes  and  procedures,  so  that  State  land  is 

being allocated for viable projects having financial capabilities for implementation.  

 

101 

You  may  wish  to  note  that  the  list  of  Leases  of  State  lands  being  allocated  by  my 

Ministry are being published on the website of my Ministry since December 2015 in a spirit 

of transparency, as specified in the Budget. 

My  Ministry  has  also  worked  out  the  modalities  for  the  setting  up  of  a  State  Land 

Assessment  Coordinating  and  Monitoring  Committee.  This  will  ensure  that  all  applications 

for State lands are being processed in  a timely and diligent manner and that these lands are 

being  developed  within  the  timeframe  imposed  in  the  Lease  Agreement.    I  have  witnessed 

many cases since 2008.  People have already received the reservation, but nothing has been 

done.  Nothing! It still remains idle! Now, it has become a jungle. 

The terms and conditions in the Letter of Reservation as well as in the Letter of Intent 

issued to potential lessees have been reviewed and we are now in the process of reviewing the 

Lease Agreement to be signed between the Lessee and my Ministry. 

A  billion  rupees  has  been  invested  over  the  last  few  years  to  set  up  a  Land 

Administration, Valuation  and Management  Information  System (LAVIMS).   It  is  a  part of 

an ongoing Land Administration and Management Reform with three major initial outcomes, 

namely  property  valuation  of  all  residential  and  commercial  sites,  digital  cadastre  and  a 

parcel-based  Deeds  Registration  System.    The  functionality  of  the  system  provides  an 

efficient and secure land transaction process. 

LAVIMS Project is jointly shared by the Ministry of Housing and Lands and Ministry 

of Finance and Economic Development through the Registrar General’s Department and the 

Valuation Department.   

An  amount  of  approximately  Rs12.5  m.  has  been  earmarked  for  the  financial  year 

2016-2017 to come up with a valuation roll regarding information on properties within Local 

Authorities.  

LAVIMS, through the issue of Parcel  Identification Number,  generates a  revenue of 

around Rs70 m. yearly.  Rs70 m.! And this is increasing each year.  This indicates a vibrant 

land  market  where  additional  revenue  through  land  registration  and  other  fees  are  being 

generated. 

A further development akin to that of LAVIMS concerns specifically the setting up of 

a State Land Digital Register. I am setting up the State Land Digital Register to better inform 

the  population  on  State  lands  leased  and  those  uncommitted  to  be  able  to  manage  them 

efficiently as advocated by Government.  

 

102 

A  pilot  project  for  State  Land  data  collection  has  been  carried  out  for  the  Savanne 

District  and  another  one  for  the  Pamplemousses  District  is  underway.    These  two  pilot 

projects will give an indication of the weaknesses and strengths of the database and provide 

valuable  information  on  the  scoping  exercise  to  be  effected  by  the  Central  Informatics 

Bureau, prior to designing the system and procuring the necessary hardware and software.  

Madam Speaker, with LAVIMS as the foundation data sets, other spatial data sets can 

be assembled and an enormous amount of information pertaining to different sectors can be 

viewed, processed and maintained.  

We aim in the very near future to set up the National Spatial Data Infrastructure. This 

infrastructure will be an important step towards achieving e-land management as it will allow 

better  sharing  and  integration  of  land  information  across  Government,  business,  and  the 

community through a simple online single source access. 

This  project  fits  into  the  Information  Highway  enunciated  in  the  Budget  and  will 

spatially enable Government and the business community to real time access to information 

and  to  improve  decision  making.    A  fund  of  Rs2  m.  has  been  earmarked  for  the  current 

budget to kick start this project. 

Madam Speaker, land survey has now evolved into a very sophisticated discipline and 

encompasses  several  allied  disciplines.  Today,  the  survey  of  land  requires  modern 

technologies.   

My Ministry has already densified its geodetic network made up of fixed points called 

geodetic  network.  These  points  are  now  being  established  with  the  use  of  modern  GPS 

systems.  For  Mauritius,  we  have  already  established  a  core  network  of  81  such  accurate 

points on the ground all over the island.  Many people are not aware of it. 

The  maintenance  of  such  points  is  very  costly  as  they  are  very  often  destroyed  and 

vandalised.  In  this  context,  the  assistance  of  the  Regional  Centre  for  Management  of 

Resources  for  Development  which  is  based  in  Nairobi  has  been  sought  to  establish  a 

Continuously Operating Reference Station which will allow surveying in a more accurate and 

less costly manner.  

Madam  Speaker,  this  Government’s  ambition  to  tap  the  ocean  resources  will  only 

become  a  reality  when,  besides  diversifying  initiatives  in  the  marine  sector.    We  also  look 

after the marine sector, not only State lands.  I am following the path of my good friend, hon. 

Alain Wong Yen Cheong.  

 

103 

So, we are also improving our marine information base. With an extent of 3.2 million square 

kilometres – sometimes we do not realise that we have 3.2 million square kilometres of sea 

territory; we have to further explore its potentials. 

 

 

Most  of  our  sea  territory  is  still  unexplored  and  the  Hydrography  Section  of 

my Ministry, in  collaboration with  the Republic  of  India, has  already carried 

out hydrographic surveys at Grand’Baie, Mahebourg and Black River. 

The  Navigational  charts  produced  would  be  extremely  useful  for  agencies 

having  stakes  in  coastal  areas  and  will  be  a  valuable  aid  to  enhance 

navigational  safety  in  our  waters.  It  will  avoid  all  the  sea  accidents,  because 

they don’t have the chart. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No conversation, hon. Gayan! 

Mr Soodhun: Sometimes they get problems. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Don’t interrupt the hon. Vice-Prime Minister! 

Mr Soodhun: 

 

This exercise will continue as Government aims at becoming a major Port and 

Bunkering Hub in the Indian Ocean. 

My friend, the Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection is coming with the 

project and this will help definitely. 

 

A sum of Rs110 m. has been earmarked for the rehabilitation works to address 

beach erosion - we are also concerned with the beach erosion and this is a very 

important issue; we have to tackle this problem for my colleague, the Deputy 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications  -  and 

coastal  degradation.  My  Ministry’s  expertise  in  maintenance  of  topographic 

maps and other geographic information and survey will contribute a lot to this 

exercise.  

 

The  Hydrography  Unit  has  effectively  completed  the  delineation  of  the  High 

Water  Mark  over  a  total  of  325  kilometres  of  coastline  around  Mauritius, 

allowing for the proper monitoring of the coastline. 

 

104 

 

The data have contributed to the implementation of Early Warning System for 

Storm Surge and Tsunami Modelling  for the Mauritius Research Council for 

Wave Energy projects. 

Madam  Speaker,  over  and  above  the  optimum  utilisation  of  land,  my  Ministry  also 

aims at addressing the problem of squatting. I think it is a problem of decades that squatters 

exist in Mauritius.  We are addressing it in an effective and efficient manner. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  will  give  an  example.  When  we  talk  about  squatters,  my  good 

friend, the Deputy Prime Minister visited Baie du Tombeau… 

(Interruptions) 

Cité Longère. Today, people are living in tents. Let me inform the House, I don’t know for 

how  many  years  the  former  Prime  Minister  has  been  in  Constituency  No.  5.  It  is  in 

Constituency  No.  5!  Hundreds  of  families  are  living  in  such  conditions.  Thanks  to  my 

colleague… 

(Interruptions) 

Yes,  thanks  to  my  brother,  he  has  visited;  we  had  a  meeting,  myself,  the  Deputy  Prime 

Minister and the Minister of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No conversation, hon. Soodhun! 

Mr Soodhun: We are having their collaboration, which is very important; the issue is 

very important. So, today, let me tell you, these people are living since maybe more than 20 

years. It’s a pity! More than 20 years! They don’t have drinking water. 

(Interruptions) 

Exactly! So, it is a pity. So, thanks to my colleague of Constituency No. 5 and the MPs, they 

sit down - and let me inform the good news that my colleague, the hon. Minister of Finance 

and Economic Development has made a provision for Rs140 m.; we are going to start work 

very soon. I am going to put our consultant to work on this. So, we are going to… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

 

105 

Mr Soodhun: We are going to solve this problem.  If the former Prime Minister has 

not done it, we are going to do it! 

Yes, we are going to do this. So, this is important. 

(Interruptions) 

 

Accordingly, a survey was carried out – it is good to know - all over the island 

and  1,174  cases  of  squatting  on  State  lands  were  registered  as  at  July  2015. 

Till to date, 238 cases have been regularised in situ and 203 cases have been 

relocated. My Ministry is already working towards regularising the remaining 

cases. 

And I hope, as we use to say Insha Allah, this year, we are going to solve all the problems of 

squatting in this country. I am sure this year we are going to do it. 

 

By  implementing  the  various  schemes  in  the  housing  sector,  I  am  confident 

that the measures announced in the Budget will reduce drastically the number 

of  homeless  and  every  citizen  will  find  a  shelter  and  a  decent  dwelling  as 

stated in the Budget 2016/2017. 

Madam Speaker, we have some Rs490 m. that were due to my Ministry as at 30 June 

2016  in  terms  of  arrears  of  rent  payment  for  the  leases  of  State  land  granted.  Rs490m.! 

People, since 2008, have stopped paying their rent. Stopped completely! There are hotels and 

campement sites.  So, we have set up a committee. In one year, Rs114 m. have been collected 

and necessary  arrangements  have been made to  recoup these arrears.  If we are not  going to 

take the necessary action, these people are not going to pay. 

So, my Ministry has already worked out the appropriate modalities to ease… 

(Interruptions) 

No write off! Who said so! This one no! 

(Interruptions) 

And  allow  for  the  settling  of  these  arrears  through  instalments  after  consultation  with  the 

Ministry of Finance and Economic Development. 

Madam Speaker, I’ll now come to the conclusion. I truly believe and this Government 

indeed believes that all the measures in this Budget, like its title rightly mentions, will bring a 

new era of development. 

 

106 

Of course, not  everyone  will agree to  this.  I  recently read in  a  weekly magazine the 

interview of one of my former colleagues who said: “Il faut semer dans le nouveau budget”. 

This  is  exactly  what  this  Government  did.  Many  of  you  will  recall  how,  when  the  Rt.  hon. 

Prime  Minister,  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  announced  the  Ébène  Cybercity  Project,  it  was 

labelled an an “éléphant blanc”. Today, there are thousands of offices and employments. 

Madam  Speaker,  this  Government  is  working  towards  building  a  robust  future  for 

Mauritius amidst global uncertainties and the measures enunciated in the Budget Speech is a 

testimony  to  this  endeavour.  We  have  made  the  choices  that  will  strengthen  our  economy 

while  ensuring  long-term  sustainability  and  fostering  inclusive  growth.  We  are  planning 

ahead while being creative as we do not believe in sitting idly and hoping things will improve 

by themselves. 

Before I end, I would like to mention about the Mauritian embassy in Saudi Arabia. 

On  24  February  2015,  in  his  speech  following  the  President’s  Address,  my  colleague  Adil 

Ameer Meea made a remark that, and I quote: “On attend cela avec impatience”.  Well, my 

brother, I am pleased to inform him that… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody! 

Mr Soodhun: … he may put an end to his… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Baloomoody, please! You are interrupting the Vice-Prime Minister! 

Mr Soodhun: … impatience as the Embassy will soon be a reality.  The same applies 

for the General Consulate in Jeddah.  This Government has always shown generosity when it 

comes to poverty alleviation and social housing policy.  I believe that it is high time that we 

shall  stand  together  and  give  a  helping  hand  for  those  who  are  in  need  and  to  refrain  to  be 

demagogue with the issue of poverty. 

A  lot  of  measures  have  been  announced  and  it  is  for  us  to  ensure  that  they  are 

implemented.   But  we  cannot  do  this  without  the  collaboration  of  one  and  all,  the  whole 

public  sector,  the  whole  private  sector,  the  NGOs,  the  whole  population  and  why  not  the 

 

107 

Opposition?  We  have  to  strengthen  our  society  and  change  our  mindset  to  face  future 

challenges and to build the Mauritius of tomorrow. 

If  we,  as  a  whole  population,  do  not  use  the  tools,  the  means  and  the  funds  put  in 

place  in  the  Budget,  the  Minister  of  Finance  cannot  be  taken  to  task  but  rather  us,  policy 

leaders and public servants, would have failed in our duty. 

We can make a better Mauritius and we will make it happen.  Together! All of us!   

Thank you very much. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Quirin! 

(5.57 p.m.) 

Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière):  Madame  la 

présidente,  avant  d’entrer  dans  le  vif  du  sujet,  je  souhaiterais  simplement  dire  mon 

étonnement d’entendre l’honorable Soodhun venir affirmer que ce n’est que maintenant que 

le  Premier  ministre  adjoint,  l’honorable  Xavier-Luc  Duval,  a  rendu  visite  à  certaines  cités 

défavorisées  de  Baie  du  Tombeau  et  qu’il  a  été  choqué  du  constat  sur  place.  Donc,  dois-je 

rappelais  à  la  Chambre  que  notre  ami  l’honorable  Xavier-Luc  Duval  a  été  ministre  de 

l’Intégration Sociale et aussi ministre des Finances dans un passé récent. 

Madame la présidente… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madame  la  présidente,  il  va  sans  dire  que  l’honorable  ministre  des  Finances  a  été  habile  et 

astucieux dans la présentation du budget 2016-2017.  

En effet, certaines mesures annoncées par le ministre des Finances en faveur des plus 

démunis de la société sont considérées comme des décisions qui vont dans la bonne direction. 

Mais,  Madame  la  présidente,  nous  ne  sommes  qu’au  stade  des  propositions.  Les 

bonnes  intentions  seules,  ne  suffisent  pas.  Sans  aucun  doute  la  population  doit  attendre 

l’implémentation  de  ces  mesures  pour  savoir  si  elles  ne  sont  que  de  la  poudre  aux  yeux  ou 

une réelle volonté d’éradiquer l’extrême pauvreté. 

Ce  gouvernement  avait  été  élu  en  2014  sur  la  base  de  toute  une  série  de  promesses 

faites à la population notamment la lutte contre l’extrême pauvreté et la création d’emplois. 

 

108 

Deux  ans  après  nous  sommes  toujours  au  stade  des  promesses.  Dans  son  discours, 

l’honorable  ministre  des  Finances  a  indiqué  que  les  mesures  pour  éradiquer  l’extrême 

pauvreté  vont  toucher  6400  familles  mais  vous  en  conviendrez  que  la  réalité  du  terrain  est 

tout autre car les chiffres sont clairement plus conséquents. Ce n’est pas moi qui le dis mais 

tous les ONGs engagés dans la lutte contre la pauvreté. D’ailleurs le 17 mai de cette année en 

réponse à une question  de l’honorable Rughoobur, le ministre de l’Intégration Sociale avait 

lui-même affirmé qu’il y a à Maurice 13174 familles vivant en dessous du seuil de pauvreté 

de R6200. 

Aussi  lors  de  la  PNQ  du  leader  de  l’Opposition  de  vendredi  dernier  sur  l’extrême 

pauvreté,  le  ministre  Roopun  a  expliqué  que  le  mécanisme  a  changé  et  qu’une  nouvelle 

enquête va bientôt démarrer pour déterminer le nombre exact de familles vivant sous le seuil 

de pauvreté et qui vont bénéficier de la nouvelle formule de subsistence allowance. 

Dans  cette  même  foulée,  Madame  la  présidente,  je  propose  que  le  ministre  de 

l’Intégration Sociale mette en place des mesures d’accompagnement afin d’aider ces familles 

à sortir de la pauvreté et ainsi assumer aussi vite que possible leur autonomie. 

Madame la présidente, l’extrême pauvreté à Maurice apporte son lot de désarrois  au 

quotidien. Nous avons tous  pris connaissance ces derniers temps d’un nombre important  de 

familles vivant dans cette situation qui ont tout perdu parce que leurs ‘bicoques’ en bois ont 

pris    feu  par  la  faute  d’une  bougie  laissée  allumée  à  défaut  d’être  alimenté  en  électricité. 

Certains  ont  même  trouvé  la  mort,  comme  l’ancienne  championne  de  judo,  Stéphanie 

Botteveau, qui est morte carbonisée en juillet dernier dans l’indifférence totale. 

Tout en étant d’accord avec les propositions faites par le ministre des Finances pour 

combattre l’extrême pauvreté, il serait aussi souhaitable, Madame la présidente, que dans la 

pratique ces mesures, une fois entrées en application, ne soient pas déviées de leurs objectifs 

initiaux pour des raisons politiques. 

Madame la présidente, ce que la population, dans son ensemble, veut savoir c’est si ce 

budget, dans son application, va améliorer son quotidien ou pas.  

Le ministre des Finances a fait preuve de subtilité dans la présentation de son budget 

en mettant en avant les mesures prises pour lutter contre l’extrême pauvreté. Mais qu’en sera-

t-il des personnes pauvres qui ne vont pas bénéficier d’un income support ? Ces familles vont 

éprouver  toutes  les  peines  du  monde  à  joindre  les  deux  bouts  malgré  tous  leurs  efforts.  Ce 

 

109 

n’est  certainement  pas  la  baisse  des  prix  du  gaz  ménager  et  des  céréales  qui  les  feront 

retrouver le sourire. 

Le coût de la vie a tellement augmenté que maintenant les consommateurs n’achètent 

que  quand  y  a  une  promotion.  D’où  la  déception  de  la  population  qui  constate,  une  fois 

encore,  que  les  denrées  de  base  et  autres  articles  de  consommation  courante  n’ont  connu 

aucune baisse. 

Le  ministre  des  Finances,  Madame  la  présidente,  a,  il  est  vrai,  annoncé  l’exemption 

des frais de douane sur plus de 350 produits. Toutefois, les consommateurs n’ont pas tardé à 

réagir  et  ont  exprimé  leur  désapprobation  après  avoir  pris  connaissance  de  la  liste  des 

produits qui sont exemptés des frais de douanes. 

En effet, l’incompréhension de la population est tout à fait légitime puisque sur cette 

liste on retrouve des items tels que des blousons de ski, des ânes et des mules entres autres. 

Il  est  clair  que  la  population  aurait  préféré  voir  sur  cette  liste  des  produits  de 

consommation  courante  et  de  première  nécessité  qui  auraient  sans  aucun  doute,  allégé  le 

budget des familles. 

Face à cette décision d’exempter un certain nombre de produits des frais de douanes, 

Madame  la  présidente,  je  me  pose  certaines  questions.  Et  ma  première  question  est :  est-ce 

que  cela  va  automatiquement  entraîner  une  baisse  du  prix  de  vente  consommateurs  de  ces 

items  sur  le  marché?  Deuxième  question ;  le  fait  d’enlever  les  frais  de  douanes  sur  des 

produits  tels  que  les  T-shirts,  robes,  survêtements  et  autres  produits  textiles,  cela  ne  va-t-il 

pas  affecter  les  ventes  des  petites  et  moyennes  entreprises  locales  et  par  ricochet  sur  la 

sécurité d’emploi dans ce secteur? Et finalement je voudrais savoir: est-ce que ce ne sont pas 

uniquement les importateurs et distributeurs qui vont tirer profit de ces exemptions?  

D’ailleurs, Madame la présidente, l’Association des Consommateurs de l’île Maurice 

a,  du  reste,  attiré  l’attention  sur  ce  point  où  dans  le  passé  des  baisses  de  frais  de  douanes 

furent  annoncés  sur  des  centaines  de  produits  mais  les  consommateurs  n’en  ont  jamais 

bénéficié. 

Madame la présidente, nous savons tous que notre république fait face à une situation 

préoccupante  au  niveau  de  la  drogue.  Il  est  vrai  que,  dans  sa  présentation  du  budget,  le 

ministre des finances a consacré quelques lignes au combat contre la drogue.  

 

110 

C’est  un  fait  aujourd’hui  que  ce  gouvernement  éprouve  d’énormes  difficultés  à 

trouver  les  moyens  pour  lutter  contre  la  prolifération  des  drogues  à  Maurice.  Tous  les 

indicateurs sont au rouge et jour après jour tous ceux, engagés dans ce combat, n’arrêtent pas 

de tirer la sonnette d’alarme. 

La situation des drogues à Maurice est arrivée à un tel niveau que la question à poser 

est  de  savoir  si  nous  ne  sommes  pas  déjà  en  échec  devant  les  barons  de  la  drogue.  La 

commission d’enquête présidée par l’ex-juge Paul Lam Shang Leen viendra sans aucun doute 

apporter des réponses à cette question. 

Mais doit-on vraiment, Madame la présidente, attendre les conclusions de ce rapport 

pour se faire une idée de la gravité de la situation? Je ne le pense pas.  Il n’y a que ceux qui 

ne  veulent  pas  voir  la  vérité  en  face  qui  peuvent  venir  dire  que  la  situation  de  la  drogue  à 

Maurice n’est pas alarmante.  

Il suffit de parcourir certaines régions spécifiques de Maurice pour se rendre compte 

que le business de la drogue se fait au vu et au su de tout le monde. L’échec est total  et en 

tant que député d’une circonscription qui est touchée de plein fouet par ce fléau, je ne peux 

cacher mon incompréhension devant certains propos tenus par le ministre de la Santé sur la 

situation de la drogue à Maurice. 

Madame  la  présidente,  depuis  qu’il  occupe  les  fonctions  de  ministre  de  la  Santé, 

l’honorable Anil Gayan, n’a pas cessé d’antagoniser les travailleurs sociaux engagés dans le 

combat  contre  la  drogue  tout  en  stigmatisant  les  usagers  de  drogues.  Dois-je  rappeler  à  la 

Chambre, que jamais auparavant à Maurice n’avons-nous vu un travailleur social défiant un 

ministre, allant jusqu’à réclamer sa démission. 

Pour  commencer,  Madame  la  présidente,  le  ministre,  une  fois  en  place,  a  remis  en 

question la thérapie de maintenance à la méthadone et le programme d’échange de seringues, 

mesures  décidées  sous  le  gouvernement  MSM/MMM  de  2000/2005  et  qui  a  provoqué 

l’indignation de la société civile.  

A ce propos, Madame la présidente, je me permets de citer, Ruth Dreifuss, présidente 

du Global Commission on Drug Policy, qui était tout récemment en visite à Maurice, et qui 

en faisant référence aux usagers de drogues a dit ceci, je l’a cite – 

« Si  on  les  perd  parce  qu’on  ne  met  pas  à  leur  disposition  la  méthadone  et  les 

seringues,  on  court  le  risque  d’avoir  une  nouvelle  flambée  au  niveau  du  VIH  et  de 

 

111 

l’hépatite C. Le risque ne se limitera alors plus à cette seule communauté. Il s’étendra 

à toute la population. C’est cela le danger principal. » 

Après  avoir  été  un  exemple  pendant  plusieurs  années,  aujourd’hui  la  sonnette  d’alarme  est 

tirée avec pour conséquence que la contamination au VIH/SIDA chez les usagers de drogues 

est en progression depuis 2015.  

Malgré le fait que les indications soient claires et que les risques que Maurice encourt, 

l’honorable  ministre  persiste  et  signe  et  place  notre  République  dans  une  situation  qui 

inquiète désormais les experts internationaux.  

L’honorable  ministre  ne  s’est  pas  arrêté  en  si  bon  chemin,  serait-on  tenté  de  dire, 

quand il a décidé d’un trait de plume de fermer la NATReSA, organisme responsable dans le 

traitement et la réhabilitation des usagers de drogues. À mon avis, il aurait été plus judicieux 

de réformer cette agence, quid à revoir ses objectifs au lieu de procéder à sa fermeture pure et 

simple sans proposer une alternative crédible. 

Madame  la  présidente,  les  chiffres  donnent  froid  dans  le  dos.  Il  y  aurait  8,000 

toxicomanes actifs et sans traitement selon les ONG engagées dans ce combat. Faut-il qu’il y 

ait plus de morts pour que le gouvernement se rend compte de l’ampleur de la situation?  

Madame  la  présidente,  notre  pays  fait  désormais  face  à  un  nouveau  type  de  drogue 

qui semaine  après  semaine  fait  des  ravages  dans  les  familles  mauriciennes  c’est-à-dire  les 

drogues  synthétiques.  Un  fléau  qui  touche  principalement  les  adolescents  des  régions 

urbaines et rurales confondues. Je déplore à nouveau la légèreté dont fait preuve le ministre 

de la Santé lorsqu’il évoque cette question.  

On n’arrête pas de compter les morts et le personnel de l’hôpital Brown Séquard est 

dépassé  par  les  événements.  Déjà  je  m’interroge,  Madame  la  présidente,  si  c’est  une  bonne 

décision que de traiter les jeunes affectés par la consommation de la drogue synthétique dans 

cet  hôpital  psychiatrique?  Je  pense  que  le  gouvernement  devrait  dès  à  présent  envisager  à 

mettre  en  place  une  unité  spéciale  dans  un  ou  dans  les  autres  hôpitaux  afin  de  ne  pas  add 

insult to injury.  

Il ne faut pas oublier, Madame la présidente, que c’est avant tout des drames humains 

et  les  interner  à  Brown  Séquard  ne  ferait  qu’empirer  leur  cas.  Ce  qui  me  révolte  davantage 

dans cette affaire, c’est que les victimes de la drogue synthétique sont de plus en plus jeunes. 

 

112 

Madame la présidente, ce n’est certainement pas la première fois que je fais ressortir 

dans cette Chambre qu’il y a un rajeunissement chez les consommateurs de drogues. Quand 

l’honorable ministre de la Santé affirme que la situation de la drogue synthétique à Maurice 

n’est  pas  alarmante,  c’est  faire  preuve  de  désinvolture  face  à  un  problème  où  la  réalité  du 

terrain est toute autre.  

En  effet,  Madame  la  présidente,  l’honorable  ministre  de  la  Santé,  Anil  Gayan,  est 

aussi  un  député  de  la  circonscription  numéro  20.  Mais  qu’a-t-il  fait  face  aux  cris  d’alarme, 

voire  les  appels  de  détresse  des  ONG,  des  travailleurs  sociaux  et  des  habitants  de  cette 

circonscription? Les marchands de drogues fonctionnent librement et le ministre de la Santé, 

à lui, choisi de pratiquer la politique de l’autruche.  

Pour vous citer un exemple, de juin à décembre 2015, un regroupement des ONG et 

des travailleurs sociaux de la région de Barkly, connu sous le nom de la Coalition des Acteurs 

Sociaux, avait organisé toute une série d’activités autour de la lutte contre la prolifération des 

drogues.  

Je  tiens  d’ailleurs  à  rendre  hommage  à  l’engagement  et  le  dévouement  de  ces 

travailleurs sociaux. Lors de cette campagne de prévention et de conscientisation, ils avaient 

pu  réunir  pour  un  travail  commun,  la  police,  la  paroisse  du  Sacré  Cœur,  la  Municipalité  de 

Beau Bassin/Rose Hill, des députés de la circonscription et des volontaires. Mais encore une 

fois,  le  ministre  de  la  Santé  avait  brillé  par  son  absence  durant  toute  cette  campagne. 

Pourtant, Madame la présidente, tous les acteurs de la région étaient mobilisés face à ce fléau 

et le ministre de la Santé n’avait pas jugé utile d’apporter son soutien à ce mouvement. Il est 

clair  que  s’il  avait  été  présent,  ne  serait-ce  qu’une  fois,  il    aurait  constaté  la  détresse  et  le 

désarroi des familles victimes des méfaits de la drogue.  

Je  ne  peux  que  regretter  aussi,  Madame  la  présidente,  la  démobilisation  de  la  force 

policière  tout  juste  après  ces  activités.  Pourtant,  cette  même  force  policière  était  fortement 

présente  sur  le  terrain  le  temps  de  cette  campagne  de  la  Coalition  des  Acteurs  Sociaux  de 

Barkly?  Du  coup,  le  soulagement  qu’avaient  ressenti  les  habitants  de  cette  région  s’est  vite 

dissipé et la situation s’est à nouveau détériorée. 

Donc, l’attitude négative du ministre de la Santé sur des sujets aussi importants que la 

drogue et  le VIH/SIDA,  suscite l’incompréhension de tout un chacun.  À tel point, Madame 

président, et je dois bien le dire, qu’on l’exclut volontairement des débats sur ce sujet. Pour 

preuve, l’honorable Gayan n’a pas été invité à la dernière conférence des ONG sur le thème 

 

113 

‘Drugs policies: Impact on health and society’, une conférence tenue le 26 juillet dernier au 

centre Rajiv Gandhi.  

A  ce  propos,  Michel  Chiffonne  du  centre  CARES  et  un  des  coordonnateurs  de  cette 

conférence a déclaré et je le cite – 

« Nous  n’avons  pas  invité  Anil  Gayan  car  nous  savons  quelle  est  sa  position.  Il  ne 

connaît pas la réalité du terrain. » 

Nous avons, Madame la présidente, sans doute touché le fond. 

Je  vais  maintenant  aborder  un  autre  sujet,  c’est-à-dire,  les  sports.  Madame  la 

présidente, avant d’évoquer les propositions faites pout le mouvement sportif dans ce présent 

budget,  permettez-moi  d’exprimer  tout  mon  encouragement  aux  athlètes  mauriciens  qui 

participent  actuellement  aux  Jeux  Olympiques  de  Rio.  Un  encouragement  particulier  au 

boxeur Kennedy St-Pierre qui tôt ce matin a remporté son premier combat et qui représente 

notre meilleure chance de médaille. 

Dans son intervention, le ministre des Finances a, entre autres annoncé la construction 

d’un  complexe  multisports  et  une  piscine  à  Saint-Pierre  dans  le  cadre  de  l’organisation  des 

Jeux des îles à Maurice en 2019.  

Madame la présidente, je dois  faire ressortir que ce projet  avait déjà été  annoncé en 

2010  par  ce  même  ministre  des  Finances.  Dois-je  rappeler  que  la  région  de  Saint-Pierre  se 

trouve dans la circonscription de l’honorable ministre des Finances et aussi celui des Sports?  

Et il est clair que l’honorable ministre des Finances favorise sa circonscription au détriment 

des autres. 

(Interruptions) 

Un fait que même l’honorable Madame Sewocksingh du PMSD et membre de la majorité, a 

récemment  dénoncé  son  intervention  sur  le  budget  et  elle  a  jugé  plus  appropriée  que  la 

construction d’une piscine se fasse à Curepipe. 

Madam Speaker:  Order! 

Order, please! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

114 

Mr  Quirin:    Mo  coze  pour  tous  pays  mwa !    Mo  gagne  droit  cozé!  Mo  pas  prend 

l’ordre ar twa pou cozé! 

Madam Speaker: No conversation, hon. Quirin! 

Mr Quirin : Dois-je encore une fois rappeler, Madame la présidente, que l’honorable 

ministre des finances a aussi indiqué que les stades Anjalay, George V, Germain Comarmond 

er  Quartier  Militaire  seront  rénovés.  Et  encore  une  fois,  je  rappelle  que  ces  stades  sont 

aujourd’hui  dans  un  état  déplorable  parce  que  le  ministère  des  sports  n’a  jamais  pris  les 

devants  pour  entamer  les  travaux  de  rénovation  et  cela  malgré  le  fait  que,  budget  après 

budget, des sommes avaient été allouées dans ce sens. 

Autre  annonce  faite  par  l’honorable  ministre  des  Finances  est  la  mise  en  place  d’un 

plan pour soutenir le développement professionnel de nos meilleurs athlètes en leur offrant un 

contrat d’embauche en tant qu’entraîneurs pour les jeunes sportifs et sportives. 

D’abord je dois relever, Madame la présidente, une contradiction entre ce qu’a dit le 

ministre des Finances sur ce projet et l’intervention du  ministre des Sports jeudi dernier. 

Les propos de l’honorable ministre des finances étaient comme suit - 

“I  am  pleased  to  announce  the  setting-up  of  a  scheme  to  support  the  professional 

development  of  our  best  athletes.    We  will  provide  them  with  a  contract  of 

employment as coach to young sportsmen and sports women.” 

Alors  que  le  ministre  des  Sports  a  lui  affirmé  dans  son  intervention  que  le  plan  en 

question concerne l’après carrière de nos meilleurs sportifs, et tel n’est pas le cas en analysant 

les propos du ministre des Finances que je viens de citer. 

N’empêche, Madame la présidente, même si en effet, le ministre des Finances voulait 

dire  que  cette  mesure  vise  l’après  carrière  des  sportifs  de  haut  niveau,  cela  me  parait  très 

limité  en  termes  d’opportunités  de  carrière  professionnelle  que  l’État  offre  à  nos  meilleurs 

sportifs. 

L’après carrière de nos sportifs est un sujet de grande  préoccupation et depuis 2010, 

ici  même  dans  cette  Chambre,  Madame  la  présidente,  j’ai,  à  plusieurs  reprises,  attirer 

l’attention sur le calvaire que vivent bon nombre de nos sportifs qui ont fait honneur au pays. 

Le 19 avril dernier, par le biais d’une question parlementaire, j’avais fait état du cas 

du boxeur, Bruno Julie, notre seul médaillé olympique, à ce jour, et qui vit aujourd’hui dans 

une situation précaire. 

 

115 

À ce jour, Madame la présidente, le cas de Bruno Julie n’est toujours pas réglé et pas 

plus  tard  que  dimanche  dernier  dans  une  déclaration  de  presse,  il  a  exprimé  sa  frustration 

concernant les promesses non tenues à son égard par le ministre des Sports et je le cite. 

« Je ne suis pas là pour juger ses compétences.  Tout ce que je sais c’est que je suis 

allé  le  voir  à  plusieurs  reprises.  Il  m’a  demandé  à  chaque  fois  d’attendre.  Au 

Parlement,  il  a  affirmé  qu’il  attendait  mon  dossier  pour  me  confier  un  poste 

d’entraîneur. Mais cela fait belle lurette qu’il a mon dossier entre les mains, je ne sais 

à  quoi  il  joue.  Il  faut  juste  assumer  ses  responsabilités  quand  on  en  a,  sinon,  lev 

paké. » 

Propos  tenus  par  Bruno  Julie!  De  ce  fait,  Madame  la  présidente,  doit-on  prendre  au 

sérieux ce qu’a dit le ministre des Sports dans son intervention la semaine dernière quand il a 

affirmé et je le cite aussi- 

« Du jour au lendemain, ces athlètes qui ont fait la fierté du quadricolore se retrouvent 

abandonnés. J’ai décidé que cette situation avait assez duré. »  

De ce fait, je souhaite bonne chance à Bruno Julie! 

Autre mesure annoncée par le ministre des Finances est l’allocation de R 26 millions 

au football professionnel à travers un ‘New Lotto Fund’. 

Madame  la  présidente,  il  est  un  fait  que  le  football  professionnel,  tout  comme  le 

football  amateur  a  besoin  du  soutien  de  l’État.  Cependant  je  déplore  l’absence  totale  de 

transparence autour de l’assistance financière accordée par le gouvernement, de surcroît à une 

compagnie privée, qu’est  la Mauritius Professional Football Limited (MPFL). 

Depuis deux ans, l’État investit de l’argent dans cette compagnie et, à ce jour, aucun 

bilan  financier  n’a  été  déposé  dans  cette  assemblée.  Je  ne  suis  pas  contre  le  fait  d’aider  le 

football  professionnel,  mais  cela  doit  se  faire  dans  la  transparence  et  nous  devons  savoir 

comment est dépensé l’argent des contribuables. 

La contribution  du  gouvernement passera de R 16 million  à R 26 million pour cette 

année  financière.  Sur  quoi  l’État  s’est  basé  pour  augmenter  sa  contribution  à  la  ligue 

professionnelle  de  football  par  plus  de  60  % ?  Et  la  Mauritius  Football  Association  (MFA) 

dans tout cela?  Cette fédération, Madame la présidente, a pourtant vu son soutien financier 

de la FIFA bondir de un million de dollars à 4 millions de dollars sur quatre ans. On parle ici, 

 

116 

Madame  la  présidente,  d’un  grant  annuel  de  R  36  millions.    Mais  quelle  est  donc  la 

contribution de la MFA dans le football professionnel ? 

Quant  aux  R  17  millions  prévus  pour  la  rénovation  des  centres  à  Pointe  Jérôme  et 

Anse La Raie, il est bon de rappeler que, tout comme les stades, ces deux centres résidentiels 

pour les jeunes sont dans un piteux état depuis des années. Pourtant, budget après budget, des 

sommes sont accordées pour la rénovation de ces centres, mais sans que cela ne se concrétise. 

Ce  qui  me  pousse  à  déplorer  l’absence  d’entretien  régulier  des  infrastructures  pour  la 

jeunesse et les sportifs. 

Quant  à  la  proposition  que  le  ministère  des  sports  procédera  à  la  rénovation  des 

infrastructures sportives dans les écoles et collèges, je note qu’il n’y a aucune dotation prévue 

dans  les  Estimates  2016-2017!    D’ailleurs  je  me  pose  la  question  si  c’est  bien  la 

responsabilité  du  ministère  de  la  Jeunesse  et  des  Sports  d’aller  rénover  les  infrastructures 

tombant sous le ministère de l’Education. 

Pour un résumer, Madame la présidente, ce sont des propositions qu’on peut qualifier 

de  ‘réchauffé’.    Il  est  clair  que  ce  gouvernement  n’a  pas  de  politique  définie  pour  le  sport.  

Voilà  ce  que  je  disais  dans  mon  intervention  l’année  dernière  après  la  présentation  d’un 

supposé budget de ‘miracle économique’. 

Madame la présidente, une année après pas de grand changement.  Ah si! Une chose a 

changé:  le  ministère  de  la  Jeunesse  et  des  Sports  fonctionne  désormais  dans  de  luxueux 

bureaux au Citadelle Mall.   

Comme il fallait s’y attendre, le ministre a mis en avant dans son intervention, sur le 

budget  récemment,  les  médailles que les athlètes mauriciens ont  ramenées des compétitions 

internationales,  dont  les  Jeux  des  Iles  à  la  Réunion  et  les  Jeux  d’Afrique  au  Congo-

Brazzaville. 

Madame la présidente, sans remettre en question le succès de nos athlètes, le ministre 

a omis de préciser que pour les derniers Jeux des Iles à la Réunion, il y avait un plus grand 

nombre de disciplines au programme dont plus de médailles en jeu. 

Comparer  ce  qui  est  comparable  et  venir  dire  que  «  Maurice  a  réalisé  sa  meilleure 

performance  depuis  les  premiers  Jeux  de  1979 »,  est  un  pas  que  je  ne  franchirai  pas. 

Toutefois  on  ne  peut  se  contenter  de  ces  médailles  pour  dire  que  le  sport  mauricien  est  en 

bonne  voie  et  que  tout  va  pour  le  mieux.    C’est,  à  mon  avis,  faire  preuve  d’un  manque  de 

vision. 

 

117 

Où  en  sommes-nous  au  niveau  de  l’encadrement  et  la  formation  des  athlètes,  aussi 

bien  que  des  entraîneurs?  Deux  secteurs  qui  sont  quasiment  les  parents  pauvres  du  sport 

mauricien.    Dans  presque  toutes  les  disciplines,  la  formation  passe  au  second  plan  et  dans 

bien des cas, c’est à cause d’un manque de financement. Pourtant, Madame la présidente, le 

ministère des Sports avait annoncé en  grande pompe la réouverture des toutes les écoles de 

football. De même que le centre technique national à Réduit.   

Grande  a  été  notre  surprise,  ici  même,  dans  cette  assemblée  et  cela  à  travers  une 

réponse de l’honorable ministre, que quelques mois, après leur réouverture, ces mêmes écoles 

ont dû cesser leurs opérations, faute de moyens financiers. 

Dans  cette  même  lignée,  Madame  la  présidente,  on  peut  ajouter  le  flou  qui  existe 

autour du projet de mettre une Académie de Football, comme l’avait dit l’honorable ministre 

des Sports lui-même, avec le soutien d’un ‘famous club’ européen, présenté comme un projet 

prioritaire de ce gouvernement. 

Que n’a-t-on pas entendu dans cette même Assemblée sur ce projet ? 

Madame la présidente, le Premier ministre lui-même avait affirmé dans une fonction 

sportive,  le  Sports  Award  de  l’année  dernière  ou  de  l’année  d’avant,  que  ce  gouvernement 

irait de l’avant avec ce projet. Mais le ministre des Sports a été incapable de dire à ce jour si 

ce projet national se concrétisera. Si ce n’est pas du bluff, cela y ressemble étrangement. 

Tous  les  spécialistes  du  sport,  Madame  la  présidente,  peuvent  confirmer  que  la 

formation est l’épine dorsale de tout projet de haut niveau. Mais à Maurice, le ministère des 

Sports  veut  faire  de  la  formation  avec  un  budget  annuel  de  R  300,000  pour  une  discipline 

collective. 

Si ce n’est pas de la formation ‘low cost’, je me demande bien ce que c’est ! C’est dire 

que le mouvement sportif local est bien souvent désorienté face aux problèmes récurrents et 

qui demeurent un obstacle au progrès. 

Il n’y a qu’à écouter, d’ailleurs, les réponses du ministre de la Jeunesse et des Sports 

aux  questions  qui  lui  sont  posées  dans  cette  Assemblée  pour  mieux  comprendre.  Très 

souvent, il évoque l’autonomie des fédérations et la confidentialité de certains dossiers pour 

ne pas avoir à donner des explications. 

 

118 

D’ailleurs,  le  ministre  des  Sports,  dans  son  intervention  sur  le  budget,  a  parlé  de  sa 

« nouvelle méthode de travail axée sur le bien-être des athlètes » depuis son arrivée dans ce 

ministère. 

Comment  alors ne pas s’étonner devant  de tels propos, quand on note les difficultés 

auxquelles  font  face  quotidiennement  les  athlètes  de  haut  niveau,  ne  serait-ce  que  pour 

s’entraîner dans des conditions adéquates ! 

Je  peux  citer  des  exemples,  tels  que  la  disponibilité  irrégulière  d’un  moyen  de 

transport  pour  les  athlètes  après  les  entraînements,  le  manque  de  financement  pour  les 

déplacements  à  l’étranger  et  le  mauvais  état  de  certaines  infrastructures  sportives,  dont  le 

gymnase  de  Phœnix,  où  le  parquet  devient  impraticable  en  période  de  pluie,  ou  encore  les 

haltérophiles  de  Curepipe  qui  s’entraînent  pied  dans l’eau  dans  une  salle  située  au  stade 

Georges V. 

Comment  peut-on  parler  de  bien-être  des  athlètes,  Madame  la  présidente,  quand  ces 

derniers sont livrés à eux-mêmes après avoir subi de graves blessures ? 

Je vais vous citer quelques cas qui ont été portés à ma connaissance. 

Le  premier  concerne  l’haltérophile  Cédric  Coret,  triple  médaillé  d’or  aux  derniers 

Jeux des Iles à La Réunion, qui a été gravement blessé au genou à l’entraînement. Par faute 

de  traitements  appropriés,  son  état  inspire  de  vives  inquiétudes.  Sa  frustration  est  telle  que 

récemment il a déclaré dans un hebdomadaire, et je le cite – 

« Je suis perdu. J’estime, en tant qu’athlète de haut niveau, avoir défendu avec brio les 

couleurs de mon pays. J’ai le droit de bénéficier de soutien adéquat après cette grave 

blessure. Ce n’est toutefois pas le cas. » 

Le second cas, Madame la présidente, est  celui du footballeur professionnel Kursley 

Louie, blessé lui aussi au genou, qui a été abandonné à son sort. Son cas a provoqué la colère 

de  ses  proches.  Sa  mère  est  même  allée  sur  les  ondes  d’une  radio  privée  pour  attirer 

l’attention des autorités sur la situation de son fils. Et elle a déclaré – 

« Tant que mon fils pouvait jouer, cela allait bien pour lui. Aujourd’hui, personne ne 

bouge le petit doigt pour lui, qu’il s’agisse de son club, de la ligue professionnelle, de 

la  MFA,  ou  encore  le  ministère  des  Sports.  Mon  fils  gagnait  sa  vie  en  jouant  au 

football, et après sa blessure, il a été licencié par son club. » avait déclaré cette mère 

révoltée. 

 

119 

Il  y  a  aussi  le  cas  du  coureur  de  demi-fond,  Paramasiven  Samynaden,  lui  aussi 

médaillé d’or aux derniers Jeux des Iles, blessé dans un accident de moto, et qui a dû lancer 

un appel sur internet pour solliciter une aide financière afin de pouvoir se soigner. 

Madame la présidente, l’incohérence dans la  répartition des dotations budgétaires se 

situe surtout au niveau des disciplines collectives. 

Alors que le football bénéficie des largesses de l’Etat, les autres disciplines, telles que 

handball, le volleyball et le basketball n’obtiennent que des miettes. Les résultats obtenus aux 

derniers Jeux des Iles à La Réunion sont là pour le prouver. 

Le ministre avait pourtant reconnu que Maurice, et je le cite - 

 “has not performed to expectation in team sports during the Indian Ocean Games 

2015.” 

Mais,  depuis,  qu’à  fait  de  concret  son  ministère  pour  relancer  la  machine ?  Surtout  que  ce 

n’est un secret pour personne que Maurice accueille dans trois ans les 10ème Jeux des Iles. 

Madame la présidente, c’est ce qu’on appelle le revers de la médaille. 

Il  ne  faut  pas  oublier  que  le  sport  mauricien  a  quand  même  vécu  des  moments 

pénibles durant l’année financière écoulée. 

Certains  sportifs ont  été traités comme des athlètes de  second  grade par le ministère 

de la Jeunesse et des Sports. 

Qui ne se rappelle pas de la polémique qui  a été lancée, ici-même, dans cette même 

Assemblé,  où  le  ministre  avait  clairement  fait  comprendre  que  les  sportifs  pratiquant  une 

discipline non olympique ne pouvaient bénéficier des mêmes avantages que ceux pratiquant 

une discipline olympique ! Allant même jusqu’à les comparer à l’opposition parlementaire ! 

Les  réactions  d’indignation  n’avaient  pas  tardé,  venant  principalement  de  Fabrice  Bauluck, 

champion du monde de kick-boxing. 

N’oublions pas, qu’à ce jour, ce sont les sportifs des disciplines non olympiques qui 

ont gagné des titres mondiaux au nom de la République de Maurice. 

Madame  la  présidente,  que  n’a-t-on  pas  fait  subir  à  Noémïe  Alphonse ?  Une  athlète 

handicapée  qui  voulait  du  respect  et  des  réponses  à  ses  interrogations  légitimes.  Et  comme 

réponse,  elle  fut  suspendue  par  sa  fédération,  et  cela,  avec  la  bienveillance  du  ministre  des 

Sports. 

 

120 

Madame  la  présidente,  le  financement  du  sport  mauricien  reste  jusqu’à  présent  un 

sujet hautement sensible dont souffre beaucoup de fédérations, et qui a une incidence directe 

sur les performances des sportifs. 

Beaucoup sont privés de compétitions ou de stages à l’étranger en raison d’un manque 

de financement. 

Je  voudrais  encore  une  fois  plaider  pour  qu’une  partie  des  fonds  alloués  au  CSR 

aillent  au  sport.  Nous  ne  pouvons  pas  continuer  à  voir  nos  sportifs  mendier  pour  aller 

représenter le pays. 

Malgré le fait que les guidelines ont été réintroduits, je constate que le sport ne figure 

toujours pas parmi les bénéficiaires. 

En  2014  pourtant,  une  décision  avait  été  prise  et  annoncée  dans  une  réponse 

parlementaire  par  l’ex-ministre  des  Sports,  suite  à  une  de  mes  questions,  que  le  sport  allait 

dorénavant bénéficier de 10% de la contribution des entreprises au CSR Fund. 

Toutefois, Madame la présidente, dans ce présent budget, le sport a été ignoré de la 

liste des secteurs qui vont bénéficier de ces mêmes fonds. 

Dois-je rappeler à la Chambre que nombreux sont les clubs  et associations sportives 

qui  se  trouvent  dans  les  régions  défavorisées  et  prioritaires,  identifiées  par  le  ministère  de 

l’Intégration sociale. 

De surcroît, ces clubs et associations sont aussi engagés dans le social, qui d’ailleurs 

va  de  pair  avec  le  sport.  Et  guider  les  jeunes  vers  le  sport,  en  particulier  dans  les  régions 

pauvres, est un excellent moyen de participer à la lutte contre la pauvreté. 

Madame la présidente, il est à mon avis primordial que les clubs sportifs puissent, eux 

aussi,  bénéficier  d’une  partie  des  fonds  du  CSR,  car  le  sponsoring  de  nos  jours  n’est 

pratiquement plus d’actualité. 

Dans un autre ordre d’idée, Madame la présidente, je voudrais aussi dire ma déception 

devant  la  décision  qu’a  prise  dernièrement  le  Mauritius  Sports  Council  afin  d’augmenter 

considérablement les frais d’utilisation des infrastructures sportives. 

Dorénavant, les frais de location des sites de compétition est un budget qui pèse lourd 

dans les comptes des fédérations. 

 

121 

Ce problème ne touche pas uniquement les fédérations, mais tout aussi bien ceux qui 

pratiquent le sport loisir. Pour une heure de natation dans une piscine ou jouer au badminton 

dans un gymnase, ces sportifs doivent débourser une somme conséquente pour avoir accès à 

ces infrastructures. 

C’est  tout  simplement  inconcevable,  Madame  la  présidente.  Drôle  de  façon  à  mon 

avis d’inciter la population à la pratique du sport. 

Pour  conclure  sur  le  chapitre  du  sport,  je  voudrais  dire  que  la  décision  du  Conseil 

International des Jeux (CIJ) de permettre à Maurice d’accueillir les 10ème  Jeux des Iles en 

2019 est une aubaine pour les sportifs de haut niveau, mais aussi pour le sport en général.  

Le Comité D’Organisation des Jeux a été mis en place et notre devoir à tous c’est de 

laisser au COJI Maurice de travailler en toute sérénité et dans le respect des règles. 

Toutefois, Madame la présidente, le choix des personnes à des postes aussi importants 

est déterminant. Nous espérons que ceux en qui l’État a placé sa confiance seront à la hauteur 

de la situation. Mais il semblerait que le départ est mal entamé avec des choix de disciplines 

qui font déjà polémiques. Dans le cas de la voile, le ministre des Sports a récemment laissé 

comprendre  que  cette  discipline  ne  sera  pas  au  programme  des  Jeux.  Il  serait,  à  mon  avis, 

impensable  que  la  voile  et  le  handball  ne  soient  pas  de  la  fête.  Il  est  à  souhaiter  que  le 

gouvernement profite de l’organisation de ces prochains jeux pour doter le sport mauricien de 

nouvelles  infrastructures  sportives.  D’ailleurs  les  dernières  qui  ont  été  construites  datent  de 

2003  lorsque  Maurice  avait  organisé  les  6ème  jeux  des  îles.  L’usure  du  temps  et  l’évolution 

technique  font  que  certaines  de  ces  infrastructures  ne  répondent  plus  aux  conditions 

imposées. 

Madame  la  présidente,  quelques  mots  maintenant  concernant  la  jeunesse.  Face  à  ce 

nouveau fléau qu’est la drogue synthétique, face à la violence dans les institutions scolaires, 

face à un chômage grandissant et à un manque de loisir et de repères, la jeunesse mauricienne 

est désorientée. 

Les  commentaires  de  l’ex-juge  Paul  Lam  Shang  Leen,  président  de  la  Commission 

d’Enquête  sur  la  Drogue  concernant  une  étude  faite  par  le  ministère  de  la  Jeunesse  et  des 

Sports  sur  le  comportement  des  jeunes  dans  la  société,  démontre  combien  ce  ministère  est 

resté sans réaction devant des indications qui pourtant nécessitaient des actions urgentes. 

Madame  la  présidente,  cette  étude  financée  par  les  fonds  des  Nations  Unies  pour  la 

population  fait  état  des  causes  de  la  violence  chez  les  jeunes.  Notamment  les  problèmes 

 

122 

familiaux, la colère, la frustration, le manque de considération à leur égard, leur impulsion à 

défier les autorités et aussi la consommation des substances illicites entre autres. 

Le ministère de la Jeunesse et des Sports a été d’ailleurs sévèrement blâmés par l’ex-

juge  Paul  Lam  Shang  Leen  pour  n’avoir  pas  su  utiliser  les  conclusions  de  ce  rapport  à  bon 

escient. Parmi les remontrances faites par le président de la Commission d’Enquête, figure la 

non-utilisation  des  centres  de  jeunesse  comme  un  espace  permettant  aux  jeunes  d’évoluer 

sainement et loin des fléaux. Pourtant, Madame la présidente, le ministère de la Jeunesse et 

des Sports est en possession de ce rapport depuis janvier 2015.  

Le comportement des jeunes, en particulier dans le milieu scolaire, est aussi un sujet 

de  grande  préoccupation.  Rapport  après  rapport,  le  constat  d’échec  est  une  évidence.  Les 

bagarres,  les  agressions  et  les  intimidations  sont  monnaies  courantes  dans  bon  nombre 

d’institutions scolaires. Le plus grave dans cette affaire, Madame la présidente, est que cette 

violence s’affiche sur les réseaux sociaux. 

Je propose, donc, à la ministre de l’Education d’aller sur Internet pour constater à quel 

point cette violence s’affiche gratuitement. Et il n’y a pas  plus grand danger pour les jeunes 

quand la violence devient gratuite. Pour l’heure il est triste de dire que les mesures prises par 

le ministère de l’Education pour essayer de régler ce problème ont été nettement inefficaces, 

d’autant plus que les pédagogues ne cessent de critiquer la Student Behaviour Policy mise en 

place pour instaurer la discipline dans les collèges. 

« Face  à  cette  montée  de  violence,  les  recteurs  et  les  enseignants  n’y  peuvent  rien, 

n’ayant  aucun  pouvoir.  Dans  la  plupart  des  cas,  nous  nous  contentons  de  suivre  les 

procédures, ce qui nous limite à nos actions à rapporter les cas à la police. » 

Propos tenus par le Dr. Hasam Sakibe, pédagogue et directeur du Mauritius Institute dans un 

récent article de presse sur la violence à l’école. 

Madame la présidente, si les pédagogues eux-mêmes commencent à baisser les bras, 

c’est tout dire sur la gravité de la situation, d’autant que de nouveaux phénomènes sont venus 

se  greffer  à  cette  violence  existante.  Par  exemple,  le  ‘bullying’,  une  action  qui  consiste  à 

humilier profondément un étudiant, affecte sérieusement les établissements scolaires de notre 

pays. 

« Les jeunes sont de plus en plus agressifs et violents. Le niveau de violence qui règne 

dans certains établissements scolaires est choquant. » 

 

123 

Ces  propos  sont  ceux  de  Jacques  Malié,  pédagogue  de  carrière  et  ex-recteur  du 

Collège  du  Saint  Esprit,  tenu  en  juin  dernier.  Je  pense  qu’il  sait  de  quoi  il  parle.  Jacques 

Malié  explique  aussi  comment  les  mesures  annoncées  par  le  ministère  de  l’Education  sont 

difficiles  à  mettre  en  exécution,  sans  compter  les  tracasseries  administratives  qui 

accompagnent ces mesures. Du coup, Madame la présidente, c’est toute la théorie –  

 

« Government is government, government decides » qui est mise à mal. 

Il  est  reproché  au ministère de l’Education de travailler en solo  et  de ne  pas consulter ceux 

qui font face quotidiennement à ces problèmes. 

Madame  la  présidente,  je  lance,  de  ce  fait,  un  pressant  appel  à  la  ministre  de 

l’Education afin de tout mettre en œuvre pour que les institutions scolaires de Maurice soient 

avant  tout  des  lieux  sûrs  et  sécurisants  pour  notre  jeunesse.  Au  cas  contraire,  ce  sont  des 

délinquants de demain qu’elles produiront. 

Contrairement  à  ce  qu’avait  annoncé  récemment  la  ministre  de  l’Education,  les 

drogues  sont  bien  présentes  dans  les  établissements  scolaires,  comme  l’a  d’ailleurs  soutenu 

un des cadres de son ministère devant la Commission d’Enquête. 

Madame  la  présidente,  je  propose,  face  à  cette  situation,  si  besoin  est,  que  les 

règlements soient modifiés afin que l’inspectorat du ministère de l’Education puisse avoir la 

possibilité  de  faire  des  visites  surprises  dans  les  établissements  où  on  soupçonnerait  la 

présence  des  drogues  ;  y  compris  de  procéder  à  des  fouilles  en  présence  du  responsable  de 

l’établissement et des membres du PTA.. 

Madame  la  présidente,  par  rapport  aux  administrations  régionales  nous  voyons  que, 

depuis  juin  2015,  il  y  a  une  gestion  frisant  l’amateurisme  au  sein  des  conseils  municipaux. 

Les critiques ne cessent de s’amplifier… 

(Interruptions) 

Causer, causer! 

Nombreux  sont  les  citadins  qui  regrettent  amèrement  d’avoir  confié  les  clés  de  leur 

ville à des néophytes, incapables d’améliorer les conditions de vie de leur quartier. 

Mo coze Plaza enn ti moment-là! 

(Interruptions) 

 

124 

Ajoutez  à  cela,  en  parcourant  les  Estimates  2016-2017,  je  note  qu’aucune  somme 

n’est prévue pour la rénovation du Théâtre de Port Louis, de même que pour le Plaza à Rose 

Hill  et  le  Town  Hall  à  Curepipe.  Cela,  contrairement  à  ce  qu’avait  annoncé  l’honorable 

ministre Dr. Husnoo dans son intervention. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Toussaint, did we ask for your comment? 

Mr  Quirin:  Les  Estimates  2016-2017  laissent  comprendre  que  pour  assurer  le 

financement  des  futurs  travaux,  les  fonds  seront  puisés  du  National  Lottery  Fund.  Vu  le 

nombre  de  projets  qui  ont  besoin  de  financement,  je  me  pose  la  question,  Madame  la 

présidente, pour savoir combien d’argent dispose  ce fonds? 

A ce sujet, je dois faire ressortir que tout ce qui concerne la rénovation de la salle des 

fêtes et le bloc administratif du Plaza (Phase 11), qui est actuellement en cours, ce projet fut 

lancé  depuis  septembre  2013,  sous  le  précédent  conseil  municipal  dirigé  par  un  Maire 

MMM…  

(Interruptions) 

… allant  du recrutement d’un consultant jusqu’au lancement des appels  d’offres et  le choix 

du  contracteur  pour  les  travaux.  Madame  la  présidente,  le  MMM  a  pleinement  assumé  ses 

responsabilités vis-à-vis des citadins de cette ville. 

Concernant ma circonscription de Beau Bassin/Petite Rivière, Madame la présidente, 

je voudrais tout d’abord exprimer mon inquiétude, encore une fois, pour les habitants d’une 

région en particulier, notamment les résidents du Morcellement Hermitage à Coromandel, qui 

vivent dans une situation d’insécurité permanente. C’est un vieux problème qui s’est empiré 

depuis  août  2012  avec  l’effondrement  d’un  mur  qui  a  causé  en  mouvement  de  terrain  et  la 

chute de grosses pierres.  

Quatre ans après, Madame la présidente, les travaux de réhabilitation promis sont au 

point  mort  et  le  danger  est  toujours  bel  et  bien  présent  dans  cette  région.  Pourtant  en  avril 

dernier,  le  ministre  des  Infrastructures  Publiques,  l’honorable  Bodha,  avait  indiqué,  en 

réponse à une de mes questions sur le sujet, que différentes mesures seraient prises pour que 

les habitants  se sentent en sécurité.  Il  avait promis, entre  autres, la construction de murs de 

protection  ainsi  que 

l’aménagement  de  drains  adéquats.  Depuis, 

les  habitants  du 

Morcellement Hermitage ne voient toujours rien venir malgré leurs nombreuses sollicitations.  

 

125 

Madame  la  présidente,  la  crainte  des  habitants  de  cette  région  s’accentue  chaque 

année à l’approche de la période des grosses pluies d’été. Je demande de ce fait au ministre 

des  Infrastructures  Publiques  d’accorder  un  certificat  d’urgence  à  ce  dossier.  J’espère  aussi 

que  les  promesses  faites  par  l’honorable  Boissézon,  PPS  de  la  circonscription,  dans  son 

intervention jeudi dernier, seront respectées. 

Je  déplore  aussi  le  peu  de  considération  qui  a  été  donnée  au  projet  de  construction 

d’un  terrain  de  football  à  Canot.  Pourtant,  une  portion  de  terrain  a  déjà  été  mise  à  la 

disposition  du  gouvernement  par  la  sucrerie  de  Médine.  En  février  2015,  le  ministre  des 

Administrations Régionales avait soutenu que le conseil de district de Rivière Noire n’avait 

pas les fonds nécessaires pour réaliser ce projet. 

Je  trouve  vraiment  désolant,  Madame  la  présidente,  qu’un  gouvernement  qui  se  dit 

‘caring’ n’arrive toujours pas à trouver les moyens financiers pour permettre aux jeunes de 

cette localité de bénéficier d’un terrain de foot. La pratique du football est sans aucun doute 

le passe-temps … 

Mo pena leçon pou prend ar zotte moi. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  I have said that interruptions are disorderly! 

Mr  Quirin:  …  numéro  un  des  jeunes.  Doit-on  s’étonner,  Madame  la  présidente, 

qu’après qu’ils s’adonnent à des activités nuisibles à la société ? 

Concernant  toujours  cette  partie  rurale  de  ma  circonscription,  je  me  pose  encore  la 

question : qu’est-ce qui motive ce gouvernement à installer une raffinerie pétrolière à Albion? 

Les  habitants  de  la  région  ont  encore  en  mémoire  la  triste  épisode  de  CT  Power  et  voilà 

qu’aujourd’hui  un  nouveau  projet  nuisible  à  l’environnement,  avec  les  risques  que  cela 

comporte sur la santé publique, a été annoncé par le ministre des Finances. J’aimerai savoir, 

Madame la présidente, est-ce que la région d’Albion est-elle condamnée à accueillir que les 

projets non écologiques? Pourquoi pas un complexe multisport et une piscine?  Pourquoi ne 

pas déplacer la raffinerie vers St. Pierre. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

Mr Quirin: Albion, Albion, à chaque fois c’est Albion! 

 

126 

Ceci  dit,  Madame  la  présidente,  je  dois  aussi  préciser  que  la  Municipalité  de  Beau 

Bassin/Rose  Hill  a  besoin  de  mieux  coordonner,  voire  une  meilleure  concertation  avec  la 

NDU  et  les  autres  institutions  gouvernementales  pour  plus  d’efficacité  afin  d’améliorer  le 

quotidien des citadins.  Ce ne sont pas les urgences qui  manquent  dans la circonscription de 

Beau Bassin/Petite Rivière. 

Rapidement, il y a, entre autres, la réfection générale des trottoirs, en particulier, dans 

le  centre-ville  de  Beau  Bassin.  L’aménagement  des  drains  dans  diverses  régions,  en 

particulier à la Rue Pope Hennessy où la situation est encore plus urgente. D’ailleurs, j’avais 

soulevé  ce  problème  il  y  a  quelques  semaines  de  cela  lors  l’ajournement  des  travaux 

parlementaires.  Et  aussi,  à  Mont  Roches,  il  est  urgent  que  les  routes  soient  remises  en  état 

après que des travaux de tout-à-l’égout aient été effectués. 

Pour conclure, Madame  la présidente, j’ose espérer que les mesures annoncées dans 

ce  présent  budget  seront  implémentées  dans  leur  intégralité.  C’est  à  ce  moment  que  nous 

saurons si le ministre des Finances est bien ce ‘fantastic guy’ comme le décrit le gouverneur 

de la Banque de Maurice. 

Je vous remercie. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Gayan! 

(6.51 p.m.) 

The  Minister  of Health  and Quality  of  Life  (Mr  A.  Gayan):  Madam  Speaker,  let 

me  start  by,  first  of  all,  congratulating  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 

Development for this very interesting Budget.  

In fact, before  I stood up to  address  the House, I was thinking how should  I qualify 

this budget.  Is it an interesting budget?  Interesting to whom? And why?  Because when one 

looks  at  the  papers,  Madam  Speaker,  one  will  see  that  the  Secretary  General  of  the  MMM, 

had instructed all the Members in this House to be honest about the Budget.   

(Interruptions) 

Yes! 

And their Leader had said: ‘It is an interesting Budget.’ 

(Interruptions) 

Very Interesting!  How interesting is this interesting Budget? 

 

127 

But listening to the orators on the other side of the House - on this side of the House - I must 

say that they find nothing good in this Budget.  Their Leader said it was interesting, but they 

find nothing good.  Hon. Quirin had just spoken.  I will come to the issue of drugs later and I 

will challenge him to certain things about Methadone in our Constituency.   I will challenge 

him. I will come to hon. Dr. Joomaye as well. 

Hon. Bhagwan, no! 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon.  Baloomoody!  Hon.  Bhagwan!  Please!    It  is  your  right  to  challenge  him.    When  you 

intervene, then you can challenge him. 

Mr  Gayan:  I  am  not  saying  anything  about  hon.  Bhagwan  because  I  know  that  he 

knows the problem of Mont Roches about Methadone. 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, wait, I will come to that. 

Let me say some words about this Budget before I come to the issues concerning my 

Ministry and also something that has been said by the hon. Members on the other side. 

This Budget, Madam Speaker, is, in fact, a people’s budget.  It could not be otherwise 

because  it  is  a  budget  of  L’Alliance  Lepep.  It  is  a  budget  of  pragmatism,  of  realism  and  a 

determination that doing nothing bold about the economy is no longer an option. This is not a 

budget  filled  with  ideology.    It  is  not  a  budget  about  very  confusing  phraseology  used  by 

Economists. It is a budget which puts people first.  For the first time, unlike others who said 

that they were putting people first, this Budget puts people first.  Not only that it puts people 

first,  but  for  the  first  time,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  is 

looking at the people les yeux dans les yeux. 

This  Budget  will  be  fully  implemented  and  it  will  be  implemented  so  that  the 

economy is democratised, really democratised. 

(Interruptions) 

 

128 

Madam Speaker: Now, if you continue to interrupt the orator, we will never finish.  I 

have  said  that  interruptions  are  disorderly  and  can  only  create  difficulties  for  the  orator  as 

well. 

You continue despite what I have said! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Gayan: Madam  Speaker, this Budget  has been said  to  be daring and bold.   The 

Rt. hon. Prime Minister said it is excellent, but it is a budget that also bears the footprint of 

the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister.  It  bears  the  footprint  of  everybody  on  this  side  of  the  House 

because  it  is  a  budget  that  is  required  in  order  to  have  this  new  era  of  development  being 

realised. 

Madam  Speaker,  let  me  say  that  apart  from  the  ten  key  strategies  which  have  been 

outlined in the Budget, which are very important to kick start the economy and to bring hope 

to those who are living in absolute poverty, there are three elements which, I think, I need to 

highlight  in  this  House.    There  are  three  elements  which  I  think  I  need  to  highlight  in  this 

House. The three initiatives which have been identified in the budget and which I am going to 

mention in the House are - 

1. 

2. 

3. 

the return of the Chagos Archipelago to the Sovereignty of Mauritius; 

the fight against poverty, and 

preparing  the  youth  of  our  country  to  rise  to  the  challenges  of  the  modern 

world. 

On the first issue, the Chagos Archipelago, I think, the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister was 

absolutely  right  in  taking  the  battle  to  10  Downing  Street  and  placing  the  United  Kingdom 

before its responsibilities. For too long, Mauritius has been asking in all international fora for 

the return of the Chagos Archipelago to the sovereignty of Mauritius. The United Kingdom 

has always maintained that it is going to return the Chagos Archipelago to Mauritius when it 

no longer requires the Chagos Archipelago for the defence of the West. 

In order to understand the problem we have to travel back in time. In 1965, when the 

Chagos Archipelago was excised from Mauritius, the world was totally different from what it 

is  today.  The  world  had  two  superpowers.    The  world  was  divided  into  two.  We  had  the 

Berlin  Wall.    We  had  the  Apartheid  in  South  Africa  and  the  two  superpowers  had  satellite 

States  all  over  the  world.  Warfare  then,  is  not  the  warfare  of  today.  The  Soviet  Union  no 

 

129 

longer exists.  The Berlin Wall has disappeared. South Africa is free.  Defence of the West is 

no  longer  an  element  that  is  relevant.  In  fact,  in  those  days,  Madam  Speaker,  we  used  to 

speak of the Indian Ocean as a zone of peace.  Who speaks today of Indian Ocean as a zone 

of peace?   

In those days, India was not that power that it is.  China had not become the economic 

power and military power that it is. So, the whole world has changed. And it is for this reason 

that the rationale, if at all it was a rationale in 1965 to excise the Chagos Archipelago from 

the  sovereignty  of  Mauritius,  that  rationale  no  longer  exists.  This  is  why,  I  think,  it  is  high 

time that we, all as a nation, get together to support the fight of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to 

win back our territory… 

(Interruptions) 

and  to  complete  the  process  of  independence  for  our  country.  We  may  not  be  a  military 

power; we may not be able to fight militarily the United Kingdom or the United States, but 

we must enlist the support of all our friends in the international community to be by our side 

in  at  quest  for  justice  and  the  restoration  of  all  parts  of  our  territory.  In  fact,  on  this  issue, 

what I want to say is that what Palestine is for the Palestinians, the Chagos Archipelago is for 

the Mauritians. 

Let me say a few words about the fight against poverty. The hon. Minister of Finance 

and Economic Development has spoken about ‘leaving no one behind and no one having to 

go to bed hungry’. I think this is only natural for a caring Government.  It is also natural that 

we,  as  a  Government,  ensure  that  no  Mauritian,  in  a  country  which  is  a  middle  income 

country, should have any of his son or daughter going to bed hungry. No one should consider 

that  there  is  one  Mauritius  for  a  few  and  another  Mauritius  for  the  rest.  There  must  be  one 

Mauritius. We are all united in the fight for justice, in the fight for equality and the fight for 

getting  what  we  consider  to  be  right  for  all  Mauritians.  This  is  why  the  Marshall  Plan, 

Madam Speaker, is so important. 

The Marshall Plan is aptly named.  It is called the Marshall Plan because the Marshall 

Plan was first adopted and implemented in Europe after the Second World War. It was then 

the Secretary of State of the United States of America who initiated this Marshall Plan and he 

designed it so that Europe could be rescued and Europe could start its economy going again 

after the Second World War. So, it is highly symbolical that we have used the term Marshall 

Plan for lifting all those who are living in absolute poverty out of poverty. It is important that 

 

130 

we give the opportunities to all Mauritians who are in that condition to understand that there 

is something that can be done and that they can do it, and they can do it with the support of 

the Government and of all Mauritians.  

This  is  why,  I  say,  Madam  Speaker,  that  there  should  be  no  underprivileged  in  this 

country  and we should also  remember that those  who have come up in  society, many of us 

here in this House, did not start off being comfortable in life.  Many of us started in very poor 

conditions, but thanks to education and thanks to responsibility of our parents, we were able 

to  get  educated  and  we  are  where  we  are.  But  what  we  did  everybody  can  do.  There  is  no 

obstacle for anybody not to be able to do what we have achieved and this is the message of 

optimism  that this Budget  has.  It  is  this optimism  that will see us through  and that  will  get 

this country to become really a high income country, and we will realise the second economic 

miracle. 

Madam  Speaker,  let  me  say  that  there  is  a  tendency  of  selfishness  among,  not  only 

Mauritians, but  generally. When  we have reached the top,  we climb  the  ladder  and we pull 

the ladder with us.  We should not pull the ladder. We should leave the ladder there for others 

also  to  come  up  to  climb  the  ladder.    This  is  also  very  important  in  this  quest  for  justice, 

justice for all and the alleviation of poverty. 

Let me come to the third point which I have identified.  It is giving hope to our young 

people. In the Budget, the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development has spoken 

about  innovation,  intellectual  property,  and  has  provided  all  sorts  of  opportunities  for  the 

young  people  to  be  able  to  make  it  in  this  world  where  IT  is  so  important.  Let  me  give  an 

example  of  a  young  boy  of  14  in  India.    In  India,  there  are  problems  of  transport.    So,  this 

young kid had to go to school.  Then, there was a strike and there were all sorts of problems. 

So, he started thinking: how am I going to get to school?  He started talking to his friends and 

to all the taxi drivers, the rickshaw-walas and everybody. He was able to organise his school 

time  table  in  such  a  way  that  somebody  was  going  to  pick  him  up  and then  drop  him  back 

from school at his place. He started for himself and very soon people were coming to him. He 

designed a programme and, at 14, that programme was so effective that he was able to sell to 

Uber.  I am sure all the hon. Members know about Uber.  He was able to sell it for 14 million 

dollars.  A young kid of 14!  So, anything is possible.  We are giving the opportunities for the 

young kids  to  be able to  do wonderful  things.   We have the talent.   They  have imagination 

and  they  have  the  creativity.    They  can  do  wonders  and  we  may  have  in  our  population 

people like Bill Gates, Steve Jobs and others and we must make Mauritius shine.  Those who 

 

131 

will allow Mauritius to shine are the young people of today. This is why it is important that 

we bear all this in mind when we need to inspire our youth. Of course, for all this to happen 

we need education; we need housing; we need food.  

We  need  to  empower  everybody  in  our  country  to  be  able  to  come  out  of  poverty. 

Anyone  can  succeed.  We  have  to  be  upwardly  mobile  and  social  mobility  is  not  an 

impossibility for a country like Mauritius. We can all do it, but we need to instill in the minds 

of all our kids, in the poor areas, in all the schools and everywhere, that they have a future in 

this country. We must believe in this country and I am sure that they can all participate in the 

construction of a wonderful Mauritius. 

Madam Speaker, having said all this about the Budget, about the three points, I think 

it is important that I come to some aspects of my Ministry because after all I am the Minister 

of  Health  and  I  need  to  inform  the  House  about  what  my  Ministry  is  doing  with  regard  to 

health. I must say that I did not intend to address the issue of drugs because in the course of 

the PQS and the statement I made today about the National Drug Observatory, I was thinking 

that I had said enough and not to have to say anything more in my speech on the Budget. But 

after having listened to hon. Quirin, I feel that I am duty bound to say a few things about the 

drugs. 

 (Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Didn’t I say that there should be no interruptions! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Jhugroo, making provocative remarks can only create difficulties in the House! Please, 

refrain from making provocative remarks! 

Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, before I come to the drugs, hon. Quirin happens to be a 

Member  of  the  same  constituency  with  me,  hon.  Bhagwan,  hon.  Lepoigneur  and  hon. 

Aliphon, we are all in the same constituency. 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, we have five! 

Hon.  Quirin  was  talking  about  Hermitage.  Of  course,  we  know  about  the  problem  of 

Hermitage. But when the 60-0 syndrome was on, Madam Speaker, in 2014, hon. Quirin, hon. 

Bhagwan  and  Anil  Bachoo  went  to  Hermitage.  They  went  to  Hermitage  to  look  at  the 

problem. And that was the 60-0. 

 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

132 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Order, please! Hon. Quirin,  you had the opportunity to talk, now allow the hon. Minister  to 

make his speech. 

Mr  Gayan:  The  then  hon.  Anil  Bachoo  promised  that  he  was  going  to  set  it  right 

before  the  elections  of  December  2014.  What  happened?  It  is  all  very  well  to  come  in  this 

House to pretend that one is concerned about one’s constituency as though my friends, hon. 

Lepoigneur and hon.  Aliphon  are not  concerned.  Ask hon.  Lepoigneur how many times we 

have been there, with hon. Dayal when he was the Minister of Environment! 

(Interruptions) 

And the project is on! So, let us not try to… 

They think they are the grand casseur paquet! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Quirin also mentioned about the oil refinery that will be put up in Albion. It is in 

their interest, Madam Speaker, that this Government does not embark on any project. This is 

what they want! Because then, they will say: “But you said you were going to do all this, to 

create  employment  and  then  you  don’t  do  anything.”  That  is  the  true  story.  But  I  want  to 

reassure hon. Quirin and all the inhabitants of Constituency No. 20 that we will never, as a 

Government, be party to a project that is going to destroy the environment.  

(Interruptions) 

We are going to  make sure that whatever project,  whether it is the oil refinery or any  other 

project, we will take into account everything having to do with the environment because the 

environment is vital to the Ministry which I have, the Ministry of Health. If the environment 

gets sick, everybody will get sick. So, it is in our interest to ensure, as a Government and as a 

Minister of Health, that we have taken all necessary precautions to avoid any damage to the 

environment. So, I can reassure hon. Quirin on this one and this Government is committed to 

the protection of the environment and making sure that nothing happens that can damage the 

environment. 

 

133 

Let me come to the issue of drugs. This afternoon, I tabled the report of the National 

Drugs Observatory. That is a report that covers the whole gamut of drugs, not only synthetic 

drugs and I will invite all Members of this House and the public and the media to read that 

report carefully. It is a report which is based on evidence and it is not a report which is based 

on  speculations.  My  friend,  hon.  Rughoobur,  raised  an  issue  recently  in  this  House  about 

someone in his constituency who had died from synthetic drugs. I asked him to give me his 

name and he did and I checked. When I checked, it was death by hanging! Nothing to do with 

synthetic drugs! So, we have to be careful, Madam Speaker. 

Gossip! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Baloomoody,  do  not  make  any  provocative  remarks!  It  is 

very indecorous for the House. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Gayan:  No, it was not a question! He had raised an issue at Adjournment Time, I 

asked  him  to  give  me  the  necessary  information  for  me  to  check  and  he  gave  me  another 

name as well.  I checked about  the other name. That  name does not  appear anywhere in  the 

records of the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life or with the Police. 

Madam  Speaker,  hon.  Quirin  mentioned  -  I  think  it  is  good  that  he  listens  -  this 

Chairperson of the Global Commission on Drug, Mrs Ruth Dreifuss. She came to Mauritius. 

She wanted to see me. Even before she came, she had asked for an appointment.  I had said 

yes.  When  she  came  to  see  me,  we  discussed  a  lot  about  all  sorts  of  things,  drugs  and 

whatever  and  then  I  asked  her  a  simple  question.  I  said:  “Mme  Dreifuss,  vous  venez  de  la 

Suisse, vous venez à Maurice et vous faites une campagne, vous faites des causeries pour la 

dépénalisation  du  gandia  et  du  cannabis.  Pourquoi  est-ce  que  vous  ne  l’avez  pas  fait  dans 

votre pays qui est la Suisse. » I asked her that question in the presence of the members of the 

press whom I had invited to talk to her. Did any member of the media report this in the press? 

No! So, it is all very well for people to come from all over the world to say: “Yes, you have 

to do this!”  But charity, Madam Speaker, has always started at home.  

(Interruptions) 

 

134 

Let us not be too complacent about the drugs, I have said and I will say it again in this House 

for  it  to  be  Hansardised.  Il  ne  faut  pas  banaliser,  il  ne  faut  pas  glorifier  il  ne  faut  pas 

glamouriser non plus la drogue. We should be careful because I asked also the question who 

this Mrs Dreifuss? 

I asked him: “In your country Mrs Dreifuss is there one parent who will be happy… 

Yes, Mrs Dreifuss 

Madam, 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Allow him to continue! 

Mr Gayan: I said is there… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: What if it is Mr or Mrs? Allow him to continue! 

You may proceed, hon. Minister. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Gayan:  I asked her again this question: “Is there any  parent in Switzerland who 

will be happy to know that their kid is living in a country where cannabis is easily available? 

Is free?” 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Rutnah!  I  have  just  asked  them  not  to  interrupt  the  orator. 

Now you are interrupting? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Gayan:  Let  me  come  to  another  issue  about  methadone.  There  was  a  time, 

Madam  Speaker,  when  methadone  was  on  demand.  Anybody  who  wanted  to  be  on  the 

programme, you just ask for it and you are put on the methadone programme.  

 

135 

When  we  were  campaigning  for  the  last  elections,  hon.  Quirin  must  know,  hon. 

Bhagwan knows, we were in Mont Roches and wherever we went people were saying please 

get rid of this distribution centre at the Brown Sequard Hospital. Everybody! Because it had 

become a problem, a serious social problem! There were about 800 to 900 people every day 

at  Brown  Sequard  Hospital.  People  could  not  walk  on  the  streets.  Girls  were  afraid  to  take 

that road. Then, we said, if we are elected because then it was 60-0, Madam Speaker! 

(Interruptions) 

It  was  60-0!  Then  we  said  if  we  are  elected  we  are  going  to  make  sure  that  this  region 

becomes normal again. 

This is why when hon. Dr. Joomaye in a press interview said that we were wrong with 

the process of decentralisation of the methadone, I called him. I talked to him and said: “Are 

you serious about what  you are saying? Do you want us to  go back to the old system?” He 

said: “Yes, I am a doctor. They should go back to where they were in the hospitals.” I said: 

“Oh, have you checked with hon. Bhagwan?” He is there he is listening to me! I asked him: 

“Have  you  checked with hon. Bhagwan whether  what  you  are saying is  agreeable to  him?” 

And  I  also  said:  “Check  with  hon.  Quirin  because  he  knows,  we  lived  it.”  Then  I  said:  “If 

hon. Bhagwan were to say yes, then you call me.” He said  yes he was going to call me. He 

never called! And that is why I am raising it here. 

Before we decentralised, Madam Speaker, and I have said it on so many occasions in 

this House and in the public but let me say for the last time - I hope it is for the last time so 

that  people  understand  -  we  went  to  look  for  alternative  sites  than  the  sites  where  the 

methadone  was  being  distributed,  we  went  all  over  Mauritius  and  we  even  went  to  Barkly 

because  in  Barkly,  Madam  Speaker,  there  is  a  building  which  belongs  to  the  Ministry  of 

Health. I said since it is  in the Ministry of Health’s jurisdiction it is easy for us to relocate. 

People in Barkly revolted against that particular presence. 

I  said  to  them:  “But,  these are people from  Barkly, people whom  you know, maybe 

your  children.  They  said:  “No  way!”  And  hon.  Quirin  knows,  hon.  Bhagwan  knows  about 

this! Then I said to hon. Dr. Joomaye: “You are a doctor. Since you are also concerned”  - I 

knew he has started a direct hair implantation at Clinic DHI… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! Order! 

 

Order! 

136 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Gayan: I can see, Madam Speaker, this hair clinic is generating a lot of interest in 

the House! 

(Interruptions) 

Then I said to hon. Dr. Joomaye: “If he is so concerned, I have instructed my officers to look 

for a site near that clinic for the distribution of methadone”. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker,  I  think  I  have  said  enough  about  the  drug  situation.  Let  me  come  to  the 

Ministry of Health and Quality of Life. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  am  very  grateful  to  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 

Development  for  having  increased  the  budget  of  my  Ministry  by  12.4  per  cent  for  the  next 

financial year. In fact, the budget has increased by Rs1.2 billion and I can give the assurance 

to the House that we are going to make sure that this money is spent wisely, there will be no 

wastage  and  next  time  the  Parliamentary  Committee  goes  to  visit  these  central  stores  they 

will find a major improvement in what they saw last time. 

Madam  Speaker,  there  are  major  projects  in  the  pipeline  for  the  Ministry  of  Health 

and Quality of Life. We have – 

 

 

 

the New Cancer Centre; 

major expansion works at the SSRN Hospital; 

an expansion of the Cardiac Centre at Victoria Hospital.  

And we also have made provision in the Budget for a – 

 

 

 

new Flacq Hospital; 

new Eye Hospital, and 

new Laboratory Services. 

Madam  Speaker,  as  the  House  is  aware  and  again  this  is  a  matter  which  has  been 

raised  repeatedly  in  the  House,  cancer  is  a  major  public  concern  not  only  in  Mauritius,  but 

also internationally. Let me give some figures.  

 

137 

The  number  of  new  cases  of  cancer  registered  in  2014  was  2,387  as  compared  to 

2,107  in  2013.  That  was  an  increase  of  270.  The  present  cancer  services  are  inadequate  to 

cope with the increasing number of cancer cases we are having and this is why we consider 

that having the New Cancer Centre is of an utmost importance and I hope that my colleague 

the  hon.  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  will  help  in  getting  his  staff  to  expedite  the  first 

phase of that project.  

Palliative  care  is  also  something  that  we  are  providing  for  in  the  Budget.  Today  we 

have cancer patients, but we do not have any palliative care which is for the end of life kind 

of patients. We need to accompany those cancer patients  towards the end of life in the best 

conditions  possible.  The  second  phase,  Madam  Speaker,  is  for  the  construction  of  a  New 

Radiotherapy Block including two Bunkers which will have the Linear Accelerators. 

Terminally,  ill  patients  have  multiple  needs  and  I  hope  that  when  we  get  the  New 

Cancer Centre we will be able to provide and to cater for all the needs both medical, physical, 

spiritual  and  emotional  needs  of  the  cancer  patients.  And  we  are  also  hoping  that  we  will 

have  teams  for  palliative  care  who  will  visit  cancer  patients  who  are  terminally  ill  in  their 

homes and provide comfort and solace. 

We  are  also,  Madam  Speaker,  in  order  to  prevent  cancer  –  prevention  of  cervical 

cancer – we are procuring the Human Papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine, which will be given to 

all girls in Std V in primary schools, both in Mauritius and in Rodrigues. Infection with HPV 

is linked to cancer. We are procuring 19,000 doses of this vaccine at a cost of more than Rs13 

m., and this will be a routine programme for the Ministry of Health in the future. 

We are also providing for a new regional hospital at Flacq.  Flacq is going to become 

a  major  city  with  all  the  developments  that  are  being  planned  in  that  region.  Today,  the 

hospital at Flacq consists of several old buildings, and they are not integrated as one hospital.  

So, we need to have one new hospital. We are actively looking for land in the Flacq region to 

be  able  to  accommodate  that  hospital.  Funds  have  been  earmarked  in  this  Budget  for  the 

procurement  of  that  particular  land.  Unfortunately,  Madam  Speaker,  one  land  had  been 

identified, but it would appear that it is between two rivers and the water table is too low, and 

it might not be able to accommodate the Flacq Hospital.  So, we are looking for an alternative 

site for that purpose. 

We  are  also  constructing  a  new  ENT  Hospital.  The  ENT  Hospital  is  presently 

accommodated in an old colonial wooden building, which is subject to all sorts of problems, 

 

138 

termites,  water  leakages/seepages.  We  are  going  to  construct  this  new  state-of-the-art 

hospital.  There  will  be  two  major  operation  theatres:  one  Minor  Operation  Theatre,  a  six-

bedded  Intensive  Care  Unit,  Outpatient  Facilities,  an  X-Ray  Department,  Laboratory 

Services,  a  Pharmacy,  a  Speech  Therapy  and  Audiology  Department,  two  Female  and  a 

Paediatric Ward of 30 beds, and one Male Ward of 30 beds. The total cost of this project is 

Rs571,148,276,  including  VAT.  Work  is  expected  to  start  on  the  new  hospital  by  the 

beginning of next year. 

We are also, Madam Speaker, constructing an Eye Hospital at Moka. One of the first 

decisions I took as Minister was to decentralise ophthalmology services and to provide new 

services at Souillac Hospital. This is working pretty well, except that we have a waiting time 

at  Moka Hospital  of 14.2 weeks for surgeries, whereas at  Souillac it is  only 3.8 weeks. We 

are encouraging people to attend Souillac Hospital for their surgeries, but Mauritians are used 

to going to Moka for any eye problem.  So, we need to break that cultural habit, and this is 

going to take some time, but we are working on it. 

(Interruptions) 

Dr. Joomaye is not an eye doctor! 

Even at the Moka Hospital, we know - and I get letters almost daily - the conditions in 

which  patients  are  being  treated.  The  buildings  are  old.  They  are  not  integrated.  We  have 

been able to obtain land of about 10 acres near Apollo Bramwell Hospital, at Réduit, and we 

are in the process of acquiring that land for the purpose of building the Moka Hospital. 

Madam  Speaker,  let  me  say  a  few  words  about  the  Non-Communicable  Diseases 

(NCDs).  We  keep  saying  that  Mauritius  is  a  country  with  an  ageing  population  and  with  a 

population  that  is  prone  to  diabetes.  For  the  last  survey  that  we  have  carried  out,  it  would 

appear that almost 25% of our population is diabetic and another almost 25% is pre-diabetic, 

and this is a matter which causes a heavy burden on the budget of the Ministry. When we add 

to this, Madam Speaker, that people get married, genetically a diabetic prone man marrying a 

diabetic prone woman, that compounds the issue. But we have to be very vigilant about how 

to prevent diabetes and what we can do to improve the quality of life of all the diabetics. 

Madam Speaker, it is important for us to know that we have about 500 amputations a 

year  in  Mauritius.  300  are  directly  attributable  to  diabetes  and  the  others  are  as  a  result  of 

accidents  and  all  this.  So,  what  we  are  saying,  Madam  Speaker,  is  that  we  must  get 

Mauritians to be concerned about their health because their health is their responsibility, and 

 

139 

they  will  not  be  able  to  contract  out  the  responsibility  for  their  health  to  anybody.  It  is 

important that everybody assumes responsibility for the own health. 

Madam  Speaker,  we  are  encouraging  people  to  carry  out  physical  activity.  We  are 

encouraging  people  to  do  any  kind  of  physical  activity,  whether  it  is  dancing,  jogging, 

walking, cycling, swimming or whatever, but they must be active; otherwise, they run the risk 

of becoming diabetics and having all sorts of complications. 

Let  me  say,  we  heard  last  year,  Madam  Speaker,  so  many  things  about  the  Cardiac 

Centre.  Let  me  give  the  results  of  the  achievements  of  the  Cardiac  Centre.  The  Cardiac 

Centre  in  2013  had  attendances  of  24,000.  The  admissions  were  3,259.  The  surgeries  for 

2013 were 1,292. In 2014, the surgeries went up to 1,480; in 2015, it went up to 1,583, and so 

far, in 2016, it is 756. For Angiography/Angioplasty also, the numbers have gone up because 

of  diabetes,  hypertension  and  all  those  complications.  We  have  to  ensure  that  Mauritians 

getthe treatment they need at the time that they need it. We are providing for a branch of the 

Cardiac  Centre  to  be  moved  to  Victoria  Hospital,  so  that  we  have  two  centres  for  cardiac 

problems. 

We are also considering, Madam Speaker, to have a neurosurgery, which is already a 

responsibility  of  the  Cardiac  Centre.  There  will  be  one  operating  theatre  dedicated  only  to 

neurosurgery,  because  it  is  very  important  that  we  have  not  only  the  facilities  for 

neurosurgery, but we also need to have the personnel. Right now, I must confess that we do 

not have qualified personnel for neurosurgery to carry out very complex operations - when I 

will come to overseas treatment, I will say. 

In terms  of projects,  Madam  Speaker, we are going to  have a Bel  Air MediClinic, a 

Coromandel MediClinic.  An amount of Rs10 m. has been allocated for in the Budget for the 

construction of a MediClinic at Coromandel.  Hon. Quirin, Petite Rivière, we have … 

No! No!  

(Interruptions) 

We are going to have an Area Health Centre at Petite Rivière.  The estimated cost is 

Rs45  m.  and  the  final  drawings  are  being  awaited  from  MPI.  There  will  be  one  at  New 

Tombeau Bay CHC. The land is available, the documents are under preparation at the MPI, 

and  an  amount  has  already  been  allocated  in  the  Budget.  We  have  a  new  Phoenix  CHC, 

Pointe-aux-Sables, Baie du Cap. 

 

140 

So, what we are doing, Madam Speaker, with regard to the Area Health Centres and 

the Community Health Centres, we are upgrading them.  Where they can’t be upgraded, we 

are  demolishing  and  putting  up  new  structures  because,  I  think,  our  people  deserve  to  be 

provided the medical care in the best of conditions.  

Let me say a few things, Madam Speaker, about the sugar tax. I am very happy that 

the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development has imposed a sugar tax. I think it 

is very important that we are careful about what we drink and what we eat. And, of course, 

this tax will be reflected in the sugar sweetened drinks such as juices and milk-based drinks, 

but this is most welcome because of the burden of disease. 

Let  me say a few words about  the shift  system  which we are going to  implement  in 

the public hospitals. The shift system was implemented on a pilot basis and now we are going 

to  extend  it  to  all  the  Regional  Hospitals  where  the  main  objectives  of  the  shift  system, 

Madam Speaker, are the following -  

 

 

 

 

improve health services so that doctors can provide service round the clock; 

reduce workload of medical officers;  

enhance the safety of patients , and 

further reduce waiting time 

With  regard  to  Overseas  Treatment  Scheme,  Madam  Speaker,  we  have  changed  the 

process  that  existed  in  the  past.    Instead  of  sending  patients  overseas,  we  are  getting 

specialists  to  come  from  overseas  to  operate  on  our  patients  in  Mauritius.   This  has  lots  of 

benefits  and we have started it  already and the number of patients  going  overseas has  gone 

down  drastically.    We  are  also  in  the  process  of  ensuring  that  we  have  all  the  equipment, 

facilities and personnel.  In some areas, we will have to train our doctors, our surgeons and 

we  need  also  to  train  the  para-medical  staff,  the  nurses  and  all  the  things  that  go  with  an 

operating theatre.  We are doing all this because I know that if people travel to Chennai, for 

example, they are given food in Chennai which they are not used to and that creates all sorts 

of complications.  So, we are going to avoid all these complications by having people coming 

from overseas to deal with our patients here.  

Madam Speaker, I wanted to say a few things about organ transplant.  I know this is 

something which is highly sensitive. We have the Human Tissue (Removal, Preservation and 

Transplant) Act 2006.  It is in the legislation, but it has not yet been implemented.  There are 

 

141 

all  sorts  of  religious  and  ethnic  concerns,  but  we  are  conscious  of  the  fact  that  we  need  to 

move  in  the  direction  of  organ  transplant.  We  have,  at  present,  about  1,223  patients 

undergoing dialysis treatment in the public hospitals and we have 323 in the private clinics. 

So, that makes just over 1,500 persons on dialysis. 

Now,  somebody  on  dialysis  is  a  person  whose  quality  of  life  is  greatly  impaired 

because of the hours that are spent on the machine and the three times that one has to go.  So, 

we consider that something has to  be tried.  At least  try!   Let  us see if  we can improve the 

quality  of  life  of  the  dialysis  patients!  The  only  way  we  can  do  that  is  by  having  organ 

transplant.  So, the organ transplant can be between live donors and recipients or we can also 

have cadaveric organ transplant.  I know that this is going to be a highly sensitive debate in 

the House when we come with the amendment to this, but we have to, at least, have an open 

and honest debate about this issue of organ transplant, because we are dealing with a highly 

sensitive issue.  I have organised workshops on this last year, but I was not happy with what 

came out of the workshops.  So, I am going to organise one more workshop and I am going to 

invite  professionals  from  overseas,  from  UK,  India  and  elsewhere  so  that  they  come  and 

share their experiences with us on this very sensitive issue. 

I hope that when we come to this debate people will be open and not be dogmatic or 

ideological.  It has to be something that we need to do in the interest of all the patients whose 

quality of life is seriously damaged. 

Madam Speaker, let me say a few works about e-health.  We have started the e-health 

on a pilot basis at Dr. A. G. Jeetoo Hospital.  The objective of this project is to facilitate the 

processing  of  patients’  files  to  minimize  duplication  of  entries  and  enable  easy  access  and 

timely retrieval of patients’ data. It is a pilot project.  I know that there have been initiatives 

in the past to import a wholesale e-health programme in Mauritius, but this is not something 

that we have considered advisable because every country has its own specificities.  In fact, in 

England they just had a brand new e-health system for the NHS and then they had to scrap it 

at the cost 10 billion dollars.  Then, they started small and growing up and this is what we are 

trying to do. I hope it is going to be successful on the pilot project and then we are going to 

extend it to all the hospitals. We need to do that, Madam Speaker, to avoid wastage.  

Today,  unfortunately,  we  have  a  culture  in  Mauritius  where  somebody  goes  to,  let’s 

say, an Area health Centre, he sees a doctor, he is not happy, so he goes to  

 

142 

the hospital.  He gets the same medication, he is still not happy.   So, there is a lot of health 

clinic  shopping,  health  institution  shopping.  We  need  to  stop  that  with  e-health.    Once  we 

type  the  name  of  the  person  with  his  identification  number,  we  have  all  the  history  of  that 

patient and this is going to be very helpful. 

Madam  Speaker,  let  me  say  something  which,  I  think,  hon.  Members  of  the  House 

have been reading a lot about in the papers. It is about Continuing Professional Development 

and Exams for Doctors. We have enacted legislation to make it mandatory as from 01 August 

for  all  doctors,  specialists,  dental  surgeons  and  dental  specialists  to  follow  courses,  so  that 

they  earn  12  credit  points  before  being  eligible  to  be  listed  on  the  register  of  practicing 

doctors  or  dentists.  So,  there  is  need  for  everyone  to  follow  this  programme  of  continuous 

professional development. I think this is something which is very important, so that they keep 

abreast of development in their field.  And we have also asked all the visiting professors and 

specialists who come, to devote at least half a day to the training of our people. 

Madam  Speaker,  after  the  Medical  Council  had  looked  into  the  matter,  we  have 

decided  to  introduce  an  entry  and  exit  exam  for  preregistration  trainees  for  doctors.  At 

present,  newly  graduated  medical  students  are  provisionally  registered  by  the  Medical 

Council and once they are enlisted as pre-registration house officers, they follow training in 

six disciplines and are assessed at the completion of each discipline by the Mauritius Institute 

of Health. However, we have noted repeated failures in assessments and multiple complaints 

have  been  received,  both  from  the  medical  profession  and  even  threats  have  been  received 

from some pre-registration house officers who do not pass their assessments. So, in view of 

the  various  institutions  where  our  house  officers  get  educated,  we  have  thought  that  it  is 

necessary to standardise the level of competence both in theory and in practice of all students 

who join our health services. 

I must say, Madam Speaker, that when we were looking into that, we didn’t know that 

India was also looking at this problem. And yesterday, the President of India, signed into law 

legislation  to  insist  on  all  Indian  students  to  pass  a  national  test  for  doctors  and  dental 

officers. In the past, every State in India had its own exams.  

Now,  there  will  be  a  national  examination  that  is  conducted  so  that  they  standardise 

the level of training and the qualifications of doctors. So, I was happy when I read about it. 

We  are  not  alone;  everybody  is  concerned  about  the  quality,  skills,  knowledge  and 

competence of doctors and dentists and this is going to benefit all our patients. So, there will 

 

143 

be, Madam Speaker, this entry and exit examination. I know the papers are talking a lot about 

the change in the system, but whenever you change something in Mauritius, there is havoc as 

though the end of the world is coming, but we, as a Government, we are responsible and we 

need to take decisions which are important for the health of our country. 

Let  me say one word about  the closed list  of medical  institutions.  This  also  is  very 

much  in  the  newspapers  and  we  have  acted  on  the  advice  of  the  Medical  Council  which  is 

concerned  about  the  quality  of  health  care  which  is  provided  in  Mauritius.    So,  again,  it  is 

important to standardise the competence and skills of doctors. Currently, the Medical Council 

of  Mauritius  recognises  medical  degrees  both  undergraduate  and  postgraduate  from  482 

medical  institutions  from  61  countries,  including  Mauritius.    Now,  they  have  applied  a 

different  standard  and  they  have  come  up  with  a  list  of  184  recognised  medical  institutions 

from 31 countries.  

The  criteria  they  used  to  establish  the  list  were  based  on  what  is  called  the 

Quacquarelli Symonds World University Rankings for Medicine for the year 2016 and this is 

an internationally recognised list. 

With  regard  to  legislation,  Madam  Speaker,  we  enacted  the  Pharmacy  Council  Act 

last  year.    A  new  Pharmacy  Bill  will  be  coming  to  the  House  shortly.    We  also  have  the 

Allied  Health  Professionals  Bill  which  will  be  coming  to  the  House.    There  will  be 

amendments  to  the  Medical,  Dental  and  Nursing  Council’s  Acts  and  the  private  health 

institutions.  We will be coming with  these Bills to  the House because we consider that we 

need to modernise the legal framework for health in the country and this is why I believe that 

we are going to do it very fast.  I hope this year we’ll be able to bring all the legislations.   

Madam Speaker, I know I used up my time allotted to me.  Let me say, once again, 

that  it  is  a  matter  of  great  pride  and  satisfaction  that  we  have  a  budget  that  responds  to  the 

needs of the country.  It is a budget that has met with the consensus from everybody and it is 

the first time in the history of Mauritius that a budget like this has been accepted by one and 

all  and  even  the  Leader  of  the  Opposition  finds it  interesting.  So,  this  is why  I  believe  that 

this is a great opportunity for Mauritius to move forward.  Let us move forward with a sense 

of patriotism so that we do something great for our country! 

I thank you for your attention, Madam Speaker. 

Mr Ramano: Madam Speaker, I move that the debate be now adjourned. 

Dr. Sorefan rose and seconded. 

 

144 

Question put and agreed to. 

Debate adjourned accordingly. 

ADJOURNMENT 

The Prime Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I move for the  adjournment  of the House to 

Wednesday 10 August, 2016 at 11.30 a.m. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun) rose 

and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned. 

MATTERS RAISED 

(7.50 p.m.) 

AVENUE ROLAND MAUREL, PAILLES – CANAL - CLEANING 

Mr  V.  Baloomoody  (Third  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West):  Madam 

Speaker, my intervention tonight is addressed to the hon. Minister of Local Government.   

Madam  Speaker,  at  the  end  of  Avenue  Roland  Maurel  at  Pailles,  the  way  towards 

Domaine Les Pailles, there is a pedestrian bridge which links Cité St. Louis to Morcellement 

Raffray.    Unfortunately,  for  the  last  year,  the  Council  has  not  maintained  that  canal  over 

which the bridge is  built and it has become a dumping ground.  But  the  worse thing  is  that 

when it rains heavily, the bridge is overflowed because there is no flow of water and it is a 

danger especially for children and old people who use that bridge to go from one side to the 

other.   

So, I am appealing to the hon. Minister if he can intervene vis-à-vis the Municipality 

of  Port  Louis  to  look  into  the  matter  so  that  the  canal  can  be  cleaned  and  to  take  action  to 

ensure that people do not throw rubbish after it has been cleaned.   

Thank you. 

The Minister of Local Government (Dr. A. Husnoo): Madam Speaker, I will look 

into it and inform the municipality. 

 

 

 

(7.52 p.m.) 

145 

CATTLE BREEDERS - FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE –- COMPENSATION 

Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port  Louis 

East): Madam Speaker, in fact, I am raising the problem of the Foot and Mouth Disease that 

we  had  the  PNQ  this  morning  on,  but  due  to  time  constraints,  I  could  not  intervene  in  the 

morning.  

During his intervention, the hon. Minister stated to the House that there is a plan for 

compensation to  the breeders in Rodrigues being  worked out.  Therefore, can  I  ask the hon. 

Minister  to  ensure  that  the  breeders  who  have  imported  cattle  from  Rodrigues  and  whose 

cattle  were  being  quarantined  at  the  Port  and  then  moved  on  to  Richelieu  and  also  those 

which were found at Vallée des Prêtres be also included on the list for compensation.   

Along the same line, we must bear in mind that there is a large number of cattle in the 

farms  around  Mauritius  because  of  the  festival  which  is  coming.    There  are  about  5,000 

cattle.  Can the hon. Minister ensure that special measures be taken on those farms which are 

not  affected  in  order  to  prevent  this  disease  from  spreading  out  to  this  area  because  if  this 

happens, it would be a disaster.  

Thank you. 

The  Minister  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security  (Mr  M.  Seeruttun):  Madam 

Speaker, I did mention this morning that we are going to look at the modalities before coming 

up with some kind of compensation, not only to breeders in Rodrigues, but also to those who 

suffered losses in Mauritius.   

With regard to the measures being taken to contain this disease, in other farms that are 

not affected yet, we are working on it and we have a full team permanently on these farms to 

ensure that the spread of that disease does not go far beyond the areas affected as at now. 

(7.54 p.m.) 

LE BOUCHON PUBLIC BEACH  - GANESH CHATURTHI FESTIVAL 

Mr  D.  Ramful  (Third  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien):  Madam 

Speaker, I have an issue concerning the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

as  Chairperson  of  the  Task  Force  that  has  been  set  up  to  overlook  the  organisation  of  the 

Ganesh Chaturthi festival on 06 September. 

 

146 

Every year, there are thousands of pilgrims from my constituency and those living in 

the south who would normally proceed to the public beach of Le Bouchon.   

Due  to  the  recent  incident  concerning  ship  MV  Benita,  cleaning  works  are  being 

carried  out  due  to  oil  spillage,  but  it  would  appear  that  this  will  take  a  few  days  or  even  a 

month.   

May I request the hon. Minister to look into the matter so that needful can be done so 

that those pilgrims can have that public beach for the immersion ceremony? 

The Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport (Mr N. Bodha): We 

have a meeting of the Task Force tomorrow, Madam Speaker, we’ll raise the matter, but it all 

depends on the gravity of the situation at Le Bouchon. 

At 7.58 p.m., the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Wednesday 10 August 

2016 at 11.30 a.m. 

 

     WRITTEN ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

 

CANAL BALKISSOON, VALLÉE PITOT – BOULDERS 

(No.  B/825)  Mr  O.  Mahomed  (Third  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  and  Port 

Louis  Central)  asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 

Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the 

ruisseau/open channel commonly known as Canal Balkissoon, in Vallée Pitot, Port Louis, he 

will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the National Development Unit, information as 

to if it is aware that same is obstructed by boulders, at its junction with Sauzier Street, in the 

aftermath of the previous successive heavy downpours and, if so, indicate if urgent remedial 

measures will be taken in relation thereto and, if so, when. 

 

Reply  (Minister  of  Local  Government):    I  am  informed  that  Canal  Balkissoon  in 

Vallée Pitot is regularly cleaned on a weekly basis by the Municipal Council of Port Louis to 

remove  litter/wastes  thereat.    However,  following  the  successive  heavy  downpours,  some 

boulders have been carried down the canal, but which does not obstruct the free flow of the 

water course. 

Given that the boulders are quite heavy, I understand that mechanical equipment such 

as  backhoe  and  JCB  is  needed  to  remove  same.    Unfortunately,  these  works  cannot  be 

 

147 

undertaken due to the absence of a vehicular access to the site.  In the given circumstance, I 

intend to explore other possible avenues for example the SMF to carry out these works.  

 

BEAU BASSIN - MORCELLEMENT LA CONFIANCE -  FOOTBALL 

GROUND 

(B/862)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  and  Petite  Riviere) 

asked  the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the football ground situated at 

Morcellement  La  Confiance,  in  Beau  Bassin,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain 

from the Municipal Council of Beau Bassin and Rose Hill, information as to (a) if it is vested 

therein and, if so, indicate since when and (b) the reasons as to why it is not operational. 

Reply:  I  am  informed  by  the  Municipal  Council  of  Beau  Bassin/Rose  Hill  that  a 

plot  of  land  of  the  extent  of  3  arpents  at  Morcellement  La  Confiance  in  Beau  Bassin  was 

acquired  by  the  then  Government  and  vested  on  15  October  2004  in  the  National 

Development  Unit  for  the  construction  of  a  football  ground.    The  final  handing  over  of  the 

football  ground  was  effected  by  the  National  Development  Unit  on  31  July  2015  to  the 

Council for maintenance and management. 

As regards part (b) of the question, I am informed that the football ground could not 

be  made  operational  at  that  time  in  view  of  the  fact  that  construction  works  were  being 

carried  out  by  the  National  Housing  Development  Company  Ltd  on  a  site  adjacent  to  the 

football  ground  and  it  was  not  deemed  appropriate  to  put  same  to  use  due  to  dust  nuisance 

caused thereat.  The NHDC Ltd which has been contacted by the Council has informed that 

the construction of the Housing Units at Morcellement La Confiance was nearing completion 

and construction of an access (a footpath) from its site to the football ground was in progress. 

In  the  given  circumstance,  the  Council  will  now  proceed  with  the  cleaning  and  re-

turfing of the football ground prior to same being put to public use. 

QUARTIER MILITAIRE STADIUM - RENOVATION 

 

(B/863) Mr F. Quirin (Fourth Member for Beau-Bassin and Petite Rivière) asked 

the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the Quartier Militaire Stadium, he will 

state (a) when renovation works were last carried out thereat, giving details thereof and (b) if 

same is being used for regional and national football competitions and, if not, why not. 

Reply:  I  am  informed that renovation works  at  Quartier Militaire Stadium  were last 

carried  out  in  the  years  2013-2014.    The  works  consisted  mainly  of  the  replacement  of  the 

damaged  fencing  by  new  chain  link  fencing  with  provision  for  5  gates.    The  works  which 

 

148 

started  on  06  November  2013  were  completed  on  28  March  2014  with  a  contract  value  of 

Rs1,375,033.40. 

 

It is worth pointing out that the Mauritius Sports Council continuously carried 

out maintenance and minor upgrading works at the stadium. 

As regards part (b) of the question, I am further informed that the stadium is used by 

the Mauritius Football  Association for its regional  league.   The stadium is also  used by the 

District  Council  and  Village  Council  of  the  locality  for  competitions  and  friendly  matches.  

Football  clubs  in the  region  of Quartier Militaire make use of the stadium  both  for training 

and competition purposes. 

 

CITÉ ATLEE – ANNIVERSARY CELEBRATION - EXPENDITURE 

(No.  B/864)  Mr    V.  Baloomoody  (Third  Member  for  GRNW  and  Port  Louis 

West)  asked the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the recent event held to 

celebrate  the  anniversary  of  Cité  Atlee,  in  Curepipe,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House, 

obtain  from  the  Municipal  Council  of  Curepipe,  information  as  to  the  total  expenditure 

incurred in relation thereto (a) giving a breakdown of the sum paid to each contractor thereof 

and/or each participant thereto and (b) indicating when approval to incur same was obtained. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

MAURITIUS MARITIME TRAINING ACADEMY - BASIC SAFETY 

COURSES 

(B/865)  Mrs  M.  C.  Monty  (Third  Member  for  Port  Louis  North  &  Montagne 

Longue) asked the Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, Shipping and 

Outer Islands whether, in regard to the Basic Safety Courses run by the Mauritius Maritime 

Training  Academy,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  said  Academy, 

information  as  to  the  (a)  various  components  thereof  (b)  number  of  trainers  thereof, 

indicating in each case, the qualifications held and (c) number of students having benefitted 

therefrom since the opening of the Academy to date. 

Reply:    With  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question, I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  the 

various components of the Basic Safety Courses are - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

Personal Safety and Social Responsibilities. 

Elementary First Aid. 

Fire Prevention and Fire Fighting. 

Personal Survival Techniques. 

 

149 

With regard to part (b) of the question, I wish to inform the House that there are 16 

trainers that are affiliated with the Mauritius Maritime Training Academy out of which 13 are 

employed on a part time basis whilst the remaining three work at the MMTA on a full time 

basis. 

I am tabling the qualifications of the 16 trainers for the benefit of the House. 

With  regard  to  part  (c)  of  the  question,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  there  are 

2894 students who have been trained at the MMTA since the opening of the MMTA in 2007 

to date. 

RIVIÈRE DU REMPART - WET LANDS - SURVEY REPORT 

(No.  B/869)    Mr  S.  Rughoobur    (Second  Member  for  Grand’  Baie  and  Poudre 

d’Or) asked  the Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security whether, in regard to the wet 

lands found in the district of Rivière du Rempart, he will state if an updated survey report on 

the location thereof is available and, if not, why not. 

 

 

(Withdrawn) 

AGENDA 2063 TREATY – MAURITIUS RATIFICATION 

(No.  B/870)  Mr  S.  Rughoobur    (Second  Member  for  Grand’  Baie  and  Poudre 

d’Or)    asked  the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and  International  Trade 

whether,  in  regard  to  the  Agenda  2063  Treaty,  he  will  state  where  matters  stand  as  to  the 

ratification thereof by the Republic of Mauritius. 

 

 

 

(Withdrawn) 

CULTURE OF INNOVATION - PROMOTION 

(No. B/871) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or)  

asked  the Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the 

promotion of a culture of innovation in Mauritius and Rodrigues, he will state the five major 

initiatives undertaken in respect thereof since 30 June 2015 to date. 

 

 

(Withdrawn) 

 

 

150 

CEB - SUGAR INDUSTRY INDEPENDENT POWER PRODUCERS - CONTRACT 

(No. B/874)  Mr  B.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 

Souillac) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in 

regard  to  the  sugar  industry  Independent  Power  Producers,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the 

House, obtain from the Central Electricity Board, information as to if their IPP’s contract will 

be  renegotiated  or  renewed,  indicating  where  matters  stand  as  regards  the  negotiation  of 

FUEL new P/S (Alteo Group). 

(Withdrawn) 

 

WASTE WATER MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY - RECRUITMENT 

(No.  B/875)  Mr  B.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 

Souillac) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in 

regard  to  the  recent  recruitment  exercise  of  Management  Support  Officers  by  the  Waste 

Water  Management  Authority,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the 

Authority, information as to the number thereof recruited, constituency-wise. 

(Withdrawn) 

RIVIÈRE DES ANGUILLES & SOUILLAC - INTERNET - FIBER-TO-

HOUSE CONNECTION 

 (No.  B/876)  Mr  B.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 

Souillac)  asked  the  Minister  of  Technology,  Communication  and  Innovation  whether,  in 

regard to the Fiber-to-House connection for high speed internet, he will, for the benefit of the 

House,  obtain  from  the  Mauritius  Telecom,  information  as  to  if  there  is  any  plan  for  the 

implementation thereof in the Southern part of Mauritius, especially in Constituency No. 13, 

Rivière des Anguilles and Souillac and, if not, why not. 

(Withdrawn) 

LE BOUCHON – FISHERMEN - COMPENSATION 

 (No. B/878) 

  Mr  P.  Jhugroo  (Second  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine 

Magnien) asked the Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, Shipping and 

Outer Islands whether, in regard to the fishermen operating at Le Bouchon and in the vicinity 

thereof  who  were  financially  affected  following  the  wreckage  of  the  MV  Benita  vessel,  he 

will  state  if  the  quantum  of  the  compensation  payable  thereto  has  now  been  determined, 

indicating  if  consideration  will  be  given  for  the  benefit  thereof  to  be  extended  to  the  non-

registered fishermen and, if not, why not. 

 

151 

Reply:   I wish to  inform the House that following the grounding of MV Benita at 

Le  Bouchon  on  17  June  2016,  my  Ministry  has  received  several  representations  from 

registered fishers at Le Bouchon and from fishers of the surrounding regions to the effect that 

the resulting oil spill has caused considerable pollution at Le Bouchon and in the surrounding 

area, such that they are not able to go out fishing and collect algae for small-cage fishing. 

Furthermore,  for  the  salvage  operations  of  the  cargo  ship,  the  National  Coast  Guard 

established  a  restricted  perimeter  which  was  preventing  fishers  from  carrying  out    fishing 

activities. 

As  regards  the  quantum  of  compensation,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  the  same 

formula  which  was  used  for the payment  of  compensation  to  fishers  following  the  wreck 

of MV Angel 1 near the coast of Poudre D’Or in 2011, would apply, that is, on the basis of 

the rate of bad weather allowance payable during days when fishers are unable to fish. 

The  exact  number  of  days will  be  determined  as  soon  as  the cleaning process would 

be  completed  at  Le  Bouchon  after  which  fishers would  be  authorised  to  undertake  fishing 

activities.  

All  claims  for  compensation  will  have  to  be  submitted  to  the insurance  company  of 

MV Benita, namely P & I Club, for payment. 

Regarding the extension of the payment of compensation to non-registered fishermen 

at Le Bouchon, as at date, no such representation has been received at my Ministry. 

In case my Ministry receives claims from non-registered fishers, the matter would be 

referred to the insurance company of MV Benita for consideration at their level. 

 

TERRE ROUGE POLICE STATION – MOTORCYCLE – THEFT - 

INQUIRY 

(No.  A/36)    Mr  J.  C.  Barbier  (Fifth  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis 

West) asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 

Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the reported case of loss of a 

motorcycle at the Terre Rouge Police Station on 04 June 2016, he will, for the benefit of the 

House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to why the said motorcycle 

which is now secured in Police custody has not been returned to the owner thereof? 

 

Reply:  I am informed by the Commissioner of Police that on 06 June 2016 at 12.43 

hours,  one  Mr  J.  D.  P,  43  years,  residing  at  Pointe  aux  Sables,  made  a  declaration  at  Terre 

Rouge Police Station to the effect that his motorcycle has been stolen between 22.30 hours on 

 

152 

04 June 2016 and 05.00 hours on 05 June 2016 from the compound of Klasic Hall situated at 

Riche Terre. 

 

I  am  further  informed  that  the  motorcycle  has  not  yet  been  found  and  the 

enquiry is still in progress 

 

GOVERNMENT PRIMARY SCHOOLS - CLEANERS 

(A/37) Mr B. Jahangeer (Third Member for Rivière des Anguilles and Souillac) 

asked  the  Minister  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and  Training  whether,  in 

regard to the complaints made by the workers of the Professional Cleaners & Mauriclean Ltd 

working as cleaners in the Government Primary Schools, he will state, if they are being paid 

according to the rates provided for in the Remuneration Orders, indicating the measures being 

taken to ensure that the company complies therewith. 

Reply:  I am  informed by the Ministry of Education  and Human Resources, Tertiary 

Education  and  Scientific  Research  that  Mauriclean  Ltd  has  been  awarded  a  3  year  contract 

with  effect  from  21  September  2015  to  provide  cleaning  services  to  233  institutions, 

comprising  161  Government  Primary  Schools  and  64  State  Secondary  Schools  and  8  other 

institutions. 

 As  regards  Professional  Cleaners  Group  Ltd,  contract  has  been  awarded  to  the 

company to provide cleaning services to 9 institutions which include 7 secondary schools. No 

contract has been awarded to the company for the cleaning of primary schools. 

Following  representations  received  in  January  2016  regarding  underpayment  of 

wages, enquiries were carried out in the first instance, with Management of Mauriclean Ltd 

and Professional Cleaners Group Ltd on 21 January 2016.    

 

 

Management  of  Mauriclean  Ltd  stated  that  cleaners  worked  only  three  hours  a  day, 

and  they  were  being  paid  wages  as  prescribed  in  the  Cleaning  Enterprises  Remuneration 

Regulations (GN 191 of 2013). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

On  the  other  hand,  Management  of  Professional  Cleaners  Group  Ltd  stated  that 

cleaners worked between three to four hours per day, and they were also being paid wages as 

prescribed. 

Inspections were thereafter carried out at the different sites of work in March, April, 

May and July 2016. Cleaners employed by Mauriclean Ltd stated that their wages range from 

Rs1,500 to Rs3,000 a month and that they were being underpaid. 

 

153 

However,  cleaners  employed  by  Professional  Cleaners  Group  Ltd,  stated  that  their 

daily  hours  of  work  vary  from  5  to  6  hours  and  they  were  being  paid  wages  ranging  from 

Rs3,000 to Rs7,000 a month.  They also complained that they were being underpaid. 

It is to be noted that according to the Cleaning Enterprises Remuneration Regulations 

(GN 191 of 2013), the monthly prescribed basic rate for a full time cleaner is Rs8,085 and the 

basic hourly rate for a part time worker is Rs40.81 for the first year in employment. 

In  view  of  the  foregoing,  it  is  observed  that  some  workers  in  both  companies  are 

being  paid  wages  below  the  prescribed  rate.    Enquiry  is  now  being  finalised  for  eventual 

Court action as appropriate. 

I have also been informed that another company namely New Cleaning Services Ltd 

has been awarded a contract for the cleaning of 54 Government Primary Schools. 

Although  no  complaint  has  been  registered  against  the  company,  my  Ministry  is, 

however, carrying out inspection visits to ensure compliance with the relevant Remuneration 

Regulations.  Appropriate action will be taken as required. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

