No. 25 of 2016 

 

1 

 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD)  

(UNRE VISE D)  

 

FIRST  SESSION  

 

THURS DAY 11  AUGUST 2016  

 

 

 

 

 

 

2 

 

CONTE NTS  

 

 

QUESTION (Oral) 

MOTION 

BILL (Public) 

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

 

3 

THE CABINET 

 

(Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

 

Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  

KCMG, QC  

Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 

Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 

Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External 

GCSK  

Communications 

Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon.  Ivan  Leslie  Collendavelloo,  GCSK, 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 

SC 

Utilities 

Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 

Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 

 

International Trade 

 

Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha, GCSK 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan, SC 

Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 

Education and Scientific Research 

Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Minister 

of 

Social 

Integration 

and  Economic 

Hon.  Marie  Joseph  Noël  Etienne  Ghislain 

Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation  

Empowerment 

Sinatambou 

Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 

Attorney General 

Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  

Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 

Hon. Santaram Baboo    

Minister of Arts and Culture 

Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  

Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 

Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 

Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 

Perraud 

Family Welfare 

Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain, GCSK 

Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 

Institutional Reforms  

 

4 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 

Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 

Institutions 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 

 

 

Shipping and Outer Islands 

Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 

Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms, 

Cheong, MSK 

Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 

Disaster and Beach Management 

Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 

Minister  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and 

Training 

 

 

 

 

 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

 

Madam Speaker 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Deputy Speaker 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Clerk Assistant 

Gopall, Mr Navin  

Hansard Editor 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 25 of 2016 

 

Sitting of 11 August 2016 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 

 

 

7 

ORAL ANSWER TO QUESTION 

CHAGOS ARCHIPELAGO – MAURITIUS SOVEREIGNTY 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger)  (by Private Notice) asked the Rt. 

hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 

National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  sovereignty  of  Mauritius  over  the 

Chagos Archipelago, he will state –  

(a)  

if  he  will  render  public  the  letter  dated  07  or  08  July  2016  he  had  received 

from  the  out-going  Prime  Minister  of  the  United  Kingdom,  Mr  David 

Cameron; 

(b)   where matters stand regarding the – 

(i)  

resolution Mauritius is proposing to present to the forthcoming United 

Nations General Assembly, and 

(ii)  

implementation  of  the  Ruling  delivered  on  18  March  2015  by  the 

United Nations Arbitral Tribunal under the United Nations Convention 

of the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), and 

(c)  

if he has received replies to the letters he wrote to the President of the United 

States of America, Mr Barack Obama, and to the Prime Minister of the United 

Kingdom, Mrs Theresa May. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  it  remains  an  undisputable  fact  that  the 

Chagos Archipelago, including Diego Garcia, forms and has always formed an integral part 

of the territory of Mauritius. 

Mauritius does not recognise the so-called “British Indian Ocean Territory” which the 

United Kingdom  purported to  create by illegally  excising the Chagos  Archipelago from  the 

territory of Mauritius prior to its accession to independence.  This excision was carried out in 

blatant  and  shameful  violation  of  international  law  and  United  Nations  General  Assembly 

Resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, 2066 (XX) of 16 December 1965, 2232 (XXI) 

of 20 December 1966 and 2357 (XXII) of 19 December 1967. 

 

8 

It is a matter of deep concern that forty-eight years after its independence, Mauritius 

is  still  being  denied  the  right  to  effectively  exercise  its  sovereignty  over  part  of  its  own 

territory.    As  long  as  the  Chagos  Archipelago  remains  under  the  unlawful  control  of  the 

former  colonial  power,  the  process  of  decolonisation  of  Mauritius  and  by  extension  that  of 

Africa will remain incomplete.  

Madam Speaker, in reply to part (a) of the question, I had informed the House on 17 

May 2016 in my reply to a Private Notice Question that I had requested the United Kingdom 

to return the Chagos Archipelago to the effective control of Mauritius by a precise date to be 

agreed  upon.    I  had  asked  for  a  reply  to  be  given  to  my  request  by  the  end  of  June  2016, 

otherwise Mauritius would take appropriate action at the international level, including at the 

United  Nations.    My  request  was  followed  by  a  letter  which  I  addressed  to  the  former  UK 

Prime  Minister  on  27  June  2016.    At  the  request  of  the  British  High  Commissioner,  I  had 

agreed to extend the deadline by another week. 

On 07 July 2016, I received a letter from the then UK Prime Minister.  In that letter, 

the  then  UK  Prime  Minister  has  expressed  the  view  that  it  would  be  appropriate  for 

discussions on the Chagos Archipelago to take place with the next  

UK  Government  and  that  he  would  advise  his  successor  to  make  necessary  arrangements 

accordingly.  He also requested that Mauritius does not refer the Chagos Archipelago issue to 

the International Court of Justice. 

 

I am tabling a copy of the letter from the former UK Prime Minister. 

Madam Speaker, in reply to part (b) (i) of the question, our Permanent Representative 

to  the  United  Nations  in  New  York  wrote  on  14  July  2016  to  the  Secretary-General  of  the 

United  Nations  to  request,  in  accordance  with  Rule  13  of  the  Rules  of  Procedure  of  the 

United Nations General Assembly, the inclusion in the provisional agenda of the next session 

of  the  General  Assembly  of  an  item  entitled  “Request  for  an  Advisory  Opinion  of  the 

International  Court  of  Justice  on  the  legal  consequences  of  the  separation  of  the  Chagos 

Archipelago from Mauritius in 1965”.  

This now appears as item 88 under section F of the provisional agenda of the seventy 

first regular session of the General Assembly.  I am tabling a copy of the provisional Agenda.  

The  General  Committee  of  the  next  session  of  the  United  Nations  General  Assembly  is 

expected to convene on 14 September 2016 to consider the provisional agenda.  The General 

 

9 

Assembly  plenary  will  then  meet  on  16 September  2016  to  review  the  recommendations  of 

the General Committee and adopt the agenda for the next session of the  General Assembly.  

We are fully confident that the proposal will gain the favour of the General Assembly. 

 

We have already prepared the draft Resolution relating to the request for an Advisory 

Opinion.  Once the item relating to the request for an Advisory Opinion has been included on 

the agenda of the next session of the General Assembly, we will submit the draft Resolution 

at the appropriate time on the advice of our Permanent Representative to the United Nations 

in New York. 

Madam  Speaker,  as  the  House  is  aware,  the  African  Union  and  the  Non-Aligned 

Movement  have  consistently  expressed  support  for  Mauritius  on  the  Chagos  Archipelago 

issue,  as  evidenced  by  the  various  Declarations  and  Resolutions  which  they  have  adopted, 

including  at  the  African  Union  Summit  held  in  June  2015  and  the  Non-Aligned  Movement 

Ministerial  Meeting  held  in  May  2014.    At  the  last  Ministerial  Meeting  of  the  Group  of  77 

and China held on the occasion of UNCTAD XIV, support was also expressed to Mauritius 

on the Chagos Archipelago issue.   

 

Mauritius is actively canvassing the support of other members of the United Nations 

for the request for an Advisory Opinion of the International Court of Justice in respect of the 

Chagos  Archipelago.    I  have  already  written  to  all  the  Heads  of  State/Government  of  other 

UN  Member  States  to  seek  their  support.    In  the  margins  of  the  forthcoming  TICAD  VI 

Summit, I propose to  meet  leaders of the  African countries  and sub-regions to  ask for their 

support.  The Ministerial Delegation which will participate  in the forthcoming Non-Aligned 

Movement Summit next month will also be lobbying for support for Mauritius. 

Our  Permanent  Representative  to  the  United  Nations  in  New  York  is  also  actively 

seeking the support of other UN Member States at various levels. 

Madam  Speaker,  in  reply  to  part  (b)  (ii)  of  the  question,  as  the  House  is  aware,  the 

Arbitral Tribunal in the case brought by Mauritius against the United Kingdom to challenge 

the legality of the ‘marine protected area’ which the United Kingdom purported to establish 

around  the  Chagos  Archipelago  delivered  its  Award  on  18  March  2015.  The  Tribunal 

unanimously  held  that  the  purported  ‘marine  protected  area’  violates  international  law.  It 

ruled  that  the  United  Kingdom  had  breached  its  obligations  under  Articles  2(3),  56(2)  and 

194(4) of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. 

 

10 

The  Arbitral  Tribunal  also  found  that  the  United  Kingdom’s  commitments  towards 

Mauritius  in  relation  to  fishing  rights  and  oil  and  mineral  rights  in  the  Chagos  Archipelago 

and its surrounding waters are legally binding.  Moreover, the Tribunal found that the United 

Kingdom’s  undertaking  to  return  the  Chagos  Archipelago  to  Mauritius  when  no  longer 

needed for defence purposes is legally binding. The Tribunal went on to hold that the United 

Kingdom had not respected Mauritius’ binding legal rights over the Chagos Archipelago. 

In its Final Observations, the Arbitral Tribunal stated that, I quote - 

“It  is  now  open  to  the  Parties  to  enter  into  the  negotiations  that  the  Tribunal  would 

have  expected  prior  to  the  proclamation  of  the  MPA,  with  a  view  to  achieving  a 

mutually  satisfactory  arrangement  for  protecting  the  marine  environment,  to  the 

extent necessary under a ‘sovereignty umbrella’.”  

Following  the  delivery  of  the  Award,  three  meetings  of  senior  officials  from  Mauritius  and 

the  United  Kingdom  have  been  held  on  09  November  2015  in  London,  11  May  2016  in 

Mauritius and 03 August 2016 back in London again. 

Hardly any progress has been made in these three rounds of discussions in view of the 

differing  interpretations  of  the  Award  by  Mauritius  and  the  United  Kingdom.  Mauritius 

considers  that  the  ‘marine  protected  area’  purportedly  established  by  the  United  Kingdom 

around the Chagos Archipelago is without legal effect under international law and cannot be 

enforced; this view is not shared by the United Kingdom. As I had informed the House on 17 

May 2016, the United Kingdom’s interpretation of the Award is very narrow. 

We believe that the rights of Mauritius, as declared by the Award, are more extensive 

than  that  which  United  Kingdom  says  we  have.  Our  broader  interpretation  of  the  Award  is 

based on, inter alia, paragraph 298 of the Award under reference and I quote - 

“The  United  Kingdom’s  remaining  undertakings,  however,  are  evidently  broader.  In 

the  Tribunal’s  view,  the  United  Kingdom’s  undertaking  to  return  the  Chagos 

Archipelago to Mauritius gives Mauritius an interest in significant decisions that bear 

upon the possible future uses of the Archipelago. Mauritius’ interest is not simply in 

the eventual return of the Chagos Archipelago, but also in the condition in which the 

Archipelago will be returned. In this respect, the question of whether the Archipelago 

will or will not be covered by an MPA in the potentially extended period prior to its 

return  significantly  affects  the  nature  of  what  Mauritius  will  eventually  receive  and 

 

11 

the uses Mauritius will be able to make of it.  The Tribunal does not accept the United 

Kingdom’s  argument  that  the  MPA  is  irrelevant  to  the  return  of  the  Archipelago 

merely because the applicable regulations could potentially be undone.  As the record 

of diplomatic correspondence in  these proceedings  amply  demonstrates, the creation 

of the MPA was a significant political decision. If it were to remain and be developed 

over  the  course  of  many  years,  it  could  well  become  impractical  or  impolitic  for 

Mauritius  to  adopt  a  radically  different  course.  In  short,  the  MPA’s  very  existence 

bears  upon  the  choices  that  Mauritius  will  have  open  to  it  when  the  Archipelago  is 

eventually  returned.  In  a  like  manner,  the  Tribunal  considers  that  the  benefit  of  the 

minerals  and  oil  in  the  surrounding  waters,  which  Mauritius  will  receive  when  the 

Archipelago  is  returned,  may  be  significantly  affected  by  the  MPA,  in  particular  in 

light  of  the  expansive  objective  of  environmental  protection  declared  by  the  United 

Kingdom.”   

We have in the different rounds of talks been submitting to the United Kingdom that - 

(a) 

the declaration of the ‘marine protected area’ in its current form should 

be rescinded;  

(b) 

any future regime of marine protection of the Chagos Archipelago 

should be the subject of an agreement between Mauritius and the 

United Kingdom in the light of the outcome of a scientific study jointly 

carried out by Mauritius and the United Kingdom. We have also 

submitted that pending the outcome of the study, no impediment, 

whatsoever, should be placed by the United Kingdom on the fishing 

rights and oil and mineral rights of Mauritius, and 

(c) 

in view of the nature of our rights, as described in the paragraph I have 

just quoted, any future use of the Chagos Archipelago, whether by the 

United  States  or  the  United  Kingdom,  must  be  subject  to  the 

concurrence of Mauritius, as the way in which the Chagos Archipelago 

is  used may adversely  and irreparably damage the condition  in  which 

the Chagos Archipelago may fall when it is physically returned to the 

effective  control  of  Mauritius.  Again,  the  United  Kingdom  disagrees 

with this submission. 

 

12 

However, at the last meeting, the United Kingdom said that it was prepared to have a 

joint  study  regarding  the  form  of  protection  of  the  marine  environment  of  the  Chagos 

Archipelago, but is maintaining that in the meantime the current unilaterally declared ‘marine 

protected  area’  should  be  maintained.    It  cannot  also  commit  itself  at  this  stage  to  a  jointly 

agreed regime of protection for the future. 

A further round of talks is scheduled for end of October in Mauritius in relation to the 

implementation of the Award. 

Madam Speaker, in reply to part (c) of the question, I received on 08 August 2016 a 

reply  from  Mr Antony  Blinken, Deputy Secretary of State, to  the letter which  I had written 

last June to President Obama.   

In  his  reply,  Mr  Blinken,  inter  alia,  urged  Mauritius  not  to  take  the  issue  of  the 

Chagos Archipelago to the UN General Assembly and the International Court of Justice.  He 

indicated  that  the  issue  can  best  be  addressed  during  meetings  at  the  lower  levels  of  our 

respective  Governments  than  at  the  level  of  the  US  President  and  the  Mauritian  Prime 

Minister.    He  also  stressed  that  the  US  recognises  UK’s  sovereignty  over  the  Chagos 

Archipelago and that the Chagos Archipelago was essential for the security that the US and 

the UK provide around the world.   

We,  of  course,  disagree  that  the  whole  of  Chagos  Archipelago  is  required  for  such 

security purposes, the more so as we have confirmed our willingness to both US and the UK 

to grant a long-term lease for the continued use of Diego Garcia for defence purposes. 

We  are  disappointed  that  notwithstanding  the  assurances  given  to  US,  it  remains 

stubbornly opposed to Mauritius exercising its sovereign rights over the Chagos Archipelago 

whilst Diego Garcia continues to be used for defence purposes. 

As regards the United Kingdom, we are equally very disappointed of its objection to 

trilateral talks being henceforth held between Mauritius, UK and US. More so, both UK and 

US have sent a joint Note Verbale to Mauritius, issued a joint communiqué, and paid a joint 

visit  to  me  and  to  our  representative  in  New  York,  to  express  their  opposition  to  the 

initiatives of Mauritius at the level of the United Nations. 

As for the letter which I have addressed to UK Prime Minister, Theresa  May, I have 

not yet received a reply. 

13 

I  am  tabling  a  copy  of  the  letters  to  President  Obama  and  Prime  Minister  Theresa 

 

May. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to reiterate that the sovereignty of Mauritius over the Chagos 

Archipelago  is  non-negotiable.    Pursuant  to  its  commitment  to  ensuring  that  the  territorial 

integrity and sovereignty of Mauritius are fully respected and safeguarded, my Government 

will  relentlessly  pursue  all  efforts  in  accordance  with  international  law  for  the  effective 

exercise by Mauritius of its sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago. 

In  this  regard,  I  wish  to  appeal  to  all  our  citizens,  including  those  of  Chagossian 

origin,  to  act  with  unity  of  purpose,  so  that  we  can  attain  our  legitimate  objective  of 

completing  the  decolonisation  process  of  Mauritius  and  ensuring  that  the  independence  of 

Mauritius is complete. 

I  am  pleased  to  inform  the  House  that,  at  the  meeting  we  had  at  the  level  of  the 

Committee  of  Parliamentarians  on  15  July  2016,  there  was  unanimity  regarding  our 

initiatives at the level of the UN General Assembly. 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, can I be allowed to thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 

for tabling a copy of the letter from the outgoing, former Prime Minister of the UK.  I shall 

read that letter very carefully.  But, in the meantime, can I tell the Rt. hon. Prime Minister the 

following. The UK, of course, are actively canvassing their case, and they say that this letter 

represents  a  breakthrough  insofar  as,  from  their  point  of  view,  it  is  the  first  time  that  a 

proposal  for  a  meeting  from  London,  from  the  Prime  Minister  of  UK  is  made  without 

excluding the issue of sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago from that meeting. 

The  Prime  Minister:    Well,  if  the  question  of  sovereignty  is  excluded,  I  see  no 

purpose  in  my  meeting  with  the  Prime  Minister  of  UK.    What  am  I  going  to  discuss  with 

him? Insofar as the Award is concerned, discussions are already taking place at official level. 

Mr Bérenger: We have been informed, Madam Speaker, that the issue of the Chagos 

Archipelago,  being  referred  to  the  International  Court  of  Justice,  has  been  placed  on  the 

provisional  agenda  and  will  be  considered  at  the  General  Committee  of  the  UN  General 

Assembly  and  will  be  considered  at  the  next  meeting,  and  then  be  either  included  in  the 

agenda or not included in the agenda.  Can I know, at this stage, whether the UK and the US 

have raised objections in the General Committee of the UN General Assembly against putting 

that issue on the agenda? 

 

14 

The Prime Minister: What has been done so far is according to the procedure of the 

United Nations, and there has been no objection from any quarters. 

Mr Bérenger: I heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister rightly make reference to the Non-

Aligned Movement.  Now that we know that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister will be in New York 

for the General Assembly, can I know whether he has received information to the effect that 

Venezuela  -  as  I  said,  the  Non-Aligned  Movement  is  in  a  mess;    Venezuela  is  supposed  to 

take over the Chair from Iran and cannot call a meeting in Venezuela for obvious reasons - is 

trying to have the Non-Aligned Movement Summit organised in New York on the occasion 

of the forthcoming General Assembly? Do we have information to that effect? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I don’t have information to that effect. 

Mr Bérenger: I raised the issue before; that, whilst the Non-Aligned Movement is in 

a mess, the Group of 77 and China at the United Nations is very active.  Can I know whether 

we have managed to have the issue taken up at the Group of 77 and China, and if yes, to what 

result? 

The  Prime  Minister:  From  the  information  that  I  have,  they  were  favourable  and 

willing to support our claim on the Chagos. 

Mr Bérenger:  At this point in  time, Madam  Speaker, can  I know  from  the Rt.  hon. 

Prime Minister whether our representatives in New York and elsewhere are confident, at this 

stage, that if the issue is put on the agenda – not the provisional agenda, but the final agenda 

– of the United Nations Assembly, we will reach two-third of the General Assembly; that we 

will have positive votes from at least two-third of the General Assembly? 

The Prime Minister: From the information that I have, the answer is yes. 

Mr  Bérenger:  If  I  can  move  on  to  the  next  part  of  my  question,  that  is, 

implementation of the UNCLOS Arbitral Award, Madam Speaker.  Is  the Rt. hon. Minister 

aware that, replying to a Parliamentary Question in the House of Lords on 03 July, Baroness 

Anelay, speaking on behalf of the Government, said, “UK and Mauritius are already engaged 

in talks that aim to implement the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea”?  And 

we have been provided with a lot of information on what has been taking place until now at 

that  meeting  of  the  two  sides.    So,  do  I  take  it  that  the  Government  of  Mauritius  is  not 

satisfied at all with progress at the three meetings that have taken place so far? 

 

15 

The Prime Minister: Certainly, we are not satisfied at all because the attitude of the 

Britishers is entirely contrary to what we are trying to discuss with them. 

Mr Bérenger: Being given that we are dealing with the Indian Ocean in that part of 

the world,  and with  the  application of the UNCLOS  Arbitral  Ruling, can  I ask the Rt.  hon. 

Prime Minister whether he has been made aware of a very serious issue of coral bleaching in 

the  Chagos  Archipelago,  and  has  it  been  raised  at  those  meetings?    If  I  can  provide  the 

information: coral  bleaching, these days, is  worse than ever in  the history  of mankind.   If  I 

can quote – 

“The coral bleaching event sweeping the globe and destroying vast tracts of valuable 

coral  reef is  now officially the most widespread in recorded history, and is likely to 

continue for an unprecedented third year (…)”, 

according  to  scientists  and  quoted  by  The  Guardian.    And  in  the  case  of  the  Chagos 

Archipelago,  I  am  sure  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  is  aware  that  bleaching  is  literally 

devastating the Chagos Marine Reserve.  If I can quote from the BBC Science correspondent 

– 

it? 

“Up to 85% of the corals in the Chagos Marine Reserve - so called; according to us, 

rightly - of the British Indian Ocean Territory are estimated to have been damaged or 

killed in the event.” 

Are we aware of that?  Have we raised it and had we proposed to do anything about 

The Prime Minister: Well, yes, that is true. It’s not only Chagos, many countries are 

suffering from that. But what can we do? We have no access. 

Mr Bérenger: Other questions? Otherwise, I’ll put my last question. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo! 

Mr  Ganoo:  Can  I  ask  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  one  question  with  regard  to  the 

rounds  of  discussions  that  the  two  sides  have  been  having  after  the  Arbitral  Tribunal  has 

given its ruling? The Rt. hon. Prime Minister expressed to the House his dissatisfaction with 

the attitude of the officials of the UK side, interpreting that it was a too narrow interpretation. 

What remedy do we have then? Because the Tribunal, in its ruling, was very forceful to the 

effect  that  the  UK  had  been  violating  the  International  Law,  has  been  in  breach  of  its 

 

16 

obligation  under  the  United  Nations  Convention  on  the  Law  of  the  Sea  (UNCLOS);  the 

Tribunal has given its ruling in our favour and now they are being difficult. Has the Rt. hon. 

Prime Minister taken any advice as to what remedy do we have now? 

The  Prime  Minister:  We  have  no  other  remedy.  The  only  solution  is  to  go  to  the 

International Court of Justice and this is what I have done. 

Mrs  Selvon:  As  the  International  Tribunal  of  the  Law  of  the  Sea  has,  in  its  recent 

Judgment, inserted into International Law the 1965 UK-Mauritius arrangements, recognising 

the rights of Mauritius on the resources of the sea around the Chagos, will the Rt. hon. Prime 

Minister send an expedition by sea to the Chagos in the near future, as suggested by the hon. 

Leader of the Opposition? 

The Prime Minister: If there is a delegation that is ready to go, we will put the hon. 

Member at the head and she will go with them. 

Madam Speaker: Last question, hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger: I must say that proposal that I made, if I may say, en passant, is not at 

all  a  laughing  matter,  but  it  would  all  be  in  a  question  of  timing.  So,  I  think  we  should 

consider that action. It is a question of timing, but it is no laughing matter from my end.  

Can  I,  Madam  Speaker,  as  a  final  question.    We  are  on  the  eve  of  the  UN  General 

Assembly and we have learnt today that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister will be present at the UN 

General  Assembly  in  New  York.  Now,  the  key  moment  is  when  the  General  Committee  of 

the  UN  General  Assembly  will  decide  to  put  or  not  to  put  on  the  agenda  of  the  General 

Assembly  this  issue,  this  resolution  from  Mauritius.  That  would  be  the  key  moment.  Can  I 

request the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to keep us informed, keep the House informed, of what 

goes  on  at  the  level  of  that  General  Committee  of  the  United  Nations  General  Assembly, 

between now and the General Assembly? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  I  don’t  know  whether  they  will  tell  us  what  discussion 

they  are  having  inside  in  order  to  take  a  decision.  We  will  only  know  when  the  decision  is 

taken and, of course, certainly I will inform the House. 

Madam Speaker: Time is over! 

 

 

17 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10(2) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move that all the business on today’s Order 

Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

PUBLIC BILL 

Second Reading 

THE APPROPRIATION (2016-2017) BILL 2016 (No. XVII of 2016) 

Order  read  for  resuming  adjourned  debate  on  the  Appropriation  (2016-2017)  Bill 

2016 (No. XVII of 2016). 

Question again proposed. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Lesjongard! 

(12.13 p.m.) 

Mr G. Lesjongard (Second Member for Savanne & Black River): I wish to thank 

you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the floor to intervene during the debates on the Budget. 

Madam Speaker, allow me, from the very outset, to refer to last year’s Budget and the 

statement made by the then Minister of Finance when he delivered his speech in relation to 

‘Mauritius at the Crossroads’, and when I intervened, Madam Speaker, during the debates, I 

had put the question to the then Minister of Finance, asking him if we were at the crossroads, 

are  we  moving  forward  or  are  we  changing  direction?  I  had  put  that  question,  Madam 

Speaker,  because  I  did  consider  at  that  time  that,  that  statement  was  a  very  ambiguous 

statement  and  to  me  the  choice  was  not  that  clear  and  when  I  refer  to  this  present  Budget 

Speech, you will understand why I am making that argument. 

Madam  Speaker,  2015-2016  has  not  been  a  good  year.  Expectations  that  were  there 

have  not  been  met.  It  was  difficult  for  Government  to  move  forward  with  their  agenda  and 

the population at large is still waiting for the second economic miracle to happen. But, what 

are the reasons, Madam Speaker?  

 

18 

I  believe  the  reasons  are  multiples.  There  is,  and  we  should  agree  to  that,  a  climate  of 

uncertainty  on  the  world  front  and  also  locally  we  have  seen  certain  sectors  stagnating, 

Madam Speaker, whereas other sectors have performed. 

Now,  it  was  amidst  that  situation  that  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  had  to  come 

forward with his document ‘Vision 2030’. I think he stated that at the right time because the 

population had started losing faith in the Government. I think it was a good decision, a good 

political move and he wanted to boost his team also at the same time. But, at the same time 

also, it was a Motion of No Confidence towards the then Finance Minister. 

Madame la présidente, l’argument  que j’avais fait un peu plus tôt, je vais soutenir cet 

argument de par les discours qui ont été prononcés à l’intérieur de cette Chambre. J’ai écouté 

attentivement les interventions des députés et ministres de l’autre côté de la Chambre, et il est 

vrai  de  dire,  Madame  la  présidente,  que,  par  exemple,  les  intervenants  du  PMSD  ont  fait 

référence dans leur discours au budget présenté dans un passé lointain sous l’ère Ramgoolam, 

budget qui avait été présenté par l’honorable Vice-Premier ministre et ministre du Tourisme, 

l’honorable Xavier-Luc Duval, mais aucune référence n’a été faite par ces mêmes députés et 

ministres du budget qui avait été présenté l’année dernière par l’ancien ministre des Finances. 

C’est  pourquoi,  Madame  la  présidente,  l’argument  que  j’essaie  de  faire  c’est  que  dans  ce 

budget, je vois que l’actuel ministre des Finances est très clair dans ce qu’il veut faire.  Et je 

me réfère, Madame la présidente, to paragraph 8, où il dit –  

“The choice is clear.” 

Et au paragraphe 28, il parle d’un ‘New Era of Development’.  

A  mon  humble  avis,  Madame  la  présidente,  cela  aurait  dû  être  le  budget  de  l’année 

dernière.  Pourquoi ?  Parce  qu’un  gouvernement  fraîchement  élu  qui  voulait  se  démarquer 

complètement de la façon que le pays avait été géré par l’ancien régime, c’était ça la direction 

à prendre. Malheureusement, comme je l’ai dit un peu plus tôt l’ancien ministre des Finances 

ne nous a pas donné la direction que ce gouvernement voulait prendre clairement. 

Now, let me, Madam Speaker, start with the measures concerning poverty alleviation. 

What has been put in the Budget illustrates how difficult this task is and also, how lightly that 

task  was  handled  by  the  former  Finance  Minister,  how  confused  we  were  all  regarding  the 

measures announced in the last Budget.  

 

19 

Madam  Speaker,  I  stated  that  clearly  when  I  intervened  last  year  that  poverty 

alleviation cannot be left to the private sector only and I refer to Parliamentary Questions that 

were  put  in  this  House  and  replied  by  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  but  also  by  the  present 

Minister of Finance and Economic Development and it was clear in their answers, especially 

on that issue concerning parrainage that Government would review the situation.  

I am happy that this situation has been reviewed because from replies that were given 

to this House, we understood that the private sector was supposed to chip in a certain amount 

of money to help in poverty alleviation. But, at the end of the day, I think that sum of money 

was not chipped in, it was just a donation in kind and I don’t know what exactly was donated 

by the private sector. 

The  measures  in  this  present  Budget,  like  I  said,  are  clear  and  I  believe  now  strict 

control should be exercised with regard to the CSR. But, I would wish when the Minister of 

Finance and Economic Development intervenes to be enlightened on the composition of the 

Board of that CSR Foundation. Having said that, Madam Speaker, allow me now to say a few 

words on the construction sector. 

L’adage veut, Madame la présidente, que quand le secteur de la construction va bien, 

tout va bien and we have seen that in the present Budget capital expenditure by Government 

will be raised to some Rs19 billion. The public sector will invest some Rs34.5 billion in the 

year  2016-2017  and  some  Rs97.6  billion  over  the  next  three  years.  We  have  heard  of  rural 

and  urban  regeneration.  We  have  heard  of  the  Metro  Express.  We  have  heard  of  the  smart 

cities, port and airport infrastructure. I was very critical about the construction of smart cities 

last year and I still maintain what I said last year although I support this type of development. 

I will explain why I am still critical.  

We have taken cognizance of the report on Heritage City. From an engineering point 

of view, I think it is a preliminary report and we need more information to be able to make a 

full statement. Now, when we get to smart cities, Madam Speaker, I would refer Members of 

this House to an article in ‘Business India’ where the Prime Minister Shri Modi visited Pune 

in  India.  When  he  visited  that  town,  because  there  also  they  have  put  up  a  project  for  the 

setting up of 200 smart cities but, he made a very powerful statement.  

True it is that in Mauritius we want to make our island an intelligent island and this is 

what  smart  city  is.  But,  we  should  not  forget  that  we  need  to  get  our  towns  or  villages  the 

 

20 

basic needs. For example, Madam Speaker, Government had made a statement that towns and 

villages would have round-the-clock water supply. I think this should happen. Our towns and 

villages should be able to have a round-the-clock water supply because when people staying 

in those villages and towns where they don’t have round-the-clock water supply, when they 

will know that in those smart cities, people are having all sorts of facilities, then we will start 

having problems in this country. This applies to the sewerage network also. Let us in parallel 

when we are developing the smart cities, at the same time and at the same pace, we should 

develop  our villages  and towns in  our country  and this is  what  I understand from  rural  and 

urban regeneration.  

I  would  wish  also  to  be  enlightened  –  we  understand  that  the  person  who  was  in 

charge of the whole concept of smart cities in Mauritius has resigned, that is, the architect Mr 

Gaëtan  Siew.  Maybe  we  would  wish  to  know  why?  What  was  the  problem?  Because  we 

know that he is a very competent person. He did not give the exact reasons why he resigned 

and until today with the problems we are having with regard to the Heritage City, one would 

wish to know why that architect has resigned!  

Now,  we  understand  also  that  the  Heritage  City  has  been  freezed.  We  do  not  know 

whether  it  has  been  freezed  for  a  period  of  time  or  whether  that  Government  will  not  go 

ahead with the project. 

Allow me, Madam Speaker, now to say a few words on the green and blue economies. 

I would have wished to see also what we call today the silver economy, but later I will say a 

few words. Let me say something on the green and blue economies. Both are paired to reduce 

our  dependence  on  petroleum  products.  We  have  heard  of  the  Mass  Transit  System  and  I 

would wish to have more information on that mode of transport. 

Now,  I  wish  to  refer  to  paragraph  126,  that  is,  the  chapter  dealing  maximising 

investment  opportunities  with  the  green  economy.  At  paragraph  126,  Madam  Speaker,  if  I 

may quote  -  

“Government’s policy emphasis on developing local sources of renewable energy 

offers  a  unique  potential  for  launching  a  green  economy,  with  high  value-added 

jobs, while at the same time addressing environmental issues and reducing future 

oil import bills.” 

 

21 

When one refers to the speech made by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister on Vision 2030 where he 

talks about creation of jobs, he stated that some 100,000 new direct and indirect jobs will be 

created within the coming five  years;  no reference is  made to  jobs  created within the green 

economy.  Jobs  will  be  created  in  the  financial  services  sector,  in  the  information  and 

communication  technology  sector,  in  ocean  economy,  in  the  health  wellness  and 

biotechnology sectors, education and knowledge sector, tourism sector, manufacturing sector, 

construction and property development, logistic, SMEs, but no reference is made to the green 

economy and creation of jobs in the green economy.  

Last year, when I intervened on the Budget, I made this statement and this is not the 

first time I am making a statement. I said it seven years ago, Madam Speaker. I said – 

« Notre  vision  de  ce  concept,  c’est-à-dire,  de  faire  de  l’île  de  Maurice  une  île 

durable est limitée. » 

It is also about creating jobs; professional jobs such as Environmental Consultants, Biological 

System  Engineers,  Environmental  Engineers,  Green  Building  Architects,  Solar  Energy 

Engineers,  Wind  Energy  Engineers,  Ecology  Educators,  not  only  for  professional,  but  also 

manual  jobs  such  as  organic  farmers,  eco-Technology  Workers,  eco-Electricians,  eco-

Plumbers,  eco-Construction  Workers.  I  still  do  not  see  that  we  are  going  in  that  direction, 

Madam Speaker. The vision with regard to green economy is not that clear. I would wish to 

have explanation to paragraph 127 of the Budget Speech – 

“To  this  end,  the  CEB  will  create  a  renewable  energy  company,  which  will 

ultimately become a special vehicle for the production of electricity from solar 

photo voltaic systems of up to 15 MW. It will subsequently open shareholding 

to SMEs, cooperative societies and small investors.” 

Why the CEB? The SMEs, the cooperative societies, the small investors, on their own, they 

can produce electricity, Madam Speaker. Whether this was a suggestion from Government or 

from the CEB and I would wish to be enlightened on this issue, Madam Speaker.  

There is something very interesting at paragraph 132 and it is stated that – 

“(…) As regards hydro power, the CEB will invest Rs200 m. for the upgrading 

of the Sans Souci plant capacity and it has identified twelve sites on private land 

with this potential hydro power generation.” 

 

22 

This  concerns  what  we  call  mini  hydro  power,  which  I  believe  will  be  very  interesting  and 

will help the CEB to produce renewable energy, Madam Speaker.  

Let  me  now  say  a  few  words  on  the  blue  economy.  I  believe  some  Members,  who 

intervened before me, spoke on the blue economy because they think this form parts the way 

forward. I also believe that this sector can become an important sector of our economy in the 

years to come.  

Now, one should know that,  the concept  of blue  economy originates  from  the green 

economy,  that  is,  both  share  the  same  outcome,  that  is,  improving  human  well-being  and 

social  equity,  but,  at  the  same  time,  Madam  Speaker,  reducing  environmental  risk  and 

ecological scarcities. I read a report recently on the ocean economy, a report by… with regard 

to  Small  Island  Developing  States  and  reference  on  that  report  was  made  to  Mauritius, 

Seychelles and Madagascar, all three islands found in the Indian Ocean. The report makes a 

series  of  suggestions  on  the  way  forward  including  sharing  on  information  on  the  subject 

between  the  Island  States.  It  talks  of  inclusion  of  oceans  as  a  key  component  in  future 

sustainable development goals.  

Now,  what  are  the  facts  and  figures  today,  Madam  Speaker,  regarding  that  sector? 

One  would  wish  to  know  that  we  have  the  largest  Exclusive  Economic  Zone  in  the  world. 

Today,  it  stands  at  2.3  million  square  kilometres  and  IT  includes  some  400,000  square 

kilometres of continental shelves recently approved by the UN, which was a joint submission 

by Mauritius and Seychelles. That Exclusive Economic Zone, Madam Speaker, is bigger than 

France, Germany, Italy, Spain and UK combined together and it has an enormous potential.  

Today, ocean related activities contribute some 10% to 15% of our GDP. And 90% of 

the contribution comes from three sectors, that is, coastal tourism and marine leisure; seaport 

related activities and sea food related activities. The potential for growth, in the sea port and 

seafood  related  activities,  is  enormous.  The  fisheries  sector  contributes  some  1.4%  of  GDP 

and employs today some 12,000 people. The seaport related activities represent some 2% of 

GDP and our country is ranked 33rd among 155 countries in terms of out shipment.  

In the document ‘Vision 2030’, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister states that that  sector in 

the years to come, that is, in the coming five years, will create some 25,000 jobs. 

Now, what are the clusters associated with the ocean economy, Madam Speaker? We 

have seabed exploration; fishing and seafood and aquaculture; - that I have said - deep ocean 

 

23 

water application; marine services, marine tourism and leisure; marine biotechnology; seaport 

related activities and marine renewable  energy.  A question that  I would  wish to  ask:  do we 

have  a  roadmap  for  the  ocean  economy  or  are  we  still  working  on  the  roadmap  that  was 

presented in 2013?  What are the priorities today in that sector, Madam Speaker? We should 

understand and I made reference earlier to that report.  In that sector today, countries that are 

moving  forward  are  now  trying  to  create  an  enabling  environment  to  allow  the  sector  to 

emerge. Lots of research and development is going on in that sector. Government is coming 

forward  with  fiscal  incentives.  We  should  move  fast,  I  believe,  Madam  Speaker,  in  that 

sector. 

Let  us  have  a  closer  look  at  the  different  clusters,  for  example,  seabed  exploration. 

There  is  one  international  authority  called  the  International  Seabed  Authority  and  that 

authority  is  responsible  for  subsoil  activities  in  the  ocean  floor.  Now,  several  nations  have 

made requests for prospecting ocean floor in areas next to our EEZ. Now, a joint Mauritian 

and Japanese expedition, some time back discovered inactive hydrothermal fields in our EEZ 

which  indicates  the  presence  of  mineral  deposits.  In  fact,  Madam  Speaker,  previous 

expeditions have also discovered such fields. Do you know what this means? This means the 

possibility  of  the  presence  of  oil  or  gas  in  our  maritime  zone,  Madam  Speaker.  I  think,  we 

should give a lot of attention to that because there are various opportunities in that field, for 

example, licensing of concession to oil companies, and eventually production of oil or gas is 

discovered, other goods and services related to the oil and gas industry. The possibilities are 

enormous, Madam Speaker.  

Others have dwelled on fishing, seafood processing and aquaculture, but I will move 

to  another  cluster  which  is  the  deep  water  ocean  application.  This  cluster  has  two  forms  of 

activities  and  I  will  deal  with  what  is  known  as  the  upstream  activity.  I  understand  that 

Government  is  in  the  presence  of  two  projects,  one  in  Port  Louis  and  the  other  one  in  the 

South,  and  I also  understand that the one in  Port  Louis  has already  received an  approval  in 

principle. This is converting deep sea water for use in air conditioning purposes. I understand 

that  there  was  a  project  submitted  to  Government  and  that  project  has  been  approved.  May 

we know where matters are?   

Now, another cluster is with regard to marine renewable energy. We understand that 

two studies are on-going. One is in relation to ocean waves and the other one is in relation to 

offshore  wind  and  will  be  concluded,  I  believe,  this  year.  Madam  Speaker,  demand  for 

 

24 

renewable energy is expected to increase by two and a half times by 2025. The generation of 

renewable energy from tides and waves, wind turbines located offshore, geothermal resources 

and  marine  biomass  are  possible  viable  alternatives  for  energy  production.  Of  all  those 

sources of energy that I have mentioned above, the highest potential for electricity generation 

is the offshore wind turbines.  

In  the  northern  part  of  Europe,  many  countries  are  now  operating  offshore  wind 

farms and Mauritius, I think, has enormous potential in the southern part of the country. Not 

only  can  we  produce  electricity  from  those  wind  farms,  but  we  can  couple  production  of 

electricity  from  offshore  wind  farm  together  with  aquaculture.  And  certain  countries  have 

successfully,  Madam  Speaker,  been  able  to  implement  such  projects.  Now,  global  offshore 

wind  capacity  is  growing  at  a  remarkable  speed;  40%  yearly  and  I  believe  we  should  not 

waste time in trying to find investors in that sector. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  last  cluster  concerns  what  we  call  ‘making  Mauritius  a  hub  in 

this  region  for  petroleum  products,  container  transhipment  and  port  services.’  And  this  is 

possible,  highly  possible  because  we  are  strategically  located  at  the  crossroads  of  Asia  and 

Africa, that is, sea routes.  And we should not forget, today the sea port contributes about 2%, 

Madam Speaker, of the country’s GDP and we can increase that.  The potential is there. We 

need to have that enabling environment and make this possible. Having said that, what I have 

said about those two sectors, that is, the green and the blue economy, I think, both sectors can 

become,  in  the  years  to  come,  two  important  pillars  of  our  economy.  We  should  give 

ourselves the means to be able to do that.  

Allow me, to conclude, Madam Speaker, by saying, the political aspect of this year’s 

budget  has  a  different  meaning.  To  all  of  us  here,  it  is  the  budget  of  a  Prime  Minister  in 

waiting. If this budget creates a feel-good factor in the country, as stated by those who have 

intervened before, one person will benefit from that and it will be the Finance Minister. 

If this Budget  creates a feel  good factor in  the country, as stated by those who have 

intervened before, one person will benefit from that, and it will the Finance Minister.  But the 

Budget  succeeds when  we  implement  the measures in  the Budget,  and  that will not  depend 

only on the Finance Minister; that will depend on Government and on all the Ministers. So, 

time  will  tell,  Madam  Speaker,  whether  the  measures  announced  in  the  Budget  have  been 

successfully implemented to the benefit of our population. 

 

25 

I  for one believe that the actual  Finance Minister needs this, because  you will agree 

that he has been going through some difficult times lately. I think this will boost his morale a 

bit. Like we say in French, this Budget brings, maybe, une bouffée d’air frais, and I wish him 

well! 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for one hour. 

At 12.53 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 1.58 p.m. with the Deputy Speaker in the Chair. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Dayal! 

Mr  R.  Dayal  (First  Member  for  Flacq  &  Bon  Accueil):  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  my 

intervention  today  will  be  based  on  our  Government’s  prediction,  intention,  translated  in 

results, oriented actions dans l’intérêt du peuple. 

This  Budget  is  for  a  projet  de  société  pour  une  Ile  Maurice  Durable.  It  enfolds  a 

plethora  of  unique  opportunities  and  concrete  sustainable  measures  for  us  all  to  rise  to  the 

challenge of a new era of development with the urgency imposed by a climate change. 

The law and order issues, combatting terrorism and organised crime, fighting the drug 

scourge,  including  synthetic  drugs,  even  having  recourse  to  drones,  road  safety  with  the 

construction of a driving and riding centre in Constituency No. 9 with funds collected as far 

back  as  1995,  with  the  blessing  of  the  present  Prime  Minister,  modern  hospital  in  Flacq  to 

service  constituencies  in  the  eastern  part  of  our  Republic,  despite  a  backdrop  of  global 

economic turmoil. 

This  Government  is  more  than  ever  committed  to  bring  the  country  back  to  its 

glorified  past.  We  are,  indeed,  upholding  our  promises  for  a  better,  prosperous  and 

sustainable  Mauritius  in  all  fronts,  to  ensure  meaningful  change  in  the  public  interest.  We 

cannot  afford  to  legate  an  environment  which  is  devoid  of  its  critical  ecosystem  for  future 

generations. 

Sustainability  is  anchored  in  all  our  initiatives  and  by  promoting  eco-friendly 

practices, including coral planting - I would like to show an example of what we are going to 

do just in a year with corals like this.  The good news is this is how we are going to plant it - 

and dealing with the ocean due to activities of the tectonic plates and the El Nino global sea 

warming phenomenon. 

 

26 

We will be amending the Environment Act to be in harmony with our environmental 

strategies. In the span of some 15 months, we have visited most of the sustainable goals with 

strategic plan of actions. 

Let me just say what we are planning to do for the bleaching of corals. We have been 

experimenting  technological  support  from  Australia  to  deal  with  coral  bleaching,  and  it  has 

been successful. We just have to bring it at project level. 

I  must,  and  we  must  particularly  commend  and  thank  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister, 

hon. Pravind  Jugnauth,  Minister of Finance  and  Economic Development,  for honouring our 

country’s  commitment  to  COP21,  the  World  Summit  in  Paris  where,  as  a  Minister,  I 

accompanied a delegation comprising my very  good friend, hon.  François, from  Rodrigues, 

and  other  professionals.    And,  I  must  say,  we  addressed  the  challenges  of  climate  change 

from the perspective of a SIDs and it was done with style and distinction, appreciated by all 

present. 

The  Government’s  policy  emphasises  on  developing  local  sources  of  renewable 

energy for launching a green economy for renewable energy, waste to energy, biomass, cane 

tops  and  trash,  photovoltaic,  wind  energy,  wave  energy  and  hydro  water  is  a  trendsetter  to 

drive forward our dream, aspirations, vision, endurance and effort undertaking for a cleaner, 

greener and safer Mauritius which is tangible right now in the landscape of our motherland. 

In  the  same  spirit,  carbon  ash  which  used  to  be  a  major  source  of  pollution  was 

scientifically engineered towards the production of green cement through the innovative no-

emission  venture  of  Omnicane.  At  the  same  time,  to  monitor  our  quality  of  air,  two  static 

units of air monitoring equipment were commissioned, one in Port Louis and a second one in 

Vacoas. A third one is planned. 

I  am  gratified  to  note  that  timely  provisions  have  been  made  and  fundamental 

resources  allocated  to  protect  and  manage  the  vulnerability  of  our  environment,  especially 

with  regard to  climate change, disaster risk reduction and management,  waste minimisation 

and  management,  land  drainage,  renewable  energy,  organic  agriculture,  bio  farming  to 

improve food security and the Blue Economy. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  during  my  tenure  of  office  as  the  Minister  of  Environment 

and  Sustainable  Development,  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management  I  spared  no  effort 

towards benchmarking Mauritius as a SIDs leading on disaster mitigation and preparedness, 

 

27 

resilience response and recovery with the support of our Prime Minister and the Cabinet as a 

whole. This was acknowledged by the UN Secretary General, His Excellency Ban Ki-moon 

during his visit to Mauritius this year. My priority of priorities was to prevent death and save 

human lives during natural calamities and we had no fatality. The success has been 100 per 

cent.  

The  development  and  operation  of  the  National  Disaster  Scheme  2015,  the 

promulgation of the National  Disaster Risk  Reduction and Management Act,  the innovative 

and  permutation of early warning system for storm surges and tidal waves with the support 

of Deltares, Holland and the EU, the construction of a multi-functional refuge centre for the 

first time in this part of the world at Quatre Soeurs with the assistance of friendly countries  

and  coastal  rehabilitation  works,  are  all  concrete  evidences  amongst  many  others  bearing 

testimony  that  we  have  gone  a  long  way  towards  risks  reduction  and  management  with 

community involvement.  And we have had the full support of the community!  

The  provision  of  Rs22  m.  for  modern  equipment  to  improve  command  and 

coordination  on  ground  during  national  emergency  operations  will  further  enhance  our 

capability to respond with all responders expediently.  A Climate Change Bill is forthcoming. 

Nine  Environment  Officers  have  been  recruited  and  others  are  forecasted.  In  our  relentless 

pursue to meet the daunting challenges of climate change, I did initiate several projects at the 

Ministry. Just to mention one, a 2050 Pathway Carbon Calculator - I repeat, a 2050 Pathway 

Carbon Calculator - has been developed for Mauritius with the support of this Government. It 

is a modelling tool which allows to analyse how emissions of greenhouse gases (GHGs), can 

be  reduced  by  changes  in  technologies  and  behaviours.  I  must  express  our  gratitude  to  the 

European Union for making this possible.  

At Government level we are fully conscious that we have to increase the green cover 

of the Republic of Mauritius with the prime objective to increase the carbon - in line with the 

Green Island Concept because we are fully conscious that trees are the lungs of our country 

and of our planet, and it will make us meet the Sustainable Goal No. 15 and its target on land 

degradation neutrality will help to reduce ambient air temperature amongst other benefits.  

This  Budget  makes  provision  for  rehabilitation  works  to  address  the  issue  of  beach 

erosion  and  coastal  land  degradation  to  the  tune  of  Rs110  m.  which  is  vital  to  our  tourism 

industry  and  healthy  lifestyle  of  Mauritians.  Lately,  the  Government  completed  the 

rehabilitation of three land mark innovative beach rehabilitations at  La Prairie, Baie du Cap 

 

28 

and  Bain  Boeuf  within  a  Beach  Rehabilitation  Master  Plan.  Mont  Choisy,  Belle  Mare  and 

Palmar  are  next  in  the  list.  The  2030  Agenda  for  Sustainable  Development  of  this 

Government is much more ambitious than the Millennium Goals as it has 17 goals and 169 

targets.  

This  Budget  testifies  the  Government’s  commitment  to  implement  the  sustainable 

development  goals  and  targets.  It  is  making  sure  that  through  the  national  and  determined 

contribution  at  COP  21,  petitioning  for  USD  5.5  billion  in  terms  of  grant  from  the  Global 

Green Fund, technical assistance and capacity building from partners to move towards a low 

carbon  development  path,  resilience  to  the  vulnerabilities  of  climate  change  will  be 

implemented.  In  the  same  spirit,  we  materialised,  in  collaboration  with  l’  Université  des 

Mascareignes,  a  cascading  system  in  refrigeration  using  ammonia,  an  outstanding 

contribution to protect the ozone layer. 

The  House  will  also  appreciate  that  Mauritius  submitted  its  Mauritius  Intended 

Nationally  Determined  Contributions  (INDC) in the context  of COP21  and we  are amongst 

the first countries to sign and ratify the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. This would not 

have been possible without the support of our Prime Minister and our Deputy Prime Minister, 

hon. Xavier-Luc Duval, who chaired the working committees with the unflinching support of 

l'Agence Française de Développement  (AFD)  and the French Embassy.  As a matter of fact, 

after  COP21,  AFD  is  helping  us  to  convert  our  transfer  stations  costing  us  billions  in 

management  fees  into  automated  sorting  out  and  recycling  waste  facility,  reducing  the 

pressure  at  Mare  Chicose  Landfill  site.  I,  therefore,  note  with  great  satisfaction  that  this 

Budget  further supports  the Ministry towards sustaining the  efforts to  mitigate and  adapt  to 

climate change as well as to build a disaster resilient architecture for Mauritius. 

As  regards  the  Sustainable  Development  Goals  (SDGs)  which  our  Rt.  hon.  Prime 

Minister  promoted,  moulding  a  new  society  with  green  eco-culture  was  on  top  of  my 

priorities. I truly believe that a throw-away society is far from being a modern society, rather 

sustainable patterns of consumption and production is the order of the day and we are striving 

for  prosperity  and  green  growth.  This  year  has  witnessed  the  successful  banning  of  plastic 

bags in Mauritius as from 01 January, which the Opposition could not implement! The intent 

of this Government behind this banned measure was never to jeopardise business but rather 

shift from a throw-away society to an ecologically responsible one.  

 

29 

We  have  started  to  reap  the  fruits  of  our  hard  work.    Plastic  industries  are  greening 

their businesses, biodegradable and compostable bags are already on the local market. There 

is no more abusive use of plastic bags in Mauritius and a change in the mindset of people is 

visible with the adoption of going green and green lifestyle. This showed that our initiatives 

had public support. There were also the rehabilitation of Le Dauguet and health tracks which 

were left abandoned and nature trails left in a very abandoned state in other places.  School 

endemic  plant  gardens  will  give  a  new  impetus  to  our  biodiversity  coupled  with  the 

embellishing and greening campaign launched.  

 

It  is  not  a  secret  to  anyone  in  Mauritius  that  diabetes  is  a  great  killer  and  so  far  we 

have  not  been  successful  in  combating  the  problem  through  conventional  medicinal 

mechanism.    It  was  high  time  for  this  Government  to  bring  meaningful  change  to  those 

suffering from diabetes and we spent lots of money in terms of insulin tablets. In this spirit, 

we are coming forward with the distribution to each household of medicinal insulin plant. 

I  am  thankful  to  my  colleague,  hon.  Minister  Mahen  Seeruttun  who  has  provided 

some 10 arpents of lands in the area of Wooton, the centre of Mauritius for a nursery for the 

free distribution of the medicinal plants.  

I  am  equally  supportive  of  the  views  expressed  by  hon.  Mrs  Selvon  that  we  should 

trigger initiatives in terms of green economy for fibrous plants. 

(Interruptions) 

To  comfort  her,  I  would  say,  apart  from  the  200,000  coconut  plants  and  the  two  billion  of 

plants  in  the  project  ‘Decade  for  Greening  Mauritius’,  the  implementation  of  the  Arundo 

Donax Green Energy Project, for which conclusive trials have been done by the  Ministry of 

Agro-Industry and Food Security and the University of Mauritius, is in the pipeline.  

The re-opening of the ex-Dubreuil tea factory and a new tea nursery at  La Brasserie 

with provision of free seedlings to tea-growers and subsidy on fertilisers will positively boost 

our green economy.  

In the same breath, I also embark on several other green initiatives, to name a few – 

 

commissioning  of  a  used  oil  facility  at  Montagne  Blanche  to  protect  our 

underground water;  

 

30 

 

collection, disposal and recycling of electronic and electrical waste.  We have 

a Memorandum of Understanding with the private sector.  There is budgetary 

provision  for  a  facility  at  La  Chaumière  in  the  same  area  where  hazardous 

waste facility is being constructed; 

collection and recycling of used tyres.  Projects are already on; 

shifting  from  the  use  of  polystyrene  containers,  a  source  of  cancer,  which 

represents health hazards to other biodegradable eco-friendly alternatives will 

be the second phase of our banned plastic campaign; 

improving the system of pets bottles collection, and recycling; 

setting  mechanisms  for  collection  and  recycling  of  other  plastic  bottles  and 

 

 

 

 

containers.  

The provisions made in this budget are very encouraging. Indeed, hon. Pravind Jugnauth, our 

Minister of Finance and Economic Development and I must say it, in the sense it supports my 

initiatives during my assignment as Minister of Environment, Sustainable Development, and 

Disaster and Beach Management.   

Last  but  not  least,  I  must  also  commend  the  hon.  Minister  for  continuity  in  the 

schemes on solar water heater, rain water harvesting and composting.  Notwithstanding other 

schemes of the living environment, these schemes will indeed support to chart our sustainable 

future for Mauritius.   

Law  and  order,  the  provision  of  funds  for  smart  camera  will  certainly  prove  a  big 

deterrent  to  hit  and  run  cases  and  diminishing  criminal  activities.    Just  without  leaking  the 

secret of the Smart Cameras. That camera, if properly fed, will identify stolen cars, vehicles 

used by drug peddlers, so on and so forth. 

The provision of funds for the construction of a Police Academy will go a long way to 

address  the  pressing  needs  for  training,  infrastructure  and  to  improve  the  capacity  building 

and quality of our Police officers.  This has been one of the projects that the Rt. hon. Prime 

Minister had at heart when  I  was Commissioner  of Police.  We  even had the plans, but  we 

could  not  implement  it. But  I think if  you want  good Police officers on the streets,  the best 

and  the  best  option  is  to  train  them  properly  in  proper  training  infrastructures  with  proper 

training implements. 

 

31 

The need for improving our Forensic lab facilities is timely in the wake of preventing 

the miscarriage of justice through state-of-the-art, hard evidence gathering technical support 

in law enforcement in a modern society. The surcroît dans un état de droit.   

We have, as a credible Government, the political will and public support to daringly 

move  forward  in  the  national  interest.    I  would  not  be  labouring  on  matters  that  have  been 

raised and which are sub judice. 

I will end here.   

Thank you very much. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Yerrigadoo! 

(2.14 p.m.) 

The  Attorney  General  (Mr  R.  Yerrigadoo):  M.  le  président,  permettez-moi,  tout 

d’abord,  de  féliciter 

l’honorable  Pravind  Jugnauth,  ministre  des  Finances  et  du 

Développement  économique  pour  la  présentation  d’un  budget  audacieux  et  réaliste.  Un 

budget  de  relance  économique  reposant  sur  dix  stratégies,  et  qui  est  aussi  porteur  d’espoir 

pour  les  plus  démunis.  Ce  budget  nous  parle  de  l’avenir,  de  la  possibilité  de  créer  une  Ile 

Maurice, débarrassée de l’extrême pauvreté. Un tel avenir est maintenant à notre portée et ce 

budget nous donne les outils pour réaliser cet objectif.  

M.  le  président,  toutes  les  mesures  annoncées  par  le  ministre  des  Finances  pour 

combattre la pauvreté sont réalistes. Le Marshall Plan, qui a été expliqué en détail par mon 

collègue et ministre de l’Intégration Social, prendra bientôt son envol. 

M. le président, on ne le répétera jamais assez: il n’y a que l’éducation qui peut aider 

quelqu’un à sortir de la pauvreté. C’est pour cette raison que ce budget encourage les jeunes à 

emprunter  cette  voie.  Ainsi,  les  élèves,  issus  de  familles  vivant  dans  des  conditions 

vulnérables, qui réussissent à leurs examens de Grade 9, SC et HSC percevront aux résultats 

des  «cash  prize»  de  R  15,000,  R  25,000  et  R  35,000  respectivement.  Par  ailleurs,  les  frais 

d’examens des élèves qui sont issus de familles pauvres et redoublant la SC ou la HSC seront 

pris en charge par l’État. Le meal allowance des élèves fréquentant les écoles ZEP passe de R 

40 à R 60. Les subventions mensuelles pour les crèches passent, elles, de R 1,500 à R 2,000. 

Les mesures énoncées, la stratégie de « creating more job opportunities  for all » vont 

permettre  à  quelques  21,400  jeunes,  hommes  et  femmes,  de  trouver  un  emploi.  Et  pour 

assurer  la  mise  en  œuvre  de  cette  initiative,  le  gouvernement  mettra  sur  pied  un  National 

 

32 

Empowerment Agency  calqué sur le model du pôle emploi en France tel que l’a décrit mon 

collègue, le ministre de l’Emploi. 

Ce  budget  trace  aussi  la  voie  d’une  relance  pour  le  «Technical  And  Vocational 

Educational  Training »  plus  connu  comme  le  TVET  et  un  «Skills  Development  Authority» 

verra le jour pour assumer le rôle de régulateur indépendant pour les jeunes qui ont terminé 

leurs  études  secondaires  et  aussi  pour  les  jeunes  diplômés.  Le  gouvernement  prévoit 

également  l’embauche  de  quelque  2,000  personnes  sous  le  Youth  Employment  Programme 

scheme (YEP) sans compter le Service to Mauritius (STM) qui a été relancé.  

M.  le  président,  je  ne  répèterai  pas  tout  ce  que  mes  collègues  de  la  majorité 

gouvernementale ont dit au cours de leurs allocutions respectives. Mais laissez-moi lancer un 

appel  à  tous  ces  jeunes,  et  moins  jeunes,  de  retourner  vers  la  terre.  Ce  gouvernement  croit 

fermement dans le développement du secteur «non sucre» et encourage les entrepreneurs à la 

culture de légumes et de fleurs en usant des nouvelles technologies et  avec pour objectif de 

créer  des  plantations  saines  qui  sont  de  moins  en  moins  dépendantes  sur  les  pesticides.  De 

l'agriculture raisonnée comme disait hier mon collègue.  

Le  ministère  de  l’Agro-Industrie  a  introduit,  en  janvier  dernier,  un  plan  stratégique 

pour la période 2016-2020 où l’accent est mis sur les pratiques soutenues pour faire accroître 

la production agricole afin d’assurer la sécurité alimentaire, une meilleure qualité de produits 

et l’autosuffisance. L’accent est aussi mis sur les mesures à prendre pour la transition vers la 

production bio afin d’atteindre l’objectif fixé de produire 50% de nos produits alimentaires en 

mode bio d’ici 2020. 

M. le président, il faut comprendre l’opportunité historique qui se présente à nous, et 

ce qu’il faut faire pour transformer l’histoire. «A new era of development » se profile et, nous 

devons  tous  travailler  pour  atteindre  cet  objectif  commun.  Nous  avons  besoin  de  l’aide  de 

tous les Mauriciens pour réaliser ce grand projet économique et social. Même de ceux qui ont 

des  opinions  différentes  de  nous.  Ici  je  citerai  Antoine  de  Saint-Exupéry  dans  son  récit  

Citadelle, où il disait – 

 « Si tu diffères de moi, mon frère, loin de me léser, tu m’enrichis. »   

C'est ensemble que nous réussirons pour le bien être de notre pays. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, allow me now to address the House on some specific issues. 

Law and order is an important priority for this Government. On many occasions the Rt. hon. 

Prime  Minister  has  reiterated  his  commitment  and  that  of  his  Government  to  empower  the 

Police  and  address  reforms  to  the  criminal  justice  process.  Recently,  we  adopted  the 

Independent Police Complaints Commission Bill. 

 

33 

I  wish  to  apprise  the  House  on  progress  made  on  the  drafting  of  the  Police  and 

Criminal Evidence Bill also known as PACE. I had previously mentioned that my Office had 

sought  the  assistance  of  the  Commonwealth  Secretariat  to  assist  with  the  review  and 

finalisation of the PACE Bill along with the Codes of Practice related to the Bill. 

Mr Geoffrey Rivlin, Q.C., who has been appointed by the Commonwealth Secretariat, 

visited Mauritius from Monday 04 to Thursday 07 July 2016. He had meetings with myself, 

the  Solicitor-General,  law  officers  of  my  Office,  the  DPP  and  the  Office  of  the  DPP,  the 

Commissioner  of  the  Police,  the  Commissioner  of  Prisons,  the  Bar  Council  and  the  Chief 

Justice. 

The  issue  of  provisional  information  was  lengthily  debated  and  all  agreed  that  its 

abolition would represent a significant progress. The main issue was to come up with a new 

system  which  would  still  empower  the  Police  to  investigate  whilst  ensuring  that  the  human 

rights  of  any  suspect  are  respected  by  bringing  that  person  under  judicial  control  at  the 

earliest. 

For the very first time in Mauritius, there is consensus from all stakeholders of a need 

to  abolish  provisional  information  and  I  will  ensure  that  this  will  be  achieved  in  the  near 

future once Cabinet agrees on a mechanism to replace provisional information. This review 

of  the  abusive  system  of  provisional  information  has  been  announced  in  the  Government 

Programme 2015-2019 which states at paragraph 132- 

“Government  will  come  up  with  a  modern  legal  framework  modelled  on  the 

UK  Police  and  Criminal  Evidence  Act  to  address  the  abusiveness  and 

arbitrariness of the present system of “provisional charges.”” 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  enactment  of  PACE,  with  a  new  alternative  to 

provisional  information,  will  undoubtedly  be  the  biggest  reform  of  our  criminal  justice 

system in modern times. 

An  amount  of  Rs8.7  billion  has  been  devoted  to  the  Mauritius  Police  Force  (MPF). 

And the Minister of Finance and Economic Development has announced that a new training 

strategy will also be elaborated and provision has been made for a modern Police Academy at 

the  Reduit-Ebène  area.  This  Budget  also  makes  provision  for  investing  in  modern  vehicles 

and equipment for the Police. Hence, Rs292 m. has been allocated for modernising the fleet 

of vehicles.  

 

34 

In order to intensify the combat against drugs, this Budget is providing for two drone 

cameras  with  night  vision  capabilities.  The  MRA  Customs  will  also  be  equipped  with 

interceptor boats, mobile low bed scanners and other X-ray scanners. 

Let me now  allude to the Judicial Process. The independence of the Judiciary,  apart 

from being vital for the functioning of our democratic system of Government, empowers our 

Courts to uphold the Rule of Law to act as guardians of the Fundamental Rights entrenched 

in our Constitution, and to ensure and enforce good governance. 

Throughout  the  years,  this  House  has  witnessed  questions  being  raised  on  delays  in 

the  judicial  system  in  Mauritius  and  it  has  often  been  said  that  ‘justice  delayed  is  justice 

denied’.  I  invite  all  hon.  Members  to  read  carefully  the  Annual  Report  of  the  Judiciary  of 

2015  which  has  been  published  in  June  2016.  Hon.  Members  will  see  that  there  is 

considerable improvement and that the Judiciary has to be congratulated for that, but there is 

still need to improve on a number of other issues. 

The  key  actions  from  the  Judiciary  include  the  setting  up  of  a  separate  Court  of 

Appeal Section and a separate  High Court Section of the Supreme Court to improve public 

perception  of  independence  and  objectivity  in  dispensing  justice  and  to  streamline  appeal 

cases. 

In  2015/2016,  the  digital  and  audio  recording  systems  of  the  Supreme  Court  have 

been  upgraded.  The  infrastructure  of  the  Supreme  Court  and  the  District  Courts  of  Grand 

Port, Flacq and Upper Plaines Wilhems will also have to be upgraded.  

Allow me Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, to give a few figures regarding case management. 

The total number of cases lodged (excluding appeal cases) at the Supreme Court decreased by 

1%  to  9,091  cases  in  2015  from  9,154  cases  in  2014.  Similarly,  the  total  number  of  cases 

disposed of (excluding appeal cases) at the Supreme Court decreased by 9% to 9,381 cases in 

2015 from 10,357 cases in 2014. 

A  physical  count  of  the  total  number  of  outstanding  cases  (excluding  appeal  cases) 

showed that 7,765 cases were not yet disposed of at the end of the year 2015, representing a 

fall  of  4%  over  the  figure  of  8,055  in  2014.    I  will  not  dwell  on  the  figures  relating  to  the 

other courts, but my learned friends can refer to them. 

 

35 

Mr Deputy Speaker, the number of cases lodged under the Protection from Domestic 

Violence Act 1997 decreased by 7% to 1,770 in 2015. More than half of them were lodged in 

the urban District Courts and half of them came from the Lower Plaines Wilhems. Following 

the same trend, the number of cases disposed of showed a fall of 6% to 1,794 cases in 2015 

from 1,916 cases in 2014. 

From  2014  to  2015,  the  total  number  of  applications  received  under  the  PDVA  of 

1997 decreased by 6% from 1,895 cases to 1,774 cases with drops for Protection Orders from 

1,855  to  1,734,  and  for  Occupation  Orders  from  35  to  34,  and  there  was  no  case  for 

revocation in 2015. On the contrary, the applications received for tenancy increased from 4 in 

2014 to 6 in 2015. 

The applicants for Protection Orders among spouse/partner showed a drop of 12% to 

1,387 in 2015. Some 93% of them were women. 

A  huge  step,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  has  been  achieved  with  the  adoption  of  a  new 

Protection    from  Domestic  Violence  Act  (PDVA)  earlier  this  year.  This  legislation  shall 

provide  better  protection  to  victims  of  domestic  violence  by  widening  the  definition  of 

domestic  violence  to  include  intimidation,  harassment  amongst  others.  A  lot  of  emphasis  is 

also being put on training and capacity building of all stakeholders to empower them to face 

new challenges. My colleague, hon. Aurore Perraud has already expatiated on these. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister is quite concerned that some of 

our  District  Courts  are  in  great  need  of  urgent  repairs  and  renovations.  Provision  has  been 

made  for  the  District  Courts  of  Mahebourg,  Rose  Hill  and  Flacq  to  undergo  repairs  and 

upgrading in this Budget.  

The Judiciary is currently spending a lot of money on rented premises. In order to curl 

this,  the  Souillac  District  Court  will  be  relocated  in  the  SIFB  building  in  the  locality.  The 

Pamplemousses  and  Rivière  du  Rempart  District  Courts  will  also  be  relocated  in  the  SIFB 

building  in  Pamplemousses.  A  sum  of  Rs8  m.  will  be  spent  on  these  projects  for  this  year, 

2016. 

The  new  Court  House  in  Port-Louis  is  currently  being  renovated.  Rs5.839  m.  have 

been provided for the year 2015-2016, Rs2.7 m. have been provided for this current financial 

year,  Rs430,000  will  be  allocated  in  the  year  2017-2018  and  a  sum  of  Rs5  m.  for  the  year 

2019. 

 

36 

As announced in the Budget, a new Supreme Court Tower will be constructed in Port 

Louis  for  a  project  value  of  Rs1.1  billion.  This  project  will  span  over  three  years.    An 

estimate of Rs100 m. has been provided for in this Budget. The current building housing the 

Supreme Court will be renovated and so will house the new Court of Appeal. An amount of 

Rs3 m. has also been earmarked for the upgrading of the courts’ e-Judiciary system. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  will  now  talk  about  capacity  building  at  my  Office.  The 

Attorney General’s Office, as everyone is aware, has been restructured in 2015 following the 

amendment to the First Schedule of the Finance and Audit Act which was amended by Act 1 

of  2015  which  came  into  force  on  05  March  2015  and  which  gave  effect  to  a  Cabinet 

Decision of 27 February 2015, whereby - 

(a) 

the  Office  of  the  Director  of  Public  Prosecutions  (ODPP)  will  function  as  a 

distinct Department of the Attorney General’s Office (AGO), as was the case 

until 2009, but with the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) as responsible 

officer; 

(b) 

the  Office  of  the  Parliamentary  Counsel  (OPC)  to  function  as  a  distinct 

department within the AGO, as recommended by Lord Mackay in his reports 

and in 2006, with the Parliamentary Counsel as responsible officer; 

(c) 

the  Solicitor  General  to  be  the  Supervising  Officer,  and  the  Chief  Legal 

Secretary to be the  accounting officer, of the whole of the AGO, comprising 

therefore three departments (the ODPP, the OPC and the Civil Advisory  and 

Litigation Department). 

The  Solicitor  General  and  myself  will  ensure  that  all  3  departments  of  the  AGO  have  got 

adequate resources to discharge their important responsibilities. 

These 3 departments have got separate vote items - 

15-1  Office of the Solicitor General 

15-2  Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions 

15-3  Office of the Parliamentary Counsel 

Although  legislative  drafting  has  always  been  done  at  the  level  of  the  Attorney 

General’s  Office,  it  is  now  increasingly  recognised  in  the  Commonwealth  that  this  is  a 

specialised  career.  The  drafting  of  legislation  is  a  specialist  career,  and  there  are  few  other 

 

37 

types  of  legal  work  where  lawyers  can  expect  to  be  involved  with  and  influence  such  a 

diverse  range of issues.  Officers of the  OPC are  involved in  implementing policy  decisions 

through  legislation.  For  instance,  they  are  currently  working  under  the  supervision  of  the 

Solicitor- General to draft the Finance Bill to give effect to policy decisions announced in the 

Budget Speech. 

The scarcity of skills in  that area has been recognised in the Commonwealth and by 

our former Chief Justice and present legal consultant, Sir Victor Glover, who in an article in 

“The Loophole” (a publication of the Commonwealth Association of Legislative Counsel) in 

August 2011, and it is befitting for me to cite an extract, had this to say - 

“Mauritius is a small jurisdiction and it has been the practice since long for the Judges 

of our Supreme Court not to be recruited from the Bar but appointed by promotion of 

Magistrates or of law officers from the Attorney General’s Office. This has meant that 

legislative counsel who have undergone training at considerable expense to the State 

have little scope for making  a career in the  field  but,  after  a few  years,  move to  the 

Bench  when  a  vacancy  occurs  there.  It  is  worth  noting  in  this  connection  that, 

between  1993  and  2003,  no  fewer  than  5  law  officers  held  office  as  Parliamentary 

Counsel, of whom 3 were subsequently appointed as Judges of the Supreme Court and 

2  retired.  Besides,  the  3  law  officers  who  hold  office  as  Parliamentary  Counsel  and 

Assistant  Parliamentary  Counsel  are  required  to  give  assistance  by  performing  other 

duties such as giving advice to Ministries and Government Departments, appearing in 

Court  cases  involving  public  bodies  and  attending  conferences  in  Mauritius  and 

abroad. Thus, the time they are able to devote to the business of legislative drafting, 

revision, updating and research is perforce rather limited. This paucity of skilled and 

experienced draftsmen has led to more frequent  outsourcing and, I am told, explains 

why successive Attorneys General have resorted to my services as consultant over the 

last 13  years  after  I  had  retired  from  the office of Chief Justice and from the public 

service.” 

I am raising this for all my colleagues to be aware because it is an important issue. My 

colleagues  of  the  legal  profession  would  appreciate.  I  see  a  former  Attorney  General  in  the 

House, he would appreciate. 

It is apposite to note that all officers posted in the OPC have benefitted from formal 

training  in  legislative  drafting.  These  included  Commonwealth  courses  for  which  officers 

 

38 

have applied for and obtained Commonwealth scholarships, training in the UK and training in 

the Office by both Sir Victor Glover and Professor Crabbe. 

At  present  there  are  only  5  law  officers,  including  Parliamentary  Counsel,  who  do 

most of the legislative drafting. Government requires legislation to implement its legislative 

programme and together with the Solicitor-General, I will ensure that the OPC is adequately 

staffed  with  a  sufficient  number  of  law  officers  and  support  staff  on  its  establishment  to 

ensure the smooth  drafting of legislation.  I wish  here to  thank the hon.  Minister of Finance 

and Economic Development for giving my Office the means in this Budget to start working 

towards this objective. 

Further,  the  OPC  as  well  as  other  law  officers  from  the  Office  of  the  Solicitor-

General,  also  perform  the  onerous  task  of  revising  legislation  under  the  Revision  of  Laws 

Act. This includes both the revision of primary and subsidiary legislation. This work is done 

alongside  their  normal  duties,  without  any  additional  remuneration,  and  the  onerous  task  is 

very often performed beyond normal working hours and weekends due to the heavy demands 

on the time the law officers have with regard to other duties. 

 

With  a  view  to  taking  over  the  whole  process  of  producing,  printing,  publishing, 

advertising,  marketing,  distributing  and  selling  the  Revised  Laws  of  Mauritius  and  the 

Revised  Subsidiary  Legislation  of  Mauritius,  and  ensuring  that  the  work  undertaken  by  the 

Law Revision Unit of my Office benefits Government rather than the private sector, we will 

be  looking  into  increasing  the  staff  of  the  OPC  and  address  the  possibility  that  the  legal 

assistant  cadre  in  the  LRU  also  be  given  a  clear  career  path  and  remuneration  which  shall 

tally with the highly technical work they attend to. 

Before  ending,  allow  me,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  to  address  a  few  measures 

concerning the financial services sector. 

Mauritius  has  become  over  the  last  20  years  a  world-class  player  in  the  financial 

services  industry  –  an  industry  which  started  in  end  1980’s  with  offshore  banks  and  in  the 

early 1990’s with non-bank offshore activities and with the creation of the MOBAA, (under 

the then abled leadership of Sir Anerood Jugnauth who was then Prime Minister and who is 

now Prime Minister). 

Today  the  Financial  Services  Sector,  a  pillar  of  our  economy  (accounts  for  not  less 

than  10%  of  GDP)  and  is  set  to  grow  even  more  and  can  actually  be  the  sector  which  will 

absorb more and more young, bright, talented and highly qualified professionals, accountants, 

 

39 

and  lawyers.  We  have  in  Mauritius,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  one  of  the  highest  per  capita 

ratios  of  accountants  in  the  world  and  as  the  number  of  barristers  keeps  on  growing,  new 

avenues  for  job  prospects  have  to  be  found  and  the  financial  services  sector  will  provide 

those job opportunities needed. 

This  Budget  is  a  milestone  in  the  history  of  the  development  of  financial  services 

because it provides  far-reaching innovative solutions  and is  visionary. The hon. Minister of 

Finance  and  Economic  Development  has  stated  that  he  is  bringing  a  “new  thrust”  to  the 

development of our financial services sector. Yes, we have to reach out to new markets with 

Africa  “en  point  de  mire”  without  forgetting,  of  course,  our  usual  markets.  We  have  to  be 

innovative with a wide spectrum of products. With the successfully renegotiated protocol to 

the Mauritius-India tax treaty, new vistas would be opened, for example, in debt-structuring 

business into India. 

The  life  of  the  Mauritius-India  treaty  was  already  on  borrowed  time,  Mr  Deputy 

Speaker,  Sir,  with  the  OECD-BEPS  initiative,  the  implementation  of  which  will  become 

effective  with  the  coming  into  force  of  the  Multilateral  Instrument,  (commonly  known  as 

MLI) early next year. The India-Mauritius treaty had embedded into it something which has 

been  the  reason  for  its  very  phenomenal  success,  but  with  the  new  international  tax 

environment  and  the  implementation  of  the  MLI,  the  treaty  would  have  fallen  foul  of  the 

MLI.  Mauritius  cannot  stay  away  from  such  international  developments  as  we  intend  to 

remain a world-class, clean, competitive and compliant jurisdiction. 

This  Budget  will  no  doubt  set  new  foundations  to  develop  the  capital/securities 

market even deeper and broader as it looks beyond tax treaties. Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the 

10,000 GBC2 companies will help  to  broaden the capital  market  as they  will be allowed to 

invest in listed securities. But most importantly, this will enhance the substance of activities 

in Global Business. 

One  of  the  vital  criteria  under  both  the  OECD  and  EU  requirements  to  sustain 

successful  development  of  a  financial  services  centre  is  the  creation  of  substance  in  the 

jurisdiction. The measures announced in this Budget do exactly that. Giving a fresh impetus 

to head quartering schemes does exactly that. Providing a tax holiday to companies holding a 

“Global Headquarters Administration Licence” issued by the Financial Services Commission 

will create that impetus. 

 

40 

Concerns have been raised whether the new regime of tax holiday schemes under the 

Income  Tax  Act  will  be  BEPS  compliant.  Allow  me  to  make  one  thing  clear,  BEPS  is  an 

OECD  project  to  make  sure  that  profits  are  taxed  where  they  arise  in  the  source  country. 

BEPS  bring  international  taxation  to  source  based  taxation  and  providing  tax  holidays  does 

not  breach  that  rule.  There  is  no  issue  of  shifting  profits.  And  the  businesses  are  real  and 

create employment. BEPS project does not remove the sovereign right of a country to decide 

on  its  fiscal  policy.  Besides,  the  OECD  Model  tax  treaty  does  provide  for  tax  sparing  and 

legitimises tax exemption. All 43 tax treaties of Mauritius spare the tax credit on account of 

tax exemption. So, I do not see any issue with tax holidays, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

International Law Firms with a Global Legal Advisory Services Licence issued by the 

FSC  will  benefit  from  a  5-year  tax  holiday  on  income  they  receive.  Such  Global  Advisory 

Services  Law  Firms  will  not  only  provide  a  kaleidoscope  of  services,  advising  on 

international law, foreign laws and be involved in international arbitration, but they will also 

have  to  undertake  to  employ  our  local  lawyers,  as  we  believe  in  capacity  building  of  our 

lawyers, as this is the future for our young professionals, as I mentioned above. 

The  vehicle,  which  these  law  firms  may  take,  as  is  done  elsewhere,  is  a  Limited 

Liability  Partnership,  commonly  known  as  LLP.  This  is  a  type  of  partnership  to 

accommodate the requirements of professionals, especially. 

The  LLP will harbinger  another level of development for financial  services. Besides 

being  licensed  by  the  FSC,  the  necessity  for  these  law  firms  to  be  registered  with  the 

Attorney General’s Office under the Law Practitioners Act will be looked into, as this would 

be desirable to maintain the highest standards of practice in Mauritius. 

M.  le  président,  ce  budget  était  très  attendu,  et  il  a  été  très  bien  accueilli  par  la 

population. Les commentaires du secteur privé, des syndicats et de la société civile ont tous 

été positifs et décrivent  ce budget de réaliste et  propice à la  relance économique.  Il est vrai 

que certains démagogues ont fustigé ce budget uniquement sur des bases de rivalité politique. 

Outre de chauffer les bancs de l’opposition, ces derniers ont aussi développé le réflexe d’être 

opposés à tout changement, qu’il soit positif ou audacieux. 

M. le président, ces démagogues devraient enlever leurs œillères et agir… 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: No interruptions! 

(Interruptions) 

 

No interruptions! 

41 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Yerrigadoo: M. le président, ces démagogues… 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Yerrigadoo:… devraient enlever leurs œillères et agir en tant que vrais patriotes. 

Ils ne peuvent pas… 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Minister! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Ameer Meea! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Ameer Meea! I am calling you to order! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Hurreeram, allow the hon. Attorney General to speak! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Yerrigadoo: M. le président, ces démagogues devraient enlever leurs œillères et 

agir en tant que vrais patriotes. 

Ils ne peuvent pas traiter ce budget…  

 (Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

…dont  l’objectif  est  la  relance  économique,  d’irréaliste,  alors  qu’il  comprend  plusieurs 

mesures concrètes. Ils ne peuvent pas … 

The  Deputy Speaker: No interruptions! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Yerrigadoo: Ils ne peuvent pas, M. le président, décrire la lutte contre l’extrême 

pauvreté de mesure « confettis ». Ces attaques gratuites constituent un manque d’empathie et 

de  respect  envers  les  plus  démunis.  Et  c’est  cette  philosophie  qui  a  gangréné  le  concept  de 

méritocratie  pendant  plus  d’une  décennie  et  qui  a  conduit  à  la  prolifération  d’une  culture  à 

l’excès.  

M. le président, le budget de l’honorable ministre des Finances et du Développement 

économique est venu rassurer la population et la communauté des affaires. Ce budget a créé 

les conditions pour franchir un nouveau palier de développement. Je tiens à saluer la vision 

de l’honorable Pravind Jugnauth et de lui réaffirmer tout notre soutien.  

 

42 

Ce budget est réaliste, ambitieux, et en rupture totale avec la culture de copinage et de 

dilapidation pratiquée par le précédent régime.  

(Interruptions) 

Je  viens  ici  le  rappeler  avec  force  à  nos  détracteurs  que  leurs  attaques  ne  nous 

atteindront pas, et nous saurons œuvrer pour assurer à notre pays et à sa population un avenir 

prometteur, un avenir d’opportunités et d’espoir. 

Je dirai bravo Pravind ! Ensemble, nous réussirons. 

Je vous remercie M. le président. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Baloomoody! 

 (Interruptions) 

(2.43 p.m.) 

Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West): Thank you, 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir,  I have listened carefully  to the speech of 

the Attorney General, but it is a matter of regret that all our institutions are being politicised. 

You know, concerning the post of an Attorney General, first, he is not elected; secondly he is 

nominated, and third, he is the legal adviser of Government! He should not verge on politics! 

I would advise him to go and read what happened to one of the Attorney Generals in UK. He 

is here as an adviser not only to Government, but to this Parliament as well… 

The Deputy Speaker: Address the Chair, hon. Baloomoody! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Baloomoody: …and he should not verge into politics… 

 (Interruptions) 

Don’t talk about what happened in the past! 

The  elections  gave  you  a  mandate  for  change!  The  last  elections  gave  you  a  mandate  for 

change, and we expect you not to follow… 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody, there is a point of order! Will you leave the 

(Interruptions) 

floor? 

Mr Yerrigadoo: On a point of order.  On the basis of our Constitution, the supreme 

law of this country, two of my recent predecessors, Mr Yatindra Nath Varma and Mr Rama 

Valayden… 

 

… were nominated… 

43 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody!  

Order! 

Sit down when I am on my feet! 

Sit down! 

Hon. Baloomoody, sit down! 

Hon. Mohamed… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Mohamed, deciding points of order lies within my jurisdiction! Allow the hon. Attorney 

General to take his point of order! 

Mr Yerrigadoo: The point of order is as follows… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Let us listen to the point of order! 

Mr Yerrigadoo: The point of order is as follows: that it is not in order to insinuate or 

cast aspersions on the fact of my nomination under this Constitution as Attorney General, in 

view of the fact that two of my recent predecessors, namely Mr Yatindra Nath Varma and Mr 

Rama Valayden were nominated in the same way, manner and form under our Constitution, 

as I am! This is the point. 

(Interruptions) 

 

44 

The Deputy Speaker: Well, hon. Members this is my ruling. 

(Interruptions) 

Silence,  please!  Hon.  Members,  it  lies  within  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Speaker  or  the  person 

presiding, which is me in this case, to decide what can be said or not by hon. Members in the 

speech. Therefore, I disallow you to… 

… cross on my jurisdiction. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Baloomoody:  This  won’t  prevent  me  from  commenting  on  his  speech  as  a 

politician and not as an Attorney General, for which office I have much respect. 

It is for the Speaker to decide, not you! 

(Interruptions) 

Not you! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Baloomoody: Sirtou pa twa! 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody, address the Chair! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Baloomoody: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, following the 2016-2017 Budget Speech a 

fortnight  ago,  let  me  remind  the  House  the  second  Budget  Speech  of  this  Government! 

Second! We have heard several comments and listened to several speeches from Members of 

this House, but let me go a few days before the presentation of the Budget. 

 

45 

Before  the  presentation  of  the  Budget,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  there  has  been  a 

deliberate and well-orchestrated mission, both by the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic 

Development and especially by his Senior Adviser, Mr Sanspeur, not only to manage public 

opinion!  They succeeded to convince the majority of people that tax will have to go up, VAT 

will have to be increased… 

Mone dire sa? As if… 

The Deputy Speaker: Silence! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Baloomoody: …days before the presentation of the Budget - not that journal! Go 

and watch TV!  Your TV, not my TV! 

The Deputy Speaker: Address the Chair, hon. Baloomoody! 

Mr  Baloomoody:  On  all  the  media,  on  the  private  radios,  the  Government  TV,  in 

most of the national papers, Mr Sanspeur was in all the media, on all fronts, as if his mission 

was  to  faire  the  nation  gagne  peur,  that  there  will  be  increase  in  tax  here,  increase  in  tax 

there.  And speaking on one of the radios – I have the CD if they want me to depone it – the 

adviser  to  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  had  this  to  say,  and  I 

quote – 

« Le ministre l’a dit, le budget doit être différent de ce qui se faisait dans le passé par 

les  anciens  ministres  des  Finances;  Rama  Sithanen,  Vasant  Bunwaree,  Xavier-Luc 

Duval and Vishnu Lutchmeenaraidoo ! » 

A Minister of this Government! 

Whilst  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  was  delivering  his 

speech on that famous Friday, we had the usual tape la table. And we could hear Members of 

the Government side, and most specially my good friend, the Chief Whip, who always leads 

the bandwagon, cheering ‘aster la travail la coumencer!’ 

(Interruptions) 

 

46 

After 20 months in power! Aster la travail la commencer! 

(Interruptions) 

This is very telling, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir! 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Order! 

Mr Baloomoody:  It means that this Government has wasted … 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr  Baloomoody:  It  means  that  this  Government  has  wasted  20  precious  months  of 

Government  days.  Government  in  power,  20  months  in  doing  nothing  with  regard  to 

economic development!  In fact, all the economic indicators reflect this accession, Mr Deputy 

Speaker, Sir, except, of course, for inflation. Even the Attorney General just said it.  Most of 

those who intervened on the other side strongly emphasised that we are now moving towards 

a  new  era  of  development.  20  months  after!    A  new  era!    Patiné  en  place  for  the  last  20 

months in power! 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: No comments, please!  

Mr Baloomoody: Nettoyer? You will see what you have nettoyé. Néttoye gold, nettoye 

la poudre, this is what you have cleaned! 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody! 

Mr Baloomoody:  Now, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, this is supposed to be a budget de 

rupture. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Dayal: On a point of order! 

 

47 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Baloomoody: I did not mention the name of any Member of this House, so I will 

not give way to any point of order! 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody, will you  give the floor? Please, sit down; 

he is not giving the floor. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Baloomoody: I did not mention any Member; I don’t intend to give way!  Thank 

you. 

   

   

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker:  He is allowed not to give the floor. 

Mr Baloomoody: So, it was a budget de rupture from all the previous budgets: from 

hon. X. L. Duval, from hon. Lutchmeenaraidoo, from hon, Rama Sithanen.  But who is hon. 

Lutchmeenaraidoo?  Hon.  Lutchmeenaraidoo  presented  last  year’s  Budget.  And,  Mr  Deputy 

Speaker,  Sir,  this  is  what  hon.  Pravind  Jugnauth  had  to  say  on  10  April  last  year  when  he 

concluded  his  speech    on  last  year’s  Budget  of  hon.  Lutchmeenaraidoo,  and  now  he  wants 

rupture from this Budget,  I quote – 

“Let  me,  therefore,  congratulate  and  thank  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and 

Economic Development who, even after 25 years of absence from this august 

Assembly,  displayed  an  avant-garde  mindset  and  a  very  dedicated  and 

innovative approach to give our country a new hope for a better future. Indeed, 

Madam Speaker, the Budget has enunciated many bold (…)” 

‘Bold’, a word used by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister after the Budget. 

“(…) many bold measures (…)” 

Instead of ‘gold’ measures, ‘gold’, and measures probably! 

“(…)  measures  that  will  lay  the  foundation  for  the  second  economic  miracle 

that is cherished by our hon. Prime Minister”. 

 

48 

This  is  what  hon.  Pravind  Jugnauth  had  to  say  last  year  on  the  Budget  presented  by  hon. 

Minister Lutchmeenaraidoo.  In today’s Budget, not a single reference to last year’s Budget.  

Only those who made reference to the previous Budget are the Members of the PMSD.  Hon. 

Ms  Sewocksingh  started.    She  was  the  first  one  to  lead,  then  hon.  Minister  Perraud.    They 

were  eager  to  emphasize,  in  fact,  that  this  is  not  a  Budget  of  rupture.    And  even  you,  Mr 

Deputy Speaker, when you addressed the House yesterday as a Member of this Parliament. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody, I am presiding over this debate!   

Do not involve me! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Baloomoody: You made a speech and I am referring to Hansard.  You referred to 

the Budget  of hon. Xavier-Luc Duval,  the previous Budget  and the PMSD Budget.  And, of 

course, you rightly!  Hon. Mrs Perraud listed - I do not want to waste the time of the House - 

not one, not two, not three, 20 projects which were initiated by hon. Xavier-Luc Duval.  Is it 

a budget of rupture? A new era!  And it was so obvious … 

Mo  dormi bien moi, pas trakasé twa ! Mo dormi très, très bien mwa! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody, address the Chair! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Baloomoody: Mo pena oken la mort lor mo conscience ! 

The Deputy Speaker: Address the Chair, hon. Baloomoody! 

Mr Baloomoody: Mo pena oken la mort lors mo conscience moi.  Mo dormi bien 

mwa. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody, are you ignoring me? 

Mr Baloomoody: It was so obvious among the Members of the Government side!  It 

was so obvious that there was no unity with regard to the interpretation of the Budget.  Even 

 

49 

hon. Bodha was sent now on the front line!  He had to make a political statement to say that 

the  Alliance  is  strong,  that  they  are  all  together  -  all  three  in  the  Alliance  were  together.  

United!  

Never mind! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Silence! 

Mr Baloomoody: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, a lot has been said about this Budget and 

there is no doubt that there are some positive measures, especially when it comes to poverty.  

However, this has always been the case in most of the Budgets.  There are some very positive 

measures, a lot of effets  d’annonce but,  very often, most are no put  into practice. So, it has 

always been the practice. There are some good measures, some popular measures, but when it 

comes to put them in practice, they very often are not implemented. 

When my good friend, hon. Dr. Ramful, was addressing the House, making reference 

to the failure, the disastrous effect of last year’s Budget - and last year’s Budget of the then 

Minister of Finance, hon. Lutchmeenaraidoo! - which has had not only on this country, but on 

the economic development of this country, and also at international level.  Referring to that, 

the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, in a sitting position, had said: ‘Abé guet kot li eté zordi!’ He was 

referring to his ex-Minister of Finance.  He is not fit to be the Minister of Finance, is he fit to 

represent  our  country  at  international  level,  when  we  know  there  is  the  ICAC  inquiring  in 

cases against him, when we know there are cases at the DPP to give advice?  His future hangs 

on the balance of these institutions! 

The  Deputy  Speaker:    These  matters  are  sub  judice,  hon.  Baloomoody.    Being  a 

Barrister, you should know better than anyone. 

Mr Baloomoody: There is the legality of things and the morality of things in politics.  

I am talking about the morality of things.  Forget the legality! Already last year, there was a 

major project, that of JIHAI at Pailles.  Money was spent, Ministers have travelled, per diem 

has  been  spent!    Where  is  that  project  today?    Same  thing  as  the  Heritage  City,  the  first 

casualty  in  this  Budget!    Parliament  was  supposed  to  be  moved  at  the  Heritage  City.    We 

learned today that Rs40 m. have already been spent on fees.  Let alone the number of visits 

 

50 

sovereign Ministers had, one went to Dubai, the other went to  India, and then the other one 

went to Taiwan to get money. Per diem!  So, how much money was wasted on so many mega 

projects which, today, have been rejected by Cabinet? 

(Interruptions) 

You always put your own goal. 

The Deputy Speaker: No cross-talking! 

Mr Baloomoody: So, this supposed budget de rupture, apart from the list mentioned 

by the hon. Members from the PMSD, a lot has been said in previous budgets.  No new era! 

Just  to  mention  a  few:  creation  of  industrial  park,  fast  track  for  business,  the  Youth 

Employment  Programme,  a  new  Supreme  Court  House,  the  Blue  Economy,  usage  of  green 

energy,  facilities  for  the  film  industry,  facilities  to  access  to  African  market,  water  supply 

24/7  –  my  hon.  friend  will  remember  what  he  said;  port  development,  implementation  of 

metro project, etc.   

So, there are lots of repetitions.  A lot of things that have been said before, but which 

have not been implemented.  I will make some propositions after. I have listened to so many 

budgets  in  this House and quite a lot  of time there are many  good things  in  the budget,  but 

when  we  come  next  year,  50%  or  75%  of  what  was  mentioned  in  the  previous  Budget  and 

remains effets d’annonces. 

This  is  why,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  at  paragraph  11  of  the  Budget  Speech  of  this 

year, the hon. Minister of Finance had this to say – 

“The  challenges  of  tomorrow  cannot  be  met  with  our  mindset,  policies  and  actions 

locked in the paradigm of yesterday.” 

I fully agree with that statement and I would add that it is about time that we look at 

the  functioning  of  our  Parliament  itself.    We  can’t  lock  ourselves.    We  can’t  lock  today’s 

activities  in  the  20th  century  institutions.    We  have  to  see  what  is  being  done  in  other 

democratic countries.   

This is why, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in view of the fact that there is no established 

institution to follow the implementation of budget, in each and every year’s budget, we hear 

from the hon. Minister concerned:  “I am having a committee set up.  There will be a steering 

 

51 

committee set up.  There will be an implementation committee set up.”  But there is nothing, 

nothing, nothing which has been done and we know that all these budgets that we have had 

for  the  last  twenty  years,  only  half  or  less  than  half  of  what  the  intentions  were  have  been 

implemented.  This is why I am coming with a proposition.  It is not a new idea.  It is in many 

Commonwealth countries and in many SADC countries.  

 Like we have the Public Accounts Committee which looks after post expenditure, we 

should  have  a  Budget  and  Appropriation  Committee  as  the  same  composition  of  the  PAC; 

majority Members from the Government and Members from the Opposition. They sit down.  

They meet every week, every fortnight, call Ministries by Ministries, get the budget here and 

ask questions. And this works very well in a country like Kenya where we were in mission 

last time and I had the opportunity to go to the Parliament and I witnessed one in action. The 

Minister  does  not  come.    The  accounting  officers  come,  the  budget  is  here  and  they  ask 

questions:  ‘why  this  is  not  being  implemented,  give  us  reasons?’    And  they  will  call  them 

again after three months or six months.  So, we will have reasons as to why what is said in the 

budget is not implemented.  It is a matter of coordination, control and monitoring.  So, I will 

ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister if he can think seriously on that.  It is not difficult.  It is like 

we  are  amending  the  Standing  Orders  to  have  a  Gender  Caucus.  Many  are  saying  ‘Women 

Caucus’.    It  is  not  a  ‘Women  Caucus’.    It  is  a  ‘Gender  Caucus’  that  we  are  going  to  have 

because I am a member of that committee.  I will and I hope to be a member of this Caucus.  

It is a Gender Caucus.  So, it is simple.  Amend the Standing Orders, have this committee and 

it will meet every week or every two weeks or every fortnight and look at the budget and call 

in the appropriate Minister, as we have , like I said, in many other countries.  This was with 

regard to the Parliament.  

I  will  come  to  two  other  institutions  which  repeat  themselves  every  year  in  our 

budget.  But before doing that, let me address the issue of law and order. As we all agree that 

the  primary  duty  of  the  State  is  to  maintain  law  and  order  and  to  provide  security  for  its 

citizens.  The Police is one institution which has the responsibility to maintain law and order 

and  safeguard  the  way  of  development.    There  are  few  measures  mentioned  in  the  Budget.  

Like  I said,  they  are interesting measures;  implementation is  the issue.  We have to  look  at 

the Police Force itself. In most of the Police stations, the working condition is inacceptable. I 

was in Moka recently. There was a table with four  lamok on it! It was leaking.  The Police 

officer  was  taking  a  statement  from  my  client.    There  is  a  problem  of  toilet  facilities  for 

Women Police officers in our Police stations.  There is only one toilet in some of the Police 

 

52 

stations.    There  is  understaffing,  especially,  with  regard  to  the  middle  management  level.  

But, most importantly, there is the number of Police officers who have been suspended.  This, 

I  can’t  understand!    The  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  replied  to  a  question  this  Tuesday.    He 

informed us that there are 184 Police officers who are suspended.  And I have looked at the 

list.  There are at least over – I am saying there is a lack of middle management in the Police 

Force – 30 Police officers over and above and rank of PS.  And the last one to join the league 

was  the  Ag.  Deputy  Commissioner  of  Police.  These  people  are  being  paid.  But  one  thing  I 

can’t  understand,  there  are  two  Police  officers  who  have  been  suspended  since  2002.    And 

what is the charge?  Conspiracy!  Are we to understand that since 2002, a case of conspiracy 

has not been tried and completed before our Court?   

(Interruptions) 

Drug trafficking!  There is one Police officer who was suspended in 2004, 12 years ago for 

drug trafficking.  Are we to understand that this case has not been on trial yet? Sentence has 

not been delivered!   

(Interruptions) 

Since 2007, possession of drugs! Bribery, damaging property, since 2008!  This case has not 

been over.  And when we know that there is a judgment of the Supreme Court, the judgment 

of  Sooklal;  2005  Supreme  Court  Judgement  35  and  this  refers  to  the  Disciplined  Forces 

Service Commission Regulations, Section 40 which reads – 

“All  acts  of  misconduct  by  members  of  the  Disciplined  Forces  shall  be  dealt  with 

under this part as soon as possible after their occurrence.” 

And  in  the  Supreme  Court  it  has  interpreted:  “(…)  as  soon  as  possible  within  at  least 

maximum  four  years  (…)”.    Within  two  to  four years!    So,  when  these  people  will  go  to  a 

disciplinary committee, they  will take the point in  law.  So, no disciplinary  action could  be 

taken against them.  So, these people who have been suspended over two to four years, you 

can’t take disciplinary action against them.   

(Interruptions) 

They  can  be  enjoying,  but  not  at  the  interest  of  taxpayers’  money.    Action  has  to  be  taken 

either to sack them and more also they are preventing others from being promoted. They are 

 

53 

still  on  the  establishment.    Action  has  to  be  taken  hon.  Prime  Minister.    Nouveau 

changement!  New Era!  But we are still living in the past.    

(Interruptions) 

Now, this year – the date is important – on 18 July, 593 Trainee Police officers were 

enlisted.  Hon. Dayal just informed us that to have efficient Police officers, they have to be 

trained  properly  in  the  good  environment  and  be  given  proper  training.    Firstly,  there  was 

much controversy regarding the recruit of the 593 Trainee Police officers.  For the first time 

in history, there has been no interview for the recruitment of these Police officers.  First time 

in history!  Are we getting the best?  Are we getting the best in the Force? Not even before or 

after the medical and physical test!  No, psychology test!  No interview! And this gentleman 

tomorrow will be in possession of a gun. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Mohamed, you will speak later!  Reserve some points! 

Mr  Baloomoody:    When  he  has  not  gone  through  any  psychological  test,  he  may 

tomorrow be in sentry in any Police station. 

(Interruptions) 

The  Deputy  Speaker:  Hon.  Baloomoody,  I  just  want  to  direct  your  attention  to  the 

provisions  of  the  Standing  Orders  concerning  statutory  commissions  and  that  their  conduct 

should be raised upon a specific motion and should not be debated upon.  I will allow you to 

some extent, but beware of what you say! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Baloomoody:    I  agree!   I  won’t  go any  further.   Now, the Police  Officers were 

recruited on 18 July. According to Police Standing Order 93, they have to and this Standing 

Order 93, they have to undergo the Trainee Police Constable Foundation Course which is a 

27-weekly  course,  a  27-Classroom  Based  Course.  So,  for  27  weeks,  they  have  to  be  in  a 

classroom  to  be  trained.  What  has  the  Commissioner  of  Police  done  last  week?  On  06 

August, not far last week, only three weeks after these people have been recruited - not even 

recruited, enlisted because when you recruit you take the oath, you become a Police Officer 

with all the protection as a Police Officer - only three weeks after they have been enlisted, the 

 

54 

Commissioner of Police, with regard to his recent campaign of disciplining the pedestrians in 

Port  Louis,  I  think  it  was  on  the  paper  everywhere,  even  he,  himself,  was  on  the  road,  got 

these  people  to  be  on  the  road  to  discipline  pedestrians,  to  be  in  the  middle  of  the  road  to 

show people how to cross the road when they, themselves, have not been taught about it… 

(Interruptions) 

Part  of  a  training!  They  are  not  supposed  to  be  there  because  they  are  not  insured.  If 

tomorrow  they  got  injured  while  giving  signal  of  the  traffic,  they  are  supposed  to  be  in 

classroom. You go in the public only when  you have taken the oath and when  you take the 

oath, you are covered by a certain privilege as a Police Officer. This is when you go public, 

not  after  two  or  three  or  five  weeks,  you  just  send  them  on  the  road  and  tell  them  to  look 

about pedestrians and you expect these people to become efficient Police Officers. So, this is 

serious, very serious and I hope that the Police Academy which has been promised for such a 

long  time  will  see  the  day  and  that  you  will  have  proper  training  with  regard  to  the  Police 

Officers. 

So,  Mr    Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  what  we  need  with  regard  to  the  Police  Officers,  we 

need  Police  who  can  uphold  the  law  fairly  and  firmly,  who  can  prevent  crimes,  who  can 

pursue and bring to justice those who break the law - only those who break the law, protect, 

help and reassure the community. And what we expect from a Police Officer is compassion, 

courtesy towards the public, patience, acting without fear or favour or prejudice to the rights 

of  others,  professionalism  and  calmness.  So,  the  Police  must  be  customer  sentry  service, 

equality  and  impartiality  in  policing;  strive  to  reduce  public  fears;  respond  to  the  well-

founded criticism with a willingness to change. This is the Police Force we expect and I hope 

that this is with all the money we are giving to the Police. 

I  don’t want  to  deal  with  the transport. We have  just seen, they have been given 50 

new  4  x  4.  On  Sunday  I  drove  from  Curepipe  to  Mahebourg.  On  my  way  I  passed  two  –  I 

won’t  make  publicity  to  that  those  food  sellers  -  one  at  Curepipe  and  there  is  one  in 

Mahebourg. They sell by le guichet, so you have to queue with your car. I saw one of these - 

one is in the queue and he was nearly the 10th. So, he will spend, at least, one hour queuing to 

get a Kentucky and another one in Quatre Bornes. In Mahebourg it is the same thing. When 

you  phone  the  Police  Station:  ‘pena  transport’.  We  are  giving  transport,  we  are  giving  the 

facility.  But  are  they  being  managed  properly.  The  hon.  Members  know,  when  you  see  the 

amount of waste there is in the garage, the amount of waste there is with regard to spare parts, 

 

55 

the way money is  being  spent  there. Unfortunately, the PAC  -  I  will come to  the PAC in  a 

few  minutes,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir  -  we  don’t  have  power  to  recommend  action  or 

sanction. Now, the prisons… 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Rutnah, you will speak after! 

Mr  Baloomoody:  It  is  unfortunate,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  Nothing  has 

 

56 

been said in the Budget with regard to prisons only the current expenditure. When we know 

so many problems we are having with regard to law and order. At least, the hon. Minister of 

Finance and Economic Development is prévoyant with regard to law and order. He has made 

provisions  for  two  more  detention  centres,  so  expecting  a  rise  in  the  crime  rate  or  a 

deterioration  in  law  and  order.  Two  more  detention  centres  and  Police  Station.  But  when  it 

comes to the prisons, there is a lot of problems in the prisons. Already all the cameras are not 

working.  I just mentioned to  the House last  week, a drone  entered the  yard of  Beau Bassin 

prison last Thursday  and  I have been informed that  they have been told  not  to  talk about  it 

anymore. Cover up! 

I  will  probably  ask  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  to  bring  it  further  to  see  how  that 

drone and what  was in  that drone. Gandia!  La drogue! God knows! And when the Rt.  hon. 

Prime Minister, himself, replied to a question which I put B/462. At the Top Security Prison, 

following  a  random  search,  69  mobile  phones;  36  batteries;  25  battery  chargers;  21  ear 

pieces; 39 SIM, and many other… 

(Interruptions) 

A  call  centre.  And  you  know  for  years  and  years,  the  Police  Officers  have  asked  for  that 

equipment to jam communication within the prisons and it has not been provided. Simple, we 

call it a jammer, but there isn’t. 

(Interruptions) 

One day I was surprised when somebody was phoning one of the private radio complaining 

about  what  is  happening  in  the  prison  from  the  prison.  Where  are  we?  There  is  still  that 

problem of staffing. There are so many vacancies there which have not been filled. There are 

so many posts which have not been filed, and there is nothing, unfortunately, in the Budget. 

There  are  many  officers  who  have  been  suspended  again  and  there  it  is  even  worse.  There 

are, at least, 14 officers who are suspended and they can’t have their hearing. Do you know 

why? Prior to 2009, there was no union in the prison. 

With the new Labour Act in 2009, the Prison Officers were allowed to unionise. Now 

they are members of trade unions. Prior to 2009, they were governed by the Standing Orders 

of  the  prisons.  The  Standing  Order  of  the  prisons  says  that  when  you  have  to  be  before  a 

Disciplinary  Committee,  you  cannot  be  assisted  by  Counsel,  you  have  to  be  assisted  by  a 

Senior Officer of your Department. Now these officers are in Union governed  by the Labour 

Act, where the Labour Act says whenever you are before a Disciplinary Committee, you can 

 

57 

and should be if you choose to be assisted by a lawyer, they have to be assisted by a lawyer. 

So,  these  14  persons  wanted  to  retain  the  services  of  lawyers  also  three-five  years  ago,  the 

Prisons Officers are refusing access to lawyers. I am telling you, I have got a case there and 

the  matter  is  still  at  the  DPP’s  Office  for  advice.  So,  I  will  ask  the  hon.  Attorney  General, 

instead  of  concentrating  what  the  Opposition  is  doing,  to  look  into  the  matter  seriously, 

urgently, at least, we will release these 14 officers. Whether they are guilty or not or they will 

continue to be on the payroll, at least they know what the future lies for them. It is the Labour 

Act  which is  more important  now not  the Standing Orders and they should  go according to 

law.  If  that  officer  chooses  to  be  represented  by  a  Counsel  of  his  choice,  he  should  be 

allowed. That is his constitutional right! 

Mr Deputy Speaker, every year, since Independence, we have a Budget and we have 

an Audit Report. All the Budgets that we have had we only speak about the amount of money 

which has been budgeted, the amount of money that is going to be spent, but we never talk 

about the money which has been wasted and there is a lot, a lot, a lot of wastage in the public 

service. This is why I say we can’t lock ourselves in the 20th century institutions.  We should 

review.    You  had  the  intention  in  the  Government  Programme.  Let  me  come  to  the  hon. 

Minister of Finance and Economic Development, on 29 July, I quote what he said on the eve 

of the presentation of his Budget -  

« L'une des options immédiates - that was in « Le Mauricien » - est de mettre l'accent 

sur les dépenses, surtout en termes de gaspillage dans le secteur public. »  

Waste!  

(Interruptions) 

In the Government Programme 2015-2019, at paragraph 250, and I quote - 

“A significant reduction in misuse and wastage of public funds will be the order of the 

day in all public institutions etc.” 

At  paragraph  431  of  this  year’s  Budget,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 

Development says -  

“This Budget does all these while at the same time maintaining strict fiscal discipline, 

and eliminating wastage and inefficiencies in the use of taxpayers’ money.” 

 

58 

It  is  a  very  good  intention,  but  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  does  not  inform  us  how  he 

intends to do so. Don’t tell me Ministers are going to supervise waste! First, they don’t have 

the time and they are not professionals to do it.  

Paragraph 251 of the Government Programme says -  

“The  public  sector  will  be  re-organised  and  reformed  to  make  it  more  productive, 

transparent, accountable and customer friendly.” 

What is more interesting, at the same paragraph it says -  

“A  Public  Sector  Efficiency  Bureau  has  already  been  set  up  as  a  department  of  the 

newly  crafted  ministry  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 

Reform.” 

Come  on!  Not  this  Minister  of  good  governance!  This  is  a  bluff!  We  know  what  has 

happened  to  the  Heritage  City,  we  know  what  has  happened  to  the  previous  Minister  of 

Finance and what we know is that every  year millions and millions of rupees are wasted in 

the  public  sector  for  several  reasons!  I  am  not  talking  about  corruption.  I  am  talking  about 

wastage,  lack  of  feasibility  study,  like  we  have  had  recently  in  the  Heritage  City.  Artificial 

creation of emergency projects so as to avoid the Procurement Act! In the Civil Service, they 

decide, it is urgent! 

Sorry? 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

You  have  said  it  in  your  programme!  Forget  when  it  started!    Have  you  noticed  it  before 

preparing  your  programme?  Has  Government  identified  this  issue?  You  decided  to  take 

action and you put it in your programme. You should take action! I am not blaming you, I am 

not blaming anybody else, I say put into action what you have promised to do.  

Artificial  creation  of  projects  so  as  to  avoid  the  Procurement  Act!  The  Ministry  of 

Health and Quality of Life knows very well how many times the Civil Service will come and 

say  that  they  need  such  and  such  medicines,  it  is  urgent.  This  could  have  been  planned 

months  before.  But,  when  medicines  are  urgent,  they  are  urgent!  So,  just  to  bypass  the 

Procurement Act, they go and order directly, urgently! 

 

59 

(Interruptions) 

But this is artificial! If you read the PAC Report you will know what I am saying! Members 

of  the  PAC  here  will  understand  what  I  am  saying.  It  is  artificially  created,  Mr  Deputy 

Speaker, Sir. 

Extension of projects! Projects which started first for X millions end up to be X +++ millions. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

So, what I am saying is this: under our Constitution we have a National Audit Office. 

The  National  Audit  Office  is  a  public  office,  it  is  a  constitutional  office  and  every  year  we 

vote  millions  and  millions  of  rupees  for  the  running  of  this  office.  This  year,  we  have 

budgeted Rs158 m. just for the National Audit Office. Every year, we have the report of the 

National Audit Office. But, then, what do we do with that report? Every year, it is the same 

thing and mind you the National Audit Bureau because it is understaffed, what we see in their 

report is the top of the iceberg because they are not manned enough to go to each and every 

department of a Ministry. If today they go to the procurement of medicines at the Ministry of 

Health and Quality of Life, that’s it, for this year it is only the medicines. Next year they will 

go to the same Ministry and they will see the kitchen. 

So, what we see in the National Audit Report is not the full wastage in that Ministry, 

it is only partial. But, then, no action is taken. We don’t debate that report in Parliament and 

we  don’t  have  a  follow-up  on  that  report.    What  we  have  is  we  will  have  the  next  year’s 

report which will come with the same things. The report will be debated on radio, they will 

call the Chairman of the PAC to come, the auditor and some Members of Parliament.  They 

will discuss on the radio, speak on the press and that’s it, it is finished! Because the National 

Audit Office has no power to go further. It can only report. 

So,  it  high  time  that  we  look  at  that  again,  see  what  is  happening  in  other 

Commonwealth countries and how they have progressed with the report. Now, it is debated in 

Parliament, it is questioned and action is taken if not sanction. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister 

just mentioned since how long. But, in the Government Programme 2015-2019, at paragraph 

252, he identified the problem and he said –  

 

60 

“Government will give serious consideration to the findings and recommendations of 

the National Auditors.” 

It is in your programme! 

The Deputy Speaker: Address the Chair, please! 

Mr Baloomoody: 20 months have gone and nothing has happened! So, we hope… 

Encore 40, beaucoup l’argent pu fini aller! 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Address the Chair, hon. Baloomoody! 

Mr Baloomoody: Yes, but tell them to shut up! 

The Deputy Speaker: It is, at least, the third time I am telling you this, now! 

Mr Baloomoody: Tell them to shut up! 

(Interruptions) 

If truly you want to stop waste and make people who waste public funds, taxpayers’ 

money, accountable we should come with a Fiscal Responsibility Act. This is what we have 

in most countries of the Commonwealth and in the UK.  You said it at paragraph 252 of the 

Government Programme - 

“Ministers,  their  accounting  officers,  and  directors  of  parastatals  will  be  held 

accountable for abuse or misuse of public funds.” 

But,  how  can  you  make  them  accountable?  You must  have  a  tool  and  the  tool is  the  Fiscal 

Responsibility  Act.  We  have  just  seen  what  has  happened  in  ICTA.    Don’t  come  with  that 

argument that it is legal fees, we can’t challenge when we know that Clarel Benoit Chambers 

have  claimed  for  a  high  fee,  Government  has  refused  to  To  pay  and  the  case  has  gone  to 

Court.  So,  why  in  that  case  that  Rs19  m.  has  been  paid  in  such  a  rush?  And,  we  heard 

yesterday, he committed an offence in ICTA, the RDA sacked him! 

The RDA sacked him because he has committed an offence in ICTA! 

(Interruptions) 

 

61 

(Interruptions) 

What  is  worse  is  that  ICTA  is  under  the  Prime  Minister’s  Office!  Do  you  know  yesterday 

what was worse?  

(Interruptions) 

Not  only  getting  him  out,  you  should  go  further.  Go  as  to  what  you  have  said  in  your 

programme! 

The  Deputy  Speaker:  Hon.  Baloomoody,  if  you  don’t  address  me  I  will  have  to 

make you sit down! You cannot ignore my ruling like this! 

Mr Baloomoody: Yes. 

The Deputy Speaker: Address the Chair! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Baloomoody:  Okay.  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  what  I  am  asking  the  Rt.  hon. 

Prime Minister is to act according to paragraph 252 of the Government Programme – 

“(…)  directors  of  parastatals  will  be  held  accountable  for  abuse  or  misuse  of  public 

funds.” 

Whilst we were shocked here, do you know who was happy sitting in this House? There was 

a gentleman sitting down there, a director of ICAC.  He was laughing at us!  

(Interruptions) 

I don’t know what is his name! 

The Deputy Speaker: No need to mention names! 

Mr Baloomoody: He was laughing at us here when the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister said 

he was shocked. He should  be sacked! All  those on that Board who approved that Rs19 m. 

payment  for  a  simple  case,  when  ICAC  is  a  co-defendant,  not  only  a  defendant,  you  claim 

that  much  of  money!  The  Board  should  be  sacked.  I  hope  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  will 

give the example to directors of all the parastatal bodies to sack the whole Board and come 

with a new Board. 

 

62 

(Interruptions) 

Now,  let  me  come  to  another  important  institution  which  can  eliminate  a  lot  of 

wastage  and  save  millions  and  millions  of  taxpayers’  money,  that  is,  the  Public  Accounts 

Committee.  What I am saying is not new.  My predecessors, be it hon. Ganoo, when he was 

Chairman  of  the  Public  Accounts  Committee,  and  most  specially  hon.  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 

who even commissioned a report  - because the  Ministry of  Finance commissioned a report, 

which  I  have  submitted  to  the  hon.  Prime  Minister,  as  it  was  released  when  I  joined  in  as 

Chairman - to look at how we can make the Public Accounts Committee more efficient. 

It  becomes  more  important  now  when  we  have  so  many  parastatal  bodies  and  State 

owned companies.  It will become even more important when we have so many projects.  Be 

it  public/private  project,  be  it  parastatal  bodies,  be  it  state-owned  money,  it  is  taxpayers’ 

money.    They  should  be  made  accountable  to  the  Public  Accounts  Committee.    Now,  our 

Public  Accounts  Committee  is  governed  by  our  Standing  Orders  -  and  second  it  does  not 

need  any  money.    It  is  only  a  motion  from  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  to  say  it  in  the 

Standing Orders. 

Our Public Accounts Committee is limited to verify only that part of the audit report 

of that Ministry which the auditors have audited.  I will give you one example.  Last time, the 

PAC decided to go for a site visit at Flacq Hospital.  In the report, they made some comments 

about the building.  So, we went to see the building.  We asked question about the building.  

Whilst going to the building, we went through the store, and what we saw in that store was 

unacceptable.  Unacceptable! 

The store at the Flacq Hospital! 

(Interruptions) 

So, we started to ask questions.  Then, we were gently, and rightly so, stopped by the 

Deputy Clerk, I think … 

The  Deputy  Speaker:  Hon.  Baloomoody,  are  you  commenting  on  the  Public 

Accounts Committee Report? Are you referring to it right now? 

Mr Baloomoody: No! 

The Deputy Speaker: Because you know that this is not allowed. 

 

63 

Mr  Baloomoody:  No,  I  am  just  giving  an  example  of  how  it  is  limited.    We  were 

informed  that  we  could  only  look  at  the  building  and  that  we  could  not  look  at  the  store, 

because the auditors had not looked at the store. So, what is the purpose of having a Public 

Accounts  Committee?    It  sits  in  camera.  Why  should  it  sit  in  camera?    When  we  question 

you,  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  as  well  as  the  Ministers  –  on  Tuesday,  we  are  going  through 

Committee of Supply, and we are going to question Ministers on each and every item.  They 

answer in public! Why do the officials have to sit in camera? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, you just stopped me because I am not supposed to say what 

happens in the PAC because the Standing Orders say so.  Why should it be like that?  Why 

that protection to the public officers?  It is a Public Accounts Committee!  The public should 

know how their money is being spent like we do in Parliament at Committee of Supply when 

we question the Prime Minister and Ministers on each and every item on the Budget.  Why, 

when  it  comes  to  the  PAC,  it  should  be  limited?    We  cannot  examine  report  of  parastatal 

bodies.    At  paragraph  364  of  this  year’s  Budget,  this  is  what  hon.  Pravind  Jugnauth,  the 

Minister of Finance has to say – 

“(…)  all  public  sector  bodies  that  have  been  making  losses  and  accumulating  debt 

will be required to submit their plan to turn around (…).  This includes the MBC, the 

Mauritius Post, the National Transport Corporation, Rose Belle Sugar Estate and the 

Mauritius Meat Authority, amongst others.” 

Do  you  think  we  would  have  reached  such  a  stage  if  these  bodies  were  accountable  to  the 

Public Accounts Committee and to the scrutiny of Parliament? 

Now, what about the follow-up of the report?  We have had so many Public Accounts 

Committee reports!  The same thing with the Audit Report.  We give each and every Member 

a copy.  I do not how many read it.  There is no debate on that report.  Nothing!  So, we will 

have  our  next  report.    There  will  be  comments  like  ‘we  were  shocked,  we  were  surprised.’  

We  cannot  recommend  sanction.  We  can  make  recommendation,  but  we  do  not  know 

whether it is abided to.  So, in most countries, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the Public Accounts 

Committee report is debated.  They reserve two days sittings in Parliament especially for the 

Public Accounts Committee.  It is debated, not voted.  The Ministers concerned come and say 

what they intend to do, how they intend to redress the situation. 

 

64 

In  other  jurisdictions,  the  Public  Accounts  Committee  give  30  or  60  days,  for  the 

Ministries that have been named to come with a report and say how they intend to redress the 

situation.  This is what we should have in this Parliament as well.  A smaller Parliament like 

ours,  Malta,  has  a  Budget  Committee,  a  Public  Accounts  Committee,  and  an  Expenditure 

Committee.  Why cannot we have this here?  In Uganda, it is worse!  In Uganda, the Public 

Accounts Committee tells the public officers, ‘you go, take action and get the money.  In six 

months’ time, we will call you and you will have to tell us what action you have taken. You 

have gone to court, and so how much money you have brought back in the kitty.’ But, here, 

in the Public Accounts Committee, we just make reports and that’s it.  It is easy!  We have 

done our work.  In the last report, we said it. 

We have had working sessions with the Solicitor General’s  Office, and he has made 

recommendations.    We  met  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister;  we  gave  him  a  report  of  what 

amendments  have  to  come.    There  is  only  a  simple  amendment:  delete  only  one  phrase, 

‘Standing 69’.  When we met the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, he was agreeable to that idea.  We 

gave  him  a  copy  of  that  report  which  was  commissioned  by  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  but, 

unfortunately, still nothing.  So, we will continue to meet again.  You know what is worse?  

What  respect  will  these  public  officers  have  towards  the  Public  Accounts  Committee  when 

they know whatever questions you are putting, whatever remarks you are saying, nothing will 

happen?    They  will  come  here  next  week  and  they  will  answer  the  same  questions  again.  

Next year, nothing will happen! They will laugh at us!  So, we have to look into that matter 

seriously. 

We  are  members  of  the  SADC  PAC.  We  are  members  of  the  Commonwealth 

Parliamentary Association of PAC.  I am  the Treasurer of CAPAC.  We have to  harmonise.  

These  countries  have  gone  forward.    There  are  very,  very  interesting  works  which  their 

Parliaments are doing. So, we have to go forward if truly we want to eliminate wastage. 

This is what I had to say to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister.  Let us review our institution; 

come with a fiscal responsibility on how to eliminate waste.  Let make the Audit Report more 

applicable.  Let us have a strong PAC.  Then, we will eliminate  – I will not say eradicate – 

wastage slowly in the public sector. 

This is what I have to say on this Budget. I wanted to add a few issues regarding my 

constituency,  but  I  will  mention  only  one,  because  my  good  friend,  the  hon.  Vice-Prime 

Minister  is  here.    It  is  about  what  the  CEB  is  doing  at  Bain  des  Dames.    Is  it  storage  of 

 

65 

inflammable liquid?  There is much concern at Bain des Dames.  I hope the hon. Vice-Prime 

Minister will address the issue, so as to alleviate the fear of the people in my constituency. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  let  me  end  here  by  concluding  that  there  are  some  good 

measures  in  this  Budget,  as  I  said.    Implementation  is  very,  very  important.  We  have  to 

review the function of our institutions.  It may be politically a good Budget, but it is only one 

year.  It will be only next year that we will be able to say whether it has been economically a 

prosperous Budget. 

Thank you. 

Mr Deputy Speaker: Hon. Members, I apologise, I have to suspend the sitting very 

briefly.  Please remain seated! 

At 3.42 p.m., the sitting was suspended. 

 

On resuming at 3.44 p.m. with the Deputy Speaker in Chair. 

The Deputy Speaker:  I do apologise! Hon. Rutnah! 

Mr S. Rutnah (Third Member for Piton & Rivière du Rempart):  Thank you, Mr 

Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.    After  having  listened  to  hon.  Baloomoody,  I  propose  to  start  on  a 

philosophical note.  

(Interruptions) 

In life we can be either a patriot or a traitor, and or we might as well be complacent.  

Laissez faire!  Let things happen, we don’t care!  

 

“Some are born great, some achieve greatness, and some have greatness thrust 

upon them”.  

From Twelfth Night of Shakespeare.   

And, Greatness comes by virtue of your deed, what you do in life.  I am a bit saddened when 

I  heard  this  disgusting  attack  that  hon.  Baloomoody  directed  against  the  hon.  Attorney 

General.  I have got great respect for him.  He is a man of great experience and wisdom in the 

discipline  of  law  and  he  is  also  a  hon.  Member  of  Parliament  for  many  years.  But  I  am 

saddened by the kind  of attack he threw towards the hon. Attorney-General.    If  I may  refer 

him  to  Section  69  (4)  of  the  Constitution,  this  is  the  section  that  actually  deals  with  the 

 

66 

appointment of the Attorney General, and for the sake of record so that never ever again, such 

a  vile  attack  could  be  addressed  against  any  Attorney  General  of  this  House  irrespective  of 

the political parties he comes from. 

Section 69 (4) states as follows – 

“Where  the  person  holding  the  Office  of  Attorney-General  is  not  a  Member  of  the 

Assembly,  he  shall  be  entitled  to  take  part  in  the  proceedings  of  the  Assembly,  and 

this Constitution and any other law shall apply to him as if he were a Member of the 

Assembly.” 

This  is  the  Supreme  law.    So,  I  was  not  expecting  such  a  disgusting  attack  against  a  hon. 

Member of this House. But in any event, I anticipate that in future, all of us, whether lawyers 

in  this House or non-lawyers will extend the respect  and courtesy ordinarily expected of us 

towards an Attorney General. 

In relation to the Budget 2016/2017 - before I reply to a number of points that hon. 

Baloomoody  has  made  -  hon.  Pravind  Jugnauth  has  not  only  demonstrated  his  ability  and 

skill of persuasion, his ability and skill of delivery, and his ability and skill of understanding 

the  fundamentals  of  economics,  he  managed  to  get  the  grasp  of  what  the  population  is 

expecting of this Government. He managed to get the grasp of the interactions of the market 

that  determine  the  rules,  if  I  may  say,  of  demand  and  supply.    If  you  look  at  the  Budget 

Speech,  the  macroeconomic  policies  that  he  has  taken,  the  fiscal  policies  that  he  has  taken, 

the social policies that he is advocating through this Budget, it is indeed a budget that is going 

to change the future of this country. I have heard intently a number hon. Members from both 

sides.  But,  unfortunately,  if  I  may  say,  the  hon.  Members  of  the  main  Opposition  party  in 

relation to the Budget, are not singing from the same hymn sheet. At times they criticise, at 

times  they  say:  “It  is  a  good  budget”.  One  said:  it  is  interesting”.  The  other  said:  “It  is 

marvellous.” 

And, if I may refer… 

…in terms… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

67 

The Deputy Speaker:  Don’t interrupt the hon. Member! 

(Interruptions) 

It does not give you a right to interrupt! 

(Interruptions) 

Let me decide that, hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr  Rutnah:  Let  me  deal  with  what  hon.  Quirin  said  first,  then,  if  that  is  the  case 

because  he  is  sitting  next  to  hon.  Ameer  Meea  and  I  still  remember  the  discourse  of  hon. 

Ameer Meea.  I will come to him as well and compare. Look at what hon. Quirin said in his 

very first part -  

« Madame la présidente, il va sans dire que l’honorable ministre des Finances a été 

habile et astucieux dans la présentation du budget 2016/2017. » 

Second – 

« En  effet,  certaines  mesures  annoncées  par  le  ministre  des  Finances  en  faveur  des 

plus  démunis  de  la  société  sont  considérées  comme  des  décisions  qui  vont  dans  la 

bonne direction. » 

Sa même mo p dire là ! 

Third - 

(Interruptions) 

« Le  ministre  des  Finances  a  fait  preuve  de  subtilité  dans  la  présentation  de  son 

budget en mettant en avant les mesures prises pour lutter contre l’extrême pauvreté. » 

(Interruptions) 

The  Deputy  Speaker:  Hon.  Quirin,  you  don’t  have  to!  You  are  not  engaging  in  a 

discussion! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Rutnah: It’s Okay, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. His exuberance lies in his verbosity. 

Fourth - 

 

68 

« Madame  la  présidente,  nous  savons  tous  que  notre  république  fait  face  à  une 

situation préoccupante au niveau de la drogue. » 

And then, he goes on – 

 

« Il est vrai que, dans sa présentation du budget, le ministre des Finances a consacré 

quelques lignes au combat contre la drogue. » 

These are only parts. If I have to make point after point - I have been given only our hour to 

speak to - I won’t be able to deal with all. 

(Interruptions) 

Now,  my  very  able  and  learned  friend,  hon.  Uteem  -  that’s  why  he  started  with  the 

quote of ‘Twelfth Night’ today – 

“The  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  has  tried  to  touch  the 

hearts of people by announcing a series of measures to eradicate poverty.” 

This is one. 

Second -  

“The cash award for students who have achieved higher level education is also 

a welcome measure.” 

Three - 

“Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development 

was  also  not  insensitive  to  the  plea  of  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  in 

favour  of  disabled  persons  which  he  made  in  his  PNQ  of  the  12  July  of  this 

year.” 

And then - 

“He has removed (…).” 

Listen to this!  

“He has removed an injustice with regard to the allocation of Basic Invalidity 

Pension to  children.  Henceforth,  a  child even below the  age of 15 would be 

entitled to Basic Invalidity Pension.” 

It seems as if a hon. Member of this side of the House is talking. 

 

Fourth - 

69 

“Madam  Speaker,  we  also  welcome  the  decision  of  the  Government  to 

increase  the  grant-in-aid  to  NGOs  dealing  with  children  with  Special 

Education Needs.” 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: No comments, please! 

Mr Rutnah: Fifth - 

“(…) if we generally welcome the various measures announced in this Budget 

to fight poverty.” 

Now, when we heard hon. Ameer Meea’s discourse yesterday, he was singing from a 

completely different himsha.  For him, it is dark, gloom, doom. 

(Interruptions) 

I am not going to go into details because of most of the criticisms - Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, 

when  one  is  in  Opposition,  one’s  duty  is  not    simply  to  criticise.  Responsible  Opposition, 

what they do? They criticise and then they propose an alternative because they are, according 

to the system of our governance, the Government in waiting. 

(Interruptions) 

But  I  am  glad.  That’s  what  I  am  saying.    If  you  listen  to  what  hon.  Ameer  Meea  said 

yesterday and compare to what today hon. Baloomoody said, they are in contradiction. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: No comments, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Mohamed, I told you, you will speak after! 

Mr  Rutnah:  So,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  these  are  the  few  things  that  I  want  to 

highlight insofar as where today our main Opposition party is in relation to their arguments 

about this Budget. I have not finished with the Opposition. There is my very able and learned 

friend, hon. Ramful.  All the bad things that are happening in this country have only started 

since the last 20 months!  In the very starting part of his speech, he said the following - 

 

70 

“I will refer to  a document published by the present  Minister of Finance and 

Economic  Development  back  in  2010  when  he  was  Minister  of  Finance  and 

Economic  Development.  It  was  during  the  last  ten  years.  ‘Facing  the  Euro 

Crisis:  Restructuring  for  Long  Term  Resilience’,  the  hon.  Pravind  Kumar 

Jugnauth in August 2010 –”  

And he reads – 

“The  Mauritian  economy  is,  once  again,  buffeted  by  a  major  external 

shock,  this  time  by  the  euro  zone  crisis.  Once  more,  and  in  a  relatively 

short span of time, Mauritius is called upon to demonstrate its capacity to 

respond effectively, to adapt its policies and even to rethink its strategies.” 

So,  when  I  went  and  checked  what  the  position  was  with  hon.  Pravind  Jugnauth  in  2010,  I 

managed to  find a document, it is  the Budget  Speech of 2011 which was then presented by 

hon.  Pravind  Kumar  Jugnauth.  If  we  look  at  what  he  did  in  2011  and  what  he  did  on  the 

presentation of the Budget of 2015-2016, we will find a common thread in both budgets, and 

2016-2017,  but  in  other  Budgets,  on  the  previous  one  which  I  referred  to  in  2011,  we  will 

find a common thread and that common golden thread is this: golden, that he always believes 

in an equal society, he always believes in alleviation of poverty, he always believes in fiscal 

incentives, he always believes in an equal society. Look at what I found! I found that in 2011, 

he spoke about the Mauritius Duty Free Shopping Paradise. This is what he said – 

“Mr Speaker, Sir, we will also need to integrate the development of tourism industry 

in the duty free shopping paradise vision. It is a new industry that will have a major 

impact  on  most  key  sectors  of  our  economy.  It  will  attract  franchised  rights  of 

international  brands 

label  and  open  up  significant  opportunities  for 

local 

manufacturing,  the  luxury  and  prestige  brands  and  even  premium  and  fashioned 

brands in Mauritius. It will generate an unprecedented synergy and put Mauritius on 

the same development track where countries like Singapore and Dubai have trodden 

before.” 

The  blueprint  on  the  development  of  Mauritius  as  a  duty-free  shopping  paradise  is 

being updated. We will make use of expertise that can draw from international experience to 

enable us to implement the project. In the meantime, Government will work with existing and 

forthcoming  shopping  centres  so  that  they  integrate  the  concept  of  duty-free  shopping 

paradise in their design and making.  

 

71 

But, we know what happened after 2011 and his creation of the Mauritius Duty Free 

Paradise  -  the  way  he  wanted  it  -  what  happened  to  it?  Dilapidated  by  the  former 

Government!  And,  we  know  where  the  money  from  the  Mauritius  Duty  Free  Shopping 

Paradise is now - Dufry/Frydu! We know what has happened and we know those who have 

dilapidated that Mauritius Duty Free Shopping Paradise where they are now! And they won’t 

be able to come and defend themselves in this country. They are hiding somewhere, there up 

in the hill, somewhere in Italy!  

And, he also then said that the BOI will be set up and the BOI will set up a dedicated 

desk  for  promoting  the  duty-free  shopping  as  a  new  sector  of  the  economy.  Dealing  with 

fiscal measures, this is what he said –  

“I  am  taking  steps  to  deal  with  anomalies  and  deviations  from  international  best 

practice in our VAT legislation. Thus the following items will be moved as from 

01 March from the list of zero-rated supplies to exempt supplies: Wheat flour and 

bran,  edible  oils,  margarine,  sterilised  liquid  milk,  curdled  milk  and  cream  and 

yoghurt,  live  chickens  and  chicks,  animal  feed  and  fertilizers.  Producers  of  such 

goods will be able to recover input tax when they export.  

As regards gains from sale of land and immovable property, a reduced rate of 10 

per cent will apply to individuals.” 

And then he goes on to say how much of exemption would the ordinary people receive. Then 

he said –  

“Mr Speaker, Sir, we made a pledge. It was about a tax that weighed too heavily 

on the budget of our elders in particular, and on taxpayers relying on revenue from 

interest sources.” 

And, this is most important –  

“I am abolishing tax on interest income.” 

I am abolishing! Why he abolished? Who… 

(Interruptions) 

Who imposed tax on interest? 

 

La queue chat?  

72 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

It was the former Minister of Finance of the Labour Government!  

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: No comments, please! 

Mr  Rutnah:  And  this  is  what  Rama  Sithanen  said  in  his  2010  Budget  Speech  at 

paragraph 420 – 

“Twelfth, I am also raising the threshold for payment of NRPT to Rs400,000.” 

What hon. Pravind Jugnauth did about it in 2011?  

“Mr Speaker, Sir, I am abolishing the NRPT (National Residential Property Tax) 

with effect as from 1st January 2010.” 

This is Pravind Jugnauth… 

(Interruptions) 

This  is  Pravind  Jugnauth  insofar  as  his  measures  are  concerned  relating  to  fiscal  policy, 

macroeconomics; understanding of the needs of the population and alleviating poverty! Now, 

we know, I don’t write my speech but I have a list of failures which I have written. I’ll come 

to it because I have to respond to hon. Ramful properly. But, before coming to it let me read 

the progress that this country has made and it is in the introductory part of the Budget Speech 

of 2016-2017. 

“The  unemployment  rate  went  down  to  7.6  per  cent  in  the  first  quarter  of  2016 

from 8.7 percent a year earlier.” 

Remember  a  year  earlier  we  inherited  a  country  which  was  made  bankrupt  and  thereafter 

there was also the subject of the BAI.  

(Interruptions) 

I will come to the R 5000! 

“The inflation rate is significantly down to 0.9 per cent for 2015/16 (…)” 

 

73 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: No comment, please! 

Mr Rutnah: “The overall Balance of Payments was in surplus of Rs20 billion, with 

the current account deficit, as a ratio of GDP, reduced to 4.6 per cent for 2015/16. 

The official reserves increased from 6.2 months of imports in December 2014” 

This is when we took power –  

“(…) to reach 8.5 months at end June 2016. 

And  the  Budget  Deficit  for  the  financial  year  2015/16  is  estimated  at  3.5  per  cent, 

with total revenue and grants amounting to Rs88.2 billion against a total expenditure 

of Rs103.1 billion.” 

These  introductory  words  demonstrate  that  our  economic  performance  has  been  an 

honourable one as he puts it in his words. Those who always come to criticise that we have 

been in Government for 20 months and nothing has been done, let me say what hon. Ramful 

said.  He  said  we  have  been  in  Government  for  20  months  and  that  the  people  are  still 

expecting to see development in the country. In 20 months, we have also been criticised that 

we did not do enough to create employment. 

Let me remind everybody that employment is down since we took power and major 

economic reform could not be done. It is not because this Government  

has not been working, it is not because of Ministers who have not been effective, it is because 

we did not realise although the coffers of the nation were dilapidated like in 1982, we did not 

realise  that  we  were  also  inheriting  the  BAI  saga!  This  is  a  list  that  I  have  made  and  I  am 

going  to  refer  to  it.  We  did  not  realise  then  that  the  MPCB  toxic  loans  of  Rs3.2  billion 

existed;  DBM,  loss  of  Rs538  m.;  Mauritius  Post  Ltd  loss  of  Rs202  m.;  Casinos,  have  you 

ever heard casinos making loss? 

Casinos, loss of Rs628 m. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mauritius  Broadcasting  Corporation  indebted,  Rs1.2  billion;  Bagatelle  Dam  which  was 

initially thought to have been completed for Rs3.1 billion later on doubled.  Regarding Terre 

Rouge-Verdun, there was initially a project for Rs2 billion, eventually Rs4 billion was spent 

and it was not yet finished.  There was the need of an additional of Rs300 m. to fix the road, a 

road which collapsed and on which even an ant at that time did not pass on it.  We could not 

even find an insect crawling on that street yet it collapsed.  

 

74 

Regarding  Biometric  Identity  Card,  initially,  it  was  Rs400  billion,  but  eventually 

Rs1.2 billion was spent. Like I said, I do not write my speech, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, but if 

we have to sit down and make a list, the list goes on. My friend, hon. Toussaint, is reminding 

me of NDU – R 1 milliard. I have not checked the figure, but I anticipate he is right about the 

figure. So, against this background, the Opposition claims that we have not done enough!  

True it is that this Budget is now going to take us to a new era. When we first took 

power, measures were taken so that we could build the base of this country. What we built is 

the  confidence  of  people.  We  built  la  paix  sociale.  We  built  l’harmonie  sociale  in  this 

country.  Hon.  Baloomoody,  during  his  discourse,  made  reference  to  the  management  of 

public  opinion  prior  to  the  presentation  of  this  Budget.  He  said  that  there  was  this 

management of opinion to create this perception that taxes will be increased and VAT will be 

increased because there  will be no money to  pay to  the people. But  do  you remember what 

they were saying when we promised that we are going to pay our elderly Rs5,000 per month? 

The language came again from the Opposition side - cot zot pu gagne sa l’argent là? But the 

l’argent was gagné! How the l’argent was gagné? 

(Interruptions) 

No,  it  is  the  diligence  and  competence  of  the  Government  in  the  decision-making  process. 

That is what allowed the Rs5,000 to be allocated.  

(Interruptions) 

There were also criticisms about money spent on foreign missions against Ministers. 

Again, I am not a Minister and I am not doing politics about it. But tell me something! If we 

are not going to send our Ministers to foreign countries to go and negotiate our development, 

how are investors going to come here? If our Ministers do not go on missions, if our country 

is not represented in many important conferences, then we will be criticised. We have to be in 

line  with  what  we  call  proper  international  relations.  Every  country  has  representatives  and 

their representatives go on missions. The reason why they go on missions is to promote their 

country, to promote international relations so that investments can be brought to the country. 

There is one thing I would like to ask hon. Baloomoody. As Chairman of the Public 

Accounts Committee, how many times he has travelled? 

(Interruptions) 

 

At least! 

75 

The Deputy Speaker: Please, address the Chair! 

Don’t engage in discussions! 

(Interruptions) 

 (Interruptions) 

You cannot reply! You do not have the floor, hon. Baloomoody! You should know that! 

Mr  Rutnah:  Not  only  that,  as  Opposition  Member,  how  many  times  he  has  also 

travelled on missions overseas? But this is something which is natural. It is something which 

comes with the job. You have to go abroad for the benefit of your people, for the benefit of 

your country. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in relation to poverty … 

In Madagascar, we had a great time! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The  Deputy  Speaker:  Hon.  Rutnah,  address  the  Chair,  I  have  been  clear  about  this 

earlier. The warnings to hon. Baloomoody applies to you as well, hon. Rutnah. You address 

the Chair! It applies to all Members of this House. Have some respect for the Chair! 

Mr  Rutnah:  Forgive  me,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  Let  me  deal  with  the  issue  of 

poverty.  After  the  presentation  of  the  Budget,  during  the  weekend,  I  walked  in  Rivière  du 

Rempart  where  I  live  and  I  met  my  friend  who  is  a  peanut  seller  -  I  will  not  name  him 

because it is not good to name names here,  I understand. He said to me ‘budget mari bon!’ 

Then, I went further and met this kalou who sells vegetables. I asked him: “How do you find 

the Budget?” He said to me: ‘Masha Allah, nu pe done beaucoup dua Pravind Jugnauth.’ On 

the same Saturday, I went to Plaines des Roches where I met this guy who is known in the 

locality. He is  a labourer.  He said  that it is  for the first  time in  his  life when a Budget  has 

been presented, no basic products have been the subject of a price increase.  On the contrary, 

he said he never thought that any Minister of Finance would ever decrease the price of gas. 

 

No, wait! 

76 

 (Interruptions) 

On Sunday, I went to a wedding in Plaines des Papayes … 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea, don’t interrupt him! 

Mr Rutnah: On that Sunday, I went to Plaines des Papayes in a wedding where I met 

this old dadi and I asked her: “how are you feeling?” 

She said to me, “I am feeling better… 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, in Bhojpuri!   

...but my diabetes is a bit high.”  I said to her, “Don’t worry, your kids will buy less sugar as 

from  this  month,  because  the  Government  has  put  a  tax  on  sugar.    So,  the  lesser  sugar  you 

consume, the more improvement for your health.” 

On the same Sunday, I met friend of mine who is a taxi driver. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

He  said  to  me,  “You  know,  everybody  is  talking  about  this  Budget.    It  is  an  extraordinary 

Budget”.  So, I asked him, “What is so extraordinary about it?”  He said, “You know, I have 

got  children  who  are  going  to  university,  and  my  neighbours  in  Roches  Noires  are  poorer 

than me.” 

No, it is not on the coastal side! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

He said, “My neighbours have children as well, and I am so glad that those children also will 

be  able  to  go  university  now,  because  this  Government  is  providing  incentives  and 

 

77 

encouraging people who are poor to study and they will be compensated for their hard work.”  

So, these are the kind of soundings that I received from my constituency, coupled with what 

has been said by the trade unionists, which my friend, hon. Benydin, has said.  I am not going 

to say everything that working class has said about this Budget.  Then, when we hear the hon. 

Leader of Opposition himself saying that it was “intéressant”, this means that there is some 

credential to be given to the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development that he has 

presented a marvellous piece of work to this Assembly, dealing with poverty. 

The other day, there was a PNQ on poverty, and it appears to me that the Opposition 

wants to make it sound like we are going to distribute money to everybody who purports to 

be poor. It is not going to be like that! 

(Interruptions) 

It is not going to be like that because we do not want our State to become a nation that will 

rely on income support for the rest of their life. 

(Interruptions) 

Self-reliance! That is why I asked that supplementary question referring to paragraph 301 of 

the Budget Speech.  Eradicating poverty does not only mean that you give people money and 

they are going to spend it, we don’t know how. But we have to take them out from the cycle 

of poverty, and to take them out of the cycle of poverty, this is what the Budget Speech says 

– 

“At the same time, we are introducing a major programme to empower these families 

to break away from the poverty cycle and stand on their own feet.” 

So,  this  Budget  is  making  provision  to  empower  those  people.  And  how  do  we 

empower people who are poor?  We give them the right education, give them the right social 

support, give them the right psychological support, give them the right encadrement, comme 

on dit, so that these people can come out of the poverty cycle and be the future of tomorrow, 

because the future of this country does not lie in our hands. The future of this country lies in 

the  hands  of  the  children  who  are  growing  now  and  will  be  the  adults  of  tomorrow,  and 

together with them, we are going to shape the future of this country. This is how this country 

should be run.  It should not run in the fashion that it was run for almost 10 years, from 2005 

to 2014. 

 

78 

In relation to drugs, quite a lot has been said about the problems of drugs; cannabis, 

synthetic drugs. Government has made provision to deal with the issue relating to drugs. But 

let me say one thing. There is a tendency by some people, in particular in the media, who are 

also  working together with some NGOs to fuel  an atmosphere, to  make people believe that 

there  is  so  widespread  of  synthetic  drugs  in  our  country  that,  virtually,  every  youngster  is 

taking  drugs.    And  also  they  say  that  there  is  a  campaign,  in  fact,  to  decriminalise  or 

depenalise  the  use  of  cannabis.    And  to  advance  their  campaign  to  decriminalise  cannabis, 

they are saying, “Decriminalise it so that those youngsters will not take synthetic drugs, they 

will rather rely on cannabis because cannabis is natural, cannabis is medicinal.  It is good for 

your health.” 

But there is one thing I have not heard from any NGO or any media.  None of them, 

who are today campaigning for the depenalisation, has ever said to our youngsters, “Go and 

plant  and  a  neem  tree  because  neem  tree  has  medicinal  ingredient.    It  is  good  for  your 

health”.  I have not heard anyone saying, “Go and  

plant some lemongrass because it is good for your health.  It fights diabetes.  It fights cancer.  

It has got antioxidants. Go and plant a mouroum tree because it is good for your health.  Go 

and plant a tulsi in front of your house because it has got virtues that can cure any skin related 

disease.  Go  and  plant  some  apana  because  it  contains  antiseptic  and  it  cures  all  kinds  of 

diseases.  ”  None  of  these  media  people  and  NGOs  has  ever  said  this  to  our  children.    But 

what they go and say around to our children in a very convincing and persuasive manner is 

that  “Cannabis  is  okay.”    But  can  I  ask  them  rhetorically  whether  they  will  allow  their 

children to smoke cannabis because it is good for their health? I have met many people who 

say,  “Legalise  cannabis,  depenalise  cannabis”,  but  when  you  ask  them,  “Would  you  allow 

your son, you daughter to take cannabis?” They would say, “No, not my children!”  So, why 

bringing these kinds of campaign against our children?  

Now, coming to the crux of the matter, there is only a fraction of users who are taking 

–  only  a  very  tiny  fraction  –  and  the  way  that  it  is  presented,  they  make  it  sounds  like  our 

children  who  are  going  to  schools,  colleges,  universities  are  living  as  if  on  cannabis,  are 

living as if on drugs, demonising the people, demonising those youngsters, demonising those 

children. But, that is not the case. We are a country where we give credence to values - I say 

it time and time again – culture, tradition. I have said it before that we have, as Members of 

Parliament, encouraged our peers, our people in our villages, in our towns, everywhere, to set 

 

79 

up again the Baitkas, the Pathshala, the Muktab,  l’Ecole Cathéchisme so that children can go 

there and learn about  values, cultures, tradition,  etc., so that we build a better Mauritius for 

the future. 

A  lot  has  been  said  about  the  way  the  PSC  has  recruited  Police  Officers  recently.  I 

was not expecting members of the Bar to come and say things in this House about the Public 

Service Commission in the way they did, and the DFSC. The PSC and the DFSC are creation 

of  the  Constitution  by  virtue  of  Section  88,  Section  89.  We,  as  Members  of  Parliament,  of 

Government, do we have the right to interfere with the functions of the DFSC or the LGSC or 

the  PSC?  Do  we  have  the  right  to  interfere  with  the  Board  and  the  Board  that  had  been 

nominated  by  the  previous  Labour  Government  to  give  an  impression  that  there  has  been 

some kind of magouille in the recruitment by the DFSC? But, if there is any proof about any 

kind of… 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Rutnah, I have already given a ruling on this! 

(Interruptions) 

It does not matter to whom. A ruling is a ruling, hon. Minister! So, please don’t comment on 

the behaviour! Don’t make any allegations about any statutory Commission! 

Mr Rutnah: I am grateful for the guidance. I have not made any allegations. 

The Deputy Speaker: It is not guidance, it is a ruling! 

Mr Rutnah: Yes. 

The Deputy Speaker: There is a difference. 

Mr  Rutnah:  I  am  grateful  for  your  ruling,  if  you  call  this  a  ruling,  but  I  have  not 

made any attack. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Rutnah, are you questioning my ruling? 

Mr Rutnah: I said… 

The Deputy Speaker: Sit down, please, when I am on my feet! Are you questioning 

my ruling? 

Mr  Rutnah:  I  have  not  made  any  attack  on  the  PSC.  I  am  not  going  to  make  any 

attack on the PSC because I have respect for institutions and this Government has respect for 

institutions and no Member, on this side of the House, will ever attack any institutions which 

are creation of Statute or creation of the Constitution of this country. 

 

80 

If anyone has got any proof that there has been some kind of maldonne or magouille 

in the recruitment, go to the Police, bring the proof, give it to them, let them investigate, go to 

ICAC; there are institutions independently which work in this country. 

Now, dealing with my final point about this Budget, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, a lot has 

been said about implementation. Yes, it is good that there has been a very good Budget and 

the policies need to be implemented, the works need to be done. I will request those who are 

in  authority  to  ensure  that  implementation  takes  place  and  we  know  that  there  are  certain 

people within the civil service who red tape policies. 

I will urge upon the hon. Minister Civil Service and Administrative Reforms to ensure 

that proper disciplinary framework is set up against those who red tape economic policies of 

any Government, because it is unfair to the population, it is unfair to any Government and it 

is unfair to us all if we have policies to be implemented, but then those policies are not being 

implemented simply because there is some kind or some degree of red tapism within the Civil 

Service. If we do not set up proper framework to deal with them in a disciplinary Tribunal or 

somewhere, then we are still going to be lagging behind. 

Overall,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development, 

hon. Pravind Jugnauth has demonstrated his leadership qualities. Leaders foster collaboration 

and build spirited teams. He demonstrated that he can bring together  a nation, he can bring 

together our society. Like in Henry IV, Act V, Scene II: 

“Let each man do his best.” 

And in Hamlet, Act I, Scene III: 

“Give every man thy ear but few thy voice.” 

So, he is a Minister of Finance who listens and then reacts and I am sure he has the blessing 

of  the  population,  of  this  country  to  take  this  country  to  the  right  direction  and  shape  the 

future of our children. 

Thank you. 

The Deputy Speaker: I suspend the sitting for half an hour. 

At 4.39 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 5.19 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Lutchmeenaraidoo! 

 

81 

The  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and  International  Trade 

(Mr S. Lutchmeenaraidoo): Madam Speaker, there was one word which came to my mind 

while  walking  out  of  Parliament,  it  was  the  word  ‘impressive’.  That  was  my  first  reaction. 

The Minister of Finance and Economic Development gave us an impressive Budget not only 

at the level of quality of the speech itself but, most importantly, at the level of substance that 

is in the Budget and which makes it extremely impressive and gives it a power of its own. I 

would never have thought that a Minister of Finance could, in 130 minutes, present more than 

300 measures! This, by itself, is an incredible feat and all those measures have been worked 

out one by one in-depth before coming to this Table for proposal.  

Therefore,  the  Budget  is  an  impressive  Budget  that  allows  us  now  to  define  the 

roadmap for the future. Roadmap for the future is important for what reason? We have to go 

back  into  recent  history  and  I  will  not,  at  any  point,  try  to  put  blame  on  the  former 

Government when we took over. But what the nation knows is that we inherited a situation 

that was disastrous and a level where institutions were near collapse. So, that was not an easy 

transition.  We  took  over  in  a  situation  where  we  either  worked  out  the  right  vision  or  we 

would have been carried off. So, that was what we had. When we took over, we realised one 

thing that Mauritius is what we call a country that is stuck in the middle income trap.  

In fact, the most important point that we put up after the elections was this: we are at 

the crossroad. I never use the words ‘we are at a crossroad’, ‘we are at the crossroad’ which 

means either we make it or it breaks and then we lose Government because a nation cannot 

stay within the middle income trap for long.  

Middle income trap means that you cannot go above the rate of growth that can allow 

the  country  to  move  further  up  towards  a  more  developed  economy.    We  were  stuck  there.  

Why we were stuck there is very complex because the various sectors of the economy have 

matured and are giving less result for investment we made, number one and number two, we 

have also a problem which, I think, the House should now give due consideration.  If we want 

to get out of this middle income trap, we need a higher growth; there is no way out of it. To 

reach the level of growth that we will need to reach to come out of it, let us say, 4%, 5% or 

6% there is no doubt that we will have to, number one, redefine the strategy, but number two, 

it is essential that the nation follows. This is probably where whichever Government is there; 

this is where we are having problems presently. It is not the fault of the people.  It is the fault 

of  a  system  where  people  take  things  for  granted  now,  instant  gratification.    People  do  not 

 

82 

want to take challenge, do not want to do the effort to join - because to join in a wave which 

will bring us up, there needs to be improvement in productivity.  You should know this.   

Productivity  has  been  stagnating  for  the  past  ten  years  which  means  that  labour 

productivity is  not  moving up. No nation can move out  of this development without higher 

productivity. This is why we are facing a situation where, in this country, if you do a survey 

and  ask  people  where  would  you  like  to  work,  they  all  will  tell  you  mo  lé  rente  dan 

gouvernement.  All!  It  has become an obsession. People speak of unemployment. We have 

some  unemployment.    Hon.  Pravind  Jugnauth  spoke  about  it.    We  have  less  than  8% 

unemployment in Mauritius, but when we go to the Constituency, meet with the people, we 

get the impression that this country has got 50% of unemployed.  They are all complaining.  

They are all without a job while they are working, but they are looking for something better. 

Now,  how  can  we  emerge?    We  have  a  total  of  42,707  -  those  are  the  latest  figures  -  of 

foreigners working in this country either with a work permit or with an occupational permit. 

42,000 is more than the level of unemployment here.  So, there is something which is going 

wrong  in  this  country.    On  one  side,  we  are  importing  labour  because  we,  Mauritians,  no 

longer  want  to  do  the  job  and,  on  the  other  side,  we  are  not  doing  what  we  have  to  do  to 

improve ourselves and to improve in productivity. This is a challenge. Whatever Government 

comes, Madam Speaker, speaking of coming out of the middle income trap, I feel, will never 

happen  if  the  nation,  itself,  does  not  realise  that  it  must  be  a  national  move  towards  more 

effort,  more  work  and  more  discipline.  If  we  do  not  have  this,  then  rest  assured  -  I  do  not 

want to predict things or to forecast things which I do not  want to forecast  - things will get 

worse. Things will get  worse for one simple reason, we are not  producing enough.  We are 

not  productive  enough.    So,  last  year,  when  we  took  over  from  the  former  Government,  I 

said,  we  were  at  the  crossroad  because  I  knew  that  if  we  do  not  put  in  the  effort,  we  will 

never come out of it.  

So, these two aspects which hon. Pravind Jugnauth have taken up beautifully - one, is 

a new strategy. If you want to move from 3%, 4%, 5% or 6%, you need to develop new sub 

sectors of the economy. So we redefined and we reengineered the whole economy last year. 

We  developed  three  subsectors  which,  in  the  10  years-15  years  to  come,  will  become  the 

backbone  of  this  economy  –  number  one,  the  ocean  economy  of  my  friend,  hon.  Prem 

Koonjoo. My friend Prem is technically President of the water continent of 2.2 million square 

kilometres, that’s him. When we speak of ocean economy, a pebble that has been thrown in 

the ocean by the Lord; we, at the same time, have got this incredible gift of being surrounded 

 

83 

by 2.2 million square kilometres of EEZ.  India does not have it, even China, I think, does not 

have it, but  we have it.  So, we are  a continent  of water.   So, it quite natural  that when we 

think  of  the  future  of  the  country  the  first  thing  which  comes  to  our  mind  is  the  ocean 

economy  whether  it  be  for  fisheries,  whether  it  be  for  exploration,  whether  it  be  for 

exploitation, the future is here the blue economy. Naturally we have to be careful because we 

are speaking of nature, we are speaking of environment, we are speaking of the planet which 

is threatened. We have to be very careful, but I know that small Mauritius can develop in an 

intelligent way the ocean and derive revenue for the development of this country. So, we put 

the ocean economy as the number one in these new three pillars of development.  

The second pillar which is obvious by everyone is the port. Then we put the question. 

How  is  it  that  Mauritius  has  been  called  the  Star  and  Key  of  the  Indian  Ocean?  This  is  no 

accident. You take the map of the region and  you will see that Mauritius is exactly situated 

strategically  to  become  the  most  important  port  in  this  region.  We  are  God  bless  from  this 

point  of  view  so  we  have  stayed  let  us  forget  this  small  port  let  us  create  a  maritime  hub 

which  rose  from  1.5  km  to  8  km.  That  will  start  with  Bain  des  Dames  Grand  River  North 

West flowing down to Port Louis and finishing in Jin Fei. It is a new huge development. Why 

this? I’ll come to it in one minute.  

The  second  component  which  is  the  maritime  hub  implies  what?  It  implies  that  the 

ocean  economy  can  no  longer  develop  with  les  pêcheurs  qui  ne  sont  pas  professionnels  or 

who cannot make money all the investment we have made for the DBM for fishing boats, all 

collapsed and we don’t have the fishermen now who want to go far for fishing. Yet, we need 

to  develop  the  fishing  industry  en  amont;  we  need  also  to  transform  and  export  with  the 

objective  that  Mauritius  becomes  a  hub  where  you  can  sell  to  the  region  sea  foods.  The 

project  is  what?  You  start  with  Grand  River  North  West  which  is  a  marina.  The  marina  is 

followed by a fishing port going in the ocean on one kilometre and that can host at all times 

eighteen  fishing  vessels,  professional  ones  and  backed  up  by  river  capacities  to  ensure  that 

those catch are transformed and exported. So this is the second aspect of it which is the one 

kilometre quay for hosting eighteen to twenty fishing vessels.  

Next  to  it,  we  come  to  the  cruise  quay.  The  cruise  quay  is  for  the  development  of 

cruise and tourism. This  has got  to  come.  It  will have to  come.  It  is  coming. After that, we 

have  the  whole  project  of  bunkering  and  petroleum  hub  because  if  and  when  we  become  a 

maritime hub, it means a huge increase in traffic. A huge increase in traffic means sale also of 

petroleum products, therefore, the maritime hub continues with this aspect of bunkering and 

 

84 

petroleum  hub  whereby  we  buy  and  we  supply.  After  that,  we  come  to  the  centre  of  Port 

Louis. On the right, we have the port development - Cargo Handling Corporation, this is why 

Government is negotiating with the Dubai port to ensure that we improve on the handling of 

freight  because  we  will  never  become  an  important  port  if  the  freight  level  is  higher  than 

elsewhere. There are competitors in South Africa who can beat us. This is why Government 

is negotiating with DP World and after that - this is new and this is how we had the third leg 

of this new strategy which is Africa. You know when Jin Fei did not come out of the ground 

we  decided  as  Government  to  take  back  those  lands  and  that  was  a  very  courageous  move 

because we were dealing with a huge country and ally China.   

But at the same time they realised that the land was not being put to the best use.  So, 

after lengthy negotiations, we took back 325 acres from Jin Fei and it is those 325 acres of Jin 

Fei that will become the Freeport.  Why a Freeport?  Firstly, because you can’t have vessels 

that come to Mauritius if there is no freight.  You need freight.  So, you need merchandise.  

Secondly,  why  a  Freeport?    It  is  for  the  very  simple  reason  that  the  third  element  of  the 

strategy  is  Africa  and  it  is  not  Africa  in  the  sort  of  going  to  meetings.    No!    Africa  is  our 

future.  This is how I say it.  Africa is the long-term future of this country.  MCB is showing 

it  among  the  first.    This  bank  is  drawing  more  than  50%  of  its  annual  profit  overseas  in 

Africa.  So, this is being done already.  We need freight, why?  It is because finally we are 

members of all organisations in Mauritius.  You call it and we are there; COMESA, SADC.  

We  are  not  in  the  East  African  Community  yet,  but  we  are  setting  up  a  tripartite  free  trade 

area  which  will  include  the  three,  which  will  involve  26  countries  and  620  million 

inhabitants.  Huge! And we are a member of all this.  So, the idea is what?  That we become 

very  much  like  Dubai  and  Singapore,  that  the  Freeport  be  used  for  the  production, 

transformation of goods and services for Africa. 

Those are the three components of the new strategy.  Naturally, we added with it other 

components  which  were  essential  internally  like  the  smart  cities  which  will  become  sort  of 

showcase of what Mauritius will be in 50 years.  There is also the work which is being done 

for  SMEs.    My  friend,  hon.  Bholah  is  here,  he  has  invented  MyBiz,  beautiful  word!    We, 

therefore, took a series of measures that will accompany this new strategy.  And the Budget 

of  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  goes  exactly  in  the  direction 

which it needs to go.  It is setting the road map for the implementation of all those measures.  

And  this  is  what  is  beautiful  and  what  is  nearly  magical  with  it.    The  hon.  Minister  has 

succeeded a master.  I must tell you one thing, the Budget of the hon. Minister of Finance is 

 

85 

masterful. It contains in it nearly all that we need to ensure now growth enough to come out 

of the middle income trap.  Now, it will depend on the nation, on the country, on us also to 

ensure it.  And the Budget itself, people would try to put more accede on the social aspect of 

it.  Though, I would say one thing; we can’t ignore the social.  We can’t ignore social peace.  

And  in  this  Budget,  the  hon.  Minister  has  declared  war  on  poverty.    Hon.  Jugnauth  has 

declared war on absolute poverty through the Marshall Plan which is being handled now by 

my colleague, hon. Roopun.  This implies what?  It implies that we are living in a country, a 

nation for all and we cannot afford to grow if the growth is not shared.  The hon. Minister has 

come  with  extremely  powerful  measures  to  ensure  that  absolute  poverty  disappears  in  this 

country in the next few years.  This will be done and it is our responsibility also to ensure that 

it is done.  You know the poor, at times we try to associate poverty as if it is a sickness.  It is 

not  a  sickness.    Poverty  is  an  economic  state.    The  poor  people  don’t  come  and  ask  us  for 

charity.    They  don’t  come  to  see  us  for  assistance.  This  is  where  this  Budget  is  different.  

Those people want to be empowered.  They want to say:  “We want to  come out of poverty 

forever, for always.” And you can’t do it in one year.   

My friends here on both sides of the House have made the  experience of looking at 

the cités ouvrières.  You go anywhere, you will have them; in Batimarais, no.13; cité EDC à 

Camp Diable and cité Mère Thérésa à Triolet.  You call it.  When you move inside, then you 

understand that the problem is not only at the level of money and subsistence.  It is the whole 

family structure which has been destroyed,  where members of the  family live in  conditions 

which are deplorable.  And this exists!  The mother very often is a prostitute; the father takes 

drugs, the children grow up.  One lady told me:  “Why should I send my children to school?  

I have not been to school.  Why should I do it?” When you go to those places, you realise that 

this can’t be done in one year or two years. Empowerment - and my colleague knows it -  is a 

generational  work  where  you  take  the  father,  the  mother,  the  grandparents  and  the  children 

and you help them at all levels so that in ten years or fifteen years they become the citizens 

that we are all today; respectful, respected and who are happy to be Mauritians.  That is what 

hon. Jugnauth has done.   

The hon. Minister of  Finance  and Economic  Development  has said: “I  am  declaring 

war on poverty and I am putting everything that needs to be put to ensure this happen.” In a 

difficult year, people don’t realise this Budget was very difficult to make because firstly, we 

increased the pension to Rs5,000 and that costs money.  We gave a compensation of Rs250, 

 

86 

at the end of the day we increased the recurrent budget by Rs7 billion.  This was done.  We 

had to do it in the name of social peace.   

Secondly, we never thought that there would be a black swan that is called BAI that 

would collapse.  BAI has two direct consequences, firstly, we had to inject public funds, that 

is, Rs3 billion in the two banks which collapsed to create a third one. The Bank of Mauritius 

had  to  issue  a  line  of  credit  of  Rs3.5  billion  to  NIC  to  pay  for  those  who  have  lost  their 

money.    So,  we  increased  the  national  debt,  by  doing  it,  by  nearly  Rs7  billion.    We  never 

wanted to do it.  We never took Government to come across BAI or come across a situation 

which  we  had  to  deal  with  and  we  have  dealt  with  it.    So,  the  feel  good  factor  of  last  year 

disappeared very quickly when we were confronted with 240,000 people who could have lost 

all their money either in the banks or in the scheme or with their policyholders.  We managed 

it, I think, in an elegant way.  This was done and it costs money.   

So,  when  my  colleague,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development 

came,  he  was  confronted  with  a  quasi-impossible  situation,  a  catch-22  situation  where 

resources  are  scarce,  where  recurrent  revenue  has  increased  and  we  don’t  forget  also  the 

PRB, the last one, I think, Rs1.3 billion.  When you add all this together, you come to say: 

“How  can  you  make  a  Budget?”  And  he  made  it!    Not  only  he  made  it  –  un  ministre  des 

Finances est avant tout un bon père de famille.  Maybe you have not taken note of it, but the 

hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development has come and has said that he is going 

to prepay Rs4.3 billion of debt. Prepay! Payer avant terme!  And this, I think, is the stuff of 

which this Government is made.  We mean business, but at the same time we want to ensure 

growth, development and ensure also a fair distribution of wealth at all times.  This is where 

we are today.  I think that we had faced incredible black swans. Who would have expected 

that in Rodrigues and in Mauritius we would have this foot and mouth disease?  No one!  It 

came.  People say: well, it is a financial tragedy.  It is well beyond it.  Each cow that is killed 

creates in the family a sort of deuil.  I have lived it and you have lived it also.   So, when you 

cull 4,500 cattle; it means an incredible tragedy.   

This  is  why  I  have  spoken  to  my  colleague,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Agro-Industry  and 

Food  Security  and  to  hon.  Pravind  Jugnauth  to  say:  “You  should  go  there  because  those 

people are losing their animals to which they are attached.” I will tell you one short story.  I 

was living in Saint Pierre, near our house there was a plot of land under cane for my father 

and we had a neighbour, Pitka.  He had one cow and the cow died.   

 

87 

He came to ask for permission to bury the cow in the field. We said: ‘No problem!’ 

then, I went there as a shrine, and I saw the whole family weeping as if they have lost a child. 

This  is  the  tragedy.  We  are  not  dealing  with  Rs5,000,  Rs15,000.  We  are  dealing  with  a 

national  tragedy  and  for  Rodrigues  I  know  it  would  be  very  difficult  to  manage  at  the 

emotional level,  but  also someone who has lost  son instrument de travail needs to  continue 

living.  

My point is this, since we have taken Government, we are having systematic numbers 

of  black  swans  which  were  not  provided  for,  but  which  are  there.  One  good  thing  which 

happened, and thanks God! And I said it in one newspaper – I speak very rarely, from time to 

time – and I said that the absence of Pravind Jugnauth in Government is traumatic for each of 

us,  in  Government,  because  how  can  the  Leader  of  the  principle  party  in  this  alliance  be 

himself  out  of  Government.  So,  we  went  through  difficult  times;  I  believed  it  and  you  all 

have lived it here; we went through difficult times. This is probably for 2016, the best news 

that you can give me, is that Pravind won his case and this is where I think the good things 

start.  

1.  He won his case. 

2.  He made an extremely good Budget.  

3.  He will become the Prime Minister of Mauritius. 

(Interruptions) 

This is what will happen and this is what the good news is.  

 

And, it is on these notes, Madam Speaker, that I will ask our colleagues here and the 

Opposition Members also to join us and to say Bravo to Pravind Jugnauth. 

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

(7.41 p.m.) 

Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port  Louis  East): 

Thank  you very much, Madam  Speaker.  I have  listened with  much interest  to  the very able 

discourse of the former Minister of Finance and Economic Development. 

I have listened to each and every word that he has uttered and there is one thing which 

I must admit, and we should all admire, it is his ability to discourse, his ability to pronounce 

words, his ability to make some people for a certain amount of time live a certain dream, but 

 

88 

there is certainty in what I will say today. Many of us, here, today, on the opposite side, will 

not admit it. Many of those, on the opposite side, will not have the courage to say it to him. 

His words of allegedly wisdom, his words of supposed decorum, in presenting his thoughts, 

cannot in any way hide the failure of his Budget of last year. 

No words, no theories, no beautiful compliments to the actual Minister of Finance and 

Economic  Development,  no  rubbing  him  on  the  back  in  the  right  direction,  not  to  say 

anything more. Nothing of that will hide the fact that he has, indeed, a protector in this House 

and  that  protector  deserves  the  compliments  of  the  former  Minister  of  Finance  and  his 

protector is the actual Minister of Finance! 

Can  he  hide  from  us  the  beautiful  picture  that  he  painted  for  us  last  year,  that  he 

would  create  thousands  of  jobs?  Can  we  not  forget  that  he  came  to  this  august  Assembly 

telling us that now starts the Second Economic Miracle, not in 2016, but in 2015, he said! I 

remember each and every Member, on the opposite side, making statements and saying how 

happy  they  were  with  this  Budget  of  2015,  how  many  jobs  it  would  create,  how  now  the 

miracle will start, how it was a much awaited Budget, recovery from the doldrums of the last 

10 years. And he goes on repeating about the doldrums and the problems of the last 10 years 

ad nauseam. Words! Words! Words! 

But what has happened in the meantime? In the meantime, he is no longer Minister of 

Finance,  and  in  the  meantime,  not  long  ago,  not  even  48  hours  ago,  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 

Minister sitting here listening to a Member of the Opposition criticising the former Minister 

of Finance’s measures and his Budget of 2015, clearly said from a sitting position that is why 

he is no longer Minister of Finance. 

What type of courage must one have? Normally, I was told that normally in politics 

you have to develop thick skin. But, what type of thick skin must one have to be able to sit in 

this august Assembly and accept the Prime Minister of this country saying that is why he is 

no longer Minister of  Finance. Clearly,  ce n’est  pas là un compliment  que l’actuel Premier 

ministre  has  thrown  in  the  way  of  the  former  Minister  of  Finance.  No,  it  wasn’t!  It  was,  in 

fact,  a  certificate  of  incompetence  thrown  to  him.  But  he  sips  on  and  he  waives  on  and  he 

now says: “Oh, no, we started the work last year. Now, we are starting it again.” What about 

the thousands of jobs that he had promised us? Where are they? 

I don’t have to go further than look at the statistics themselves. The statistics of this 

country proved that the net job creation for 2015 will not be more than 2,200 jobs. How come 

 

89 

not more than 2,200 jobs created in 2015 to 2016? How come? What will they say? Because 

the previous regime messed up so much that we could not create jobs? The previous regime 

messed up, that’s why we could not give jobs and really keep our promises. Because of the 

BAI Affair we could not create jobs, because of the BAI Affair we could not ensure that FDI 

would go up. We had no choice.  Obviously, it fell and plummeted because of the BAI Affair, 

because of the previous regime. It’s not their fault. Oh, no! How can it be of their fault? It is 

not theirs. It is never their fault. 

Madam Speaker, it is never the fault of the actual Government, but always the fault of 

the  previous.  It  is  never  the  fault  of  the  Ministers  concerned,  but  always  the  fault  of  the 

previous Government, or BAI.  And what have we heard recently, civil servants are at fault! 

In a speech just before me, a Member of Government has said: “It’s civil servants who are at 

fault.” Should I take more time to describe the type of individual or the type of Government 

that  never  can  accept  wrong,  that  they  do  wrong,  they  always  place  the  responsibility  on 

others and not them? How can they, therefore, explain if such a Budget was so amazing last 

year, why is it that the actual Minister of Finance goes ahead and talks about rupture? Why is 

it, as hon. Baloomoody rightly put it, that the adviser of the actual Minister of Finance says: 

“Rupture from the Budgets that from or before” - specifically mentioning the Budgets of hon. 

Xavier-Luc Duval, hon. Jugnauth and hon. Lutchmeenaraidoo. 

We have a Government that specifically are very good at one thing, which is fighting 

with  one  and  other,  because,  in  the  meantime,  I  have  just  gone  through    some  of  the 

discourses.  Minister  Bhadain,  what  did  he  not  say  about  the  previous  Budget  of  2015!  In 

those  days,  he  was  full  of  compliments  for  the  actual  Minister  of  Finance  and  he  stood  up 

criticising  hon.  Uteem  and  getting  quite  annoyed  that  hon.  Ueem  had  dared  to  criticse  the 

Budget, and the Government has not changed on that.  They call themselves Democrats, but 

they fail to understand that we have a right not to agree. And, if we have a right not to agree, 

instead of agreeing to disagree, what they do, is that they hit below the belt and criticise you 

personally. This is what happens in this House!  

So,  when  I  look  at  the  speech  of  hon.  Minister  Bhadain,  what  do  I  read  from  his 

speech at the budgetary debates of last year? He says –  

“Everybody  is  aware  of  the  sincerity,  the  seriousness,  the  pragmatism  which  have 

guided the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development and his team in the 

preparation of this Budget.” 

 

90 

Did  hon.  Minister  Lutchmeenaraidoo  think  about  those  compliments  coming  from  hon. 

Minister Bhadain? Sincerity, seriousness, pragmatism? When he saw his affidavit and talked 

about  the  other  one  being  a  KGB  operative,  did  he  think  about  these  compliments?  Oh  no! 

This 

is  also  another  element 

to  what  happened  ever  since.  The  hon.  Minister 

Lutchmeenaraidoo swears an affidavit, calls his colleague a KGB type operative and still sits 

in the same Cabinet as him and has the courage and thick skin to sit here with him behind! 

Not afraid that he will be hit in the back! 

(Interruptions) 

Very  courageous  man!  And  that  type  of  thick  skin,  I  never  want  to  have  and  I  will  never 

have. And I don’t want it! 

(Interruptions) 

But  then,  I  will tell  you  something  else. How complimentary they were in those days, hon. 

Minister Bhadain to hon. Minister Lutchmeenaraidoo! He says, in his speech on the Budget – 

“The Stock Market’s reaction to this budget was in fact the litmus test.” 

And he goes on to  explain,  voilà, the stock market  has really  gone up.  It  is  rising and what 

happened? Whatever rises for a short time, falls. Does he not know that? He should know it 

and better than everyone else: whatever goes up comes down! What happened? And, he goes 

on to say –  

« Les investisseurs étaient en mode d’attente jusqu’à la fin de la semaine dernière. Le 

signal fort du gouvernement visant à doper la croissance les ont ramenés (…) » 

Well, investors are back! These are the words of hon. Minister Bhadain! 

« Les investisseurs sont retournés. » 

Where?  Where  are  thou  investors?  Where  are  thou?  We  have  Ministers  standing  in  this 

august  Assembly  telling  us  -  at  least,  they  should  have  had  the  courage  to  apologize  to  the 

people! We have had estimates, but we will blame it on BAI! We could not bring the foreign 

direct investment into Mauritius, we could not bring those investors but, what we have done 

over and over again, as this Government has done - and they have done it - just promise and 

promise that they we will do.   

 

91 

Just  now  I  heard  hon.  Minister  Lutchmeenaraidoo  talking  about  what,  the  sport 

development, and supposedly, this great work that has been done by Minister hon. Koonjoo! 

Supposedly,  he  has  done  such  a  great  work.  A  man  who  believes  that  you  have  to  be  a 

labourer’s son in  order to be able to  be elected in  Parliament!  A man who believes that the 

only  quality  of  someone  who  has  to  be  elected  in  Parliament  and  the  one  who  can  have  le 

discernement d’être au service de l’Etat est celui qui est le fils d’un laboureur, et que si vous 

n’êtes  pas  le  fils  d’un  laboureur,  vous  ne  pouvez  pas  prétendre  à  être  ici,  à  l’Assemblée 

nationale ! 

Il l’a dit dans son discours! He said it! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed! Hon. Mohamed, please sit down! 

Order! Order! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Mohamed! Hon. Mohamed, first of all, you cannot say that the hon. Minister is  a  

‘menter’. Please, withdraw this word!  

 

 

Mr Mohamed: I withdraw, but I…. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  Now,  what  I  am  going  to  tell  you  is  that  I  know  you  are  very 

passionate about what you are saying… 

(Interruptions) 

This is very good that you are very passionate. But then, please refrain from making personal 

attacks! 

(Interruptions) 

 

92 

Right! Don’t make personal attacks. I would request you to be passionate about what you are 

saying, but to do so very calmly. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Koonjoo: On a point of order, Madam. 

Mr Mohamed: I am not giving way.  

Mr Koonjoo:  I never said that! 

Mr Mohamed: This is not a point of order! This is a point of explanation! 

 

(Interruptions) 

 

Madam Speaker: Please, sit down. Yes, what is your point of order? 

Mr Koonjoo: I never said in the House that you have to be the son of a labourer to be 

in the Parliament. I never said that! 

Madam Speaker: Okay! 

Mr Koonjoo: I said that I am the son of a labourer! He is the son of an advocate. 

Madam Speaker: Please!  

Calm down!  Please! 

Mr Koonjoo: Never! Liar! 

 (Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No, no! Hon. Minister, I just asked the hon. Member to withdraw 

that word ‘liar’. It is unparliamentary. Please withdraw that word! Okay? 

(Interruptions) 

 

Mr Koonjoo:  I withdraw the word, Madam, but the hon. Member is misleading the 

House. 

 

 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Mohamed,  please  continue.  I  know,  as  I  said,  you  are  very 

93 

passionate, but then be calm. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed: I will here, Madam Speaker, quote from Hansard what  hon. Minister 

Koonjoo  said,  and  if  he would  like  a  copy,  I  can  even  give  it  to  him  right  now!  08  August 

2016! He just said that he never said that no one here is a son of a labourer.  Can we read? 

He goes on… 

He says here, nobody… 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

Order! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed: He basically says here – 

“Have you ever felt the pang of hunger? No, you don’t …” 

And looking at us!  And then, he goes on… 

(Interruptions) 

He goes on -  

“Nobody  because  the  Labour  Party  is  Labour  Party  in  name  only,  Madam  Speaker. 

Have you found any Member whose father was a labourer in the Labour Party?” 

Word for word!  

Madam Speaker: Non, non… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

Hon. Minister Koonjoo! 

94 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Minister Koonjoo, please calm down! 

Mr Mohamed: I rest my case! 

(Interruptions) 

 (Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, please continue with your speech, but refrain from 

making unbecoming remarks. Please! 

Mr Mohamed: You are right, Madam Speaker, I should ignore unbecoming people! 

Now,  what  I  find  really  shocking  is  that  he  comes  here  and  says,  as  though  hon. 

Minister Koonjoo is doing a fantastic job with regard to Blue Economy, and when I look at 

the document that has been produced by hon. Minister Jugnauth  - and this is what? A New 

Era of Development, Supplement  to  the Budget  Speech 2016-2017!  And  I look  at  page 64 

and this is about Ocean Economy, Production of fish (in wet weight equivalent) in 2013 high 

seas.  The total  production was 3,625 and the total production was 5,795, but  it went  up to 

12,000 or so in 2014 and 12,650 in 2015. So, as far as the increase is concerned ever since 

hon. Minister Koonjoo has been in power, according to the figures of the Ministry of Finance 

and Economic Development, it is a measly (650 minus 351) which is basically 259! Measly!  

But, when the Labour Party that he is so good at criticizing was in power, it jumped 

more than doubled in the space of one year and on average, it increased by 1,000 or slightly 

less than 1,000 every year. 

(Interruptions) 

And when we look also at the job creation in the sector, why is it that hon. Minister Koonjoo 

did not give us the figures as to how many… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Non! Hon. Minister Koonjoo, please! Do not interrupt! Allow the 

hon. Member to … 

Non! Allow him to make his argument! 

(Interruptions) 

 

95 

Mr Mohamed: I am here referring to the document which is that of… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No! 

Mr Mohamed: I am here referring to the document which is that of Ocean Economy, 

the  one  that  -  maybe,  he  does  not  know  -  was,  in  fact,  attached  to  the  Budget  and  is  a 

supplement. Maybe the hon. Minister is not aware. Maybe he should be aware now that there 

is a supplement and not only his speech! And maybe it is not only what his civil servants give 

him, but it is more than that. When you look here… 

Madam Speaker: Non,… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed: ... the employment… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  I  will  again  appeal  to  the  hon.  Member.  You  have  got  valid 

arguments which  you can bring up and  you are bringing evidence with some report in  your 

hands. Please, make your arguments, but don’t make provocative remarks! 

Mr  Mohamed:  When  you  look  at  the  figures,  employment  in  the  Sea  Food  Hub 

between 2014 and the figures given by the Minister of Finance and Economic  Development 

in the Sea Food Hub for 2015 – employment, Statistic of Mauritius, that is the source - over 

one year, ever since he is Minister, the increase according to this document is of 60 jobs. 60 

jobs! I am not talking about 60,000, not 60 was another zero, Madam Speaker, I am talking 

about  60  jobs.  I  am  not  here  inventing  anything.  It  is  at  page  63  of  the  supplement  to  the 

budget.  Now,  maybe  the  hon.  Minister  could  care  to  explain  at  an  another  session  or  at  an 

another  occasion  or  another  colleague  of  his  could  maybe  help  him  out,  but  this  is  not 

something which I am inventing. This is not something which anyone else has really put here 

as  an  invention,  it  is  what  I  am  basing  myself  on  in  this  document  emanating  from  the 

Ministry of Finance and Economic Development. 

When I listened to hon. Lutchmeenaraidoo saying how this is a pillar of the economy; 

now, if this is a pillar of the economy, that has supposedly been started by this Government in 

2015, that has been helped to  grow and  grow very, very strongly by the  former Minister of 

Finance  and  Economic  Development,  then,  I  really  wish  that  we  could  have  a  better  act  in 

 

96 

2016  because  2015  was  a  total  failure  if  we  could  only  create  60  jobs  according  to  the 

Ministry of Finance and Economic Development in the seafood hub. 

Now, one looks at what hon. Lutchmeenaraidoo has done when he said in his previous 

budget  that  he  was  going  to  create  eight  Smart  Cities,  where  are  they?  If  there  was  one,  at 

least,  Madam  Speaker,  I  would  say  commencement  de  preuve.  There  are  none!  Am  I  here, 

Madam  Speaker,  inventing  this.  No!  I  am  here  referring  to  simple  reports  that  clearly  have 

analysed what is it exactly that the former Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

had promised, had been applauded and approved by every single Member of Government, be 

it  Cabinet  or  non-Cabinet  Members  and  what  has  he  achieved?  We  are  still  waiting  for  the 

eight Smart Cities. But instead of the eight now, hon. Pravind Jugnauth talks about three, it is 

not only three, and the Heritage City. That is what is mentioned in the budget. Heritage City! 

So, the growth of 4.1% that he refers to, takes into account Heritage City.  

It is the first time in history that I find that the debates are not over, Committee Stage 

has not started, the voting has not taken place, but part of an essential element of this budget, 

which  is  Heritage  City,  which  is  taking  into  account  in  the  equation  for  the  calculation  of 

growth on an annual basis, is no longer in reality. It just disappeared. Will the hon. Minister 

of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  come  and  circulate  an  amendment  to  his  prévision 

and  his  estimates?    Because  he  is  duty  bound,  Madam  Speaker,  to  come  and  explain  to  us. 

Now that he has talked about 4.1%, when we have all the billions that were supposedly going 

to go to Heritage City, the thousands of jobs going to be created, the trade that was going to 

be ensued, all these are no longer on sur les cartes. Will he now not review and clearly, let 

me say it today, it is not an exaggeration simply because of this element ‘no longer being in 

the equation’ that the growth will never ever reach higher than 3.6% to 3.7%. That is a fact. I 

am  not  the  one  saying  it;  Economists  out  there  are  saying  it;  Accountants  are  saying  it; 

business experts are saying it; Members of Government are saying it. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please proceed! 

(Interruptions) 

Order! 

 

97 

Mr  Mohamed:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  talking  here  about  the  first  budget  of  this 

Government  in  2015,  but  then  we  have  had,  as  a  rattrapage  because  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 

Minister saw it coming from afar, he saw it coming from  afar that is  why in  August  of last 

year he ensured that there was the presentation of his Vision Statement 2030 because he had 

to  correct  the  mistakes,  because  le  pays  ne  démarrait  pas.  We  were  stuck  in  the  mud.  He 

came  up  with  Vision  2030.  But  what  is  scary  is  because  clearly  the  preparation  of  Vision 

2030 was not solely the job of one man. He may have led this whole project. He may have 

led  this  vision.  But  the  figures  that  were  given  to  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  clearly  came 

from somewhere and it would not surprise me that those figures came from the officers of the 

Ministry of Finance and Economic Development. I am sure that the same Minister of Finance 

and Economic Development was also somewhere party to the preparation of these figures. I, 

therefore,  do  not  blame  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  when  he  said  last  year  that  his 

Government would create 60,000 jobs in 2015/2016. This is in his Vision 2030. In Ébène, in 

a  beautiful  backdrop,  this  is  what  was  said  in  the  Vision  2030.  In  2015/2016,  60,000  jobs 

would be created and he goes on to say: ‘We will create 100,000 jobs in the next five years’ 

and Statistics Mauritius talks about the net job increase of 2,000 or so jobs in 2016.  

Clearly, therefore, whatever les prévisions qui étaient formulées par l’ancien ministre 

des  Finances,  les  chiffres  erronés,  clairement,  qui  ont  été  donnés  au  Premier  ministre,  Sir 

Anerood Jugnauth et l’actuel ministre des Finances qui vient nous dire que cette année-ci, il 

y aura vingt et quelque mille d’emplois qui seront créés, you can only believe a Government 

in what they say if they can, in a recent past, prove to us that what they have said they have 

done. But  as far  as their record and promises are concerned with  regard to job  creation, we 

cannot really say that they have credibility because hon. Lutchmeenaraidoo promised jobs, he 

did  not  deliver. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister, unfortunately, was misled. The officers of the 

Minister of Finance and Economic Development and the other members of his team could not 

deliver because the figures were clearly exaggerated.  

Today, when the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development  comes to say 

that he is going to create so many jobs, he is going to revamp the whole employment sector, 

he is going to tackle the skills gap that exists, he is going to find solutions to the mismatch 

that exists and if he says all that, what he should also underline is that he is promising a lot, 

but will not be able to deliver. He has also,  dans son intérêt, venir admettre what he has to 

do. He said that the majority of those jobs that he has referred to, in a big way, a big chunk of 

it,  belongs  to  the  Youth  Employment  Programme.  A  Youth  Employment  Programme  does 

 

98 

not give a permanent job, does not give a fixed job, but gives a job that is precarious. This is 

the reality.  

Now, as I have said, I have read what hon. Bhadain said in the former budget. I read 

also  read  what  hon.  Bodha  had  said  in  2010.  Madam  Speaker,  I  have  had  the  honour  of 

representing  the  Republic  of  Mauritius  and  this  is  my  third  mandate.  It  is  not  long.  It  is 

nothing compared to the years and years and the decades that some Members have had in this 

august Assembly. This month, I turned 48. I am on my third mandate. I have had the honour 

of being a backbencher in  Government.  I see the  youth  and the dynamism  opposite me and 

salute it. I may not agree with everything they say, but I salute the vigour.  

I have been the Minister of Labour, and now I have the honour, and thank God I say 

of being in the Opposition because this is also where one has to be to learn the trade. Many 

before me have been in such situations and have learnt the trade that way not only of being in 

Government,  but  also  in  the  Opposition  and  that  is  a  good  path.    And  I  appreciate  that.    I 

thank  the  inhabitants  of  my  Constituency  for  having  given  me  this  opportunity  of  being 

elected again, second time in my Constituency. 

I have been going on a lot of thought as to what apart from the criticisms I may have 

about the Budget; a lot of us have criticised, a lot of us have congratulated. It reminds me of 

the time when I was also a backbencher and it seems as though that all of us, whenever we 

are in Government, we suffer from a serious virus, a syndrome. It is that we are never wrong.  

I  was  in  Government,  I  remember  a  time  when  I  used  to  stand  up  as  backbencher  and  I 

remember hon. Sinatambou was Minister when I was backbencher.  It has been a pleasure to 

have  him  as  a  senior  colleague.    I  remember  the  time  when  each  and  every  time,  he  also 

would  stand  up  and  tell  the  Opposition,  they  were  wrong.    Opposition  is  always  wrong, 

Government is always right!  Are we right, Madam Speaker, to behave in such a way? And 

yes, most probably, if I was still in Government, I would still not see straight. I admit!  

Hon. Ramful said: “They seem to be living in an ivory tower”, but I extend it. Even 

the  Labour  Party,  when  we  were  in  Government,  we  were  living  in  an  ivory  tower.  A  time 

comes  when  in  the  life  of  any  Government,  if  you  start  living  in  this  ivory  tower  and  you 

don’t realise that, this is the end of your time. We have heard a lot of things this week, about 

Rs19  m.  being  paid  to  lawyers.    This  is  the  sign  I  am  talking  about  of  living  in  the  ivory 

tower.  There is sign of a Minister saying that: “synthetic drugs do not cause death”.  He may 

 

99 

be right in the equation, but it would be like President Zuma saying or reported to have said 

that… 

Sorry!  Basically having sexual intercourse without… 

(Interruptions) 

and can give AIDS ... 

I am sorry, he reported it.  He said it! 

Madam Speaker:  No! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed:  I am sorry.  He said it!  It is also saying… 

(Interruptions) 

It  is  public knowledge for God sake!   I don’t  exaggerate.   I can say it in public and he is a 

client… 

Madam  Speaker:  Whatever  you  have  said  hon.  Mohamed,  you 

take 

the 

responsibility for it! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed:  Mo client sa!  I know what I am saying and I know I have the right to 

say it.  Now, this problem which I am explaining right now is, when Government lives in an 

ivory  tower,  they  believe  that  they  can  give  lessons  to  every  single  Member  of  the 

Opposition, just like when I was in Government. Whenever someone would put a question to 

me, I always thought that they had and agenda and their agenda were surely to do me harm 

and nothing else. What I should have thought as well is that maybe what they are trying to do 

is try to tell me: “Listen, there is another way of doing things.  We don’t necessarily want the 

harm, be it  you or Government.   We want  the good of the country”.   I should  have reacted 

that  way,  but  I  didn’t.    And  maybe  if  I  had  been  in  Government  for  many,  many  more 

months, I would still be reacting the same way that my friends on the other side are. It is one 

 

100 

of  the  diseases  of  power.    It  is  one  of  the  diseases  that  we  suffer  from  and  I  have  decided 

today to come and say it.   

I had a conversation with my friends from the Labour Party and I said to them.  It is 

time for us to come and say that when in 2014, the Government lost the elections, there was a 

very strong message that the people had sent. And the message that the people had sent, I will 

not  get  into  the  details  as  to  whether  it  was  the  Alliance;  whether  it  was  the  programme; 

whether it was the five years’ President or seven years or what not. These are excuses as far 

as I am concerned, reasons, but, at the end of the day, excuses because then, deep down there 

is a message that the people of Mauritius have sent to us.  It is: “we were not happy with the 

way  that  you  were  governing”.    Simple!  You  can’t  get  around  this  reality.    The  people  of 

Mauritius were not happy with the way that we governed and we lost the elections! 

(Interruptions) 

Now, it is always easy for hon. Members of Government to come and laugh at what I say.  It 

is easy for them to come and criticise what  I say.  It is  easy for them to come and chuckle, 

and enjoy that  I am  admitting that we did wrong, but  I believe it takes courage and it takes 

humility to admit that we were wrong and we are not always right.  

Now,  what  I  would  like  to  add  here  is:  what  the  message  of  the  people  was  in 

December  2014,  Madam  Speaker,  was  that  there  was  a  signal  they  were  sending  us  and 

sending  the  people  who  are  politicians;  the  leaders  of  today  and  tomorrow,  and  the  actual 

leaders.    They  wanted  a  rupture.    And  I’ll  come  to  the  word,  the  word  that  is  used  by  hon. 

Jugnauth  in  the  presentation  of  his  Budget,  ‘rupture’.  And  he  says  that  there  has  been  a 

rupture.  Now, I humbly state that there is no ‘rupture’.  I was reading a document - because I 

have had the chance, as I said, of being in Government and seeing how things work – of what 

exactly would be ‘rupture’, which is not found in this particular Budget. 

When hon. Jugnauth came up and said that it had to be different to what there was in 

the past, there were certain things I expected and those are certain things that a lot of people 

in Mauritius were expecting because those are the things that the message that the people of 

Mauritius have sent to la classe politique. And I thought that finally someone has understood 

that message and would put it into practice and would translate it.  We were wrong because 

we  could  not  do  it.  We  did  not  hear.  We  were  not  listening  may  be,  but  maybe  now  in 

Government, he would listen because he has heard. But I was wrong again, he had not heard.  

 

101 

Because if  you really want to have a  rupture, one of the first things  you must do is, have a 

fundamental  reform  of  the  Civil  Service.  No  Government,  Labour  Party;  MSM-MMM;  we 

have  never  managed  to  achieve,  implement,  undertake,  study  and  put  into  action  a  proper 

reform of the Civil Service. None!  We may talk about - a Civil Service Academy, the Civil 

Service institutions for training  – all that,  but  the fundamental fact  remains  that  you cannot 

talk about progress and I here read from a document which I read with much interest written 

by  Ruth  Richardson  in  the  ‘Telegraph’  and  in  that  document,  she  talks  about  the  reform  of 

Government.  Here in this document I read – 

“The  public  sector  is  such  a  big  player,  economically  and  socially,  that  no 

transformation programme can succeed without embracing civil service reform. 

I learned that success in government relies on ensuring that the forces of productivity 

and innovation, so crucial to lift private sector performance, must equally be allowed 

to make themselves felt in the ranks of the Civil Service.” 

This  paper talks about  having to  do away  with  the  burdens of bureaucracy.  And here  I  am 

not  blaming  the  civil  servants.    The  civil  servants  can  only  work  within  a  system  that  we, 

legislators, create.   

(Interruptions) 

Can you imagine, Madam Speaker, that hon. Baloomoody was here talking about the Public 

Accounts  Committee,  and  the  Standing  Orders  do  not  allow  us  to  even  criticise  the  Public 

Accounts  Committee!  Can  you  imagine  that  we  cannot  critise  the  Public  Service 

Commission,  if  they  do  anything  wrong,  within  this  Assembly  unless  we  do  it  by  a 

substantive  motion!  Is  this  democracy?  We  have  no  right  to  question  any  civil  servant  in 

public, we have no right to question the PSC if they have done something wrong or even call 

them within a Committee of the House because the Standing Orders say  we cannot.  This  is 

what  I  am  talking  about,  Madam  Speaker.  If  we  want  to  change  fundamental  issues  in  this 

country, I expected the hon. Minister of Finance to come and change the method of working 

of the civil service. When it comes to us as Parliamentarians having the right, a democratic 

right to question in public the working of Government, it also goes as far as each and every 

officer of the civil service because there needs to be accountability. 

If there was rupture which there is not; I would expect hon. Pravind Jugnauth to come 

and do so something that  we could  not do. Maybe we did  not  have the courage to.  I admit. 

 

102 

Maybe we did not even have the vision to. But now let me say it out loud, I would like to see 

a piece of legislation that comes to make a Minister accountable for wrong that he does to the 

country  when  it  comes  to  causing  damage  and  prejudice  and  losses  to  the  coffers  of  this 

country. 

A  Minister  must  be  able  to  pay  the  consequences  of  his  decision.  If  he  has  made  a 

wrong decision, if he has intervened in such a way as to make a wrong decision and later on 

down the road the State is to pay damages, the Minister must be liable for that and he cannot 

hide  forever  behind  the  Public  Officers’  Protection  Act.  A  civil  servant  or  a  Police  Officer 

cannot  keep  on  hiding  derrière  le  Public  Officers’  Protection  Act  and  you  have  two  years 

within which  you are to  enter a matter, otherwise,  you are finished. This  is not  democracy! 

This  is  not  accountability!  And  this  is  evidence,  Madam  Speaker,  qu’il  n’y  a  pas  eu  de 

rupture because today, tomorrow morning, next week, next month and next year, we will still 

be  working  within  the  same  old  decrepit  system  which  is  archaic.  Other  countries  have 

evolved, Africa has moved forward and we are still, on fait du surplace. We did not have the 

courage to do it. We did not have the vision to do it. I apologise for that and I just pray that 

this Government would. I pray this Government could. 

Now, if there was to be rupture, Madam Speaker, we did not have the courage to do 

it,  I  say  it  again.  But  what  I  take  the  solemn  commitment  to  do  is  the  following:  that  the 

Labour Party - and me as a Member of the Labour Party - I will keep on fighting and I will 

not keep quiet if we have political nominees ever again. I don’t agree with it. Other Members 

may  not  agree  with  me,  I  respect  their  opinion,  but  I  don’t  agree  with  it.  I  will  give  you  a 

simple example.  Yesterday, I raised a matter at Adjournment Time and I here salute the Rt. 

hon.  Prime  Minister.  When  I  raised  that  matter  at  Adjournment  Time,  he  acted  promptly. 

What  was  this  matter  about?  It  was  about  someone  had  been  nominated  as  a  lawyer  at  the 

Equal  Opportunities  Commission  and  that  person  was  wrongly  nominated,  because  that 

person allegedly had five years’ practice at the Bar which the law says she must have, but she 

only had two. In other words, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister immediately took action. I salute 

him for that. Because this is the type of reaction, as a Member of the Opposition, I would like 

to see from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister because he has acted in the interest of the country and 

I  stood  up  in  the  interest  of  the  country.  There  was  no  party  politics  there,  but  the  fact 

remains, how was she nominated? 

The  fact  remains  that  there  were  civil  servants  somewhere  who  processed  those 

documents. There were certain people who informed the Rt. hon. Prime Minister that she was 

 

103 

eligible, certain people did not give the right information to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and 

because  of  their  wrongdoing,  the  President  of  the  Republic,  Her  Excellency,  got  the  wrong 

information  and  made  a  nomination  going  against  the  parameters  of  the  law.  Now,  who  is 

going to be accountable for this? The system of Government we live in, la rupture il n’y en a 

pas eu, parce que s’il  y avait  rupture, there would have been a method, a system whereby 

the person who is responsible should pay for it and should be paid for it in public, because we 

cannot  tolerate  such  mishaps.  Can  you  imagine  a  simple  mistake  of  this  nature  because  we 

have politicised the nomination at the head of a Body of that nature. That is what I am getting 

at. 

The Labour Party also did that. The Labour Party also chose if it has to be a member 

going to be named, let’s find who is close to us, we are going to name him. The excuse that 

we used – well, because they believe in our policy, that’s why we are going to name them! 

We were wrong! This is the message that the people of the country sent us in 2014. C’est cela 

le message de la rupture, that we should give the opportunity to people with the ability to be 

in  these  Committees,  to  have  Bipartisan  Parliamentary  Committee,  interview  people, 

graduates,  qualified  people,  who  can  come  and  speak  the  truth  as  far  as  their  CV  is 

concerned,  not  rely  solely  on  the  recommendations  of  the  Leaders  of  an  alliance.  Il  ne  faut 

pas se baser seulement sur ce que les Leaders de l’alliance disent comme proposition et de ce 

fait cause un embarras à la Présidence et au bureau du Premier ministre. 

If we stop political nominees and we choose to go with transparency where we have 

Bipartisan  Parliamentary  Committee  to  interview  people,  then  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister 

chooses, but he chooses on the basis of a report and the ability, la méritocratie. This is what I 

believe in.  I say it again, we did not have the courage to do it, but this would have been  un 

budget de la rupture because it comes to propose something that is diametrically opposed to 

what had been done ever since Independence. We have not seen that rupture. The youth out 

there, en 2014, wanted to see la télévision privée. Where is it? S’il y avait rupture, we would 

have  had  clearly  either  a  privatisation  of  the  MBC,  because  even  under  the  regime  of  the 

MMM, the Labour Party, the MSM, the MBC has always been une institution that is not the 

pride of the nation. 

Rupture  means  that  we  would  have  had  to  have  an  MBC  where  there  is  no  longer 

political  nomination,  there  is  no  longer  control,  there  is  even  privatisation  if  need  be,  but 

there is also la création d’une télévision privée. We are still waiting. The people out there are 

 

104 

waiting. This is not a criticism. This would have been evidence of certain rupture that there is 

in there. 

I came across another article that really took me aback. It is an article in which I have 

seen  the  hon.  Prime  Minister  of  the  Netherlands  riding  his  bicycle  to  the  office.  I  am  not 

asking the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to ride a bicycle. 

I am not asking you to do that! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

No. But I would even offer you my services to take you along. But this is not what I am 

saying. What I am saying here is la mentalité.  

(Interruptions) 

What I am talking about here, Madam Speaker, c’est la mentalité. I am sure there are lots of 

friends, on both sides of the House, who would understand what I mean. In a paper - I have it 

here and I will show it to you - it is the Prime Minister who is riding and it is in Kenya 

today… 

(Interruptions) 

No. He is riding a bicycle, not going to the office as far as your hon. father is concerned, but 

he is going as a pleasure, which is still good. Now, I would not compare playing ball, like I 

do at the office, I am talking about riding to the office. It is a matter of principle. Now, what 

this article says is that it is shocking - and this is a report from Kenya today  - and what the 

article says also is that whilst people in Netherlands, like the Prime Minister, is in economic 

powerhouse, ranked 16th in the world in terms of GDP, by all standards the country is rich, 

yet the Prime Minister has never driven in convoys.  

The  Labour  Party  has  had  long  convoys  for  their  Deputy  Prime  Minister  and  their 

Prime  Minister.  The  former  Governments  of  2000/2005  have  had  long  convoys.  In  1995,  I 

remember, CA205, the first BMW, the white one the hon. Prime Minister had. I remember it. 

Now,  please,  we  all  go  for  convoys.  But,  the  thing  is  when  you  talk  about  a  developed 

country you don’t have long convoys. Why is it that they can avoid not to have convoys? So, 

what  I  am  trying to  say  here is in  my programme of  rupture for the  Labour Party, this is  a 

 

105 

method  which  we  should  study.  Now,  he  will  go  on  and  say  what  do  you  mean,  that  the 

former Prime Minister will ride bicycles? 

(Interruptions) 

What  I  am  saying  here  is  that  this  country  should,  therefore,  start  thinking  about  a  new 

generation of politicians, a new way of doing things whereby we can leave convoys behind, 

we can leave les signes of rich behind, where we can even not be afraid of walking without 

bodyguards  and  riders  among  the  public  and  walk  to  office  and  even  ride  a  bicycle  to  the 

office, like a Minister of the Republic of France using his moped and going to his office in 

the Republic of France. This is what I would have called rupture! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! Order, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed: Madam Speaker… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker,  what  I  am  suggesting,  let  me  say  it  again,  for  fear  that  I  may  be 

misunderstood. 

(Interruptions) 

I don’t want to be misunderstood, Madam Speaker. I say it that those are measures that even 

our  Government  could  not  even  fathom,  could  not  even  dream  of.  When  we  were  in 

Government, we could not even think about implementing them.  

But those are new methods of going to the public. Those are new way of doing things 

and those are the ideas that are existing out there among the youth of this country. When I see 

hon. Duval, the third, nodding, then I say there is, therefore, a chance for hope. There is hope! 

When  I  see  hon.  Duval  nod,  approvingly,  then  I  say  there  is  the  possibility  of  better  days 

ahead. There is the possibility of turning the page and not in any way criticising the Rt. hon. 

Prime Minister, but saying that maybe it will be the last Prime Minister of the last era. But the 

new era de la rupture would be where we will do things without necessarily having to have 

riders  accompanying  us  and  blocking  the  roads  and  being  nasty  to  members  of  the  public, 

 

106 

where things are different. This is the type of ideas that the youth out there expect and expect 

ever since December 2014. 

Now,  s’il  y  avait  rupture,  Madame  la  présidente,  I  would  have  expected  something 

else from hon. Minister Jugnauth. He has talked about a new sector of the economy, Albion. 

People  are  screaming  about  Albion,  their  constituency  going  to  have  a  mobile  oil  platform 

and, that platform, I hear, according to the press, would be owned by Mr Roland Maurel. If 

that is true, it is besides the point whoever it is, but I would expect hon. Minister Jugnauth to 

come forward and say: “au nom de la rupture, we have heard the messages of the people and 

the youth, we now instil a new system in Government, because it is such a new system, we 

are  going  to  have  a  referendum  about  it.”  Because  a  referendum  about  it  would  give  the 

people of Mauritius the right to choose, is this the path they want to go upon? Is this the type 

of development they want? 

(Interruptions) 

I  am  not  inventing  anything.  In  Geneva,  Madam  Speaker,  the  construction  by  the 

WTO  of  a  simple  annex  has  acquired  a  referendum.  The  construction  and  the  change  of  a 

public building in Geneva has … 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Can we have less noise in the House, please? 

Mr Mohamed: … required a referendum because the vote and the voice of the people 

matter. We cannot keep on saying we are running this country  au nom du peuple et pour le 

peuple but we do not go to them and tell them we are going to have a floating platform before 

your eyes, we are going to really now have an oil refinery… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: I just said, can we have some silence in the House, please? 

Mr Mohamed: And finally, we just have not had a rupture. 

Madam Speaker, I have listed and those are just a few of the list that I have given. But 

then, I was talking to hon. Jhuboo and he was telling me how in Rwanda, in Kigali, the new 

leader of that country, once a month with all people of his Cabinet,  just as Mr Lee Kuan Yew 

used  to  do  when  he  came  to  power  in  Singapore,  insists  that  you  have  a  national  day  of 

 

107 

cleaning. The cleanest city in Africa is Kigali. The cleanest city in Africa is found in Rwanda. 

When  you  look  around  -  and  I  talked  about  this,  unfortunately,  the  hon.  Deputy  Prime 

Minister is not here he would understand - when you look at all the dirt… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, please sit down! 

Mr  Mohamed:  …  tourists  are  sending  me  documents,  photographs  about  how 

Mauritius has become dirty, how Mauritius is not clean, how Port Louis is not clean. Then we 

understand that we have something to do. So, what I call upon the Government to do, rupture 

would mean that, at least, once a month all the country can together go to the streets and put 

our hands down in  gloves and, if need be, clean Mauritius in  the name  of posterity and for 

posterity. This would be rupture! 

Whatever the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development has proposed has 

nothing new. It has nothing new because the system within which it will operate is the same 

system that has existed ever since independence. Now, I have only spoken very honestly and 

accepting liability when I can accept and accepting wrongdoing whenever I need to accept it. 

Now, it is unfortunate, I cannot please everyone and in reaction to me being very honest and 

accepting  wrong  when  we  have  done  wrong  I  am  hearing  people  from  the  other  side  just 

saying: bla bla bla! 

But,  let me basically say one last thing to  the Member who keeps on saying  bla bla 

bla! Last week, and this would be a rupture but there is no rupture whatsoever - this week we 

have heard about Rs19 m. of taxpayers’ money going to one man for one case and the case is 

not over and it is a watching brief. We have heard about someone named at the level of ICTA 

who has no qualifications but has still been named by the President of the Republic and that 

person may have benefited from salary and car facility when she was not entitled to it. 

That’s EOC? Alright!  

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

There have been interviews carried out at the level of the … 

(Interruptions) 

 

Choomka! 

108 

(Interruptions) 

Who are paying the consequences? She is still in office on top of it! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No conversations, please! I don’t think he needs your help! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed: Well, I appreciate. But, now I have just received information that has 

come to my attention only a few minutes before I started this intervention. That information, I 

will  share  with  this  august  Assembly.  There  have  been  recruitments  at  the  CEB  and  those 

positions  were  meant  for  internal  staff  only,  promotions  from  within.  I  have  the  document 

here  that  clearly  shows  the  salary  scale,  the  notice,  the  reference  of  the  notice.  I  have  it  all 

here. And that document shows that it was for internal staff only, lo  and behold no internal 

staff has been appointed! But, external staff have been taken in lieu and instead. If this budget 

de la rupture est une façon de rupture avec le passé ? We may have done wrong but does that 

mean  that  we  can  continue  such  wrong  again  where  people  of  a  specific  constituency  are 

recruited externally in spite of advertising for internal? Is this un budget de la rupture? Is it a 

budget de la rupture, when you have two people who have been suspended from the CEB - I 

will  not  go  long  more  -  Mr  Fakim  and  Mr  Kurreemun!    Those  two  people  have  been 

suspended from the CEB.  Why those two? Who is in charge of the Disciplinary Committee 

to listen to them?  Someone from Collendavelloo Chambers, Mr Colunday!  Is this  rupture, 

Madam Speaker? We are all very shocked when we see Mr Trilochurn earning Rs19 m. But 

no, it is not the only fact of wrongdoing, there is the case of Christelle Sohun! Collendavelloo 

Chambers happens to be a member of the IRP.  So, rupture?  There is no rupture.  There is 

none.   

Let me, once again, do what others cannot do.  We were condemned for wrongdoing 

in 2014. This Government has changed nothing, in spite of the good intentions enunciated by 

the Rt. hon. Prime Minister. The Leaders have a responsibility, as I have said, and I repeat it, 

of not wrong footing him, and the Leaders have done what I have just said behind his back.  

If today, the lady has been fired from the Equal Opportunity Commission, has been asked to 

leave,  thanks  God,  I  raise  the  matter  yesterday,  and  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  reacted 

 

109 

promptly.  This is a Government of trial and error!  But the only problem with this equation is 

what?  They make the error and we go on trial!   

Long live Mauritius! Long live la rupture! 

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Minister Sinatambou! 

The  Minister  of  Technology,  Communication  and  Innovation 

(Mr  E. 

 

 

Sinatambou): Madam Speaker, please do not listen to the gentleman who spoke before me.  

He has got a sweet tongue, but a tongue full of venom. His ploy is to try and make believe 

that  this  Government  is  as  dirty  as  the  one  to  which  he  belonged,  that  this  Government,  he 

will  try  and  make  believe,  especially  to  those  sitting  up  above  there.    Because  he  has  not 

made his speech first; we will see tomorrow in the newspapers… 

(Interruptions) 

That’s the point, hon. Rt. Prime Minister.  This is a tongue full of venom which he is trying to 

throw filth instead of looking at the filth lying in his own party and his previous Government.  

It is all too well to come before this House this evening to claim, to give us lessons as to what 

rupture means.  You always see the light when you are in Opposition.  That seems to be the 

trend of the First Member for Port Louis Maritime and Port Louis East.   As he says, he has 

had three mandates.  Three mandates during which he never saw the light!   

I am sorry!  Well, maybe, you’ll have the third when we are 65! 

(Interruptions) 

Two mandates, where he never saw it fit to tell his then Leader of the House, Prime Minister 

of this country that they needed to have a proper reform of the Civil Service, that it would be 

fundamental, he says, to get rid of an old and decrepit system. 

Today,  when  we  are  at  the  helm  of  power,  when  we  have  to  attend  –  I  will  here 

borrow the words of my distinguished friend, hon. Bhagwan.  When patient Mauritius is ill, 

we should stop attending to the patient to embark onto what I think would be an ill-advised 

reform  of  the  Civil  Service.    Patient  Mauritius  which  has  been  fed  with  poison  by  the 

Opposition  sitting  here  was  in  the  worst  possible  condition  when  we  took  over.    And,  the 

country must know that it will take us some time to get patient Mauritius in better condition.  

 

110 

However, we need to reassure this House that patient Mauritius is in the best of hands.  We 

will not… 

Yes! In any medical institution … 

(Interruptions)  

 

 

Madam Speaker:  No interruptions! 

Mr Sinatambou:  In any medical institution, you have a whole medical team - in any 

medical institution worth its name. I am sure, Madam Speaker,  you will agree with me that 

any  medical  institution  worth  its  reputation,  you  don’t  have  only  one  specialist,  you  will 

make sure that you have a full medical team which can adapt to the circumstances. 

 

I will concede one thing, Madam Speaker, this evening.  Yes, we do not get it all right 

every time, but then, again, who does?  But what I am here to challenge is the preposterous 

allegation that this Government is doing what the previous Government did.  I would strongly 

object  to  that  because  I  refused  to  participate  in  what  the  previous  Government  was  doing.  

And  what  is  even  worse  is  when  the  previous  orator  actually  comes  on  to  say  that  he  will 

have no more political nominees, that there should be no more such things in Government.  If 

that were the case, how come - I mean, I believe that when he speaks of political nominees, 

he also has in mind political acolytes.  Now, if we go by the very explanation of the Leader of 

the party to which he belongs, the 227 odd millions of rupees are apparently the ownership of 

that party.  How could he, saying that, oh, we have – if you believe in rupture, to stay away 

from political nominees.  How could he stay in a party which is actually keeping money by 

hundreds of millions coming from political acolytes and such nominees? 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Sinatambou:  I would like, at this stage, to … 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Minister, please proceed! 

Mr Sinatambou:  I would like, at this stage, to mention to you, Madam Speaker, that 

 

 

 

 

I  made  it  a  point  because  I  was  going  to  speak  after  the  hon.  First  Member  for  Port  Louis 

 

111 

Maritime and Port Louis East, to go to his speech on the Budget of last year. I wanted to just 

instruct myself about the type of tone he had taken, the type of contribution he had brought to 

the Budget of last year and I must say I was quite satisfied with the substance of his speech 

last  year.    Because  he  came  up  with  something  which  I  will  now  devise  as  an  expression  I 

call the ‘narien pas bon’ syndrome.    

As he says and he said it again today that sometimes if you are in Government, you 

would claim  that everything that is  done is  good and when  you are in  Opposition,  you will 

actually say everything that happens is wrong.  Now, when I look at the debates coming from 

the other sides of the House, I must say that, fortunately, the ‘narien pas bon syndrome’ has 

been  the  appurtenance  of  only  a  few.  It  has  not  been  generally  the  tone  and  tenure  of 

everyone. And I think that we can only… 

Well, we don’t need to divide you!  

You will really need to! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Sinatambou:  When one wonders... 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Sinatambou: As someone was just telling me: ‘one wonders in how many bouts 

the  MMM  has  got  split  now!’    So,  I  don’t  think  they  need  me  to  divide  them.    What  I  am 

trying to say here is that we were expecting and I think that this country should expect from 

its elected Members, constructive criticisms.  And this is where I beg to disagree with what 

the previous speaker has been saying to this House.   

(Interruptions) 

 

112 

The previous orator!  I beg your pardon.  Thank you, Rt. hon. Prime Minister.   

Madam Speaker, I see what he was saying to this House in two tiers.  The first one is 

where he had put the former Minister of Finance and Economic Development on trial.  And 

that  is  not  the  purpose  for  which  we  are  all  here,  not  only  this  evening.    This  is  not  the 

purpose for which we are in this House, debating the Budget of this year.   

The  second  tier  was  about  –  I  won’t  even  say  it  is  idealistic.    I  won’t  even  say  this 

utopian talk about rupture.  It was sheer demagoguery.  C’était de la démagogie!  Just trying 

to make people, with simple things which may bother them, to react in his favour or in favour 

of  his  party!  We  all  know  if  we  go  outside  among  the  public,  very  often,  for  every  single 

frustration  which  is  suffered  by  members  of  the  public,  they  just  put  it  ‘fonctionnaire  ça.  

Bann là paress, bann là pas travail!’  Fortunately, he could not change the Ministers because 

we are elected by the people.  Now, it would be appealing to a segment of the population that 

we say: “Yes, we need to change and reform the public sector”.  But even if it were the case, 

Madam Speaker, that there has to be a reform of the public sector, now is not the time!  The 

time is to attend to the economic health of this country.  The time is to address the economic 

problems of this country.  We will look at other things afterwards.   

Now, it also looks at how it is sheer demagoguery when he says that there should be 

no  convoy,  I  mean,  if  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  has  to  come  to  Cabinet,  you  look  at  the 

congestion problems  of Port  Louis,  I mean, in  fact,  if he comes on bicycle, he might  arrive 

quicker.   

(Interruptions) 

But it sounds so appealing to come and say that the Prime Minister of such and such country 

in  the  northern  hemisphere,  goes  to  his  Ministry  on  a  bicycle  and  that  will  be  appealing  to 

another segment of the population.  

This  thing  about  political  nominees,  we  know,  we  have  heard  of  nine  years  of 

scandalous behaviour where monstrous things were happening to this country. So, it is now 

the  right  time  to  come  and  appeal  to  another  section  of  the  population  and  say:  “Well,  I 

wouldn’t do that!” While I heard him coming up with six particular proposals… 

Especially the four others!  Make it ten!   

(Interruptions) 

 

113 

Why  were  they  not  part  of  the  political  manifesto  of  the  MMM/Labour  Party  fiasco 

alliance when they thought they would win elections by 60-nil?  Why was it not part of their 

winning  alliance?    It  wouldn’t  be  because  he  knows  he  will  never  do  it.    Now,  in  addition, 

Madam  Speaker,  to  what  I  have  heard  the  previous  orator  saying,  let  us  make  a  wise 

suggestion  to  him  through  you;  why  doesn’t  he  bring  it  to  the  next  political  bureau  of  his 

party and have it put to the vote at the next Congress of the Labour Party? 

(Interruptions) 

If he does, we look forward to reading the results. I can already see the leading Members of 

the Labour coming to their office on bicycle.  Everyone can already anticipate looking at that.  

The previous Member asked that we should not get personal, otherwise I would have said 

about the car he drives.  But never mind!   

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  No! 

Mr  Sinatambou:    One  thing  which  I  would  like  to  add  is  also  (a)  some  of  the 

demagoguery in the proposals of la rupture qu’il souhaiterait voir and, in an event, one can 

rest assured, if positive measures are proposed to this Government, we have in the leadership 

of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, someone who is attentive and who will take them on board if 

they  are  practical,  if  they  are  enforceable  and  if  they  are  right  for  this  country.  And  the 

previous orator, himself, said  so about  a few problems  he mentioned to  the Rt. hon.  Prime 

Minister. 

But  there  is  another  thing,  which  I  think  I  should  actually  express  in  this  August 

House.  It is that regardless of the demagoguery, there is one thing we ought not to do. I will 

not  say  that  it  was  made  consciously  and  wilfully,  but,  in  any  event,  it  resulted  from  my 

standpoint, in a misleading consequence.  

The previous orator spoke of page 63 of the Supplement to the budget of this year and 

said that according to Statistics Mauritius, there had been only 70 recruits  – he said 60, but 

when I looked at the figure, it is 70. 

(Interruptions) 

 

114 

He said 60, but when I checked the figure, I mean it is just a calculation error, but according 

to the figure which appears at page 63, it is, in fact, 70.  But he said 60.  You are right! 

(Interruptions) 

I am not going to discuss on that!  What I object to is that he failed, however, to add that just 

above that particular graph, there is another graph which shows that the value added to that 

sector has increased by nearly another Rs100 m.   

(Interruptions) 

Well, please have a look at page 63 and you will see! 

(Interruptions) 

Now, the point I am trying to make is that it is one thing to speak about statistics; it is another 

thing to make sure that we disclose the truth.   

Now,  in  addition  at  page  63  of  that  supplement,  the  graphic  about  the  70  new 

employees is  only about the seafood hub.   It  does not  speak about  fisheries. So, it does not 

speak about fisheries, it does not speak about cruise workers. All those other aspects will fall 

under the purview and the portfolio of the distinguished Minister. So, in that respect… 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, but you ought to say that there is more. It did appear to me and I am sure it must have 

appeared especially to those members of the press sitting in the gallery that the Minister had 

only managed to create 60 jobs which is not a realistic thing to say. 

Now, especially as the hon. first Member for Port Louis Maritime and Port Louis East 

is  saying  that  we  should  read  the  supplement.  Exactly!  When  we  read  the  supplement,  we 

should  not  just  concentrate  on  what  we  read  to  come  and  give  a  misleading  impression  to 

others who have not read it. 

Especially. You mean as not a labourer. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, I must say that I think I would not be doing justice to this Budget if I 

were  to  keep  on  trying  to  respond,  to  reply  to  the  speech  of  the  previous  orator.  I  think  I 

would be doing more justice to this Budget by speaking about the very Budget itself. Here, I 

believe that anyone who is sensible; who, while acknowledging that things are not and cannot 

 

115 

ever be perfect, everyone should acknowledge that this Budget is worthy of congratulations. 

I, for one, would like, therefore, to congratulate the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic 

Development  for  what  I  consider  to  be  an  excellent  piece  of  work.  Because  not  only  I  so 

believe but also because there is much to comment in this excellent Budget which has been 

widely acclaimed by so many sectors of the population not only by me, not only by MPs on 

this side of the House, I will come to Members on the other side of the House but also by so 

many sectors of the population  whether it be by  the common people, the private sector, the 

business community and even by the trade unions.  

Here,  Madam  Speaker,  if  you  would  allow  me  to  refer  to  some  of  the  comments 

which were made by other Members of this House especially those sitting on the other side of 

the House. I made it a point to read an extract of the Defi Media Info of 31 July 2016. What 

did  I find in  it? I found  that no less  than the Leader of the Opposition  to take again  what  a 

few  Members  on  this  side  of  the  House  had  said:  the  Leader  of  the  Opposition  found  this 

Budget  to  be  interesting.  He  went  on  to  commend  among  others  the  fall  in  the  price  of 

cooking gas and the increase in the monthly allowance to those at the bottom of the scheme. 

To me, that is something very commendable especially coming from someone who is known 

for his criticisms regarding this Government.  

The next person who I normally know to be quite critical of Government action is no 

less  than  the  Opposition  Whip,  respected  Member  of  Parliament  who,  if  I  understand  well, 

has been here on his eight mandate and I was very happy actually to know that in his speech 

he  acknowledged  the  introduction  of  positive  measures.  I  am  quoting  him.  When  he 

acknowledged  the  introduction  of  positive  measures,  he  himself  mentioned  the  introduction 

of  innovative  poverty  eradication  programmes,  the  decrease  in  the  selling  power  price  of 

household gas, several measures scheme to boost the SME sector and the merging of related 

parastatal  organisations.  What  a  compliment  coming  from  the  Opposition  Whip!  I  believe 

that  this  is  one  of  the  best  compliments  that  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 

Development could have got.  

Now,  this  being  said,  I  must  add  that  I  welcome  the  same  type  of  tone  which  was 

adopted  by  the  immediate  neighbour  of  the  Opposition  Whip.  Hon.  Baloomoody,  earlier, 

found and I believe rightly that the Budget contains good measures and I especially welcome 

the  measure.  It  was  not  this  ‘narien  pa  bon’  syndrome  which  I  mentioned  earlier,  which  I 

think this year has been the sole prerogative of the Labour representative seated there. And I 

will  come  to  that  later  with  one  exception;  the  one  exception  is  unfortunately  hon.    Ameer 

 

116 

Meea. I believe it is unfortunate that hon.  Ameer Meea, the Second Member for Port Louis 

Maritime and Port Louis East, I was shocked, was telling us that things were being decided in 

this Government afin de mieux traficoter avec les biens publics. Is hon. Ameer Meea saying 

that the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister who leads Cabinet, who leads this House is taking decisions 

afin  de  mieux  traficoter  avec  les  biens  publics?  That  I  think  is  shameful.  As  much  as  I 

welcome constructive criticisms, I think we took them well from hon. Baloomoody who did 

very well perhaps except for one or two dérapages.  

As we say no one is perfect; so that should reply to the sitting comments of the First 

Member for Port  Louis  Maritime and Port  Louis East.  He says when did  you  faner and  we 

blame  you? No. If we faner, we will assume. What we are saying: don’t be mistaken to try 

and compare us to the filth that you left over nine years. So for the Second Member for Port 

Louis  Maritime  and  Port  Louis  East  is  he  is  speaking  de  mieux  traficoter  avec  les  biens 

publics, go and see to his left not opposite us here. Because where and when were les biens 

de  l’État  being  traficoted  with?  I  would  not  be  here  and  I  am  sure  the  Rt.  Hon.  Prime 

Minister would never condone that, say something else which is why I unfortunately have to 

condemn the approach of the Second Member for Port Louis Maritime and Port Louis East. 

He spoke about un héritage macabre. Did he see what their partner had been doing? Did he 

note what that partner of 2014 with whom they were partnering… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea! But  you had the opportunity to talk. You had 

the opportunity to intervene. 

Mr Sinatambou: Yes. I am proud to say. I was a Minister in the Government where I 

never  condoned  Dufry  or  Frydu.  I  never  condoned  maîtresse  getting  billions.  I  never 

condoned big buildings  being  given to  friends. All  those things happened when  I was not  a 

Minister. You can go and check. 

(Interruptions) 

Yes I can say that.  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Sinatambou: My last comment about hon. Ameer Meea, and I am saying that in 

all friendship, I think that he should refrain from trying to make those types of formulations, 

 

117 

saying that avant nou ti pe vende reve, aster nou pe donne reve cadeau. No, we are a serious 

Government, we mean well for this country, we are working very hard, and we hope that we 

get the results that will take this country out of the hell that others put it in. 

Yes! 

(Interruptions) 

So,  I  think  I  have  replied  to  the  Members  of  the  Opposition  sitting  on  the  left  hand 

side here. Now, I would like just to say a few things very quickly, Madam Speaker, about the 

distinguished  hon.  Members  of  the  Labour  Party.  I  think  I  have  said  enough  regarding  the 

hon. First Member for Port Louis Maritime and Port Louis East… 

(Interruptions) 

Let me go to the Third Member for Port Louis South and Port Louis Central. I must 

say, Madam Speaker, I think all of us here have known him to be a fairly nice guy, looking 

very  moderate,  well  measured.  But  I  could  not  understand  how  he  could  say  that  what  we 

have stated, what we want to do, what this Budget is about is scarcely a can of beans! If this 

is what we see amounts to, then he should be called Mr Bean henceforth, because I object to 

our debates being… 

Madam Speaker: Oh no! Hon. Minister please, withdraw this word! 

Mr Sinatambou: Yes, I withdraw that. He is such a nice guy. I am sorry. But I beg to 

disagree that what we have stated scarcely amounts to a can of beans. And I will say that his 

immediate  neighbour  was  also,  as  far  as  I  am  concerned,  as  bad,  because  the  hon.  Third 

Member  for  Mahebourg  and  Plaine  Magnien  would  have  us  believe  that  there  is  only  one 

good  thing  about  this  Budget.  Incredibly,  what  is  it?  It  is  blinding  the  people!  You  can  see 

why,  when  I  speak  about  the  Labour  Party  on  the  Budget,  at  least,  is  the  narien  pas  bon 

syndrome. 

Yes, or tout pas bon! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

118 

Now, why am  I saying that? I am saying that, Madam Speaker, because  - and here I 

will perhaps haste to add that I propose to deal with that aspect of my speech in five minutes 

and  then  go  to  my  Ministry.  Now,  why  I  disagree  with  this  narien  pas  bon  syndrome  is 

because  of  all  those  results  that  this  Government  can  be  proud  of.  Despite  the  difficulties, 

despite the omissions, whatever be our failures, we have, however, been able to do a number 

of things of which we can be very proud! 

The first one, when we think about all those criticisms that were levelled against that 

proposal  to  provide  a  Rs5,000  pension  to  240,000  Mauritians,  what  did  we  not  hear? 

Impossible! You know how hon. Ameer Meea would have said it: pe vend reve! But we did 

it!  We  did  it,  Madam  Speaker!  And  what  we  spent  was  Rs4.7  billion  on  those  240,000 

Mauritians receiving pensions. And not  only is  that a measure which will  have to  continue, 

but just for this Budget, an additional amount of Rs748.4 m., nearly Rs800 m., will have to be 

added to the Rs4.7billion to provide for the increase of just the Rs250 in basic pension. So, 

already  we  can  see  Rs5.5  billion  being  spent  again  for  those  who  are  in  need  or  who  have 

reached retirement age. 

Let’s look at the salary compensation which was given in the last Budget.  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah, this is the last warning I am giving you!  

(Interruptions) 

This  is  the  last  warning  I  am  giving  you!  Please  have  some  decency  and  decorum  in  the 

House! 

Mr Sinatambou: Now, if we look at the salary  compensation of last year, it was an 

additional amount of Rs4.3 billion which was put in the hands of Mauritian families, and the 

new  salary  compensation,  which  ought  to  be  paid  for  this  year,  of  Rs250,  benefited  private 

sector  employees  by  another  Rs1.6  billion.  I  am  not  here  speaking  of  the  salary  review 

brought by the PRB, which costs another Rs3 billion. 

So,  all  those  proponents  of  the  narien  pas  bon  syndrome,  please  wake  up  and  stop 

misleading this population! I get nearly angry when I hear comments which actually mislead 

the Mauritian population that nothing is good in this country… 

 

119 

(Interruptions) 

That no one is good in this Government, when, in fact, we are working so hard! 

Let me give you a few more examples. In the Budget Speech of the hon. Minister of 

Finance  and  Economic  Development,  what  we  come  to  know  is  that  we  will  give  another 

chance to those in need, to those who fail SC and HSC exams. When you look at the figure, 

however, it looks to be quite a small figure. It is Rs10 m.  But what we must understand is 

that that figure of Rs10 m. must be added to the continuous measure of Rs310 m. which we 

are using to subsidise the fees for all people taking SC and HSC. 

Maybe, lastly, for me to be given some time to go to my Ministry, Madam Speaker, 

the last point I will raise, especially because it gives us regarding this aspect of my speech, 

concerns the construction and completion of 1,900 housing units for those who actually fall 

within the definition of absolute poverty. The figure is 1,900 units. The amount is Rs1 billion. 

But, two improvements; first of all, the surface area of each house is increased by more than 

50 per cent.  From 31 square meters, we will now build houses which will be of at least 50 

square meters for those who fall in the realm of absolute poverty, plus they will be no more 

be in corrugated iron sheets. Poor people have the right to own concrete houses. So, for  the 

narien pas bon syndrome sufferers… 

(Interruptions) 

I hope we are giving you the right recipe to get better!  I must say, Madam Speaker, there are 

so many measures which I could mention, but then there are other speakers after me who can 

always, I am sure, take them and explain them to this House, especially for those who do not 

seem to have seen them yet. 

Allow me, however, Madam Speaker, to go to my Ministry because as stated by the 

hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development in  his  fourth  strategy, in  this Budget, 

this country has to move towards a fully-fledged digital society. The first measure which he 

announced was the training of 1,000 young people in the ICT sector.  I must say 1,000 people 

in  the  ICT  sector  is  on  the  low  side,  but  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 

Development  owes  no  apology  for  that.  This  is  what  we  are  going  to  subsidise  through  the 

National Skills Development Programme. 

 

120 

The  sector,  however,  itself,  should  create  more  employment.    I  heard  the  hon.  First 

Member for Port Louis Maritime and Port Louis East speaking about the skills gap between 

academic achievements and employability. How we are doing that here in the IT sector?  My 

Ministry  is  actually  collaborating  with  world  leaders:  IBM,  through  its  Middle  East  Africa 

(MEA) University, to bring its course delivery centre here to train people; through Oracle, to 

set  up  a  centre  of  excellence;  through  Huawei,  which  is  going  to  provide  two  laboratories: 

one to the University of Mauritius and one to the University of Technology. We are confident 

that  this  is  the  way  to  actually  solve  the  disparity  between  academic  achievements  and 

employability in the ICT sector. 

This allows me perhaps to touch on another aspect, the BPO sector. Business Process 

Outsourcing is a big segment of the ICT sector.  In 2014, the BPO sector was worth globally 

$304  billion.  This  time,  I  would  like  to  answer  to  those  who  speak  about  Ministers  being 

pigeons voyageurs. Do they think that by sitting in Mauritius, the ICT sector is  going to be 

able to get the actual infrastructure, the actual investors to come here? Let me tell you how to 

make  it  happen.  Not  later  than  the  end  of  last  month,  I  went  to  China  where  I  met  the 

Canadian  Minister  of  Science,  Innovation  and  Economic  Development.  Why  did  I  need  to 

meet him? Because - 

(a) 

(b) 

he will not come here. He has got other things to do, and 

Canada actually controls a 37% market share of the BPO market. 

Similarly,  I  have  been  able,  in  the  course  of  my  travels,  to  meet  the  Indian  State 

Minister of Finance for Maharashtra. Why is that important?  It is because India controls 47% 

of the BPO market in the world. As opposed to finding nothing good from the Government, 

from the Ministers, from the decisions we take, would it not be such a good thing if we work 

together to try and convince either Canada or India or both to collaborate with Mauritius, so 

that we could get just 1% of the market share? 

We are already in the sector, we are already seen as a good place from which to work, 

but 1% of the market share, Madam Speaker, would mean $3.04 billion. That means we have 

increased our GDP by nearly 25%. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister would be able already to say, 

‘Hey,  the  second  economic  miracle  is  nearly  there.’  How  would  we  convince  them,  the 

Canadian and Indian Ministers, that their private sector could use Mauritius as a springboard 

to other markets which they have not tapped? It is by having, in this country, highly reputable 

private sector companies dealing in BPO. I am so happy, because not later than two months 

 

121 

ago,  I  went  to  the  launch  of  a  new  company  called  SD  Worx.    SD  Worx  was  a  name 

unknown to me.  I believe it would be a name also unknown to many of those who are here. 

But,  surprise,  surprise!  SD  Worx  is  Europe’s  second  largest  provider  of  payroll  and  HR 

outsourcing services. And guess what, Madam Speaker!  It has got a yearly turnover of 400 

m. euros.  SD Worx now employs 275 people in Mauritius. So, we can actually use that as the 

arguments to convince our Indian and Canadian counterparts that Mauritius can really be the 

springboard to markets to which they do not have access. 

I here have in mind, especially the French-speaking market for India and the African 

market for Canada. If someone does not believe me about SD Worx, I actually was the chief 

guest, less than a month ago, to the branding of the group called the DSO Group. I have never 

heard of them. I believe probably no one has here.  But the DSO Group has actually bought 

two companies from Mauritius. It is involved in debt collection in France. It has decided to 

buy  two  companies  here,  to  do  it  from  here.  Those  two  companies  were  employing  200 

people.  DSO  Group  has  already  recruited  another  50.  They  are  hoping  to  reach  400 

employees by December, and they would like to reach 1,000 employees in a near future. This 

is how we need to get it done. 

If a third and last example were needed, let us take Ceridian.  Ceridian, I think, most 

of  us  know,  because  it  has  been  here  for  15  years.    Ceridian  is  a  Global  Human  Capital 

Management  company.  It  operates  in  50  countries.  It  offers  cloud-based  Global  Human 

Capital  Management  solutions.    What  is  good  about  Ceridian,  in  addition  to  SD  Worx  and 

DSO  Group,  is  that  Ceridian  has  a  $900  m.  turnover  every  year.    So,  that  is  the  type  of 

companies which are coming to this country or which have been in the country and which we 

should use in order to actually make sure that we reach the targets in terms of generation of 

wealth or creation of employment, of GDP growth. 

Maybe  I should say something about  another measure, which was quite striking and 

quite  new  to  me,  which  was  the  introduction  of  3D  printing.    To  tell  you  frankly,  Madam 

Speaker, maybe you might not know, but I have got no IT background.  So, I did not know 

what  3D  printing  is  about.    I  had  to  find  out.    3D  printing,  I  understand,  is  a  process  of 

making 3-dimensional solid objects from a digital file.  On the screen,  you build the house, 

but  when  you  print  it,  the  house  appears  in  three  dimensions.  It  is  impressive.    But  do  you 

know  what,  Madam  Speaker?    3D  printing  is  a  global  industry  worth  around  $11.5  trillion 

every year. 

 

122 

Now,  $11.5  trillion  every  year.    So,  if  one  per  cent  of  the  BPO  sector  could  bring 

$3.04  billion  to  this  country,  0.05%  of  the  3D  printing  sector  would  bring  more  than  $5 

billion to this country.  $5.7 billion to be exact!  That would bring an increase - I checked - of 

about 46% to our GDP. 

(Interruptions) 

Arithmetic  is  good  enough!    So,  just  to  tell  you,  Madam  Speaker,  I  find  it  highly 

objectionable, not only as a Minister of this Government, not only as an elected Member of 

this country, but as a citizen of the country.  I am of the view that “Yes, please, highlight our 

errors, but mention the good thing that we do!”  This is what is lacking.  The narien pas bon 

syndrome is doing tremendous damage to the tissue, to the very soul of national building of 

this country. 

(Interruptions) 

Please,  if  it  is  part  of  an  agenda,  gentlemen  on  the  other  side  of  the  House,  if  for  some 

unfortunate reasons, it were part of an agenda, “Please, throw that agenda to the bin.  Come 

with a fresh one which has got better motives, and we will be happier.” 

I  will  speak  about  another  measure  which,  I  believe,  Madam  Speaker,  is  worth 

mentioning.   It  is  called  the information  highway. As the hon. First  Member for Port  Louis 

Maritime  and  Port  East  was  saying  about  the  public  sector,  as  opposed  to  reforming  when 

there  is  no  time.    Time  is  for  other  things.    The  information  highway  is  going  to  bring 

efficiency to the public sector.  What is it about?  It is that when someone goes to the Civil 

Status Office, when someone needs a birth certificate, he has to go to the Civil Status Office, 

give his name, his address, his ID card, and so many other details. The same person, when he 

gets his birth certificate, needs a passport.  He goes to the Passport Office; he needs to bring 

his  act  of birth, his  act  of marriage, he has to  give his  address,  he brings  his  ID card.  And 

then,  after  getting  the  passport,  he  needs  to  go  and  get  a  pension  from  the  Social  Security 

Ministry. And, there again, guess what, Madam Speaker! He needs to show his act of birth, 

act  of  marriage,  ID  card,  proof  of  address.  It  is  not  the  making  of  the  Minister.  I  hope  you 

won’t say that!  It is the system. 

The  system  requires  duplication  of  procedures,  and  the  information  highway  will 

solve  this  problem.  Once  you  have  your  data  in  a  central  population  database,  the  law  has 

been amended to make sure that any other organisation in the public sector, which needs the 

 

123 

data, can access it. No more need to trouble the citizen about ‘bring this, bring that and the 

other’, and when you bring them, they say, “no, you missed that one, go back home and bring 

it another day.” 

(Interruptions) 

Everything will be done through the information highway.  That is something which, I think, 

is going to bring great efficiency in the Public Service without going into the extremes which 

were  suggested  by  the  distinguished  hon.  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  and  Port  Louis 

East. 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, it is good! The hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development drew my attention 

to one thing I omitted to say; that there has to be a driving licence to go on the information 

highway. Yes, because otherwise, you might hear a former boyfriend getting the new address 

of his previous girlfriend through the information highway. 

(Interruptions) 

I  don’t  need  the  information  highway  to  do  that.    But  what  we  have  decided  to  put  in  the 

information highway is a login portal, that is, each and every citizen should have the right to 

log  into  the  portal  to  know  who  actually  sought  information  about  him  or  her.  So,  in  that 

login  portal,  I will know whether the Police or the Social Security or the MRA or the FIU, 

whichever be the body which is allowed to use it.  So, that is actually what we are going to 

do, and I think this is a wonderful measure which is going to be of great use to the country. 

Madam  Speaker,  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  also 

mentioned  that  the  country  needs  dedicated  Chief  Information  Officers.    This  is  something 

which is really necessary, because we have embarked onto what is called the digitisation of 

the public sector. Therefore, they are a member of E-Government projects. The latest one was 

mentioned by the hon. Minister of Health  and Quality of Life, hon. Gayan.  Let us take his 

example, E-health. 

There is something which is really unfortunate and, maybe, this is the rupture which 

the hon. First Member for Port Louis Maritime and Port Louis East was speaking about; this 

brings  efficiency  in  the  public  sector.    Most  people  who  go  to  hospital  will  tell  you  that  if 

they have gone to hospital 10 times in a year, they will have been given a new hospital card 

 

124 

eight times. There is never any record which can be used to just tell you who you are, what 

you were here for.  So, what we shall now do, as a pilot project, at Dr. A. G. Jeetoo Hospital, 

we  will  actually  have  the  whole  of  the  Registry  system  digitised.    When  you  come  in, 

everything  is  digitised,  so  that  next  time  you  come,  when  we  look  at  your  name,  we  know 

when you came, etc. No need to give a new card again, again and again. 

The  next  step  is,  once  you  get  your  card  normally,  you  go  to  meet  the  doctor  in 

casualty,  who  is  going  to  investigate  your  problem.    Now,  if  the  doctor  who  works  from 

09.00 to 01.00 p.m. has to see 300 patients for that half a day, it means, in arithmetic terms, 

he has 45 seconds per patient.  So, as the person is coming in, the doctor is already writing 

the  prescription,  which  is  why  they  say,  very  often,  that  you  only  get  Panadol  in  hospitals. 

Because  the  doctor,  in  fact,  physically  and  humanly,  has  so  little  time  to  dedicate  to  that 

patient. So, now what we are going to do, as there is going to be a seamless system, as a name 

and the particulars of the patient  are being entered into the computer at registry at casualty, 

the  same  information  is  available  for  the  doctor  in  his  consultation  room,  on  his  PC. 

Immediately,  the  same  information,  in  a  seamless  manner,  will  be  available  for  the  nursing 

management people, if they have to give a bandage, a suture or whatever. They have all the 

information,  as  whatever  is  entered  at  casualty,  in  the  consultation  room,  is  immediately 

appearing in the nursing management office. 

Fourthly  -  the  hon.  Chief  Whip  will  be  happy  -  the  same  information  is  seamlessly 

available in the pharmacy. So, as a doctor gives the prescription in his consultation room, it 

already appears in the pharmacy. No one has to queue for hours. The pharmacist can already 

prepare the medicine to give to the patient.  I have proposed, I must say, to the hon. Minister 

of Health and Quality of Life to have a fifth one, which is laboratory because the laboratories 

of hospitals take a lot of time. So, we are trying to have those E-Government facilities being 

put, and to make sure this happens, we need Chief Information Officers who are dedicated to 

the projects.  This is disruptive technology. 

We are going to change the way the hospitals have been working for decades.  

(Interruptions) 

We  will  have  to  train  them.  That  is  why  we  are,  first  of  all,  appointing  Chief  Information 

Officers who are dedicated people in  IT, who will be there to supervise things and to make 

sure that relevant training is given the way it has to be given and to those to whom it has to be 

 

125 

given.  This allows me, however, to say something very important about potential problems 

which are as follows, Madam Speaker – 

 

As soon as you get successful - and God allows that we shall be successful because I 

believe that we deserve to be successful if these are the measures that have been announced 

by the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development. They are bold, they are daring 

and they are excellent, and they deserve to succeed.  But if we succeed, there is one problem.  

It  will  attract  a  specific  breed  of  nasty  people  called  Cyber  criminals.    So,  as  we  build  the 

system, we have to make sure that we actually get stronger in Cyber Security and in the fight 

against cybercrime.   

(Interruptions) 

For  the  financial  year  2015/2016,  there  were  225  Cyber  Security  incidents  which  were 

reported,  but,  fortunately,  solved.    However,  what  we  have  had  to  do  is  we  are  already 

members of a number of international organisations which allow us, therefore, to get help to 

tackle  problems,  allow  health  to  know  what  are  the  new  viruses,  what  are  the  new  ways  in 

which Cyber criminals attack.  We also made it a point to join a programme called the Glacy 

Programme which is under the Council of Europe which concerns the Budapest Convention 

against  cybercrime  and  the  protection  of  personal  data.    Now,  under  that  programme,  we 

actually get help and cooperation to make sure.  

So, you will see, Madam Speaker, there are so many good things that are happening 

and which, therefore, deserve attention, which deserve to be looked at from  a positive point 

of view. 

To end, Madam Speaker, I would like to find just a piece of paper which I had been 

using, which, I think, needs to be said before I stop.   

(Interruptions) 

Mr Sinatambou: No. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Sinatambou: In fact, Madam Speaker, were it not for time constraints,  I would 

have been so happy to keep enlightening the House about all the measures announced by the 

hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  for  the  welfare  of  this  country  to 

ensure  that  we  actually  get  that  second  economic  miracle.    What  I  will  do,  however,  I  will 

finish on two notes.  For all those who will not have been convinced by what I said, at least, 

 

126 

regarding the IT sector for which I am grateful to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to entrust me 

responsibility  for,  I  will  say  this:  there  are  6  indices  concerning  the  IT  sector  which  were 

most important for countries.   

The  first  one  is  the  e-government  index.    It  tells  us  the  level  of  achievement  of  the 

country in the field of e-government.  Mauritius is first in Africa on that index.   

The  next  one  is  the  global  innovation  index,  which  indeed  measures  innovation.  

Mauritius is first in Africa.   

The third one is the world economic forum network readiness index.  Mauritius is first 

in Africa. 

The  fourth  one  is  called  the  A.T.  Kearney  Global  Service  Location  Index  which 

measures  the  opportunity  of  using  a  country  as  an  offshore  business  location.    Mauritius  is 

first in Africa.   

The  fifth  one  is  called  the  ICT  development  index  which  a  UN  index.    Mauritius  is 

first in Africa, and the last one, the global cyber security index, measures – as the word says – 

cyber security.  Not only are we first in Africa, we have got the ninth best score in the world 

out of 105 countries. 

(Interruptions) 

And  to  conclude,  Madam  Speaker,    there  is  one  thing  I  will  say.    When  the  hon. 

Minister of Finance and  Economic Development  was reading his  Budget,  all our eyes were 

focussed on him and on what he was saying, but I have seen, myself, the pride of the Rt. hon. 

Prime Minister after the speech of the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development.  

I can say that the hon. Minister made his father proud of him.  

(Interruptions) 

And I, for one, found that to be one of the most fulfilling moments of the Budget 2016/2017.   

 

Thank you, Madam. 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  move  that  the  debate  be  now 

adjourned. 

 

 

Mr Jugnauth rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

 

Debate adjourned accordingly. 

127 

ADJOURNMENT 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  move  for  the  adjournment  of  the 

House to Friday 12 August, 2016 at 3.00 p.m. 

The Minister of Finance and Economic Development rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned. 

MATTERS RAISED 

(7.50 p.m.) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

APOLLO HOSPITAL - SALE 

Mr R. Uteem (First Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis Central): Thank 

you,  Madam  Speaker.  I  would  like  to  raise  an  issue  which  is  addressed  to  the  Minister  of 

Finance  and  Economic  Development  but  also  concerns  the  Minister  of  Labour,  Industrial 

Relations, Employment and Training. 

 On Tuesday, addressing my PQ on the purchase of Apollo Hospital by Omega Ark, 

the Minister of Finance and Economic Development stated that Omega Ark had undertaken 

to take all the employees on board on the same terms and conditions. Unfortunately, he did 

not  table  a  copy  of  the  agreement  for  confidentiality  reasons,  but  this  has  raised  a  lot  of 

confusion  now  in  the  minds  of  the  staff  of  Apollo  Hospital  because  there  are,  at  least,  four 

companies  involved.  There  is  British  American  Hospital  Enterprise  Ltd;  there  is  Apollo 

Bramwell Nursing School Ltd. which does the training of the staff; there is Bramer Catering 

Ltd  which  does  all  the  food  preparation  and  distribution,  and  there  is  Metropolis  Bramser 

which is a joint venture with Metropolis India which runs the lab and does all the analysis.  

So,  not  all  employees  have  received  contracts  and  even  those  who  have  received 

contracts, there have been changes. For example, they are not entitled to pension rights, some 

of them don’t even get a return bus fare which is contrary to the Employment Rights Act. But 

worse, Madam Speaker, I have received a letter which was issued on 08 August 2016, where 

the Special Administrator of Apollo Bramwell  Nursing School is writing  to one of the staff 

and saying – 

 

128 

“We  regret  to  inform  you  that  your  employment  with  Apollo  Bramwell  Nursing 

School  Co.  Ltd.  is  being  terminated  with  immediate  effect.  This  decision  has  been 

taken on pure economic grounds.” 

So, now this is creating a problem among all the staff because if the Special Administrator is 

now going to say: “We are terminating on economic grounds”; it means that they won’t have 

much in terms of compensation. So, I would want to…. 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, it is signed by the Special Administrator. So, I would humbly request the hon. Minister 

of Finance and Economic Development, together with his colleague, the Minister of Labour, 

Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and  Training  to  look  into  the  matter  to  ensure  that,  as 

promised, Omega Ark will be taking on board all the staff, of the various people employed at 

Apollo Hospital. 

The Minister of Finance and Economic Development (Mr P. Jugnauth): Madam 

Speaker, following, in  fact,  last Tuesday’s question to  which  I answered,  I thereupon asked 

the Permanent Secretary of my Ministry to seek information with regard to the reemployment 

of the staff at the Omega Ark.  

In fact, I have been given a report if I had had notice I would have come up with all 

the information available to me. But, I can recall that there are a number of employees who 

have already signed a new contract of employment. I was told that they were being given not 

less  favourable  terms  and  conditions  of  employment  and  I  was  also  told  that  because  there 

were,  in  certain  cases,  I’ll  say,  some  amendments  the  Ministry  of  Labour,  Industrial 

Relations, Employment and Training had been requested to intervene and had given advice in 

order to see to it that whatever new terms or added terms and conditions that were put they 

would not be inconsistent with the employment law.  

Therefore, I need to find out if, as the hon. Member is saying, there are cases where 

new  contracts  have  been  offered  to  some  employees,  what  are  the  changes  that  are  being 

proposed  and  whether  they  are  in  line  with  the  employment  laws  of  Mauritius.  But,  I  can 

assure the hon. Member that I will again look into the matter and see to it that, first of all, the 

interests of the employees are being safeguarded.  

I must also add that I had received a letter from the trade unions; I can’t recall which 

one… 

 

129 

(Interruptions) 

CTSP  and  I  have  also  requested,  therefore,  the  Permanent  Secretary  to  look  into  all  the 

aspects that they have mentioned in that letter. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

(7.55 p.m.) 

MEDICAL STUDENTS – PRE-REGISTRATION EXAMS  

Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port  Louis 

East):  Thank  you, Madam  Speaker. Tonight  I will address  the issue to the hon. Minister of 

Health and Quality of Life. It is in relation to a medical student who has successfully passed 

her  exams  of  Doctor.  Her  name  is  Miss  Nawsheen  Dustagheer.  She  studied  four  years  in 

Mauritius and two years in Bordeaux France. 

As the House is aware, a six years degree of MBBS is almost worthless without being 

a registered doctor in one’s own country. So, to become a registered doctor, one has to do 18 

months of pre-registration training by the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life.  

For Miss Dustagheer’s case, she came back in June 2015 and she applied directly for 

this pre-registration. Unfortunately, at the University of Mauritius, they were very slow in the 

processing  of  her  document  because,  as  I  stated  earlier,  she  studied  four  years  at  the 

University  of  Mauritius  and  she  could  not  retrieve  her  certificates,  thus,  she  was  being 

penalised by this slow administration because the intake was in October 2015. 

I  am  given  to  understand  that  normally  we  have  two  intakes  in  a  year  but  last  year 

there were three intakes namely in March, May and October 2015. So, clearly since she has 

been  back  in  June  2015  up  to  now  it  has  been  more  than  a  year  she  is  waiting.  She  comes 

from a modest family. She has got a scholarship; she went to the University of Mauritius and 

some charitable institution paid her studies to finish her exams in Bordeaux. Right now she is 

in severe financial distress and I believe there are other students as well in the same case. 

So,  the  problem  they  are  having  also  is  that  there  is  no  communication  between  the 

Ministry of Health and Quality of Life and these students. They are just being told to wait so 

they are on a standby mode. Also, in the past, when they are being informed it is just two or 

three days before to report to duty. I don’t think it is a way forward that it should be. I will 

 

130 

kindly  ask  the  hon.  Minister  to  look  into  this  case  specifically  and  also  in  all  the  pending 

cases. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

The Minister of Health and Quality of Life (Mr A. Gayan): Madam Speaker, I am 

sure the hon. Member is aware that in the Budget that we are debating in the House there is a 

provision with regard to pre-Reg doctors and one of the conditions for pre-Reg doctors to be 

allowed to proceed to do their pre-Reg is an entry exam which everybody will have to sit. We 

are waiting for the Budget to be over because there will be provisions in the law to provide 

for the entry exams and this is why it is taking some time. But, it is going to happen. She will 

have the chance to apply and sit for the exam before pre-Reg.  

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

 

(7.59 p.m.) 

FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE –OUTBREAK 

Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port  Louis  East): 

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue I wanted to raise will be of concern to the 

hon.  Minister  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security  and  would  or  may  be  of  concern  to  the 

hon. Minister of Health and Quality of Life. We have been favoured with a long and detailed 

answer  given  by  Minister  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security  with  regard  to  the  foot-and-

mouth  issue  in  Mauritius  and  the  measures  that  have  been  implemented  by  his  Ministry 

through  his  leadership  in  order  to  try  to  ensure  that  this  does  not  turn  out  to  be  a  national 

catastrophe, which it almost is. 

I  have  had  information  that  the  Mauritius  Meat  Producers  Association  have  made  a 

formal  request  to  the  authorities  that  two  areas  Vallée  des  Prêtres  and  Richelieu  be 

quarantined  as  areas  because  the  practice  has  been,  as  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  other 

countries where the foot-and-mouth disease has existed, that they have quarantined not only 

where the animals are found but the whole zone around it and that all people, all vehicles, all 

equipment  entering  those  zones  must  be  sanitised,  disinfected  and  that  the  clothes  that  are 

worn  should  not  be  carried  out  from  within  those  areas  and  outside  those  areas  because  it 

would be sufficient for the virus to be carried on clothes to contaminate other animals.  

 

131 

So, the deer in Mauritius are at risk and also all the other four-legged animals, cattle 

and  herds  in  Mauritius  are  at  risk.  Unfortunately,  my  request  therefore  is  that  if  the  hon. 

Minister  could  look  into  this  request  of  the  Mauritius  Meat  Producers  Association  because 

they  have  made  that  request  and,  unfortunately,  it  has  not  been  implemented  as  yet.  As  we 

speak  today,  there  are  no  quarantined  geographical  zones  as  such  and,  therefore,  we  stand 

today on the brink of a total disaster with regard to the foot-and-mouth disease because, as we 

have  seen  in  other  countries,  we  have  the  benefit  of  experience  now,  when  it  starts 

somewhere it is difficult to stop it unless drastic herculean measures are implemented.  

That is why my humble request is that we are on the brink of a total breakdown and 

meltdown  of  this  sector,  if  the  hon.  Minister  could  please  look  into  it  for  us  not  to  have  a 

repeat situation where cattle is allowed to be disembarked; when the Minister, himself, knows 

that his services have asked that it should not be sent to Mauritius but still, in spite of that it 

was sent and allowed to be disembarked into Mauritius and cattle from Mauritius should not, 

first  of  all,  have  gone  there  without  going  through  quarantine.  Because  this  is  also  the 

information I have, it left Mauritius and went to Rodrigues and did not go through quarantine 

in Rodrigues. So, this is my request. 

The  Minister  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security  (Mr  M.  Seeruttun):  Madam 

Speaker, let me just state to the House again that we, at the level of the Ministry, at the level 

of the Department of the Veterinary Services, have been taking all the necessary precautions 

to ensure that this disease does not spread all over the island. There were two sites which we 

localised  where  had  been  the  outbreak  of  that  particular  disease.    One  was  at  the  Richelieu 

quarantine site of the Ministry where there was a consignment from Rodrigues that came on 

01  August  that  was  taken  in  charge  by  the  officers  of  my  Ministry  to,  in  fact,  isolate  those 

cattle and then we proceeded with the culling of all the cattle that came on that consignment.  

There was one consignment that came on 15 July whereby at the time when it arrived, 

no one was aware of that disease that had been detected in Rodrigues.  Those who imported 

the  animals  had  taken  them  to  their  different  farms.  We  had  been  able  to  localise  all  the 

animals that were sent to the different farms and we identified 19 farms where they had been 

sent.  Of those 19 farms, we had put in place different teams to supervise and ensure that the 

diseases  are  not  affecting  those  animals.    In  only  one  farm,  we  discovered  that  the  disease 

was manifested and that was in Vallée des Prêtres.   

 

132 

As soon as we were made aware of that, we secured that area within a radius of 3 km.  

But we must also be aware of the fact that here in Mauritius, we do not have farms like we 

have in other countries, that is, secured farms.  We see the cattle grazing on the slope of the 

mountain.  That’s why we have as at to date proceeded with the culling of the animals in two 

farms  in  that  area.    We  have  located  60  farms  in  the  regions  of  Vallée  des  Prêtres,  Cité  La 

Cure  and  the  surrounding  regions.    When  we  talk  about  farms,  we  are  talking  about  some 

have maybe two animals and some a bit more.  

We have also come up with a number of different animals that they have in each farm 

and we are looking about their state of health.  So, the question of whether we have isolated 

the area, I must say that we have people there who are in contact almost every day with those 

farmers to see to it that there is no spread of that disease elsewhere.   

With regard to the protective measures, the vehicles that go there are being sprayed to 

be decontaminated.  The officers of my Ministry who go in the different farms, they go there 

with protective clothing.  Once they get out of one farm, they destroy the whole clothing that 

they have on them so that they do not take that virus with them and go elsewhere. 

With  regard  to  the  Mauritius  Meat  Producers  Association,  we  have  set  up  a  Crisis 

Committee.    They  form  part  of  that  Committee  and  they  are  expressing  their  views  and 

concerns.  We are addressing their concerns and their views that they are expressing. So, we 

are taking about  all the measures that we feel  that are necessary to  contain  that disease and 

we do not want it to go on other parts of the island.  Rest assured that we are taking all the 

necessary precautions.  I am also glad to inform the House that we have got the results of the 

test that we sent abroad to confirm the strains of the virus.  It is confirmed that it is from what 

we  call  SAT  1,  SAT  2  and  SAT  3  which  originated  from  South  Africa.    We  had  already 

ordered 10,000 vaccines which are coming tomorrow. We are going straight away to proceed 

with the vaccination campaign in Mauritius and in Rodrigues. 

The hon. Member may  rest  assured that we are doing everything that  we  can in  our 

capacity to ensure that this problem is contained and not spread all over the island. 

At 8.07 p.m. the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Friday 12 August 2015 at 

3.00 p.m. 

