No. 30 of 2016 

 

1 

 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

(UNREVISED) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

 

WEDNESDAY 31 AUGUST 2016 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2 

 

CONTENTS 

PAPERS LAID  

QUESTION (Oral) 

MOTION 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER 

BILLS (Public) 

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

3 

THE CABINET 

 

(Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

 
Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 
KCMG, QC  
Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 
GCSK  
Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Hon.  Ivan  Leslie  Collendavelloo,  GCSK, 
SC 
Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK 

 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 
Communications 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 
Utilities 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 
International Trade 
 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha, GCSK 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan, SC 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 
Sinatambou 
Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 
Perraud 
Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain, GCSK 

of 
Minister 
Empowerment 
Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation  

Integration 

and  Economic 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 
Family Welfare 
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 
Institutional Reforms  

 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

 
Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 
Cheong, MSK 

Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 

4 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 
Institutions 
Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands 

 
Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms, 
Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 
Disaster and Beach Management 
Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and 
Training 

 

 

 

 

 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Gopall, Mr Navin  

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 30 of 2016 

 

Sitting of 31 August 2016 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 

7 

PAPERS LAID 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table – 

A.    Prime Minister’s Office ‒ 

(a)   Certificate of Urgency in respect of the Finance (Miscellaneous Provisions) 

Bill 
(No. XX of 2016) (In Original). 

(b)   The  Civil  Aviation  (Hadj  2016  Pilgrims)  (Exemption)  Order  2016. 

(Government Notice No. 179 of 2016). 

B.    Ministry of Agro-Industry and Food Security ‒ 

The  Annual  Reports  2012  and  2013  of  the  Agricultural  Marketing  Board  (In 
Original). 

 

C.    Ministry of Arts and Culture ‒ 

The Audited Financial Statements of the Ramayana Centre as at 30 June 2015. 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

8 

ORAL ANSWER TO QUESTION 

APOLLO BRAMWELL HOSPITAL – SALE DEED 

The  Leader  of  the  Opposition  (Mr  P.  Bérenger)  (by  Private  Notice)  asked  the 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the Apollo Bramwell 
Hospital, he will state -  

(a) 

(b) 

if the deed of  sale of the assets thereof has been signed and if US $ 11 
m. has been paid in respect thereof; 

the value of the outstanding pension contributions, bank loans, suppliers 
and other commitments to be paid by NIC Health Care Ltd.; 

(c)  who  decided  to  sell  only  the  business,  excluding  the  land  and  the 

building, indicating the conditions of the sale of the business, and 

(d) 

the  results  of  his  inquiry  into  the  circumstances  in  which  Omega  Ark 
was registered and into the identity of the shareholders/directors thereof. 

The Minister of Finance and Economic Development (Mr P. Jugnauth): Madam 
Speaker, in the wake of the BAI collapse, the Apollo Bramwell Hospital was one of the assets 
of  the  Group  which  were  put  under  administration.  On  07  August  2015,  the  Special 
Administrators of BAI  Co. (Mtius)  Ltd, Messrs Oosman and Basgeet of Price Waterhouse 
Coopers  transferred  the  land  and  buildings  of  Apollo  Bramwell  Hospital  to  National 
Insurance  Co.  Ltd  (‘NICL’),  whilst  the  operations  of  Apollo  Bramwell  Hospital  were 
transferred to NIC Healthcare Ltd (‘NICHL’), a wholly-owned subsidiary of NICL. The land 
and buildings were transferred from BAI to NIC at a book value of Rs2.5 billion. 

On 08 September 2015, NIC Healthcare  Ltd appointed BDO  & Co. as  Transaction 
Advisor to identify a preferred bidder for the acquisition of the Apollo Bramwell Hospital. 
The objective was to obtain the maximum price for the policy holders, while protecting the 
employment of the hospital employees. 

On  11  September  2015,  an  Expression  of  Interest  (“EOI”)  was  published  in  local 

newspapers with a deadline for submission of application by 18 September 2015.  

On  02  October  2015,  a  ‘Request  for  Proposal’  was  issued  to  all  parties  having 
responded  to  the  EOI.  Interested  parties  had  the  possibility  to  bid  on  the  following  six 
options, namely - 

 

9 

The deadline for submission of proposals was 19 October 2015 and 12 proposals were 

Option 1  

Management contract AND  

Outright acquisition of land & building  

Option 2  

Equity participation of <100% in the operations AND  

Management contract AND  

Outright acquisition of land & building  

 

Option 3  

Equity participation of 100% in the operations AND  

Option 4  

Option 5  

Outright acquisition of land & building  

 

Management contract AND  

Rental of land and building  

 

Equity  participation  of  less  than  100%  in  the 
operations AND  

Management contract AND  

Rental of land and building  

 

Option 6  

Equity participation of 100% in the operations AND  

Rental of land and building  

received.  After  carrying  out  an  evaluation  of  the  technical  and  financial  soundness  of  the 
proposals received, the Transaction Advisor shortlisted 3 applicants, as follows -  

1.  Omega Ark Group PLC 

2.  Lenmed Health Africa Ltd 

3.  CIEL East Africa Healthcare Ltd 

 

10 

Omega Ark Group PLC had proposed the outright acquisition of operations and land 

and buildings subject to carrying out a detailed due diligence exercise.  

LENMED  Health  Africa  Ltd  had  proposed  to  acquire  75%  of  the  operations  for 
Rs230 m. and to rent the land and building at a rental to be agreed subject to the company 
being granted a right of first refusal to acquire the land and buildings in the event of a future 
sale. Furthermore, the company had proposed to retain only 400 employees. 

As regards CIEL East Africa Healthcare Ltd, the company had proposed to acquire 
100%  of  the  operations  for  Rs275  m.  and  to  rent  the  land  and  buildings  at  a  rental  to  be 
agreed subject to the company being granted an option to buy the land and buildings between 
Year 5 and Year 10. It is to be pointed out that the price of Rs275 m. will be reduced by Rs80 
m. representing leased assets and is inclusive of stock valued at Rs25 m., bringing the net 
price  to  Rs170  m.  Furthermore,  that  amount  is  payable  conditional  upon  the  future 
performance  of  the  hospital.  In  addition,  the  company  had  proposed  to  retain  only  500 
employees.  

Of  these  three  shortlisted  candidates,  Omega  Ark  Group  PLC  was  the  only  one  to 
propose  an  outright  purchase  of  the  operations  and  the  land  and  buildings.  BDO 
recommended NIC Healthcare Ltd to, inter alia, proceed in the following order - 

First, to negotiate with Omega Ark on its employment strategy and to seek evidence 

of financial means; 

Second,  if  negotiations  with  Omega  Ark  are  not  conclusive,  to  then  negotiate  with 
Lenmed  Health  Africa  Ltd  for  an  increase  of  its  offer  to  100%  for  the  operations  and  to 
improve its employment proposal, and 

Third,  if  the  above  fails  to  negotiate  with  CIEL  East  Africa  Healthcare  Ltd  with 

regard to the quantum of the deferred consideration which should be paid upfront. 

The  Board  of  NIC  Healthcare  Ltd  endorsed  the  recommendations  of  BDO  and 

mandated the latter to proceed according to its recommendations.  

Consequently,  NIC  Healthcare  Ltd  granted  Omega  Ark  Group  PLC  the  status  of 
preferred  bidder  to  allow  BDO  to  start  negotiations  with  the  company.  After  obtaining 
clarification  on  the  employment  strategy  and  the  proof  of  funds,  Omega  Ark  Group  was 
given access to the hospital premises and records to enable it to carry out its due diligence 
exercise.    After  the  exercise,  Omega  Ark  Group  Plc.  submitted  its  final  offer  of  USD  60 
million (equivalent to about Rs2.2 billion). 

 

11 

Madam Speaker, as regards part (c) of the question, Government, on the 08 July 2016, 
took note that the outright sale of Apollo Bramwell would impact negatively on the accounts 
of the NIC and agreed to the land and buildings being leased instead.  

Following that decision, NIC Healthcare Ltd negotiated with Omega Ark for the sale 

of the hospital business together with the leasing of the land and buildings. 

There  were  still  issues  with  regard  to  how  the  settlement  of  charges  and 

encumbrances would be effected which remained outstanding. 

Concerning  part  (b)  of  the  question,  the  value  of  the  outstanding  pension 
contributions, bank loans, suppliers and other commitments to be paid by NIC Healthcare Ltd 
is Rs638 m. 

Madam Speaker, regarding part (a) of the question, I am informed that Omega Ark 
has agreed to acquire the movable assets for a sum of USD 18 million, that is, about Rs650 
m. of which USD 11 million is payable on the date of signature of the deed of transfer of the 
movable assets and the balance annually over a maximum period of 5 years or the date of sale 
of immovable properties, whichever is the earlier. 

Moreover, Omega Ark will pay annual rent of USD 1.35 million to NIC Healthcare 

Ltd. for use of the immovable properties.  

The  deed  of  sale  will  be  signed  after  all  the  conditions  for  the  completion  of  the 

transaction have been fulfilled. Now, these conditions pertain to – 

• 
• 
• 

• 

Omega Ark receiving all the licences and permits to operate the hospital; 
New contracts of employment be signed by the employees; 
Tax losses be transferred in the name of Omega Ark Healthcare Investments 
Ltd, and 
Finalisation  of  the  Lease  Agreement  and  Notarial  Deed  for  transfer  of 
movable assets. 

I am informed that the above conditions will be achieved shortly. In the meantime, 
Omega Ark has advanced an amount of USD 225,000 (about Rs8 m.) to NIC Healthcare Ltd 
for the payment of salaries. 

Madam Speaker, concerning part (d) of the question, I am informed as follows - 
1. 

Omega Ark Healthcare Investments Ltd was incorporated on 29 October 2015 
in Mauritius by Omega Ark Group Plc. to acquire Apollo Bramwell Hospital;  

 

12 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

According to the records at the Registry of Companies, the shareholder is Mr 
Guy Anthony Rees;  

The Director is Mr Gooroodeo Sookun; 

I am informed that Mr Vikram Katral is its ultimate beneficial owner;  

Omega Ark Group Plc.  UK was incorporated in the United Kingdom on 22 
June 2015, its shareholder is Omega Ark (HK) Limited; 

The  current  Directors  are  Mr  Vikram  Katral  (Chairperson)  and  Mr  Guy 
Anthony Rees; 

Omega Ark (HK) Limited, the ultimate holding company, was incorporated in 
Hong Kong on 02 February 2012; 

The name of the company on incorporation was Jaganmyee Brothers Trading 
Private  Limited  and  on  06  February  2014,  it  was  renamed  Aasure  Holding 
Limited and then on 02 February 2015, the name was changed to Omega Ark 
(HK) Limited, and 

The current shareholders and Directors of Omega Ark (HK) Ltd are Mr Rohit 
Kumar and Mr Vikram Katral. 

Mr Bérenger: At one point, the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development 
told us that Omega Ark was granted access so that it could prepare its due diligence, but the 
deed of sale and so on, when signed, then they would pay USD 11million. Am I not right in 
saying that, in fact, not access has been granted, Omega Ark has taken over the hospital?  It 
has changed the sign.  It is interviewing the staff.  It is running the show.  Can I know who 
authorised Omega Ark - before the deed of sale is signed, before the USD 11 million is paid 
to the Government of Mauritius, to the Government’s company concerned - to take over the 
hospital? 

Mr Jugnauth:  Well, I am not sure whether they have taken over the hospital, but 
what  I  know  is  that  there  are  discussions  that  are  being  held  with  the  employees;  that 
contracts are being drawn. I have, in fact, replied to a PQ and also to a point that was raised at 
Adjournment to say that the employees have been proposed contracts of employment  and, 
therefore, those contracts of employment are being discussed and are being signed.  In fact, if 
they had taken over, there would have been no need for them to make an advance to NIC 
Healthcare Ltd. for payment of salaries. They would have paid outrightly.  

 

13 

Mr Bérenger:  This is adding insult to injury.  I am sure the hon. Minister is aware 
that,  in  fact,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 
Reforms, on 03 May 2016, said: “A deal had been done with Omega Ark for USD 60 million 
and that it would be finalised by the end of May”.  Now, what has happened in the meantime, 
even USD 11 million have not been paid to date.  The hon. Minister has said his information - 
can we know by what date supposedly the deed of sale and the money will come in? 

Mr Jugnauth: Well, I have said in my answer that there are a number of conditions 
that have to be fulfilled. How can they operate without, for example, receiving all the licences 
and permits to operate their hospital in their own name and new contracts have to be signed 
with  the  employees,  and  there  are  a  few  other  issues  that  have  to  be  finalised!    Let  those 
conditions be fulfilled and then I have said that shortly the deed of sale will be signed.  

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, the BDO was appointed transaction adviser.  They 
carried out an evaluation of the three offers and I am sure the hon. Minister is aware - I am 
going to table a letter from BDO addressed on 09 August to the Board of NIC Healthcare Ltd. 
where  they  come  with  the  evaluation  that  they  place:  our  evaluation  gives  the  following 
points – 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

85% is Ciel East Africa Healthcare Ltd. 

Lenmed Health Africa Ltd. 

Omega Ark 

This was their evaluation. And then, they add:  the reason Omega Ark fell short was it did not 
give any employment plan as a starter, which gave points to Lenmed Health Africa Ltd and 
Ciel East Africa Healthcare Ltd. However, Omega Ark was the only one who bid outright for 
land  and  building  for  Rs2.2  billion  which  the  hon.  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good 
Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms  referred  to  months  before  that.    Ciel  East  Africa 
Healthcare Ltd was for 100%, it goes on to say. Therefore their evaluation is clear.  NIC goes 
for Omega Ark only before - they are the only one who offered Rs2.2 billion. Now, the fraud 
is  that  after  this  is  decided  upon,  this  is  why  Omega  Ark  becomes  the  preferred  bidder, 
because  they  are  the  only  one  who  have  come  with  Rs2.2  billion.    In  the  meantime,  the 
Minister had said: ‘We decided’. On change les règles du jeu as the tender goes along.  It’s a 
shame! It’s a fraud! 

(Interruptions) 

 

And the only offer…. 

14 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Don’t make comments! 

Mr Bérenger: The only offer… 

Madam Speaker: Don’t make comments! 

Hon. Leader of Opposition, please! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Leader of the Opposition, please! Don’t make comments as you go along! Allow the 
hon. Minister of Finance to give his reply and then you may make your argument, please! 

Mr Bérenger: My point is that the evaluation from the transaction adviser BDO gives 
Omega Ark third in their evaluation and they are appointed for third bidder on that basis of 
that evaluation because they are the only one who have offered Rs2.2 billion. And then, as we 
go along the rules of the game are changed and that same Omega Ark is offered the same 
conditions that the other two had offered. If that is not a fraud, can the hon. Minister tell me 
what to call it? 

Mr  Jugnauth:  The  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  is  referring  to  what  the 
recommendations of BDO, according to him, was made, to NIC Healthcare Ltd. I have the 
document with me. They are recommendations stating to renegotiate with Omega Ark with 
regard to the following – 

•  Clarification on employment strategy; 
•  Evidence of financial means… 

Let me answer! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

You’ve asked a question, you don’t want me to answer! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No! 

 

15 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Jugnauth: You have asked a question! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Yes.  Please! 

Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Order, please! 

Order, I said! 

Let me give my ruling on this matter! 

 (Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 (Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Leader of the Opposition, I have drawn attention … 

(Interruptions) 

Order, I said! When I am on my feet, there should be silence in the House! Hon. Leader of 
the  Opposition,  you’ve  asked  your  question,  you  should  give  the  hon.  Minister  the 
opportunity to reply and as you go along you come with more arguments and you ask again 
questions to the hon. Minister of Finance. You are a seasoned politician, you know that,  I 
believe! 

(Interruptions) 

Let all the debates be carried out very calmly!  The hon. Minister of Finance is prepared to 
reply, so, allow him to reply and, please, don’t interrupt him while he is replying! 

Mr Bérenger: On a point of order! I have referred to the document. I am tabling the 

document dated 03 August and the hon. Minister is referring to another document. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition,  this  is  not  a  point  of  order.  My 
ruling is that when you ask a question, you should give the opportunity to the hon. Minister to 

 

16 

give his reply.  Whether he is referring to another document is another matter, which is not 
under the control of the Speaker. But this is his reply and the House should accept his reply. 
Please, proceed! 

Mr Jugnauth: This point of order! The letter that has been tabled by the hon. Leader 
of the Opposition,  I have it. He is talking  about the recommendations of BDO and that is 
what I am saying, the recommendations of BDO - there it is -  saying after analysing the three 
bids. And where the Leader of the Opposition is getting…. 

Eta aller do ta!  To nek zet labou lor dimoune!  Eta aller do couyon! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order! 

Order, I said! 

 (Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

If that continues, I will have to suspend the sitting! 

Hon. Jhugroo, please! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

I have said that when I am on my feet, there should be silence in the House. We won’t be able 
to carry out the debates calmly if that goes on. Then, I will have to suspend the sitting. Hon. 
Leader of the Opposition, once again, I draw your attention to the fact that when you ask your 
question, you should not interrupt the hon. Minister when he is giving his reply. You may 
agree or you may disagree with what he is saying, yet you should give him the opportunity to 
give his reply. 

Mr Jugnauth: So, I was saying - let me repeat again - I have the copy of the letter 
that  was  tabled  by  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition.  He  is  talking  about  the 
recommendations made by BDO. I also have the recommendations that have been made by 
BDO. After they have analysed the three deals, they have come to the conclusion and they 

 

17 

have recommended the NIC Healthcare Ltd. to renegotiate with Omega Ark with regard to 
the following – 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

Clarification on employment strategy; 
Evidence of financial means for Rs2.2 billion; 
Deposit of 10% to be made in an escrow account; 
One month time frame for due diligence; 
Binding offer 01 December 2015; 
Completion date 31 December 2015, and 
Omega Ark to be given one week to confirm if agreeable to counter-proposal. 

And this is how the discussions have been ongoing. 

Mr Bérenger: Yes, we are not quoting the same document anyway, Madam Speaker. 
That was my point. But, my point is, they were chosen as preferred bidder on the basis of 
bringing in Rs2.2 billion and then, as I said, the rules of the game were changed. This falls 
and they are allowed to come in with the same offer that the two others had made, but have 
been  eliminated.  At  a  point  in  time,  the  Minister  said:  “We  decided.”  Today,  I  hear 
‘Government’. Therefore, can I clarify the point: is it a Cabinet decision that the rules of the 
game were changed as we went along, the way they were changed? 

Mr Jugnauth: The rules of the game have not been changed. 

Not been changed! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

Mr Jugnauth: And if I can ask the Leader of the Opposition to… 

Alle lire do couyon! 

Alle lire document! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: I have said once again, order, please! 

(Interruptions) 

 

18 

Order! Allow the hon. Minister to proceed! Yes! 

Mr Jugnauth: I will ask him to go and read the Request for Proposal that was issued 
by  BDO  whereby  there  have  been  requests  for  six  options.  All  the  options  are  there.  And 
furthermore, it is BDO itself who said that they have the right to review or to discuss further 
with regard to anyone of the six options. So, the rules of the game have not changed. If it was 
only for the acquisition of the whole of the business and nothing else and if Government had 
decided to go otherwise, then it would have been different, but it is for all of these options. 
And I have stated also why. It is Cabinet decision by the way, not one person or anybody 
else. Cabinet had decided. Cabinet was fully briefed about this and Cabinet decided because 
it would have impacted negatively on the accounts of the NIC Ltd, therefore, we decided to 
go for the leasing of the land and building. 

Mr Bérenger: We are not being provided any serious information about the… 

(Interruptions) 

…about the Directors and shareholders of Omega Ark, especially on one gentleman Vikram 
Katral, who is he? No information at all on that! But, at least, now we know, and this 
gentleman gave an interview in ‘Business Magazine’ of the 24th, and he said - it is a lie - I am 
quoting – 

“Omega Ark was set up a few years back in 2012.” 

A lie! Now, the Minister has given us information which is available; we did our enquiry. In 
fact, it starts in 2012 under a company called Jaganmyee Brothers in Hong Kong… 

Exactly! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

But not Omega Ark! Omega Ark surfaces… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! Order! 

Order, I said! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

Order! 

19 

Mr  Bérenger:  That  company  that  we  know  nothing  about,  the  shareholders,  the 

directors, nothing about!  

(Interruptions) 

We are not provided with any information! Then it changes its name in 2014 and it becomes 
Aasure Holdings Limited in Hong Kong. Then it changes its name again and becomes Omega 
Ark (HK)! No sign of UK company, or what have you, in February 2015 and it is only in 
October 2015 that Omega Ark Mauritius surfaces! It is a lie what that gentleman said! Why 
are we not provided with all the information required? And the same gentleman in the same 
interview said –  

“Our holding company is based in Singapore.” 

According  to  all  the  research  I  have  done,  another  lie!  Another  lie!  Has  the  Minister 
enquired? Has Government enquired? Supposedly, their holding company is in Singapore! A 
lie again! Why are we not told who is the final beneficiary? Who is behind this? 

Madam  Speaker:  Yes,  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition,  there  I  have  a  comment  to 
make. We can’t say that the Minister of Finance and Economic Development is lying! We 
cannot say that he is lying. 

He is giving information, but you said… 

(Interruptions) 

…the Minister of Finance… 

Hon. Leader of the Opposition… 

Let me give my ruling! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  has  given  all  the  details  of  the 
names of the company and how the names have been changed. I have heard that. Now, you 
are saying that this is a lie, that the names have been changed… 

 

So, what did you say? 

20 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, I said that this gentleman in his interview is lying. 

That is what I have said, you hear… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Fair enough! Fair enough, if you said that, allow… 

(Interruptions) 

Don’t disturb him! 

Mr  Jugnauth:  Madam  Speaker,  I  can’t  answer  for  other  people,  what  they  have 
stated. What I can answer is for myself and for this Government and it seems that this is the 
first time that the  Leader of the Opposition is being aware that a company is changing its 
name! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger: Not at all, Madam Speaker. Is the hon. Minister aware that in the same 

interview that gentleman said –  

 “We  came  here  last  year  on  invitation,  we  were  invited  to  come  here  by  the 
Government.” 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

Mr Bérenger: Can I know whether this is correct because he even goes to the extent 

of saying –  

“We received an invitation from the Government of Mauritius.’’ 

And he even said that –  

“Whilst being here we had meetings with different Ministries and were proposed by 
the Health Minister…” 

(Interruptions) 

“…to look into Apollo Bramwell Hospital.” 

 

Order! 

21 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! Order! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Jugnauth:  Madam  Speaker,  I  can  only  answer  for  questions  that  are  in  the 
purview of what the Government knows about and what we have been dealing with. I can’t 
answer  for  what  X,  Y  and  Z  have  been  publishing  in  interviews  and  what  has  been  said 
elsewhere. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Yes, last question, hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr Bérenger: If you rule that this is the last question, Madam Speaker, my point is 

that this is another MedPoint affair! 

This is another MedPoint affair! 

The whole thing… 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger: The whole thing stinks, it is a fraud! Therefore, can I put the request to 
Government  to  stop  it,  not  to  go  ahead  with  what  is  being  discussed  now?  Not  the  Rs2.2 
billion,  but  the  new  proposal  that  is  being  discussed  and  to  have  a  full-fledged  enquiry, 
Commission  of  Enquiry,  chaired  by  a  retired  Judge  with  two  Assessors?  Can  I  put  that 
request to Government so that we don’t carry on with another MedPoint affair? 

 (Interruptions) 

Mr Jugnauth: Madam Speaker, I will have, at a different opportunity, to give a lot 
more details about this case. Suffice for me to say today that what we are comparing, Omega 

 

22 

Ark  has  made  an  offer  to  buy  the  business,  operations  of  Apollo  Bramwell  Hospital 
excluding land and building for Rs648 m. The other interested party, and I won’t make any 
comment, CIEL… 

 (Interruptions) 

… has made an offer, when we remove the amount of stock and the lease of equipment, it is 
Rs170 m. 

Right! That is one!  

 (Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Second, Omega Ark is actually negotiating and I have asked them that they should retain, and 
they have agreed that they will retain, all the employees working at the hospital. 

(Interruptions) 

686  employees!  CIEL  was  only  ready  to  employ  500  employees.  I  can  understand  also, 
Madam  Speaker,  that  the  Supreme  Court  in  the  MedPoint  case  has  given  a  smack  to  the 
Leader of the Opposition… 

A smack! 

 (Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

And he dares in the House, and he is saying it outside, that it is another Med Point! You will 
wait and see… 

(Interruptions) 

...what the Supreme Court has said. Now, you can say ‘asté vendé’! But time will tell! We 
will go to the Privy Council and time will tell about this kind of campaign! 

(Interruptions) 

This kind of mudslinging campaign that is being conducted by the Leader of the Opposition! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Time is over! But I wish to make a comment here. I see that there 
are some Members of the Opposition who are showing their discontent because they have not 

 

23 

been given the opportunity to ask further questions. Let me remind hon. Members that the 
Private Notice Question is the privilege of the hon. Leader of the Opposition and that unless 
and until the Leader of the Opposition has exhausted all his questions, I cannot allow other 
Members to intervene. Time is over! 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10(2) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move that all the business on today’s Order 

Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun) rose 

and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

(12.09 p.m.) 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER 

CEB – ELECTRICITY GRID - UPGRADING 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo): Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me permission to make a statement 
on the upgrading and strengthening of the electricity grid by the Central Electricity Board. 
This is in the wake of certain questions which have been raised in different quarters about the 
resilience  of  our  electricity  infrastructure  in  case  of  violent  cyclones  particularly,  after  the 
experience of small islands such as Vanuatu after the passage of a destructive storm. 

In the course of the first meeting that I had when the new General Manager of CEB 

was appointed, we discussed the following points - 

(i) 

(ii) 

first of all, we agreed as he said, that there was no fear of rolling black outs, 
but the point was that there was urgency to attend to the silent degradation of 
the CEB network over the period 2005 to 2015; 

during  that  period,  CEB  had  neglected  to  maintain  its  transmission  and 
distribution  networks,  thus  making  its  installation  particularly  vulnerable  to 
cyclones; 

(iii) 

the  whole  network  had,  during  that  period,  been  subject  to  wear  and  tear, 
vandalism and corrosion, but no remedial measures had been taken, and 

 

(iv) 

there was, therefore, urgency. 

24 

The  66kV  transmission  network  comprises  330  km  of  lines,  both  over  ground  and 
underground as well as 33 substations. The major portion of the transmission network (that is, 
289 km) has been erected on steel lattice towers and wooden and rectangular concrete poles, 
erected some 35 to 45 years ago. The 132 kV towers, which were erected around year 2000, 
are more robust, and they are currently operated at 66 kV. 

Following this conversation, I directed that an audit would need, for obvious reasons, 
to be carried out independently of CEB. The CEB, as a matter of priority, appointed EDF for 
an audit exercise of the Transmission system (HTB, i.e. the 66 KV network), which included 
an assessment of the network and its resilience to cyclones, a diagnosis of the state of the 
equipment and their installation, identification of risks and recommending measures for the 
rehabilitation of the network. 

 EDF submitted a report of its findings in December 2015. A similar exercise on the 
Distribution system (HTA, i.e 22 kV network) is presently being carried out as a continuation 
to the first audit. The audit of the Distribution network is expected to be submitted in end 
2016. 

The main recommendations were -   

• 

• 
• 

• 

Priority 1: Immediate replacement of all main corroded members on the 66 kV 
Wooton-Champagne line.  
Construction of a new line 66 kV Wooton-Champagne line on concrete poles. 
Priority  2:  Replacement  of  all  rotten  bolts,  corroded  fittings  and  carrying 
corrosion  treatment/painting  on  66  kV  St  Louis-Chaumière  &  Chaumière-
Henrietta, 
Priority  3:  Replacement  of  all  rotten  bolts,  corroded  fittings  and  carrying 
corrosion  treatment/painting  on  Dumas-Belle  Vue,  Belle  Vue-Amaury  and 
Amaury-FUEL. 

I  am  tabling  a  copy  of  the  EDF  report,  and  I  am  communicating  one  further  copy  for  the 
Leader  of  the  Opposition.  A  copy  will  also  be  made  available  on  the  CEB  website  for 
everyone to be able to assess the dangerous state of that network. 

In March 2016, Madam Speaker, the CEB awarded the contract for the replacement of 
members on some 23 towers on part of 66 kV Champagne-Wooton in the region of Midlands. 

 

25 

These  works  have  been  completed  in  May  2016.  Identical  works  on  66  kV  St  Louis-
Chaumière and Henrietta-Chaumière will be completed by the end of this  year.  CEB will 
issue tenders for the replacement of all rotten bolts, corroded fittings and carrying corrosion 
treatment/painting  on  Dumas-Belle  Vue,  Belle  Vue-Amaury  and  Amaury-FUEL  networks. 
Complete exhaustive works on these towers, which are structurally sound, are scheduled to 
be  carried  out  in  2017.  CEB  has  already  started  replacements  on  some  segments.  Tree 
lopping is being carried out island wide to minimise possibilities of faults.  Remedial action is 
being taken regularly following inspections to replace all damaged items. 

The  CEB  is  also  constructing  new  66kV  lines,  which  will  ensure  that,  in  case  a 
transmission line fails, the second one can carry the full power and avoid power cuts. Three 
new substations have been commissioned at La Tour Koenig, Jin Fei and Medine, and CEB is 
currently carrying out electrical works at the new 66/22kV Case Noyale substation, which is 
due  to  be  commissioned  in  December  2016.  A  new  66/22  kV  GIS  substation  will  be 
constructed  at  the  Airport  to  cater  for  the  Freeport  and  Air  Cargo  developments  and 
surrounding developments such as Omnicane Smart City. 

To  avoid  power  cuts  during  lightning  strikes,  CEB  is  installing  surge  arresters  at 

strategic locations in addition to existing overhead earth conductors and lightning masts. 

Reconstruction of Lines 

Since  June  2015,  the  CEB  has  been  investing  in  the  reconstruction  of  lines  on  an 
island-wide basis. Bare conductors are systematically being replaced with insulated cables. 
Currently, 50% of the 22kV network has already been insulated, and the CEB is targeting to 
increase  this  value  to  90%  in  the  next  two  years.  This  will  have  direct  incidence  on  the 
number of faults caused by foreign objects during cyclones and also by bats. 

CEB is also proceeding  with the re-alignment of some of its existing network over 

sugar fields or “Chassée”, so as to facilitate access for maintenance and repair works. 

Maintenance works 

CEB is implementing a preventive and predictive maintenance approach with regular 

inspections and remedial actions. 

Undergrounding of networks 

CEB  has  already  carried  out  undergrounding  of  its  network  on  feeders  at  La  Tour 
Koenig, Case Noyale, Jin Fei and has been encouraging the undergrounding of service lines 

 

26 

in new residential developments. It plans to underground its 22kV and low voltage networks 
in towns and major villages to ensure continuous supply of electricity during cyclone. The 
aim of CEB is to achieve 50% of this undergrounding works by 2025. 

With regard to post-cyclone remedial works - 

• 

• 

a working document is issued annually in September/October prior to 
cyclonic period, indicating the approach to be adopted during passage 
of cyclone and post-cyclone reinstatement works, and 
CEB has trained the leading persons of some seven contractors, which 
are now accredited to the CEB and are fully competent to shoulder the 
CEB to reinstate the network after a cyclone. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to reiterate to the House that the windfall gains arising from 
the drop in fuel prices are now being cautiously spent in investing for the future economic 
development of the country. 

Thank you. 

PUBLIC BILLS 

First Reading 

On motion made and seconded, The Finance (Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill (No. XX 

of 2016) was read a first time. 

Second Reading 

THE FINANCE (MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) BILL  

(NO. XX OF 2016) 

Order for Second Reading read. 

The Minister of Finance and Economic Development (Mr P. Jugnauth): Madam 
Speaker, I move that the Finance (Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill (No. XX of 2016) be read a 
second time.    

Madam  Speaker,  the  main  purpose  of  the  Bill  is  to  give  legal  effect  to  measures 
announced in the Budget Speech and its annex and for matters connected, consequential or 
incidental thereto. 

Thus,  Madam  Speaker,  the  Finance  (Miscellaneous  Provisions)  Bill  (2016)  brings 

amendments to 58 enactments.  

 

27 

 

I will elaborate on the main amendments of the Bill starting with the banking sector.    
The amendments to the Bank of Mauritius Act and the Banking Act relate mainly to 
the need to strengthen the regulatory framework, especially in the wake of events that have 
rocked  the  banking  system  last  year  and  revealed  a  number  of  weaknesses.  Other 
amendments relate to promoting the development of the banking sector.  

Bank of Mauritius Act 

Thus Clause 2 amends the Bank of Mauritius Act as follows - 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

to  grant  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  authority  to  regulate  and  supervise 
ultimate  and  intermediate  financial  holding  companies  that  have  at 
least  one  subsidiary  that  is  a  bank  or  a  non-bank  deposit-taking 
institution;  

to  allow  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  to  grant  advances  to  financial 
institutions  and  such  other  entities  only  against  securities  issued  by 
Government or the Bank of Mauritius instead of “against such security 
as the Board may determine”;  

to provide for new families of currency notes and coins to be issued 
after the concurrence of, instead of consultation with, the Minister of 
Finance, and 

a new section 50A is being added for the Central Bank to issue Rules 
without the need for prior approval of the Minister and these shall be 
published in the Government Gazette. 

Financial Stability 

 

To strengthen financial stability, amendments are being made to - 

• 

• 

• 

provide for better coordination among the Central Bank, the Financial 
Services Commission and Statistics Mauritius;  
empower  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  to  use  data  maintained  in  the 
Mauritius  Credit  Information  Bureau  for  supervisory  purposes  and 
financial stability assessment, and  
include the Minister responsible for Financial Services as a member of 
the Financial Stability Committee.  

Banking Act 

 

28 

Clause 3 amends the Banking Act as follows - 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

(f) 

(g) 

to  remove  “investment  banking  business”  from  the  definition  of 
“bank” so that only the Financial Services Commission regulates that 
business with a view to preventing regulatory arbitrage; 

to  add  a  definition  of  private  banking  business  and  cater  for  private 
banking business;  

to  add  a  new  section  3(8)  for  the  provisions  of  the  Banking  Act  to 
prevail in the event of any conflict or inconsistency with provisions of 
other laws, other than sections 110A and 110B of the Insurance Act; 

to provide for subsidiaries of financial institutions incorporated outside 
Mauritius to submit to the Bank of Mauritius, within one month after 
publication,  a  copy  of  their  audited  annual  consolidated  financial 
statements with a view to facilitating consolidated supervision; 

to allow for the Central Bank to carry out an independent valuation of 
the assets which a bank holds as collateral; 

to provide for a Receiver to discontinue the operations of a bank which 
has been placed into receivership instead of continuing its operations. 
However, the Central Bank can still appoint a conservator to continue 
the operations of the bank;   

to add a new section 79A to enable a simplified licensing procedure for 
a temporary financial institution to take over the assets and liabilities 
of a financial institution which has been put into receivership by the 
Bank of Mauritius, and 

(h) 

to  make  it  mandatory  for  banks  to  rotate  audit  firms  instead  of  its 
partners every 5 years. 

Financial Reporting Act 

In the same vein, Clause 23 amends the Financial Reporting Act to make it mandatory 

for audit firm for companies listed on the stock exchange to rotate every 7 years.  

Building Control Act 

Clause 4 amends the Building Control Act to - 

 

29 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

extend  the  definition  of  “principal  agent”  to  also  include  firms  of 
architects or engineers registered under the Construction and Industry 
Development Board Act.  

make provision for plans and drawings that support an application for 
permit with respect to  a proposed  construction  work to be submitted 
electronically or such other technological means, and 

reduce  the  time  frame  for  the  issue  of  a  compliance  certificate  by  a 
local authority from 10 to 5 working days from the date of application.  

Business Registration Act 

In  order  to  enhance  exchange  of  information,  Clause  5  amends  the  Business 
Registration  Act  to  provide  for  the  Registrar  of  Companies  to  be  able  to  issue  business 
registration card electronically.  

Central Electricity Board Act   

To facilitate and democratise the development of local renewable sources of energy, 
Clause 6 amends the CEB Act to provide for the setting up of companies.  These companies 
shall be exempted from the Public Procurement Act and their shareholdings will be opened to 
small investors. 

And Clause 15 amends the… 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed:  I am sorry to interrupt! On a point of order! I have just heard the hon. 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development refer to Clause 6 which is referred to in the 
Finance Bill that has been circulated and all the materials have been circulated. At the same 
time, Madam Speaker, I am reading the ruling that you had delivered yourself last year on 13 
May 2015 following a point which was raised by hon. Uteem.  The issue that was raised is: in 
a Finance Bill, can issues such as this one - that those private companies shall not in anyway 
be  under  the  purview  of  the  Public  Procurement  Act  and  exempted  from  the  Public 
Procurement Act – be dealt with as has just been done in this Bill and referred to by the hon. 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development in the Finance Act? On the same issue, you, 
Madam Speaker, had delivered a ruling, if I may call it that way.  You had said that – 

 

30 

“Under  Standing  Order  52  (b),  a  Finance  Bill  may,  in  addition  to  the  measures 
relating  to  taxation  and  national  finance  announced  in  the  Budget  Speech,  contain 
provisions relating to the other measures announced therein (…).”  

Meaning announced in the Budget.  

 “(…)  and  provide  for  matters  connected,  consequential  or  incidental  to  those 
measures”. 

And my humble view is the following.  At no time in the Budget has the issue of those 
private companies, no longer falling under the purview of the Public Procurement Act, been 
referred to directly or indirectly and did not even make mention of it even in the Annex.  That 
is why I took the time to go and find the Annex again and found it.  Has the hon. Minister of 
Finance and Economic Development, during the Budget Speech, even in the Annex, referred 
to the fact that private companies shall no longer be under the purview or control or subject to 
the provisions of the Public Procurement Act?  No, it has never been mentioned!  This is a 
major legislation that has to be debated.   

In my humble view, based on  your ruling itself, this cannot stand in this particular 
Bill.  This Clause of the law, as being provided, cannot stand anymore based on your ruling 
of last year.  And not only based on your ruling of last year, but based on the ruling of the 
previous Speaker who had also ruled clearly on this matter.   

Now, to just very briefly finish off on this point of order, the question that I put is: has 
the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development referred to this issue of exempting 
a  specific  company,  creating  a  different  animal  in  the  Companies’  Act,  by  which  specific 
companies will no longer be under the purview of the Public Procurement Act?  The answer 
is  no.  Did  he  refer  to  it  in  his  Budget  Speech?  The  answer  is  no.  Is  it  consequential  or 
connected or incidental? The answer is no. It cannot be said to be consequential or connected 
or  incidental.  It  is  a  different  matter  altogether  that  was  never  canvassed  in  the  Budget 
Speech, not even in the Annexes.  

For those reasons, Madam Speaker, I pray that you rule on this matter before the hon. 
Minister  of  Finance  continues,  because  we  cannot  continue  without  your  ruling  to  tell  us 
whether this can continue in the debate and I, therefore, base myself upon your own ruling of 
last year to stand up and say that we wait for another ruling; and I am sure that if it’s looking 
in the same direction as last year, you will agree with me that this cannot form part of this 
Bill. 

 

Thank you very much. 

31 

Madam Speaker: I thank you for your point of order. Can I ask the hon. Minister to 

demonstrate how this clause has been included in the Bill? 

Mr Jugnauth: Well, first of all, Madam Speaker, the hon. Member has referred to a 

ruling of the previous Speaker that was… 

Yes! But let me… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Allow the Minister to talk. 

Mr Jugnauth: The previous Speaker had given a ruling when there was no provision 
in the Standing Orders with regard to what could contain in the Finance Bill and reference 
was being made to what was the precedence that has been established in Erskine May with 
regard to Finance Bill in the UK. Since then, there has been an amendment to the Standing 
Orders and section 52 (1) (b), in fact, is very clear to me. It says – 

“A  Finance  Bill  may,  in  addition  to  the  measures  relating  to  taxation  and 
national finance announced in a Budget Speech, contain provisions relating to 
the  other  measures  announced  therein  -  I  emphasise  on  other  measures 
announced therein - and provide for matters - and again, I wish to emphasise 
on matters - connected, consequential or incidental to those measures.” 

Now, we are dealing with the amendment I have just stated. Clause 6 amends the CEB Act. 
Now,  what  was  said  in  the  Budget?  I’ll  refer  the  hon.  Member  and  Madam  Speaker  to 
paragraph 135 which states and I’ll read – 

“The  Electricity  Act  and  the  CEB  Act  will  be  amended  to  accelerate  the 
permit approval process of renewable energy investment projects.” 

Now, this amendment, in fact, pertains… 

(Interruptions) 

Paragraph 127! Yes. There is also reference at paragraph 127 which says and  

 

I’ll read – 

32 

“To this end, the CEB  will create  a renewable  energy  company, which will 
ultimately become a special vehicle for the production of electricity from solar 
photovoltaic  systems  of  up  to  15  MW.  It  will  subsequently  open  its 
shareholding to SMEs, cooperative societies and small investors.” 

(Interruptions) 

For further support at paragraph 149! No it’s no 149. But anyway, these two paragraphs by 
themselves are very clear to support the fact that the amendment we are proposing today is, in 
fact, consequential and incidental to the measures that have been announced. 

Mr Mohamed: May I… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Yes! You wish to add something. Please do. 

Mr  Mohamed:  I  would  like  to  say  that  I  heard  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  with 
much  interest  and  each  and  every  of  the  clauses  or  the  paragraph  that  he  referred  to  - 
precisely I said it, I was aware of it before standing up and I did say it - refers to the fact that 
what  the  CEB  intends  to  do  with  regard  to  renewable  energy  special  vehicles  would  be 
created. That is not in any way a matter on which I disagree. On that, I agree with him. But, 
where  I  totally  disagree  is  that  there  is  a  major  piece  of  legislation,  which  is  Public 
Procurement  Act,  that  is  an  Act  which  is  of  such  substance  that  has  not  in  itself  been 
mentioned and it should have been mentioned in the Budget Speech or the Annexes. Now, 
what  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  is  trying  to  say  is  that  because  he  referred  to  a  special 
purpose vehicle, it is clearly… 

(Interruptions) 

If I may continue without being interrupted, Madam Speaker! Please! 

Madam Speaker: Nobody is interrupting. Please, continue! 

Mr Mohamed: So, what he is trying to say - and there he is trying to say with the 
help  of  other  Members  of  Government  -  is  that  it  is  incidental  and  here  it  is  also 
consequential.  My  humble  view  -  and  this  is,  I  am  sure,  the  view  of  all  Members  of  the 
Opposition  -  is  that  this  is  not  consequential,  it  is  not  incidental.  It  cannot  be  said  to  be 
consequential  and  incidental.  It  should  have  been  an  amendment  to  the  Act,  the  Public 

 

33 

Procurement Act, that should have been entered before this august Assembly separate to the 
Finance Bill. It cannot, therefore, be said to be incidental because, let’s not forget about that 
Standing  Order  52  (b)  referred  to  by  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance.  We  are  dealing  with 
private money and we are dealing here not with issues that were referred therein – therein 
meaning  in  the  Budget  –  we  are  dealing  here  with  a  separate  legislation  altogether,  that 
cannot and should not be considered in any way to be incidental or consequential because 
that  would  be  a  dangerous  precedent.  This  is  a  precedent  that  has  never  been  laid  in  this 
august Assembly and it is a precedent that we should avoid to drown ourselves in. This is 
dangerous! 

Madam Speaker: Yes. I thank the hon. Member for the point of order which has just 
been made and wherein he feels that in the Finance (Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill there are 
issues  which  ought  to  have  been  incorporated  in  distinct  legislations.  May  I  draw  the 
attention  of  hon.  Members  that  in  2009  the  then  Speaker,  hon.  Purryag,  gave  a  ruling  to 
which the hon. Member has just referred and I will quote that ruling. He said – 

“I  rule  that  the  Finance  (Miscellaneous  Provisions)  Bill  should  not  contain 
provisions intended to make permanent changes in existing laws unless they 
are essentially connected with national finance, or, are consequential upon, or 
incidental to the taxation proposals and may also include provisions that are 
sufficiently closely related in those matters within the spirit and scope of the 
Bill as defined in the long title” 

In the light of that ruling, the Standing Orders were amended. That was in March 2015 to 
include Standing Order  52 (1) (b). And for the information of hon. Members,  I will quote 
what that specific section of the Standing Orders say. I quote – 

“A  Finance  Bill  may,  in  addition  to  the  measures  relating  to  taxation  and 
national finance announced in a Budget Speech, contain provisions relating to 
the  other  measures  announced  therein  and  provide  for  matters  connected, 
consequential or incidental to those measures.” 

Now, the long title of the Bill reads as follows – I quote – 

“(…) this Bill is to provide for the implementation of measures announced in 
the  Budget  Speech  2016  and  for  matters  connected,  consequential  or 
incidental thereto.” 

 

34 

So,  following  the  additional  information  from  the  Ministry  of  Finance  in  the  form  of 
Explanatory  Notes  which  has  been  circulated  to  all  hon.  Members  and  in  the  light  of  the 
explanation  which  has  just  been  provided  by  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development, I am satisfied that the provisions of the Bill comply with Standing Order 52 (1) 
(b). Thank you. 

Mr Jugnauth: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  May I just also say that I have circulated 
all the provisions with regard to the different clauses that relate to the Budget Speech or to 
the Annex so that Members will have an ease of reference to what all the clauses relate.  

Madam  Speaker,  I  was  saying  that  -  let  me  repeat  that  part  -  to  facilitate  and 
democratise the development of local renewable sources of energy, clause 6 amends the CEB 
Act to provide for the setting up of companies and these companies shall be exempted from 
the Public Procurement Act and their shareholdings will be opened to small investors. 

Clause  15  amends  the  Electricity  Act  to  simplify  the  procedures  for  approving 
applications by small and medium scale electricity producers generating less than   2 MW of 
electricity from renewable sources.  

Clause  7  amends  the  Civil  Aviation  Act  to  stop  crediting  the  proceeds  of  the 
Passenger Solidarity Fee on airline tickets to UNITAID and credit to the Consolidated Fund 
instead. 

Clause 8 amends the Code Civil Mauricien to bring clarification to the application of 
Article 2202-6 of the Code Civil Mauricien regarding capitalisation of interest. Henceforth, 
this Article will be subject to Article 1154 which does not allow the capitalisation of interests 
which are due for less than a year.  

In line with our policies to facilitate business, clause 9 amends the Companies Act - 
(a) 

to provide for the appointment of an administrator instead of a liquidator in the 
event of winding up a limited life company;  

(b) 

(c) 

for the Registrar of Companies to remove a company from the Register where 
an objection lodged before 01 July 2009 has not been withdrawn, and 

to allow for a process where undisposed funds available when companies are 
being removed from the Register to be vested in a Companies Special Deposit 
Account or the Curator of Vacant Estates as the case may be. 

 

35 

Clauses  11,  12  and  18    amend  the  Customs  Act,  the  Customs  Tariff  Act  and  the 
Excise Act, respectively to implement the measures announced in the Budget Speech and its 
Annex relating to customs and excise, including - 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

empowering  Customs  to  suspend  the  clearance  of  goods  suspected  to  be 
counterfeit for a maximum of 21 days instead of 3 days, in the context of the 
fight against counterfeit trade;  

harmonising  the  procedure  for  compounding  of  customs  offences  with  that 
obtaining under other revenue laws, and   

allowing  the  heirs  of  a  deceased  owner  of  a  duty  free  motor  vehicle  not  to 
become liable to pay the remaining proportionate excise duties, provided that 
the vehicle is not disposed of within the duty liability period.    

The Dr. A Ferriere Underpass, Port Louis (Authorised Construction) Act 1996 and the 
Sir  William  Newton  Underpass,  Port  Louis  (Authorised  Construction)  Act  are  amended  to 
exempt the State Property Development Company Ltd (SPDC) from the payment of annual 
fee to the Ministry of Housing and Lands and Municipal Council of Port Louis as SPDC is 
servicing both underpasses at its own cost. 

Clause 14 amends the Education Act to provide for the phased implementation of the 

Nine-Year Continuous Basic Education project and transitional arrangements.  

In clause 16, the Environment and Land Use Appeal Tribunal Act is being amended 

to reinforce and remove ambiguity in the process for determining and hearing of appeals.  

Clause 17 amends the Environment Protection Act to provide the legal framework for 
the  financing  of  new  e-waste  management  systems  that  are  set  up  jointly  with  the  private 
sector.  

Clause 19 amends the Finance and Audit Act to avoid having to amend the Schedules 
to the Act at Budget time in case there has been a change in the portfolio of a Minister and in 
the appellation of a Ministry or Department.  

Consequential amendment is being made for holders of investment banking licences, 
co-operatives  credit  unions,  global  legal  advisory  services  licence  and  captive  insurance 
licence to fall under the purview of the Financial Intelligence and Anti-Money Laundering 
Act.  

To further diversify and consolidate the financial services sector, a new Part XA is 
also  being  added  to  the  Financial  Services  Act  to  provide  for  an  umbrella  licence  for 
investment banking.  

 

36 

New  sections  are  being  added  to  the  Financial  Services  Act  to  allow  the  Financial 
Services  Commission  to  issue  a  new  Global  Legal  Advisory  Services  Licence  to  cater  for 
flagship international law firms to set up offices and operations in Mauritius.  

Clause  24  amends  the  Financial  Services  Act  to  allow  Global  Business  Companies 
category 2 to invest in listed companies on the stock exchange and to empower the FSC to set 
up a standardised centralised online KYC database for the non-bank financial services sector.  
As regards the  gambling sector, the Gambling Regulatory  Act is being amended to 

provide for - 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

 the  introduction  of  a  2  percent  levy  on  the  gross  gambling  yield  of  all 
licensees;  

setting  up  of  a  regulatory  and  taxation  framework  for  on-line  betting  which 
will be opened to non-resident and foreign punters only; 

betting  games  to  be  organised  in  hotels  and  restricted  to  non-residents  and 
foreigners; 

an increase in the betting duty for horse-racing bookmakers operating outside 
the racecourse, and 

for 50 percent of the net proceeds from the Mauritius National Lottery (Lotto 
Lottery)  to  be  credited  to  the  Lotto  Fund  which  will  be  set  up  as  a  Special 
Fund under the Finance and Audit Act.  

Clause 26 amends the Hire Purchase and Credit Sale Act to make it clear that interests 

cannot be charged on any amount that has been prepaid. 

Clause  27  amends  the  Income  Tax  Act  to  inter  alia  give  effect  to  the  revision  in 
personal  income  tax  allowances,  exemptions  and  tax  holidays  granted  to  qualifying 
enterprises, review the investment tax credit and implement the changes in tax administration 
as announced.   

Madam  Speaker,  I  now  come  to  Corporate  Social  Responsibility.    Clause  27(h) 

amendments to the Income Tax Act as  follows - 

First, Companies will be required to contribute through MRA at least 50% of their 
CSR money to the new National CSR Foundation at the start of their next accounting year.  
Thus,  for  companies  with  accounting  period  ending  31  December  2016,  the  new  CSR 
framework  will  be  applicable  as  from  01  January  2017.  The  rate  of  contribution  will  be 
changed to at least 75% in the following year.   

 

37 

Second,  provision  has  been  made  to  list  the  six  national  CSR  priority  areas  in  the 
Tenth  Schedule  to  the  Income  Tax  Act.    Moreover,  a  number  of  activities  which  do  not 
qualify  for  funding  under  CSR  are  also  specified.  Detailed  operational  guidelines  will  be 
finalised by the Foundation after consultation with stakeholders.  

It is proposed to set up the new National CSR Foundation under the Foundations Act 
and  will  be  under  the  aegis  of  the  Ministry  of  Social  Integration  and  Economic 
Empowerment.  It  will  be  managed  by  a  Council,  comprising  a  Chairperson,  and  members 
from the private sector, public sector and civil society. 

Third, provision has also been made to enable a company or its foundation to continue 
using its CSR money on an existing or a new CSR Programme, provided it fits within the 
priority areas, and is approved by the National CSR Foundation. 

And  fourth,  a  company  may  use  the  balance  of  its  annual  CSR  Fund  to  continue 
providing funding to the CSR Programmes into which it was already engaged prior to August 
2016.  However,  as  from  01  January  2019,  it  will  be  required  to  spend  the  balance  in 
accordance with the six priority areas identified and announced in the Budget Speech or other 
areas as may be prescribed. 

As regards tax administration, I wish to highlight that Clause 27(t) allows the Director 
General to raise an assessment beyond the three years limit in the case of non-submission by 
a  taxpayer  of  his  tax  return  on  income.  Furthermore,  to  counter  abuse  cases  where  a  tax 
payment has been collected by companies on behalf of the State such as PAYE and TDS, but 
not  remitted  to  MRA,  provision  is  made  for  the  Director-General  of  the  MRA  to  claim  a 
penalty not exceeding 50%. In addition, the maximum imprisonment term on conviction of 
such an offence is being increased from a maximum of 2 years to 8 years.  

Provision  has  also  been  made  to  improve  the  Investment  Tax  Credit  Scheme  on 

expenditure in new plant and machinery by qualifying companies as follows - 

(i) 

(ii) 

removal of the minimum qualifying amount of investment of Rs100 m.; 

extension  of  the  number  of  years  any  unrelieved  tax  credit  may  be  carried 
forward to 10 consecutive income years; 

(iii) 

extension of the investment window to the year 2019/2020; 

 

38 

(iv) 

(v) 

(vi) 

raising  of  the  rate  of  the  investment  tax  credit  to  15%  over  3  years  for 
companies  engaged  in  manufacture  of  textiles,  wearing  apparels,  ships  and 
boats, computers, pharmaceuticals or in the production of films industry;  

 the credit is being extended to a company investing in the share capital of a 
subsidiary company engaged primarily in the setting up and management of 
accredited business incubators and accelerators, and 

clarifying that the period during which unused tax credit under the special tax 
credit  scheme  for  investment  in  a  spinning,  weaving,  dyeing  or  knitting  of 
fabrics factory should have been six instead of five income years. 

Madam Speaker to unlock major investment projects and give a boost to innovation, 

Clause 29 amends the Investment Promotion Act to – 

(a) 

(b) 

provide  that  the  Investment  Projects  Fast-Track  Committee  may  request  the 
BOI  to  issue  the  relevant  permit,  licence,  authorisation  or  clearance  for  a 
business  to  start  operation  in  cases  where  the  statutory  deadlines  for 
processing of applications by the relevant public sector agencies have lapsed, 
and  

a  new  section  is  added  on  the  Regulatory  Sandbox  Licence  (RSL).  The 
Licence will have to be applied to and issued by the BOI to operate innovative 
projects  for  which  no  legal  provision  has  been  made  or  where  there  are 
inadequate provisions in the relevant enactments. 

Clauses 30 and 43 amend the Land (Duties and Taxes) Act and the Registration Duty 
Act to, inter alia, give effect to the incentives provided in the Budget for the construction or 
acquisition of a house, namely -   

(a) 

any Mauritian citizen who acquires during the period from 01 September 2016 
to 30 June 2020 a newly-built dwelling for an amount not exceeding Rs6 m., 
will be granted full exemption from the 5% registration duty.  This exemption 
will  also  apply  to  a  dwelling  purchased  on  the  basis  of  a  plan  or  during 
construction  (i.e.  under  Vente  à  Terme  or  Vente  en 
l’Etat  Futur 
d’Achèvement). This exemption will not apply in respect of a property that is 
located  on  Pas  Géométriques  or  within  the  Integrated  Resort  Scheme,  Real 
Estate Scheme, Property Development Scheme or Invest Hotel Scheme;  

 

39 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

(f) 

a first-time buyer of bare residential land will be exempted on the first Rs2 m. 
of  land  value  provided  the  area  of  land  being  acquired  does  not  exceed  20 
perches;  

it  is  clarified  that  the  existing  provision  enabling  a  first  time  buyer  of  a 
dwelling  that  is  not  newly-built  to  benefit  from  registration  duty  exemption 
has been maintained; 

a Mauritian who, in the past, may have purchased a residential property, but 
did  not  own  any  as  at  29  July  2016  will  qualify  as  a  first  time  buyer. 
Furthermore, no age restriction will apply; 

under the Construction of Housing Scheme, the upper limit of Rs4 m. of the 
value  of  a  residence  in  a  project  of  at  least  five  residential  units,  registered 
with the MRA, is being raised to Rs6 m. and the scheme extended to 30 June 
2020, and 

no registration duty will be payable on the registration of a secured housing 
loan contracted by a Mauritian if the loan amount is below Rs2 m., instead of 
the  current  limit  of  Rs1  m.  This  amendment  will  be  made  by  way  of 
regulations. 

The exemption from land transfer tax on the transfer by an employer to his employee of a 
free social dwelling.   

Madam  Speaker,  opportunity  is  being  taken  to  correct  an  unfairness  relating  to  the 
sharing,  following  a  divorce,  of  an  immovable  property  that  has  been  acquired  under  the 
communauté des biens. Currently such sharing is subject to registration duty. This is unfair 
because it implies double payment of registration duty on the same property. Thus, in such 
cases  there  will  be  no  registration  duty  when  the  property  is  being  transferred  from  one 
spouse to the other.  This again will be made by way of regulations.  

Consequential amendments are being made to the Law Practitioners Act regarding the 
setting up of Global Legal Advisory Services in Mauritius. The Law Practitioners Act shall 
not apply to holders of the Global Legal Advisory Services Licence. 

I  will  now  elaborate  on  amendments  relating  to  the  local  Government.  Clause  32 

amends the Local Government Act to - 

 

40 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

abolish the requirement for obtaining the stand of the Executive Committee, in 
the process of determining an application for an Outline Planning Permission 
and a Building and Land Use Permit; 

review the composition of the Permits and Business Monitoring Committee, 
which will now consist of the Lord Mayor or Deputy Lord Mayor, the Mayor 
or  Deputy  Mayor,  the  Chairperson  or  Vice-Chairperson  of  a  district  council 
shall be the chairperson; and four councillors designated by the Lord Mayor or 
Mayor  or  Chairperson,  the  Chief  Executive,  and  the  heads  of  the  Land  Use 
and Planning, Public Infrastructure and Public Health Departments of the local 
authority; 

provide that the Local Authority will have only eight working days to seek any 
additional information, particulars or document from an applicant and on the 
effective date, issue to the applicant an acknowledgement receipt in respect of 
the application; 

add  a  new  provision  to  exempt  economic  operators  carrying  out  trade 
activities  whose  annual  trade  fee  does  not  exceed  Rs5,000  at  30  June  2016 
from the payment of trade fees, for a period of three  years from 01 January 
2017, and 

(e) 

restore the provisions relating to the updating of the Valuation List used by 
Municipal Councils for the assessment and levy of General Rates. 

Mauritius Revenue Authority Act 

Clause 34 amends the Mauritius Revenue Authority Act to provide, inter alia, for an 
Alternative  Tax  Dispute  Resolution  mechanism  at  the  level  of  the  MRA  to  expedite  tax 
appeal cases. 

Medical Council Act 

The Medical Council Act will be amended to provide for a prospective doctor to be 
assessed before his enlistment as a pre-registration intern with a view to ensuring that he has 
the required knowledge, standard, skills and competence. 

Morcellement Act 

 

41 

The Morcellement Act is amended at clause 36 to provide that an application for a 
morcellement  permit  be  made  in  one  original  copy  and  accompanied  by  the  required 
supporting  documents  specified  in  the  guidelines;  and  for  the  morcellement  permit  to  be 
issued by the Minister not later than five working days from the date reported to him by the 
Morcellement Board. 

National Pensions Act 

The National Pensions Act is being amended to provide for - 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

entitlement of a widower to receive a pension from the National Pensions 
Fund after the death of his spouse who has been making financial 
contributions to the Fund; 

payment of Basic Invalidity Pension in respect of a child with disabilities who 
is below 15 years of age, and 

option for an employee and his employer to effect higher amounts of 
contributions to the National Pension Fund than the statutory ceiling,  with a 
view to securing higher benefits from future pension. 

National Savings Fund Act 

National  Savings  Fund  Act  is  being  amended  to  enable  contributors  of  National 
Savings Fund, who retire before or stop being in employment before the age of 60, to receive 
their lump sum payments at 60. 

Non-Citizens (Property Restriction) Act 

In  clause  39,  the  Non-Citizens  (Property  Restriction)  Act  is  being  amended  so  that 
companies  in  which  non-citizens  in  total  do  not  hold  more  than  25  per  cent  of  the 
shareholding will not be required to seek the approval of the Prime Minister’s Office when 
there is a transfer of property. 

I should here point out that I am bringing an amendment to this clause as it stands 
now in the Finance Bill to better reflect the policy measure announced in the Budget Speech.  

The Act is also being amended to allow non-citizens, registered with the BOI, subject 
to security clearances, to acquire apartments in a building of at least two floors above ground 
floor. 

Public Debt Management Act  

 

42 

Clause 40 amends the Public Debt Management Act to - 

(a) 

(b) 

specify that the proceeds from Treasury Bills and other Government securities 
that are issued for monetary policy purposes shall be deposited at the Bank of 
Mauritius and used only for redemption of those securities, and 

provide that the Minister may require a risk assessment exercise to be carried 
out prior to acceding to a request by a public entity for a guarantee on a loan. 

Public Private Partnership Act 

The Public Private Partnership Act is being amended to allow the BOT Projects Unit 
to  oversee  all  matters  pertaining  to  public  private  partnerships  with  a  view  to  avoiding 
duplication of resources and aligning the PPP process with the BOT Projects process. 

Public Procurement Act 

Madam Speaker, the Bill also adapts the Public Procurement Act to new needs and to 
ensure greater value for money.  Thus, the Public Procurement Act is being amended for a 
public body to - 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

seek prior approval of the Central Procurement Board before amending works 
contract where there are significant variations in the contract value; 

cancel a bidding exercise where substantial modifications are required in the 
bidding documents and where there is an IT system failure for procurement; 

be exempted from the Act in relation to the purchase, maintenance and repairs 
of marine vessels in view of the specialised nature of the market for such 
activities, and 

limit award of the number of lots to suppliers based on criteria to be included 
in the bidding documents for a better allocation of contracts and improved 
delivery of goods, works and services. 

The amendment to the Public Procurement Act also enables a public body to proceed 
directly with an open invitation for bids where the public body has previously carried out a 
prequalification exercise which was unsuccessful, thus minimizing risks of delays and cost 
escalation. 

Representation of the People Act  

 

43 

Clause 46 amends the Representation of the People Act to allow for notices by the 
Electoral Supervisory Commission and Electoral Commissioner to be made also in electronic 
form. 

Securities Act 

A  new  definition  is  being  inserted  in  the  Act  regarding  corporate  finance  advisory 
services.  This  is  consequential  to  the  powers  being  given  to  FSC  to  regulate  investment 
banking. 

Shooting and Fishing Leases Act 

Clause 46 amends the Shooting and  Fishing  Leases Act to provide for eco-tourism 

activities. 

Small and Medium Enterprises Development Authority Act 

Clause 48 amends the Small and Medium Enterprises Development Authority Act to 
provide  for  individuals  and  cooperative  societies,  engaged  in  qualifying  activities  and 
registered  with  SMEDA,  to  benefit  from  the  SME  Development  Scheme,  i.e.  8-year  tax 
holiday. 

Social Aid Act 

The  Social  Aid  Act  is  being  amended  to  provide  for  a  standard  definition  of 
“household” with a view to rationalising various household income eligibility criteria.  Thus, 
for  all  in-kind  assistance  under  the  Social  Aid  Act  such  as  hearing  aids,  spectacles  and 
wheelchairs, it is proposed to apply a uniform household income threshold of Rs30,000 per 
month. 

Concerning the implementation of the new Empowerment Support Scheme under the 
Marshall Plan against Poverty announced in the Budget, which will become operational in 
December this year, I wish to point out that a separate Bill to that effect will be introduced by 
my colleague, the Minister of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment. 

State Trading Corporation 

The  State  Trading  Corporation  Act  is  being  amended  to  allow  the  STC  to  acquire, 
hold  or  dispose  of  an  interest  in  any  corporate  body  for  the  purpose  of  bunkering  and 
petroleum related activities. 
Statutory Bodies (Accounts and Audit) Act 

 

44 

The  Statutory  Bodies  (Accounts  and  Audit)  Act  is  being  amended  to  enable  a 
statutory body to remit part of an operating surplus or accumulated revenue reserve arising 
from special circumstances to its reserve account with the approval of the relevant Minister 
and transfer the remaining amount to the Consolidated Fund. 
Sugar Industry Efficiency Act 

The Sugar Industry Efficiency Act is being amended in clause 52, to provide that an 
applicant for land conversion can submit only one original copy of an application and can do 
so electronically. 
Sugar Industry Pension Fund Act 

The Sugar Industry Pension Fund Act is being amended to provide legal certainty that 

the assets of each employer will be distinct and separate. 

Sugar Insurance Fund Act 

Clause 54 amends the Sugar Insurance Fund Act to allow the payment of a one-off 
financial assistance to all planters for sugar crop 2015, amounting to a sum of Rs2,000 per 
tonne of sugar accrued. 
Tourism Authority Act 

Clause 55 amends the Tourism Authority Act to rationalise the licensing system for 

similar activities carried out in the tourism sector. 

Provision is made for the introduction of three types of licences; boathouse licence, 
clubhouse  licence  and  surfing  licence.  The  list  of  activities  and  terms  and  conditions 
applicable to each type of licence will, in fact, be prescribed by way of regulations. And, in 
addition, the validity of the pleasure craft licence is being extended from one to three years.  

Operating rental agencies for bus and minibus or for motorcycles will no longer be 
licensed by the Tourism Authority as these activities are already regulated by the National 
Transport Authority. Therefore, appropriate regulations will be made. 

Transcription and Mortgage Act 

Clause 56 amends the Transcription and Mortgage Act to allow public sector agencies 
and  other  specified  entities  as  may  be  prescribed  to  carry  out  searches  at  the  Registrar-
General’s Department free of charge. 

Tourism Employees Welfare Fund Act 

 

45 

Clause  56  amends  the  Tourism  Employees  Welfare  Fund  Act  for  the  definition  of 
‘tourism enterprise’ to also include any hotel-based or airport-based taxi operator. Provision 
is also made for these operators to make a monthly contribution to the Tourism Employees 
Welfare Fund according to rates to be prescribed. 

Value Added Tax Act 

The VAT Act is being amended to provide for the implementation of the measures 

announced in the Budget Speech and its Annex. These include, amongst others – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

introduction of a 20 percent penalty to discourage excessive claims of input and 
increasing the penalty for late payment of VAT;  

reviewing the VAT Refund Scheme on construction of a dwelling, and 

zero-rating of goods and services, such as, photovoltaic batteries and inverters; 
production of film for export; CCTV camera systems, and burglar alarm systems 
and sensors. 

Clause 60 repeals the Shooting and Fishing Lease Tax Act as it is no longer relevant 
since the lease rentals of State lands for such purpose have been increased substantially and 
are in force in all cases. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  income  tax  exemption  which  will  be  granted  to  seafarers,  co-
operatives  engaged  in  non-sugar  agricultural  activities,  industrial  fishing  companies  and  in 
respect of specified financial services will be made by way of regulations. 

And  the  exemption  from  land  transfer  tax  on  the  transfer  by  an  employer  to  his 
employee  of  a  free  social  dwelling  and  correction  of  an  anomaly  relating  to  sharing  of 
immovable property following a divorce will be made by way of regulations. 

Madam Speaker, I will also bring certain minor amendments at Committee Stage to 

some Clauses of the Bill, namely - 

• 

• 

Clause 4 on the Building Control Act to clarify that the online application for 
Building and Land Use Permit be made in respect of building having a floor 
area of more than 150 square meters. 
Clause 23, on the Financial Reporting Act to provide for transitional provision 
for rotation of auditors of listed companies. 

 

46 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Clause 27, to remove the figure of six in relation to the CSR priority areas of 
intervention in Section 50 L of the Income Tax Act as well as in its Tenth 
Schedule. 
Clause 32, to remove sub-paragraph (i) at Section 117 of the Local 
Government Act as the provision is already covered in the Building Control 
Act. 
Clause 34, on Mauritius Revenue Authority Act to correct a cross referencing 
error and to clarify the time limit for decision of the Alternative Dispute 
Resolution Panel. 
Clause 61, on Commencement Clause to specify that the provisions of the 
Regulatory Sandbox Licence will come into effect on a date to be fixed by 
proclamation instead of 01 October, 2016. 

Madam Speaker, I now commend the Bill to the House. 

The Prime Minister rose and seconded.   

Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for one and a half hours. 

At 1.17 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 2.51 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Members,  before  we  proceed  with  the  debating  of  the 
Finance (Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill, I wish for the guidance of the House to state that 
although  some  latitude  is  permitted,  this  does  not  extend  to  reopening  an  entirely  general 
debate on economic policy, as these matters have already been canvassed in the course of the 
debate  on  the  Appropriation  Bill.  So,  I,  therefore,  expect  hon.  Members  to  stand  guided 
accordingly. 

Thank you. 

Hon. Uteem! 

(2.51 p.m.) 

Mr R. Uteem (First Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis Central): Madam 
Speaker, allow me at the outset to put on record our strongest possible objection as to the 
manner  in  which  this  Bill  is  coming  before  this  House  today  for  First,  Second  and  Third 
Reading under a Certificate of Urgency. 

 

47 

This Bill is 180 pages and purports to amend not less than 57 Acts of Parliament. Yet, 
hon. Members of this House only received a draft of this Bill last Thursday, less than a week 
ago. We only received a copy of the existing legislative provisions to be amended yesterday 
and it is only late last night that we received an Explanatory Note explaining the rationale for 
most, if not, all of the amendments being proposed by this Bill. And we are talking about a 
highly technical Bill. How are we expected, Madam Speaker, to have any meaningful debate 
on this debate in these circumstances? Have the hon. Members been given sufficient time to 
read, to analyse, to digest those amendments? Is this the way to treat hon. Members of this 
House? Is this the way to treat Parliament and lawmakers? 

Last  year,  intervening  on  the  Finance  (Miscellaneous  Provisions)  Bill,  Madam 
Speaker, I already drew the attention of the House against the practice of lumping together 
dozens  and  dozens  of  legislation  under  one  Bill.  Last  year,  the  Bill  amended  53  pieces  of 
legislation. This year, instead of taking heed to our concern, the hon. Minister of Finance and 
Economic  Development  is  doing  better,  he  is  lumping  together  57  different  Acts  of 
Parliament! This is not fair, Madam Speaker. This is not how democracy is supposed to work. 
We  have  only  had  two  working  days:  Monday  and  yesterday  to  discuss  the  Bill  with 
stakeholders.  The  stakeholders  which  we  contacted  understandably  could  not  provide  any 
meaningful comment because they, themselves, had not had time to go through the Bill.  

So, why rush through so many amendments? I really hope that it is not because some 
of  us  are  in  a  hurry  to  take  a  vacation!  Yet,  Madam  Speaker,  some  of  the  amendments 
proposed  in  this  Bill  deserve  to  be  debated  as  standalone  Bills  after  consultation  and 
meaningful debate. For example, let us take the Education Act which is being amended at 
page 26 of the Bill. The proposed amendment provides for the phased implementation of the 
Nine Year Schooling. The amendment will have an impact on our children, on our teachers, 
on our schools, on academies but, also on special education needs schools. There are not less 
than  seven  pages  of  amendments  to  the  Education  Act.  Such  an  important  fundamental 
reform,  Madam  Speaker,  to  our  education  system  ought  not  to  be  dealt  lightly.  The 
amendments to the Education Act deserve to be presented in a standalone Bill. We need a 
thorough debate on the proposed amendments.  

This  morning  the  Education  Committee  of  the  MMM  held  a  press  conference  and 
urged the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development to withdraw the Education 
Act from the purview of this Bill and I am now also formally reiterating our appeal to the 
hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development to withdraw the proposed amendments 

 

48 

to the Education Act from this Bill and allow the substantive Minister, hon. Mrs Dookun-
Luchoomun, to come with a new Bill which can be thoroughly debated in this House. In his 
intervention, my colleague, hon. Baloomoody will come more in details about the position of 
the MMM party on this proposed amendment to the Education Act. 

Similarly, Madam Speaker, the amendment proposed to the Local Government Act at 
page 85 deserves a thorough debate on its own. Currently, we have a Permits and Business 
Monitoring Committee consisting of the Chief Executives and Heads of several departments 
of local authorities which consider applications for building and land use permits. They are 
technicians.  These  technicians  then  make  recommendations  to  an  Executive  Committee 
which consists of the Lord Mayor and Councillors and if the Executive Committee does not 
agree with the recommendations, the matter is sent to the Minister of Local Government. 

Now,  what  we  are  proposing  is  to  change  the  composition  of  that  Permits  and 
Business Monitoring Committee to include Mayors and Councillors. Mayors and Councillors 
will have a majority of voice in that Committee and they can overrule any recommendation 
made by the technicians in that Committee. Now, is that a good thing? Is there a risk of abuse 
by councillors? Is there a risk of undue pressure on councillors to approve the permits? Are 
there sufficient safeguards, checks and balances inbuilt in the system to prevent such abuse?  

These are issues, Madam Speaker, which ought to be debated thoroughly before this 
House and should have been better debated had the amendment to the Local Government Act 
been part of a standalone Bill because  I  am sure that hon. Members, who have been  Lord 
Mayors,  former  Mayors,  former  Chief  Executives  of  District  Councils,  would  have 
contributed to the debate and given the point of view on whether it is a good thing to have 
now councillors, elected people, overriding the decision of technicians. 

Similarly, Madam Speaker, I think that we would have had a more meaningful debate 
if  the  far-reaching  reforms  being  brought  to  the  gaming  industry  through  the  proposed 
amendment to the Gambling Regulatory Authority Act were presented as a standalone Bill. 
There are not less than 13 pages of amendments being proposed to that legislation. Madam 
Speaker, I am not an expert in gambling regulatory matters but, I am sure that, given time, 
other hon. Members would have had interesting things to say about the proposed amendments 
and their impact.  

 

49 

This said, Madam Speaker, I do have one comment about the proposed amendment to 
the  Gambling  Regulatory  Authority  Act.  The  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development  is  proposing  at  section  85  the  creation  of  a  Lotto  Fund  which  will  be 
administered as a special fund under the Finance and Audit Act. 

Last year, in his Budget Speech this is what the then hon. Minister of Finance had to 

say about Special Funds and I quote from paragraph 253 of last year’s Budget Speech –  

“I  would  like  to  mention  that,  in  line  with  our  objective  to  bring  greater 
transparency  in  the  management  of  public  finances,  all  Special  Funds  will  be 
closed by end June except the National Resilience Fund and the Build Mauritius 
Fund which will be phased out gradually.” 

In line with our objective to bring greater transparency in the management of public affairs! 
This is what this Government said last year. They are going to get rid of special funds. Now, 
today,  surreptitiously,  in  the  thickness  of  880  pages  of  a  Bill,  we  are  introducing  a  Lotto 
Fund, a new special fund! Is that transparency, Madam Speaker? And, we all know, Madam 
Speaker, that special fund is a device used to circumvent budgetary control to make sure that 
expenses do not have to be scrutinised during Committee Stage of a Budget. 

At the level of the MMM, Madam Speaker, we have always been opposed to special 
funds and we even congratulated the former Minister of Finance when he decided to put an 
end to the use of special funds last year. But, now, the new incumbent is taking us back into 
opacity.  Is  this  what  Government  means  by  fiscal  responsibility,  by  good  governance,  by 
good management of public finance? And,  I don’t know if this is what some Members of 
Government were referring to when they were talking about this Budget being a politique de 
rupture. But, if it is rupture, it is certainly not one in the right direction! 

Now, Madam Speaker, what will this Lotto Fund be used for? We are told at section 

85(a) that it will be used -  

‘(…)to  finance  projects  and  schemes  in  respect  of  community  development, 
education, health, sports, culture, heritage or arts and for reimbursement of public 
debt of Government and for such other purposes as may be prescribed’ 

So, for example, Madam Speaker, if tomorrow the Government is short of cash to make an 
expenditure which was not budgeted, to acquire some property which was not foreseen in the 
Budget, all the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development needs to do is pass a 
regulation and off he goes. No need to come with a Supplementary Appropriation Bill, no 

 

50 

need  to  obtain  the  approval  of  Parliament,  no  need  for  public  scrutiny!  Surely,  this  is  not 
good  governance!  Surely,  this  is  not  transparency!  Surely,  this  is  not  accountability!  But, 
unfortunately,  Madam  Speaker,  this  is  not  the  only  instance  where  this  Finance  Bill  is 
introducing opacity and lack of transparency. And, what better way to do it than to bury it in 
180 pages of Bills which most of us will never read! 

I  am,  of  course,  talking  about  the  proposed  amendment  to  the  Central  Electricity 
Board at page 14 of the Bill. According to the proposed amendment the Board may, with the 
approval of the Minister, set up such companies under the Companies Act for –  

(a) 

(b) 

the  implementation  of  projects  relating  to  the  production  of  electricity 
from renewable energy sources; 

the use of its network for the development of projects of national interest; 
or 

(c) 

the implementation of such other projects as the Board may determine. 

I  listened  carefully  to  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  when  he 
explained the rationale of introducing the amendment to the Central Procurement Board. He 
would  have  us  believe  that  the  purpose  is  to  cover  small,  independent  business  projects 
involved in small renewable energy projects.  

But, Madam Speaker, when we take a closer look at the proposed amendment, we are 
not talking only about renewable energy and projects of national interest. Subsection (c) is 
clear - 

“(…) the implementation of such other projects as the Board may determine.” 

which literally means anything and everything.  

By allowing the CEB now to set up companies, we are effectively taking the award of 
contract by these companies outside the scrutiny of Parliament because we all know too well, 
Madam Speaker, if tomorrow Members from this side or the other side of the House were to 
ask questions about the fully owned subsidiary of the CEB, what will the hon. Vice-Prime 
Minister answer? He will say: ‘Private companies, you know, I can’t answer about it.’ We 
have  examples  here.  When  we  ask  questions  about  Mauritius  Telecom,  he  can’t  answer. 
When we ask questions about Air Mauritius, he can’t answer. So, it will be the same thing, 
when we are going to ask questions about the subsidiary of CEB, he can’t answer. There is 
total opacity!  

 

51 

There  is  worse,  Madam  Speaker.  In  subsection  3  of  section  10,  there  is  a  new 

proposed amendment which reads as follows - 

“The Public Procurement Act shall not apply to any procurement exercise effected by 
a company set up under subsection (2).” 

Not only are we not able to ask Parliamentary Questions about what these companies will be 
doing, how they are going to allocate contracts, but now we know that these companies will 
not have to go through the Public Procurement Act. So, we won’t have any safeguards. Gone 
are the safeguards offered by the Central Procurement Board. Gone are the safeguards offered 
by  the  Independent  Review  Committee.  We  are  talking  about  projects  which  are  worth 
hundreds  of  millions  of  rupees,  if  not,  billions  of  rupees.  Now,  the  Board  simply  can  do 
whatever  they  want.  They  can  award  the  contract  to  whoever  they  want,  using  whatever 
procurement procedures they want in total opacity, without scrutiny from this House thanks 
to this amendment which is buried among 180 pages of the Finance Bill.  

Again,  Madam  Speaker,  unfortunately  the  Central  Electricity  Board  is  not  the  only 
instance in this Bill where we are trying to circumvent the provisions of the Central Tender 
Board for awarding the contract. The State Trading Corporation Act, which is being amended 
at page 119, is going to allow the State Trading Corporation now to engage in the storage of 
petroleum products and the development of bunkering. We don’t have any issue with that. 
This is the policy of Government.  If they want the STC to do bunkering and storage, we are 
all in favour of that. But then there is a new section 16A which states that - 

“The Corporation may, for the purpose of its activities, acquire or hold 
any interest in any other agency or body of persons, whether corporate 
or unincorporate.” 

So, the State Trading Corporation can do exactly like the CEB.  If they want to engage in 
bunkering, fine!  We won’t do it.  We are now being given power by this House to create a 
subsidiary for the purpose of taking it outside the purview of Parliament. Does that sound 
familiar,  Madam  Speaker?  Does  that  ring  a  bell?  Sure  it  does!  Have  we  forgotten  about 
STCM Ltd.? Have hon. Members of this House already forgotten what happened to the butter 
beans  from  Madagascar?  What  happened  to  the  sugar  deals  in  Brazil?  More  importantly, 
what happened to that packing machine from China which no one could operate because they 
could not read Chinese? That was all under the STCM Ltd, Madam Speaker. The operation of 
the STCM Ltd had been … 

 

52 

(Interruptions) 

Wait!  The  operation  of  the  STCM  Ltd  had  been  the  subject  matter  of  an  investigation  by 
Forensic, a firm owned by the now Minister of Good Governance. What did he do when he 
was working as a Forensic auditor? What did hon. Bhadain had to say about STCM Ltd? We 
were informed that the main reason for the creation of the STCM Ltd. was - 

“To alleviate the existing administrative burden incumbent upon the STC with regard 
to compliance with tendering procedures and regulations.” 

Clearly,  they  even  tried  to  hide  it.  STCM  Ltd  was  set  up  in  order  to  circumvent  with  the 
tendering procedures. Then, he goes on to conclude - 

“In  this  regard,  the  creation  of  STCM  Ltd.  appears  to  be  a  colourable  device 
employed in order not to present legislative amendments to the existing Procurement 
Act.” 

That was when they were in the Opposition. That was what they were saying. Scandals! They 
were scandalised by what was going on. And when they are in Government, what are they 
doing? They are making it legal. It is no longer a colourable device. It is no longer colourful.  
It  is  black  and  white.  We  are  amending  the  State  Trading  Corporation  so  that  the  State 
Trading Corporation can now set up lawfully an STCM and be outside the purview of the 
Public  Procurement  Act  and  outside  the  purview  and  scrutiny  of  this  House.    They  are 
laughing about it. They are saying: ‘Yes, the Labour Government did STCM.’ But now, what 
are you doing? You are institutionalising what you were criticising yesterday.  That is what 
you  are  doing.  When  you  are  in  the  Opposition,  you  said  one  thing,  when  you  are  in 
Government, it’s another thing.  

Madam Speaker, again this is not the only example of opacity and bad governance. If 
we look at the proposed amendment to the Public Procurement Act at page 108 of this Bill, 
the Public Procurement Act will not apply to procurement undertaken – 

“(g)  by  any  public  body  in  respect  of  vessels,  including  maintenance,  repairs  and 
periodic overhauls in a dry dock.” 

Why are we exempting the requirement for a public body to comply with the provision of the 
Procurement Act when it comes to acquisition of a vessel, when it comes to the maintenance 
of that vessel? What are we doing? Are we taking the stage for another Betamax? Because 
this is what this will lead up to, awarding a contract for the acquisition of a vessel without 

 

53 

going through Public Procurement Act and as incredible as it may sound, Madam Speaker, 
the explanation provided in the Explanatory Note circulated by the hon. Minister of Finance 
last night and I quote – 

“The  public  body  must  be  exempted  from  the  act  in  relation  to  the  purchase, 
maintenance and repair of vessels in view of the specialised nature of the market for 
such activities.” 

Because  it  is  a  specialised  market  activity,  we  do  not  have  to  go  through  public  tender 
procedures.  But then, Madam Speaker, that is the very reason why we have section 19 in the 
Public  Procurement  Act.  Section  19  of  the  Public  Procurement  Act  allows  for  restricted 
bidding.  I quote – 

“Restricted bidding may be used – 

(c)  by  limiting  the  participation  in  a  particular  procurement  to  those  suppliers 
included on pre-approved supplier eligibility lists drawn up and maintained by the 
public body, in such manner as may be prescribed, so as to ensure that suppliers of 
specialised (…)” 

Identical word - 

“(…) specialised goods and services have (…).” 

We already have a provision in the Public Procurement Act for the specialised market. We do 
not need to have an exemption for the Public Procurement Act so that we can go behind the 
back of CTB, behind the other side of the Independent Review Panel and acquire vessels. 

Madam Speaker, again there is no transparency and no accountability. And that’s not 
all!  Yet  another  example  of  a  recul  in  matters  of  transparency  and  accountability  when 
dealing with public funds is the proposed amendment to the Public-Private Partnership Act at 
page  106.  Section  14  is  being  amended  to  provide  that  the  provisions  of  the  Private 
Partnership Act will not apply where - 

“(b)  subject  to  the  Public  Procurement  Act,  there  is  an  agreement  or  arrangement 
between Mauritius and a foreign State for a project which allows Mauritius to benefit 
from  the  expertise  and development  experience  of  that  foreign  State  in  a  particular 
field”. 

G-to-G!  Hasn’t this Government, Madam Speaker, learnt its lesson from the mega flop of 
Heritage City?  What did the hon. Minister of Good Governance state in this House when we 
questioned him about the exorbitant fees that were being paid to Stree Consulting without any 

 

54 

tender  procedure?  G-to-G  agreement!  Government-to-Government  agreement!  A  choice 
dictated by Dubai after a meeting between the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and the representatives 
of Dubai.  How much money did we get, by the way, from Dubai in return for appointing 
Stree consulting? Now, Madam Speaker, that Heritage City is dead and buried who is going 
to foot the bill for the Stree?  I am glad to read today in a newspaper that ICAC - which I 
don’t  attach  much  credibility  unfortunately  -  has  started  an  enquiry  into  the  scandalous 
manner  how  the  contract  was  awarded  to  Stree  consulting  under  the  supposed  G-to-G 
arrangement. 

Unfortunately, Madam Speaker, this Government has not learnt its lesson! And here 
we  go again! For Public-Private Partnership  agreement we won’t need to comply with the 
provision of the Public-Private Partnership Act when there is a Government-to-Government 
project.  So,  we  will  no  longer  need  to  go  through  the  BOT  Project  Unit  which  is  now 
replacing  the  Public-Private  Partnership  Unit.  And  we  know,  Madam  Speaker,  the  hon. 
Minister of Public Infrastructure has already mentioned it in his Budget Speech that there are 
big, huge, enormous contracts worth billions of rupees in the pipeline with MetroExpress and 
the Road Decongestion Programme. We know that for MetroExpress, Madam Speaker, we 
will  benefit  from  the  expertise  of  India.  We  know  for  the  projects  under  the  Road 
Decongestion Programme, we will benefit from experience by the Koreans. We know that 
there  is  a  real  possibility  that  some  of  the  projects  for  the  MetroExpress  and  some  of  the 
projects under the Road Decongestion Programme will now be carried out by way of Public-
Private Partnership. And what do we do?  We remove it from the purview of the Act. We 
remove  it  from  the  control  of  the  Procurement  Board.  Is  that  transparency?  Is  that  good 
governance? Is that how we are nettoyé? 

Madam Speaker, this 180 pages Bill is like small print in a contract.  All these opaque 
provisions, all these provisions which will make it more opaque to question the financing of 
public projects are being lumped together in this Bill and this is done surreptitiously, without 
knowing it. And if, by any chance, no one reads about it, so be it. By the time we would have 
realised what we have done, it will be too late. The Act would have been passed. This is not 
good governance, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker, it is not possible in the time allotted to me to go through each and 
every legislation that is being amended by the Bill, but before resuming my seat, I would like 
to  comment  on  two  specific  legislations  that  are  being  amended,  namely  the  Non-Citizens 
(Property Restriction) Act and the Income Tax Act.  

 

55 

The Non-Citizens (Property Restriction) Act at page 104 of this Bill is being amended 
so that companies, in which non-citizens do not hold more than 25% of the shareholdings, do 
not have to get the approval of the Prime Minister’s Office when they are going to acquire 
immovable  property.  As  the  law  currently  stands  –  any  company  who  has  at  least  one 
shareholder who is a non-citizen, has to go through the Prime Minister’s Office to get the 
approval, to get a certificate which allows him to acquire this immovable property. And there 
was a good reason for doing so, Madam Speaker because Mauritius is a small island.  Land is 
scarce.    Already  for  the  ordinary  Mauritians,  it  is  very  difficult  to  acquire  property.  If  we 
allow  foreign  investors  to  come  in  and  freely  acquire  property,  there  is  bound  to  be  land 
speculation. There is bound to be an upward pressure on price and it will make it even more 
difficult for even the middle-class of this country to acquire property.  

Worse, we will have probably the emergence of foreigners’ ghettos with gated walls 
and electrical wires which we have already seen in parts of Mauritius in the western coast and 
in the northern part. So, there was a rationale about requiring all approvals to go through the 
Prime Minister’s Office. Of course, there were designated schemes like the IRS, the RES, the 
Property Development Scheme where foreigners could acquire property. But now I am afraid 
that we are opening the floodgates because it is very easy on big projects worth hundreds of 
millions of rupees to have a company with a shareholder who is willing to put only 25% of 
the shareholders and own immovable properties in Mauritius. 

Another  reason,  Madam  Speaker,  why  the  approval  of  the  Prime  Minister’s  Office 
was required; it was to ensure that dirty money is not laundered through real estate projects in 
Mauritius.  We  have,  unfortunately,  Madam  Speaker,  seen  in  the  past  how  certain 
unscrupulous real estate promoters including management companies that were duly licensed 
by the Financial Services Commission, abuse every regulatory loopholes to create a bogus 
real estate projects with many investors both local and foreigners, losing considerable amount 
of money. We are just having a word of caution that, on this side of the House, we are very 
concerned of not opening the floodgates and allowing dirty money being laundered through 
our real estate projects. 

Similarly,  Madam  Speaker,  we  would  urge  the  Board  of  Investment  to  exercise  all 
necessary  care and carry out full due diligence before authorising non-citizens to purchase 
apartments as residence in a building of at least two floors. We fully appreciate that we need 
Foreign  Direct  Investment.  We  fully  appreciate  that  we  need  to  boost  our  construction 

 

56 

industry, but we should be careful that by doing so we are not making it more difficult, if not 
impossible, for the ordinary Mauritians to be able to acquire an apartment in this country. 

Madam Speaker, moving to the proposed amendment to the Income Tax Act on page 
60  of  the  Bill;  we,  of  course  fully  agree  with  the  principle  that  every  person  who  derives 
income exceeding Rs15 m. or owning assets which exceeds Rs15 m. to submit a statement of 
assets  and  liabilities.  This  will  enable  the  Director-General  of  the  MRA  to  report  any 
suspected case of unexplained wealth to the Integrity Reporting Services Agency. 

However, in my opinion, Madam Speaker, the proposed amendment to section123C at 
page 70 of the Bill requires certain clarifications. First of all, when we say that the person 
will  have  to  file  a  statement  of  assets  and  liabilities,  what  do  we  mean  by  ‘assets’?  
Everything is an asset. To take an extreme example, a pen is an asset.  So, I would urge the 
hon. Minister Finance and Economic Development -I don’t know whether the MRA will do it 
through guidelines - set out a threshold of the assets that has to be disclosed, for example, the 
threshold  of  Rs20,000  or  some  figures  which  will  cover  mandate  small  items  which  are 
acquired for daily use. 

Secondly, ‘person’ is defined in the Income Tax Act as ‘including trust’. I have, of 
course, no issue with trust who has set laws for Mauritians and beneficiaries Mauritians to 
disclose all their assets and liabilities. But is the proposed amendment intended to cover also 
foreign  trust?  We  have  hundreds  of  trusts  in  Mauritius  where  the  set  law,  where  the 
beneficiaries are non-Mauritians, where the assets are located outside Mauritius. In fact, we 
have a whole industry in asset management, in private wealth management. So, are we also 
going to require these foreign-owned trusts to declare all their assets every year to the MRA?  
If  this  is  the  intent,  then,  surely,  that  would  affect  the  jurisdiction  of  Mauritius  as  a 
jurisdiction to set up trust for foreigners. 

With regard to CSR, it is very unfortunate, Madam Speaker, that the hon. Minister of 
Finance has not taken on board the various issues that were highlighted in the recent PNQ 
which the hon. Leader of the Opposition asked on this subject. The priority areas set out in 
the  Tenth  Schedule  will  effectively  mean  that  a  significant  number  of  NGOs  that  are 
currently  receiving  CSR  funds  from  companies  will  no  longer  be  eligible  to  receive  those 
funds after 01 January 2019. 

I would urge the hon. Minister of Finance to, at least, insert a provision that will allow 
the National SCR Foundation, all the Ministers concerned, to, at least, have the power, by 

 

57 

regulation, to amend this Tenth Schedule so as to provide some flexibility in deserving cases, 
which  may  not  strictly  fall  onto  the  sixth  priority  area.  And  it  is  quite  telling,  Madam 
Speaker,  that  the  Income  Tax  Act  should  refer  to  the  CSR  Foundation,  when  the  CSR 
Foundation is not even defined in the Act; we don’t know its composition. We have been told 
by the hon. Minister of Finance that it will be a Foundation under the Foundation Act, but we 
don’t know who would appoint members of the Council, what would be the profile of the 
members of Council, how many members from the private sector, how many members from 
NGOs, how many members for the public sector. 

Madam Speaker, I will end up by referring to a proposed amendment to the Income 
Tax Act which, to my mind, sums up all that I have stated about opacity, lack of transparency 
and the deliberate lumping together of amendments to this Bill. I am referring to the proposed 
amendment to section 24, subsections (7) and (8) of the Income Tax Act at page 62. What we 
are doing at page 62, Madam Speaker, is to provide that, where a company has invested Rs60 
m. in a spinning factory or Rs10 m. in weaving, dyeing, knitting of fabrics, it will be allowed 
what we call an ‘investment tax credit’. So, for the next four to six years, they can amortise 
that cost of investment. If they spend Rs60 m. over the next six years, every year, they can 
get a rebate of Rs6 m. - and Rs6 m. is the minimum; it can be higher. 

This piece of legislation, which is very technical, has not even been referred to in the 
Explanatory Note. So, this is something that would have gone totally unnoticed. But when we 
read carefully these two sections, Madam Speaker, what are we talking about here? We are 
talking about giving investment tax credit, a tax break for investment made. When? Between 
2003 and 2008! More than a decade ago! Why? And not a word about this! Why are we so 
generous? Why the tax break? Why this retrospective application of the law? Who are the 
intended  beneficiaries  of  such  largesse?  This  is  what  I  mean,  Madam  Speaker,  by  lack  of 
transparency, opacity. 

Madam Speaker, when I intervened on the Budget a few weeks ago, I concluded by 
saying that this Government will be judged not by what it says, but what it does. Today, in 
this  Finance  Bill,  this  Government  is  laying  the  foundation  for  an  era  of  bad  governance, 
opacity and impunity. Truly, a sad day for the lepep out there. 

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun! 

(3.25 p.m.) 

 

58 

The  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 
Scientific Research (Mrs L. D. Dookun-Luchoomun): Madam Speaker, I note with much 
surprise  the  concerns  raised  by  the  Members  of  the  Opposition  on  the  issue  that  the 
amendments to the Education Act are being brought through the Finance Bill. 

May  I  remind  the  Members  of  the  Opposition,  in  particular  the  MMM,  that  when 
reforms in the education system were brought between 2000 and 2005 by the former Minister 
Obeegadoo,  nothing  was  brought  to  Parliament.  Everything  was  done  just  through 
regulations, whereas in the case of the present reform, tremendous  amounts of discussions 
and  consultations  have  been  held  with  various  stakeholders,  and  today,  we  are,  in  fact, 
debating on these amendments. 

So,  Madam  Speaker,  I  really  can’t  understand  what  is  the  stand  taken  by  the 
Opposition, because this morning, it appears that the former Minister has held an urgent press 
conference, stating that we are passing amendments en catimini, where it is totally not the 
case, Madam Speaker. They went even as far as saying that the PSSA (Amendment) Bill is 
also  being  passed  through  the  Education  Act  when,  again,  it  is  totally  untrue,  Madam 
Speaker; misleading. 

Madam  Speaker,  it  is  today  commonly  accepted  that  the  education  sector  faces 
numerous challenges, especially in the light of the international development, globalisation, 
increased  digitisation  and  other  societal  changes.  In  this  situation,  we  are  condemned  to 
evolve in line with these transformations. Opting for the status quo is no option at all. 

It is in this context, Madam Speaker, that clause 14 of this Finance (Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Bill, which aims at amending the Education Act, becomes a landmark in its own 
right. It is a landmark because it gives the means to action the comprehensive reform agenda 
my Ministry has put on rails since last year. 

In  fact,  I  must  show  my  deep  appreciation  to  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  for 
responding to the bien-fondé of the Education Reform Programme, one of whose main thrusts 
is the Nine-Year Continuous Basic Education – NYS. 

The  Budget  has  set  a  milestone  because  it  has  provided  the  necessary  financial 
resources for the implementation of the measures, activities, as well as for the much-needed 
infrastructural  improvements.  Now,  we  will  be  in  a  better  position  to  properly  set  up  the 
structures and lay the foundations for the reform. 

 

59 

Madam  Speaker,  I  need  hardly  emphasise  that  the  drive  for  the  educational  reform 
and implementation is guided by one fundamental principle. This is a major investment in the 
future. 

Our youth represents the future, and that future, we are duty bound to give them the 
means whereby they can inspire to fulfil their aspirations. Such a future will remain bleak if 
we continue to  allow a  ferocious  and cutthroat  competition to continue to hold sway  right 
from an early age. 

It is high time that we give back to our children their childhood; a childhood that the 
system  has  compelled  them  to  give  up  in  a  scramble  for  higher  and  higher  scores  at 
examinations.  Should  we  not  instead  transform  their  learning  experience,  their  learning 
environments into an exciting and pleasant one? 

It  is  the  sacred  mission  for  us  to  aim  at  the  whole  personal  development  of  our 
learners, to ensure that they manage to develop all their potential, all their talents, Madam 
Speaker. 

I need to stress that the hon. Minister of Finance has, through the Budget, provided for 
an investment of no less than Rs2 billion over a period of five years for the implementation of 
the educational reform. 

This  Bill,  particularly  clause  14,  shows  the  way  to  making  that  investment 
worthwhile. It will amend the Education Act to provide for a phased implementation of the 
Nine-Year  Schooling  and  for  the  transitional  arrangements,  as  mentioned  earlier  by  the 
Minister of Finance - 

• 
• 
• 

• 

• 
• 

the new provisions make rule for a revisited educational structure; 
the introduction of new assessments; 
the Primary School Achievement Certificate and the National Certificate of 
Education; 
the setting up of academies; 

the creation of new pathways for TVET; 
the award of regional scholarships, and  

a new framework for the institutionalisation of the sector.  

• 
Madam Speaker, the amendments thus address the main features of the reform and I 

will elaborate on these.  

 

60 

In  the  very  first  place,  a  new  education  structure  is  proposed  for  the  nine  years  of 
continuous basic education in line with international standard classification of education. The 
changes proposed in the nomenclature are as follows. In the new nomenclature the traditional 
appellations of standards and forms in schools are changed to grades. This is reflected in the 
amendment of section 2 of the Education Act. Let me highlight that this new appellation has 
been kept in view during the formulation of the National Curriculum Framework for Grades 1 
to  6  that  was  made  public  in  December  last  and  will  also  be  reflected  in  the  National 
Curriculum  Framework  of  Grades  7  to  9  currently  being  finalised.  The  amendments  in 
section  3  subsection  2  also  provide  for  the  conduct  of  programmes  for  the  holistic 
development  of  children,  their  emotional  and  social  well-being  as  well  as  innovative 
pedagogical practices for effective teaching and learning. 

I would wish, Madam Speaker, to highlight the programmes that are highly innovative 
and seminal in nature. One major innovation is the provision of early support programme so 
as to stem the tide of learning deficits right from an early age. This will positively impact 
both on learning outcomes and retention at school. This, Madam Speaker, is how we intend to 
reduce failure and how we intend to better encadrer our students. Support teachers, remedial 
teachers would be within our school structures as early  as in Grade 1 to help our students 
overcome their learning difficulties. 

The other programme relates to emotional and social well-being of learners. Madame 
la présidente, qui saurait contredire l’affirmation que la gestion des émotions est une facette 
incontournable  pour  le  bien-être  de  l’apprenant?  Ceci  explique  la  raison  d’être  du 
programme  intitulé  « Emotional  and  Social  Well-Being  of  Learners ».  C’est  là  un 
programme  majeur  introduit  sur  une  base  pilote  dans  les  écoles  primaires  mais  qui  sera 
surtout plus tard étendu aux autres écoles.  

Madam Speaker, to be able to make these innovative programmes a reality, the reform 
calls  for  a  sustained  and  ongoing  professional  development  of  those  to  whom  the  nation 
entrusted the fate of its children. By professionalising the educators, we make certain that the 
pedagogical skills are updated for  an effective  delivery of the curriculum. Above all, such 
capacity building should become the norm in this new educational paradigm and I am glad to 
state, Madam Speaker, that over the years, teachers within our system have upgraded their 
qualifications and today we no longer have uncertificated teachers. Hence, the parts relating 
to  uncertificated  teachers  are  being  deleted  wherever  they  appear  in  the  Education  Act. 

 

61 

Moreover,  the  prescribed  forms  in  the  Schedule  to  the  Education  Act  concerning 
uncertificated teachers are also being deleted. 

Madam Speaker, provision is also being made for new modes of assessment at the end 
of Grade 6 and at the end of Grade 9. Under the Nine Year Schooling (NYS), there will also 
be  formative  assessment  at  key  stages  to  provide  feedback  on  the  learning  taking  place. 
Alternate forms of assessment will be introduced such as school-based assessment, modular 
assessment  and  ICT-based  assessment  in  due  time.  The  CPE,  a  high  stake  exam,  will  be 
eliminated as from 2017. The new Primary School Achievement Certificate Assessment will 
be introduced at the end of Grade 6 in that year. 

Madam  Speaker,  section  2  of  the  Act  has  been  amended  to  provide  for  new 
definitions.  This  section  of  the  Act  provides  a  definition  for  the  term  assessment  and 
introduces the new PSAC and NCE assessments. I wish to add here that regulations regarding 
the conduct of the new PSAC assessment, the regional mode of admission to Grade 7 have 
been made in 2015 and will come into effect as from January 2017. The Education Act will, 
therefore, need to provide for the transitional arrangements. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  will  now  seize  this  opportunity  to  expatiate  on  these  new 
assessments that I have referred to earlier. Let me start with the modular assessment under the 
PSAC. This will apply for history and geography and science. The purpose is to relieve some 
of the pressure on the learners and allow them to concentrate on a limited number of subjects 
assessed at a given time. This assessment will be carried out by the MES and the results will 
be banked for the final computation. Two modular assessments in the two core subjects will 
be taken at the end of Grade 5 and at the end of term II of Grade 6. This assessment will be, 
in the future, ICT-based.  

We  need,  therefore,  to  develop  the  preparedness  for  implementation  of  such  an 
innovative  assessment  mode  and  this  in  terms  of  provision  of  dedicated  infrastructure, 
equipment  and,  again,  I  seize  the  opportunity  to  express  my  deep  appreciation  to  the  hon. 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development for having made the provision of Rs250 m. 
under the Early Digital Learning Programme for the acquisition of tablets for Grades 1 and 2 
pupils.  This  initiative  will  promote  digital  learning  at  an  early  stage  of  schooling  and  will 
pave the way for greater equity and access to IT facilities by all our learners. 

Madam Speaker, as for the school-based assessment, this will concern the non-core 
learning areas that are crucial for the development of the personality of all our children. We 

 

62 

are starting with the communication skills in 2017 and it will be followed by ICT skills in 
2018. We all agree that it is not proper that non-core learning areas should have for so long 
played second fiddle to core subjects. This reform places a major premium on these learning 
areas and we want them to enjoy the same prominence as the core subjects do. 

As regards the National Certificate of Education, it will be introduced  in 2020 and 
will serve for gauging the progression of students to upper secondary and their orientation to 
either general or technical and vocational education. Under the same section 2 of the Act that 
I have referred to earlier, provision is being made for new definitions for regional schools and 
for the Academy. The nine year continuous basic education advocates an exclusively regional 
mode of admission to Grade 7 as from 2018 and this will be on the basis of the same criteria 
as is the case for the current admission to Form I in regional schools. Twelve State colleges 
will be transformed into academies and will only admit students as from Grade 10, currently 
Form  IV,  in  2021.  Admission  to  academies  remains  a  matter  of  choice  and  will  be  on  a 
national basis depending on the performance at NCE assessment. 

Madam Speaker, as regards the regional scholarships, a new provision is being made 
at  section  33  (c)  of  the  Act  for  the  award  of  16  additional  scholarships  to  students,  four 
scholarships per geographical zone. These are meant for the best students from the regional 
schools alone. An attractive feature of this scheme is that students in the regional schools will 
thus  have  the  advantage  of  being  able  to  compete  for  both  national  scholarships  and  the 
regional ones. Students from academies will not be eligible to compete for these 16 regional 
scholarships  which  are,  as  I  have  said  earlier,  exclusively  reserved  for  students  from  the 
regional schools. 

Madam  Speaker,  it  is  also  important  to  keep  in  view  that  the  system  we  are 

introducing is based on the twin aspects of equity and inclusiveness.  

This Bill is bringing relevant amendments to the Act by including for the first time a 
definition for special education needs, making provision for registration of special education 
needs  schools  and  the  payment  of  grant-in-aid.  These  amendments  to  the  Act  will  help  to 
better  regulate  the  sector,  provide  enhanced  support  and  facilities  and  ensure  good 
governance and accountability. 

Never  before,  Madam  Speaker,  in  the  Education  Act  was  reference  made  to  the 
special education needs sector. The hon. Minister of Finance has now given us the resources 
by increasing the grant element from Rs60 m. to Rs90 m. which will provide a more effective 

 

63 

encadrement  to  students  with  special  needs  within  a  proper  institutional  and  regulatory 
framework.  Furthermore,  another  important  measure  that  will  be  implemented  is  the 
provision  of  five  scholarships  to  students  with  disabilities  for  the  pursue  of  their  higher 
education studies. 

Madam Speaker, TVET is being given greater recognition in the educational reform. 
Provision is being made under section 37 of the Act which deals with compulsory education 
up to the age of 16 for alternative pathways to be open to a student that, at the end of grade 9, 
for him to decide whether to join general, technical or vocational education. The possibility 
of transferring to and from the general and technical vocational streams will also exist. 

The new policy orientation is to enhance attractiveness of the technical and vocational 
education  while  ensuring  greater  alignment  with  the  labour  market  needs.  The  Budget  has 
provided the necessary means of gradually transforming the technical and vocational training 
landscape through the provision of state-of-the-art infrastructure facilities in the vocational 
training centres. 

One  of  the  tragic  pillars  of  this  reform  is  the  need  to  have  an  enhanced  system  of 
governance and accountability for improved learning outcomes. To that effect, emphasis will 
be placed on a closer inspection and quality assurance of the teaching and learning process in 
secondary schools. 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Minister,  can  I  just  draw  your  attention  because  I  am 
referring to the Explanatory Note also which has been circulated by the hon. Minister and I 
said right at the beginning that we should not deal with policy issues as such. I have given 
some  latitude  for  you  to  explain  your  programme  as  per  the  amendment  which  is  being 
brought, but can I ask you not to go deeply into policy matters. This has already been debated 
when the Finance Bill was passed. 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: I stand guided by you, Madam Speaker. I just wanted to 

give some explanations for fear that our friends required some more clarifications. 

This will apply for both public and private secondary schools. The Bill accordingly 
restores  the  pedagogical  inspection  powers  to  the  PSSA  as  was  the  case  in  its  pre-2000 
mandate.  In  this  regard,  necessary  amendments  are  being  brought  to  section  7(a)  of  the 
Education Act. Madam Speaker, I shall be elaborating on this particular amendment during 
the presentation of the PSSA (Amendment) Bill before the House. The enactment of these 
amendments  to  the  Education  Act  should  be  seen  as  a  critical  step  in  the  implementation 

 

64 

process and we, along with all stakeholders, should continue to invest our efforts to create a 
stimulating  learning  environment  that  will  open  opportunities  for  all  our  students  to  reach 
their full potential.  

This,  Madam  Speaker,  is  the  idea  behind  the  amendments  brought  to  the  House 

through the Finance Bill and I thank you for your kind attention. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo! 

(3.45 p.m.) 

Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River): Madam Speaker, I shall 
make  a  few  comments  on  the  provisions  of  the  Finance  Bill.  I  have  selected  two  or  three 
clauses in the Bill.  

As we all know, Madam Speaker, the Finance Bill is a legal instrument that translates 
many  of  the  proposals  in  the  Budget  into  concrete  measures  within  an  appropriate  legal 
framework so that different bodies can operate and implement policies of Government. So, 
therefore, the Finance Bill contains proposal of the Government for the levy of new taxes, the 
modification of the existing structures, the continuance of the existing tax structure and other 
measures related of a financial nature that require approval by Parliament. 

The present Bill that is being presented before this House, Madam Speaker, as it has 
been said before me, does, in fact, propose the amendment - as far as I can remember - of 
about 58 legislations in a bulky document, which has been circulated in this Bill before us 
today, made up of 180 pages. 

Madam Speaker, I agree that sufficient time has not been given to all Members of this 
House. Whilst Government has been elected to rule this country, Government has the final 
say. I think, in a spirit of good democracy, a Bill which, as far as I know, has taken perhaps 3 
or  4  weeks  for  the  State  Law  officers,  for  the  different  Ministries  to  agree  upon  with,  of 
course, the input of the Minister himself with the proper coordination being made and so on, 
but only four or five days have been given to Members of this House to study the Bill, and to 
come and make comments on the Bill in question. So, this is why I regret that this has been 
the case this year, independently of what the other Governments had done in the past. I think, 
Madam  Speaker,  in  the  future,  Government  should  review  that  situation  and  given  ample 
time to all Members of this House to be able to study the Bill and to come up with comments 
and positive proposals or criticisms whatever they may be. This is the first point I wish to 
make, Madam Speaker. 

 

65 

Many  of  the  proposals  or  the  first  series  of  proposals  made  in  this  Bill,  especially 
concerning  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  Act  and  the  Banking  Act,  Madam  Speaker,  have  been 
perhaps influenced by the recent events, the realisation of the part of Government that there 
was some sort of dilution of authority, absence of relevant legislation to address particular 
problems and the necessity of new ways to conduct business which requires fresh legislation. 
The first set of amendments, I referred to, I think is clearly influenced from recent events, 
which have still not been resolved in a decent and proper manner to the satisfaction of one 
and all. 

I am making allusion, Madam Speaker, to the  power of the Bank of Mauritius and 
these amendments are coming at an appropriate time perhaps when the financial services are 
being called upon to be a new engine of growth. I suppose Government is coming with these 
amendments  concerning  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  to  send  the  right  signals  to  operators  both 
within and outside the country, but, to me, I think, Government has been pushing the cork too 
far. Some of the amendments which have been proposed do create an environment where the 
role  of  the  Minister  of  Finance  appears  to  be  hazy.  In  principle,  Madam  Speaker,  the 
separation of the banks’ role and that of the Ministry is encouraged in order to ensure the 
independence of the bank and avoid monitoring and physical policy to be blended in such a 
way that they might have counter-productive effects. 

As  we  know,  there  are  many  officers  at  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development  who  sit  in  important  committees  and  decision-making  instances,  even  of  the 
banks.  This  is  why  there  is  the  serious  risk  of  contagion  –  if  I  may  use  that  word  –  of 
directives issued through the representatives of these officers or as we shall see through the 
amendments to the present legislation.  

In section 2(b), Madam Speaker, it is not clear why the board which is designed to 
operate  in  all  independence,  free  from  the  grips  of  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  with  the 
objectives of ensuring policy effectiveness, is now being denied of its independent authority 
and replaced by, as we see in the law- “securities as Government or the bank may issue”. I do 
not  think  we  should  endorse  this  amendment.  Just  as  I  have  reserves  regarding  the 
amendment proposed in (e), Madam Speaker, by seeking to replace ‘(…) after consultation 
with the Minister’ with the new formula ‘the Bank may, with the concurrence of the Minister, 
determine’ such and such matters. 

 

66 

This is opening the possibilities influenced by the Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development  and  this  will  certainly  give  the  impression  of  an  encroachment  on  the 
independence of the Bank of Mauritius and might be looked upon as being dangerous to our 
monetary policy. 

Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister was probably right in calling off the issue of the 
banknotes. This was one particular event, but I don’t think we should allow the jeopardisation 
of the concept of the independence of the Central Bank. 

Madam Speaker, I come to this question of public procurement.  A lot has been said 
by hon. Uteem, but I will just say a few words about this question of public procurement with 
regard to the CEB which is clause 6 of the Bill. Clause 6 - Central Electricity Board Act is 
being  amended.  No  doubt,  Madam  Speaker,  we  must  allow  the  CEB  to  be  enterprising  to 
diversify its activities and create different profit centres. These are all good ideas and should 
be encouraged, but exempting these activities from the control of the Public Procurement Act 
is a different kettle of fish and is a violation of good governance principle. It is my belief, 
Madam Speaker, that all public sector projects should be guided by similar principles and as 
such be subject to the same accountability principle. 

Madam Speaker, when we look at the Public Procurement Act, presently the Central 
Electricity Board which falls under the purview of this Public Procurement Act, I think the 
threshold is Rs100 m. in terms of works or even in terms of consultancy.  We are, therefore, 
saying implicitly or explicitly in this Bill, that from now on when the company which will be 
set up by the Board and will implement projects of even more than Rs100 m., there will be no 
need for these projects to fall under the purview of the Public Procurement Act. Therefore, 
the  Board  of  the  CEB  will  decide  on  investments  and  on  the  projects  of  the  CEB.  I  am 
talking, of course, of the projects referred to in the Bill, that is, renewable energy sources and 
other projects as spelt out in clause 6 (2) (c) –  

“(…) such other projects as the Board may determine”. 

Therefore,  all  these  projects  now  will  fall  outside  the  purview  of  the  Public 
Procurement Board. Is this the way to ensure that public funds are being properly managed, 
Madam Speaker?  

We know that in the Public Procurement Act, Madam Speaker, the law is clear. The 

Act says that -  

 

67 

“This Act applies to any other procurement effected by a public body, other than an 
exempt organization.”  

And  the  regulations  have  defined  these  ‘exempt  organisations’.    The  ICAC,  as  far  as  I 
remember, is an exempt organisation and not the CEB because as I have just said the CEB is 
mentioned in the schedule of the Public Procurement Act.  The Finance Bill today comes to 
shield  the  Central  Electricity  Board  from  the  necessity  of  operating  under  this  Public 
Procurement Act. This is why, Madam Speaker,  just as there are other cases in this present 
Finance  Bill  today  where  certain  transgressions  to  our  procurement  principles  are  being 
proposed, I think, we should on the contrary, in the spirit of good governance, strengthen the 
role of the Public Procurement Office, Madam Speaker.  But, unfortunately, we are doing the 
contrary  in  the  case  of  the  Central  Electricity  Board  by  allowing  the  Board  to  set  up  this 
company for implementation of projects for the production of renewable energy or for other 
projects as the Board may determine.  

I said that, Madam Speaker, because there have been reports in the past.  The World 
Bank, for example, in its Country Procurement Assessment Report on Mauritius, a few years 
ago,  congratulated  Mauritius  for  setting  up  the  right  procurement  legislation  for  preparing 
and strengthening the legal and  regulatory framework in the spirit of good governance.  The 
World Bank has even made comments with regard to electricity projects which should not be 
carried out without tendering or bidding procedures in the past, Madam Speaker. So, this is 
why, I think, this proposal today comes a bit as a douche froide - if I may use the word- and 
goes against all the efforts that have been made in order to see to it, Madam Speaker, that 
projects especially in the utilities area are subject to proper procurement framework. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  now  come  to  another  clause  in  the  Bill  concerning  a  few  other 
institutions  which  have  nothing  to  do  with  procurement.  It  concerns,  for  example,  the 
environment in clause 16 of the Bill; clause 32 of the Bill, the Local Government Act; clause 
36 of the Bill, the Morcellement Act, and clause 52 of the Bill, the Sugar Industry Efficiency 
Act.    

All these clauses, Madam Speaker, have a common thread. I am talking of the time 
frame  and  these  are  linked  to  this  concept  of  the  ease  of  doing  business.  Linked  to  this 
question is this concept of silent agreement, the time frame where institutions have to respond 
to applications made to them. The Environment and Land Use Appeal Tribunal, for example, 
Madam Speaker, as I said, in Clause 16 of the Bill, the law which set up this Environment 

 

68 

and Land Use Tribunal, in this law, it is stated that section 5 provides that the Tribunal shall 
make a determination not later than 90 days after the start of hearing of the appeal, except 
where there is valid reason and with the consent of the parties. But, as in the other cases to 
which I will come to, this section is really complied with and inasmuch as the law does not 
provide for any penalty, any sanction for such non-compliance. 

I agree that the new procedural formalities which have been proposed in the Finance 
Bill today and which was announced by the hon. Minister in his speech will speed up the 
determination of appeals, but all these new proposals that are being proposed to the House 
will be frustrated and will become inefficient to the extent that the law itself does not provide 
for the consequence of non-observance within the statutory time limits. 

With  regard  to  the  Local  Government  Act,  Madam  Speaker,  now  we  see  that  the 
Executive Committee will be disbanded. The applications for Building and Land Use Permit 
will be determined solely  by the Planning and Business Monitoring Committee which is a 
hybrid  committee  consisting  of  five  councillors,  professionals  and  officers,  but  with  the 
councillors having a majority in this committee. I think hon. Uteem said this, we are  back to 
square  one.  The  question  we  have  to  ask  ourselves:  is  this  desirable  what  we  are  doing, 
allowing the  councillors to decide?  Is this desirable in terms of orderly and efficient town 
planning? 

We see also in this same clause, Madam Speaker, that the power of the Minister of 
Local Government to intervene in respect of applications for Building and Land Use Permit is 
now  limited  only  to  public  places  of  worship.  In  fact,  I  realise  that  from  now  on,  Madam 
Speaker, Clause 32 (9) provides - 

“Except  with  the  approval  of  the  Minister,  no  Outline  Planning  Permission  or 
Building  and  Land  Use  Permit  shall  be  issued  for  any  development  of  land, 
construction  of  a  building  or  extensive  alterations,  or  additions  or  repairs  to  an 
existing building for use as a place of public worship.” 

That  is  the  power  of  the  Minister  of  Local  Government  to  intervene  in  respect  in  the 
application for Building and Land Use Permit is now limited, as I just said, to public places 
of worship. This will put tremendous pressure on the hon. Minister of  Local Government. 
Madam Speaker, I am not too sure whether this is the correct thing to be proposed. 

Madam Speaker, related to this clause also, we see that stringent time limits have been 
introduced to expedite matters, I am talking of the Local Government issues. Again, I say that 

 

69 

these initiatives are likely to be inefficient in the absence of provisions in the law regarding 
the consequences for non-respect of the said time limits.  It is a right thing, therefore, in a 
nutshell, what I am arguing, Madam Speaker, to set time limits, but in the absence of any 
sanction for the non-respect of these time limits, it might be an exercise in futility. 

The same thing applies to Clause 36 with regard to the Morcellement Act which is 
being amended, Madam Speaker. Here again, simplification of procedures which is a good 
thing.  Time  limits  are  being  imposed  which  is,  again,  something  which  is  positive,  but  I 
repeat that such time limits will be useless in that the law does not provide for penalties for 
non-observance with the statutory time limits. 

The  same  thing  applies  to  Clause  52  of  the  Bill,  Sugar  Industry  Efficiency  Act  is 
being  amended.  Again,  simplification  of  procedures  are  being  proposed.  Time  limits  are 
being imposed, but again these time limits will be useless in that the law does not provide 
once again for penalties for non-observance with the statutory time limits which have been 
set in the law. 

I  would  like  also  to  say,  Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  the  Mauritius  Revenue 
Authority Act which is being amended to introduce the Alternative Tax Dispute Resolution 
Panel. This is an additional mechanism in order to resolve tax disputes. This is a welcome 
proposal,  Madam  Speaker.  I  think  it  is  being  done  so  on  the  grounds  of  convenience  and 
expediency for the taxpayers. 

These are the few points I wish to make, Madam Speaker. I have done. 

Thank you for your attention. 

(4.08 p.m.) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bholah! 

The  Minister  of  Business,  Enterprise  and  Cooperatives  (Mr  S.  Bholah):  Thank 
you for giving me the opportunity to share my views on the Finance Bill. I will be brief and I 
will stick to matters pertaining to the Business Enterprise and Cooperatives, as I have already 
extensively commented on the Budget. 

The  House  will  recall  that  during  my  intervention  on  August,  08,  on  the  Budget,  I 
concluded by saying that the Budget is now almost behind us. Indeed, the media focus should 
from now on solely and firmly be on the diligent implementation of the measures announced. 
And  everyone,  on  this  side  of  the  House,  will  now  have  to  ensure  implementation  of  the 

 

70 

measures.  Already,  Government  is  working  in  this  direction  and  I  have  no  doubt  that  this 
Government will achieve its set objectives. 

This  Finance  Bill,  Madam  Speaker,  which  makes  provision  for  amendments  to  be 
made to 58 enactments, has a strong positive correlation with the quality of the 2016-2017 
Budget  which  proposes  powerful  action  to  deal  with  complex  issues.  The  various 
amendments proposed translate in concrete terms and objectives of Government to come up 
with  the  most  appropriate  response  to  the  population’s  economic  and  social  emergencies. 
Likewise,  the  provisions  contained  in  the  Bill  under  consideration  include  many  measures 
aiming  at  modernising  the  economic  architecture.  We  will,  indeed,  see  that  some  of  the 
amendments  proposed  today  are  simply  and  rightly  so  and  update  in  view  of  the 
technological innovations brought in various sectors. 

Two  of  the  10  key  strategies  underlying  the  pillars  of  the  new  era  of  development 
advocated for in the Budget directly relate to the business and enterprise sector. We, indeed, 
has  Strategy  1  which  is  fostering  a  wave  of    modern  entrepreneurs  and  Strategy  5 
fundamentally reforming business facilitation and expanding our economic horizons. These 
two, indeed, go hand-in-hand. 

Madam  Speaker,  what  are  the  main  complaints  of  most  entrepreneurs?  Too  many 
procedures, too many administrative hassles and time-consuming steps before being able to 
set  up  or  improve  a  business.  I  can  see  that  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development is taking the bull by the horns by proposing amendments… 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Minister, I have given you some latitude. I took it as being an 
introduction to your speech to the amendments which are being brought in the Finance Bill. 
Can you please come to the amendments right away? 

Mr  Bholah:  I  am  coming,  indeed,  to  that,  Madam  Speaker.  I  remember  meeting 
representatives  of  local  authorities  in  November,  last  year,  to  plead  in  favour  of  the 
rationalisation  of  procedures  related  to  the  delivery  of  permits  and  clearances  to 
entrepreneurs.  This  intent  can  now  be  transformed  into  reality  thanks  to  the  amendments 
proposed  in  the  Local  Government  Act.  Indeed,  clause  32  amends  this  Act  to  abolish  the 
requirement for obtaining the stand of the Executive Committee in the process of determining 
an application for Outline Planning Permission and Building and Land Use Permit to provide 
that an application for a BLP be made electronically and to provide that the local authority 

 

71 

will  have  only  eight  working  days  to  seek  any  additional  information,  particulars  or 
documents from an applicant. This is, indeed, Madam Speaker, a major improvement. 

Last  year, we set up MyBiz, the SME one-stop shop to act as a single window for 
licences, permits and other clearances required by entrepreneurs. One of the major constraints 
of this operating model is that all agencies that are present should be on the same wavelength 
when it comes to information they have. However, in reality, this is seldom feasible, notably 
with the large amount of paperwork which still contaminates our administrative system.  

However, clause 5, which proposes to amend the Business Registration Act to cater 
for  the  electronic  issue  of  business  registration  cards  by  the  Registrar  of  Companies,  is  in 
itself a significant measure. This will notably enhance the exchange of information among 
various public sector agencies,  which shall, henceforth, upon mutual  agreement, share and 
use information relating to businesses amongst themselves for the purpose of exercising their 
functions in a more effective manner. 

Madam Speaker, I will now comment clauses 27 and 49, which pertain to proposed 
amendments to the Income Tax Act and the SMEDA Act respectively. It is to be noted that 
during debates on the 2015-2016 Budget, that is, last year, more specifically on 13 May 2015, 
hon. Reza Uteem deplored the fact that provisions relating to SMEs, enabling them not to file 
their accounts and not to pay taxes, only apply to SMEs set up on or after June 2015. He went 
further by stating that we are going to have two classes of SMEs after June 2015: one that 
will be exempted and the other one that will not be exempted. I admit that, for this one, he 
was not wrong. 

For several months, we indeed received representations from entrepreneurs operating 
before June 2015, bemoaning the fact that we had omitted to give due consideration to their 
contribution to the Mauritian economy so far, by granting a tax holiday only to enterprises set 
up  on  or  after  02  June  2015.  I  think  that  the  community  of  entrepreneurs  must  now  be 
relieved  as  their  appeal  has  somewhat  been  heard.  Clause  27  (zc)  proposes  to  amend  the 
Income Tax Act by making provision for a fourth year tax holiday for a small enterprise set 
up prior to 02 June 2015, registered with the SMEDA, with an annual turnover of less than 
Rs10 m. and engaged in qualifying activities under a scheme approved by Government.  

The House will also note the will of the Government to develop a unified, coherent 
approach  in  the  field  of  enterprise  development,  notably  with  clause  48  amending  the 
SMEDA Act in such a way that an individual operating an enterprise with an annual turnover 

 

72 

of not more than Rs10 m. or a cooperative society may now apply for registration with the 
Authority.  Registration  was  up  to  now  limited  to  persons  operating  a  small  enterprise  or 
medium enterprise. Indeed, Madam Speaker, l’union fait la force, and it is definitely more 
pertinent  to  regroup  all  types  of  enterprises,  that  is,  micro,  small  and  medium  and 
cooperatives  as  well  under  the  same  umbrella,  to  give  more  impetus  to  a  sector  which  is 
expected to play a vital role in our economy. 

Madam  Speaker,  still  with  regard  to  SMEs,  I  wish  to  highlight  clause  14,  which 
amends the Education Act by, inter alia, providing for reforms in the technical and vocational 
education  and  training  sector  with  regard  to  new  pathways  after  Grade  9.  Its  relevance  to 
SMEs may not seem obvious at first sight, but I must say that this is a measure that comes at 
an opportune time. Indeed, the skills mismatch is one of the major factors which significantly 
affects  our  SMEs,  particularly  in  technical  sectors  like  woodwork  or  handicraft.  This 
amendment  will,  thus,  address  the  critical  problem  at  source  and  will  in  the  long  term 
compensate for the lack of technical know-how in this sector. 

Coming to the cooperative sector, Madam Speaker, consequential amendment is being 
made for cooperative credit unions to fall under the purview of the Financial Intelligence and 
Anti-Money Laundering Act - clause 22. We all remember the trauma caused, a bit more than 
one year ago, by the Vacoas Popular Multipurpose Cooperative Society; a mega fraud. At the 
level of my Ministry, we have had to take many drastic decisions with regard to this crisis, 
and I am happy to say that, at the end of the day, we managed to find a mutually beneficial 
solution for all parties involved. 

However, with the wisdom of hindsight, we came to the realisation that there were 
quite a few loopholes in the legal and institutional frameworks of the cooperative movement 
and  that  the  Registrar  of  Cooperatives  needs  to  be  empowered  to  effectively  deal  with 
fraudulent cases. 

Clause 10 amends the Cooperatives Act in this vein. It prescribes the transfer of the 
licensing of credit unions with a turnover above Rs20 m. from the Bank of Mauritius to the 
Registrar of Cooperatives. This transfer will be done in a smooth and realistic manner in the 
sense  that  the  Registrar  of  Cooperatives  will  still  benefit  from  the  technical  support  and 
assistance of the Bank of Mauritius with regard to the licensing, regulating and supervision of 
these credit unions. The Registrar of Cooperatives is being definitely empowered, as it will 

 

73 

have more control over credit unions, notably by ensuring that every credit union complies 
with the relevant guidelines issued by the FIU. 

Hence,  clause  10,  Cooperative  Act,  and  clause  22,  Financial  Intelligence  and  Anti-
Money Laundering Act, are amendments that lay the groundwork for a framework that will 
not tolerate malpractices as those that have been exposed in the case of the Vacoas Popular 
Multipurpose Cooperative Society. 

Madam Speaker, it is quite obvious that the main amendments suggested by the hon. 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development, when it comes to the business, enterprise 
and cooperative sector, are coherent. I am convinced that the Finance Bill, when passed, is set 
to create a conducive environment that will promote business, good governance as well as 
attract potential entrepreneurs to venture into taking risks, which are part and parcel of the 
entrepreneurial work. When we adopt a holistic approach to the Finance Bill, we very clearly 
see that it is proposing to set up the appropriate legal framework to put our country firmly on 
the path to a new era of development and prosperity for the whole nation. 

Earlier I said that I will be brief, Madam. I am done. 

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

(4.19 p.m.) 

Dr.  Z.  Joomaye  (Second  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  &  Souillac):  Thank 
you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to speak in the context of the debate of 
the Finance Bill 2016. In clause 35 of the proposed Finance Bill, there is provision for the 
Medical  Council  Act  1999  to  be  amended.  It  concerns  the  entry  examinations  for  pre-
registration trainees. 

The  health  sector,  be  it  public  or  private,  is  facing  several  challenges  nowadays, 
Madam. Delivery of healthcare has to be well-structured, uniform, constant, result oriented 
and cost-effective. The  healthcare providers, therefore, have to be maintained to a level of 
practice that would uphold the quality of service towards the upper end, this, in order to meet 
the  expectations  of  the  population  and  to  make  Mauritius  acquire  the  recognition  as  an 
international medical hub that we are aiming to be in the region. 

This is not an easy task as our medical population is not homogeneous. Our doctors 
have been trained in different parts of the world according to different syllabuses, sometimes 

 

74 

in  different  languages  and  from  countries  of  different  socio-economic  and  epidemiologic 
background. We have had to accommodate them in our healthcare system. We have spent to 
that effect. It cost us a lot to cater for this purpose to give training to our young doctors to 
reach the level of practice that meets the international guidelines for delivery of healthcare 
services, but, Madam Speaker, it will cost us even more if we do not do so. 

Several  new  measures  have  recently  been  announced  and  some  have  already  been 

implemented to uniformise the level of competence of the medical community. These are – 

the preregistration … 

(i) 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Joomaye, I draw your attention that you have to comment 
and to intervene on the amendment which is at clause 35. If you look at the amendment, you 
will find that it concerns the entry examinations for preregistration trainees. Can you please 
make your comment and your intervention on the amendment? 

Dr. Joomaye:  Yes, Madam Speaker, I was going to talk about the concept of 

examination for young doctors. So, it all concerns the amendment. These are – 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

the preregistration examination of practitioners prior to registration with the 
Medical Council; 
implementation of the continuing professional development programme for 
medical practitioners and dentists, and 
the entry examination for preregistration of trainees to be recruited as what is 
commonly called pre-reg.  

This is in line with the amendment. 

They are all good measures, but they are not the doing of this Government only. I fully 
agree that there is a need to assess the level of a practitioner before registering. It is so in 
several countries in the world. Each Medical Council should have the right to carry out a full-
fledged  assessment  in  order  to  really  serve  the  purpose  of  its  existence.  However,  the 
methods of assessment have to be appropriate, coherent and adapted to our local context. The 
choice of the examining body  is of prime importance  and has to be very  judicious.  In the 
choice  of  the  body,  will  depend  the  success  of  the  whole  process.  Indeed  it  has  to  be 
independent  and  of  international  repute.  Il  ne  doit  pas  y  avoir  un  soupçon  de  doute  sur 
l’intégrité de l’institution qui va organiser l’examen d’enregistrement des médecins. A large 
consensus has to be sought by the Council before finalising with the examining institution. 

 

75 

We all know, Madam Speaker, that there is a surplus of young qualified and registered 
doctors on the job market. There is as well a long list of degree holders waiting to be enrolled 
as preregistration trainees. Introducing new hurdles should not be used as a means to control 
unemployment in the medical sector. Medical demographics, Madam Speaker, is a science in 
itself.  It  corresponds  to  the  matching  of  the  basic  laws  of  demand  and  supply  as  far  as 
medical service is concerned. 

It is the role of the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life to have a clear strategy for 
the coming decades on how it is planning to organise the healthcare system. We have to think 
ahead. It is now that we have to determine how many doctors we would need in the next 25 
years. It is about planning and a long-term one. 

Today, section 24 of the Medical Council Act is being amended. A new subsection is 
being added concerning the organisation of examinations for preregistration of trainees. Even 
if we agree with the principle of this amendment, we are of the feeling that an issue of such 
an importance should not have been tackled on a piecemeal basis. This is in the same vein of 
what has been stressed out by my friend, hon. Uteem. It is urgent that the Medical Council 
Act  be  reviewed  as  a  whole  and  the  long  overdue  amendments  be  brought  in  front  of  the 
House for debate.  

Last  year,  Madam  Speaker,  the  Council  sitting  at  that  time,  proposed  several 
amendments and communicated same to the Minister of Health and Quality of Life. One of 
the  main  concerns  of  the  Council  was  the  number  of  nominated  members  which  tends  to 
impact on its independence. 

I will end here with an appeal to the hon. Minister of Health and Quality of Life to take 

into consideration the views of the Council and urgently take action in that direction. 

I thank you for your attention. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Fowdar! 

(4.26 p.m.) 

Mr  S.  Fowdar  (Third  Member  for  Grand’  Baie  &  Poudre  D’Or):  Thank  you, 

Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker, the Finance Bill is thick and has more than 60 items of amendments. 
Certainly I am not going to go through all the amendments, but I have chosen to focus on one 
particular amendment which is of interest to me and to the accountants and auditors. 

 

76 

Madam Speaker, all the amendments brought to the laws here are to make the country 
an attractive place to do business. I am sure this will happen once they are all enacted and 
implemented.  

Madam Speaker, I have chosen to focus on the issue of rotation of auditors for listed 
companies as proposed by the Bill. The amendment proposed with regard to appointment of 
auditors is that an audit firm shall not audit the accounts of a listed company for a continuous 
period of more than seven years. 

Madam Speaker: Can I know to which clause you are referring in the Bill? 

Mr Fowdar: I need to check. It is in the Bill. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, but we need to know which clause you are referring to, if that 

is possible. Okay, please proceed! 

Mr Fowdar: It is clause 23. 

Madam Speaker, the proposed change which is coming to this country is in line with 
similar changes brought in many other countries, but the rotation of auditors is not new in 
Mauritius. In fact, section 25 of the Banking Act of 1988 already requires a rotation of the 
audit partner every five years for the banking sector, but it does not require a rotation of the 
audit firm. The proposed change is in regard to the listed companies and, therefore, concerns 
a  bigger  audience,  in  particular,  the  public  at  large.  This  change  has  become  more  than 
necessary  for  many  reasons,  but,  more  particularly,  because  auditors  auditing  in  the  same 
companies  for  a  long  period  of  time  have  tendency  to  become  complacent  due  to  the 
familiarity with the directors and the staff of the company. In fact, a break is needed in order 
to improve the quality of audit and also to reinforce the independence of the auditors. 

Madam Speaker, the modern business environment is unfortunately accompanied by 
sophisticated financial crimes and it is extremely important that measures are put in place to 
prevent such crimes to happen. Financial crimes have adverse effects on the economy and do 
seriously  affect  the  credibility  of  the  country  as  an  investment  destination.  Unfortunately, 
Mauritius has not been spared and we have recently seen few Ponzi schemes and also the 
famous  BAI  saga.  Financial  crimes  are  becoming  more  complex  and  it  is  becoming  very 
difficult to detect and to prevent.  

With globalisation and easy movement of funds around the world, financial frauds are 
more likely to occur and may take different forms and structures. The Police against financial 

 

77 

fraud is the auditor, Madam Speaker, but, alas, in many cases, auditors have been found to be 
complacent, negligent and deliberately acting together with the fraudsters. In many cases, the 
auditors have been pointed fingers. Very unfortunately, we have witnessed so many types of 
financial frauds around the world where the auditors have been pointed fingers. Needless to 
recall the famous Enron case in 2001, where one of the big audit firms, Arthur Andersen, lost 
its licence after one of the biggest audit failures ever.  Since then, year after year, we have 
continued to witness audit failures. 

Madam  Speaker,  Mauritius  has  not  been  spared  from  the  financial  crimes  although 
sanctions are still being awaited in some cases. I still remember, Madam Speaker, the famous 
MCCB  crash  where  it  appears  that  the  auditors  submitted  a  clean  audit  report  with  no 
adversity,  yet  the  bank  crashed  only  after  a  few  days  of  the  audit  report  and,  as  far  as  I 
remember, the auditors were not sanctioned.  Recently, we have witnessed the cases of two 
audit firms that have been accused of negligence with regard to the BAI saga. Although it is 
clear that the regulators did not play their role properly, yet the auditors are also to be blamed 
to a large extent in these cases. 

Madam Speaker, I hope the FRC, the regulatory body, is investigating and will come 
up with sections in the near future if the auditors are found guilty. The population and the 
business world in general are watching and are expecting sanctions and this is necessary to 
restore confidence to the business world. 

Madam Speaker, in one of the cases involving BAI, I was myself shocked to learn 
that a very material item involving a sum of Rs3.6 billion was not investigated by the auditors 
who produced a clean report and later it was found that it was a mere window dressing, a 
paper entry and that the sum of over Rs3.6 billion were never paid into the accounts. Here 
again, Madam Speaker, I expect the FRC to come up with results after their investigation if 
ever they are investigating. 

Madam  Speaker,  coming  back  to  the  proposed  amendments,  I  note  that  there  is  no 
mention. The  proposed amendments state that the audit firms can last until seven years and 
then there would be a break, but it does not mention when the audit firm can be taken back on 
board after the mandatory break of seven years. Does it imply any time after one year or after 
another seven years? This is very important. Madam Speaker, if it is after one year, then I 
believe the expected dividend from bringing a rotation will not be reaped.  A longer period of 

 

78 

separation would be ideal to break the link arising from familiarity between the auditor and 
the directors.  

There are two other pertinent issues which need some clarity. Again, the first one is: 
is  a  rotation  also  imposed  on  non-audit  services  that  an  auditor  may  provide  to  a  client 
company or is it simply limited to the audit work? I hope the hon. Minister will clarify this 
issue. Secondly, are subsidiaries of groups also subject to some form of audit rotation?  There 
is no mention in the amendment. Madam Speaker, in all, the amendment is extremely good 
and is in line with advanced countries, developed countries and is welcome. 

Madam Speaker, in February last year, the EU published a briefing note as guidance 
for issues arising from the application of the rotation of auditors and the paper fully discusses 
the two issues I have raised earlier, and I hope this can help the hon. Minister to implement 
the rotation of auditors. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Ramano! 

(4.35 p.m.) 

Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes):  Madame  la 
présidente,  pour  ma  contribution  au  Finance  Bill,  je  me  limiterai  aux  amendements  à  être 
apportés  au  Land  (Duties  and  Taxes)  Act,  au  Registration  Duty  Act,  au  Non-Citizens 
(Property Restriction) Act et à l’Investment Promotion Act.  

Madame  la  présidente,  j’aborde  ici  le  volet  immobilier  que  j’ai  eu  l’occasion 
d’aborder lors du débat budgétaire et j’ai eu l’occasion de dire que ce budget représente un 
caractère particulier pour le secteur de l’immobilier. Je parle ici du premier point en ce qui 
concerne le concept de first-time buyer qui a été aboli en 2006 et qui a été réintroduit en 2010 
par l’honorable Pravind Jugnauth. J’avais souligné l’année dernière, Madame la présidente, 
que  le  seuil  pour  bénéficier  du  first-time  buyer  ne  reflétait  pas  la  réalité  du  marché.  Avec 
l’amendement proposé à la section 27 du Registration Duty Act, aujourd’hui le prix considéré 
est de R2 millions pour les terrains vagues et R6 millions pour les immeubles bâtis. Je dois 
reconnaître que cela est en phase avec la réalité du marché. Au paragraphe 318 du présent 
budget - toujours en parallèle je fais référence à la section 27 du Registration Duty Act - le 
bon sens a prévalu où il est précisé que - 

 

79 

“318.  A first-time buyer will now be allowed to buy bare residential land 

free of registration duty, on the first Rs2 million, (…)” 

L’acheteur sera exempté sur les premiers R2 millions et payera 5% sur la différence du prix 
de  vente,  ce  qui  est  correct.    Je  salue,  bien  sûr,  la  décision  de  l’honorable  ministre  de 
préconiser, d’une part, l’augmentation du plafond des prix pour les terrains vagues de R1,5 
millions à R2 millions, et d’autre part de corriger cette injustice qui existait avant le présent 
budget  qui  consistait  à  taxer  5%  sur  la  totalité  du  prix  une  fois  que  le  prix  dépassait  les 
R1,500,000.  Une fois que le prix dépassé R1,500,000, il y avait plus de first-time buyer. Tout 
le monde payait 5% de registration duty sur la totalité du prix de vente. À partir du présent 
amendement, on est exempté jusqu’à R2 millions et on paie 5% de duty sur la différence de 
prix. 

La  section  27  (3)  du  Registration  Duty  Act  préconise  ainsi  que  pour  les  first-time 

buyers -  

“(…)  the  duty  leviable  under  this  Act  on  any  deed  of  transfer  (…)  witnessing  the 
transfer of - 

(i) 
(ii) 

a portion of freehold bare land; or  
the right to construct a residential building on top of an existing building (…), 
shall be reduced by the amount of the duty leviable or 100,000 rupees, 
whichever is the lesser.” 

Cela confirme le fait que le bon sens a prévalu et que seulement la différence supérieure à R2 
millions sera taxable à 5% pour les first-time buyers avec une contrainte que la superficie ne 
doit  pas  dépasser  les  20  perches.  Le  point  que  je  souhaite  souligner  ici,  Madame  la 
présidente, est la suivante.  Je souhaite ici attirer l’attention de l’honorable ministre et de la 
Chambre  sur  la  question  des  first-time  buyers  pour  l’acquisition  des  maisons  et  des 
appartements. Le présent budget reconnaît deux types d’offres d’achat, soit des offres d’achat 
des particuliers qui souhaitent vendre leur maison ou leur appartement déjà construit dont ils 
sont  déjà  propriétaires.  C’est  le  premier  type  d’offre  d’achat.  Le  deuxième  type  d’offre 
d’achat concerne les offres d’achat des promoteurs, c’est-à-dire, les promoteurs viennent de 
l’avant  avec  des  projets  de  plus  de  5  units,  des  projets  d’appartements  ou  des  projets  des 
maisons for the construction of a housing estate as registered under 161A (46) of the Income 
Tax Act. 

 

80 

Le discours du budget le confirme sans ambiguïté. Ces deux offres sont reconnues. À 

la page 43 et la section 317, il est clairement fait mention – 

“A Mauritian citizen acquiring a new house or a new apartment during the 
period 1st September 2016 to 30 June 2020 for an amount not exceeding Rs 6 
million will be eligible to full exemption from registration duty.  There will be 
no age restriction.” 

A la section 323 - 

“As regards promoters, they will be allowed to build and sell residential units of up 
Rs6 million, free of land transfer tax, instead of Rs4 million currently.  The scheme is 
being extended to 2020.” 

Dans son summing-up, l’honorable ministre reconfirme que le plafond des prix pour les first-
time  buyers  des  maisons  et  appartements  est  de  R6  millions.  Je  pose  la  question  tout 
simplement à tous ceux concernés par le secteur de l’immobilier où les membres de la presse 
vous diront que le plafond des prix pour l’acquisition des maisons et des appartements pour 
les first-time buyers sera de R6 millions à partir du 01 septembre 2016.  

Mais,  à  la  lecture  du  présent  Finance  Bill,  Madame  la  présidente,  malgré  les  mesures 
annoncées, le plafond est resté toujours à R 4 millions. Ainsi la section 27 (5) (a) n’a pas été 
amendée et se lit toujours comme suit - 

“The  duty  leviable  under  this  Act  on  any  deed  witnessing  transfer  of  a  residential 
apartment  or  a  portion  of  land  with  a  building  thereon  shall  be  reduced  by  the 
amount of the duty leviable or Rs200,000 whichever is the lesser.” 

Lorsqu’on parle de Rs200,000 of duty, cela équivaut à un prix de vente de R 4 millions. 5% 
de R 4 millions, cela nous fait R 200,000 et non pas R 6 millions. 

Mon  appel  s’adresse  à  l’honorable  ministre  de  considérer  cette  proposition 
d’amendement  pour  que  le  plafond  de  R  6  millions  ne  s’applique  pas  seulement  aux 
promoteurs  des  projets  d’appartements  mais  aussi  à  l’acquisition  des  maisons  ou 
appartements  déjà  existants.  Cette  proposition  d’amendement  doit  aussi  prendre  en 
considération,  tout  comme  les  first  time  buyers,  des  terrains  vagues  ou  l’exemption  du 
registration duty sur des first Rs6 millions et le paiement de 5% sur la différence. 

Il  est  bon  aussi  de  considérer,  Madame  la  présidente,  que  lors  du  dernier  budget 
lorsque  le  quantum  a  été  augmenté  à  R  4  millions  pour  les  maisons  et  appartements  déjà 

 

81 

existants et aussi pour le Housing Estate Scheme.  Donc, eux aussi, le plafond a été amené à 
R 4 millions. La logique veut à ce que les R 6 millions s’appliquent et pour les maisons déjà 
existantes, comme pour les newly built houses. 

Madame  la  présidente,  lors  des  débats  budgétaires,  j’ai  attiré  l’attention  de  la 
Chambre sur l’injustice qui est causée aux couples divorcés lors des transferts immobiliers 
entre ex-époux. Il est inacceptable que ces mêmes ex-époux ont à payer et le land transfert 
tax côté vendeur et le registration duty côté acheteur à un taux de 5% chacun, alors que de 
l’acquisition qu’ils ont fait conjointement pendant le mariage, ils avaient déjà payé les frais 
d’enregistrement et j’avais suggéré que ces transferts entre ex-époux soient exemptés de la 
taxe. 

Lors de son summing-up du 16 août 2016, l’honorable ministre a reconnu cet état des 

choses et il a dit entre autres choses – 

“(…)in  order  to  correct  an  anomaly,  the  division  of  assets  between  ex-spouses 
following a divorce, assets which have been acquired during the legal community of 
goods will be exempted from registration duty and land transfer tax.” 

J’accueille favorablement la décision du ministre de venir de l’avant par voie de regulations 
pour amender le Eighth Schedule du Land (Duties and Taxes) Act. 

A  la  section  151  du  budget,  l’honorable  ministre  a  proposé  des  amendements  en 
profondeur au Property Development Scheme and Regulations. Et là, comme c’est mentionné 
aussi au niveau du Finance Bill, la logique veut qu’on retire le maximum size limit  de 50 
arpents ;  qu’on  retire  l’obligation  de  vendre  25%  aux  mauriciens ;  qu’on  augmente  le 
permissible land size pour une villa de 50 perches à 1.25 arpents. J’accueille favorablement 
ces amendements pour booster ce secteur qui est tombé dans une certaine morosité après le 
budget de l’année dernière. 

Madame la présidente, je souhaite ici aborder les amendements prévus à l’Investment 
Promotion  Act  et  au  Non-Citizens  (Property  Restriction)Act  pour  permettre  aux  étrangers 
d’acquérir des biens à Maurice. A la section 155 du budget, il est dit - 

 “(…)to further open the economy we are allowing non-citizens, registered with the 
BOI,  subject  to  security  clearances,  to  acquire  apartments  and  business  spaces  in 
buildings. The Non-Citizens (Property Restriction) Act will be amended accordingly.” 

 

82 

Madame la présidente, moi-même et beaucoup de professionnels dans le secteur de 
l’immobilier,  ont  été  surpris  par  l’audace  du  ministre  des  Finances  dans  ce  secteur.  Avant 
pour  l’acquisition  des  business  premises,  c’était  réservé  à  la  catégorie  investors  sous  le 
Investment Promotion Act, alors que pour l’acquisition d’un appartement dans un complexe 
de ground plus 2, c’était permis aux professionnels, investors and retired persons holding an 
occupational permit ou aux détenteurs des permanent residence permits. 

Avec l’amendement proposé aux Non-Citizens (Property Restriction) Act, Madame la 
présidente, tout non-citizen, en passant par le BOI tout simplement, a le droit d’acquérir un 
commercial space ou encore un terrain pour construire un bâtiment commercial et tout non-
citizen a le droit d’acquérir un appartement dans un complexe faisant plus de deux niveaux. 

Madame la présidente, je suis surpris qu’il n’existe aucune condition attachée à cette 
permission donnée aux non-citizens. La seule condition est les security clearances donnés par 
le BOI. Je suis déçu qu’il n’y ait aucune condition, aucun guideline proposé par le BOI à ce 
niveau en ce qui concerne l’acquisition. Pas de restriction en ce qui concerne le montant à 
être payé. Est-ce que ce sera 500,000 dollars, comme cela a été le cas initialement, ou c’est 
ouvert à n’importe quel prix de vente. 

Je dois souligner que je ne suis pas contre l’idée de permettre aux étrangers d’acquérir 
des biens immobiliers à Maurice. C’est vrai que le marché mauricien est assez restreint. Mais, 
la philosophie de la loi le Non-Citizens (Property Restriction) Act, c’est  principalement de 
contrôler la superficie limitée du sol mauricien, d’empêcher toute spéculation foncière, toute 
inflation  exagérée  du  prix  foncier,  de  permettre  un  accès  des  mauriciens  à  la  propriété 
foncière avec une protection particulière du lower-income group et du middle-income group, 
d’empêcher  aussi  toute  forme  de  ségrégation  sociale  entre  citizens  et  non-citizens,  comme 
c’est présentement le cas dans certaines régions des côtes nord et ouest du pays. 

Je demande au ministre de donner une attention particulière à ce sujet et d’insister au 
niveau du BOI de venir de l’avant avec des garde-fous tel un seuil de prix afin d’empêcher 
toute dérive. 

Dans le passé, il y a eu des abus à travers des Trusts et même des compagnies fictives, 

tout simplement pour permettre à des non-citizens d’acquérir des biens à Maurice. 

La section 39 du Non-Citizens (Property Restriction) Act est amendée pour permettre 
des transferts des biens immobiliers aussi longtemps que le pourcentage des actions dans la 
compagnie ne dépasse pas 25%. 

 

83 

Ce qui est surprenant, Madame la présidente, c’est qu’on enlève le contrôle du PMO 
et même du BOI et il n’y a pas lieu d’avoir aucun enregistrement au niveau de la BOI, le 
transfert  peut  se  faire  tout  simplement  entre  vendeur  et  acheteur.  Aucune  condition  n’est 
imposée  dans  la  loi,  aucune  distinction  n’est  faite  entre  les  ordinary  preference  shares  ou 
même redeemable shares. Je demande au ministre de considérer une meilleure définition de 
la loi pour éviter tout abus dans ce domaine. 

Je vous remercie, Madame la présidente. 

Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for half an hour. 

At 4.51 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 5.23 p.m. with the Deputy Speaker in the Chair. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Minister Gayan! 

The Minister of Health and Quality of Life (Mr A. Gayan): Mr Deputy Speaker, 
Sir, I shall be speaking on clause 35 of the Finance (Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill which 
deals with an amendment to the Medical Council Act. 

The  purpose  of  this  amendment  is  to  provide  for  a  prospective  doctor  to  be 
compulsorily  assessed  before  his  enlistment  as  a  pre-registration  intern  with  a  view  to 
ensuring that he has the required knowledge, standards, skills and competence in the medical 
field. I am aware that this amendment must be set in a historical and proper perspective in 
order to demonstrate its necessity and to give assurance to the House that it is in the interest 
of both doctors and patients and the public service at large. 

Before I come to the rationale of the amendment let me also say, Mr Deputy Speaker, 
Sir,  that  we  did  not  know  at  the  time  when  we  started  work  on  this  issue  that  the  Indian 
Government  was  also  working  on  what  has  become  known  as  NEET  (National  Eligibility 
cum Entrance Test). It had become imperative for India to set a common exit exam which 
replaces the myriad university level exams that MBBS students have to take before they start 
practising medicine. A centralised exam is predicated around these principles – 

quality of health professionals; 
standardised medical education, and 
certification of competencies and skills. 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
When NEET was being passed in India there were mixed reactions and, in fact, what 
NEET  does  is  to  tell  MBBS  graduates  that  their  right  to  practise  will  henceforth  be 

 

84 

conditional upon their getting through the national NEET exam. This particular provision was 
challenged before the Supreme Court of India, but the Supreme Court upheld NEET as an 
important feature in the assessment of health professionals. In fact, all countries, Mr Deputy 
Speaker,  Sir,  have  a  methodology  for  the  assessment  of  medical  graduates.  I  have  spoken 
about this previously in the House and I do not propose to go over that again. 

I wish also to say that this amendment does not mean that we are casting any doubt on 
the  qualifications  of  those  who  wish  to  be  enlisted  as  pre-registration  interns  or  on  the 
institutions where they study. In fact, this exam will give them added comfort and confidence 
in their knowledge of medicine, their skills and their competence. They should look forward 
to  this  exercise  as  a  confirmation  of  their  qualifications  and  by  this  entry  exam  we  are 
adopting a policy of quality assurance for all our health professionals. 

I will have to give a brief chronology of the events to show why this amendment has 
become  necessary.  In  2011  there  was  no  assessment  and  no  examination  for  interns.  The 
assessments were being carried out by the respective consultants in charge in each regional 
hospital. The same situation prevailed in 2012. Then, in 2013 following protests which were 
received  to  the  effect  that  certain  pre-registration  house  officers,  that  is,  the  interns,  were 
being favoured by their respective consultants in charge, it was decided that an assessment be 
carried out by a panel of five consultants in charge at the level of regional hospitals.   

Complaints  were  still  received  then  to  the  effect  that  graduates  of  certain  countries 
were being penalised. It was then decided that the assessment would be carried out by the 
Mauritius Institute of Health in the five major postings: general medicine, general surgery, 
obstetrics and gynaecology, paediatrics and orthopaedics.  

Then in 2013 also the Medical Council introduced an examination for all those who 
would  have  successfully  completed  their  training  before  being  registered  as  general 
practitioners.  This  examination  is  still  being  carried  out  by  the  National  Board  of 
Examination of India and the Medical Council of Mauritius. Then, 183 doctors protested and 
they served a mise en demeure on the Ministry to the effect that such a condition did not form 
part of the offer of enlistment. Advice was sought from the Solicitor General’s Office and, in 
fact, all these doctors had to be exempted from the examination. 

In 2014, to ensure that pre-registration house officers would be assessed by the MIH 
there  was  this  new  condition  inserted  in  the  letter  of  enlistment.  This  is  to  ensure  that 
everybody who would like to practise as a doctor had to meet certain minimum standards. 

 

85 

Then in 2012 as well - I know a lot has been heard about this Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 
being used as a diversion from proper amendments to the major pieces of legislation - let me 
say  that  in  2012  four  fundamental  amendments  were  brought  to  the  Medical  Council  Act 
through  the  Economic  And  Financial  Measures  (Miscellaneous  Provisions)  Act  of  2012. 
These measures were –  

(i) 
(ii) 

(iii) 
(iv) 

eligibility criteria for undertaking medical studies; 
examinations prior to registration as medical practitioners by the Medical 
Council of Mauritius; 
setting up of a Postgraduate Medical Examination Board, and 
continuing professional development. 

I  must  repeat  that  before  2012  no  examinations  were  being  held  for  doctors  prior  to  their 
being registered by the Medical Council. They were being registered under section 22 of the 
Medical Council Act.  

But  we  have  introduced  certain  measures.  We  have  introduced  examinations  since 
2013 for all doctors and dental surgeons prior to their being registered with the Medical and 
Dental Councils. We have also set up Postgraduate Medical and Dental Boards for those who 
want to be registered as specialists. Even there we have some problems as many of those who 
come  to  be  assessed  to  be  specialists  are  found  to  be  unsuitable  for  that  particular  grade. 
Thirdly,  in  order  to  improve  the  skills  and  to  keep  abreast  of  innovations  and  new 
technologies in the field of medicine, CPD (Continuous Professional Development) courses 
and programmes are now mandatory  from August of this  year. This applies to all doctors, 
dentists, specialists and if they do not follow the CPD then they are not entitled to practise. 
We have also worked with the Medical Council to come up with a close list of recognised 
medical institutions where Mauritian students can pursue medical studies and these studies 
must also comprise clinical training provided at the chosen institutions. 

This  amendment  has  been  dictated  by  these  considerations  and  also  because  of  the 
lack of uniformity and standardisation and disparities in the level of medical education which 
are provided in countries where our students go for studies. Because of those disparities there 
is an urgent need to regulate the level of competence both in theory and in practice of those 
students who wish to practise medicine. This is why we are proposing that an independent 
body of international repute organises the entry exam. Since 2013 it is the National Board of 
Examiners of India that has been doing it and it seems that that practice will continue. 

 

86 

We want to pave the way, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, for all our health professionals to 
meet the basic requirements prior to their being allowed to practise whether in private or in 
public. The Medical Council will organise this examination around September or October in 
collaboration with the National Board of Examiners of India. It is only after the students have 
passed that exam that they will be enlisted as pre-registration interns and they will be allowed 
to follow their clinical training.  

So, I believe, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that this particular amendment is necessary. In 

fact, I am happy that hon. Dr. Sorefan who spoke on behalf of the Opposition … 

(Interruptions) 

Dr. Joomaye, sorry.  I think he changed his hairstyle. I was confused about his hair. 

He also said that he has no qualms about this amendment, and I am happy that there is 
consensus  in  the  House  about  the  need  for  our  doctors  and  dentists  to  be  of  comparable 
international standard. It is a fact that our doctors have been trained in all sorts of countries, 
with different languages, with different prescription skills, and it is necessary that we have, at 
least, one standard in Mauritius before they are allowed to practice. 

This is what I had to say. 

Thank you. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody! 

(5.32 p.m.) 

Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West): Thank you, 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I intend to intervene on clause 14 of the Finance Bill - I am 

sure everybody is aware - regarding the amendment to our Education Act. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  let  me  at  the  outset  reply  to  the  hon.  Minister  when  she 
stated  that,  during  the  2000-2005  (MSM/MMM  Government),  there  were  no  amendments 
brought  to  the  Education  Act  with  regard  to  reform.  First  of  all,  let  me  remind  the  hon. 
Minister that, at a certain moment, she was part of that Government and the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister  was  Prime  Minister,  and  after  that,  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  was  Prime 
Minister.  In  fact,  there  have  been  three,  not  one,  not  two,  but  three  amendments  to  the 
Education Act. 

 

Let me finish! 

87 

(Interruptions) 

Any Minister is advised by the Attorney General’s Office. If the Attorney General’s 
Office says that we have to amend the Act, we go and amend the Act, and the only way to 
amend the Act is to have a full debate on the amendment to the Act. If the State Law Office 
says that we do not need to amend and to go by regulation, we go by regulation. But, in this 
particular  case, there was a need to amend the  Act, and to  amend the  Act, we need  a full 
debate, where the Minister presents the Bill at first reading, and then at second reading. All 
the Members of this Parliament who want to intervene, who have an interest in education, 
intervene  and  put  questions,  and  then  the  Minister  replies.  After  the  reply,  if  we  are  not 
satisfied, we ask further questions at Committee Stage. This is what a debate is. This is what 
an amendment to an Act should be. Not hiding behind the shield of the Finance Bill to amend 
such an important Act; an Act which will have many consequences, not to this generation, 
but  to  the  future  and  future  generations.  This  is  why  we  have  asked  the  hon.  Minister  of 
Finance not to move for this part of the Bill, so that we can have a full debate. I am sure, 
knowing the number of parliamentarians who want to intervene on education, the interest of 
this  House,  we  would  have  had  more  than  two-third  of  this  Parliament  that  would  have 
probably intervened. 

On the Human Rights Bill, which was just a photocopy of the previous one, we had 
more than 20 orators. And, on such an important Education Bill, we hide behind the shield of 
the Finance Bill, and en catimini, bring the amendment without a full debate. 

Let me say one thing. The hon. Minister has intervened this morning, and she has left 
more doubt on the implementation than people had before. People who have listened to her 
phoned  me  and  sent  me  SMS.  They  told  me  that  it  is  not  even  clear.  There  are  so  many 
questions to be asked. Even this morning, the hon. Minister must have received a letter from 
the  Roman  Catholic  Secondary  School  Union  asking  questions  about  issues  in  the  reform, 
that is, the Nine-Year Schooling. 

The  hon.  Minister  is  saying  that  she  has  cleared  the  issue.    It  is  not  only  to  this 
institution  that  it  should  be  clear,  but  to  the  public  at  large!  Every  stakeholder  should  be 
aware. So, this is why we say that there should have been a full debate on such an important 
issue. 

 

88 

What are we having today? The Minister has spoken as an intervener, but also as the 
mover of a Bill today!  She has intervened like any Member of the House.  The way that she 
has intervened gave us the impression that she, herself, is not sure about the implementation, 
whether we are ready for that implementation, what effect it will have in the long run to our 
institution;  positive  or  negative.    Otherwise,  she  would  have  come  with  a  full  debate  and 
answered to our queries.  Today, what will happen?  I am going to ask a full question on the 
Bill.  Who is going to reply?  The Minister should reply and not the Attorney General!  The 
Attorney General is not here to implement policies.  The Attorney General is here to advise 
Government on legal issues, and when it comes to policies, how we intend to implement, it is 
the role of a Minister. The hon. Minister of Finance cannot answer. He is not the Minister 
responsible for the portfolio of education. He cannot answer with regard to the question I am 
going  to  put  with  regard  to  that  Bill  and  which  will  remain  unanswered  because  the  hon. 
Minister will not be able to answer, and this will create more flou in the eyes of the public 
regarding that Bill. So, this is our stand. 

Education is an issue where we do not want to have any political gain from it. It is an 
issue where there should have been consensus, not only in this House, but also with regard to 
all  stakeholders.  Yesterday  morning,  I  phoned  a  few  stakeholders  and  some  were  even 
surprised.  They  were  surprised  when  they  received  the  letter  this  morning.  They  were  not 
aware that the amendment to the Education Act is becoming law today. There were not aware 
that we were introducing the Nine-Year Schooling. This morning, I made it a must to listen to 
all the radios, including the MBC radio, which I very rarely listen. None of the news, be it at 
8.00 a.m., at 9.00 a.m. or at 7.00 a.m. mentioned that the Education Act is being amended. 
They talked about other issues. They talked about Banking Act, about Financial Act.  They 
were not  aware! So, the nation was no aware that we are  going to change the educational 
system next year. Most of the stakeholders were not aware. 

Let me be clearer. Up to now, what we have had is only a copy of a slide which was 
projected  to  all  Members  of  Parliament.  We  were  all  invited.  I  attended,  and  most  of  us 
attended  because  we  are  interested  in  the  education  of  our  children  and  of  our  future 
generation.  That’s  all  we  have.  Up  to  now,  we  have  not  had  a  full  brief,  an  exclusive 
document, a comprehensive document, telling us exactly how this system will work. Today, 
we are voting a Bill where Members will not be able to debate. The hon. Minister will not be 
able to answer questions on that particular and such important issue. 

 

89 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, let me come to the Bill itself. I am not going to debate the 
Bill because I have to debate only the amendment. So, I will come to the amendment and ask 
questions. But who will reply to my questions? There are questions which have been put to 
me  -  not  my  question  -  by  stakeholders,  by  people  who  are  in  the  profession,  academics, 
students, rectors, managers. We would have expected the hon. Minister responsible for the 
portfolio to answer. 

Now,  let  us  look  at  the  Education  Act  in  section  2.  The  definition  of  “Form  VI 

College” is being deleted. Deleting the definition of ‘Form VI College’ and ‘principal’! 

It is being deleted! Answer! 

(Interruptions) 

So, without forgetting, that it was the MSM/MMM Government which introduced the Form 
VI College.  I have had queries from the Islamic College at Cité La Cure.  It is a Form VI 
College.  Now, you don’t answer me!  I want an official answer which will go in Hansard so 
that the public can read.  Not just sit down and say: it remains; it goes; it will come; it will be 
replaced!  No, we don’t want this!  We want official reply. What will happen to the Islamic 
College at Cité La Cure, which is a Form VI college?  

Now, the most important issue, we are talking about abolition of CPE and nine-year 
schooling. So, we are introducing two examinations: one at the end of Grade 6 and one at the 
end of Grade 9.  

(Interruptions) 

No, it is not there!  This is why I am asking for a debate.  The Speaker had to stop the hon. 
Minister. We have to have a debate.  This is why we say there should have been a debate. 
Today, we have only one examination which gives a certificate. The CPE examinations!  The 
Standard  III  examination  does  not  give  a  certificate.    Now,  we  are  going  to  have  two 
examinations. One is at Standard VI and one at Grade 9. And when we know, we are keeping 
the CPE.   

(Interruptions) 

Don’t talk about examen national!  I know about examen national, but it is not a certified 
examination. It does not lead to any certificate. It is just an examination, But now we have to 
pass these two examinations, then we’ll get a certificate and to get a certificate we have to 
compete. You have to pass an examination. 

 

90 

(Interruptions) 

Replying to my PQ B/549, this is what the hon. Minister had to say regarding how you will 
be admitted in Grade 7. So, we are taking about the equivalent of CPE. Same age!  

“All students will move on to Grade 7 (…).” 

(Interruptions) 

Can you please sit down and listen!  Because whether you say yes or no, it will not go in 
Hansard and nobody will know! 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Members! 

Hon. Baloomoody! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Baloomoody:  “All students will move on to Grade 7, but the admission will be 
done  on  a  regional  basis  as  it  is  done  right  now  for  regional  schools  depending  on  the 
students’ results.” 

So,  results  are  still  important  at  Standard  VI.    The  competition  is  still here  and  if 
there  are  several  good  schools  in  the  region,  the  one  with  the  best  result  goes  to  the  best 
school. Regional! So, we still have that competition. 

(Interruptions) 

Can I be allowed to speak without being interrupted by the hon. Minister? 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun, please don’t reply from the 

bench… 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Baloomoody:  She chooses to hide behind the Finance Bill in order not to reply… 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker:  I have  given my ruling,  hon. Baloomoody!   I don’t need to 

repeat! 

 

91 

Mr Baloomoody:  Now, we are keeping the two examinations.  Instead of one, we 
are  going to have two, and both examinations are important for  you to move forward. So, 
there is competition even at Standard VI and at Grade 9.  Now, the same sub-section (2), talks 
about a special education needs school.  This is very important.   It means a school which 
provides  a  specialised  education  to  learners  with  disabilities  or  students  having  learning 
difficulties  and  requiring  additional  specialised  services.  We  all  know  this  is  against  the 
principle  of  the  UN  report  where  it  says  that  we  should  get  these  children  into  the 
mainstream. 

(Interruptions) 

We all know, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that this is important because we have had a 
report which says that we should encourage these children in the mainstream. We should not 
have a specialised school for them. They should be treated as equal. To a PNQ put to the hon. 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions, she replied that she 
is talking to the hon. Minister of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and 
Scientific Research to ensure that these people who are disabled do join the mainstream.  So, 
no specialised school! And here we are legalising and institutionalising what the international 
institution  has  told  us  not  to  do.    Unfortunately,  again,  we  won’t  be  able  to  have  more 
clarification on this issue.   

Now, section 3 (d) – 

“A College which provides post-primary education for Grades 12 and 13, leading to a 
public examination of the level of Higher School Certificate or its equivalent.” 

What is the definition of a ‘college’?  It is not defined.  We have deleted ‘Form VI College’.  
What  is  a  ‘College’?    The  Academy!    There  is  a  debate  with  regard  to  the  RCA,  Roman 
Catholic  schools.    Are  they  going  to  join  the  Academy?    Are  we  going  to  have  Academy 
schools or will there be a separate entity where you will do your SC, HSC, as it is now?  We 
have  asked  this  question  several  times  and  the  hon.  Minister  has  given  evasive  answers: 
consultations are still on; the RCA is on-board.  But we know they have send papers, they 
have made representations that they are not going to join the Academy.  So, are we going to 
have l’éducation à deux vitesses in the private sector?  They have issued a communiqué that 
they are not going to be on-board.  So, what are we going to have in that sector?  One  

 

92 

academy and the other one the RCA having their own schools as it is now.  So, are we going 
to have l’éducation à deux vitesses or two parallel mainstreaming, one going in that direction 
and the other one going in the other direction? 

We are still not clear about the equality of treatment for those who are abled and those 
who are disabled.  We don’t know per capita. Are we spending the same sum of money?  Are 
we giving them the same facilities to attend schools?  Are they having transport facilities?  
The per capita issue!  We have asked many times that it should be the Ministry which should 
enforce compulsory education up to the age of 18.  It is not in the amendment Bill.  We will 
come with the PSSA Bill tomorrow.  We have another issue, so I won’t refer to the PSSA 
today. 

With regard to scholarships, the hon. Minister informed us this morning that it will 
apply only to regional schools, not to academy.  May we know why? Why is it that those 
choosing to go to the academy don’t have the opportunity to have a scholarship?  These are 
questions which need to be answered.  Subsection (1) says - 

“By inserting, after the word ‘schools’, the words ‘including special education needs 
schools and technical and vocational institutions.” 

There is no mention of polytechnic.  Why, again?  So, it is unfortunate that all these questions 
which  I  have  put  will  remain  unanswered  or  we  will  have  an  answer  à  côté,  without  the 
principal person concerned with education enlightening the House.  

So, on this side of the House, the MMM, we are making an appeal to Government to 
withdraw these amendments for the time being.  Let us come at the next sitting - I don’t know 
whether it will be November or December - with an Amendment Bill where we can have a 
full debate, a clear debate and most of the stakeholders would have an opportunity either to 
inform us about their concerns, about the pros and cons of the Bill and we would have other 
educators to contribute.  In front of me, I see at least 4 or 5 educators.  I am sure they have 
something  to  contribute.  I  am  sure  they  would  contribute  to  make  it  better  and  have  a 
consensus on this debate. Unfortunately, we are going in catimini. There is no debate. There 
will be no answer. My question at Committee Stage will remain unanswered because the hon. 
Minister of Finance cannot answer for the Minister of Education. This is where we are today, 
in a complete mess, with regard to such a serious issue of education which is a fundamental 
issue for our children and the future generations. I rest my case. 

Thank you. 

 

93 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Yerrigadoo! 

(5.51 p.m.) 

The  Attorney  General  (Mr  R.  Yerrigadoo):  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  before  I 
address  you  specifically  on  the  ambit  of  clauses  24  and  31  -  because  I  have  listened  to  a 
couple of Members and hon. Uteem on the fact that there are some parts of the Bill where we 
use the terms “as may be prescribed” - allow me to state that it is certainly not objectionable 
to use the formula “as may be prescribed in the Bill”. 

Now, this is because it is a legislative drafting device and this device does not take 
away  le  droit  de  regard  of  the  legislature  in  terms  of  the  scrutiny  of  legislation  by  the 
National Assembly. Now, as I said, a number of amendments will be brought by regulations 
and this why the phrase “as may be prescribed” has been resorted to. 

In this context, I have to refer to section 122 of the Constitution as well as section 20 
of the Interpretation and General Clauses Act. I shall not be reading them, but the essence of 
section  122  talks  about  parliamentary  control  over  certain  subordinate  legislations.  Mr 
Deputy  Speaker,  we  all  know  that  those  have  to  be  tabled  and  laid  before  the  National 
Assembly and one would have 30 days to challenge those. Of particular relevance is section 
20 of the IGCA on ‘Commencement and disallowance’ which in subsection (1) states – 

“(1) 

Subject to section 22, every subsidiary enactment shall come into 
operation on the date of its publication in the Gazette or on such earlier 
or later date as may be specifically provided in the enactment.” 

And, of course, it goes on. But, what is important is subsection (3) – 

“(3)  No subsidiary enactment may be amended by the Assembly(…)” 

And, we talk about the 30 days to be opened up to challenge after it is being laid on the Table 
of the Assembly and when under subsection 4 – 

“(4)  Where  a  subsidiary  enactment  has  been  disallowed  under  subsection 
(3),  the  Attorney-General  shall  give  notice  of  the  disallowance  by 
regulations  and  the  subsidiary  enactment  shall  cease  to  have  effect 
from the date of the publication of the regulations.” 

So, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I hope that is now beyond doubt from the provisions of both 
section 122 of the Constitution and section 20 of the IGCA that Parliament retains its power 
to scrutinise and disallow subsidiary legislation. 

 

94 

The Finance (Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill provides for implementation of a number 
of measures.  For the  first time, not only have detailed provisions been  circulated, but also 
Explanatory  Notes  which  help  all  Members  of  this  House  gather  the  context  of  the 
amendments. 

The  two  specific  clauses  I  wish  to  allude  to  are  those  which  pertain  to  the  Global 
Legal Advisory Services Licence which will ensure that young professionals in the legal field 
will have a wider array of opportunities to use their knowledge and will be able to take their 
career to the next level. 

Amendments  are  being  brought  to  the  Financial  Services  Act  and  to  the  Law 

Practitioners Act to enable the setting up of global law firms in Mauritius. 

Clause 24 (c) of the Bill seeks to introduce the concept of Global Business Advisory 
Licence in a new proposed section 77A of the Financial Services Act. Further, clause 24 (c) 
also introduces the concept of the Global Legal Advisory Services Licence. That licence will 
be  delivered  by  the  Financial  Services  Commission  and  will  enable  the  FSC  to  issue  an 
Advisory Services Licence to an entity which is licensed or registered in a foreign country. 
All the requirements are very well laid out in this. Whilst the FSC will regulate the licensees, 
the  Law  Practitioners  Act  is  also  being  amended,  of  course,  to  include  the  definition  of 
Global Legal Advisory Services Licence and, of course, ensuing amendments. What is very 
important is that we  all  know that it is not the  first time that the  Law Practitioners Act is 
being amended. But what is the purport this time? It is to enable those big players to come 
into  Mauritius  bringing  with  them  the  business  they  generate  elsewhere  and  give  an 
opportunity to local law practitioners to be able to gain experience and work in a wider and 
different field. Of course, when the application is being done the Attorney General’s office 
shall be involved in the process and the Legal Secretary, as is, shall cause to be published the 
list of all these firms/practitioners/legal consultants that will be so licensed. The amendment 
also  caters  for  such  other  conditions  as  are  specific  depending  on  the  nature  of  each  case 
which the FSC may impose. Now, for the sake of clarity, let me highlight that the proposed 
amendment which purports to introduce the new section 2(a) of the  Law Practitioners Act 
does not imply that lawyers who work for the holder of the Global Legal Advisory Services 
Licence  would  be  able  freely  to  roam  into  our  courts  as  some  of  our  colleagues  fear.  Of 
course we all know that the purport of this amendment has been carefully studied, I must say, 
by the Solicitor General and officers of the Attorney General’s office and we all know that 
the right of audience is intrinsically linked to the fact that you are on the roll of practising 

 

95 

barristers in this country. Currently even without such amendments, if a foreign lawyer were 
to  appear  in  any  case  before  our  court  we  all  know  the  set  prescribed  procedure  already 
existing under the LPA to enable so. Again, what the proposed amendment purports to do is 
to create the market for global law firms to choose Mauritius as a venue for setting up their 
offices and to then allow them to retain local law practitioners to give advice, of course, on 
Mauritian law. As I said, it is not the first time we are going to a different palier, a different 
step in our legal area. I am sure my learned friend, the Minister of Financial Services, will be 
able to  expatiate on this.  It is part  and parcel of the new  gearing of our financial services 
sector  in  the  widest  spectrum  to  enable  Mauritius  to  be  jurisdiction  of  substance  as  far  as 
financial services are concerned. These are the two amendments I wanted to dwell over but 
before  I  finish  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  allow  me  to  thank  all  the  officers  of  the  Attorney 
General’s Office who have been working relentlessly since the Budget Speech was read out 
in this House; who have put in very long hours of work over the few weeks and over the 
weekends, and I have to place on record and commend them for their good work. I also wish 
to  conclude  by  placing  on  record  the  unanimity  with  all  scenes  with  regard  to  positive 
comments that have followed the presentation of this Budget and those amendments which 
are  being  brought  today  by  the  Finance  Bill  will  usher  Mauritius  in  a  new  era  of 
development.  

Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker Sir. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mohamed! 

 (6.59 p.m.) 

Mr S. Mohamed (First Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port Louis East): I 
have listened with much interest into the process of today’s interventions. I must admit that I 
am a bit dazzled by the new process that has been adopted today. I had always thought that 
we  should  not  comment  on  policy.  We  should  not  in  any  way  comment  on  Government 
policy but should stick to budgetary provisions and budgetary proposals and exactly what is 
referred to under the new Standing Order - if I am not mistaken memory serves me correctly, 
Standing Order 52 (1) (b) as was ably referred to and I say ably in between inverted commas, 
referred to by the Speaker this morning.  

Now,  in  spite  of  that,  I  have  heard  with  a  lot  of  interest  my  good  friend,  hon. 
Baloomoody who very, very rightly so pointed out how the hon. Minister of Education has 
tried, at some stage of those proceedings today, to enter the debate on policy, to try to explain 

 

96 

and justify why this Government has come with this nine-year schooling project.  She was 
called to order, rightly so, by the Speaker of the House and the reason why she was called to 
order is because one should not embark upon any debate with regard to policy. If this stands 
true, to stay in line with the provisions of the Standing Orders and to stay in line with the 
provisions of what rulings we have had from the Speaker last year and the Speakers before 
and the tradition and the Standing Orders, one should not therefore hide behind the Finance 
Act in order to avoid a debate.  One may not like what the Opposition is saying but the fact 
remains that we do not have the right today to debate on Government policy. In other words, 
it is a barrier that is placed before each Member of Parliament. It is a procedural truth that we 
have to abide to. We have no right to do so. Then, if this barrier is there precisely, the whole 
reason is to stop us and it means also one should not come up with a piece of legislation that 
cannot  be  debated  upon  because  it  is  the  duty  of  this  august  Assembly,  Members  here,  to 
debate on every policy but it should be brought in as a proper legislation.  

So, it is, therefore, correct for us to say that procedurally speaking it is not the first 
time that this matter is being raised in this House. If I am not mistaken and if my memory 
serves me correctly, even former Governments or maybe one of the Governments I belonged 
to  between  2005  and  2010  did  also  do  something  of  this  nature.  And,  I  do  recall  that  the 
Speakers in those days did rise up to the occasion and did not depart from what the process 
had to be and stood up and said: ‘you cannot talk about policy’. In other words, do not hide 
behind procedural aspects by coming up with legislations and this is what has been done. 

(Interruptions) 

The  Deputy  Speaker:  Silence!  Order,  please!  Hon.  Mohamed,  please  come  to  the 

Bill now! 

 (Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed: I have to! I am doing that! 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Please, do so! 

Mr Mohamed: I am doing that!  

(Interruptions) 

 

97 

And their excuse I hear each and every time right now is because it is in this Bill. Now I am 
questioning myself the fact that it is in this Bill, I am debarred, each and every Member in 
this House is debarred from debating on it because it is a matter of policy. 

(Interruptions) 

So, if that is the case and some people feel I am rubbing it in, they are right. I am 

rubbing it in! That is what I am doing and it is my duty… 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, please sit down! 

(Interruptions) 

The hon. Speaker gave a ruling earlier to the effect that you should stick to the amendments 
and focus on this. So, please now, you have made your point, come to the amendments! 

Mr Mohamed: So, since I have rubbed it in enough now… 

(Interruptions) 

…let me first go to one of the issues that was raised by the hon. Attorney General. The hon. 
Attorney General referred to clause 24 of the Finance (Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill and if 
one looks at clause 24 which is at page 45 of the Bill - if I may be allowed to go through it - it 
talks  about  amendments  to  the  Financial  Services  Act  and  about  specific  clauses  of  the 
Financial Services Act which is 77A as a new section altogether and 77B. And, what I read 
here with a lot of interest, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, is the following, it says at 77A (4) –  

“For avoidance of doubt, this section shall not apply to a person authorised to provide 
legal services or give legal advice under the Law Practitioners Act.” 

Now, what is of most interest also, if we go further, is clause 31.  At clause 31 which 
is at page 84, the  Law  Practitioners Act being  amended, there is a section 2A which talks 
about Application of Act - 

“This Act shall, subject to sections 10AA and 10B, not apply to the holder of a Global 
Legal Advisory Services licence under the Financial Services Act.” 

And when I, together with my learned friends, went to that particular section which is section 
10B, it is clear therefore that through legal manoeuvring, some may call it legal drafting, they 
have clearly decided to remove within the ambit of the Law Practitioners Act people working 
under this new appellation, legal practitioners, albeit the Global Legal Advisory Services with 

 

98 

whom  they  would  have  informed  the  Attorney  General  from  the  Financial  Services 
Commission and obtained the permit. 

So, the question is: through this legal operation, section 13 of the Law Practitioners 
Act will not apply  with  regard to discipline.  In  other words, imagine the scenario because 
each and every time a legislation is passed one has to at least look at the practical side of 
things.  A client goes to see a lawyer working under this licence, the Global Legal Advisory 
Service, he has a licence albeit. The client has a complaint to make with regard to the lack of 
professional attitude or  wrongdoing in his profession by this law practitioner but, working 
under  this  specific  scheme  that  would  mean  that  because  of  the  construction  of  the  law, 
section 13 of the Law Practitioners Act would not apply and, therefore, the question would 
remain: whom will this client who is aggrieved will go to see in order to make the complaint? 
Where will he be able to make his complaint? And the answer to that is nowhere! The answer 
to that is that he will not be able to make a complaint before the normal avenues provided for 
under our legislation. 

So, in the process, through this intelligent manoeuvring of the Government who has 
provided for this piece of legislation we are creating two categories of lawyers. One who are 
law practitioners amenable to discipline under section 13 of the Law Practitioners Act and 
another  who  are  free  birds,  who  will  be  jetting  around  and  who  will  have  no  qualms 
whatsoever, no answers to give to whomsoever and will not be amenable to any disciplinary 
action because precisely clause 31 in this particular piece of legislation specifically says in 
this new section that it shall not apply to the holder of a Global Legal Advisory Service. At 
the same time, we will also have law firms which are joint ventures, approved by the Office 
of  the  Attorney  General,  they  will  be  amenable  to  discipline.  Three  categories  of  law 
practitioners in a move of this magic wand!  

This is why I think that it is important here: yes, we should open our frontiers; yes, we 
should  open  our  economy;  yes,  our  lawyers  should  have  experience;  no,  we  cannot  create 
more than one category of law practitioners; no, we cannot have part of our law practitioners 
who are not amenable to the disciplinary action provided for under section 13 of the  Law 
Practitioners  Act.  Now,  as  I  said,  in  this  particular  instance  I  would  expect  the  Attorney 
General, in a debate which would have surrounded the amendment to the Law Practitioners 
Act, to be able to rebut what I have said. I would have expected him to be able to enlighten 
the House with regard to this issue. But, he cannot now because he is not in a proper debate 
as such, we are taking this matter in the midst of a Finance (Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill 

99 

 
and, therefore, we cannot have that legislation.  And it is not for the hon. Minister of Finance 
to answer to that, but it is for the Attorney General who has to carry the accountability and 
burden of this process. 

Now, with regard to clauses 24 and 32, I have clearly explained that we are creating 
several categories and worryingly so, another category that will not be in discipline and this, 
therefore,  will  not  go  well  for  the  reputation  of  Mauritius  when  it  comes  to  an  interesting 
jurisdiction to do business in.  

Now with regard to another element which is clause 6. A lot of my hon. friends have 
talked about clause 6. A lot of friends from Government have also spoken to me about clause 
6. Now clause six, which is at page 14 of this Bill … 

(Interruptions) 

I thank the hon. Vice-Prime Minister for translating fourteen to quatorze. That shows that he 
is  following!  Very  often,  we  will  see  14  which  will  become  28!  Let  us  go  on.  Later  on, 
maybe, he will try to imitate me. But I hear he was very, very poor at that. 

When  we  come  to  the  Central  Electricity  Board  Act,  what  I  don’t  understand  is 
precisely the following. Why is it that the hon. Minister, who is also a well-respected lawyer, 
- whom I have respect for as a lawyer - will come later on today and say there is no need 
clearly for us to go through this amendment.  It is only to underline the fact we already do not 
have  to  comply  with  the  Public  Procurement  piece  of  legislation.    So,  it  is  only  to  clarify 
matters, he will most probably say that we have come up with this particular clause under the 
Finance Bill.  Let us not get twisted and mixed up because of legal interpretation. My point is 
the  message  that  Government  is  sending  out.    I  do  remember  the  hon.  Minister,  himself, 
criticising the former Government for what he called manque de transparence et opacité.  I 
did hear him personally and every single Member of Government criticised - not later than a 
few days ago - the total lack of transparency with regard to the methodology of work of the 
former Government.   

Now, I fail to understand why is it that they criticised avec tant de véhémence and 
some sort of semblance of what they are saying that they believed in it when in actual truth, 
they have a chance for the first time, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, to show.  There is a saying: ‘To 
put money where your mouth is.’ The saying is that why is it, therefore, that they criticised 
the former Government for manque de transparence and here  you underlined and clarified 
the fact that the Public Procurement Act shall not apply to any procurement exercise effected 

 

100 

by a company set up under sub section 2.  This is in my humble view legalisation.  You are 
legalising l’opacité. This is what you are asking Parliament to do. Outside there, you say that 
you want to be transparent.  Outside, you say that you have to show exactly what is going on.  
Here, you are talking about legalising through parliamentary process l’opacité.  I would like 
to hear the hon. Minister answer on that and not take us on a merry-go-round with regard to 
legal interpretation.  I would like to come down to earth.  What the common man out there 
was told and explained that they would be transparent … 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed: Should I? 

The Deputy Speaker: No, you can continue! 

Mr Mohamed: Thank you very much. 

Now,  with  regard  to  clause  15  of  the  Electricity  Act,  which  is  another  important 
section which I thought I may have to cover.  In clause 15, at page 32 of the Electricity Act, 
the particular clause is the appeal to the Minister clause.  That is one which we will have 
noted  here  that  many  legislations  in  the  older  days  existed  in  such  a  way  that  whenever 
someone was felt aggrieved by a decision of a Board, it was forwarded to the Minister like in 
the  case  of  the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  that  if  ever  there  is 
someone who is not happy with the NTA decision, they appeal to the Minister. Same in that 
particular legislation, here also we have the same principle.  What I am suggesting here is that 
we should depart from such principles because I do not believe that it is right for a Minister to 
decide on appeal issues of such a nature.  I am of the view that the Executive should not have 
a  role  whatsoever  in  the  decision-making  process  of  any  one  application  that  is  rejected.  
There  should  be  a  tribunal  for  that.    There  should  be  people  independent.  No  politicians. 
None whatsoever!   

The reason why I say so is simply because there should never be any finger pointed at 
any Minister and, in particular, there should be no finger pointed at this Vice-Prime Minister.  
So, the hon. Vice-Prime Minister will go on and insist that this is the way it should be simply 
because it is the case and there is nothing wrong in there.  He is going to paint a picture to try 
to explain that there is  nothing to hide, but it is normal process. What  I am saying is this 
could have been so in the old days, but the trend worldwide is that members of the Executive, 
Members  of  Cabinet  should  not  have  this  power  because  this  tends  to  cloud  matters  and 
creates once again encore plus d’opacité. 

 

101 

If the hon. Minister of Finance comes forward to say that we have done that in order 
to  speed  up  matters.  Really!  Is  there  any  delay  that  is  established  within  which  the  Board 
must refer this matter to him? No! Is there any delay within which they must refer this matter 
to him? No!  But there is a delay within which he must decide once he receives it.  Once 
again, there is confusion with regard to the delay that it takes to get to him. So, it could take a 
long time to get to him and then he would then have to decide within 14 days.  How long 
must it take for it to get to him?  That is another issue which I believe could really bring some 
corrections to. 

I  have  seen  with  much  interest  the  Investment  Promotion  Act  which  was  an  issue 
which I wanted to raise today. That would be at clause 29 of this piece of legislation.  Clause 
29  talks  about  all  the  incentives  being  proposed  to  a  specific  industry.  It  talks  about  the 
registration at the Board of Investment for private health institutions. This morning I heard 
the hon. Minister of  Finance clearly state that no agreement  as  yet has  been signed in the 
particular case of Omega Ark with regard to Apollo Bramwell.  I heard the hon. Minister of 
Finance saying clearly that there is no agreement which has been signed.  I heard him very 
clearly explaining - at some stage getting very carried away - with regard to the delay and 
why it has finally become the preferred bidder.  I will not get into this.   

But what is interesting in the answer, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, this morning, is the 
following:  the  hon.  Minister  said  that  no  agreement  had  been  signed.    When  I  read  the 
website of Omega Ark PLC today… 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: This is not related to the amendments! 

(Interruptions) 

It is not related! 

Mr Jugnauth: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, there was a PNQ this morning about Omega 
Ark, but this Finance Bill has got nothing to do with Omega Ark.  The hon. Member was 
here.  If he had the opportunity to intervene, he would have intervened. 

The Deputy Speaker: I completely agree with the hon. Minister.  This is not related to 
the amendments, and there was a PNQ regarding this subject this morning.  There was ample 
time to speak about this. 

 

102 

Mr Mohamed: At clause 29 of the Bill, there is a provision at Part III which talks 

about Registration with Board of Investment and I also read here – 

(ii)(d)  Any investor who wishes to operate – 

(i)  

a private hospital under the Private Health Institutions Act; 

That is why I am of the view that, when I talk about Omega Ark, it is a private hospital within 
the provisions of this Finance Bill. So, that is why one of the conditions referred to by the 
hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development this morning was the fact that it had to 
be licensed under the Private Health Institutions Act, and this is referred to at clause 29 of 
this Finance Bill.  That is why I am talking about it. Now, the fact that I did not put a question 
this morning was neither here nor there, because I do not want to be in any way disrespectful 
to the Chair.   But  what  happens here is:   Am  I  relevant? The answer is  yes, because it is 
referred to here, in the Finance Bill. 

Now,  I  continue.    Why  is  it  that,  with  regard  to  the  Private  Hospital  and  Private 
Health Institutions, I have to give an example to show why I question the following: how is it 
that, at clause 12, where it talks about registration, is this being provided for Omega Ark?  
That is a question.  Is this piece of amendment that is provided here, this provision that is 
provided here to suit specifically the owners of Omega Ark? 

I am sorry!  Why am I out of order? 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

I see that it hurts, and the question I ask… 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker:  Silence, please!  Order, hon. Jhugroo!  

Hon. Ameer Meea! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Mohamed:  And  the  thing  is  that  the  question  I  ask,  which  is  a  legitimate 
question, is not only one that I am asking, but I am only becoming le porte-voix of what I am 

 

103 

hearing outside.  People are asking me to put that question!  And this is what I am asking for 
the people outside. 

(Interruptions) 

Is this… 

The Deputy Speaker:  Silence, please! 

Mr  Mohamed:    And  I  say  it  again.    Is  this  piece  of  legislation  being  prepared  to 

satisfy only one operator?  If that is the case, then it is very serious. Or does that explain… 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Collendavelloo: I am rising on a point of order, if I may.  I feel I must rise on a 
point of order.  The hon. Member knows very well that he is imputing motives to the hon. 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development. 

(Interruptions) 

Please! He is saying that the Minister of Finance and Economic Development… 

(Interruptions) 

…is introducing a legislative amendment in order to suit a particular operator. Now, if hon. 
Member imputes such corrupt motives of the Minister of Finance, then it is out of order. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Members, I have listened to the point of the hon. Vice-
Prime  Minister.    The  hon.  Mohamed,  First  Member  for  Constituency  No.  3,  should  be 
mindful  of  his  language  and  any  accusations  that  he  might  have.  I  would  remind  the  hon. 
Member to stay on the provisions - although he is doing so - of the amendments of the Bill.  
He  has  been  lengthy  enough  about  this.  I  would  ask  him  to  please  move  to  the  next 
amendment. 

Mr Mohamed: Let me just also underline the fact that, in the comments I am making, 

I am in no way pointing the finger at the hon. Minister of Finance! 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Minister, please down! I have to say it again.  Perhaps I 
was not sufficiently clear before.  I agree with the hon. Vice-Prime Minister that, by saying 
that in the Finance Bill, the hon. Minister of Finance has included this specific clause 12 - 

 

104 

whether you are asking the question, whether it has been specifically for one hospital - it does 
impute motives. 

Mr Mohamed: I ask a question and, therefore, the hon. Minister of Finance is free to 

stand up and say ‘no’. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I will use something that the Vice-Prime Minister himself had used 
with regard to what I said.  He said, “Basically, if the hat fits, so be it!”  I never wanted, in 
my mind, to even think of anything corrupt, but if the hon. Vice-Prime Minister has this in his 
mind, I leave it to his own conscience. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, please move on to the next amendment! Let’s 

carry on with the business of the House! 

Mr Mohamed: I have not finished with this.  I will have to move slightly slower than 
the  Deputy  Speaker  wishes  I  do.    Now,  why  do  I  say  that  I  have  questions  in  my  mind? 
Because what surprises me is that we have today, in Mauritius, a private operator that is not 
licensed, that has already given contracts of employment to its employees, signed and sealed 
and delivered, which is Omega Ark, and it has not even paid a penny yet with regard to this. 
Now, I would like to hear the hon. Minister of Finance come and tell us and give assurances 
to the House that, at no time, will any deal that was agreed upon in a MoU, this particular 
clause would be in any  way retroactive; it will not be retroactive and will not in any way 
apply to Omega Ark.  Then, I will be reassured that, in actual fact, this is not a legislation that 
applies  to  any  one  operator,  and  it  does  not in any  way  have  in  mind Omega  Ark.    But  I 
would like him to give reassurances that this is the case and it will never give the incentives 
that he is referring to in this legislation to Omega Ark. Now, that is with regard to clause 29. 

(Interruptions) 

That’s how touchy they are! 

The Deputy Speaker:  Silence, please!  Order! 

Mr Mohamed: This is the law that is coming afterwards and obviously it cannot be 
retroactive; otherwise, that will explain why they have not signed.  What is also shocking, en 
passant, I must say, they say nothing has been signed and the website of Omega Ark says 
everything has been signed. 

 

105 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Mohamed! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed: Anyway!  With regard to clause 39, which is about the Non-Citizens 
(Property  Restriction)  Act,  we  have  heard  the  Government  talking  a  lot  about  the  need  to 
protect  our  real  estates,  our  lands.    We  have  heard  the  Government;  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister, with reason, has said, during political campaigns, that we have to ensure that our 
lands are protected, our real estates are protected.  We heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister say 
how we must ensure that we do not put all our eggs in one basket with regard to construction; 
we should diversify. And we have heard the previous Minister of Finance, how he came to 
this House and tried to talk about the importance of helping Mauritians acquire and have an 
IRS or a RES, have a Mauritian content, un pourcentage for Mauritians to be able to acquire 
real estate. 

Now, in this particular legislation, it is a different ball game altogether. Now, in any 
company  where  a  non-citizen  has  not  more  than  25%  shares,  that  company  can  buy 
immoveable  property  in  Mauritius  without  the  permission  of  the  Prime  Minister’s  Office 
because this will be an amendment to the Non-Citizens (Property Restriction) Act and it says 
here – 

“(d) 

 in the case of a non-citizen or person not resident in Mauritius, where – 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

there is a transfer, sale or disposal of property to a company in which 
non- citizens do not hold more than an aggregate of 25 per cent of the 
shareholding of the company; and 

such transfer does not result in the non-citizens holding more than an 
aggregate of 25 per cent of the shareholding of the company; or 

there is a transfer of shares in a company provided that this does not 
result in more than 25 per cent of the shares of the company (…).” 

This, basically, even in the Explanatory Memorandum clearly tells us that as from now on 
with this piece of legislation any company in Mauritius, as a non-citizen and that non-citizen 
does  not  hold  more  than  25%  of  the  shares,  that  company  can  own  property  in  Mauritius 
without the permission of the PMO. That is the case today. So, at the same time, we have 
pieces of legislation that come and talk about the need for foreigners to go through security 
check  at  the  Board  of  Investment  to  buy  apartments  in  ground  plus  two.  But,  here,  if  the 

 

106 

foreigner owns not more than 25% shares in the company, that company can own property 
without any security check. 

Imagine, therefore, all the structures that can be created through this for the foreigners 
to even have a maximum 25% in several companies and owning, therefore, even agricultural 
land.  So,  through  the  operation  of  this  piece  of  legislation,  the  Non-Citizens  (Property 
Restriction)  Act,  a  foreigner  owning  not  more  than  25%  in  a  company,  can  become  part 
owner, in other words, of even agricultural property, of even a lease without the permission 
of  the  PMO.  This  is  a  drastic  departure  from  the  policy  of  all  successive  Governments  to 
protect the interest of our nationals with regard to property rights. 

I have heard Members of this Government always say that we have to be very careful 
as  to  who  are  those  foreigners  coming  to  own  property  here.  They  have  to  have  security 
checks; we have to ensure that prices of property for the Mauritian common men and women 
do not rise so much so that they can no longer be within their reach. But now, 25% only and 
through  a  lot  of  legal  structuring,  a  non-citizen  through  proper  structuring,  though  this 
loophole,  is  going  to  put  Mauritians  in  a  hole  because  the  prices  of  property  are  going  to 
increase,  we  are  going  to  have  clearly,  it  is  going  to  be  beyond  the  reach  of  the  normal 
citizens, the men on the streets and they will end up being only des locataires and foreigners 
are  going  to  be  even  owners  of  agricultural  land,  in  Mauritius.  All  this  in  the  name  of 
attracting FDI! 

What  I  find  surprising  and  sad  is  that  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development  did  not  even  mention  this  in  his  presentation  of  the  Bill.  I  think  that  it  is 
important for him to clarify quels sont les garde-fous, quelles sont les mesures pour protéger 
le mauricien lambda, quelles sont les mesures pour protéger ce jeune qui veut acheter une 
maison, un appartement ou un morceau de terrain, quelles sont les mesures qui vont être là 
pour assurer ce jeune mauricien et mauricienne que ce ne seront jamais les étrangers qui 
deviendront  propriétaires  de  leur  terre.  Here,  when  we  remove  this  garde-fou  where  the 
Prime Minister’s Office’s authorisation is no longer required, then anything is possible. 

So, I fail to understand how we could take such a drastic measure and not even define 
what type of land because we say ‘any property’, ‘any immovable property’. It could even be 
on State land. 25% of foreigner, he does not need the Prime Minister’s Office permission, he 
can go and buy a lease… 

(Interruptions) 

 

And that’s it! 

107 

And even if the hon. Vice-Prime Minister has good intentions, he will not legally be able to 
do  anything  about  it  because  that’s  the  law.  So,  if  we  want  to  ensure  that  Mauritians  no 
longer have access to real estate, this is the beginning of the end. In the past, no matter what 
we can say on all regimes, at least, there was this garde-fou, there was this means of ensuring 
that there was a filtration process, and this is now disappearing. 

I would like to also refer to Clause 27 which is, if I am not mistaken, at page 62. At 
page 62, there is an important piece here – as hon. Uteem has talked about it, I will not go on 
also  about  it.  He  has  basically  referred  to  this  and  expressed  his  disbelief  and  I  expressed 
mine  as  well  with  regard  to  2003-2008.    We  are  talking  about  small  enterprises  qualified 
under  an  approved  scheme,  we  are  talking  about  here,  specifically,  enterprises  that  have 
invested in specific industries: weaving, dyeing, knitting of fabrics factory. I would like the 
hon. Minister to come and explain what is this measure for? Who is it aimed at? What exactly 
is  the  benefit  that  our  country  is  going  to  gather  from  this  measure?  What  exactly  is  the 
benefit that our accounts of the Republic of Mauritius will gather from this? Has there been a 
study to understand the rationale behind it? I would like to understand and when there is no 
explanation to explain the rationale of giving such largesse under this particular amendment 
of the Income Tax Act, then it leads to doubts that we linger. But I am sure that if there is an 
explanation  that  is  forthcoming  from  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development, it could really help matters. 

Now, there are also amendments that I have seen at Clause 32 which is at page 87 and 
that concerns the Local Government Act. At page 87, Clause 32, I see here that there is going 
to  be  a  drastic  change.  Once  upon  a  time  a  Lord  Mayor  or  the  Deputy  Lord  Mayor,  a 
Chairperson of a District Council and a Vice-Chairperson of a District Council were never on 
the Permits and Business Monitoring Committee. Clearly, there is a drastic change. 

Accountability  is  of  utmost  importance,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.    Each  and  every 
time  that  the  hon.  Minister  of  Local  Government  stands  up  and  sometimes  he  has  to  be 
briefed by what has happened in municipalities or district councils and he is accountable to 
this  House  for  what  goes  on  and  he  obtains  these  information  from  officers  who  are  civil 
servants such as the Chief Executive and he is also accountable. Those are, in other words, 
accountable officers and there is, in other words, a straight line between all those parties who 
are accountable, from the Chief Executive who once upon a time - and it will be different 

 

108 

soon,  because  of  this  amendment,  he  will  no  longer  be  the  one  to  chair  the  Permits  and 
Business Monitoring Committee. He will not be the one, the civil servant, who is accountable 
to chair, but it will be a politician elected who is not accountable to the Minister who will 
chair.  

So,  what  this  amendment  will  do  now  is  that  it  will  be  for  the  Lord  Mayor  or  the 
Deputy Lord Mayor who will chair or for the Chairperson of the District Council or the Vice-
Chairperson  who  will  chair  that  Committee  and  the  Councillors  will  also  be  on  that 
Committee,  and  none  of  those  people  are  accountable  to  the  hon.  Minister  of  Local 
Government! It, therefore, places the hon. Minister of Local Government in a very difficult 
situation of accountability because he will have to come and justify what they have done and 
they can refuse to give him information because they are not accountable to him. The person 
who is accountable in law is being demoted. He is becoming a simple member of that Permits 
and  Business  Committee.  It  may  have  been  like  that  in  the  old  days  but  one  of  the  main 
reasons why it changed is precisely because of the accountability issue to avoid possibility of 
corruption.  That  is  why  it  was  changed.  But,  now  if  we  are  reverting  to  what  it  was  like 
before, when the argument of all political parties in agreement with the change, all political 
parties were agreed that this should change to avoid corruption and possibilities and potential 
corruption. Now that we are reverting back to the past, we are placing the hon. Minister of 
Local Government in a very difficult position and I do not envy his position because he will 
have to struggle to get information from political people, politicians and this will put him in a 
situation where he will have to go through thick and thin. Then again, I mean others will take 
advantage of his very wide and generous back, but fair enough! 

What  I  am  trying  to  also  get  at  here  is  what  was  not  in  this  piece  of  legislation.  I 
started out by saying what was in the legislation and what basically was never referred to in 
the Budget but talked about. There was something else that was talked about in the Budget 
and  I  have  gone  through  the  Budget  at  paragraph  97  –  the  Global  Headquarters 
Administration Licence, 8-year tax holiday –  

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

5-year tax holiday for licences issued by the FSC; 
Treasury Management Centre License; 
Asset and Fund Managers license; 
international law firms; 
Investment Banking and Corporate Advisory License; 

 

109 

• 
• 
• 

Overseas Family Corporation License, and 
once again, 5-year tax holiday for Foreign Ultra High Net Worth Individuals; 
Tax holidays will be subject to meeting conditions of employment creation 
and substance.  

The way that this was sold, the way that this was presented in the Budget, eight times tax 
holidays are mentioned in the Budget! Eight times! Five times it was mentioned even that it 
would  be  introduced  as  a  new  incentive  scheme  to  attract  industrial  fishing  companies  to 
operate from Mauritius. So, 8 years and 5 years! When I go through this piece of legislation, 
the  Finance  (Miscellaneous  Provisions)  Bill,  I  do  not  find  any  of  those  provisions  to 
implement  those  decisions.  There  are  no  legal  provisions  there  to  implement  what  was 
announced in the Budget and my question is: why? Why is it that the Income Tax Act is not 
being amended in any way to provide for the tax holidays? 

When it was announced, it was announced as though it was going to act as a catalyst 
to  create  thousands  of  jobs.  It  was  going  to  change  the  scenery  and  attract  all  those 
companies; it was waiting for those companies to come in. It was announced, but why is it 
that, in spite of the fact that it was announced, presented en fanfare as going to be something 
great  for  job  creation,  it  is  not  in  this  particular  Bill?  And,  this  is  a  fair  question.  On  this 
particular  issue,  I  think  it  was  fair  for  me  to  mention,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  each 
country/each foreign jurisdiction has got its own interpretation as to what substance means.  

Certain  countries  would  think  that  substance  would  be  gauged  by  the  quantum  of 
investment and here I talk about those companies that were supposed to benefit from those 
tax holidays. Certain countries may gauge and assess investment based on the fact that it is 
listed on the Stock Market or not. Certain countries may gauge substance for those foreign 
companies  based  on  the  number  of  employment  they  have  created.  It  may  also  decide  on 
whether  the  place  of  effective  management  is  indeed  Mauritius.  Decisions  are  made  from 
here. That it has an office space not only a post box, not only a virtual address but a physical 
space that people use for management. Those are elements that are used in the equation to 
decide  what substance is. When the hon. Minister of  Finance and Economic Development 
talked about those tax holidays  I would like to clarify one point which  everyone seems to 
have gone quiet about or, at least, I did not hear anyone talk about that. It is that this business 
of tax holiday is not viewed with a good eye… 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, how is this relevant to the amendments right 

now? 

110 

Mr Mohamed: It is announced in the Budget but not here! 

The  Deputy  Speaker:  But,  you  are  going  into  the  policy.  Can  you  please  stick  to 

 

the… 

Mr Mohamed: No, I can assure you that I am going only for five seconds on this. I 

can assure you. 

The Deputy Speaker: Well, don’t dwell on the policies, please! 

Mr Mohamed: I can assure you I will not, but what I am trying to get at here is the 
OECD does not in any way view positively this whole concept of tax holiday and I have the 
report which I can table to show exactly that. Hon. Minister Bhadain can go on saying that 
and I have the report that I can table to show him exactly that. There have been observations 
made  to  Ministerial  Committees  at  the  OECD  and  chapters  and  chapters  written  on  the 
dangers of tax holiday  and how it can hit back  and backfire  against a  country specifically 
because there is no one way to assess substance.  

Now  I am of the view that maybe there is one reason why it is not in the Finance 
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill because precisely there is no consensus on this. Had it been 
such a measure that, without any doubt, would have helped this country, would have been in 
line with what the hon. Minister Bhadain believes. I am sure the hon. Minister of Finance and 
Economic Development would have brought it here. Most probably further study on the part 
of the officers of the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development, further study on the 
part of experts and able people at the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development have 
shown that this, which is defended avec vehemence and passion by hon. Minister Bhadain, is, 
in fact, empty because this whole issue about substance is clearly defined as being something 
that  has  no  consensus  on  it  across  jurisdictions.  South  Africa  has  one  way  of  judging 
substance, England has another, Mauritius has another, India has another. That is why those 
countries, members of the OECD, have really pointed a finger at this system because it is 
something which is eroding their source taxation. 

Now, I would like the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development to come 
and explain why is it that when he presented it and he talked about, it was going to contribute 
to the development of Mauritius, creating jobs, creating substance. I would like him to come 
and explain and maybe there is a valid explanation, that the reason he did not bring it in this 
particular  piece  of  legislation  and  tell  us  maybe  we  will  understand  because  I  think  it  is 
important for us to understand why there is a difference between what was presented in the 

 

111 

Budget Speech as opposed to what is presented in the Finance Bill. This is important for the 
people out there to be able to assess.  

Thank you very much. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Minister Bhadain! 

 (6.50 p.m.) 

The Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms 

(Mr S. Bhadain): Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  

Before moving to Sections 23 and 24 of the Bill which touch upon the activities of my 
Ministry, I am going to quickly brush on Section 2 which deals with the Bank of Mauritius 
Act being amended and clause 2(a) which basically introduces the concept of ultimatum and 
intermediate  financial  holding  companies  which  are  now  going  to  be  monitored  by  the 
Central Bank. When we look at the Bill itself it says 2(b) subsection (ii) to –  

“regulate and supervise – 

(ii) ultimate and intermediate financial holding companies, incorporated in Mauritius, 
which have, within the group, at least one subsidiary or joint venture, or such other 
ownership structure as the Bank may determine, which is a bank or non-bank deposit 
taking institution licensed by the Bank;” 

Now, here, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I have to congratulate the hon. Minister of Finance and 
Economic Development for bringing that into the Finance Bill because this is exactly what 
happened with  BAI. We have spent months and months to find solutions to all those who 
have been suffering as a result of that. Now, with this measure, all the related companies’ 
structure which we have seen in the BAI complex group structure would now, when there is a 
bank in the middle - like was the case of Bramer Bank - this will now be subject to scrutiny 
by the Central Bank and we can have a look at the ultimate and intermediate financial holding 
companies as well. So, this is a very welcome initiative in the Finance Bill. 

Secondly,  in  terms  of  2(b),  I  heard  hon.  Ganoo  mentioned  that  clause  2(b)  which 

refers to - 

“ in section 6, in subsection (1) (o), by deleting the words “security as the Board may 
determine” and replacing them by the words “securities as Government or the Bank 
may issue”; 

 

112 

Now, everybody is talking about good governance these days. Whenever there is something 
which they feel might upset them or they feel these are not to their liking then it becomes bad 
governance.  But  when  you  look  at  what  this  section  means,  basically  it  is  referring  to 
securities  which  are  also  issued  by  Government  because  Government  do  issue  bonds,  Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir. In fact, whenever bonuses are paid at the end of the year, there is excess 
liquidity on the market. The Central Bank may well issue Government bonds to mop up the 
excess  liquidity  which  is  there.  This  is  why  we  have  this  section  saying  “securities  as 
Government  or  the  Bank  may  issue”  and  it  has  nothing  to  do  with  what  hon.  Ganoo 
mentioned  in  terms  of  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  denying  the 
Central  Bank,  their  independent  authority  or  their  general  independence.  Certainly  it  has 
nothing to do with good governance! 

Then, of course, we move on to the Banking Act. Again, there are measures in there 
which  basically  deal  with  what  we  have  seen  with  the  BAI  scandal.  Of  course,  there  are 
definitions of affiliate which is being introduced in relation to financial institutions and then it 
includes a number of scenarios in terms of subsidiary companies. So, all of that is going to 
bring more transparency, more accountability and it is going to make sure that this country 
does not see anything like that scandal that we have seen in terms of the structures which 
were operating before. 

Then, just to move on very quickly, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in terms of the Banking 
Act, clause 3 (a) introduces the concept of investment banking business. I will come to that 
when we talk about clause 24 later on. Hon. Mohamed has decided not to be with us because 
I was going to explain to him what the financial services vision is all about, but he decided to 
go. But anyway, this is one of the measures which is being brought in because now we will 
see investment banks in this country. If we want to really move the banking and the financial 
services sector into this new era of development and create jobs and get people to come and 
invest in Mauritius, we need to have the relevant legislation which allows for that and now 
we can have investment banking business in Mauritius which we couldn’t have before. 

Similarly, clause 3 (b) introduces the whole concept of private banking business. In 
the  case  of  investment  banking  it  is  going  to  be  regulated  by  the  Financial  Services 
Commission,  but  the  private  banking  side  will  still  be  regulated  by  the  Central  bank. 
Amendments, therefore, have been made to the Banking Act in this context.  

 

113 

Now, when we move on to other sections, we also see – again, this is a measure which 
relates to the BAI case that we have seen - in clause 3 (e) which amends section 7 (ii) for the 
Bank of Mauritius to refuse an application for a banking licence from a group which already 
has  a  banking  licence  and  is  predominantly  engaged  in  banking  activities  with  a  view  to 
alleging  the  concerns  of  the  Financial  Stability  Board  Evaluation  Team  regarding  parallel 
owned banks. If you really have a banking licence, we have seen that with Bramer Bank and 
then there was Century Banking and other scenarios. So, all of that are measures which are 
going to make sure that our financial system is protected. People in this country are protected 
when they are putting money into groups which have that kind of structure.   

Now,  we  move  on  very  quickly  on  clause  10  which  deals  with  Co-operatives  Act 
being amended. Clause 10 provides for Co-operative Credit Unions to implement anti-money 
laundering policies.  Again, we have seen scandals under the previous regime, the  Vacoas 
Multipurpose Cooperative Society where so many people lost their money and if it was not to 
the ability of my colleague, hon. Sunil Bholah, to basically sit with them and explain to them 
how solutions could be found, again, that would have been disastrous for the small people 
who have put money into those Cooperative societies.  But here, the Financial Bill is creating 
a  new  way  of  reporting  to  the  Financial  Intelligence  Unit  whenever  there  are  such  issues 
regarding  money  laundering  and  proceeds  of  crime  which  then  takes  me  very  quickly  to 
section 23 of the Bill dealing with the financial reporting side.   

Quite  a  number  of  things  have  been  said  in  this  House  today  about  rotation  of 
auditors.  I think hon. Fowdar - who also has decided to go - mentioned that.  When you talk 
about rotation of auditors, it is a welcome measure, he said, in terms of making sure that there 
is no complacency in the way that auditors carry out their works especially if they have been 
in  a  relationship  with  a  major  client  for  many  years.    There  have  been  many  cases.    He 
referred to the case of Enron in the US, but, of course, you have had Polly Peck, BCCI and 
Maxwell in the UK.  You have got Stanford and so many in the US. But in Mauritius, we 
have also had our fair share of cases, Air Mauritius auditors where fingers were pointed at. 
Then, of course, we had the MCB/NPF case, the First City Bank case, the Delphis Bank case 
and it went on. Now, BAI is another example where auditors, fingers were pointed at.  So, we 
need  to  be  able  to  pass  the  necessary  legislations  to  make  sure  that  our  system  does  not 
condone  that  kind  of  behaviour  where  auditors  have  become  too  familiar  with  the  clients 
whether it is in terms of wining and dining or in terms of the fees that are being charged.  

 

114 

The  law  now  makes  provision  that  you  have  to  rotate  after  seven  years  for  listed 
entities.  I  think,  again,  I  must  congratulate  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development for that. But what hon. Fowdar mentioned was whether this relates to non-audit 
services as well.   I  am sure the hon. Minister of Finance will probably take that up in his 
closing speech, but the way I read it is ‘no’. It does not relate to non-audit services.  It is only 
the level of assurance which is being provided when you are performing what is known as a 
statutory audit and you are saying whether the financial statements are true and fair or not. 
This is when this particular clause will apply. 

Now, again in terms of the Financial Reporting Act, clause 23 (a) introduces the fact 
that the National Committee on Corporate Governance must have a representative who sits 
on  the  Financial  Reporting  Council.    That  was  very  important,  the  linking  out,  the  work 
which  is  being  done  by  the  National  Committee  on  corporate  governance.    We  will  very 
soon, may be in one or two weeks, issue the new code which has not been looked at for the 
last 10 to 12 years,  the new code on corporate governance for the private sector, but also for 
State-  owned  enterprises.  After  Cabinet  has  had  a  look  at  it,  this  will  become  something 
which all the organisations have to adhere to.  But also in section 23(c), section 65 of the 
Financial  Reporting  Act  has  been  amended  for  the  National  Committee  on  Corporate 
Governance  to  cooperate  with  the  Financial  Reporting  Council  on  corporate  governance 
relating to State-owned enterprises. We have seen so much, even the recent issue of payment 
of legal fees and so on and so forth. All of that has to be looked at in terms of the whole 
concept  of  good  governance  which  is  being  introduced  by  this  Government.    Nobody  can 
expect us to get everything right in less than 20 months.  

And of course, through experience, through live cases, through what we are seeing, 
we are not only correcting the mistakes of the past, but we also correcting some of the things 
which are coming up as we are putting this proper ecosystem, that proper structure in place. 
And  this  new  code  will  do  that.  So,  again  it  is  a  welcome  initiative  in  terms  of  national 
committee on good governance being working in collaboration with the Financial Reporting 
Council.  

This takes me now to Section 24 of the Bill, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, which first and 
foremost, I shall mention this new initiative where Section 73 (2) of the Financial Services 
Act  is  being  amended  to  allow  Global  Business  Companies  Category  2  to  invest  in  listed 
companies on the Stock Exchange. This is something that the Stock Exchange of Mauritius 
has been talking to us about in terms of, if we really want to increase the level of activities 

 

115 

which is taking place in the Global Business Sector in Mauritius, we must be able to let those 
GBC 2 companies list on the Stock Exchange and bring that volume of activities. Again, it is 
a very welcome measure. 

Now, it takes me to some of the issues which hon. Mohamed has been mentioning 

about Global Legal Advisory Services and also, hon. Uteem, I believe.   

(Interruptions) 

The bottom line, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with great respect to hon. Mohamed, he has not 
understood anything. He has not understood what the law says.  He has not understood this.  
Why?  It  is  because  when  we  are  talking  about  global  law  firms,  it  is  part  of  the  overall 
strategy of bringing the level of activities into the financial services sector in Mauritius. Now, 
of course, we have created the Financial Services Promotion Agency. Of course, the BOI is 
there, but when we are talking about promotion and getting people to come and invest over 
here, we have looked at other models like the Dubai model, the DIFC. What did they do over 
there?   

They have attracted all the law firms first and when you get the law firms in, you get the level 
of activity in and that creates a momentum in  your economy. And this is exactly what we 
want to achieve. We had to sort out the situation with the Double Tax Treaty with India. We 
have done that. For 10 years it has remained like that. Same thing with the Double Tax Treaty 
with South Africa, for four years it has remained like that.  

Now, that we have sorted it out those problematic issues and we have renewed the 
great relationship which exists with those countries, it is high time that we come up with the 
measures in our country, in our financial services sector to be able to boost it up and bring it 
into  its  next  phase  of  development  and  it  will  also  bring  a  lot  of  benefits  in  terms  of  job 
creation  of  course,  but  also  getting  people  to  do  the  right  jobs,  moving  up  the  level  of 
sophistication  because  when  you  look  at  the  Global  Business  Sector  in  Mauritius,  we  are 
talking  about  administrative  jobs,  we  are  talking  about  people  filing  documents,  we  are 
talking  about  people  opening  companies,  we  are  talking  about  people  doing  all  the 
administrative  work,  but  here  we  are  talking  about  captive  insurance,  everything  that  hon. 
Mohamed has mentioned in terms of treasury management being in the budget in terms of 
global headquartering, regional headquartering, attracting high net worth individuals, moving 
into captive insurance, getting the fund managers in, getting them to come and manage their 
funds  here  in  Mauritius  rather  than  using  a  management  company,  looking  at  the  asset 

 

116 

management side.  All these measures were announced in the Budget.  Of course, they are 
going to be implemented.  And again this is an answer to what the hon. Member - particularly 
in his typical style - has made as if like we have announced things that we are not going to 
do, and also create some kind of perception that the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development and the hon. Minister of Financial Services do not work together.  

That is not true! That is certainly not true! We consult on everything, we work on everything 
and these measures are going to be introduced by way of regulations and this is the answer to 
what he has said. True it is not there. It is coming through regulations and there are specific 
reasons as to why these regulations will be passed to do that. 

So, when we look at what the hon. Member has said about the Law Practitioners Act 
in  Mauritius,  fair  enough,  that  particular  section  says  that  global  legal  advisory  services 
licensees  will  not  fall  within  the  ambit  of  the  Law  Practitioners  Act.  But  what  is  also 
interesting is that we should first and foremost look at what this type of company does and 
then we will realise that it is not doing everything that a lawyer does in Mauritius because it 
is limited to and I will very quickly try to find the relevant section here, the Law Practitioners 
Act being amended. It says here – 

“‘Global  Legal  Advisory  Services’  means  the  activity  referred  to  under  section 
77A(1) of the Financial Services Act.” 

And when we look at section 77A(1), it says – 

“subject  to  this  section,  an  entity  whose  main  activity  is  to  provide  legal  services 
pertaining to global business, international arbitration, corporate law, taxation law and 
foreign and international law”. 

So, saying that these foreign lawyers will come to Mauritius and do everything that a lawyer 
does in Mauritius and go to court and have the right of audience and be able to fight cases in 
court, this is not true. It is certainly not true! And also, as has already been said by the hon. 
Attorney-General,  in  order  to  practise  law  in  Mauritius,  you  need  to  be  on  the  roll  of 
barristers. Then you become what is known as a practising barrister or else you are a non-
practising  barrister.  So,  we  all  know  how  it  works,  but  again  it  has  been  said  in  a  very 
flowery way to create fear.   

Now, of course those licensees, the global legal advisory services licensees, if they 
breach any conditions of their licence, they are amenable to sanctions by the FSC and also the 
Attorney General’s Office.  So, it is not as if that these licensees can do whatever they want 

 

117 

and they are not going to be sanctioned because what hon. Mohamed was saying was if you 
remove  that  applicability  of  the  Law  Practitioners  Act  in  relation  to  them,  they  basically 
cannot be disciplined. It is not true!  It is in the Bill.  They can be disciplined. They can be 
sanctioned if they do something which is not right. And then of course the hon. Member went 
on to say that we are creating two categories of legal practitioners. Well, let me say it, Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir, we are not creating two categories. We are attracting global law firms to 
come and develop the financial services sector so that we can move that sector into its next 
phase of development and contribute in terms of GDP growth and as the hon. Minister of 
Finance and Economic Development has stated, it will take us to the new era of development.  

The  Financial  Services  Sector  will  have  to  play  a  major  part  in  that.  Already  it 
represents now 12.2 % of GDP which is an increase of 5.4% from the previous year. It is one 
of the sectors, if not the only sector in Mauritius which has moved up in terms of an increase 
in growth rate. So, we need to continue that and move towards that 15% GDP contribution 
target that we have set ourselves for 2019. 

Now, in relation to the Non-Citizens (Property Restrictions) Act, again, I heard hon. 
Mohamed mention a lot of things in terms of structures that can be put in place so as you are 
going to get people who are going to come and abuse the system. The hon. Member did not 
mention the word, but I think what he was referring to were those pyramid schemes where 
you can abuse the system in terms of real estate projects in Mauritius and so on and so forth. 
But just by looking at the Bill at Section 39, the hon. Member missed one section. He did not 
read  it  and  then  he  went  away  so  that  I  would  not  remind  him  of  that. So,  if  you  look  at 
section 39 (b)(ii) (d)- 

“in the case of a non-citizen or person not resident in Mauritius, where –  

(i) there is a transfer, sale or disposal of property to a company in which non-
citizens do not hold more than an aggregate of 25 per cent (…)” 

These are the words! An aggregate! Now you can’t have any complex structures in terms of 
an  intermediate  holding  company  or  another  company  in  another  country  and  then 
manipulating that shareholding because the law does not allow for that. It says ‘in aggregate’.  

You can’t have more than 25%. And I think hon. Uteem also missed that, because… 

Well, I very much believe he did, because if you look at the next subsection, it also says… 

(Interruptions) 

 

118 

(Interruptions) 

Twa ki conne tigit …! 

The Deputy Speaker: No crosstalking! 

Mr Bhadain: 

“(iii) 

there is a transfer of shares in a company provided that this does not 
result in more than 25 per cent of the shares of  the company, in the 
aggregate, - again, these words have been added - being held, directly 
or indirectly, by non-citizens.” 

So, whether it is a direct holding or an indirect holding, in aggregate it cannot go more than 
25%.  So, this is the section which prevents any sort of abuse. 

Now, moving on, Mr Deputy Speaker, to section 45, the Securities Act has also been 
amended to actually bring in the relevant provision.  A new definition is being inserted in the 
Act  regarding  corporate  finance  advisory  services,  which  is  consequential  to  the  powers 
being  given  to  the  FSC  to  regulate  investment  banking.  So,  that  also  would  contribute  to 
having the right legal framework in terms of how this new vision for the financial services 
sector is going to operate. 

And then, just to finish on this point, Mr Deputy Speaker, hon. Uteem mentioned the 
issue regarding section 27 of the Income Tax Act and unexplained wealth. The whole reason 
that this section has been brought in is basically to empower the Integrity Reporting Agency 
now to be able to liaise with the Mauritius Revenue Authority and whenever there are cases 
which basically exceeds Rs10 m., a report is made by the Mauritius Revenue Authority to the 
Integrity Reporting Agency, so that cases of an unexplained wealth are properly looked at. 
This  is  what  it  is!  I  heard  hon.  Uteem  mentioning  that  everything  is  an  asset.  How  can 
everything be  an asset? We have some liabilities too. And he says: how do  you define  an 
asset? But you go to the Oxford Dictionary, you will see. It is something which is generating 
future economic benefits. That’s what an asset is. He said he wants it to cover a Trust. Well, 
he is an expert in Trust! We know about the Trust that has been set up recently, which the 
hon. Vice-Prime Minister has been very much referring to. So, here, our expert in Trust wants 
the Trust to be in.  But an asset… 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: No crosstalking! 

 

Hon. Uteem, no comments! 

Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Bhadain: He says he is… 

119 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

Hon. Uteem! 

Hon. Uteem! 

Hon. Uteem! 

D30/TAKE056/JG/3(Mr Bhadain) 

Hon. Uteem! Hon. Baloomoody! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Uteem, are you disregarding the Chair like this? Don’t disrespect me! I am speaking to 
you! Allow the hon. Minister to talk! 

(Interruptions) 

Allow him to talk! You had your chance to talk! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Baloomoody: On a point of order! He is imputing motives and he is challenging 

his professional qualifications. 

His competence as a professional. This is not allowed. This should not be allowed. 

(Interruptions) 

 

120 

The  Deputy  Speaker:  Hon.  Baloomoody,  in  what  way  is  he  imputing  motives? 

Please enlighten the Chair! 

In what way? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Baloomoody: That he is not a competent professional to draft the Trust that he 

has drafted in the past for the Government of the day. 

The Deputy Speaker: This not imputing motive! Hon. Bhadain, please continue! 

Mr Bhadain: Touchy! Very touchy, Mr Deputy Speaker. Anyway! It’s not because 
somebody has actually drafted the law on Trust that basically that person can go and misuse 
Trust. 

So, when the report is made by the MRA to the Agency, the Agency will look at all 
situations of unexplained wealth and that, of course, will include certain Trusts and also other 
vehicles which may have been used. 

These are actually my observations on those sections of the Bill. And just to say in 

terms of what hon. Uteem has actually stated in terms of this Government… 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Uteem, please, no comments! 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Uteem, I have given you a ruling. 

Hon. Uteem! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Uteem, don’t test me, please! I told you twice now, no comments! Please! 

Mr  Bhadain:  So,  in  terms  of  what  has  been  stated  that  this  Government  will  be 
judged on its actions and not on what it says, of course, we are going to be judged on our 
actions, and this is why we are working so hard.  And some people who believe that they 
come and even attempt… 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Bhadain! 

 

121 

Mr Bhadain: …to contribute to join us over here, to pou reste labas mem! 

Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

 (7.16 p.m.) 

Dr.  R.  Sorefan  (Fourth  Member  for  La  Caverne  &  Phoenix):  Thank  you,  Mr 
Deputy Speaker. I will be very, very brief, and I will just touch on two issues, two sections of 
the  amendment:  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  Act,  section  50A,  and  the  Medical  Council  Act 
amended, clause 35. 

The Bank of Mauritius Act, section 50A, Power to make rules, reads – 

(1) 

(2) 

The Bank may make such rules as it may determine for the purpose of 
the banking laws. 

Any rules made by the Bank under subsection (1) shall not require the 
prior approval of the Minister and shall be published in the Gazette.” 

I think this is very dangerous because we are giving too much power to the Central Bank, and 
when they make rules without the prior approval of the Minister, they are not answerable. 
Actually, it should require prior approval, so that whatever they do, all the rules they make 
with the approval of the Minister, then the Minister becomes answerable to this House; we 
can ask questions. Are we going in such direction that the banks – we know what they are 
doing – can come with rules to protect their directors, directors of banks and other banks? 

I will give an example. The son of a Permanent Secretary of the PMO, two months 
ago,  got  a  loan  of  Rs8  m.  from  the  State  Bank  without  guarantee,  without  collateral.  Can 
these people make rules to protect people like this? The son of a PS from the PMO. That’s 
what I want to know.  Whether… 

The  Deputy  Speaker:  Hon.  Dr.  Sorefan,  can  you  substantiate  whatever  you  are 

saying? 

Dr. Sorefan: Well, I am saying it in this House! 

The Deputy Speaker: No! Can you substantiate your allegations? 

Dr. Sorefan: I don’t have to.  I am in this House. 

The Deputy Speaker: You have to! 

 

Dr. Sorefan: No! 

122 

The  Deputy  Speaker:  Hon.  Dr.  Sorefan,  let  me  remind  you  that,  according  to  the 
Standing Orders, you should not make empty, frivolous allegations. So, you should be able to 
substantiate these allegations if you are making it! 

Dr. Sorefan: Well, when I come to this House, when I say something outside, some 
Ministers, one Minister especially knows that when I get my information, I come with true 
information. It’s for the hon. Minister of Finance to check with the State Bank whether I am 
telling the truth or not. Well, on this issue, I leave it to this House to decide, because it is very 
important that the hon. Minister of Finance have a say in the rules that the Central Bank is 
making, so that it is answerable. Whatever information we get, we come to the House and ask 
questions that the Minister of Finance can answer on behalf of the bank. 

Now, let me come to the Medical Council Act amended at clause 35.  The Medical 
Council Act will be amended to provide for a prospective doctor to be assessed before his 
enlistment as a pre-registration intern with a view to ensuring that he/she has the  required 
knowledge.  Knowledge  is  academic,  standard  skills.    The  skills  in  medical  terms  mean 
surgical  skills,  medical  skills  and  competence.  The  medical  students  go  to  an  institution 
wherever in the world, they are trained and they are assessed, they take an examination with 
internal and external professors in the institution, they get a degree whether it is in Mauritius 
at SSR Medical College or in any other  country. They come with a degree.  How can  you 
assess their skills through written papers? Later on I will talk about the national examination. 
As we do an examination, skills are assessed by the professors on clinical terms at bedside in 
the clinical theatres. That is where we assess skills. 

Here,  we  have  changed  the  rule.  We  have  got  representations  in  the  past,  as  the 
Minister has said and we had examinations after they had done their clinical internship. That 
was good because they had certain experience skill wise. But, representations always come, 
Mauritius  is  Mauritius,  people  are  never  satisfied.  Then,  what  did  we  do?  Now,  we  are 
talking about doing the examination before taking them as interns and, at the same time, we 
are  talking  about  judging  their  skills  which  will  be  very  difficult.  As  the  Minister  has 
mentioned, here, we say by the competent authorities, but we have only one worldwide and 
you mentioned India, the National Board of Examiners of India. 

Does the hon. Minister know how India came with this National Board of Examiners? 
Let  me  inform  the  House  that  in  India  there  were  so  many  medical  and  dental  schools 

 

123 

growing  like  mushrooms  and  the  Medical  and  Dental  Councils  were  suspended  by  the 
Ministry of Health because of this. They were just dishing licences and the level of qualified 
doctors from every corner was there. That is why they came with the centralised examination, 
but we don’t have mushroom schools here. I will explain… 

(Interruptions) 

I will explain! So, India came with this examination and the Minister, I am sure, knows very 
well  that  the  Supreme  Court  took  the  Medical  Council  of  India  to  task.  There  was  a  big 
problem there! 

What we are saying is that we imported… 

(Interruptions) 

No, we did not import the mushroom of medical colleges, we imported that issue… 

The Deputy Speaker: Address the Chair, please! 

Dr.  Sorefan:  We  imported  the  way  they  did  it  in  India  to  Mauritius  which  is  not 
comparable. The national examination, when we included it here, did not work. So, now we 
are going to do it before taking them. I know the House will go for this amendment even if I 
object, but they will go for this amendment. I will ask a question: when those pre-reg, those 
degree holders take the examination, we have a lot of them waiting, more than a hundred and, 
say, if all of them get through, can the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life absorb all of 
them in the hospitals? 

(Interruptions) 

They  past  the  examination,  it  is  not  a  50%  or  60%  that  you  select,  but  that  is  where  the 
problem comes. If you pass the examination, you are qualified to be in. It is not on points.  In 
medical terms you don’t talk like in the CPE where you get A+ or A- or whatever. In medical 
terms, you get your degree and that’s it. 

So, that will create a big problem for you to select them. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan, address the Chair, why don’t you understand 

that! 

Dr. Sorefan: Yes, but there are some… 

The Deputy Speaker: No, you address the Chair! 

 

124 

(Interruptions) 

Dr. Sorefan: Yes, sorry.  

The Deputy Speaker: Don’t be disrespectful to me, I am warning you! 

Dr. Sorefan: Okay. 

The Deputy Speaker: You address the Chair! 

(Interruptions) 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Yes,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  When  we  are  talking  about  the  Indian 
examination in Mauritius, we can’t come with the way the  Indian people do the academic 
examination. We must adopt what is good for Mauritius, organise something for Mauritius. 
We can do it. We have competent people and we can do it. 

Now,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  our  Medical  Council  register  lists  all  medical 
institutions that it thinks are fit to give the courses and they enlist them. When they come, 
you are on the list.  As probably most of you know, the Medical Council does not know who 
to select, who to list, still going on, ten in China, one in Pakistan, in England and so on and so 
forth.  They  don’t  know.  That  is  the  problem  with  the  Medical  Council.  They  are  creating 
problems. They want to have a list and when they recognise this list - actually it used to go 
through  Parliament  that  the  list  has  been  recognised  -  that  means  you  accept  the  syllabus 
because  when  I  was  in  the  Dental  Council  before  we  enlist  an  institution,  we  get  all  the 
syllabuses  and  all  the  technicalities  to  see  whether  the  institution  can  give  the  course 
properly.  They have done the examination over there, they come here and now we are going 
to reassess. 

The  hon.  Minister  said  we  don’t  want  to  create  doubts  in  the  person  or  private 
institution as if we are doing examination for even those who have taken degrees abroad. I 
was in England and when I go to England I make sure that I meet some of my professors. I 
met  one  of  them  and  do  you  know  what  he  said?  He  said:  “How  come  Mauritius  creates 
doubt on the University degrees from England? Dr. Sorefan, you are qualified from London 
Hospital,  University  of  London,  how  come  if  anyone  now  gets  qualified  from  London  or 
anywhere else, they have to go through an examination that will be set up by a recognised 
institution?”  So far, we know it is  India.  How  come? They can’t understand that. That is 
where the question mark comes. 

(Interruptions) 

 

125 

But, we have the means, Mauritius has got the means. We have to stand on our own feet and 
we can do it, set up our own examination, if need be.  

The hon. Minister mentioned that in year 2012, there were four clauses in the Finance 
Bill regarding the Medical Council.  The question was: when the Bill was approved regarding 
the institution of CPD, three or four years have gone. 

Whatever! 

(Interruptions) 

The Medical and the Dental Councils, Mr Deputy  Speaker, Sir, up to now are still 
inviting through the press service providers. We put laws without realising whether we can 
implement them. Here in the Medical and Dental Councils, we cannot. I  am sure the hon. 
Minister has got a letter from the Mauritius Dental Council to postpone this idea of points 
because the Medical and Dental Councils cannot get service providers to give lectures and 
points so that one can be registered. I am sure the hon. Minister will have to waive this and 
we will learn it through the Medical and Dental Councils. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we are bringing this amendment following the grievances of 
people.  When  they  say  this,  we  do  this.  We  must  have  a  body  to  sit  and  think  about  the 
Mauritian way, for the Mauritians because we are talking for the Mauritians who come here. 
We can do it, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. I am sure I can give my help to the hon. Minister on 
this; I have got proposals. On this, I thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Members, Madam Speaker will now resume the Chair! 

At this stage, Madam Speaker took the Chair 

Madam Speaker: Please be seated! Hon. Collendavelloo! 

 (7.33 p.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I.  Collendavelloo):  Madam 
Speaker, I shall be focusing on two sections, section 6 is at page 14 and section 15 is at page 
32, I believe, the amendments to the CEB Act and to the Electricity Act. 

Let me start with the CEB Act. I have listened with great care to the points raised by 
the Opposition. I agree that I understand their apprehensions. These apprehensions stand from 
the scandalous abuses for corrupt motives of corporate veils by unscrupulous Labour Party 
officials  who  abused  of  the  corporate  structures  of  subsidiary  companies  especially  at  the 

 

126 

level of the State Trading Corporation in those days. This has led even the Labour Party to 
react in 2009 when the Statutory Bodies (Accounts and Audit) Act was amended to insert a 
prohibition on public bodies, on statutory bodies to create subsidiary companies because the 
CEB and the STC, for instance, had created subsidiary companies without any control.  

That Act was passed in 2009. But this prohibition is not an absolute prohibition. It is 
a relative prohibition because Parliament can amend, as we are trying to do now, the parent 
Act, the Act creating the statutory body in order to enable statutory bodies such as STC, CEB 
- the two companies are in issue in this Finance Bill - to create subsidiaries on conditions 
which  are  spelt  out  in  the  law  and  during  the  debates.  This  is  why  there  has  been  an 
amendment and it is wrong to say that this is a catimini amendment.   When we hear the lot 
of  catikata  which  has  been  said  in  the  course  of  the  debate,  we  cannot  say  it  is  catimini. 
Precisely, the purpose is to put in front of the House the intention which is avowed here and I 
shall come to this almost immediately.  

I remind the House that in paragraph 127, as the hon. Minister of Finance referred to 
this  morning,  it  has  already  been  announced  that  CEB  would  set  up  a  renewable  energy 
company for production of electricity from solar PV system. This is the policy of the Minister 
of Finance, of Government. Then in paragraph 146 - I am sorry, I have said 149 this morning, 
in fact it is 146 - the Minister of Finance has announced that CEB would use the fibre optic 
cable  network  to  provide  high-speed  broadband  to  internet  service  providers.  It  is  a  bit 
complicated, but never mind this is what is going to be done. 

Now, there are, of course, safeguards. First of all, I am announcing the objects for 
which these companies will be set up. Secondly, there is a safeguard. CEB won’t be able to 
do whatever it wants, it will need the approval of the Minister and that, of course, implicitly 
means the approval of  Cabinet. Therefore, it will not be a free for all that CEB does as it 
wants. The objects I have said will be restrictive and it is not the intention of Government to 
allow CEB to divest itself of its statutory duties. We are now dealing with new adventures 
which CEB cannot, on its own, handle in this competitive world in which we live. Let us see! 
There are three objects – 

(i) 

(ii) 

renewable energy; 

the optical fibre network, and 

(iii) 

the other operations which I shall call ancillary operations. 

 

127 

First of all, renewable energy, up to now, CEB has been a facilitator. It has set up the 
structures  to  enhance  renewable  energy  so  as  to  allow  the  private  sector  to  come  in  and 
produce electricity from renewable energy, but the pace must be quickened and CEB has got 
the facility of doing this.  CEB won’t be able to do this within that heavy structure which it 
has; this is a specialised body  and for that purpose a company will be  set up, call it CEB 
Green  Energy,  for  instance.    What  is  going  to  happen?  We  have  engineers  specialised  in 
renewable energy, and I have met a few bright ones I can tell you, when they are recruited at 
the CEB, they become general cadre of engineers.  So, they do not specialise.  They cannot 
put into practice the specialised skills that they have because they are in the cadre. And what 
is worse, they start at the bottom of the scale and they cannot get a good salary, and therefore 
they go to the private sector.  We want to encourage these young people to come in.  And 
more than that, we are going to create what we call green jobs. Already, now, we have 30 
technicians being trained at Riche Terre because we will need technicians for that purpose. 
Therefore, CEB will now become a competitor and not a facilitator.  It will be an operator, a 
player in the field. I say this because we are preparing for the coming into operation of the 
Utility  Regulatory  Authority.  Let  me  say  that  the  members  have  been  chosen  and  we  are 
awaiting the procedures.  

Therefore,  CEB  will  no  longer  be  a  sort  of  arbitrator.  It  will  no  longer  be  the 
facilitator. It will compete with everyone. But how can it compete with this heavy structure?  
This  is  why  a  company  must  be  set  up  for  that  purpose.  Initially,  CEB  will  be  the  sole 
shareholder  of  that  company  -  I  will  come  to  the  amendments  later,  listen  to  me  for  the 
moment - but then progressively it will attract fresh capital, SMEs, Cooperatives, Planters’ 
Association, but also if need be, strategic partner. We can think of, for instance, Rose Belle 
Sugar Estate which has lots of land and we should come in with a capital and get the benefit 
from this, but it will be for the company to decide. 

The second one is the optical fibre network. CEB has a network of 66kV line, 330 
Kms. It is being used only for their own internal communications to operate their computers 
in order to alert them of breakdowns etc. This is called the SCADA.  This asset required an 
initial investment of Rs70 m. Rs70 m. which are sleeping!  Now, CEB has said, and we have 
agreed,  that  we  need  to  optimise  this  network  so  as  to  provide  bandwidth  to  the  existing 
telecom operators.  The first step has already been done. A consultant, a subsidiary of EDF 
specialised  in  the  use  of  surplus  fibres  on  electricity  network  has  already  carried  out  a 
feasibility  study.  On  the  basis  of  that  feasibility  study,  now  we  enlisted  the  services  of  a 

 

128 

Project Manager, and this subsidiary company, called it fibre net company for the moment, 
will build and operate the fibre net infrastructure and will appoint a strategic partner. But for 
this, we need to have a company. We cannot allow a strategic partner just to enter into CEB 
as  it  is  now.    We  need  a  company  where  that  operation  will  be  carried  out.  The  fibre  net 
project will be executed in 18 months.  This is the timeline and wholesale data services are 
expected to be launched in December 2017.  This will attract jobs of high-level IT specialists 
and lots of young people who are IT diploma. It will not be like the renewable energy.  It will 
not attract massive employment, but quality employment, quality jobs to operate in this fibre 
network. 

This  will  help  to  bring  down  investment  cost  in  the  backhaul  network  of  existing 
telecom operators and ultimately bring down the cost of our Internet services. CEB will be 
able to optimise the use of its optical fibre and provide a fallback wholesale network in case 
of cyclones. It will pave the way for migration of data from 4G to 5G and then the IT/BPO 
sector will be able to be connected to the international bandwidth services and therefore the 
purpose  is  to  support  all  the  economic  development  to  improve  quality  of  life  through 
enhanced  access  to  information,  distant  learning,  telecommuting,  telemedicine  and  even 
entertainment.  All  this  will  be  done  and  this  is  in  keeping  -  not  only  in  keeping  -  in 
compliance with the instructions which the Rt. hon. Prime Minister declared in Vision 2030.  
We won’t wait for 2030.  2030 will be next year and that is important. 

The third level of intervention, this is for ancillary services; corporate, legal, financial 
services will be required for these two companies in the medium term - not now - we will be 
able to do this.  These are the objects of the company. The next issue is procurement and that 
is what we find in section 6 (3) of the Bill.  

“The Public Procurement Act shall not apply to any procurement exercise effected by 
a company set up under subsection (2)”. 

I take the points that have been raised by the three interveners of the Opposition and I 
think they are right.  The way that it is drafted, it is as if you are making them become like 
Rey & Lenferna or Henri Le Maire or whatever. This is not the intention. This has never been 
the intention. The intention is not to allow a free for all that is the companies do what they 
want as hon. Mohamed - who is now back luckily - stated. 

(Interruptions) 

 

129 

Your points are well taken, but let me say that was not the intention. Let us see what 

is the intention? There are three solutions.  

Firstly,  these  companies  renewable  energy,  the  hon.  Member  said  they  have  to  go 
within  the  Public  Procurement  Act  like  all  public  bodies.  If  you  decide  this,  then  you  kill 
these companies. You kill the operations immediately. That cannot be the intention because 
in  a  competitive  world  such  as  renewable  energy,  fibre  net  optic,  if  you  are  going  to  go 
through public procurement, IRP, etc., then it is not in 2017, 2030,  you will still be there. 
Therefore, that cannot be the situation. 

The second alternative would have been just to keep quiet.  Not to say anything about 
it and leave it in catimini.  And this would have been in catimini and then just tell the hon. 
Minister of Finance to put in the Procurement regulations, two lines; CEB Renewable Green 
Energy Company, CEB Fibre Net Optic Company, CEB Corporate Legal Services Company.  
Then,  that  would  have  been  a  lack  of  transparency  altogether.    I  have  hidden  this  from 
Parliament when I know that this is what I want to do.   

So,  the  third  one  is  what  is  the  real  intention,  and  I  am  sure  there  will  not  be  any 
disagreement.  The  Public  Procurement  Act  tells  us  that  the  Minister  of  Finance  may,  by 
regulations,  declare  a  public  body  to  be  an  exempt  organisation.  Already,  as  hon.  Ganoo 
pointed  out,  CEB  can  procure  contracts  up  to  Rs100  m  without  the  Central  Procurement 
Board. That’s a lot of money. But, it’s not a lot of money for CEB because they have huge 
contracts of billions of rupees. When St. Louis is going to be set up, that goes through the 
Central Procurement Board because of the value. But there is a second point which is in the 
procurement regulations. 

When CEB purchases goods for resale, for instance, it purchases renewable energy or 
electricity from Independent Power Producers, it purchases it from Belle Vue, it goes on the 
network and it sells it back to the public.  It is  an exempt organisation.  CEB is already  an 
exempt organisation for the purchase of goods for resale. Therefore, there is no magic in it. 

What  is  to  be  allowed  is  that  CEB,  these  two  companies,  will,  if  the  Minister  of 
Finance  agrees,  and  it  will  go  through  the  Minister  of  Energy,  through  the  Minister  of 
Finance, through Cabinet and then we will decide whether that company will be an exempt 
organisation and for what purpose: restricted purpose, free-for all. It will depend on what are 
the companies’ requirements. But I agree that the way that that matter had been drafted in the 
initial proposed Bill, would legitimately give rise to the adverse comments which we heard. 

 

130 

This is why the hon. Minister of Finance has asked me to agree to his proposal for an 
amendment to section 6, to be very clear that every company set up under subsection 2 shall 
be deemed to be an exempt organisation within the meaning of the Public Procurement Act. 
Now, what does it mean? There is a directive of the Procurement Policy Office which applies 
to  all  public  bodies.  It  says:  “If  you  are  an  exempt  organisation,  you  need  to  have 
procurement  rules  confirmed  by  the  PPO.  You  need  to  have  a  Bid  Evaluation  Committee. 
You need to have tender procedures streamline, of course, to suit your purpose, but approved 
by the PPO and, therefore, the Ministry of Finance.” Therefore, it will not be the free-for-all. 
It will be a procurement exercise.  The procurement rules will be published and in case of 
non-compliance, an aggrieved bidder will go to Court.  Three months ago, the whole process 
of renewable energy was stopped at CEB. Why? Because an aggrieved bidder had gone to the 
Supreme Court to say: “CEB has breached its own procurement rules.” And the Judge gave 
an  injunction  against  CEB.  We’ve  fought  the  case.  We  did  not  agree  with  the  aggrieved 
bidder.  We  went  before  the  Judge  and  the  case  was  dismissed.  But  it  is  the  rule  of  law. 
Everything must be done according to the rule of law. And this is what is going to happen. 
Let me allay the fears of one and all and let me reassure everyone. Especially with these two 
amendments, it is not the intention of having a free-for-all, there will be procurement rules, 
the  streamline  to  meet  the  requirements  of  these  two  companies  in  accordance  with  the 
Procurement Policy Office. 

The next point is the Electricity Act. There have not been many comments on this. 
The purpose is to allow the small scale, the rooftops to be quick to get their solar energy and 
step  up  the  process,  especially  with  the  coming  into  force  with  the  incorporation  of  the 
Renewable Energy Company. 

To  reply  to  hon.  Mohamed,  he  comes  up  with  all  sorts  of  theories,  appeals  to 
Ministers. Well, he should know, we have been  debating this for  I don’t know how many 
times in this House, he was in Government in 2005 – whatever or he was not in Government 
– when the Utility Regulatory Authority Bill was passed, for 12/13 years, the Labour Party 
did nothing about it. Now we are setting up the URA, of course, if a person is dissatisfied 
with the decision of CEB, where does he go? Well, he goes to the Minister for the moment! 
But this is a transitional provision with the coming into operation of the URA in the next few 
weeks  or  so,  that  will  become  redundant.  A  new  Electricity  Act  will  be  in  force  and  the 
appeals  will  be  to  the  Independent  Body  of  which  we  are  talking,  that  is,  the  Utility 
Regulatory Authority. You could have saved a lot of time of this House by just checking or 

 

131 

asking  hon.  Osman  Mahomed,  he  would  have  told  you  that  this  is  how  it  is.  It  is  not  a 
difficult matter at all. Therefore, Madam Speaker... 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No interruptions! 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  Therefore,  I  will  not  go  into  the  details  of  this  amendment 

because they have not created any opposition or any dissent on any side of this House. 

Therefore, the only issue which we are left with is that issue of procurement. With 
that new amendment, it has become clear what we want. I, therefore, commend the Bill to the 
House, at least. 

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: It is for the Minister of Finance to commend the Bill to the House. 

Hon. Jugnauth! 

(7.58 p.m.) 

Mr  Jugnauth:  Madam  Speaker,  let  me,  first  of  all,  thank  all  Members  who  have 
intervened on this Bill. I have to be particularly thankful to all my colleague Ministers who 
have, not only shed light on a number of issues that have been raised, but have also answered, 
in fact, to a number of queries that have been put forwarded by the Opposition. My task even 
is easier because hon. Ivan Collendavelloo has even commended the Bill to the House. 

Néanmoins, Madame la présidente, laissez-moi réagir par rapport à certains points qui 
ont été soulevés par l’Opposition. Je ne vais pas répondre dans l’ordre parce que je n’ai pas 
tout noté. 

Let me first react to the process that we have adopted. Hon. Uteem is complaining and 
hon.  Ganoo  also.  I  can’t  remember  if  the  Members  of  the  Labour  Party  have  complained 
about the process!   

You have complained? You always complain! 

(Interruptions) 

First  of  all,  Madam  Speaker,  I  thought  the  MMM  claimed  to  be  a  well-structured 
party, to have the best brains and to be always ready. I thought that one week would have 
been enough for them to peruse through this Bill and to be able to have gone through all the 

132 

 
amendments that we are making to this Act. But, what I find even more, I would say, I would 
be puzzled because - maybe hon. Uteem has not been in this House for long, but hon. Ganoo 
- unfortunately, he is not here - we have been together in a Government. I see hon. Bérenger 
who  is  on  the  list  is  not  here,  but  he  would  have  confirmed  to  you  that,  in  2001,  we  had 
circulated the Finance Bill. You know what, Madam Speaker?  As usual, on a Friday, Cabinet 
sits.  It approved the Finance Bill. Members received the Finance Bill normally Friday late 
night or Saturday morning. So, we had Saturday, Sunday and Monday. We had three days, 
and the Order Paper for that Finance Bill was First reading, Second reading, Committee Stage 
and Third reading. Just in a matter of three days!  But, today - I don’t know if they listen to 
what  they  say  -  they  are  complaining  that  we  have  given  one  week,  and  one  week  is  not 
enough! 

(Interruptions) 

But,  what  I  find  offensive  -  I  would  say  that  in  reply  to  hon.  Uteem  -  is  that  hon. 
Uteem candidly made a remark, en passant, to say that some of us were in a hurry to go on 
vacation - I have noted what he said - and that it is against democracy for what we are doing. 

(Interruptions) 

Well, first of all, we should already have been on vacation! We are sitting today and we are 
ready to sit also. We are not scared of facing the Opposition. But we will sit up to when.  Of 
course, we have other businesses to look into, and the Leader of the House, of course, at the 
appropriate time, will adjourn. But, talking about being anti-democratic! But, may I remind 
the hon. Member, in 2014, nearly for a whole year, this House did not sit! 

 (Interruptions) 

And he is talking about a process of being anti-democratic! I don’t want to go into the details, 
but just to remind him of what they did and now reproaching us about being anti-democratic! 

The hon. Members… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

…  were  provided  with  a  full  detailed  annex  to  the  Budget  Speech,  which  outlined  all  the 
legislative amendments and the purposes for which they will be made. As I said, secondly, 
we  have  circulated  the  Bill  one  week  in  advance,  and  we  have  also  circulated  a  full 
explanatory note to the hon. Members, outlining the reference to the Budget Speech and the 

 

133 

Annex. Fourthly, all hon. Members had plenty of time to debate on the philosophy and the 
measures that have been announced in the Budget Speech during Budget debates. 

Since hon. Mohamed is here, I better reply to this one before he leaves. You know, I 
too listened very carefully to what he has said about Omega Ark. I would say such bad faith 
or if it is not bad faith, such nonsense then! He can’t come to this House and make a show, 
citing that we are amending the law just to suit the interest of one company! I will refer hon. 
Mohamed to page 39 of the Annex - I hope he has read! - Healthcare and medical tourism, 
and I read – 

“To give a boost to the healthcare sector along with medical tourism and encourage 

the export of our healthcare activities, the following measures will be adopted” 

I come to (b) -  

 “(b)  VAT  will  be  exempted  on  the  construction  of  a  purpose-built  building  for  a 

nursing home under the Private Health Institution Act (…)”  

And it goes on to talk about residential care, which is of no interest, but he has mentioned 
Omega Ark. 

This section is for building a new hospital, and you get VAT exemption; not for the 

acquisition of an existing hospital! 

(Interruptions) 

So, how stupid can one be or how can you be of bad faith to come before this House and to 
start making allegations that this is… 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed: On a point of order! I am sitting very quietly, but I honestly believe 

that it is very unparliamentary to call anyone stupid and of bad faith. So, I… 

(Interruptions) 

…  will  humbly  request  that  the  hon.  Minister  withdraws  that,  because  he  was  specifically 
referring to me, and I can assure him that, as I appreciate what he is saying, I humbly request 
that he please remove those words.  Simple! 

(Interruptions) 

 

134 

Mr  Jugnauth:  I  have  referred  to  the  allegations  that  have  been  made  by  the  hon. 

Member as stupidity, and I maintain that what he said was stupidity! 

Madam Speaker: Can I give my ruling? I have taken note of what the hon. Member 
has said, and the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development did not point at you 
and said, ‘Hon. Mohamed, you are stupid.’ 

(Interruptions) 

In what he just stated, he said how stupid one can be. So, don’t take it as if he is addressing it 
to you, hon. Member! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed: And what about the bad faith? 

Madam Speaker: Same applies! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed: I am not surprised! 

Mr Jugnauth: Let me also… 

(Interruptions) 

… reply to the issue that the hon. Member has raised about granting an additional year to 
allow  companies  getting  on  a  spilling  mill  to  carry  forward  unrelieved  tax  credit  for  an 
additional year. In fact, the reason for this amendment is to clarify the period during which 
the  unused  tax  credit  under  the  Special  Tax  Credit  Scheme.    It  is  to  resolve  an  issue  of 
interpretation of an income year as opposed to a year of investment. We have already reacted 
to this issue of the non-citizens. 

Let me reply to the issue that was raised with regard to procurement of vessels which 
will not be subject to Public Procurement Act, because it has been said that there is already a 
provision  in  section  19 concerning  restricted  bidding  and  why  not  make  use  of  it.  But  we 
can’t make use of section 19 because it is applicable only to low value procurement and not 
for vessels. 

With regard to the other issue which was raised concerning statement of assets and 
liabilities, I am informed that the form and manner of submission will be prescribed prior to 
finalisation  of  the  particulars  which  will  be  included  in  the  statement.    In  fact,  MRA  will 
consult  the  accounting  firms  and  other  stakeholders  in  order  to  come  with  this  form.  The 

 

135 

statement  of  assets  and  liabilities  will  only  apply  to  individuals.  In  fact,  MRA  will  issue 
guidelines to this effect and the objective is for MRA to build a database of high network 
individuals. 

With  regard  to  CSR,  it  has  been  stated  why  is  it  that  we  have  limited  the  priority 
areas. In fact, they can be amended. There is a provision and we can add also to the priority 
areas. 

Regarding  the  Gambling  Regulatory  Authority  Act,  it  has  been  said  that  it  is 
providing for a Lotto Fund and why is it that there is this special fund, but there is nothing 
new, in fact, in this utilisation of the Lotto Fund. In fact, section 85 of the Act, use of money 
that is paid into the Consolidated Fund already specifies that the money should be used to 
finance the implementation of projects relating to community development, the promotion of 
education, health, sports and culture. In fact, the proposed allocation of the funds was being 
published as appendix in the Estimates each year and submitted to the National Assembly. 
What  is  being  proposed  is  to  have  a  formal  process  of  selection  of  projects  that  may  be 
submitted by NGOs, sport associations and artists.  

The  Lotto  Fund  will  be  a  complement  to  the  National  CSR  Foundation.  For 
transparency and accountability purposes, there is need to set up the Lotto Fund as a special 
fund under the Finance and Audit Act by way of regulations. I can inform the House that the 
regulations will provide for the following, that is – 

• 

• 
• 
• 
• 

a Committee for the management of the funds and its composition will also 
include relevant stakeholders;  
functions and powers of the Committee;  
preparation of financial statements;  
auditing of accounts by the Director of Audit, and  
tabling of audited Financial Statements to the National Assembly. 

I can also remind the hon. Member that, I think, for three years, that is, for 2012, 2013 and 
2014, if you’ll have a look at the appendix in the Budget Estimates, you will see that there is 
a list of all the items, the allocations and the amount that has been spent under each item and, 
again, of course, the same procedure will apply. Therefore, Members can rest assured that 
any question, it will be transparent because it will be open to public scrutiny, any question 
can be put in the House and, of course, if it falls under my Ministry, I will be answering to 
questions. Rotation of auditors has been answered by my colleague. 

 

136 

There was an issue raised by hon. Ramano, I think, that a Mauritian acquiring newly 
built dwelling during the period 01 September 2016 to 30 June 2020 will be exempted from 
registration duty provided that the value of the building does not exceed Rs6 m. Now, the 
existing exemption regarding the purchase of a building, which is not newly built by a first-
time buyer has been maintained, but the existing threshold is Rs4 m. on the value that will 
apply because the purpose for this new measure is to give a boost to the construction industry 
and for there to be an incentive for newly built houses or apartments. 

My  colleague,  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  has  very  ably  replied  to  the  issue  of 
procurement and the CEB. In fact, it is good to note that in the Public Procurement Act of 
2006, ‘exempt organisation’ means a public body which is excluded from the application of 
the  Act  in  relation  to  contracts  referred  to  in  the  First  Schedule  and  the  First  Schedule 
mentions  CEB.  Of  course,  it  is  for  the  purpose  of  buying  and  selling  energy.    That  is  the 
intention of Government.  

In  fact,  I  will  be  also  moving  for  an  amendment  to  delete  clause  6  (a)  (iii)  and 
replacing it by a company set up under subsection (ii) shall be an exempt organisation within 
the  meaning  of  the  Public  Procurement  Act.  In  fact,  the  amendment  has  already  been 
circulated. 

There was an issue concerning the Bank of Mauritius which was raised by hon. Dr. 
Sorefan. I think the hon. Member must understand that we are not talking about the laws. We 
are talking about the operational rules. The Bank of Mauritius acts as a regulator which looks 
into  the  way  the  financial  institutions  are  being  run  and,  therefore,  they  make  the  rules.  I 
think it is very proper for the Bank of Mauritius, in its own independence, to come up with 
whether  there  are  new  rules,  whether  there  are  amendments  to  rules,  but  that  these  rules 
should not be subject to the consent or to the approval of the Minister of Finance. 

Again, maybe rightly so, it was the Deputy Speaker then who had requested the hon. 
Member to refrain from making allegations because whatever a private institution, whatever 
loan has been given, it is not within my purview. I am not able also to look into this matter 
because it is a private institution. If the hon. Member has, of course, information, we can pass 
it on to the regulator and the regulator can deal with it. Or if it is a criminal matter, well, then 
there is an institution. The Police also can deal with it. 

With regard to tax holidays, in fact, just to quote what has been said in the budget, 
will  be  granted  to  seafarers,  cooperatives  engaged  in  non-sugar  agricultural  activities, 

 

137 

industrial fishing companies and in respect of specified financial services and these will be 
made by way of regulations and this has also been answered by my colleague. 

With regard to CSR, I think, hon. Uteem raised the issue that there will still be some 
NGOs who will not be eligible, but let me remind the hon. Member that there are going to be 
very clear guidelines. Amongst those guidelines, I think, it is clear that a lot of the NGOs are 
already operating in those sectors. But, anyway, the foundation will still be able to provide 
funding  to  deserving  NGOs.  Let  me  repeat  again,  en  passant,  I  can  understand  quite  well 
because Members do not have full information about how some companies were spending 
their CSR money. I have stated to this House that I was myself shocked when I looked at 
certain financing that was done with regard to really non-deserving organisations or clubs for 
the wrong purposes, in fact, and not for those objectives that we have always established. 

Well, whenever a Member would intervene with regard to the amendment to an Act 
which  falls  under  the  purview  of  one  Minister,  then  that  Minister  is  not  able  to  reply. 
Therefore, we should remove the provisions of that amendment so that we have a full debate.  
In  that  case,  Madam  Speaker,  we  won’t  be  able  to  amend  any  Act  because  all  these 
amendments will pertain to an Act and, therefore, there will always come a time when the last 
hon. Member will say: “Well, since I am intervening now, the hon. Minister will not be able 
to reply”. He will have the opportunity to reply. He will have the opportunity to make the 
point before this House. The very purpose of this Bill is, in fact, for that reason and therefore, 
I do not find merit in that. 

The last issue may be is with regard to what was said about the Metro Express that 
there is no transparency only because India is financing, but let me tell the hon. Member that 
India  is  giving  money  free.  It  is  grant  money,    but  it  is  grant  money  with  a  number  of 
conditions and if we want to get the money, we will have to abide by those conditions also. 
So, I think it is only right that they choose to impose on us a number of conditions that if we 
agree then we will be able to use that grant money. So, I think that is nearly all the issues that 
have been raised and again let me thank all the hon. Members both from the Opposition and 
Government sides who have contributed to this debate.  

Thank you. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Bill read a second time and committed.  

 

138 

COMMITTEE STAGE 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

THE FINANCE (MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) BILL  

(No. XX of 2016) 

Clauses 1 to 3 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 4 (Building Control Act amended) 

Mr Jugnauth: I move to amend Clause 4 by deleting paragraph (b) and replacing it 

by the following paragraph –  

 (b) 

in section 15, in subsection (2)(a), by adding the following new 
subparagraph,  the  word  “and”  being  deleted  at  the  end  of 
subparagraph (i) and the word “and” being added at the end of 
subparagraph (ii) –  

 (iii) 

electronic 

forwarded  by  the  architect  or 
engineer, as the case may be, by 
such 
other 
technological  means 
the 
relevant 
local  authority  may 
direct; 

or 

as 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 4, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 5 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 6 (Central Electricity Board Act amended) 

Mr Jugnauth: I move to amend Clause 6 by deleting in paragraph (a) the proposed 

new subsection (3) and replacing it by the following subsection – 

 

 
 
 

(3) 

 
an  exempt  organisation  within 
Procurement Act. 

A  company  set  up  under  subsection  (2)  shall  be  
the  Public  

the  meaning  of 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 6, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

 

139 

Clauses 7 to 22 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 23 (Financial Reporting Act amended) 

Mr  Jugnauth:  I  move  to  amend  Clause  23,  in paragraph  (c),  in  the  proposed  new 

section 41A –  

(i) 

in subsection (2)(b), by deleting the words “up to such time as its 
current contract with that company comes to an end” and replacing 
them by the words “subject to such conditions and for such time as 
may be prescribed”; 

(ii) 

by adding the following new subsection –  

 (3)  Notwithstanding  subsections  (1)  and  (2),  an 
audit firm may be exempted from the application of this section 
where it meets such conditions as may be prescribed. 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 23, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clauses 24 to 26 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 27 (Income Tax Act amended) 

Mr Jugnauth: I move to amend Clause 27, in the proposed section 50L, in subsection 

(2)(b)(ii), by deleting the figure “6”; 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 27, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clauses 28 to 31 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 32 (Local Government Act amended) 

Mr Jugnauth: I move to amend Clause 32, in paragraph (i), by deleting subparagraph 

(i), subparagraphs (ii) to (v) being renumbered as subparagraphs (i) to (iv); 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 32, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill 

Clause 33 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 34 (Mauritius Revenue Authority Act amended) 

 

140 

Mr Jugnauth:  I move to amend Clause 34, in  paragraph (d), in the proposed new 

section 21C – 

 (i) 

 (ii) 

in subsection (7), by deleting the words “subsection (7)” and replacing 
them by the words “subsection (6)”; 

in  subsection  (10),  in  paragraph  (a)(ii),  by  inserting,  after  the  word 
“proceed”, the words “, within 28 days from the date of the decision 
referred to in subsection (6),”; 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 34, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill 

Clauses 35 to 38 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 39 (Non-Citizens (Property Restriction) Act amended) 

Mr Jugnauth: I move to amend Clause 39 –  

(i) 

(ii) 

by deleting paragraph (a); 

in paragraph (b), in subparagraph (ii), by deleting the proposed new 
paragraph (d) and replacing it by the following paragraph –  

 (d)  where a company, in which non-citizens do not 
hold  more  than  an  aggregate  of  25  per  cent  of 
the  shareholding  of  the  company,  purchases  or 
otherwise  acquires,  sells,  disposes  or  otherwise 
transfers  property  or  deals  in  shares  provided 
that  such  transaction  does  not  result  in  such 
shareholding  exceeding,  directly  or  indirectly, 
25 per cent. 

Mr Mohamed: Before the question is put with regard to Clause 39, I see here that 
there is an amendment that has been circulated following comments that we had made with 
regard to that particular section of the law. I had drawn the attention of the House that the 25 
per cent meant as it stands, even with this particular amendment, a non-citizen can now be 
owner of even agricultural land and there is no limitation to it. If it is 25 per cent owner of the 
company, that company can now own agricultural land or land which is leasehold, any right 
therein, anywhere in Mauritius without the permission of the Prime Minister’s Office.  So, I 

 

141 

re-iterate  my  request  to  the  hon.  Minister  that  this  removal  of  all  checks  and  balances  to 
protect our real estate for posterity that it be re-considered and that, at least, some checks and 
balances be put therein in terms of an amendment.  At least we do not give the possibility to 
agricultural land and our leasehold lands to go out to foreigners, all be it even if they hold 25 
per cent maximum in a company and that, at least, the Prime Minister’s Office and the Rt. 
hon.  Prime  Minister’s  advice  be  given  to  that.    So,  I  would,  therefore,  request  that  this 
particular Clause, if the hon. Minister is not ready with it, be removed altogether and it be 
repealed because this is very dangerous.  I humbly request that this be done in order to protect 
our  real  estate.    I  understand  that  there  has  been  a  move  on  Government  following  my 
remarks  earlier  on.  Because  I  have  the  impression  that  the  remark  I  made  has  drawn  the 
attention  of  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  on  the  dangers  therein,  but  unfortunately  the 
amendments that have been proposed do not in any way sort it out and if this amendment 
goes  through,  I  humbly  say,  it  would  mean  that  a  company  with  a  maximum  25  per  cent 
owned by a non-citizen can own any real estate in Mauritius without knocking at the door or 
even bothering about the Rt. hon. Prime Minister’s discretionary opinion on that.  Please, if 
the hon. Minister could just stop on this and re-consider it at another time. 

Thank you.  

Mr Jugnauth: May I just be given some time, Madam Speaker, to consult. 

(Interruptions) 

The Chairperson: No! We can’t! We can’t do that! It’s not according to principles.  

(Interruptions) 

Mr Jugnauth:  I move that clause 39 be deleted. 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clauses 40-60 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 61 (Commencement). 

Motion made and question proposed:  “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

Mr Jugnauth: Madam Chairperson, I move for the following amendments in clause 

61 – 

 

 

“(i)  

in subclause (1), by deleting the words “and (o), 36” and  

 

replacing them by the words “and (o), 29(e), 36, 49”; 

 

142 

            (ii) 

in subclause (4), by deleting the words “, 49”;” 

Amendments agreed to. 
Clause 61, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 
First Schedule, Second Schedule, Third Schedule, Fourth Schedule and Fifth Schedule 

ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

SIXTH SCHEDULE 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the Sixth Schedule stand part of the Bill.” 

 Mr Jugnauth:  Madam Chairperson, I move that the Sixth Schedule be amended as 

follows – 

“(i) 

in the proposed Sixth Schedule, in Part A, in the heading, by deleting the word 
“SIX”.” 

Amendment agreed to. 

The Sixth Schedule, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

The title and enacting clause were agreed to. 

The Bill, as amended, was agreed to. 

On the Assembly resuming with Madam Speaker in the Chair, Madam Speaker 

reported accordingly. 

Third Reading 

On motion made and seconded, the Finance (Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill (No. XX 

of 2016) was read the third time and passed. 

ADJOURNMENT 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  that  this  Assembly  do  now 

adjourn to Thursday 01 September 2016 at 2.00 p.m. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun) rose 

and seconded. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned.  

 

MATTERS RAISED 

 

(8.36 p.m.) 

143 

CONSTITUENCY NO. 1, & 4 - STREET HAWKERS 

Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis Central):  
Madam Speaker, my Constituency, Constituency No. 2 is one where there live many street 
hawkers,  marchants  ambulants.  Not  only  in  my  Constituency,  but  as  well  in  Constituency 
Nos. 1, 3 and 4. 

Now,  as  you  are  aware  a  few  months  ago,  they  have  been  compelled  to  stop  their 
vending activities along the streets where they have been for decades and have since been 
relocated on two sides, namely Decaen and La Gare du Nord. Many of them have contacted 
me and have shared their following qualms to me – 

(1) 
(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

People who do not live in Port Louis are operating at these two sites; 
Because of this genuine hawkers from Port Louis, some of them have had the 
misfortune of being located deep inside these two sites, Decaen on the other 
side, and the consequence of this is that they can hardly sell their stuffs. So, 
they no longer have a source of income and they are thus facing real hardship; 
Some genuine street hawkers, even those with hawker’s licence have not been 
able to secure a place at these two sites; 
Some fruit sellers who have been relocated at La Gare du Nord are selling 
foodstuffs in very smelly environment because of effluents flowing there, I am 
told and to think that only recently Port Louis was elected one of the best 
destination for street food. 

Madam Speaker, in recent weeks, many of them have tried their hard luck to earn a 
living by  resorting to what we call ‘vend dan lamain. But  I am told that they have had to 
constantly bolt away, if I may use this term, if not, they get insulted, and more importantly, 
have their stuffs confiscated by a team of Police Officers based at Port Louis South Division 
called ‘Tornado’. 

(Interruptions 

I am going to table it. 

I am here tabling a press article of Sunday 17th on this Tornado. 

 

144 

Now, this situation has been going on since then. Now, some street vendors have even 
narrated that they were beaten up and that they have reported the case to the Human Rights 
Commission. 

I am going to table such a letter just now. 

Now, while the street vendors are no longer able to sell their stuffs, ironically some 
shop owners along the streets of the capital, along Farquhar Street, for example, I am told, 
have replaced them and that they are selling their stuffs where the marchands ambulants used 
to be. The only difference now is that they are licensed to do it. This is a most disturbing 
situation, Madam Speaker. 

I know that it has been explained in this august Assembly that the permanent solution 
to the street hawker problem resides in the Port Louis Smart City Project, but this is a long 
road ahead. 

My plea this evening to the hon. Minister of Local Government is to look into this 
awkward situation, that is, people being arrested and mishandled and having to incur severe 
losses because they are having to look for their daily subsistence. I am most willing to share 
with the hon. Minister the name of the people who came to see me. And my second plea to 
him  is  that  he  meets  them  in  order  to  address  this  issue  because,  if  not,  it  will  culminate 
further into a drame humain and I thank him for his positive consideration. 

The Minister of Local Government (Dr. A. Husnoo): Madam Speaker, I have taken 
note of all these complaints. I can assure the hon. Member, firstly, he is going to circulate it, I 
am going to get the names and everything afterwards. 

Firstly, now the hon. Member is telling me that there  are people from  outside Port 
Louis. But there were lots of people who are hawkers, who are working, who are staying in 
Port  Louis,  but  now  they  have  moved  out.  So,  they  are  outside  Port  Louis,  but  they  were 
registered hawkers. That’s why they have been given a stall. That’s number one. 

Secondly,  the  hon.  Member  is  saying  that  genuine  hawkers  have  not  got  a  stall.  I 
would  like  to  get  the  names  because  all  people  who  are  genuine  hawkers  and  who  have 
badges and whom we know that they are working, we try to give them a stall to work. So, if 
the hon. Member has any name, please give it to me and I will look into it. 

As  far  as  cleaning  is  concerned,  the  last  time  the  hon.  Member  mentioned  it,  I 
discussed  it  with  the  Lord  Mayor  of  the  Municipality  of  Port  Louis.  They  are  paying 

 

145 

contractors to clean these two places, but if there is any deficiency, I will look into it as well. 
I have raised that point with the Lord Mayor last time and he told me there are contractors 
cleaning these two sites. But, anyway, I am going to take it up with him. 

As  far  as  people  having  their  goods  confiscated,  that  is  why  we  came  with  these 
measures, in the first place, because we can’t allow hawkers to be on the roads. I mean, I 
know  the  Police  is  trying  to  be  hard,  but  we  talked  to  the  hawkers  trying  to  get  them  to 
understand that they have to move to these places temporarily. I am afraid one or two people, 
unfortunately,  keep  working  on  the  road  and  naturally,  the  Police  takes  some  action.  It  is 
tough,  but  they  have  to  take  action  because  if  we  allow  two,  five  or  ten  people  today, 
tomorrow we are going to get 50 people on the road. So, we can’t continue like that.  

As  far  as  shop  owners  are  concerned,  even  then  we  don’t  allow  it  and  I  have  had 
meeting with the Lord Mayor, with the Police to make sure that the shop owners do not put 
their stuff on the pavement. So, we have had meeting for that as well. Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

(8.42 p.m.) 

PORT LOUIS - ÉCOLES DE FOOT – RE-OPENING 

Mr R. Uteem (First Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis Central): Thank 
you, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise an issue relating to écoles de foot. The House will 
remember that on 17 May 2016 I asked a Parliamentary Question and the hon. Minister of 
Youth and Sports stated and I quote –  

“We have taken the decision that, as from 01 July 2016, all the Écoles de Foot all 
over the island will be re-opened as per the numbers and even increased accordingly.” 

In fact, answering to supplementary questions, three times he said that all écoles de foot will 
be re-opened as from 01 July 2016. In Port Louis we have ten écoles de foot and up to now 
only  six  have  been  re-opened,  the  four  that  have  not  been  re-opened  are  the  ones  in 
Tranquebar, Champ de Mars, Cassis, Abercrombie and Plaine Verte.  

So, I will make a humble request to the hon. Minister of Youth and Sports if he can 
keep his words and have these remaining four écoles de foot be reopened as soon as possible. 

The Minister of Youth and Sports (Mr Y. Sawmynaden): Madam Speaker, I think 
six, we are getting there and I think now with the Budget definitely we are going to open all 

 

146 

the écoles de foot. Once we have enough kids and the trainers are on, definitely we will open 
all the écoles de foot. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody! 

(8.44 p.m.) 

HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION 

Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West): Thank you, 
Madam Speaker. I tend to raise an issue of national importance with regard to the Human 
Rights Commission. As you are aware, Madam Speaker, in 2012 we amended the Protection 
of  Human  Rights  Act  and  created  divisions  and  one  of  the  divisions  was  the  National 
Preventive Mechanism Division which is chaired by a Deputy Chairperson. 

One of the functions of that Division is to enquire into any written complaint from 
any  person  alleging  that  any  act  of  his  human  rights  has  been,  is  being  or  is  likely  to  be 
violated by the act of omission of any person acting in the performance of the public function 
confirmed by any law or otherwise in the performance of the function of any public officer or 
any public body. So, they are here to enquire into written complaints. 

Now, it has come to my attention that the Human Rights Commission in breach of its 
statutory duty has written to the Prison Services and has informed the Prison that as from now 
on no written complaints from prisoners should be sent to the Human Rights Commission and 
this is creating real tension in the Prison amongst the prisoners and the Prison officers.  

So,  I  am  asking  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  as  this  is  a  serious  matter  which  can 
create great problems in the prisons, that he intervenes urgently vis-a-vis the Human Rights 
Commission and see why we have reached such a situation. Thank you. 

The Prime Minister: I will look into it, Madam Speaker. 

SCHOOLS - SOLAR ECLIPSE - SAFETY MEASURES 

Mr  D.  Ramful  (Third  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien):  Yes,  thank 
you, Madam Speaker. I have an issue addressed to the hon. Minister of Education and Human 
Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific Research  concerning the viewing of the solar 
eclipse  tomorrow  by  the  students  attending  school.  Now,  we  all  agree  that  this  is  a  very 
important  and  good  pedagogical  experience  for  the  students  because  they  will  be  able  to 
physically witness this rare phenomenon tomorrow. 

 

147 

However, when I look at the papers I have heard this morning the President of the 
GTU as well as some parents, they are expressing concerns about the safety measures that 
have been taken by the Ministry at the level of the schools. It has been said that apparently 
not  all  schools  have  received  the  protective  equipment  and  that  apparently  there  is  not 
sufficient staff to ensure the safety of the students tomorrow. 

Now, in the light of all these concerns I heard nothing from the Ministry of Education 
and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific Research. May I request the hon. 
Minister at least to take the opportunity today - I know it is very late – to make a statement 
assuring  the  parents  because  a  lot  of  parents  will  not  be  sending  their  children  to  school 
tomorrow fearing a problem. So, may I request the hon. Minister to make a statement. 

The  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 
Scientific Research (Mrs L. D. Dookun-Luchoomun): Madam Speaker, it is important for 
me to inform the House that the Rajiv Gandhi Science Centre has, weeks back, carried out 
two  workshops  with  teachers  of  both  the  primary  and  secondary  sector.  The  schools  have 
been provided with protective spectacles for students. Obviously, the spectacles were on sale.  

Now, all schools have been provided with these and we have requested Headmasters 
and  Rectors  to  make  sure  that  students  are  retained  in  class,  but  to  provide  them  with  the 
opportunity of viewing using the spectacles. We have taken these measures at the level of the 
schools, but we do understand that certain parents may still have apprehensions and they can, 
obviously, take the decision whether to send their children to school or not. But the schools 
have been provided with the spectacles  and we are not saying that we  have spectacles for 
each  child, but the teachers must take measures  to ensure that when the  children view the 
eclipse, they have to use the spectacles.  

Now,  obviously,  over  and  above  instructions  have  been  given,  circular  letters  were 
sent to all schools. We have taken the measures that need to be taken. Parents should inform 
their  children.  The  media  has  done  a  good  job  to  a  certain  extent  to  explain  what  are  the 
protective measures to be taken. But then, I must say that the newspapers tend to talk about a 
lot of things that are totally untrue and we have to be able to make a distinction between what 
is right and what is wrong. But nevertheless, I will still ensure that all the Headmasters take 
necessary measures and I would make an appeal to parents also to take the responsibility.  

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

 

148 

At 8.51 p.m., the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Thursday 01 September 

2016 at 14.00 p.m. 

 

