No. 20 of 2016 

 

 

 

1 

 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

(UNREVISED) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

 

THURSDAY 04 AUGUST 2016 

 

 

 

 

2 

 

CONTENTS 

 

 

 

QUESTION (Oral) 

MOTION 

BILL (Public) 

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

3 

THE CABINET 

 

(Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

 
Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 
KCMG, QC  
Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 
GCSK  
Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Hon.  Ivan  Leslie  Collendavelloo,  GCSK, 
SC 
Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK 

 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 
Communications 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 
Utilities 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 
International Trade 
 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha, GCSK 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan, SC 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 
Sinatambou 
Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 
Perraud 
Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain, GCSK 

of 
Minister 
Empowerment 
Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation  

Integration 

and  Economic 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 
Family Welfare 
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 
Institutional Reforms  

 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

 
Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 
Cheong, MSK 

Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 

4 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 
Institutions 
Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands 

 
Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms, 
Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 
Disaster and Beach Management 
Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and 
Training 

 

 

 

 

 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Gopall, Mr Navin  

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 20 of 2016 

 

Sitting of 04 August 2016 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 

 

 

 

 

7 

ORAL ANSWER TO QUESTION 

COIN IDEAL INCIDENT – INQUIRY 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Rt. 
hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  incident  which  occurred  on  27  May 
2016 in which Mr S. S. was involved, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the 
Commissioner of Police, information as to –  

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

(f) 

who has been in charge of the inquiry when the incident was initially reported 
to the Police and since; 

if the inquiry has now established that Police instructions and procedures in 
relation thereto have been flouted; 

if the mobile phone of Mr S. S. was recovered and returned thereto; 

if Mr S. S. made a fresh statement on 26 June 2016; 

why no arrest was effected until 11 July 2016, and 

the charges lodged against the arrested suspects. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  refer  the  hon.  Leader  of  the 
Opposition to my reply to Parliamentary Question B/714 on 12 July 2016 wherein I stated, 
inter alia, that the Rose Hill CID was currently enquiring into the circumstances which led to 
the Coin Ideal incident which happened on 27 May 2016.  I also stated that I would ask the 
Commissioner of Police to look personally into the matter. 

In regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that  the  enquiry  is  under  the  responsibility  of  Superintendent  of  Police,  Mr  Bansoodeb,  in 
charge  of  CID  Western  Division  and  under  the  overall  supervision  of  ACP  Ramsurrun, 
Divisional Commander, Western Division. 

In regard to part (c) of the question, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that on the night of the incident, Mr Saven Seerungen verbally reported the loss of his mobile 
phone to a Police officer on patrol at Coromandel.  On 30 May 2016, one Mr J. M. B. called 
at Rose Hill CID and produced  a mobile phone  make  I-Phone S6 colour silver and black.  
The  Police  officer  to  whom  the  mobile  phone  was  handed  over  reported  same  to  SP 

 

8 

Bansoodeb.  The latter established that the phone belonged to Mr Saven Seerungen to whom 
same was returned. 

In regard to part (d) of the question, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that on 27 May 2016 at 1.53 a.m, Mr Saven Seerungen verbally stated to Coromandel Police 
Station that his car had been stolen.  Police inserted a Diary Book Entry on the reported loss 
and  immediately  proceeded  to  patrol  the  area  to  trace  out  the  lost  car,  in  company  of  Mr 
Saven Seerungen.  The car could not be traced out.  As the incident had occurred in Rose 
Hill, Mr Saven Seerungen was taken to Rose Hill Police station to report the case.  There, 
another Diary Book Entry was inserted to the effect Mr Saven Seerungen’s car make BMW 
and  registration  number  unknown  to  him  had  been  stolen  by  two  unknown  persons.    Mr 
Saven Seerungen did not give any statement. 

At  3.27  hours  on  the  same  morning,  another  Diary  Book  Entry  was  made  at 
Coromandel  Police  Station  that  during  the  course  of  a  patrol  at  Morcellement  Montreal 
Coromandel, car bearing registration number 7824 DC 11 make BMW colour black had been 
recovered some 300 metres away from Winner’s supermarket.  Upon instructions from the 
Rose  Hill  Divisional  Operational  Room,  the  car  was  brought  back  to  Coromandel  Police 
Station.  The Rose Hill Police Station was informed accordingly.  As Mr Saven Seerungen 
was still in Rose Hill Police Station, he was also informed that the car had been recovered but 
he stated that he did not wish to make any declaration regarding the incident and expressed 
the  wish  to  take  possession  of  his  car.    He  was  then  taken  to  Coromandel  Police  Station 
where  the  car  was  handed  over  to  him.    Another  Diary  Book  Entry  was  inserted  at 
Coromandel  Police  Station  to  the  effect  that  the  car  had  been  returned  to  Mr  Saven 
Seerungen.  The latter stated that he was satisfied with Police action, and did not have any 
complaint. 

I am further informed by the Commissioner of Police that on 25 June 2016, officers of 
Rose  Hill  CID  recorded  a  statement  from  Mr  Saven  Seerungen  at  his  residence  at 
Morcellement  Mewasingh,  Solferino,  Vacoas.    In  his  statement,  he  explained  in  detail  the 
circumstances  which  led  to  the  incident  which  occurred  in  the  vicinity  of  Notre  Dame  de 
Lourdes Church, Rose Hill on 27 May 2016. 

As regards parts (e) and (f) of the question, I am informed by the Commissioner of 
Police,  that  Police  enquiry  was  initiated  after  the  statement  was  recorded  from  Mr  Saven 
Seerungen on 25 June 2016.  The enquiry led to the arrest of two suspects on 11 July 2016.  

 

9 

On the same day, a provisional charge of larceny with violence was lodged against each one 
of them.  They appeared before Rose Hill District Court on the same day and were remanded 
to Police cell.  Subsequently, they were remanded to jail on 18 July 2016. 

I am further informed that the enquiry has been completed and the matter has been 

referred to the Director of Public Prosecutions for advice on 13 July 2016. 

Madam Speaker, in the light of the facts that have been disclosed so far, given the 
complexity and certain unclear elements surrounding this case, I have decided, in regard to 
part  (b)  of  the  question,  that  a  sitting  Magistrate  be  appointed  to  conduct  an  independent 
enquiry on the whole incident and to determine whether Police instructions and procedures 
have been flouted in this case. 

Furthermore, pending the completion of the independent enquiry, the Commissioner 
of  Police  has  been  requested  to  advise  DCP  Seerungen  to  proceed  on  leave.    The 
Commissioner of Police will also give instructions to the Police Force so that DCP Seerungen 
does not have access to any document nor interferes with any witness in the matter. I have 
decided  to  have  an  enquiry  because  there  are  so  many  facts  that  have  not  been  brought 
forward  and  it’s  not  so  far  clear  how  the  whole  incident  took  place  and  in  what 
circumstances. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to assure the House and the population that there will be no 
cover up in this matter and if enquiry reveals that there has been any breach on the side of 
Police, appropriate action will be taken. 

Mr Bérenger: I must say I have to refrain from saying ‘better late than never’ once 
more. We have been informed that the file is with the DPP and now I am glad to hear that a 
sitting Magistrate will be appointed. So, I won’t put all the questions, but I have to put a few 
questions, because I am sure the sitting Magistrate will take notice also. Is the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister aware that the two Police officers whom he said have been in charge of the enquiry 
since the incident, one CID Assistant Superintendent, I think, of Rose Hill, and then an ACP - 
I will refrain from mentioning his name, at this stage - were involved in the corrupt exercise 
right from night one until now and terrorising policemen at Rose Hill? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I have no such information that is why I feel there must 

be an enquiry to bring to light all the facts in this case. 

 

10 

Mr Bérenger: Do we know, at this stage, which Police officer directed unlawfully 
that this car, a government car under the responsibility of the Acting Commissioner of Police, 
be illegally returned to his son? Have we established which Police officer did that? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  I  can’t  say  which  Police  officer;  there  are  so  many 

names here. Who did it? Well, all this will be enlightened in the enquiry. 

Mr Bérenger: My information is precisely that ACP that I referred to the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister. Can we know whether at least the Rose Hill and Coromandel Diary Books 
have been seized, by whom and in whose custody they are now? 

The Prime Minister: I can’t say whether they have been seized, but I have been told 
that they are there and the entries are there; they are with the CCID. I think they are safe, 
nobody will interfere on this. 

Mr Bérenger: Well, I am glad to have heard that the DCP concerned has been asked 
de prendre ses distances for the time being. Has it at least been established that on that night 
because last time the Rt. hon. Prime Minister got me wrong completely, he felt that I wanted 
to know whether the then Acting DCP had gone to the Police station as if this is what should 
have been done. Not at all! My information is that he interfered illegally, he turned up and 
this  was  alleged  by  a  Member  of  Parliament,  not  refuted  since,  and  he  turned  up  at  both 
Police stations to take an active part in the cover-up? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I don’t have such information and that is why we must 

have an enquiry to enlighten all this. 

Mr Bérenger: Now, we have been provided with information, Madam Speaker, that a 
mobile phone was seized and then obtained from a person and returned to the owner, that is, 
the son of the Acting Commissioner of Police. Returned by a fille de joie, not arrested until 
much later! But she returned and the Police took the decision to instead of getting hold of that 
and  other  telephones,  instead  of  examining  them  as  should  have  been  done  -  has  it  been 
established which Police officer took that decision to return that mobile phone? 

The Prime Minister: Which Police officer? I must read the whole thing to find out… 

It must be one of those who are involved in this matter. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger: The Rt. hon. Prime Minister is an experienced lawyer he knows that 

somebody took the decision. We will know. If I can allow the little paper to fly! 

 

11 

The Prime Minister: The one who was enquiring - Bansoodeb. 

Mr Bérenger: Good. It is a good thing, you didn’t have to read through the whole 
thing. We have been informed that after all this, a month went by without anything happening 
until a Press article. Then another month nearly before arrests were made and then a month 
after the incident a statement is taken at the residence of the gentleman concerned. Is the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister aware that, in fact, in the Rose Hill Occurrence Book dated 26 June, that 
is, a month later and recorded by Police Constable so and so, I will omit his name -  can I 
read?  

“Mr (…) reported (…)”  

A month later! 

“(…) through DPC so and so to the effect that on 27 June (…)” 

In fact, it is 27 May, even that is wrongly recorded! 

“(…) on 27 June at around 00.00 hours he was in his car (…)” 

His car! 

“(…) registered so and so, make BMW, at Celicourt Antelme an unknown woman and 
a man, the latter with a cutter threatened him and stole his mobile phone make Apple, 
colour grey, sum of Rs1000 (…)” 

He was even bargaining! 

(Interruptions) 

“(…) and a pair of shoes (…)” 

Ki shoes! Professionals not like the Police! They took the precaution to get hold of his shoes, 
to retain his shoes so that he would not run away! 

(Interruptions) 

I apologise, Madam Speaker, can I carry on? 

(Interruptions) 

It is a good thing he did not lose his trousers as well!  

(Interruptions) 

 

12 

“(…) then after drove away in the said car towards Coromandel and left abandoned 
thereat.” 

False! The car was not left abandoned, it went.  

“The  car  was  recovered  together  with  the  purse  and  the  ignition  key.  The  mobile 
phone make Apple was recovered.” 

As if it was recovered on that day! Which it was not!  

“And was returned to him. He has not been injured, he can identify the aggressors, 
value and so on.” 

Does the Rt. hon. Prime Minister find that acceptable? I am sure no because of his 

reply and what is shocking is that Mr Seeruttun goes to the Press… 

Thousand apologies! 

Of all people! 

(Interruptions) 

 (Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Of  all  people!  I  withdraw  unreservedly  my  tongue  because  it  was  the  slip  of  the  tongue! 
Madam Speaker, yes. 

(Interruptions) 

So,  the  Acting  Commissioner  of  Police  wakes  up  and  gives  for  the  first  time  a  Press 
statement on 02 July in Le Défi –  

“Il était traumatisé.” 

Il est un petit chef-d’œuvre, Madam Speaker. 

«  Il était traumatisé. Lorsqu’il s’est senti mieux il a donné sa déclaration. » 

A  month  later!  The  son  of  an  Acting  Commissioner  of  Police!  I  hope  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister has taken good note. 

The Prime Minister: I am taking good note now! 

(Interruptions) 

 

13 

Madam Speaker, I must say that from all the circumstances of this case it is clear that there 
has  been  attempt  to  cover  up,  that  is  why  I  have  decided  there  must  be  an  independent 
enquiry. 

Mr Bérenger: Well, I think that I will stop there if you will allow me. But, I will end 
up, let us not have just a young sitting Magistrate. I insist that it should be a Senior sitting 
Magistrate. Can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree to that? 

The Prime Minister: Okay, we will try to get one, if available. 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10(2) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move that all the business on today’s Order 

Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to 

Second Reading 

THE APPROPRIATION (2016-2017) BILL 2016 

(No. XVII of 2016) 

Order  read  for  resuming  adjourned  debate  on  the  Appropriation  (2016-2017)  Bill 

2016 (No. XVII of 2016) 

Question again proposed. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Gungah! 

(11.50 a.m.) 

The Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection (Mr A. Gungah): 
Madam Speaker, it is indeed with immense pleasure that I am commenting on the measures 
announced in the 2016-2017 Budget. 

At  the  very  outset,  I  would  like  to  seize  this  opportunity  to  extend  my  personal 
congratulations  to  hon.  Pravind  Jugnauth,  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development.    This  Budget  will  always  be  referred  to  as  being  the  game  changer,  which 
propels Mauritius into a new era of development by laying the foundation for the next phase 
of development and prosperity. 

 

14 

Madame la présidente, ce budget venant d’un nombre de visions à placer l’humain au 
centre  du  développement,  la  pierre  angulaire  réside  du  fait  que  la  pauvreté  absolue  sera 
résolue,  tout  en  proposant  des  mesures  pour  stimuler  l’économie  vers  davantage  de 
modernisme  et  de  prospérité,  tenant  en  compte  les  enjeux  économiques,  domestiques  et 
internationaux. Un budget humaniste et social. 

Madam Speaker, the Minister of Finance had to take into account several challenges 
while  preparing  this  Budget.    Economic  challenges  on  the  global  stage  have  been  on  an 
unprecedented scale since the last decades, impacting negatively on the Mauritian economy 
and in particular on exports. At the same time, the local landscape has been plagued by mega 
Ponzi schemes and scandals to the tune of billions.  It is unfortunate that these scandals have 
diverted much public funds from developmental purposes. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  room  for  manoeuvre  in  preparing  this  Budget  was,  therefore, 
very slim.  In such a situation, some countries had recourse to trimming of the Welfare State 
and cuts in public expenditures.  In many European countries, funds for social security and 
housing were brought down due to difficult economic situations.  Greece, Spain and Italy, 
amongst others, have resorted to social security cuts. 

Malgré les contraintes que j’ai mentionnées au début, le ministre des Finances a su 
mettre le citoyen au centre du développement avec un budget à visage humain, Madame la 
présidente. 

He has maintained all social welfare measures and has over and above come up with 
new  measures  to  boost  social  inclusion,  social  cohesion  and  social  progress.    All  social 
partners  are  unanimous  that  this  Budget  is  effectively  putting  people  first  by  empowering 
particularly the 6,400 families who are still living below the absolute poverty threshold. 

Comme un gouvernement responsable, on ne pouvait rester insensible, et nous nous 
sommes attelés à bâtir une société plus juste. Dans cette optique, les mesures en termes de 
création d’emplois, de logements et la mise sur pied du National CSR Foundation viennent 
démontrer la volonté du ministre des Finances pour combattre la pauvreté. 

Ce budget est aussi une continuité dans notre lutte contre la prolifération de la drogue 
et  le  maintien  du  law  and  order.  Nous  ne  devons  pas  nous  voiler  la  face.  La  jeunesse 
mauricienne est de plus en plus vulnérable face à ce fléau. Quelques mois après notre prise de 
pouvoir, le Premier ministre a mis sur pied la Commission d’enquête sur la drogue, et ceci 
démontre sa volonté tenace pour assainir la situation. Le renforcement de la force policière 

 

15 

avec  des  équipements  adaptés  vient  donner  plus  de  moyens  dans  cette  lutte.  Toutefois, 
permettez-moi, Madame la présidente, de souligner que, malgré les efforts du gouvernement, 
le  combat  contre  la  drogue  et  d’autres  produits  illicites  serait  vain  si  les  parents,  les 
enseignants, les associations socioculturelles et la société civile ne prenaient pas conscience 
du danger et ne s’impliquaient pas dans ce combat. 

Madam  Speaker,  this  Government  is  one  which  lives  up  to  its  words.    In  our 
manifesto,  we  committed  ourselves  to  reduce  the  price  of  foodstuff  and  basic  necessities, 
purchasing power being one of the main concerns of the population.  Last year, Government 
took the decision to decrease the interest rate on hire purchase.  We also introduced the free 
six-metre cube of water  and the new social tariff by CEB for the most vulnerable.   In the 
same vein, this year, in the budgetary measures, VAT has been removed on many products, 
including cereal and some household items. 

I must say, Madam Speaker, that the population in general and even some Members 
of  the  Opposition  have  responded  positively  to  the  Budget  and  the  social  measures 
announced by the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development. 

Madame  la  présidente,  nous  savons  tous  que  le  gaz  ménager  est  une  commodité 
utilisée par la majorité de la population. La baisse du prix du gaz ménager est ainsi parmi une 
des décisions majeures, et démontre la volonté du gouvernement pour augmenter le pouvoir 
d’achat de nos citoyens. Depuis samedi matin, le prix de la bonbonne de 12 kg est passé de R 
330 à R 270, soit une baisse de R 60 ; celle de 6 kg, de R 165 à R 135, et celle de 5 kg passe 
de R 137.50 à R 112.50. Une baisse conséquente, Madame la présidente. 

Allow me, Madam Speaker, to give some information to the House on the subsidy on 
LPG provided by Government and how we achieved to bring down the price of LPG.  The 
retail price of a 12 kg cylinder of LPG was revised on 03 March 2012 from Rs300 to Rs330.  
In 2012, Government subsidised an amount of Rs717 m., in 2013, an amount Rs640 m., and 
in 2014, an amount of Rs564 m. 

Madam Speaker: I wish to interrupt you, hon. Minister.  I think I can hear a phone 
ringing somewhere, and I wish to remind Members that when the phone rings, it disrupts the 
smooth proceedings of the House. 

Mr Gungah: Tax should be imposed on phones, Madam Speaker. 

Madam  Speaker,  as  I  was  saying,  in  2012,  Government  subsidised  an  amount  of 
Rs717 m., in 2013, an amount of Rs640 m., and in 2014, an amount of Rs564 m.  I wish to 

 

16 

inform the House that, as at December 2015, Government was still subsidising domestic LPG 
to the tune of Rs90 m., that is, around Rs20 per cylinder of 12 kg, to maintain the price at 
Rs330. For the period January to June 2016, the CIF prices of LPG have been fluctuating, 
and for the same period, a surplus of Rs48 m. has been realised. 

Madam Speaker, the reason for the decrease in price of LPG on international market 
is due to an oversupply of LPG.  And this oversupply is due to the following reasons, among 
others - 

1.  Iran is back on the LPG market following the lifting of the US sanctions; 
2.  there is a rise of supply from shale gas producers; 
3.  there is a decrease in the price of crude oil, and 
4.   there is an increase in availability of LNG on the market. 

Madam Speaker, now that there is a clear indication of a downward trend in the price 
of LPG on the world market, as a responsible and cautious Government, we hence took the 
decision to reduce the price on the local market. We took a decision that can be financially 
sustainable  and  at  the  same  time  allow  consumers  to  benefit  from  such  reduction  over  a 
longer period of time, of course, depending on the trend.  

Madam  Speaker,  similar  to  LPG,  the  prices  of  petroleum  products  in  Mauritius 
depend on the international market rate. That is why in September 2015, I took a decision to 
set up a technical committee to review the formula for the calculation of the retail price so 
that  the  decrease  in  prices  of  petroleum  products  on  the  world  market  be  passed  on  to 
consumers while, at the same time, be able to contain any eventual rise in prices.  

Based  on  the  recommendations  of  the  technical  committee,  the  Petroleum  Pricing 
Committee (PPC) has been able to reduce the price of Mogas by a total amount of Rs7.10 per 
litre and Rs6 per litre for Gas oil since November 2015. 

Madam Speaker, though there has been an increase in the price of petroleum products 
on  the  world  market  in  June,  the  new  formula  has  enabled  the  PPC  to  maintain  the  retail 
prices by using funds from the price stabilisation account. I wish, Madam Speaker, to inform 
the House that from November 2015 to July 2016, a total amount of Rs927 m. has been used 
from the price stabilisation account to reduce and maintain the retail prices of Mogas and Gas 
oil. The decrease in the price of Mogas and Gas oil wouldn’t have occurred if changes in the 
regulations and amendments in the formula for computation of the retail price had not been 
done, Madam Speaker. 

 

17 

Let me now come to consumer protection. We have been very sensitive to opinions 
voiced out by our customers. We have not hesitated to reduce the price of live cattle during 
Qurbani. In fact, as hon. Members of the House are aware, in 2015 the price per kilo of live 
cattle was reduced from Rs139.50 to Rs125.  And we are now in the process of fixing the 
price of live cattle for Qurbani for this year. 

Madam Speaker, we will also ensure that all the conditions set out in the communiqué 
issued on 18 July 2016 by my Ministry concerning the importation of live cattle, goats and 
sheep  for  Qurbani  2016  are  respected.  And,  for  the  first  time,  the  price  of  live  goat  and 
mutton was fixed at Rs185 and Rs200 per kilo respectively during the end of year festivities 
2015.  

I can assure the House, Madam Speaker, that this year as well, we will do the same 

exercise, of course, after discussions with all stakeholders concerned. 

Dans le même sillage de protéger nos consommateurs, nous n’avons pas hésité pour 
assurer  un  meilleur  contrôle  sur  l’importation  et  la  vente  des  voitures  de  seconde  main  à 
travers les amendements requis au cadre légal. Ces mesures ont été prises après consultations 
avec les différents partenaires dans le secteur. Il fallait, Madame la présidente, protéger nos 
citoyens et nous l’avons fait.  

To further ensure protection of consumers, my Ministry has been working on a new 
Consumer Protection and Fair Trading Bill which I propose to introduce in the House as soon 
as it is finalised. Madam Speaker, the objects of the new legislation will be to address issues 
such  as  unfair  prices,  supply  of  goods  of  sub-  standard  quality,  consumer  education, 
prevention and misleading commercial practices among others. It will also provide a system 
of fixed penalty for prompt settlement of offences. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  agenda  to  rank  higher  on  the  World  Bank’s  Ease  of  Doing 
Business Index is highly important for this Government. In this context, it is noteworthy that 
we have considerably simplified trade procedures through the single window system which 
operates as an electronic platform. It is to be noted that the trading environment comprises 
also many defaulters which prompted my Ministry to take appropriate and relevant control 
measures. 

Indeed, Madam Speaker, following complaints and representations received from the 
associations  of  motor  car  dealers  of  new  as  well  as  second-hand  motor  vehicles  and  the 
general public on the importation of damaged and accidental vehicles, and alleged fraud in 

 

18 

the sector, my Ministry has brought several major amendments to the legislation. These new 
measures will provide a level playing field in the activity and business  of importation and 
sale of second-hand motor vehicles as well as protect the interests of our citizens. 

In the same line, Madam Speaker, my Ministry has also reviewed the holding of trade 
fairs and exhibitions following representations of Front Commun des  Commerçants de l'île 
Maurice and the Shop Owners’ Association, as well as the public in general. Indeed, Madam 
Speaker,  the  holding  of  numerous  trade  fairs  across  the  island  had  even  led  to  some  local 
businesses  having  to  close  down  and  employees  laid  off.  With  the  measures  brought, 
consumers are now protected from fraudulent traders and at the same time we have restored a 
more competitive trade environment.  

Madam Speaker, allow me now to comment on the measures announced by the hon. 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development in this Budget that will give a new boost to 
the economy. We know that a budget is a fiscal instrument that shapes the economic contours 
of  a  country.  Though  challenges  have  impacted  negatively  on  our  macroeconomic 
fundamentals,  the  hon.  Minister  Finance  and  Economic  Development  has  taken  bold  and 
innovative measures to bring them to a healthier state which speak volumes on his vision to 
steer the country towards safer economic foundations. 

Madam Speaker, promoting investment is a sine qua non condition to redress weak 
economic indicators. On doit reconnaître que l’instabilité au niveau mondial a été néfaste sur 
l’investissement étranger à Maurice. In fact, Foreign Direct Investment in the manufacturing 
sector in Mauritius declined from Rs1.6 billion in 2012 to Rs0.04 billion in 2015, impinging 
on the growth rate. In this difficult context, our business community has also been more on a 
wait and see mode, leading to the low private sector investment. 

Madame  la  présidente,  le  budget  ouvre  la  voie  à  un  redressement  de  cette  courbe 
descendante,  à  travers  des  investissements  massifs  dans  des  secteurs  tels  que  le  port, 
l’aéroport et les infrastructures routières, en ligne avec la Vision 2030 du Premier ministre. 
Certainement,  ces  investissements  favoriseront  le  secteur  manufacturier.  Nos  entrepreneurs 
doivent  être  aussi  parties  prenantes  dans  l’effort  de  diversification  économique  en 
investissant dans de nouveaux créneaux. Les mesures budgétaires vont amplement dans cette 
direction. 

Madame  la  présidente,  notre  pays  peut  ambitionner  un  nouveau  tournant  dans  son 
histoire  économique  en  adoptant  un  modèle  basé  sur  la  technologie  et  l’innovation.  Nous 

 

19 

sommes unanimes à reconnaître que le ministre des Finances a été prévoyant. Une panoplie 
de mesures favorisent l’émergence d’une économie digitale et le développement de nouveaux 
pôles  innovateurs  tels  que  le  village  pharmaceutique,  et  un  ‘commodity  exchange’  pour  le 
secteur de la bijouterie, entre autres. 

Madam  Speaker,  our  manufacturing  sector  has  gone  through  different  phases 
confronting multi-faceted challenges. En effet, ce secteur a connu des années de croissance 
robuste mais il  y a  eu aussi des périodes très difficiles avec le démantèlement de l’accord 
Multifibre en 2005, la crise financière de 2008-2009 et la turbulence économique en Europe. 
Nous  sommes  maintenant  confrontés  à  une  période  de  grande  instabilité  et  d’incertitude, 
accentuée  par  la  sortie  de  la  Grande  Bretagne  de  l’Union  Européenne.  Très  peu 
d’économistes  et  d’analystes  peuvent  prédire  les  retombées  économiques  du  Brexit.  Mais 
c’est certain que nous ne sommes pas immunisés de cette période d’instabilité. 

Madame la présidente, le secteur manufacturier, excluant le secteur sucrier, a toutefois 
démontré de la résilience. Concernant le secteur ‘Export Oriented Enterprise’, une baisse de 
0.8%  a  été  enregistrée  en  2015,  cela  dû  principalement  à  des  problèmes  conjoncturels  de 
l’industrie du poisson. Toutefois, le segment d’export du secteur de textile et de l’habillement 
a enregistré une croissance de 2% en 2015. Je dois admettre que l’année 2016 semble être 
plus  difficile,  Madame  la  présidente.  Mais  je  suis  convaincu  que  les  mesures  budgétaires 
annoncées  aideront  à  faire  face  à  des  défis  qui  ont  émergé  subitement.  Je  voudrais  ici 
souligner qu’une attitude alarmiste n’est pas appropriée. 

Madame la présidente, ce budget nous gratifie de deux mesures phares et innovateurs 
pour accélérer l’exportation. Premièrement, l’Air Freight Rebate Scheme vient soutenir nos 
exportations du textile vers l’Europe. Nos exportateurs bénéficieront d’une baisse de 40% sur 
le coût du fret de la compagnie nationale d’aviation. Ce qui est dans la même lignée avec le 
Freight Rebate Scheme, qui a été étendu vers 45 ports en Afrique en 2015. Cela avait permis 
à nos entreprises de bénéficier de R 11.7 millions de janvier 2015 à juin 2016 sur leur coût 
total de production. Cet Air Freight Rebate Scheme sera vital pour répondre aux défis d’un 
marché qui requiert d’avantage de réduction du délai de livraison. Le volume d’exportation 
par  voie  aérienne  sera  en  hausse  et  les  produits  seront  aussi  davantage  accessibles  et 
compétitifs sur le marché Européen. Le coût de fret représente près de 5 à 10% du coût total 
de production et sera ainsi conséquent pour la compétitivité. 

 

20 

Madame  la  présidente,  nous  sommes  dans  un  monde  où  prime  le  digital  et  nos 
secteurs économiques ne peuvent rester à l’écart de cette évolution. Notre pays doit bâtir de 
nouvelles structures pour répondre aux exigences commerciales et manufacturières. Nous ne 
serons jamais à la pointe du développement sans l’apport des outils modernes. D’où, Madame 
la présidente, la deuxième mesure importante pour notre secteur manufacturier, c’est-à-dire 
l’E-Commerce  Platform.  Nous  envisageons  une  plateforme  qui  pourra  être  un  lien 
indispensable de commerce entre nos opérateurs et ceux du monde entier. Je suis convaincu 
que cela apportera un nouveau dynamisme à nos exportations avec une plus grande visibilité 
de nos produits. C’est donc une mesure catalyseur. Je suis confiant que les compagnies qui 
aspirent à se tourner vers de nouveaux marchés pourront en bénéficier, incluant nos petites et 
moyennes entreprises. Ce sera une première pour l’île Maurice et un tremplin pour élargir nos 
frontières au-delà de nos missions de prospection. Cette mesure va créer des opportunités car 
ce  sera  une  fenêtre  vers  le  monde  du  commerce.  La  structure  de  cette  plateforme  sera 
évidemment déterminée ultérieurement en collaboration avec la MEXA. 

Madam  Speaker,  as  far  as  our  export  is  concerned,  I  am  pleased  to  say  that  the 
Jewellery  Sector  is  showing  promising  signs  of  development.  Exports  increased  from  Rs5 
billion in 2014 to Rs5.5 billion in 2015. We want to give a further boost to its development 
and, in this regard, my Ministry has prepared a Strategic Roadmap for the Jewellery Sector. 
Already, new training programmes have been initiated for capacity building. 

Madame la présidente, le budget ouvre maintenant une nouvelle perspective pour ce 
secteur.  La  mise  sur  pied  d’une  plateforme  pour  le  commerce  de  l’or,  du  diamant  et  des 
métaux  précieux,  entre  autres,  donnera  une  autre  dimension  au  développement  du  secteur. 
Notre  petite  île  sera  propulsée  comme  une  plaque  tournante  dans  la  région  et  aussi  sur  le 
marché  international.  C’est  établir  une  plateforme  entre  les  fournisseurs  d’Afrique  et  les 
acheteurs  de  l’Asie,  en  particulier.  Cela  aidera  à  attirer  d’autres  investisseurs  et  créer  des 
emplois rémunérateurs. Je considère que le secteur de la bijouterie a un potentiel énorme avec 
un  nombre  grandissant  de  touristes  et  un  marché  international  en  croissance.  Notre 
expérience et savoir-faire est déjà un avantage. Nous allons accentuer la formation, aider les 
entreprises à monter en gamme, rehausser la visibilité de nos produits, et surtout, optimiser 
sur la plateforme pour  attirer de nouveaux investisseurs. Je suis certain que nous pourrons 
relever le défi. 

Madam Speaker, without doubt, this Budget has come up with an array of measures 
to provide a new strategic direction to the manufacturing sector. La modernisation du secteur 

 

21 

industriel  est  essentielle  pour  un  développement  sur  des  bases  robustes  et  durables.  La 
réintroduction  du  LEMS,  le  nouveau  Investment  Tax  Credit  et  la  mise  sur  pied  du  3D 
Printing dans deux technopôles vont dans cette direction. 

Un  village  pharmaceutique  sera  un  atout  pour  attirer  de  nouveaux  investisseurs  et 
élargir  la  base  du  secteur  à  travers  d’autres  créneaux  tels  que  des  intrants,  des  dispositifs 
médicaux  et  des  médicaments  traditionnels  entre  autres.  C’est  un  projet  qui  a  requis  une 
vision  nouvelle  pour  le  pays  et  je  souhaite  que  le  secteur  privé  participe  pleinement  à  sa 
réussite. 

Madam Speaker, capacity building in design and fashion is crucial for the production 
of trendy and fashionable products. As far as our textile industry is concerned, it is satisfying 
to note that the Fashion and Design Institute is playing its role as a pourvoyeur de designers 
et  stylistes.  Now  more  than  ever,  it  is  called  upon  to  drive  the  process  of  design  led 
production which is crucial to compete in higher market segments. We can proudly say that 
the number of students has increased from 104 in 2009 to 386 in 2015. New courses have 
been  implemented  up  to  degree  level.  It  is  also  good  to  note  that  former  students  of  the 
Fashion and Design Institute are now providing their expertise in textile enterprises which are 
increasingly being oriented to design led production.  

Madam  Speaker,  export  promotion  is  also  an  important  aspect  which  we  could  not 
neglect for the manufacturing sector while our competitors are very much active in this field. 
Despite  the  increasingly  volatile  export  market,  we  have  been  successful  in  providing 
visibility  to  our  products  through  participation  in  international  fairs,  contact  promotion 
programmes  and  buyers  and  sellers  meetings  organized  by  Enterprise  Mauritius.  Many 
enterprises have obtained trial orders of Rs18 m. and orders to the tune of Rs288 m. were 
confirmed. Orders worth Rs1.05 billion are under negotiation. New markets have also been 
explored  including  Australia,  the  Czech  Republic,  Spain,  Denmark,  Tanzania  and  Zambia. 
South Africa has  already  emerged  as a promising market for diversification where  exports 
increased from Rs5 billion in 2014 to Rs5.9 billion in 2015. 

Madam  Speaker,  let  me  now  comment  on  a  key  project  that  has  the  potential  to 
change  the  business  landscape  of  our  island.  As  initiated  in  the  Government  Vision  2030, 
much emphasis has been laid on transforming Mauritius into a bunkering and petroleum hub 
in  the  region.  The  bunkering  and  petroleum  hub  is  poised  to  become  one  of  the  new 

 

22 

economic pillars with a high potential growth which will attract state-of-the-art technology 
and FDI and contributing to job creation.  

Our  geographical  location  and  business  friendly  environment  provide  a  unique 
opportunity  to  position  our  country  as  a  major  operator  in  this  sector.  Annually  there  are 
around 35,000 tankers using the ship route of the region. But, only 10 per cent have recourse 
to our maritime services. We want this sector to develop rapidly. In this perspective, Madam 
Speaker, one of the measures to boost the bunkering operations in the Port Louis Harbour is 
that any vessel engaged in the delivery of bunker fuel within the port limit will be exempted 
from excise duty and VAT as in the case for export of bunker fuel. This measure is expected 
to render trade in bunker fuels in the Mauritian port more attractive.  

I  wish  to  point  out  that  recently  one  operator  namely,  Bomin  Ltd,  registered  in 
London  and  which  is  one  of  the  leading  independent  bunker  traders  and  suppliers  in  the 
world with more than 35 years of experience in the sector has started bunkering transactions 
in Mauritius. It is expected that with such a big player in our waters there will be a substantial 
boost in operations which will contribute to promoting Mauritius as a reliable and renowned 
bunkering hub. 

 Madam  Speaker,  in  this  context,  Government  has  received  a  proposal  from  a 
consortium comprising of five world-class companies. Nearshore Resources Ltd - the latter 
subscribes to the vision of the Government and has expressed its intention to contribute to its 
realisation by constructing a modular near shore mobile refinery which will be first of its kind 
in the region. Expected foreign direct investment for this project is around 574 million US 
Dollar. At the same time, Madam Speaker, jobs will be created. Government will ensure that 
the project is implemented in a safe and secure manner in accordance with best oil industry 
practices which respond to highest national and international environmental standards. 

Moreover,  together  with  Government,  the  promoter  has  engaged  to  promote  local 
activities  and  enhance  interest  and  welfare  in  the  region.  It  is  expected  that  the  Nearshore 
Refinery will produce a cumulative 1.5 million tonnes of top quality refined products namely 
gasoline, kerosene for aviation, gas oil and low sulphur bunker fuel, that is, LS380 with less 
than  one  per  cent  of  sulphur  content,  meeting  the  incoming  international  MARPOL  6 
Standard. 

Madam Speaker, in the coming years, all tankers will be required to use this type of 
fuel  and  Mauritius  will  be  one  among  the  few  countries  in  the  world  like  Singapore  and 

 

23 

Fujairah Port in the United Arab Emirates to supply this product. Madam Speaker, it will be 
very  beneficial  for  our  tiny  Mauritius  to  be  among  the  league  of  major  players  in  the 
bunkering  sector.  As  a  responsible  Government,  we  want  to  leave  a  legacy  to  the  next 
generation  without  jeopardizing  the  environment  while  developing  a  new  economic  pillar. 
Madam  Speaker,  we  all  here  are  patriots.  Let  us  work  together,  let  us  make  this  project  a 
success. This will position Mauritius as a petroleum hub. 

Madame la présidente, je vais conclure en disant ceci: certaines personnes choisissent 
de faire de la politique par soif du pouvoir, d’autres pour des gains pécuniaires et d’autres par 
amour pour le pays. Comme l’a si bien dit le Premier ministre, il aurait pu prendre sa retraite 
politique et jouir de tous les conforts, mais il est resté parmi nous pour reconstruire le pays et 
la nation. Cela peut être fait seulement avec du courage, de l’audace, un leadership fort et un 
sens aigu du patriotisme. Des qualités que possède aussi le ministre des Finances, Madame la 
présidente.  Le  budget  vient  réconforter  le  peuple  avec  un  dosage  de  justice  sociale  jamais 
connue auparavant. 

Madam Speaker, history will bear testimony. 

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rughoobur! 

(12.31) 

Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre D’or): Thank you, 
Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to say a few words on this Bill. I would like 
also to congratulate the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development and his team 
for the preparation of this excellent budget. At the same time, I would like also to thank hon. 
Gungah  who  has  intervened  before  me  and  all  the  hon.  Members  for  their  valuable 
contribution in this Bill. 

Madam Speaker, I am going to intervene on two issues on this Bill today. Firstly, on 
the vision of our country and how the budget presented by the hon. Minister of Finance is 
totally in line with that vision. The second issue that I am going to address is the issue of 
implementation  and  how  important  it  is  that  the  proposals  contained  in  the  budget  are 
implemented  so  that  we  reap  the  benefits  of  what  has  really  been  the  intention  of  this 
Government. 

 

24 

Madam  Speaker,  there  have  been  critics  from  some  quarters  that  the  budget  lacks 
long-term perspective and vision. Unfortunately, Madam Speaker, I have not seen any among 
those people who have been critical about this budget, stating that it lacks vision and I have 
not  seen  any  among  them  defining  what  they  mean  by  that  vision.  I  am  tempted  today, 
Madam  Speaker,  to  go  50  years  back  just  before  our  country  became  independent.    Our 
forefathers  and  those  people  who  struggle  for  independence,  including  our  sitting  Prime 
Minister,  50  years  back  what  was  their  vision  for  our  country?  Was  it  different  from  the 
vision  we  have  for  our  country  today?  Was  it  different  from  what  today  we  expect  our 
country to become in 50 years from now? 

Madam Speaker, today we are dreaming of a smart Mauritius. I don’t think that the 
vision was different. I do not mean translating ‘smart’ literally, but each and every alphabet 
in  that  word  ‘smart’  means  something  to  me.  ‘S’  stands  for  sustainability.  Were  those 
struggling for independence 50 years back, dreamt of a sustainable Mauritius? This is what 
we are looking forward to in 50 years from now. If we have a look at this budget, Madam 
Speaker,  series  of  proposals  that  are  in  the  budget  goes  in  line  with  our  vision  for  a 
sustainable Mauritius. But our forefathers were struggling for a sustainable Mauritius equally. 
Otherwise, possibly we would have converted the Botanical Garden of Pamplemousses and 
Curepipe into housing estates. They were sustainable in their thought as well and vision. This 
is what this Government also has.  

With this budget, Madam Speaker, I am going to list some measures which go in that 
direction, which are in line with our vision for making Mauritius sustainable in 50 years from 
now - 

(i) 

(ii) 

the hon. Minister of Finance spoke about the promotion of renewable energy 
with hundreds of millions of rupees invested to increase the capacity of the 
national grid to enable injection of an additional 18 to 20 megawatts from 
renewable resources; 
inclusiveness and fair distribution of wealth. There have been numerous 
measures announced to combat poverty and improve the working conditions 
of the poor. The Government will disburse an additional Rs500 m. annually as 
support to those who are at the bottom of the social ladder; 

(iii)  major investments in the water sector to ensure 24/7 supply of water around 

the island; 

 

25 

(iv)  mass transit system with a view to meeting the requirements of a modern and 
vibrant economy and responding to the needs of the coming generation for a 
hassle-free and effective traffic management system, and also 
the setting up of a High-Level Committee on the whole issue of pensions and 
ageing population. 

(v) 

Madam  Speaker,  what  do  we  mean  by  sustainability?  It  is  not  only  taking  into 
consideration  the  economic  component  of  any  development,  but  a  mixture  of  economic, 
social and environmental. This is what the hon. Minister of Finance has dared to do. When 
we have a look at the budget, it is visionary and in line with the vision that we have for our 
country. We are preparing our country for the 50 years to come, Madam Speaker.  

When  we  speak  of  ‘smart’,  the  second  alphabet  ‘m’  refers  to  mobility,  Madam 
Speaker. Our forefathers wanted a society where there is social mobility, that is, you attempt 
at improving the plight of the downtrodden. There is social mobility. This is what the hon. 
Minister of Finance as well has tried to do. In this budget, Madam Speaker, there is adequate 
provision for us to be socially as well as economically mobile.  

For social mobility, Madam Speaker, I can list a series of measures that have been 

taken by the hon. Minister of Finance - 

• 
• 
• 
• 

ensure the improvement of the plight of the downtrodden;  
measures to alleviate poverty;  
social housing projects;  
projects, as I have just mentioned, relating to the series of measures to 
alleviate poverty;  
restructuring of the SRM, and 
National Empowerment Foundation. 

• 
• 
In  terms  of  economic  mobility,  Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  has 
been speaking about the need for us to go beyond our shores, encouraging entrepreneurs to 
take advantage of COMESA. In the recent years, we know that there has been an increase in 
exports  to  COMESA  countries.  In  the  budget,  once  again  provision  has  been  made  to 
encourage entrepreneurs to export their products in the region. But at the same time, Madam 
Speaker,  provision  has  been  made  to  further  improve  our  economic  diplomacy  with  the 
appointment of seven new consulates.  

 

26 

So,  I  have  been  talking  about  sustainability  and  mobility,  Madam  Speaker,  but  we 
have got, in this whole vision of smart, also our ambition for an agile nation. And all this, 
Madam Speaker, contributes in ensuring that we meet on the vision that we have to make our 
Mauritius smart in the 50 years to come. An agile nation, Madam Speaker!  

Once again, if we have a look at the measures that have been taken of what will make 
our country agile.  That was also the vision of our forefathers 50  years from now. This is 
what has contributed, encouraged them to invest in education, to empower our people and we 
have reached where we have reached today, Madam Speaker. It is because we have struggled 
to become an agile nation.  In his Budget Speech, Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister Finance 
and Economic Development took a series of measures to empower the nation, to empower 
the youth. And what are those measures, Madam Speaker?  Let me come to a few of them -  

• 
• 
• 

• 
• 
• 

• 

the reform of our education system;  
vast training programme for quality teaching; 
the different  empowerment schemes at the level of Government  for training 
engineers; 
service to Government: SCM, YEP; 
creation of a regional aviation training Academy;  
setting  up  of  a  faculty  of  digital  technology  and  ICT  engineering  at  the 
University of Mauritius.   
Rs50 m. provided for the empowerment of young entrepreneurs.   

All these measures, Madam Speaker, go directly in line with our vision to become an agile 
nation. This was the case 50 years from now and this will be the case today also and we have 
to prepare the nation for the vision that we have. This Budget, Madam Speaker, is a Budget 
which is in line with the vision that we have for our country and it is forward-looking. 

Fourth,  Madam  Speaker,  is  risk;  apart  from  becoming  an  agile  nation.  We  are  a 
nation, we have always been taking risk, Madam Speaker. And even now in this Budget as 
well, there have been critics on this issue of nine-year schooling and everybody knows that 
during the implementation phase, when we will be implementing the nine-year schooling, we 
will be coming very near to the next general election, but the hon. Minister of Finance and 
Economic Development and the Government have been very audacious  and we have been 
taking the decision. We are convinced that taking decisions timely is what will bring results. 
That is a reason why, Madam Speaker, we will be going forward and implementing the nine-

 

27 

year schooling because  otherwise without taking risk we will not be able.  We should not 
forget,  Madam  Speaker,  at  the  same  time that  in  the  past  there  are  numerous  examples  of 
where we had had to take risk and this is what has contributed in bringing development, in 
making of this country where it stands today.  

Let me refer to the case when this country had to take the decision in the past whether 
to sell its sugar in the world market or to join the European market. We should not forget that 
at that time we took a big risk and there is no politics to be done in this, Madam Speaker. It is 
a question of vision. At that time we had the option either to sell sugar in the world market at 
a much better price or to join Sugar Protocol, join the European Union and sell sugar at a 
much lower price. But the decision we took, the risk that we took paid dividend in the long 
run. It was in line with the vision of our forefathers to make our country where we are today. 
It is the same thing that we are doing today with this reform that we are about to bring in the 
education sector.  

Finally, Madam Speaker, on this issue of vision is T for technology. If Mauritius has 
once again been able to develop itself the way it has developed itself today, it is certainly due 
to it being at the forefront of technology, Madam Speaker. And I believe that it is essential 
that this particular issue of technology be given same consideration and be in line once again 
with  the  vision  that  we  have  for  our  country.    The  hon.  Minister  Finance  and  Economic 
Development has taken a series of measures and let me list some of them, Madam Speaker. 

• 
• 

• 
• 
• 

The reintroduction of the LEMS, Leasing Equipment Modernisation Scheme; 
investment  tax  credit  to  manufacturing  firms  for  renewal  of  equipment  and 
new technology; 
the proposal for the setting up of a biotechnology Institute; 
250 additional free WIFI hot spots; 
major 
connectivity drastically. 

investments  by  Mauritius  Telecom  and 

improve 

the  CEB 

to 

Madam  Speaker,  when  we  listen  to  all  these  measures  in  the  Budget,  it  would  be 
interesting for everybody in the House to ask ourselves whether the measures that have been 
proposed by the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development and his team in the 
Budget has a vision or not. What I have been talking here, Madam Speaker, whether it is in 
terms of sustainability, whether it is in terms of mobility, agile nation, technology, risk, all 

 

28 

these, Madam Speaker, components of our vision are present in the Budget. It is a budget that 
is very much in line with where we want to position our country in 50 years from now. 

The  issue,  Madam  Speaker,  that  I  want  to  address  is,  of  course,  the  issue  of 
implementation. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister was very right last time when he said that one is 
the list of very good bold measures that has been very much appreciated by the nation. This is 
one.  But the issue of implementation is extremely important.. I was recently listening to an 
exposé by Prof. Arun Sareen who was the former CEO of multinational company Vodafone 
and he stated three things on leadership. I am saying this because I believe that leadership is 
extremely important to be able to implement what we are about to implement. And with this 
Government, this is what we are about to promote at all levels, Madam Speaker.  

First  component  of  leadership:  there  should  be  strategy.  The  first  component  is 
strategic leadership. The second component is operational leadership and the third is people 
leadership. I have heard somewhere that the Budget est un peu en désordre, on ne comprend 
pas  trop,  but  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  has  been  very  right  in 
demonstrating his strategic leadership capabilities, Madam Speaker. You have to be strategic 
in approach and the ten strategic drives that he has listed in the Budget were the very first 
thing that we had to do to address the growing challenges of our nation. But the two other 
components will come with the implementation as well. And of course, the hon. Minister and 
his team alone will require support from all spheres. I believe for operational leadership to be 
possible, there are four issues that we will have to address. Firstly, for operational leadership; 
better  efficiency,  effectiveness  and  transparency  in  the  public  procurement  process.  I  fully 
agree with the Rt. hon. Prime Minister on this. 

Second, better management of public infrastructure and investment and promotion of 

the principle of good governance. 

Third, appropriate and adequate technology and operating systems, that I am sure is 

being addressed. 

Fourth, smart and effective public and private sector collaboration, and 

Fifth, we have to be very innovative. 

The hon. Minister of Finance and Development, I know, has taken it as a priority. We have to 
be innovative, innovative, and very innovative in approach. 

 

29 

Finally, Madam Speaker, the third component of leadership, people leadership; and I 

believe what we require is the following as well - 

(i) 

(ii) 

hard work, discipline and timely delivery; 

empowerment and better accountability; 

And this is where we have to make a request to Chief Executives, Deputy Chief Executives 
and higher officers in the public sector; that it will not be the role of the Ministry of Finance 
and Economic Development to run after them to see whether the projects are being completed 
on  time.  They  have  to  be  responsible.  The  CEOs,  the  Deputy  CEOs,  the  Senior  Chief 
Executives  have  to  ensure,  and  where  there  is  a  need  for  empowerment,  the  Ministry  of 
Finance,  the  Ministry  there  will  give  all  support,  as  has  been  clearly  demonstrated  in  the 
Budget. 

And, finally, with regard to the third issue on people leadership - and that is a humble 
request that I will have to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister -, I think we will have to review the 
process. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister has always laid emphasis on the need to be transparent 
in approach. I fully agree, but sometimes we might be having some issues; like we want to be 
transparent, but there is recruit without conducting interviews, because the issue of academic 
qualification,  I  believe,  is  not  the  only  criterion  that  might  be  helpful  in  determining,  in 
promoting a transparent recruitment process. So, I believe we will have to review completely 
the recruitment process in the public sector, not only for better transparency, but ensuring that 
we have the right people at the right place. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the House for your attention. Thank you very 

much. 

Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for one and a half hour. 

At 12.53 p.m., the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 2.33 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Seeruttun! 

The Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security (Mr M. Seeruttun): Madame la 
présidente,  c’est  avec  une  grande  fierté  que  je  voudrais  avant  tout  féliciter  le  ministre  des 
Finances  et  du  Développement  économique  pour  avoir  présenté  à  la  population  le  budget 
2016/17, et je voudrais étendre mes félicitations aussi au Premier ministre pour son support 
indéfectible au ministre des Finances et du Développement économique. 

 

30 

Madame la présidente, la présentation d’un budget reste toujours un événement phare 
dans la vie d’un pays, d’un peuple, car cela touche au quotidien de tout un chacun. Il y avait 
une attente de la population, et elle était impatiente de savoir comment se jouait son avenir. 

Madam Speaker, ce budget a, en effet, reçu l’approbation de toutes les composantes 
de la nation arc-en-ciel. Le feel good factor a été restauré. On n’avait qu’à écouter les gens 
dans la rue, dans les foires, dans les boutiques. Et à lire les commentaires le lendemain de la 
présentation du budget, des déclarations positives ont été notées, à commencer par celle du 
leader de l’opposition qui l’a qualifié ‘d’intéressant’, et cela ne pouvait pas être autrement 
pour  avoir  déjà  qualifié  le  budget  de  notre  ministre  des  Finances  dans  un  passé  pas  très 
lointain de ‘coup d’essai, coup de maître.’ 

Samedi dernier, un journal en ligne a donné la parole aux jeunes, et ces derniers ont 

tous utilisé des mots, tels que ‘bon’, ‘apprécié’ ‘excellent’, pour qualifier le budget. 

C’est un budget qui fait donc l’unanimité. 

Les  firmes  d’experts-comptables  se  sont  jointes  à  cette  cohorte  de  bon  sens.  Cette 
unanimité, Madame la présidente, est le résultat d’un travail abattu par un homme qui croit 
dans l’avenir de son pays et de l’ensemble de sa population. Il a consulté, il a écouté, il a noté 
- et je dois dire en cette courte période de deux mois qu’il assume cette responsabilité - et au 
final, tout le monde se retrouve dans les 10 stratégies et les 300 mesures annoncées. 

Les  gens  au  bas  de  l’échelle,  les  bébés,  les  jeunes,  les  personnes  handicapées,  les 
ménagères,  les  entrepreneurs,  la  classe  moyenne,  les  planteurs,  les  éleveurs,  le  secteur 
corporatif, les ONG, l’île Rodrigues, Les Chagos, et même les expatriés. 

Ce  qui  est  intéressant,  c’est  que  ce  n’est  pas  un  budget  Bonhomme  Noël.  Bien  au 
contraire, un budget bien réfléchi, où la rigueur, la discipline et prudence étaient les maîtres 
mots. 

Mon bon ami, l’honorable Francisco François, a trouvé le juste mot pour qualifier ce 

budget, et le terme utilisé est le PRAVINOMICS. 

C’est encourageant, Madam Speaker. Un budget qui est bon pour le pays, bon pour 
notre  avenir,  bon  pour  notre  peuple,  malgré  l’incertitude  qui  prévaut  sur  le  plan  global,  et 
ajouté à cela l’impact du Brexit. Un budget qui répond aux attentes de la vision 2030 de ce 
gouvernement. Mais j’irai plus loin pour dire que c’est un budget qui va au-delà de 2050. 

 

31 

Madame  la  présidente,  le  budget  qu’a  présenté  l’honorable  Pravind  Jugnauth  porte 
l’ambition d’un gouvernement sérieux, d’un homme sérieux, d’un leader politique sérieux et 
discipliné. Il nous faut saluer son travail, son sens du devoir et sa discipline. Ce ministre des 
Finances ne prend pas avec les pauvres pour donner aux riches, contrairement aux autres. 

Madame  la  présidente,  le  Premier  ministre  nous  avait  promis  dans  son  Mission 
Statement  Vision  2030  un  high  income  economy.  Ce  budget  est  une  opportunité  pour  le 
progrès. Il nous faut agir maintenant en hommes et en femmes responsables, travailler dur 
pour assurer notre avenir et celui de nos enfants. 

Madame la présidente, avant d’aborder les mesures préconisées pour le  secteur de 
l’agro-industrie  et  de  la  sécurité  alimentaire,  laissez-moi  rappeler  à  la  Chambre  où  nous 
étions en 2014 et où nous en sommes en 2016. 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

la croissance était à 3, 6% en 2014, et la tendance était à la baisse ; 

le secteur de la construction connaissait une décroissance de 8, 5%, tout 
comme le secteur sucrier, une décroissance de 3, 5% ; 

l’investissement total était de 18, 9% avec celui du privé à la baisse à 14,1% ; 

au niveau de l’épargne, tendance également à la baisse, avec un taux de 10,5 
% du PIB; 

la balance de paiement était en déficit, équivalant 5,6% du PIB ; 

le déficit budgétaire était de l’ordre de 3,2% ; 

la dette publique, 5,3% du PIB, et 

les réserves en devises étrangères équivalant 6,2 mois d’importation. 

Au niveau des institutions, la situation était alarmante - 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

la MPCB, avec des prêts non-productifs de l’ordre de R 3, 2 milliards ; 

la DBM, avec des pertes de R 538 millions ; 

Mauritius Post, avec des pertes de R 202 millions ; 

les casinos, avec des pertes de R 628 millions ; 

la MBC, avec des dettes de R 1, 2 milliards ; 

Et là, sans compter le gaspillage au niveau infrastructurel – 

 

32 

• 

• 

• 

le  Bagatelle  Dam,  qui  initialement  devait  coûter  R  3,1  milliards,  a  presque 
doublé de coût ; 

la  route  Terre-Rouge-Verdun,  avec  un  coût  initial  de  R  2  milliards,  a 
finalement  coûté  R  4  milliards.  Et  la  réparation  de  la  partie  effondrée  a 
nécessité une somme additionnelle de R 300 millions ; 

et  pour  ne  pas  dire  la  fameuse  carte  biométrique,  qui  devait  coûter  R  400 
millions, nous a coûté R 1.2 milliards. 

C’est ça l’héritage que nous a légué l’ancien régime du Dr. Ramgoolam ! 

Madame la présidente, l’Alliance  Lepep, depuis  le début de son mandat, a pris des 

mesures pour redonner confiance à la population. 

Au niveau sectoriel, il y a eu des efforts - 

• 

au niveau de la construction, la décroissance est passée de 8, 5% à 4, 9% ; 

Et là, nous sommes convaincus de pouvoir renverser cette tendance négative. 

• 

• 

• 

• 

le tourisme a enregistré une croissance de 8,5% en 2015 contre 6,1% en 2014 ; 

le secteur des TIC, hausse de 7% en 2015 contre 6,4% en 2014 ; 

les  réserves  en  devises  étrangères  à  fin  juin  2016  équivalant  8,  5  mois 
d’importation ; 

la balance de paiement a enregistré un surplus de R 20 milliards, équivalant 4, 
9% du PIB ; 

L’économie  reprend  après  tant  d’années  de  règne  du  Parti  travailliste,  elle  aurait  connu 
davantage de détérioration si ce peuple ne s’était pas montré intelligent en décembre 2014  

Madame  la  présidente,  l’honorable  Pravind  Jugnauth  a  annoncé  dans  le  Budget 

2016/2017 dix stratégies qui visent à  - 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

promouvoir l’entrepreneuriat;  

la création de l’emploi; 

booster la croissance; 

favoriser une société digitale; 

améliorer le climat des affaires; 

 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

33 

construire des infrastructures modernes; 

améliorer la qualité de la vie des Mauriciens ; 

lutter contre la pauvreté; 

apporter une réforme majeure de la fonction publique, et à  

10. 

garantir la stabilité économique. 

Madame la présidente, les indicateurs économiques tels que le taux de l’épargne et de 
l’investissement  sont  des  signaux  de  l’état  de  santé  d’une  économie.  Prenons  le  cas  de 
l’épargne,  Madame  la  présidente.  De  tout  temps,  les  Mauriciens  avaient  une  culture  de 
l’épargne ; nos grands-parents, nos parents faisaient toujours en sorte qu’ils ont un compte en 
banque  pour  mettre  de  côté  leurs  économies  pour  assurer  l’avenir  de  leurs  enfants.  Cette 
culture permettait d’avoir un taux de l’épargne adéquat qui assurait aux banques d’accorder 
des prêts aux investisseurs qui emmènent la croissance. Mais que s’est-il passé ?  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker : Order ! 

Mr  Seeruttun :  Madame  la  présidente,  on  a  eu  entre  2005  et  2010  un  Docteur  en 
économie comme Ministre des Finances et il a fait de Maurice une ile cobaye en essayant 
toutes sortes de mesures farfelues. Une de ses mesures phares était de taxer les intérêts sur 
l’épargne.  Qu’a-t-on  vu ?  Une  réaction  tout  à  fait  normale,  naturelle  et  humaine,  les 
épargnants ont retiré leur argent de la banque pour investir ailleurs. 

(Interruptions) 

Et par pur hasard, au même moment, Bhai Rawat, BAI plutôt, est venu proposer des produits 
d’investissement les uns plus alléchants que les autres et au vu et au su des autorités.  

Avec recul, on peut se demander s’il n’y a pas eu de complicité entre le gouvernement 
d’alors et le Groupe BAI d’arnaquer les Mauriciens avec ces ponzy schemes qu’on connait 
aujourd’hui. Ce mécanisme mis en place a permis à Sunkai, Whitedot et Je t’aime Marketing, 
entre autres, de rentrer sur ce marché. Même si en 2011 l’honorable Pravind Jugnauth avait 
pris la décision d’abolir cette taxe sur l’intérêt, le mal était déjà fait. Les épargnants n’ont pu 
se débarrasser de cette mentalité pour des retours faciles sur leurs investissements Et nous 
avons vu les  conséquences par la suite. Espérons qu’avec le nettoyage qu’on a  commencé 

 

34 

depuis l’an dernier, cette culture à l’épargne dans des institutions viables, crédibles va refaire 
surface.  

Madame la présidente, l’autre indicateur est l’investissement, surtout du privé qui a 
connu une tendance à la baisse ces dernières années. Une des raisons, c’est le temps que ça 
prend pour obtenir les permis d’opérations.  Dans un monde qui bouge à une vitesse grand V, 
comment peut-on accepter qu’un investisseur, qui présente un projet avec un business plan 
basé  sur  les  chiffres,  les  données    d’aujourd’hui,  doit  attendre  3  à  5  ans,  voire  plus  dans 
certains  cas,  pour  démarrer  son  projet ?  Ils  ne  vont  pas  rester,  Madame  la  présidente !  On 
n’est pas le nombril du monde, ils ont d’autres options. Ce budget vient corriger cette carence 
avec,  entre  autres,  la  relance  du  Silent  Agreement  Principle,  l’adoption  du  Regulatory 
Sandbox Licence et aussi la mise en place d’un e-licensing platform. 

Un autre aspect qui pèse dans le choix des investisseurs, c’est la sécurité. Personne ne 
voudra mettre son argent et opérer dans un pays où sa sécurité est menacée. Encore une fois, 
les  mesures    budgétaires  viennent  renforcer  notre  force  policière  en  leur  donnant  les 
ressources  nécessaires  pour  qu’elle  puisse  assumer  son  rôle  pleinement  et  faire  respecter 
l’ordre et la paix dans le pays.  

Bien souvent, Madame la présidente,  on prend des pays tels que Singapour et Dubaï 
comme un modèle de réussite. Une des raisons de leur réussite c’est qu’ils ont pratiqué une 
politique d’ouverture. Le Singapour est un tiers de notre taille en surface, mais sa population 
est  trois  fois  la  nôtre.  L’ouverture  d’une  économie  n’est  pas  une  menace  quand  c’est  bien 
planifié  et  le  budget  prévoit  des  mesures  pour  permettre  aux  étrangers  d’acquérir  un 
appartement ou un espace commercial et des facilités à s’y implanter.  

Le  tax  credit  offert  à  certains  secteurs  sur  leur  capital  investment  est  encore  une 
mesure  pour  favoriser  et  encourager  l’investissement.  L’Air  Corridor  reliant  l’Afrique  et 
l’Asie vise à positionner Maurice pour attirer les affaires. L’ICT fait partie de notre quotidien 
et le E-commerce génère des transactions en trillion de dollars. L’introduction d’un national 
payment switch favorisera le E-commerce et préparera Maurice pour l’avenir.  Il y a d’autres 
mesures encore, Madame la présidente, pour favoriser, pour soutenir, pour venir en aide aux 
entrepreneurs, aux petites et moyennes entreprises. Je parle de factoring. Un des gros soucis 
des petits et moyens entrepreneurs c’est la trésorerie et aujourd’hui on sait que, quand ils sont 
en  train  de  produire  et  vendre  leurs  produits,  ils  n’arrivent  pas  à  avoir  leur  argent  tout  de 
suite.  Il  faut  attendre  un  mois,  deux  mois  ou  plus  des  fois  et  aujourd’hui  en  donnant  la 

 

35 

possibilité  d’avoir  cet  argent  à  travers  le  factoring,  cela  va  leur  permettre  de  continuer  à 
opérer et de produire encore plus pour pouvoir générer plus de profitabilité et d’étendre leurs 
activités économiques.   

Donc,  c’est  autant  de  mesures  aujourd’hui  que  propose  ce  budget  et  sans  compter 
l’investissement  public  qui  a  été  annoncé  par  le  Ministre  des  Finances.  Si  avec  toutes  ces 
mesures il n’y a pas de relance, il n’y en aura jamais. Donc, ceux qui ne veulent pas voir qu’il 
y a de relance, qu’il y a des mesures pour inciter la relance, c’est qu’ils ne veulent pas voir ce 
qu’il y a dans ce budget, Madame la présidente. C’est en se basant sur ces mesures que le 
Ministre des Finances a avancé un taux de croissance de 4.1% à la fin de l’exercice 2016-
2017.  

Madame  la  présidente,  j’aimerais  maintenant  aborder  des  réalisations  de  mon 
ministère  durant  l’année  financière  écoulée  et  des  perspectives  pour  l’année  financière 
2016/2017.  Je  commencerais  par  le  secteur  sucre  qui  reste  un  secteur  clé  de  notre  secteur 
agricole en terme d’emplois et de création de la richesse.  L’industrie de la canne continue à 
faire face à d’énormes défis, surtout en prévision de l’abolition interne des quotas de sucre 
sur le marché européen  en 2017, c’est-à-dire l’année prochaine, qui risque de rendre notre 
sucre moins compétitif. 

Hélas, la situation pourrait se corser davantage suite à l’avènement de Brexit. Donc, il 
faut  être  vigilant  et  nous  devons  continuer  à  nous  battre  pour  défendre  les  intérêts  de  ce 
secteur  tant  au  niveau  du  groupe  ACP  à  Bruxelles  qu’au  sein  de  l’accord  de  partenariat 
économique  de  la  région  avec  l’Union  Européenne.  Nous  explorons  aujourd’hui  les 
possibilités  d’exportation  de  sucre  vers  les  pays  africains  à  travers  des  blocs  régionaux 
comme le  COMESA et la SADC. 

Madame la présidente, le secteur sucre a, encore une fois, été sérieusement touché en 
2015  en  raison  du  faible  prix  de  R  13,100  obtenu  par  tonne  de  sucre  et  la  chute  dans  la 
production sucrière à 366,000 tonnes qui ont contribué, bien sûr, à une baisse de la recette 
totale. Quand nous savons que le prix de viabilité étant de R 16,000 par tonne, les planteurs - 
surtout les petits planteurs - auraient fait face à de grosses difficultés, s’il n’y avait pas eu 
l’intervention de l’État. 

En  effet,  le  gouvernement  est  venu  de  l’avant  avec  les  mesures  suivantes  afin 

d’alléger les difficultés des planteurs - 

 

(i) 

36 

D’abord, il y a eu la mise en place du Sugar Cane Sustainability Fund sous la 
gestion de la Mauritius Cane Industry Authority (MCIA) pour l’octroi d’une 
subvention aux planteurs de – 

(a) 

(b) 

R 1,100 par tonne de sucre aux planteurs produisant jusqu’à 60 
tonnes de sucre, et de 

R 300 par tonne de sucre aux planteurs produisant au-dessus de 
60 tonnes. 

Les paiements ont été effectués au début de l’année pour un montant total de R 
137 m.  

(ii) 

Il  y  a  aussi,  Madame  la  présidente,  le  paiement  d’une  compensation  de  R 
2,000 par tonne de sucre à chaque planteur assuré au Sugar Insurance Fund. 
Des amendements nécessaires seront apportés à travers le Finance Bill à cet 
effet.  

(iii) 

Il  y  a  aussi  l’exemption  de  paiement  de  la  prime  d’assurance  accordée  aux 
planteurs produisant jusqu’à 60 tonnes de sucre. 

Madame la présidente, afin d’encourager la vente de notre sucre sur le marché local, 
une taxe de 15% sera frappée sur le sucre  blanc importé. De plus, des normes de contrôle 
seront  introduites  pour  s’assurer  que  le  sucre  importé  soit  de  bonne  qualité  vu  que  de 
nombreuses doléances ont été reçues concernant la qualité de ce produit.   

A cet effet, la Mauritius Standards Bureau travaille actuellement sur l’élaboration de 

ces normes en consultation avec le MCIA et mon ministère.  

Madame la présidente, afin d’assurer des revenus supplémentaires aux planteurs, la 
MCIA  Act  sera  amendée  à  travers  le  Finance  Bill  pour  augmenter  la  contribution  des 
distilleurs et embouteilleurs de R 20 à R 40 par litre d’alcool absolu. 

Madame  la  présidente,  le  gouvernement  a  récemment  agréé  à  l’introduction  d’un 
Ethanol Framework qui permettra le mélange de l’éthanol avec le mogas et ce à partir du 01 
juillet 2017.  Un comité de mise en œuvre a déjà été établi à cet effet pour travailler sur les 
modalités et proposer un mécanisme approprié. Ce projet, qui s’insère dans le cadre du COP 
21 en vue de réduire le “carbon footprint” dans le pays, offrira aussi une source additionnelle 
pour chercher de revenu supplémentaire aux planteurs sur le prix de la mélasse. 

 

37 

Madame la présidente, la superficie de terre sous culture de la canne à sucre a diminué 
considérablement durant la dernière décennie et il est estimé que 20,000 hectares ont ainsi 
été, soit convertis pour des projets infrastructurels ou immobiliers, soit carrément abandonnés 
parce  que  les  planteurs  n’arrivaient  plus  à  cultiver  leurs  terres.    Cette  catégorie  de  terres 
abandonnées sont estimées à être à environ 10,000 hectares.   

C’est une aberration, Madame la présidente, qu’autant de terres soient abandonnées et 
restent  inutilisées  alors  que  le  pays  a  besoin  de  terre  pour  faire  accroître  sa  production 
agricole en vue d’assurer l’autosuffisance alimentaire. 

Madame la présidente, nous accueillons favorablement l’idée de la mise sur pied d’un 
Agricultural Land Management System à être géré par la MCIA. Ce projet vise à identifier les 
terres abandonnées et leur gestion viendra renverser la vapeur et les rendra productives. 

Mon  ministère  compte  aussi  apporter  bientôt  des  amendements  au  Sugar  Industry 
Efficiency Act en vue de faciliter des réformes dans l’industrie de la canne en conformité aux 
recommandations  faites  par  les  consultants  de  Landell  Mills  Consulting  (LMC)  et  qui 
contribuera à rendre ce secteur viable.   

Madame la présidente, en ce qui concerne le secteur non-sucre qui couvre notamment 
les  fruits  et  légumes,  l’élevage,  les  services  des  bois  et  forêts  et  la  conservation,  mon 
ministère a introduit,  en janvier dernier, un plan stratégique pour la période 2016-2020 où 
l’accent est mis sur les  pratiques soutenues pour faire  accroître la production agricole  afin 
d’assurer la sécurité alimentaire, une meilleure qualité des produits et l’autosuffisance. 

L’accent est aussi mis sur les mesures à prendre pour la transition vers la production 
bio afin d’atteindre l’objectif fixé de produire 50% de nos produits alimentaires en mode bio 
d’ici 2020. 

Madame la présidente, à cet effet, mon ministère a pris les mesures suivantes - 

(i) 

l’introduction  du  Bio  Farming  Promotion  Scheme  en  mai  2016  pour 
encourager la production agricole en mode bio en offrant des facilités fiscales 
et  financières  en  termes  de  ‘tax  holiday’,  d’exemption  de  la  TVA  sur  les 
équipements et intrants agricoles et un taux d’intérêt de 3% sur les emprunts 
auprès  de  la  banque  MauBank.  22  demandes  ont  déjà  été  reçues  sous  ce 
programme; 

 

38 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

(v) 

(vi) 

(vii)  

(viii) 

(ix) 

la mise en place d’un ‘Compost Subsidy Scheme’ pour la distribution gratuite 
du  compost  aux  planteurs  afin  de  les  inciter  à  utiliser  plus  d’intrants 
organiques et moins d’intrants chimiques.  A ce jour, quelques 3,300 planteurs 
ont bénéficié de ce programme; 

l’introduction du Sheltered Farming Scheme pour la culture vivrière sous des 
structures  protégées  afin  d’atténuer  les  risques  liés  aux  changements  
climatiques et réduire à terme la dépendance sur les agrochimiques. Quelques 
68 planteurs ont jusqu’ici pris avantage de ce scheme; 

la  réservation  de  66  arpents  de  terre  à  Britannia  pour  l’usage  exclusif  des 
projets agricoles bio. 

l’élaboration d’un programme de formation en cinq modules par le FAREI sur 
le Mauri Gap Niveau 1 qui est la norme basique pour la culture bio.  A ce jour, 
quelques 250 planteurs ont déjà complété ce programme et 67 autres sont en 
train de le suivre actuellement; 

la  sensibilisation  et  la  formation  des  planteurs  sur  les  pratiques  de  «zero 
budget natural farming» développé en  Inde par  le Dr. Subhas Palekar. A ce 
jour, 3,000 planteurs ont participé à ce programme de formation; 

la mise en œuvre du projet « SMART Agriculture » en collaboration avec la 
Chambre  d’Agriculture  de  Maurice  en  vue  de  réduire  la  dépendance  sur  les 
agro-chimiques  dans  la  production  agricole.  Ce  projet,  implémenté  sur  une 
base pilote conjointement par la  Chambre d’Agriculture et le FAREI, vise à 
suivre, à travers l’île, dix petits et dix grands cultivateurs. 

la création d’un Agriculture Certification Body au sein de mon ministère pour 
la certification des fruits et légumes produits d’après les normes de Mauri Gap 
Niveau 1. 

la  mise  en  œuvre  d’un  projet  sous  le  Programme  d’Assistance  Technique 
financé par la FAO, intitulé « The Development of Organic and Institutional 
Capacity Building in Mauritius». Ce projet vise, Madame la présidente, entre 
autres,  à  l’élaboration  d’une  législation    sur  l’agriculture  organique  et  le 
développement d’une stratégie de marketing pour les produits organiques. 

 

(x) 

(xi) 

(xii) 

39 

la mise en place d’un comité technique pour l’élaboration des règlements sous 
la  Dangerous  Chemical  Control    Act  pour  mieux  contrôler  l’usage  des 
pesticides par les agriculteurs ainsi que les résidus des pesticides sur les fruits, 
les légumes et autres produits agricoles. Ces règlements seront prêts d’ici la 
fin de 2016. 

l’enlèvement  de  13  pesticides  de  la  liste  des  produits  par  le  Dangerous 
Chemicals  Control  Board  suite  à  des  recommandations  faîtes  par  mon 
ministère. 

la  préparation  des  législations  appropriées  avec  l’assistance  technique  de  la 
FAO pour l’introduction des normes pour les biofertilisants, les bio-pesticides 
et autres intrants bio afin d’assurer que des produits de bonne qualité soient 
mis en vente sur le  marché local. 

Madame  la  présidente,  le  site  à  Britannia  destiné  uniquement  à  la  culture  bio  sera 
bientôt  doté  de  toutes  les  infrastructures  nécessaires  afin  d’être  mis  à  la  disposition  des 
planteurs et une provision de R 20 millions est faite dans le Budget 2016-2017 à cet effet. Les 
planteurs sélectionnés seront encadrés par le FAREI et il y aura un contrôle et un suivi strict 
pour assurer que ces planteurs travaillent en conformité avec les normes établies. 

Madame la présidente, afin de dissuader les planteurs à utiliser les intrants chimiques 
et à les encourager à se tourner vers les produits bio, un levy de 15% sera introduit sur les 
pesticides, herbicides et mûrisseurs. Mon ministère travaille actuellement sur une autre liste 
des pesticides à être retirés du marché. 

Madame la présidente, le Food Technology Laboratory de mon ministère s’activera, à 
l’avenir, à analyser davantage d’échantillons pour la détection des résidus de pesticides dans 
les fruits et légumes. Une provision de R 25 million est faite dans le budget pour l’achat d’un 
nouvel appareil moderne qui aidera le FTL à mieux faire le travail. 

Madame la présidente, une vaste campagne de sensibilisation sera entreprise par mon 
ministère afin d’encourager les planteurs à adopter la culture bio et à prendre avantage des 
incitations offertes par le Bio Farming Promotion Scheme. Cette campagne sensibilisera aussi 
les consommateurs sur les bienfaits des produits bios. 

Madame la présidente, mon ministère opère actuellement 12 schemes qui offrent des 
facilités et des incitations aux planteurs en vue d’augmenter la production agricole. En 2015-
2016, 3881 planteurs ont ainsi bénéficié de ces schemes et la somme déboursée est d’environ 

 

40 

R 44 millions. Vu que les planteurs continuent à faire face à des défis et des contraintes, mon 
ministère  a  revu  quelques-uns  de  ces  schemes  afin  de  les  rendre  plus  attrayants  et  mieux 
répondre aux besoins des fermiers. 

Madame  la  présidente,  le  Sheltered  Farming  Scheme  qui  vise  à  encourager  les 
planteurs à adopter le système de culture protégée pour mitiger les effets des changements 
climatiques, augmenter la capacité de production et aussi améliorer la qualité des produits a 
été  revu,  et  le  grant  accordé  aux  planteurs  a  été  substantiellement  augmenté,  passant  de  R 
250,000 à R 400,000. Le scheme sera dorénavant étendu aux producteurs des fleurs et aux 
planteurs engagés dans la culture bio et l’hydroponique. 

Madame la présidente, la production des fruits, notamment les letchis, les mangues et 
les longanes a été sévèrement affectée l’année dernière à cause des chauves-souris. Le Fruit 
Protection Scheme qui finance l’achat des filets à hauteur de 75% pour un maximum de 10 
filets a été revu. Les filets importés, doivent dorénavant satisfaire les normes de qualité et les 
propriétaires de vergers auront droit à des filets pour couvrir 50% de leurs arbres fruitiers. Par 
contre, les personnes, qui ont des arbres fruitiers dans leur arrière-cour, pourront bénéficier 
du scheme pour couvrir la totalité des arbres. 

Madame la présidente, la culture de bananes est affectée par une maladie «La Freckle 
Disease », caractérisée par la noircissure de la peau. En dépit de plusieurs traitements à base 
chimique  préconisés  par  le  FAREI,  cette  maladie  a  persisté.  Le  FAREI  a  constaté  que  les 
fruits sont protégés de la maladie s’ils sont couverts par des sacs en plastique. Un Banana 
Bagging  Scheme  est  ainsi  introduit  dans  ce  budget  pour  subventionner,  à  hauteur  de  50%, 
l’achat de 450 sacs polythène par arpent. 

Pour  booster  la  production  des  fruits,  nous  avons  établi  un  calendrier  pour  2016  et 
2017.  Nous comptons produire 7500 provins de letchi, 800 de longane, 6000 de pitaya, 2800 
de  mangue.  Il  y  a  aussi  des  bananes  (24000),  fruits  à  pain  (3500),  passion  fruit  (200 
mensuellement),  des  anthuriums  (12500)  et  des  orchidées  (4600).  Tout  cela  est  fait  pour 
pouvoir augmenter la production locale, Madame la présidente.  

Le Freight Rebate Scheme, qui subventionne le coût du fret à hauteur de 25% pour 
l’exportation de certains produits à l’étranger, sera ouvert à d’autres produits comme prévu 
dans ce budget. 

Madame  la  présidente,  le  Technology  Introduction  and  Diffusion  Scheme  a  été 
réintroduit à travers le budget 2016-2017 pour offrir l’assistance technique dans des secteurs 

 

41 

spécifiques afin d’améliorer les systèmes de production agricole, et introduire de nouvelles 
activités et de nouvelles pratiques culturales. Le Purchase of Agricultural Equipment Scheme 
a aussi été revu pour couvrir une plus large gamme d’équipements agricoles afin de permettre 
aux fermiers de mécaniser leurs activités et ainsi faire face au manque de main-d’œuvre.   

Madame  la  présidente,  mon  ministère  met 

  beaucoup  d’importance  sur  le 
développement  de  l’agro-industrie  en  vue  d’encourager  les  planteurs,  les  jeunes  et  les 
femmes à s’engager dans la transformation des produits primaires pour y ajouter de la valeur 
et ainsi proposer des substituts aux produits importés. Le National SME Incubator Scheme 
avec une dotation de R 50 millions aidera les jeunes entrepreneurs à développer leur talent et 
leur  idées  en  vue  d’établir  leur  propre  entreprise.  Mon  ministère  donnera  tout  le  soutien 
nécessaire aux jeunes afin de les encourager à cultiver la terre et professionnaliser le secteur 
agricole.  

Avec  la  création  de  l’Agri-Business  Park  à  Highlands  sur  une  superficie  de  100 
arpents  a  aussi  pour  objectif  d’encourager  les  jeunes  à  s’embarquer  dans  la  production  de 
produits à forte valeur ajoutée. 

Mon ministère saisira cette opportunité pour développer des ‘clusters’ pour les agro-
processeurs pour divers produits.  Mon ministère travaillera en étroite collaboration avec le 
ministère du Business, des Entreprises et des Coopératives, pour mener à bien ce projet. 

Madame  la  présidente,  pour  rehausser  la  qualité  des  fruits  et  légumes,  il  faut 
promouvoir  la  qualité  des  semences.   Au  fait,  mon  ministère  a  l’ambition  de  transformer 
Maurice en un hub pour les semences. 

Nous avons ainsi signé un accord, le Reimbursable Technical Assistance Agreement 
avec  le  FIDA  pour,  entre  autres,  l’élaboration  des  règlements  sous  le  Seeds  Act,  le 
développement  d’une  politique  et  stratégie  nationale  pour  les  semences  et  la  création  du 
National Plant Varieties and Seeds Office. 

Madame  la  présidente,  la  biotechnologie  joue  un  rôle  prépondérant  dans  le 
développement  de  l’agriculture  et  il  est  donc  nécessaire  d’établir  un  institut  de  la 
biotechnologie  à  Maurice  si  nous  voulons  devenir  plus  compétitif  et  avoir  plus  d’accès  au 
marché international. 

A cet effet, mon ministère recrutera des consultants pour faire une étude de faisabilité 

sur l’éventuelle création d’un National Institute of Biotechnology. 

 

42 

Les mouches de fruits causent d’énormes pertes aux fruits et légumes.  Il est estimé 
que 30% de la production de cucurbites est affectée annuellement avec des pertes d’environ R 
160 millions. Ce problème persiste en dépit des diverses mesures introduites au fil des années 
pour éradiquer ces mouches. 

Mon ministère se propose de construire une nouvelle facilité pour la reproduction des 
mouches stériles qui seront éventuellement relâchées dans la nature en vue de stériliser à leur 
tour les mouches femelles.  

Cette facilité produira quelques 50 millions de mouches par semaine contre 2 millions 
actuellement. Le coût de ce projet est estimé à R 30 millions et les provisions nécessaires ont 
été faites dans le budget. 

La  production  de  miel  a  été  sévèrement  affectée  ces  derniers  temps  en  raison  de 

l’apparition d’une maladie en 2014 - le varroa. 

Pour  relancer  ce  secteur  prometteur  des  zones  pour  la  réserve  d’abeilles  seront 
établies  à  Bras  d’Eau,  Cap  Malheureux,  La  Ferme  et  le  Morne.  Quelques  10  000  arbres 
mellifères seront mis en terres dans ces zones d’ici la fin de 2016. 

Madame la présidente, le secteur de thé qui a été négligé depuis très longtemps a un 
regain  au  niveau  du  gouvernement.  La  demande  de  thé  sur  le  marché  local  est  de  1,500 
tonnes  annuellement  et  la  production  est  de  1,300  tonnes.  Le  manque  est  comblé  par 
l’importation. 

Mon ministère se propose de relancer cette industrie et 600 arpents de terre agricoles 
non-utilisées actuellement seront mises à la disposition des planteurs et des acteurs du secteur 
de thé. Les plantules sont en voie de préparation et seront distribuées aux planteurs avant la 
fin de l’année. 

Madame  la  présidente,  afin  de  permettre  aux  métayers  d’avoir  une  meilleure 
productivité, mon ministère, va introduire un « Fertilizer Subsidy Scheme » qui permettra de 
donner un support et d’aider à rehausser les champs de thé de ces métayers. 

Mon ministère a aussi lancé un appel d’offres pour l’achat d’équipements servant à 
une  meilleure  cueillette  des  feuilles  de  thé  et  pallier  au  manque  de  main-d’œuvre.  Ces 
équipements seront distribués gratuitement aux métayers.   

Madame la présidente, l’ancienne usine de thé à Dubreuil sera rouverte et donnera de 

l’emploi aux habitants de la région. 

 

43 

En ce qui concerne l’élevage,  Madame la présidente, la production du lait en 2016 
était  environ  4.5  millions  de  litres  et  celle  de  la  viande,  excluant  le  poulet,  était  de  1,300 
tonnes.  Cette  tendance  dans  la  production  sera  maintenue  en  2016.    Notre  objectif  est 
d’augmenter la production du lait et de la viande par 5% d’ici juin 2017. 

Mon  ministère  viendra  de  l’avant  avec  un  nouveau  scheme  pour  compenser  les 
éleveurs  qui  nourriront  leur  génisses  jusqu’au  stade  de  lactation.    Une  compensation  de  R 
5,000 par animal est prévue dans ce contexte et des dotations budgétaires sont inclues dans le 
nouveau budget qui a été présenté. 

Madame la présidente, des règlements ont été promulgués récemment pour interdire 
l’abattage des moutons, des cabris et du bétail dont le poids est inférieur aux normes requises.  
Cette mesure assurera le maintien de la production de la viande d’une façon durable. 

 Mon  ministère  exécutera  deux  projets  majeurs  à  Melrose  sur  une  superficie  de  40 

arpents pour donner une nouvelle impulsion au secteur de l’élevage.   

Le  premier  projet  concerne  la  création  d’une  zone  pour  bétail  qui  comprendra  dix 
unités pouvant accueillir dix bêtes chacune avec toutes les facilités requises dont une unité 
pour la production des fourrages.  Ces différentes unités seront allouées aux éleveurs après un 
exercice  d’expression  d’intérêt.    On  estime  qu’avec  ce  projet,  la  production  laitière 
augmentera par 200,000 litres annuellement. 

Le  second  projet  concerne  la  mise  en  place  d’une  ferme  pour  génisses  qui  seront 
élevées  jusqu’à  qu’elles  soient  pleines.    Les  génisses  pleines  seront  ensuite  vendues  aux 
éleveurs à un prix subventionné. Ce projet vise à atténuer les difficultés des éleveurs à trouver 
des génisses de bonne qualité pouvant s’adapter aux conditions locales. 

Madame la présidente, afin de permettre aux éleveurs de prendre mieux soin de leurs 
animaux et de leur prodiguer les premiers traitements en cas de maladie, 62 fermiers ont reçu 
une  formation  de  base  cette  année  en  premiers  soins  et  30  autres  suivent  actuellement  ce 
cours de formation. 

Ce  programme  est  financé  sous  le  projet  VET-GOV  pour  l’Union  Africaine  et  le 

Bureau Interafricain Pour les Ressources Animales.  

Mon  ministère  proposera  d’étendre  ce  programme  de  formation  afin  d’atteindre  un 

plus grand nombre d’éleveurs. 

 

44 

Madame la présidente, les éleveurs de porcs éprouvent beaucoup de difficultés pour 
rembourser  les  emprunts  pris  auprès  de  la  Banque  de  Développement  pour  relancer  leurs 
activités suite à la fièvre porcine il y a quelques années de cela. 

Je suis heureux que le ministre des Finances ait entendu leurs doléances et a décidé 
d’abolir  les  intérêts  ou  de  write  off    50%  du  montant  dû    et  j’espère  que  cette  mesure 
apportera beaucoup de soulagement aux personnes concernées. 

Néanmoins, les éleveurs de porcs n’arrivent toujours pas à écouler leurs produits dans 
les hôtels et les supermarchés en raison de la qualité inférieure de la viande, supposément, et 
l’absence de certification à l’abattoir central. 

Mon  ministère  retiendra  les  services  d’un  consultant  pour  offrir  les  conseils 

techniques nécessaires aux éleveurs en vue d’améliorer la qualité de la viande. 

De son côté, la Mauritius Meat Authority a lancé un appel d’offres en vue d’avoir la 

certification HACCP de la section porc à l’abattoir.  

Madame la présidente, le projet du nouvel abattoir à Belle Rive est en bonne voie et le 
contrat  sera  bientôt  alloué  à  une  firme  de  consultants  pour  rédiger  les  spécifications  et  les 
documents  d’appel  d’offres  pour  la  construction  de  l’abattoir.  Je  dois  ici,  Madame  la 
présidente, informer la Chambre de l’éruption d’une maladie grave à Rodrigues, la Foot and 
Mouth disease, qui affecte normalement le bétail, les cochons, les moutons et les cabris. Des 
animaux  suspectés  d’être  contaminés  par  cette  maladie  ont  été  exportés  vers  Maurice 
récemment. Les services vétérinaires de mon ministère suivent la situation de très près et des 
mesures appropriées seront prises dans l’intérêt national. 

Madame  la  présidente,  les  planteurs,  les  éleveurs  aujourd’hui  subissent  l’effet  du 
changement climatique. Ce sont eux qui nourrissent la population. Quand il y a de grosses 
pluies, des inondations ou la sécheresse, ce sont eux qui perdent leurs récoltes, donc leurs 
revenus. Jusqu’aujourd’hui il n’y a pas eu une couverture d’assurance adéquate pour voir les 
protégés dans des cas de catastrophe naturelle. Aujourd’hui on est venu proposer de mettre 
sur pied un fonds d’un plan d’assurance pour pouvoir couvrir les planteurs et les éleveurs. Le 
budget a mis en place R10 million pour pouvoir démarrer ce plan et j’espère que bientôt on 
arrivera à mettre sur pied un fonds de protection qui viendra justement protéger nos éleveurs 
et nos planteurs. 

Maintenant  je  voudrais,  Madame  la  présidente,  tourner  vers  l’autre  sous-secteur  de 
mon  ministère,  c’est-à-dire  nos  forêts  et  aussi  tout  ce  qui  concerne  notre  biodiversité.  La 

 

45 

protection de nos forêts et de notre biodiversité reste une priorité pour mon ministère. Ainsi, 
des nombreuses mesures ont été initiées pour maintenir et rehausser l’étendue de nos forêts et 
prévenir la perte de la biodiversité. Un programme pour la plantation d’arbres a été élaboré 
avec l’objectif de mettre en terre 500,000 arbres sur une période de cinq ans dans les forêts 
nouvellement identifiées. L’exercice a commencé cette année et quelques 45,000 arbres ont 
été  plantés  jusqu’ici.  Dans  le  cadre  de  cette  même  campagne  32,000  plantes  ont  été 
distribuées à diverses institutions et organisations à leur demande. 

Une nouvelle loi, La Native Terrestrial Biodiversity and National Parks Act adoptée 
l’année  dernière  a  été  proclamée.  Cette  loi  fait  provision  pour  une  meilleure  protection  de 
notre biodiversité. Les plans d’aménagement de nos deux parcs nationaux ont été élaborés et 
seront mis en application bientôt.  La stratégie pour l’expansion des zones protégées  a été 
finalisée  et  inclura  des  corridors  pour  la  biodiversité  pour  une  meilleure  protection  de  nos 
écosystèmes et de nos habitats. 

Madame  la  présidente,  le  contrôle    de  la  population  des  chauves-souris  reste  un 
énorme défi en raison des dégâts causés aux fruits et aussi aux espèces endémiques.  L’IUCN 
a  délégué  un  expert  à  Maurice  pour  nous  conseiller  sur  la  méthodologie  appropriée  pour 
compter  le  nombre  de  chauves-souris.    Le  comptage  se  fera  en  octobre  prochain  et  mon 
ministère décidera des mesures à prendre à la lumière des résultats de cet exercice. 

Madame  la  présidente,  le  jardin  botanique  de  Pamplemoussses  est  en  train  d’être 
réaménagé  et  deviendra  bientôt  un  centre  d’attraction  touristique  majeur  dans  le  pays.  Les 
nénuphars géants ont poussé en abondance après avoir été sévèrement menacés de disparition 
vers la fin de 2014.  Le Château Mon Plaisir est en rénovation.  Le SSRBG Trust a retenu les 
services d’un botaniste français de renom, M. Gilles Clément, pour faire un constat de l’état 
du jardin et proposer des mesures pour son ‘lifting’.  Les recommandations de M. Clément 
sont mises en œuvre par le Trust actuellement. 

Madame la présidente, avant de terminer je voudrais saluer le courage du ministre des 
Finances pour avoir relancé le débat sur notre système de pension.  Tout le monde le dit tout 
bas que le système actuel n’est plus soutenable et il faut le revoir mais par manque d’audace 
on dit tout haut qu’on ne peut toucher au système actuel. Si on est responsable il faut que, 
tous ensemble, on se met d’accord pour trouver une solution durable. Plus question de faire 
du  cheap  politics  sur  un  sujet  aussi  important  que  la  pension.  Pour  conclure,  Madame  la 

 

46 

présidente, je dirais c’est un budget PRAVIND -  il y a Prudence, Rigueur, Action, Vision, 
Innovant, Noble, Discipline. 

Merci beaucoup, Madame la présidente.  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

(3.26 p.m.) 

Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière):  Thank  you, 
Madam  Speaker.  I  am  deeply  honoured  and  privileged  to  intervene  this  afternoon  on  the 
Budget  presented  by  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  in  this 
Assembly last Friday. Honoured and privileged, Madam Speaker, because my first speech as 
a freshly elected member of this House was back in August 1983 and it was precisely on the 
Budget when I made my first speech in Parliament. Quite some vivid memories come to my 
mind and I cannot refrain from the recollection of a few of the major events since then. My 
presence in this House  continuously since 1983 would not have been possible without the 
trust  and  the  unflinching  support  of  women  and  men  from  my  constituency  and  I  wish 
wholeheartedly to thank them for this long lasting partnership.  

Madam  Speaker,  by  far  and  very  far  indeed,  everybody  now  agrees  that  the  prime 
concern  of  the  moment  is  the  prevailing  economic  situation  in  our  country  and  its  social 
impact on the population especially on the lower and middle income groups. But, despite the 
need for intensive care patient Mauritius has not clearly been receiving the appropriate care 
and medication since the sitting Government has assumed office. Had it been a real medical 
case, most probably the Medical Council would have initiated an enquiry for alleged medical 
negligence.  This  remark,  Madam  Speaker,  is  not  meant  to  hurt  anybody  or  to  make  you 
laugh.  Ce  n’est  pas  de  gaieté  de  cœur  que  je  vous  le  dis,  rassurez-vous.  It  is  just  the  gut 
feeling I get when  I visit families in my constituency and around the island. When I meet 
people from all walks of life, in the streets and stores and when I discuss with the economic 
operators from almost every sector of the economy.  

Things have been getting worse for low and middle income families, for young job 
seekers and contractors and in spite of the fact that inflation remains low, people are finding 
it more and more difficult to cope with the cost of living and have had to drastically change 
their consumption trends. Economy, Madam Speaker, is unfortunately not just about figures 

 

47 

and percentages. It is foremost about lives of men and women, about hope and despair for 
families, smiles on faces or sorrow at work places and homes.  

But, while that patient Mauritius, Madam Speaker, was expecting quick recovery, the 
more so a miracle économique, everybody agrees that since 2015 patient Mauritius has not 
been very lucky in the hands of its first doctor post general elections. One and a half year 
gone, un crime contre l’économie nationale.  

Madam Speaker, we all remember here, in the National Assembly, the golden dreams 
du miracle économique in terms of growth rates, employment creation and all sort of smarties 
that were sold by hon. Lutchmeenaraidoo. Everybody in Government fell under the spell of 
the so-called magician who later admitted that he did not believe in figures, but in building 
love bridges. He took the whole nation for a pitiful ride and was more interested in his gold 
placements financed by Euro loans. 

Madam Speaker, let me put it bluntly. While ailing patient Mauritius was expecting to 
have a dedicated doctor at its bedside, it had a mortuary assistant who had already an eye the 
patient’s  gold  watch.  The  incumbent  was  forced  to  vacate  his  office,  completely  smeared 
with  tar  and  gold  flakes.  Before  leaving  the  financial  scene  dans  la  honte,  the  so-called 
magician took out a note from his chapeau de paille: The economy required a hard-working 
full-time Minister of Finance and his state of health then - as said by him - was not allowing 
him to deliver as the nation could have expected, and so he needed to quit. He did not say that 
he was forced to go. 

In the prevailing financial circumstances, patient Mauritius did expect that a  Lepep 
Government would assure its fiscal responsibility and act accordingly. But patient Mauritius 
was  thoroughly  deceived.  Game  was  over  for  the  so-called  magician.  The  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister,  who  is  normally  heavily  burdened  by  his  own  responsibilities  at  the  Prime 
Minister’s Office, also took this Office to restore some confidence. Deprived of a full-time 
Minister, the economy was put into a quasi-automatic mode since, save the few initiatives by 
high-ranking officials of the Ministry and the Rt. hon. Prime Minister. 

Due to drastic cuts in public expenditure, lack of skills and leadership at the Ministry 
of  Finance,  slowing  the  take-off  of  projects  admittedly,  many  of  which  were  just  illusions 
staged  by  the  so-called  magician  and  the  dull  performance  of  some  Ministers,  patient 
Mauritius was deprived of appropriate care and due diligence. 

 

48 

This sluggish state of affairs has been impacting on the morale of the population, and 
there was a growing feeling of dissatisfaction in the country. The electorate felt somewhat 
betrayed by the Government Lepep. One, among the load of recriminations, the scandalous 
practices here raised by numerous PQs brought to light by us, Members of Parliament from 
both  sides  of  the  House,  on  the  appointments  and  also  the  expenditures  like  voyages 
ministériels and the appointment of some advisers who had police cases. 

Furthermore, the bal kuler episode as well as other suspicious transactions give a clear 
indication  that  an  atmosphere  of  sleaze  and  corruption  was  still  around,  and  certains 
nettoyeurs étaient en fait des salisseurs. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, patient Mauritius has a new doctor, our Minister of Finance, 
hon. Pravind Jugnauth. The new doctor has been called upon to help the ailing patient. And 
what  is  the  very  first  thing  that  he  has  done?  Scrap  the  previous  prescription.  Déchire 
l’ordonnance and give us a new ordonnance. This is the rupture. 

One  may  be  tempted,  in  the  present  circumstances,  to  say,  ‘Enfin,  un  ministre  des 
Finances à plein temps. Cela déjà, Madam Speaker, en soi, est un facteur déterminant.  Fort 
heureusement, il ne s’agit pas de cela uniquement. 

As a first opening remark on the first Budget Speech of the hon. Minister of Finance, I 
would say that, while keeping in mind the morose backdrop and the short term deadline for le 
bouclage of the Budget, the Minister has managed to give some breathing space through the 
introduction  of  some  positive  measures,  especially  with  regard  to  the  introduction  of 
innovative  poverty  eradication  programmes.  Some  other  measures,  namely  the  decrease  in 
the selling price of household gas, long overdue perhaps, have had a very ephemeral effect, 
mainly because of major price increases concerning alcoholic drinks and tobacco. I am sure 
my colleagues from both sides of the House will express their views on this very sensitive 
issue,  particularly  with  regard  to  the  full  and  comprehensive  implementation  of  the  World 
Health Organisation Framework Convention on Tobacco Control. 

Several  measures  schemed  to  boost  the  SME  sector,  thus  providing  additional 
employment opportunities, are on the drawing board, but the biggest hurdle, Madam Speaker, 
remains poor project management, resulting in long delays. 

The merging of related parastatal organisations is a nice move, provided it is carefully 
planned and fully endorsed by the employees actually in post. We all know three rotten fishes 
put  together  do  not  render  them  edible.  We  all  know  the  reputation  of  many  of  these 

 

49 

parastatal bodies, especially the Chairpersons who have been appointed and some driving big, 
big limousines, BMW 7 or Mercedes.  I find it difficult for them, at least, to get rid of all 
these limousines. 

Going through the 56 pages of the Budget Speech a few times, Madam Speaker, while 
preparing my intervention, and having read so many such speeches previously, it is clear to 
my mind that the Minister wanted to achieve two main objectives – 

(i) 

(ii) 

demonstrate that he is fully aware of the current socioeconomic temperature in 
the country, and 
announcing as many measures as possible for the different sectors in an effort 
to change the perception regarding overall Government performance. 

Madam Speaker, le plus dur reste à faire : en clair, relancer la croissance économique. 

Since several Members from both sides of the House are taking part in the debates, I 

will restrain myself to comment specifically on two issues – 

public infrastructure, and 
environment. 

(i) 
(ii) 
Madam Speaker, before  that,  I would like to invite my hon. Colleagues,  as well as 
opinion leaders outside the House, to reflect more particularly on the final overall allocation 
of resources and revenue collection to ensure the sustainable development of our country. I 
strongly feel, Madam Speaker, that we cannot continue year after year to provide incremental 
increases  to  all  Ministries  and  Departments  without  periodic  strategy  review  in  view  to 
enhance  ultimate  budget  allocation.  Resources  are  precious,  and  the  guiding  principles  of 
sustainable development compel us to think smarter. 

Let  me  now  come  to  the  Ministry  of  Public  Infrastructure,  Madam  Speaker.  The 
current state of the M1 Highway is in itself a clear proof of an underperforming Ministry. Not 
only it is simply foolish to postpone these urgent remedial works as it will be more expensive 
later on, but most importantly they constitute a real security risk to drivers. If we go along 
M1  from  the  airport  down  to  the  North,  we  will  see,  not  only  on  the  motorway,  but  also 
inside, the state of the road, which is degrading day by  day,  especially  with this very bad 
weather.  It also, Madam Speaker, constitutes a real security risk to the drivers. 

This Budget of the Ministry of Public Infrastructure is providing almost an additional 
billion  rupees  to  public  infrastructure,  and  hopefully  resurfacing  works  can  start  in  a  very 
near  future.  The  Road  Decongestion  Programme  was  stuck  in  the  budget  jam  for  a  whole 

 

50 

year, and now we understand that a fresh feasibility study is to be carried out following the 
decision to shift from the Metro Leger to Express Mode. Madam Speaker, this project was 
shelved, according to us, without proper evaluation, and it could have been started earlier. 

The Ministry of Public  Infrastructure has also been  dans l’oeil du cyclone with the 
unearthing  of  large-scale  malpractices  at  the  National  Transport  Authority  (NTA)  and  the 
Road Development Authority (RDA), and we do hope to see the conclusions of the enquiry 
very soon. And if we go to records, we will see that, at the head of the RDA, still there is 
nobody appointed full-time as Chief Executive. 

Madam Speaker, another issue falling under the responsibility of Ministry of Public 
Infrastructure  is  road  safety,  les  accidents  de  la  route.  L’année  2016  a  démarré  sous  de 
mauvais  augure :  80  victimes  d’accidents  de  la  route,  dont  plusieurs  cas  de  Hit  and  Run 
depuis le 01 janvier. 139 victimes en 2015, dont 9 cas de Hit and Run. Les motocyclistes et 
les piétons demeurent les plus vulnérables. The  fatality  rate tourne autour de 11.2%, sans 
compter les dizaines de blessés dont certains ayant subi des traumatismes irréversibles. 

Madam  Speaker,  we  cannot  say  that  the  Ministry  has  not  done  anything,  but  the 
outcome is yet to be seen and, in the meantime, the death toll continues to rise day by day. In 
terms  of  key  actions,  the  Ministry  plans  to  set  up  a  National  Road  Safety  Observatory  by 
December this year, whereas road hazards have already been identified and remedial works 
have to start. 

Admittedly,  Madam  Speaker,  reversing  the  trend  of  road  accidents  is  a  long-  term 
project that requires a cross sectoral approach.  Campaigns advocating increased caution from 
all road users are necessary, but not enough to reverse the trend.  The Ministry is well aware 
of the fact that the level of service of our highways and major roads is largely inadequate at 
peak hours.  This has a serious impact on the behaviour of drivers. 

L’insécurité routière est, et demeure un sérieux problème à Maurice et cela depuis de 
nombreuses années. In the Budget, sums have been provided for the upgrading of the lighting 
network on the motorway.  Madam Speaker, hon. Members on both sides of the House have 
been  querying  the  hon.  Minister,  week  after  week,  to  have  the  lamps  repaired  on  the 
motorway.  According to me, too much time is being wasted.  Now, we have been told that 
there is a committee at the Ministry of Energy and Public Utilities, but what about road users 
and their safety. I think immediate actions should be taken; actions within the least possible 
time should be taken as it was mentioned that the CEB would be responsible for the road 

 

51 

lighting.  I have been in the Local Government for so many years, and my friend also. I think 
this is a very bad decision to give to the CEB the responsibility for the maintenance of the 
road network lighting on the motorway.  They can give a technical advice. If the budgets of 
the Local Authorities are beefed up and they are given equipment, I think the centralisation is 
one of the prospects to have results.  

La décision de l’Alliance Lepep de faire de la révision du mode opératoire des radars 
une promesse  électorale a envoyé un très mauvais signal de départ.  En dépit de quelques 
initiatives des autorités, dont la recherche de l’expertise réunionnaise, et une ième campagne 
de sensibilisation annoncée et qui finissent toutes par se ressembler, aucun progrès notable 
n’a été constaté sur nos routes.  

  I think we have sufficient know-how in Mauritius. We don’t need to have recourse 
to somebody from Reunion Island as expert to come and teach us on how we have to go with 
regard to road safety.   There they drive cars on the left side while our mode of driving is 
different here.    This gentleman, apart from being paid too much money, I think he is more 
on holidays here than giving results; apart from press interviews, day by day accidents are 
being  increased.    The  other  day  I  was  talking  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development  and  I  said  that  he  should  have  had  put  an  item  to  have  a  Maha  Yaj  for  the 
Minister of Public Infrastructure to prevent more accidents… 

(Interruptions) 

Our colleague, I am sure will recall the time when we were saying that there was Yamraj here 
in  Parliament;  we  were  having  so  many  accidents,  bus  accidents  and  so  on.    Yamraj,  you 
know what that means ! 

(Interruptions) 

Madame  la  présidente,  c’est  vrai  que  la  sécurité  routière  requiert  une  approche 
pluridimensionnelle  et  des  mesures  ad  hoc  ne  produiront  pas  les  résultats  escomptés.  Le 
constat est accablant en ce qu’il s’agit des résultats. C’est probant.  Il n’y a pas un jour sans 
qu’on  constate  à  travers  la  radio  ou  la  presse  qu’il  y  a  eu  un  accident  mortel.  Il  y  a  la 
responsabilité des automobilistes mais il y a aussi la qualité de gouvernance et le degré de 
civisme qui prévaut dans un pays tel que l’île Maurice. 

Madam Speaker, nous avons des institutions déphasées et opaques. Madam Speaker, 
comment  et  qui  obtiennent  des  permis  d’auto-école ?  Sometimes  we  ask  ourselves  these 
questions and more, Madam Speaker.  We think that these permits have been given through 

 

52 

political interventions over the years in all Government.  I think there must be a stop to that.  
I  hope  the  hon.  Minister  will  be  working  on  that;  the  giving  of  permits  for  auto-écoles  to 
political agents should be stopped and be given to professionals.  

Madam Speaker, this question of road safety a un enjeu modial.  Even at the General 
Assembly of the United Nations, that issue was raised et le 02 mars a même été proclamé  la 
décennie  2011-2020  ‘Décennies  d’action  pour  la  sécurité  routière’.    There  are  several 
initiatives which have been proposed by the United Nations to all the members with regard to 
that aspect.  

With  regard  to  the  United  Nations,  Madam  Speaker,  la  Décennie  d’action  pour  la 
sécurité routière 2011-2020 a pour but de permettre d’atteindre l’objectif de sauver 5 millions 
de  vies  et  il  a  été  recommandé  à  l’assemblée  générale  d’inviter  les  Etats  membres,  entre 
autres, à - 

• 
• 

• 
• 

• 
• 

• 

aborder la question de la sécurité routière d’une façon globale ; 
améliorer l’application de la législation existante et à intensifier les actions de 
sensibilisation en vue de réduire le nombre de blessés et de morts ; 
améliorer la qualité des données sur la sécurité routière ; 
améliorer  les  soins  pré-hospitaliers  et  les  soins  de  traumatologie  et  de 
rééducation ; 
améliorer les infrastructures ; 
mobiliser  les  appuis  politiques  et  financiers  nécessaires  à  la  réalisation  des 
objectifs, et 
observer  la  journée  mondiale  du  souvenir  des  victimes  des  accidents  de  la 
route chaque année le troisième dimanche de novembre. 

Madam Speaker, we are not far from November and I am sure the Ministry is working 
on that to have this journée mondiale du souvenir des victimes des accidents de la route.  We 
still remember this very tragic accident at Sorèze. 

Madam Speaker, there have been several proposals.  I think the Minister should act 
urgently – the Minister has started to act but, according to us, he is not going so fast. There 
need to be action.  We have been told since months that legislation will be brought to toughen 
the penalties. 

  According to me, these ordinary penalties will not be sufficient. Madam Speaker,  I think 
that somebody who has  been found drunk  and involved in a car  accident, should have his 

 

53 

permit suspended for life and even a sentence of imprisonment because the  lives of people 
are at stake.   

Madam Speaker, I now come to the Ministry of Environment.  While we are trying to 
figure out how smart our Smart Cities will be in the future, we are neglecting the single most 
important natural asset and this may compromise the future of our tourism industry as well as 
the  quality  of  life  of  our  citizens.    Unfortunately,  Madam  Speaker,  since  the  tristement 
célèbre  épisode  de  ‘bal  couleur’,  the  Ministry  of  Environment’s  credibility  has  been  –  I 
would  say  –  gone  to  the  air.      I  have  been  Minister  of  Environment,  and  there  are  other 
colleagues too who have been Minister of Environment.  In fact, the Ministry of Environment 
is one of the most important Ministries in a Government.  

Now,  we  call  it  Ministry  of  Environment  and  Sustainable  Development.  It  is  a 
Ministry which has un rayonnement mondial. But, unfortunately, what has happened with the 
episode of bal kuler is a disgrace, not only for Mauritius, it’s a disgrace on Mauritius. And 
since then, the Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development has been entrusted to a 
part  time  Minister.  His  handling  of  the  Benita  wreck  and  the  minor  oil  spill  was  most 
inappropriate. We just hope – I am sure Government has the person in mind, to have a full 
Minister of Environment and Sustainable Development, who must be in office very soon. 

(Interruptions) 

And my plea is that things must change for the better. 

(Interruptions) 

So, we must have the right person, a dedicated person and a honest person.  Honest, because 
it is one of the main, I would say, criteria, I am sure the Rt. hon. Prime Minister will use, 
following what has happened, the episode of bal kuler; it is honesty, and this criterion… 

Right person in the right place! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, taking a closer look at the Budget proposals, one cannot conclude 

that le budget a fait une priorité nationale du Ministère de l’Environnement. Au contraire! 

The  proposals  regarding  our  COP  21  commitments  are  rather  sketchy  and  no 

reference is made to the ongoing Environment Investment Programmes. 

 

54 

It  is  proposed  that  some  Rs110  m.  will  be  allocated  to  address  the  issue  of  beach 
erosion  and  carry  out  coastal  rehabilitation  works,  and  Rs22  m.  will  be  allocated  to  the 
National Emergency Operations. Here, I have to put on record the SMF work which is being 
performed by the Head of the SMF who is overseeing this National Emergency Operations. 

The Land Drainage Authority is again on the agenda but no details are provided with 
regard to its effective implementation. Madam Speaker, I think Government should not wait 
for another flash flood to act. The creation of this Land Drainage Authority is of paramount 
importance  and  of  utmost  urgency  to  give  this  Authority  les  moyens  pour  mettre  en 
operation, and then to thrash out this long outstanding problem of drains.  Work has started 
through several Governments. 

Unsorted landfilling of  waste remains a real time bomb for environment. Mauritius 
cannot continue with this unsustainable costly practice. While the Ministry of Public Utilities 
is requesting for Expression of Interest for waste to energy projects, no mention is made in 
the Budget. The population would not be prepared to accept any incinerator project anywhere 
if there is a lack of transparency in the selection process. Already, Madam Speaker, there is 
some  kind  of  conflict  of  interest  as  the  Ministry  is,  at  the  same  time,  the  regulator  of 
environmental standards and a service provider in the Waste Management Sector and this has 
been criticised by the World Bank. 

Madam Speaker, there is no need to spend Rs110 m. in coastal protection works if our 
lagoonal  water  quality  is  not  being  properly  monitored.  Our  lagoonal  water  quality  is  not 
being  properly  monitored.  Up  to  now,  we  have  the  Lower  Plaines  Wilhems  Sewerage 
Network. The extension to Flic-en-Flac area, all western area is long overdue. If you ask me 
the  quality  of  water  at  the  Flic-en-Flac  beach,  it  laisse  à  désirer  and  I  hope  the  Ministry 
responsible, even the Ministry of Fisheries has the necessary laboratory to check regularly the 
quality of water at the lagoon of Flic-en-Flac and the nearby region because this is un endroit 
très fréquenté. 

Madam Speaker, sustainable environment is no more an option. It is now imperative 
to act especially and we see how climate change is turning the atmosphere into a dangerous 
weapon. The earlier we realise it, the better for humanity. 

Madam Speaker, I’ll come to two minor comments concerning Constituency No. 20 - 
the problem of drugs. The problem of drugs in our constituency is very, very alarming. The 
Rt. hon. Prime Minister stated rightly the other day the responsibility of parents. The parents 

 

55 

have their responsibility. Et nous sommes très, très tracassés du problème de la drogue dans 
certaines  régions  de  notre  circonscription  et  il  y  a  urgence.  C’est  vrai  qu’il  y  a  une 
Commission  d’enquête,  c’est  vrai  qu’il  y  a  des  initiatives  des  ONG,  but  there  is  need  for 
concerted  action:  the  State,  the  ONG,  the  Local  Authorities,  MPs  of  the  region,  oui.  I  am 
talking of myself and my colleague. We have been active in the constituency for many, many 
years. Now, we have new MPs. I hope that certain would have had the opportunity –  you 
have a Minister of Health and Quality – you can have the opportunity to walk more often, 
within the regions of the housing estates, more, more often and see and hear what people are 
saying,  what  the  ONG  are  saying.  You  cannot  just  say  that  you  are  satisfied  because  the 
problems are there and if you don’t act, we shall be blamed by the generations to come. I 
wanted just to draw the alarm bell, myself and my colleague, hon. Quirin, on this side of the 
House; we are MPs of the constituency. We are not making it a political issue. The problem 
is  there.  Everybody  in  the  constituency,  in  the  region,  is  traumatised,  unless  there  is  no 
concerted  and  national  effort,  I  am  sure  in  other  regions  as  well.  I  sincerely  hope  that  the 
Commission of Enquiry will come with concrete suggestions and ultimately we’ll be here. If 
there is any report, we’ll have to debate and change legislation, if need be, I am sure. 

Madam  Speaker,  there  is  another  question  concerning  another  region,  Albion.  The 
region of Albion has been traumatised for years. We have had this Covanta Project and then 
we  have  the  CT  Power  Project.  We  have  witnessed,  nous  avons  vécu  le  traumatisme  des 
habitants, des gens qui ont investi sur les terrains, qui ont construit des maisons, qui ont vécu 
avec ces projets qui ont été annoncés finalement, qui ont créé beaucoup de problèmes. 

Madam Speaker, we have told at page 8 of the Budget, paragraph 59 – 

“Firstly, an international private consortium is setting up a modular near shore mobile 
oil  refinery  and  onshore  storage  facilities  at  Albion.    Besides  its  impact  on 
employment  and  growth,  the  project  can  make  of  Mauritius  the  first  source  of  low 
sulphur bunker fuel (LS380) in the Indian Ocean region.” 

The intention is there in the Budget. 

At page 26, paragraph 191 of the Budget, I see – 

“And a new petroleum port will be developed at Albion.” 

I think, Madam Speaker, without being against development because without development, 
there is no progress. But I think, with past experience, we have to hear the views of all the 
inhabitants of the region. We have witnessed what has happened near this boat in the South. 

 

56 

And Albion, c’est une région difficile. L’accès sur la mer est très difficile ; il y a des falaises. 
J’espère que le ministre du Commerce qui est responsable de ce projet va tout faire qu’il y 
ait une concertation, et là, je vois déjà des écologistes qui sont contre une raffinerie à Albion. 
Ils disent - 

« Une raffinerie de pétrole serait une catastrophe pour la santé des habitants et pour 
l’environnement. » 

Madam  Speaker,  I  think  there  are  ways  and  means  for  the  Minister  responsible  to 
discuss with the people of the region, ask for EIAs before going - I would say - blindly into 
that project. We have seen certain governments which have gone blindly into projects and 
ultimately we have seen this case of CT Power in Court and I don’t know how much money 
will be spent as compensation if ever there will be compensation to be paid. 

Madam Speaker, one last item concerning the CEB for the planters. There has been an 
increase for the planters. I am very happy with this decision. I, myself, have raised the issue 
for the bagasse transfer price. The issue had been raised by me and the Minister, at least, has 
made  the  follow-up  and  planters  have  been  given  the  increase.  I  hope  that  any  further 
increase will not be taken into the pension fund; this is what they have been told from the 
SIFB Fund and so on. I think the Minister must urgently reassure the planters concerning the 
decision of Government, which I am sure he will do, because in my own Constituency we 
have received queries from the planters even though it is a good decision. I think the money 
must  come  from  the  CEB.  The  CEB  has  made  billions  of  profits  and  the  payment  to  the 
planters must come from the CEB Fund.  

Again, while I am talking on the CEB, Madam Speaker, before concluding, I was very 
sad to hear on the radio that the CEB has suspended two senior officials. Zot péché is that 
they  have  supposedly  given  information  to  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition.  Madam 
Speaker,  I,  myself,  am  an  ex-employee  of  the  CEB.  I  have  worked  for  17  years  in  that 
organisation which is a very important one. These people are professionals. We cannot just 
do an enquiry that they have given information to the hon. Leader of the Opposition.  

We don’t have this fiscal responsibility; we don’t have Freedom of Information Act; 
so how can we faire dominer like this? So, I am appealing to the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister to, 
at least - this morning we have raised a very important issue which we raised some time back, 
the Prime Minister has taken a very bold decision and it has come from the Opposition. So, 

 

57 

why suspend professionals working at the CEB? Zot seul  péché c’est donne l’information au 
Leader de l’opposition. I think it is a shame if we come to such decisions! 

And this information has saved the country millions of rupees! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, before leaving the floor, let me remind my hon. colleagues that we 
are fully aware that external factors are bound to affect the growth of our tight economy. The 
patient Mauritius is pressing for  results. This patience is nearly  exhausted. The population 
wants to see jobs, opportunities and renewed growth. Taxpayers wish that Government walks 
the talk with regard to good governance and public accountability. Palliative care and playing 
for time tactics will serve no useful purpose.  

The hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development is hoping to transform the 
economic landscape into a new era of development with his Budget proposals. As patriots, 
Madam  Speaker,  we  are  born  here.  Nous  vivons  ici  and  we  wish  he  could  succeed  in  his 
Budget.  The  country  deserves  that  this  Budget  succeeds  but,  the  Government  has  to  be 
serious. The Ministers responsible for the follow-up of the decisions of the Budget must be 
serious.  

They  must not be pigeons voyageurs just travelling  and then sometimes not  giving 
figures to the Parliament. Madam Speaker, the real proof of the pudding is in the eating. The 
biggest deficit for Government remains, however, the huge gap between what is being said 
and what actually is being done and seen to be done. Madam Speaker, we shall be here next 
year analysing the results and what we have done with the first part of my speech concerning 
the magician; we shall be here next year analysing the results prescribed by the new Doctor, 
hon. Pravind Jugnauth. 

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

(7.05 p.m.) 

Mr  P.  Jhugroo  (Second  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien):  Merci, 
Madame  la  president.  C’est  un  immense  plaisir  pour  moi  de  m’adresser  à  cette  auguste 
Assemblée pour la douzième fois concernant les débats budgétaires et surtout le quatrième 
budget du ministre des Finances, l’honorable Pravind Jugnauth.  

 

58 

Tout d’abord après avoir écouté mon très bon ami je peux lui dire : patient Mauritius 

is telling the MMM, I am pleased to be patient because we have 40 months to go. 

(Interruptions) 

And  I  would  like  to  tell  my  hon.  friend  that,  with  regard  to  the  refinery  at  Albion,  the 
promoters  will  have  to  follow  all  procedures  including  EIA  certificate  and  due  diligence 
exercises will be carried out before any implementation of the project. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, let me, first of all, through the Rt. hon. Prime Minister who has a proven 
leadership,  congratulate  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  for  this 
bold, imaginative and innovative Budget which has undoubtedly created a feel good factor in 
the country which shows that this Budget has been widely accepted by the population. 

By introducing momentous measures such as making Mauritius a duty free paradise, 
the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development is bringing the country into a new 
era of development whereas with the social measures provided in the Budget, he also shows 
that he really cares for the welfare of the downtrodden and the population at large. 

Here, Madam Speaker, I would like to remind this House how the hon. Minister of 
Finance  and  Economic  Development  est  un  homme  du  terrain,  that  he  has  listened  to 
everybody, il est personnellement descendu dans les poches de pauvreté à travers l’ile. He 
has met as many people from the various poles of the economy, les jeunes, les sportifs, les 
NGOs,  les  petits  éleveurs,  les  agriculteurs,  les  travailleurs  sociaux  et  la  liste  est  encore 
longue, Madame la présidente. He has, thus, come with concrete measures to alleviate the 
burden of the most vulnerable group of our population with a social Budget. He has spared no 
effort  to  respond  to  the  comments  and  proposals  of  his  people  and  that  is  why,  I  repeat 
myself, this is a Budget for the people, with the people. 

We are l’Alliance Lepep, Madam Speaker; l’Alliance pour le peuple and we hear what 
is  being  said  outside  the  House.  Nous  n’avons  qu’à  lire  les  commentaires  des  internautes, 
qu’à écouter nos mandants et entendre les intervenants sur les ondes des radios privées et sur 
la place publique pour comprendre que, dans son ensemble, ce budget a été très bien accepté 
par la population en général. Du jamais vu, Madame la présidente! 

Il est clair, Madame la présidente, que notre honorable Opposition est à contretemps 
des aspirations de Lepep moris et l’honorable Leader de l’opposition a raison lorsqu’il avoue 

 

59 

que ce budget contient des mesures intéressantes mais j’ai de la peine à comprendre comment 
un  budget  qui,  dit-il,  contient  des  mesures  intéressantes,  ne  répond  pas  aux  aspirations  du 
peuple. Mais probablement il va peut-être nous  apprendre pour qui donc ces mesures sont 
intéressantes. 

Par  ailleurs,  Madame  la  présidente,  j’ai  écouté  avec  attention  le  discours  de 
l’honorable Ramful, malheureusement il est absent aujourd’hui parce qu’il est pris ailleurs et 
il n’a pas à cœur sa responsabilité en tant qu’élu de la circonscription numero 12. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No, hon. Jhugroo, I don’t think you should say this! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Moi-même,  depuis  que  je  suis  élu,  cela  fait  plus  de  dix  ans,  je  suis 
toujours  présent  à  l’Assemblée  nationale.  Je  crois  que  chaque  député  doit  assumer  sa 
responsabilité.  On est payé avec de l’argent public. 

Même le Premier ministre est là depuis son élection! 

(Interruptions) 

J’ai été déçu du contenu du discours de mon jeune collègue, qui provient, peut-être 
d’une méconnaissance de l’histoire récente et les frasques de son Leader, qu’il adore toujours 
au  lieu  de  lui  dire  ‘leve  paké  aller.’  Il  n’y  a  pas  de  comparaison  possible  entre  la  culture 
travailliste et la nôtre que ce soit sur la gestion du pays, sur notre philosophie politique ou 
notre  sens  du  leadership.  Notre  culture,  c’est  de  construire  un  pays  pour  les  générations 
futures  avec  le  sérieux  et  le  travail.  La  culture  du  Parti  Travailliste,  c’est  une  culture  de 
dilapidation  des  biens  du  pays.  Khalé  pilé,  tousse  sali,  amène  copine  dans  campement  ek 
majja karo. C’est ça la culture du Parti Travailliste. 

L’honorable Ramful ne comprend pas la philosophie du Nine-Year Schooling et je le 
comprends,  parce  qu’il  ne  faut  pas  oublier  que  durant  la  période  2000  à  2005  -  avec 
l’Alliance  MSM/MMM  au  pouvoir  -  afin  d’alléger  le  fardeau  de  nos  enfants,  on  avait 
construit  40  écoles  secondaires  pour  que  nos  enfants  puissent  avoir  un  développement 
harmonieux. Le Parti Travailliste - son parti - a réintroduit le rat-race en les écrasant avec 
une formule qui vole l’enfance de nos petits Mauriciens. 

 

60 

Deuxième chose, Madame la présidente, je voudrais lui rappeler la faillite de certaines 
institutions  avec  la  gestion  désastreuse  de  certains  nominés  politiques  qui  ont  vu  des 
compagnies tel qu’Air Mauritius avec son hedging calamiteux.  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah, I don’t think your comments are warranted! 

Mr Jhugroo: Des casinos déficitaires et la STC qui ont, de tout temps, coûté très cher 
à la population. L’honorable Ramful - malheureusement, il n’est pas là - sera très heureux de 
savoir  que  depuis  la  prise  de  pouvoir  de  notre gouvernement,  l’Alliance  Lepep,  toutes  ces 
entreprises, aujourd’hui sont profitables. C’est ça la différence!  

Venons-en maintenant, au recrutement. Nous n’avons pas de leçon à prendre du Parti 
Travailliste.  La  population  ne  va  pas  oublier  les  manipulations  honteuses  d’un  député 
Travailliste  sur  des  institutions  dites  indépendantes.    Ce  n’est  pas  moi  qui  le  dit,  mais  un 
ancien député du Parti Travailliste et ancien PPS, M. Khamajeet, qui je vous le rappelle n’a 
même pas été inquiétée par les autorités du pays jusqu’à présent. Laissez-moi vous dire, M. le 
député  Travailliste,  qu’avec  votre  bilan,  enfin,  le  bilan  de  votre  parti,  le  Parti  Travailliste, 
vous êtes mal placé … 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, you don’t have to address yourself to any Member 

of the Labour Party, but you address yourself to the Chair! 

Mr Jhugroo: Madam Speaker, I was just answering to hon. Ramful. 

Madam  Speaker:  No,  but  even  then  do  not  address  yourself  to  hon.  Ramful,  you 

address yourself to the Chair! 

Mr Jhugroo: I want their friends to convey him the message.  Le bilan de votre parti, 

le Parti Travailliste, vous êtes mal placés pour nous donner des leçons.  

Et  comme  l’honorable  Ramful  est    aussi  député  de  la  circonscription,  il  doit 
commencer par remercier le ministre des Finances, qui lui, a pensé à notre circonscription en 
rendant flambant neuf le stade Sir Harry Latour et le centre de jeunesse de  Pointe Jérôme, 
qu’ils ont oublié pendant les dix derniers années et que  ce  gouvernement va donner  à nos 
jeunes  deux  bijoux  qui  vont  leur  permettre  d’exprimer  leur  potentiel  et  de  devenir  des 
citoyens épanouis. 

 

61 

A court d’argumentaire, l’opposition risque de tomber dans la surenchère politique et 
dans la démagogie. Mais la population n’est pas dupe, Madame la présidente. Elle ne veut pas 
accepter d’avaler toutes les couleuvres de l’opposition comme ce fut le cas en 2014.  

Ce budget, Madame la présidente, a touché tous les créneaux de notre économie en 
passant  par  le  pouvoir  d’achat,  le  développement  du  pays  en  termes  d’infrastructures,  les 
logements sociaux, la réforme des institutions, la lutte contre la pauvreté et les gaspillages de 
fonds publics, pour ne citer que ces exemples. 

Concernant les voyages, suite à l’interpellation parlementaire de mon ami, l’honorable 
Bhagwan,  sur  le  sujet  des  missions  à  l’étranger,  Madame  la  présidente,  nous  jouons  la 
transparence.  We are a responsible Government. The measures announced by the Minister of 
Finance to curtail overseas missions of our Ministers and MPs are proof enough. Et j’espère 
que nos honorables collègues de l’autre côté de la Chambre emboiteront les pas. 

(Interruptions) 

Il  est  bon  de  rappeler  que  suite  à  mon  interpellation  dans  cette  auguste  Assemblée,    il  est 
devenu  du  domaine  public  que  le  Leader  de  mon  ami,  l’honorable  Shakeel  Mohamed, 
l’ancien Premier ministre, Dr. Navin Ramgoolam, a effectué pas moins de 75 missions durant 
son mandat de neuf ans à la tête du gouvernement et cela a coûté à l’État la somme de R 
206,411,584.17.  R 77 m. en billets d’avions ; R 75 m. per diem ; other allowances R 5 m. ; 
miscellaneous expenses près de R 40 m. et tenez-vous bien satellite costs R 10 m. Je dis bien 
satellite  costs  –  ki  ti  pe  guetter  dan  mission?  Il  voyageait  toujours  avec  son  baraat  sans 
oublier sa sœur et son beau-frère. 

Comme on le dit, Madame la présidente, l’exemple vient toujours d’en haut. Savez-
vous que notre actuel Premier ministre - qui s’assoit dans ma gauche - et Leader de l’Alliance 
Lepep, n’a pas encore effectué un seul voyage à l’étranger depuis le début de cette année! 
C’est ça l’exemple! 

Dans  la  même  foulée,  Madame  la  présidente,  suite  à  une  autre  interpellation 
parlementaire,  nous  avons  appris  l’ampleur  d’un  autre  cas  de  gaspillage  de  fonds  publics. 
Imaginez-vous,  Madame  la  présidente,  que  sept  voitures  furent  mises  à  la  disposition  de 
l’ancien  Premier  ministre,  pour  véhiculer  son  beau-frère,  sa  sœur,  ses  beaux-parents,  sans 
compter les voitures officielles avec les services de la VIPSU mises à la disposition de ses 
petits copains tels que M. Geoffrey Cox, M. Andrew Scott et M. Laurent Obadia entre autres. 

 

62 

Madame la présidente, auriez-vous imaginé que la police mauricienne puisse être affectée à la 
surveillance des magasins de sa copine! 

C’est de la classe! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

J’allais  dire:    ‘How  do  you  call  this?’    L’honorable  Premier  ministre  a  dit, «  c’est  de  la 
classe!»  This is called ‘putting people first’ 

(Interruptions) 

Et ils vont venir nous donner des leçons!  Et sans oublier les nombreux feuilletons à Trou aux 
Biches Hotel.  Si matelas ti conne cozer, ou ti pou conner ki passer! 

Je félicite chaleureusement l’honorable ministre des finances… 

(Interruptions) 

….pour la décision de merge plusieurs corps paraétatiques. Il y a eu certes une prolifération 
des corps paraétatiques sous l’ancien régime. Vous imaginez, Madame la présidente, qu’il y a 
actuellement  plus  de  125  institutions  paraétatiques  à  Maurice,  et  finalement  on  ne  se  sait 
même pas qui fait quoi dans ces institutions. Grâce à la vision de notre Premier ministre et la 
clairvoyance de notre ministre des finances, plusieurs de ces institutions paraétatiques seront 
revues.  Un  ministère  de  la  bonne  gouvernance  et  des  réformes  institutionnelles,  comme 
annoncé dans notre programme gouvernemental est devenu une réalité. 

En parlant des réformes de la bonne gouvernance, je profite de cette occasion pour 
rendre hommage au Premier ministre et au ministre de tutelle, l’honorable Roshi Bhadain qui 
ont fait voter le Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill. 

Madam Speaker, what was the Opposition not saying outside this House during the 
debates on the said Bill last year.  Que les chauffeurs de taxi auraient à émettre un reçu pour 
chaque  course  effectuée,  que  les  invités  aux  mariages  devaient  demander  des  reçus  en 
échange des cadeaux d’argent. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No dialogue…. 

 

63 

Mr Jhugroo : Madame  la présidente, le  Good  Governance and Integrity Reporting 
Agency  est  déjà  opérationnel.  Have  we  yet  witnessed  one  single  example  of  what  the 
Opposition has been saying outside?  No, Madam Speaker!  C’était de la pure démagogie. 
Madame la présidente, contrairement aux commentaires de l’opposition ici, j’ai reçu, durant 
ma  récente  mission  officielle  en  Angleterre  en  compagnie  de  mon  ami  l’honorable  Aadil 
Ameer Meea…  

(Interruptions) 

…des messages l’appréciation et de félicitations pour le vote de cette loi à l’île Maurice. 

(Interruptions) 

Les Anglais nous ont salués pour avoir eu le courage de venir de l’avant avec une telle 

législation. 

Les  mesures  annoncées  de  mergers  des  plusieurs  institutions,  whose  mission  and 
objectives tend to overlap visent à rendre ces dernières plus efficientes et plus effectives afin 
d’offrir un meilleur service à la population dans son ensemble et les acteurs économiques en 
particulier. 

Permettez-moi,  Madame  la  présidente,  d’aborder  les  sujets  de  la  drogue.  Malgré 
plusieurs  questions  adressées  à  l’ancien  Premier  ministre,  Navin  Ramgoolam,  ce  dernier 
n’eut  jamais  le  courage  ni  la  volonté  d’instituer  une  commission  d’enquête.    Notre  actuel 
Premier ministre qu’on a surnommé ‘Rambo’ très longtemps, n’a pas hésité un seul instant à 
instituer cette commission d’enquête  et qui est en train de faire un travail remarquable. Et 
après  avoir  entendu  ce  qu’à  dit  mon  ami,  l’honorable  Bhagwan,  je  connais  la  capacité  de 
travailler de notre Premier ministre.  Je crois qu’il va mettre de l’ordre dans plusieurs coins et 
recoins de ce pays.  

Avec une société en pleine évolution, Madame la présidente, on a constaté plusieurs 
incidents dans plusieurs écoles. Les cas d’indiscipline au sein de nos institutions éducatives 
nous interpellent. Je suis d’avis qu’il faut permettre aux professeurs de maintenir l’ordre et la 
discipline comme c’était le cas dans le passé.  And I am for a multi-approach system pour 
encadrer nos enfants et nos jeunes. 

Madame la présidente, beaucoup pourrait être dit sur la manière dont le portefeuille 
des infrastructures publiques et du transport routier qui a été géré par le précédent régime, 

 

64 

notamment les tragiques accidents des autobus de la CNT, le crash du Ring Road, le scandale 
des fissures sur le Terre Rouge/Verdun Link Road et plus récemment la NTA. 

Cependant, je préfère mettre l’emphase sur la réalisation et les projets de ce présent 
gouvernement. Bravo au ministre Nando Bodha pour le rude travail accompli en si peu de 
temps malgré le lourd héritage de l’ancien ministre. 

Quel plaisir de voyager dans le nouveau bus plus confortable et facilement accessible 
aux personnes âgées, aux enfants et à ceux souffrant d’un handicap dans le bus de la CNT, 
Madame la présidente! 

(Interruptions) 

L’autoroute de Verdun redevient graduellement de plus en plus utilisable, bientôt le 
public  pourra  se  rendre  compte  des  avantages  de  la  refonte  et  de  la  décentralisation  des 
services d’examen technique de la NTA. Et dans ce sens, malheureusement le ministre n’est 
pas là. Je l’invite à accélérer le processus de transformation et à considérer favorablement la 
possibilité d’ouvrir d’autres centres de fitness car à ce jour,  à  Forest Side, les queues sont 
interminables et certaines personnes n’ont d’autre choix que de prendre un jour de congé pour 
le fitness test. 

Gageons que dans un avenir très proche, les propriétaires de voitures passant le fitness 
test verront cela comme une obligation plaisante et non un stress, un stress qui par le passé a 
probablement été un facteur de passe-droits. 

Avec  le  nombre  grandissant  de  véhicules,  le  pays  doit  impérativement  avoir  une 
nouvelle  vision  du  transport  de  masse.  L’introduction  du  métro  express  sera  la  meilleure 
formule, Madame la présidente, pour décongestionner notre pays qui est en pleine expansion. 
Je suis d’avis que son tracé bien défini doit être étendu dans plusieurs villages et quartiers du 
pays, pour faciliter le déplacement de la population et par la même sera un incentive to leave 
one’s car at home and use public transport instead. 

Quant à nos routes, Madame la présidente, tout en remerciant l’honorable ministre des 
finances pour avoir alloué R 30 millions pour le maintien du système de street lighting sur 
nos autoroutes, je souhaite ici proposer au gouvernement de venir de l’avant au plus vite avec 
un  sole  authority  pour  ce  maintien.  Nous  avons  ici  même  soulevé,  à  plusieurs  reprises,  la 
question  de  lighting  sur nos  motorways  qui  sont  dans  le  noir  depuis  très  longtemps  et  qui 
représente un danger potentiel pour les road users. 

 

65 

Madame la présidente, l’eau c’est la vie and it is a fact that the supply of water in this 
country has for long been a pebble in the shoe for people in numerous regions.  I, therefore, 
welcome the decision taken by the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development to 
inject  some  Rs3.4  billion  in  this  budget  to  address  the  problems  in  various  regions  of  the 
island. 

However,  I  make  a  plea  in  the  name  of  the  inhabitants  of  my  Constituency 
Mahebourg/Plaine  Magnien.    This  region,  Madam  Speaker,  is  suffering  from  acute  and 
drastic water cuts all the year round due to distribution pipes that date back to colonial days. I 
am confident that my good friend, the hon. Vice-Prime Minister and Minister of Energy and 
Public Utilities is hearing me and will do what needs to be done. 

May I humbly suggest that the subsidies on the purchase of water tanks be extended 

to the purchase of rain water harvesting system. 

Tout  en  félicitant  l’honorable  ministre  des  finances  pour  avoir  prévu  l’argent 
nécessaire  à  la  construction  et  à  la  décentralisation  des  services  médicaux  spécialisés, 
j’aimerais  que  le  gouvernement  considère  le  cas  de  ce  vieil  hôpital  de  Mahebourg  qui  est 
dans un état délabré. J’ai même posé des questions parlementaires à ce sujet. 

Si  l’honorable  ministre  des  finances  a  aussi  annoncé  de  nouvelles  mesures  pour  la 
lutte contre le cancer - ce qui est un grand pas en avant car beaucoup de gens souffrent de 
cette  maladie  -  j’aimerais  suggérer  au  ministre  que  la  mise  sur  pied  d’un  centre  médical 
hautement  spécialisé  en  cancer  soit  envisagé  le  plus  tôt  possible.  L’apport  de  l’expertise 
étrangère dans ce domaine serait souhaitable. 

J’exprime  également  le  vœu  que  la  mise  sur  pied  d’un  centre  spécialisé  en  soins 
gériatriques soit matérialisée, car il est un fait indéniable que notre population vieillit, et nos 
aînés qui ont servi le pays méritent un meilleur traitement. 

En  parlant  de  nos  aînés,  je  profite  de  cette  occasion,  Madame  la  présidente,  pour 
rendre un hommage particulier à notre actuel Premier ministre qui a sacrifié sa vie, sa famille, 
pour l’avancement de ce pays depuis plusieurs années ; ce pays qui était au bord de la faillite 
en 1982. Et depuis, il a toujours répondu présent quand le pays a eu besoin de lui, et encore 
aujourd’hui. Merci, M. le Premier ministre. 

Madame la présidente, comme j’ai mentionné au début de mon intervention, c’est un 
budget social qui cadre avec la vision du gouvernement, de mon parti, le MSM, et aussi celle 
de l’Alliance Lepep. 

 

66 

Je  connais  l’actuel  ministre  des  Finances  et  du  Développement  économique, 
également mon leader depuis de nombreuses années, et je dois dire qu’il est quelqu’un qui a 
un très grand sens de réflexion avant de parler, qui ne zigzague jamais ; pas de ‘On’, pas de 
‘Off’ avec lui. Il est quelqu’un qui tranche quand il le faut dans l’intérêt du pays, mais aussi 
quelqu’un avec qui le principe passe avant tout. 

Le  parcours  politique  du  ministre  des  Finances  et  du  Développement  économique, 
jalonné de réalisations, tels que le VRS, le concept de duty free island, la réintroduction des 
mesures fiscales abolies par l’ancien ministre travailliste, Rama Sithanen, démontrent que la 
population peut toujours compter sur lui et avoir la confiance nécessaire in his dedication and 
sound judgment. 

Rien ne pourra empêcher Pravind Jugnauth de devenir le prochain Premier ministre de 
ce pays, car il possède toutes les qualités requises en prônant l’unité nationale, et avec un 
cœur de patriote. 

Madame  la  présidente,  nous  sommes  là  depuis  19  mois,  mais  nous  avons  été 
plébiscités par le peuple pour un mandat de cinq ans. Un mandat pour nettoyer, reconstruire 
cette île Maurice où il fera bon vivre, dans la modernité et la prospérité. 

Madame la présidente, nous savons tous qu’un avocat doit être consommé at the right 

moment. 

If too early… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

Mr Jhugroo:…ce sera très dur à consommer. If too late, ce sera un fruit pourri. 

Le  ministre  des  Finances  et  du  Développement  économique  a,  par  sa  perspicacité, 
compris que notre avocat - comprenez par là l’économie mauricienne - est à point. Mûr pour 
entamer a new era of development.  Now, it is the time, Madame la présidente. Régalons-
nous! 

Merci. 

Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for half an hour. 

At 4.34 p.m., the sitting was suspended. 

 

67 

On resuming at 5.11 p.m. with the Deputy Speaker in the Chair. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Jahangeer! 

Mr  B.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  &  Souillac):  Mr 
Deputy Speaker, if you allow me, I would like to refer to hon. Uteem’s speech on the Budget 
of  yesterday  with  regard  to  infrastructural  development.    I  think  there  has  been  some 
misinterpretation of figures. 

(Interruptions) 

If a Ministry, let’s say the Ministry of Public Utilities or Public Infrastructure, has a 
Budget of Rs300 m., and spends only Rs20 m. That does not mean there has been no progress 
in  infrastructural  development,  because  you  have  a  tendering  time  for  consultation,  a 
tendering  time  for  EPC  and,  at  the  end  of  the  day,  it  takes  10  months  to  come  up  with  a 
project. By that time, you are in another fiscal year. So, that’s one reason. 

Second reason, when  you see that  you paid only Rs20 m. for the construction of a 
road, for example.  We talk about the Mare d’Albert Link Road to the airport, and it is Rs600 
m., but you will see that only Rs10 m. or Rs20 m. has been disbursed. Why? Because it is 5 
kilometres and today the contractor has completed only one kilometre. So, we pay according 
to progress of work. That’s why you will see the figures small, but that does not mean that the 
work  is  not  going  on.  So,  I  would  like  to  reassure  the  hon.  Member  that  infrastructure 
projects are on the go, but only at a natural pace. 

Exactement! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Deputy Speaker, last  year’s  Budget  focussed on the  elderly. This  year, it is for 
their children and their grandchildren. Furthermore, by giving different incentives to the Real 
Estate and Property Development, the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development 
is  definitely  giving  a  big  boost  to  the  construction  industry,  which  was  badly  needed. 
Construction  industry  is  the  heart  of  economic  development  because  when  we  have 
construction,  it  means  you  are  giving  -  it  is  like  a  domino  effect  -  jobs  to  the  transport 
company,  to  the  hardware  shops,  to  everybody.  They  will  end  up  with  employment  and 
money in, money out. It is the flow of cash. That’s why we have to applaud this Budget for 
giving a big boost to the construction industry. 

 

68 

Mr Deputy Speaker, in line with the determination of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to 
fight corruption when it comes to public procurement and tendering process, I would like to 
make a suggestion to reinforce this policy. My suggestion is the constitution of a Technical 
Audit. What is a Technical Audit? It is a committee comprising of six to seven engineers of 
different fields: civil, chemical, electrical and so on, with good reputation. Now, what this 
committee  will  do?  They  will  assess  projects  that  have  been  completed,  that  have  gone 
beyond  their  warranty  period,  three  to  five  years  after  the  warranty  period.  Why?  Simply 
because in tender specification, there are time dependent parameters which only with time 
you can assess. 

I will give two to three examples. For example, street lighting poles, what we see in 
the streets, on highways. They are supposed to be rust proof.  Yet, you commission it, the 
project is finished, they get their money back, certification is issued, but after five or six years 
-  which  we  can  see  right  now  on  the  highways  -  the  poles  get  brown,  rusted.  So,  in  the 
specification, it is specified 20 years rust proof. So, how we follow these projects? This is 
how we need this Technical Audit. 

I give another example.  St Louis Power Station at Pailles.  People now are protesting 
about  noise,  air  pollution.  Why?  At  the  time  of  commissioning,  everything  was  perfect, 
because it was a new engine. So, the contractor complied 100% with, suppose 50dB, but with 
time, after two/three years, the engine gets old and then the sound level gets higher. So, what 
we do in this situation? We penalise the contractor.  We insist on new projects.  For mega 
projects, we need a guarantee certificate, around 0.5% of the contract value, which will last 
for  10  years,  because  during  that  time,  you  have  a  time  to  assess  if  the  contractor  has 
performed correctly or wrongly. 

Some of our hon. colleagues talked about monitoring Ministry, different Ministries’ 
projects, Monitoring Committee, Steering Committee. Very good! But we have to think also 
after the completion of that project. Let us take the case of Melrose Prison; roof leaking! So, 
this  is  how  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  can  get  extra  revenue  by 
cashing the Guarantee Certificate for these projects. It is you give me a certificate of 2% of 
the contract value and  I will cash it.  If  you  fail, if whatever criteria is in the specification 
which, at the time of commission, I could not check, now you pay. So, this is the point that is 
very important for the Technical Audit. I’ll kindly request the hon. Minister of Finance and 
Economic  Development  to  give  due  consideration  to  this  suggestion.  It  will  improve  our 

 

69 

method of procurement, public procurement, and also it will make sure that we get value for 
money from the contractors. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, we have promised the people of Mauritius water supply 24 out of 

7. We are working towards same. 

(Interruptions) 

The  process  of  changing  defective  pipes  is  already  on.  I  have  witnessed  some  tenders  on, 
some change of pipes are going on. This Budget caters for more change of defective pipes, 
but  this  is  not  sufficient.  This  is  not  sufficient.  I  deeply  believe  in  the  construction  of  a 
desalination  plant.  Our  country  badly  needs  a  desalination  plant,  at  least  one,  around  7  to 
10,000 metre cube. Desalination means seawater to drinking water. So, we cannot rely on the 
caprices of nature. Today, we are having rainy water. Today, we are having a lot of rains, but 
tomorrow El Nino can affect us deeply. So, what we do? If we have a desalination plant, at 
least, we can cater for these severe conditions. Rodrigues is ahead of us. Rodrigues will have 
four desalination plants. They are already ahead of us. Now, what you do with your water in 
case the reservoir is full? 

We do like the Israel, we do like the US, we do like the Moroccan, like Senegal, we 
stock the water hundred metres down the ground for future. This is vision, my friend! This is 
vision! We have to think ahead. We need this desalination. What is the cost of a desalination 
plant of around 10,000 metre cube? Rs300 m. only! 

Sorry? 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Address the Chair, hon. Jahangeer! 

Mr Jahangeer: But… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: No comments, hon. Mohamed! 

Mr Jahangeer: This desalination plant is a sustainable one. How? Because it will be 
powered by solar panels, photovoltaic; this means that, we are not spending money on the 
pumps and on the electricity costs, it will be only by nature. 

 

70 

(Interruptions) 

As  I  said,  at  least  in  the  case  of  severe  drought  we  have  something  that  people  will 
appreciate. We do not have to depend every time on water cuts and all these things. We can 
also sell the water to the sugar industry, to agriculture and to the people who need water. So, 
it  is  a  must.  We  have  to  come  with  a  desalination  plant  because  Mauritius  is  an  island 
surrounded by water. We cannot suffer the caprices of nature and say that we cut the water 
today because we have no water. Come on man! 

The Deputy Speaker: Address the Chair, hon. Jahangeer! 

Mr Jahangeer: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in 1720, Sir Edward Walpole designed the 
first Budget. But, at that time, it was based on taxation for wine and tobacco. But, today, the 
process of budgeting is very complex it is more than cash in cash out. 

(Interruptions) 

So, projects budgeted at ‘X’ amount and are paid at twice the amount will never happen with 
our Government, with l’Alliance Lepep! And, this kind of waste - the present Budget is so 
designed that the waste control is very important. 

Moreover, we also have to avoid procurement of equipment that is not used at all. We 
know that certain equipment, whether it is in the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life or in 
other Ministries, had been bought in the previous years but they have never been used. Allow 
me, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, to give a few striking examples of such projects still existing 
now. 

In 1999, the CEB embarked on an ambitious project to upgrade its network from 66kv 
to 132kv at the cost of Rs240 m. Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am referring in layman terms so 
that all hon. Members of this august Assembly can understand. The voltage you have in your 
house when you pick yours is only 230 Volts… 

(Interruptions) 

240! The one that you would hang out in the street and you get burnt is 22kv and the one on 
the metallic tower that we see around the island is 66,000 Volts. 

Why do we need to upgrade? It is very simple. If you plug in your computer, you will 
see that your adapter gets hot. The hotness is a loss of energy, loss of money. So, the same 
thing in our electrical network when we transfer power from one end to another, the cable 
gets  heated  so  we  lose  a  lot  of  energy  and  money.  So,  that  is  the  reason  they  wanted  to 

 

71 

upgrade,  according  to  the  World  Bank’s  recommendation;  at  that  time  it  was  urgent  to 
upgrade  the  network.  But,  so  far,  what  has  happened  to  the  upgrading?  You  go  at  Pailles 
when you leave Port Louis during the night, you will see there is a tower to your right, and 
still  there  is  no  cable!  This  tower  is  85  km  across  the  island.  This  means  it  is  lying  there 
dormant and the process of upgrading has never happened! What happened to this process? 
And we are talking about the smart grid! This is where the smart grid should start. It is to 
upgrade the voltage. So, why this has not been done, so far, since 1999? 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: No comments, please! 

Mr  Jahangeer:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  everybody  talks  about  poor  water  supply 

due to leaky pipes. One thing we ignore, however, is the metering system… 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: No comments, hon. Ameer Meea! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Jahangeer: What is the metering system? For any utility it is the heart of rate. 
This is where the revenue comes from. If we do not meter properly we lose a hell of money. 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, when you have the meter tender - it is all mechanical in your house 
by the way - the tender calls for a lifetime of 20 years for the water meters. Now, the water 
meter  that  is  in  your  house  or  your  parents’  house  is  30  years  or  more.  So,  how  do  we 
conciliate the lifetime of a metre? This means that the meter that is at your place is without 
value! It can give wrong reading… 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, this is very important. We can be at this stage; so far, we have not encountered it, but 
civil  groups  can  take  measures  against  the  Public  Utilities  because  of  the  defective  water 
meters; because when we register a lost in the pipes, it is not only the pipes that are leaking it 
is also that the meters are defective. That is why I am requesting humbly to the hon. Minister 
of Finance and Economic Development to give us a financial package in his Budget to move 
from the mechanical meters to the electronic meters which cannot be tampered with by the 
way. You cannot tamper with the electronic meters and also it gives accurate results. 

 

72 

This change in technology, if we consider 300,000 subscribers, will amount to Rs300 
m. only. So, I don’t see it that big because you are going to have a modern water network and 
also you will reduce your losses in the network. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  this  Budget  caters  for  all  walks  of  life.  I  must  salute  the  bold 
measure of the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development to attempt to remove 
sugar from the daily intake of adults and children, thus, reducing the risks of diabetes and 
other  health  complications.  I  am  grateful  to  have  soon  a  swimming  pool  in  Rivière  des 
Anguilles, … 

(Interruptions) 

…I  would  have  preferred  the  Rivière  des  Anguilles  Dam  which  was  part  of  our  electoral 
manifesto. I would have preferred that! 

Let me conclude,… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: No comments, hon. Ameer Meea. No comments, let the hon. 

Member speak! 

Mr  Jahangeer:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  will  conclude  by  congratulating  the  Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister for giving this Budget his benediction. But, what about the maestro, the 
financial engineer behind this Budget? 

(Interruptions) 

No one but hon. Pravind Jugnauth, and I thank him very much for getting us closer to our 
goal of roti, kapda aur makaan for all.  

Thank you. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Barbier! 

(5.30 p.m.) 

Mr  J.  C.  Barbier  (Fifth  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West):  Mr  Deputy 
Speaker,  Sir,  it  is  a  fact  that  this  Budget  presented  by  hon.  Pravind  Jugnauth,  Minister  of 

 

73 

Finance  and  Economic  Development,  brings  faith  in  himself,  but  also  to  all  reasonable 
citizens of that country.  

This  Budget  contains  realistic  and  achievable  goals,  but  I  am  much  worried,  Mr 
Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  about  the  attitude  of  the  officers  who  will  have  to  implement  the 
decisions  announced  by  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development. 
Unfortunately, we have witnessed so much, in these past months, of the attitude and bad faith 
of some officers since the last 20 months to deliver according to their responsibilities. I have 
in  mind  especially  those  from  the  NDU  who  are  not  helping  the  Government  and  the 
population. The PPSs are continuously complaining and the Citizens Advice Bureaux are not 
playing their role as they were in the past years. 

Maybe! 

(Interruptions) 

We are in the month of August and the Finance Bill will not be voted before the end 
of August. So, Government will have only 10 months left to implement the contents proposed 
in this Budget. I hope the feel good factor installed in this country will not be only words at 
the end of this financial year. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with regard to the Management Rights Society, the Minister 
of Arts and Culture, despite all his efforts and good intention announced, it is only after 20 
months  that  he  finally  informed  the  House  that  amendments  to  the  Copyright  Act  will  be 
introduced in this House this  year, which means here again we have been waiting for two 
years to bring simple amendments to this Act, which was promised to the artists since the end 
of 2014. Again, I am sceptic and I hope that this year we shall debate on these amendments 
which are long overdue now.  

I  welcome  the  decision  of  the  Minister  to  come  with  proper  legislation  to  give  to 
artists  their  appropriate  status  in  the  Republic  of  Mauritius.  I  hope  this  decision  will  be 
implemented within this financial year. Artists, especially of the musical industry, are having 
their creation used worldwide, but most of them are not being paid royalties from abroad due 
to non-implementation of our catalogue to be visible on the appropriate international database 
website. So, since years now, very few are having their royalties paid from abroad and they 
are only those who are registered with the SACEM, but the other sister societies around the 
world are not paying royalties to our local artists. We are paying royalties to abroad artists, 
but our artists are not receiving the international royalties. 

 

74 

Artists through the collection of royalties in England are paying for the running costs 
of the Management Rights Society - which was the MASA in the past - to the tune of around 
Rs50 m. yearly and Government is only contributing a meagre amount which is around Rs1 
m.  to  the  Management  Rights  Society.  I  hope  that  the  hon.  Minister  will  revise  this  grant 
upward side using the additional grant of Rs10  m. budgeted for this financial  year. May  I 
hope that this year our artists will have a more rational grant from this Government which we 
are fighting for, for years now?  

May  I  again  request  the  Minister  that  while  coming  with  amendments  to  the 
Copyright Act, to make sure that artists are rationally represented on the Board? Because last 
time this new legislation was brought to the Copyright Act, unfortunately, we all noticed that 
the ratio represented for artists on the Board has gone down considerably. Thus, making the 
voice of the artists less heard on the Board of the Management Rights Society. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with regard to pig breeders, I recently drew the attention of 
the hon. Minister of the difficulties of those in this industry. I know and I welcome that some 
efforts  are  being  made  actually  to  help  the  breeders.  But  regarding  the  quality  of  meat 
produced,  I  would  like  to  come  back  on  that  issue.    It  is  usually  not  to  the  market  needs 
standard. I think Government should give to this industry the required equipment; equipment 
which is needed for the  testing of live pigs in order to measure the contents of fats in the 
meat. This is being done next door in Reunion Island. I think we just can have a mission here. 
So many missions have been organised recently. We can have a mission there and see what 
are the mechanisms set and try to impose those conditions here. I am sure that the Minister 
will agree with me that this will help this industry. We must give the proper training to the 
pig breeders.  And why not subsidise the food that is produced locally! This will be a win-win 
situation  for  the  Government  and  for  the  breeders.  The  breeders  will  recover  their  market 
share and Government will save currencies from importation cost and I am sure it will also 
bring  additional  employment  in  this  industry.  I  am  relying  on  the  good  faith  of  the  hon. 
Minister to see to it that we give due attention to this sector during this financial year. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with regard to the fisheries, I do not know why Government 
is hesitating in investing massively in this sector. Foreign fishing vessels are exploiting our 
exclusive  economic  zone  since  years  now.  They  are  making  a  lot  of  money,  Mr  Deputy 
Speaker,  Sir,  from  our  natural  resources  paying  a  meagre  licence  fee  to  the  country.  This 
situation is going on for years and years now. Government, in this Budget, only announced 
the purchasing of one vessel for research purposes. The fact is here. Others are making big 

 

75 

money for themselves and, according to me; there is no need for research. The facts are there, 
they are using foreign vessels and they are making a lot of money. So, I think we need to 
invest massively. We have to stop foreign vessel activities in our exclusive economic zone 
and  conquer  the  international  fish  market.  Who  knows  it  can  become  our  first  economic 
pillar! This is what I feel. It can create growth, employment and so on.  

Concerning the fishers of Port Louis and Tombeau Bay, again, I draw the attention of 
Government  to  give  due  attention  to  these  fishers.  Actually,  important  development  is  on-
going in the port region and much more is to come in the future, especially in Constituency 
No. 1.  I would like to make an appeal to Government to establish a permanent consulting 
panel  including  all  stakeholders  to  follow-up,  monitor  and  compensate  what  need  to  be 
compensated for the damage it is causing and it will cause especially to fishers of the regions 
of Bain des Dames, Grand Rivière and the surrounding. 

As regards the problem of illicit drugs, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the problem is now 
around  the  island.  I  am  surprised  that  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development has not given any particular consideration to this evil of our society despite all 
harms it is causing to youngsters from all quarters. I hope that the hon. Minister of Finance 
and Economic Development will come to it while summing up the debate. 

As hon. Rughoobur stated in the House, the situation is alarming and I will add that, 
for the first time, the problem today is islandwise. I think we have to give special attention to 
this problem actually in this country. We cannot stay quiet. All our children are exposed to 
this evil.  Whatever precautions we may take as responsible parents, the evil is here. So much 
harm is being caused to many families, I beg the Government to give due consideration to 
this problem.  Our future generation is in great danger actually. 

With  regard  to  the  SMEs,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  so  many  measures  have  been 
announced last year and so many others this year again.  But the fact remains that access to 
financing and access to markets remain the two main obstacles for the development of SMEs.  
Many good intentions, many incentives, but with a rigid financing policy and a very timid 
marketing policy; how will this sector develop in the future?  I put the question!  It is not so 
easy  if  we  do  not  tackle  these  two  main  problems.  It  is  very  difficult  and  Government  is 
relying  on  the  SMEs  for  job  creation.  So,  let’s  cure  the  ills  first.  Remove  barriers  and 
obstacles, then the incentives will be helpful to one another.   

 

76 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I would like to thank warmly hon. Pravind Jugnauth for the 
unprecedented efforts he is making for poverty alleviation and particularly for eradication of 
absolute  poverty.    Money  is  not  the  only  problem.    It  is  only  part  of  the  problem.  These 
families  need  guidelines.  These  families  need  monitoring.  These  families  need  to  be 
accompanied. L’encadrement est aussi important, M. le président et je voudrai pour terminer 
faire un pressant appel au gouvernement pour la réintroduction des travailleurs de rue, mais 
aussi pour la mise en place d’un organisme permanent pour faire le suivant de ces familles 
qui  sont  dans  la  pauvreté,  absolute  poverty  comme  on  le  dit.    Donc,  j’espère  que  ce 
gouvernement mean business.  On pourra faire au bout de l’année financière le bilan et on 
saura si vraiment toutes ces bonnes intentions ont été traduites dans les faits.  Je souhaite 
bonne chance au ministre des finances. 

Merci, M. le président. 

The Deputy Speaker :  Hon. Ramkaun ! 

 (5.45 p.m.) 

Mr  S.  Ramkaun  (Third  Member  for  Pamplemousses  &  Triolet):    Mr  Deputy 
Speaker,  Sir,  thank  you  for  allowing  me  to  address  this  august  Assembly,  proposing  my 
views and opinions on the Budget for the financial year 2016-2017 presented by hon. Pravind 
Jugnauth, Minister of Finance and Economic Development on the 29 July 2016.  

First  of  all,  I  have  to  congratulate  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development for having, in only a few weeks after having taken over this Ministry, worked 
hard together with the officers of the Ministry; for having read before this Assembly the bold 
decision in the 10 strategies which shall lead this country toward a new era of development. 

This Budget has been widely commented by several financial institutions, economists, 
stakeholders, trade unionists and people at large as being one from a caring Government and 
taking  into  consideration  all  the  factors  leading  to  a  sound  economic  growth.  In  fact,  my 
views and opinions are those of a large majority of around 66,000 voters of Constituency No. 
5,  Pamplemousses-Triolet,  where  myself  and  my  colleagues,  fellow  hon.  Members  of  this 
august Assembly, hon. Callichurn and hon. Teeluckdharry got elected in the December 2014 
general election defeating even the Prime Minister of the previous Government. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, my views and opinions reflect the actual state  of mind of 
Constituency  No.  5  at  large.  Since  last  Friday  evening  until  late  during  the  night,  this  has 
been the case until this morning. I have been receiving calls à longueur de journée requesting 

 

77 

me to convey messages to hon. Pravind Jugnauth for the outstanding Budget he presented for 
the betterment of the Mauritian people especially for the poor.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir,  I would like to share  with all of  you, here, present in the 
House, une rencontre anodyne que j’ai eu avec une dame de 63 ans living at Petit Gamin, a 
suburb in Arsenal Village. It happened that last Saturday morning, the lady came to see me at 
my  place.  We,  elected  Members  of  Constituency  No.  5,  are  used  to  meet  people  every 
Wednesday at the Citizen Advice Bureau of Pamplemouses and Triolet, not to be part of the 
problems for our mandates, but to be part of the solutions to any grievances expressed to us. 
During the meeting with the lady at my place, she stated that she came  to see me only to 
convey  a  message  to  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  for  all  the 
measures announced in the Budget in favour of the poor people. She narrated to me that very 
often she had been out of stock of LPG in the middle of the month and she had to collected 
dry branches pour faire bouillir la marmite familiale. But with the price drop of the LPG she 
will be able to buy another one, thus she will not have to look for a dry branches. Maybe for 
the hon. Members of the House it can be a kind of joke, but I can assure you, Mr Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, that this was the bitter truth in some families in the villages of Mauritius. Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir, I have received thankful messages more than a hundred times coming 
from  every  corner  of  Pamplemousses  and  Triolet  as  far  as  the  price  drop  of  the  LPG  is 
concerned.  

On  Saturday  30  July,  as  we  favour  une  politique  de  proximité  avec  nos  mandants, 
accompanied  by  the  hon.  Minister  Callichurn,  we  went  to  some  functions  to  honour  the 
invitations. There also, there were only words of satisfaction, of consideration in respect of 
hon. Pravind Jugnauth and for the Government led by Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Sir Anerood 
Jugnauth.  

The Minister of Finance and Economic Development is being blessed by one and all 
for  the  “magnifique”  job  he  did.  Comme  un  seul  homme,  la  circonscription  No.  5  est 
désormais derrière notre futur Premier ministre, l’honorable Pravind Jugnauth. Ces gens ont 
hâte de laisser derrière eux les années néfastes connues sous le règne du Parti Travailliste et 
de Navinchandra Ramgoolam. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, la vérité est dure mais elle mérite d’être dite haut et fort. The 
poor  people  will  not  have  to  consider  themselves  doomed  because  now,  they  have  a 

 

78 

“messiah” in the name of hon. Pravind Jugnauth to cater for the betterment of their everyday 
life. This is what has been done in the last budget, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  

Coming back to the ten strategies of this budget, entrepreneurs, employers, people of 
all  the  different  social  classes  and  particularly  those  down  the  ladder  have  been  taken  on 
board. 

The strategies, be it jobseekers, modern entrepreneurs forging a new economic cycle 
focusing in innovation, boosting exports of existing businesses, private investment, moving 
towards  a  full-fledged  digital  society,  fundamental  reforms  in  business  facilitation  and 
expansion  of  economic  horizon,  building  the  infrastructure  fits  into  the  future,  lifting  the 
quality of life for one and all, addressing the root causes of poverty, launching major public 
reform  programmes  and  lastly  ensuring  the  macroeconomic  stability  and  sound  public 
finance; all these strategies have been clearly and boldly reengineered to cater for stronger 
economic performances and challenges on the social and environmental fronts.  

I shall focus my views on only some of the key strategies.  Addressing the root cause 
of poverty - it is not “une fatalité” to be poor, but there are measures “à la pelle” in this 
budget to help the poor à faire face à l’avenir. The hon. Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development  a  pris  les  taureaux  par  les  cornes  au  bénéfice  de  ceux  qui  vivent  au  bas  de 
l’échelle.  L’histoire  retiendra  que  seul  l’honorable  Pravind  Jugnauth  a  eu  le  courage  de 
venir avec un budget qui a fait pâlir ses plus féroces adversaires. This Minister of Finance 
has much conviction to alleviate poverty and to bring a smile to all those who are at risk.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, despite the price drop of the LPG, I would like to pinpoint 
some other measures courageously announced by the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development  to  show  that  “les  plus  grands  soi-disant  humanistes  auraient  échoué  là  où 
l’honorable Pravind Jugnauth a réussi avec brio et de quelle manière!” As far as alleviating 
poverty  is  concerned,  I  must  insist  that  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development has left no stone unturned. “La hausse de l’allocation de subsistance à partir 
du  01  décembre  prochain,  l’aide  financière  pour  améliorer  les  performances  éducatives, 
l’augmentation du montant pour les coupons et la possibilité pour les enfants en situation 
d’échec de reprendre gratuitement les examens  de fin d’études secondaires”, among other 
measures, show clearly that this Government wants to have an intelligent future generation. 
Opportunities are at the feet of the future generation to be able to face “les aléas du futur”. 
Only hon. Pravind Jugnauth had the guts as Finance Minister to take such decisions. But, Mr 

 

79 

Deputy Speaker, Sir, only “les passéistes et ceux qui se sont développés le comportement des 
oiseaux de mauvaise augure qui verront que du mal dans ces mesures”. 

Increasing the monthly grant under the crèche voucher scheme for poor families from 
Rs1,500 to Rs2,000, meal allowances for students attending ZEP schools increased by 50%, 
i.e. from Rs40 to Rs60, are other measures to alleviate the burden of these vulnerable groups. 

Under the housing policy of this Government, the construction of 800 housing units 
over the next three years shows the deep commitment of this Government to provide a decent 
shelter for the absolute poor. Rs1 billion for the construction of 1,900 housing units of up to 
50 square metres each, on the 16 sites across the island and Rs155 m. for the rehabilitation 
programme of NHDC housing estates are other concrete measures for alleviating poverty.  

The requests from several families not falling within the income limit for eligibility of 
obtaining a house from the NHDC for social housing scheme has also been considered, that 
is, raising the limit from Rs10,000 to Rs20,000. We have also come across many individuals 
who  were  facing  tough  and  traumatising  sale  by  levy  experience  and  they  shall  now  be 
relieved  by  this  laudable  measure  of  waiving  all  the  arrears  of  interest  on  loans  being 
contracted from the NHDC and the MHC Ltd. Many other measures reflect the commitment 
of this Government to support families in their effort to invest in construction and acquiring 
their residences. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we all know qu’il n’y aura pas un développement sain sans 
une  bonne  fourniture  d’eau.  In  allocating  Rs3.4  billion  for  a  better  water  supply,  the  hon. 
Minister of Finance has shown that nothing as such under this chapter has been done by the 
previous Labour Government. The regions of Rivière du Rempart, Plaines des Roches and 
Roches Noires have long suffered from drastic water cuts due to lack of water or inadequate 
water networks coupled with major losses in the networks. The people of these regions were 
left so abandoned.  

This Government means business. The CWA has confirmed that the design of the new 
network, drawings and tender documents are ready. Procurement procedures are already on 
for  a  project  with  an  estimated  cost  of  around  Rs136  million.  Similarly,  the  regions  of 
Pereybere  and  Morcellement  Swan  have  been  provided  with  this  service  through  water 
tankers  for  the  last  decade.  In  this  millennium,  such  a  situation  is  really  unacceptable. 
Drawings and Tender documents for this region are also ready. All existing pipe networks are 

 

80 

going to be replaced taking into consideration the forecast requirements for this region which 
have considerably developed in the recent past. 

The SME sector, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, is also a sector contributing 40 % of the 
GDP.  This  sector  can  be  further  reinvented  to  create  business  opportunities  to  the  many 
young persons who in turn can provide employment to those in search of jobs. 

The creation of a National SME Incubator Scheme is being welcomed. It will help our 
young entrepreneurs to show their skills and these people will be able to contribute in the 
financial success and development of the Mauritian nation. With such a measure, along with 
the idea of converting the DBM of Coromandel into an integrated SME Industrial Park, the 
hon.  Minister  of  Finance  is  giving  every  opportunity  to  the  young  generation  à  faire  leur 
preuve. Il n’y aura plus de place pour les paresseux et pour ceux qui veulent être des éternels 
assistés, une situation nourrie jadis par l’ancien régime. Under this chapter, I would have 
failed in my endeavour if I do not give credit to the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development who has put at the disposal of entrepreneurs financial avenues to help them. A 
titre d’exemple, comment ne pas mentionner la facilité aux finances avec le prolongement du 
SME  Financial  Scheme.  The  8-year  tax  holiday  in  respect  of  business  income  to  new 
enterprises set up by individuals and even co-operative societies qualifying under the scheme 
and registered with SMEDA and 4-year tax holiday for existing enterprises registered with 
SMEDA with an income of less than Rs10 m.  

To  promote  modern  production  techniques  in  agriculture,  for  the  first  time,  this 
Government is providing a pilot Agri-Business park at Highlands over an area of 100 acres. 
This will facilitate some 200 planters to undertake crop production under protected structures. 
This will also include facilitation of sales of their products in a common sales point provided 
within the parks. 

SME Parks shall be constructed at Plaine Magnien and Vuillemin whereas the DBM 
industrial  zone  shall  be  converted  into  a  modern  integrated  SME  Industrial  Park.  The 
National  SME  Incubator  Scheme  which  shall  be  provided  with  the  aim  of  supporting  and 
mentoring  young  entrepreneurs  will  involve  a  grant  of  Rs50  m.  Furthermore,  to  improve 
access  to  finance,  SME  Financing  Scheme  will  be  continued  for  a  further  three  years  and 
which will be extended to individual entrepreneurs with the interest brought down from 7.5 
per cent to 6.0 per cent.  

 

81 

All  facilities  for  starting  a  new  small  business  have  been  considered  in  these 
strategies. Permits, industrial park for housing businesses, technical support, mentoring, even 
leasing  equipment,  modernisation  schemes,  SME  Capital  Fund  increased  to  Rs500  m.  for 
equity  or  partnership  with  ongoing  businesses.  And  also,  line  of  credits  to  be  used  for 
providing  factoring  services  to  these  businesses.  With  all  these  facilities  provided,  it  is 
expected that many small businesses are created to cater for all those aiming to become the 
big  businesses  of  tomorrow.  The  reintroduction  of  the  Leasing  Equipment  Modernisation 
Scheme will surely be un plus and same for the comptoir spécial at the DBM for the micro 
enterprises. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  along  with  what  I  enumerated  above,  I  am  more  than 
convinced that the suspension of the trade fee for licence of Rs5,000 or less for a period of 
three years will give an outstanding boost for Small and Medium Enterprises. This measure 
will relieve 20,000 small businesses for the district of Pamplemousses alone and will cost the 
Government some Rs14 m. annually. As I stated before, pas de place pour les passéistes, les 
paresseux et les assistés. Ce gouvernement veut une nation laborieuse, saine et le ministre 
des Finances a créé les conditions et l’atmosphère nécessaire pour le succès de ce secteur du 
SME.  

The unemployment problem is being also taken at heart by this Government, creating 
more  job  opportunities  for  our  youth  and  women.  It  has  never  been  considered  by  the 
previous Government as has been provided in this Budget. For better matching the skills and 
creating more jobs this Government is enlisting 4000 persons under the Skills Development 
Programme for training of technical skills that is in high demand, 1,200 seafarers for cruise 
jobs and shipping companies, the scheme of 200 young engineers, training opportunities for 
pre-registration training as professional engineers, 2,000 employment under ZEP and filling 
7,200  vacancies  in  the  Civil  Service  are  all  bold  measures  to  reduce  unemployment,  Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir.  

Considering other new policies to recruit some 7000 people in a short-term and some 
other  21,400  youth,  men  and  women  will  be  taken  out  of  unemployment.  Engineering  the 
infrastructure that fits the future is another measure to make investment, raise productivity 
and reduce unemployment in the short term. Major projects like the new Mass Transit System 
with its network of urban terminals; Victoria Terminal on a BOT model basis, the Heritage 
City,  the  Road  Decongestion  Programme  as  well  as  the  New  Integrated  Government 

 

82 

Clearance Centre in the Cargo Village plus a modern Control Tower are surely projects that 
will revamp the whole infrastructural setup of this island and creating job opportunities. 

Our appreciation as Members of the National Assembly for Constituency No. 5 to the 
hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development for the construction of a long awaited 
new  District  Court  in  Pamplemousses  and  Souillac  as  well  as  the  renovation  of  SSRN 
Hospital. The construction of a new Supreme Court Tower and upgrading and renovation of 
the New Court House, District Courts of Moka, Mahebourg, Rose Hill and Flacq are other 
projects which should have long been implemented. 

Other major investments, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the National Road safety Strategy 
like the introduction of Moto Ecole, the construction of pavements, rehabilitation works for 
road shoulders, new handrails, restoring road markings and new signage as well as reparing 
the lighting along motorways have not been overlooked by this Government. This concerns 
the safety of road users and this Government won’t leave any stone unturned for the safety of 
pedestrians, motorcyclists as well as vehicular traffic. 

One  last  measure  which  I  would  like  to  address  is  the  review  of  the  National 
Development  Unit  and  the  36  CABs  offering  the  various  services  to  the  public  at  large. 
Surely the National Development Unit is a major tool for developing both the urban as well 
as  the  rural  areas.  This  Unit  has  to  be  ready  for  any  intervention  in  cases  of  flooding, 
inundation, natural calamities and other infrastructural problems. This organisation has also 
to be re-engineered to intervene in such problems as a fast track basis and remedial measures 
cannot wait so long as has been the case of flooding at Fond du Sac, Rivière du Rempart, 
Grand’ Baie and Pereybere. Ways and means have to be devised to avoid a second flooding 
in these areas as well as those other flood prone areas. Such remedial measures should be 
prompt. 

As regards CABs which are also important tools for the Government led by the Rt. 
hon.  Prime  Minister,  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  had  initiated  in  1989  has  not  been  given  any 
boost to keep up the actual exigencies of the public. Same has to be revamped so that any 
request of information by this office which is under the aegis of the Prime Minister’s Office 
be provided on a very fast track basis. Even if  need be, desk officers be provided in each 
Ministry to provide information requested by the officers of the CABs.  

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  caring  as  this  Government  led  by  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, there is none! This Government led by the Rt. hon. Prime 

 

83 

Minister  and  with  hon.  Pravind  Jugnauth  has  left  far  behind  those  who  used  to  call 
themselves protectors of the poor and the children of this country. Hon Pravind Jugnauth a 
fait ce qu’aucun ministre des Finances n’aurait fait en accordant une attention particulière 
aux enfants invalides. Ces derniers ne devront plus attendre qu’ils soufflent leur quinzième 
bougie  pour  qu’ils  reçoivent  une  pension  d’invalidité.  En  accordant  cette  attention 
particulière à ces enfants le ministre des Finances a montré qu’il est fait d’un autre métal. Et 
comment ne pas souligner le lancement de cette bourse spéciale pour les enfants ayant des 
besoins spéciaux? In fact, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, there is nothing more human than to see 
smile on the face of these needy children. Hats off to you hon. Pravind Jugnauth! 

Concerning the measures announced for the other sectors, I am convinced, Mr Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, that the implementation of these measures will give birth to another Mauritius. 
We believe that we can make it and we will see to it that things will be done because Lepep is 
with us and we are with them.  We believe in hard work and not in Macarena parties and 
bluff. 

We will deliver! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, en guise de conclusion, j’ai ceci à dire à l’honorable Pravind 
Jugnauth. Vous avez montré que vous êtes fait pour être leader d’un grand parti comme le 
MSM.    Vous  avez  les  qualités  requises.    Vous  avez  la  conscience  claire.  Pour  vous,  la 
sincérité,  le  sens  des  responsabilités  et  la  reconnaissance  n’ont  pas  de  bornes.    Laissons 
certains self-proclaimed leaders, leaders politiques patauger dans la boue à leur sale besogne.  
Ils ont été là une décennie durant et jamais ils n’ont connu une acclamation populaire comme 
vous l’avez connu depuis vendredi dernier.  La circonscription No. 5 est désormais derrière 
vous, et elle vous soutient à 100%.  Elle a déchiré du cahier de sa vie et a jeté à la poubelle 
les pages des années vécues sous le règne du Parti travailliste. La circonscription No. 5 vit 
désormais l’ère Pravind Jugnauth, qui, je dois dire, est soutenu par le Premier ministre, Sir 
Anerood Jugnauth.  Pamplemousses/Triolet est confiant et est avec vous.  Elle renaîtra de ses 
cendres, et le pays arrivera à bon port. 

I would like to thank you all for your kind attention. Let us force together our future 

slowly but surely, with serenity. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Ms Sewocksing! 

 

 

(6.12 p.m.) 

84 

Ms M. Sewocksingh (Third Member for Curepipe & Midlands): Thank you, Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir.  It is indeed an honour and privilege for me to give my views on the 
Budget 2016/2017. On the very outset, allow me to congratulate the hon. Minister of Finance 
who,  in  a  very  limited  time,  prepared  his  Budget.  He  made  sure  that  no  stone  remain 
unturned. Budget 2016/2017 will pave the way forward for the Mauritius economy. 

La marge de manœuvre was also limited as the world economic situation is difficult, 
especially into main markets. Europe is in turmoil, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, facing challenges 
with  the  migrant  crisis.  And  who  does  not  know  about  Brexit!  China  is  experiencing  a 
slowdown in growth. Our economy has known major changes since the past decades.  We do 
not depend upon one sector only, but each sector has its own importance. And here, there are 
some few who pretend to be les plus grands argentiers du monde who come to challenge this 
Budget. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, this Budget caters for everyone.  Name it, you get it; from 
the cradle to the coffin, from the toy to the Metro Express.  The poor and the vulnerable, of 
course,  but  also  schoolchildren,  young  graduates,  taxpayers  with  an  increase  in  their 
threshold. High representatives of the private sector have expressed their satisfaction talking 
about  the  feel  good  factor.  Even  some  Members  of  the  Opposition  have  given  their 
favourable views. 

Surprisingly, intéressant, comme vous le dites honorable! 

(Interruptions) 

Indeed, for 20 months, nothing seems to be good, and suddenly everything seems to 
be  fine.  I  was  expecting  today  to  find  one  of  my  idols,  hon.  Bhagwan,  to  be  like  the 
bulldozer, come and challenge the Budget, mais je suis restée sur ma faim.  

Even hon. Barbier was very positive.  

(Interruptions) 

At  this  stage,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  would  like  here  itself  to  react  on  some 
comments that I heard on hon. Wong.  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, hon. Wong is holding two 
Ministerial portfolios and is excelling very well. I am not going to get into polemics, but one 
very vivid example is the way he handled the case of MV Benita. 

 

85 

In Mauritius, the major issue is to revamp the economy and give full confidence to 
economic  stakeholders.  We  can  keep  on  talking  and  discussing  about  means  and  ways  of 
different  financing  models.  We  can  talk  about  GDP,  growth  rate  and  deficit,  but  concrete 
things come up when the feel good factor is acquired. 

Coming  directly  to  some  main  measures  announced  in  the  Budget,  the  Minister  of 
Finance said it boldly that this Government will act urgently and directly to eradicate absolute 
poverty.  The  fight  against  poverty  is  one  of  the  priorities  of  this  Government,  Mr  Deputy 
Speaker, Sir.   I  am personally proud that hon.  Xavier-Luc Duval was the first Minister of 
Social  Integration  and  that  he  has  paved  the  way  for  the  eradication  of  absolute  poverty 
which is today one of the main objectives in this Budget. 

Concrete  measures  have  been  announced,  including  a  variety  of  programmes  and 
actions to assist and empower poor families. I am sure that all of us in this Assembly, in our 
specific constituencies,  have come  across cases  of families living in absolute poverty. The 
new  scheme  under  which  every  adult  on  the  Social  Register  will  be  entitled  to  a  monthly 
allowance, based on a minimum average of Rs2,720, with a maximum average of Rs9,520 for 
a family of two adults and three children, is most welcome. We are relieved to note that the 
Marshall Plan will at last be implemented, and this was long overdue, Mr Deputy Speaker, 
Sir. There is a list of measures in the Budget for eradicating poverty, and I am sure if they are 
well implemented the outcome will be successful. 

Another important chapter of this Budget is education.  A lot has been  said in this 
Budget about education, and rightly so, because education is the gateway to success. A sum 
of  Rs16.1  billion  has  been  earmarked  for  the  Ministry  of  Education,  and  this  shows  the 
seriousness of this Government. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  there  are  some  measures  which  the  hon.  Deputy  Prime 
Minister, Xavier-Luc Duval, took when he was Minister of Finance and that now we can see 
the  actual  Minister  of  Finance  has  taken  forward  to.    In  this  Budget,  there  are  some  21 
measures  which  reflect  the  same  philosophy  of  both  hon.  Xavier  Duval  and  the  actual 
Minister of Finance. This shows that great brains have common visions too. 

The provision made for the nine-year continuous basic education, initially known as 
the Nine-Year Schooling Programme, is another measure that hon. Duval introduced, that we 
must all be proud of and are satisfied of, and which this Government is implementing. This 
measure and other fundamental reforms will bring a holistic approach towards children and 

 

86 

education. A lot of stress on children and their parents will be eliminated with the nine-year 
schooling.  It will be a major breakthrough in our system. Another measure, which rejoices 
many parents, is the complete abolition of SC and HSC fees.  Students from poor families 
will be awarded a cash prize to achieve higher education, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, hard things are put in our way not to stop us, but to call for 
our courage and strength. This Government knows that vulnerable people have to get their 
chances too in life.  And it is this Minister of Finance and Economic Development, hon. P. 
Jugnauth  who  has  removed  age  discrimination  concerning  the  Basic  Invalidity  Pension.  
There will be special scholarships scheme for disabled students and appropriate measures will 
be taken to include the needy children in the 9-year schooling.  These measures will come as 
a  blessing  for  these  children.    A  good  health  system  makes  a  better  nation.    The  sum  of 
Rs10.9  billion  which  has  been  earmarked  for  the  Ministry  of  Health  shows  another 
commitment of this Government.  It shows that this Government cares for its nation. With the 
openings of new hospitals, renovations, extensions, setting up of new units, recruitment of 
personnel, our health sector will not be under artificial ventilation.  

 
Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  this  Budget  says  a  lot  about  decent  housing.    The  concept  of 
supporting  families  in  their  efforts  to  invest  in  construction  and  acquiring  their  residences 
will become true with all the measures taken in this Budget concerning the Housing Schemes.  
Technology is another key element in this Budget.  We are talking about Mauritius 2.0.  This 
Budget is paving the way to a full-fledged digital society.  This Budget is an FMI friendly 
one  and  caters  to  reform  our  business  sector.    Our  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development clearly understood that due to bureaucracy and regulations constraints, many 
businesses have suffered and investors were reluctant to invest. 

Measures  like  the  National  SME  Incubator  Scheme,  the  8-Year  Tax  Holiday  in 
 
respect of business income is being extended to new enterprises.  Suspension for payment of 
Trade Fee Licences of Rs5,000 and below will definitely benefit to new businesses and for 
75,000 existing business enterprises. 

 
Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  another  key  element  of  this  Budget  is  job  opportunities.  
Unemployment is a very pertinent issue.  One thing that seems clear is that unemployment in 
Mauritius is under control with a rate which is decreasing in 2016.  Job creation is a major 
issue which is at the centre of Government’s policy. With the accent of youth and the great 
achievement  at  the  level  of  the  Youth  Employment  Programme,  around  16,000  young 

 

87 

graduates have been successfully integrated, of which 44% have a permanent job and, as per 
this Budget, some 21,400 youth, men and women, will be taken on board and will be out of 
unemployment.  What else do we need, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir? 

 
I have elaborated on many big projects which, as per my opinion, will focus on our 
vision 2030, but also there are those regular simple measures that have been taken care of in 
this Budget, will ease the life of so many citizens.  I am not going to list them all, they are all 
there in the Budget.  This Budget, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, for once, has been in a very clear, 
simple and explicit language.  It does not contain technical speeches which are sometimes 
confusing and understood by only few people.   

 
I  was  overwhelmed  that  an  Embassy  will  be  opened  in  Saudia  Arabia  soon  and  a 
Consulate  in  Jeddah  and  Reunion  Island  too.    Several  councillors  will  be  recruited  for 
economic matters in few countries.  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, diplomatic relations are very 
important.    In  the  same  context,  I  would  like  to  make  an  appeal  to  the  hon.  Minister  of 
Finance and Economic Development, if he could consider opening a Consulate in Italy where 
there is a Mauritian diaspora.  Having been there myself on a private visit some months back, 
I could see the pain of those Mauritians who are working hard over there.  I was told that 
there are Mauritians who are taking foreign nationalities due to lack of support.  I am sure 
this will not leave our hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development insensible. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we are all talking about matters that are very close to our 
 
heart  and,  today,  my  heart  will  speak  about  my  constituency.    My  focus  will  be  my 
constituency,  Curepipe/Midlands.    Our  constituency,  Curepipe/Midlands,  with  some  more 
than 68,000 people is a landmark.  It links the south to the north.  It is the centre point of the 
country.  Curepipe is, no doubt, full of talents, potentials and it has led the way in the past, 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. We can all relate to that beautiful town at the time of Sir Gaëtan 
Duval.  Curepipe has its own ambition to be grand once again. Today, thousands of people 
cross this town every day.  As I said, it links the south to the north.  It is a town which has a 
high number of schools and institutions.  It is a town with its own style due to the climatic 
weather.  One of the two botanical gardens of the country is found over there.  We have the 
Trou aux Cerfs crater.  We have a very nice Carnegie Library.  Almost all tourists visit the 
town during their visits.  But, unfortunately, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with time, Curepipe, 
known as the ‘Ville de Lumière’ has been dim to off.  Almost 20 years in the hands of the 
Opposition, nothing was done.  And today, with yourself, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, and hon. 
Toussaint, we are striving hard to meet the requirements of our mandates who have a lot of 

 

88 

faith in this Government.  And it is with great pleasure, indeed, that we learned in this Budget 
that the ex-Dubreuil Tea Factory will be re-opened and a tea nursery will be established at La 
Brasserie.  These will definitely create direct and indirect jobs. 

 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the metro express will start from Curepipe.  A new Radar 
Tower Building with an Exhibition Hall for the public will be constructed at Trou aux Cerfs. 
The  replacement  of  water  pipes  are  there,  but  what  Curepipe  needs  is  a  relooking  -  a 
relooking being a landmark – as it is a town where thousands of people, including tourists 
come.  The Jan Palach main bus stand does not make any sense now.  And here, Mr Deputy 
Speaker,  Sir,  I  would  like  to  add  that  we  have  a  very  dedicated  Minister  of  Public 
Infrastructure, hon. Bodha, who keeps an eye on us from time to time.   

(Interruptions) 

I take this opportunity, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir – because it is not often – to thank the hon. 
Minister for his outstanding support that he is giving to the three of us in Curepipe.  He has 
already  understood  the  importance  of  this  place  and  why  we  should  turn  Curepipe  into  a 
modern urban terminal just like the model of Port Louis under the BOT.   

 
Situated in a strategic location, Curepipe/Midlands has the full right to progress.  Mr 
Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  there  is  a  pool  of  talents  in  Curepipe/Midlands,  including  artistic, 
sporting,  and  entrepreneurial,  and  other  talents  that  Mauritius  as  a  whole  can,  of  course, 
benefit. 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, what you sow in Curepipe you reap.  It is a majestic 
place with ambitions, of having a sport academy, a theatre, a business park, a museum, SME 
incubators,  swimming  pool  but,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  in  reality  we  still  do  not  have  a 
synthetic track for our athletes in Curepipe.  There are many athletes in Curepipe. I am sure 
the  hon.  Minister  of  Youth  and  Sports  will  agree  -  and  athletes  of  national  level,  but, 
unfortunately, there is a lack of proper infrastructure.  Minister of Youth and Sports say that 
the National Olympic swimming pool will be constructed in Saint Pierre as Saint Pierre is 
found in the centre. But, as per my geography, Curepipe is more in the centre point. As the 
name itself says ‘Midlands’.  Minister will put all his efforts to support us. 

(Interruptions) 

Thank  you.  This  is  what  we  wanted.  It  is  a  must  for  the  inhabitants.  I  am  very  much 
convinced, Mr Deputy Speaker. Sir, that it is only this Government, the Government of Lepep 
with  the  Finance  Minister  of  such  a  calibre  and  of  such  a  vision  can  make  these  things 
happen. If it is not now, it will be never. We cannot trust others. 

 

89 

There are so many proposals which I know, like big projects, but, Mr Deputy Speaker, 
Sir, there should be a start somewhere. I make an appeal to all my hon. colleagues, with some 
determination and willpower, let us together give some light to Curepipe again. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I cannot end my speech if I do not greet and thank the Rt. 
hon.  Prime  Minister  who  has  been  there  all  throughout  and  has  helped  in  making  such  a 
genuine Budget. 

The  commitment  of  l’Alliance  Lepep  is  found  in  this  whole  Budget  which,  as  I 

mentioned, is very clear and explicit, understood by everyone. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, this Budget is in a spirit of frankness, both our challenges 
and the opportunity to turn our economy’s direction towards hope, confidence and a better 
future  for  all.  Let  us  unite  as  a  team,  sharing  our  skills  and  resources,  building  social 
solidarity,  defending  the  institutions  of  our  democracy  and  developing  our  economy 
inclusively to bring a new era of development. 

Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Tarolah! 

(6.34 p.m.) 

Mr  K.  Tarolah  (Third  Member  for  Montagne  Blanche  &  GRSE):  Mr  Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, it is with deep sense of pride and satisfaction that I rise in this august Assembly 
to  speak  on  the  Budget  2016-2017  which  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development, hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth, has presented to the House and to the nation on 
29 July 2016. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, allow me to congratulate hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth and 
the whole team of his Ministry as well as everyone who contributed in the preparation of this 
long-awaited Budget and the great job realised to the satisfaction of the nation. 

The credit also goes to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, who had 
started the consultations of the Budget 2016-2017 and which were finalised by hon. Pravind 
Kumar Jugnauth. 

We can easily recall that the date of 06 July 2016 was announced for the presentation 
of the 2016-2017 Budget, but was finally fixed for 29 July 2016 as the task of managing the 
finances of the nation and steering the economic development of our country was entrusted to 

 

90 

hon.  Pravind  Kumar  Jugnauth  and,  obviously,  no  doubt  this  Budget  bears  out  the 
determination in living up to the trust that has been put to him. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I said earlier a deep sense of satisfaction because it reminds 
me of the days during the electoral campaign when we announced the creation of the second 
miracle as a major theme. The electorate gave us a clear mandate to clean up the mess and 
give our country a fresh start. And the result is in front of us. The light of hope is brighter 
today  and  a  new  era  of  development  has  paved  its  way,  a  big  thanks  to  hon.  Pravind 
Jugnauth. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  expectations  are  many  and  the  aspirations  are  high,  thus 
priorities and concerns have been voiced out. It is essential that we have a clear vision of the 
future  we  want  for  our  nation.  A  proper  policy  of  national  sharing  is  also  crucial  for 
maintaining social peace. That is where the choice of coming on top, moving forward and up 
has been applied. 

This  is  where  hon.  Pravind  Kumar  Jugnauth  chose  to  break  with  the  past  that  has 
stifled development for the last decade and see the future in a new light which hon. Ramful 
could not get it right. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, let us not forget the introduction of nine  years continuous 
basic education until the elimination of the CPE examination as from 2017. This is a long-
awaited reform in the education sector and today this reform is being materialised due to the 
vision  and  determination  of  this  Government.  So,  it  is  better  that  hon.  Ramful  be  fair  and 
partial rather than mixing up personal issues. It is the wish of this Government to give equal 
opportunity to each and every child of this country access to education. I do hope that hon. 
Ramful would have had advised his dear friends, the former Ministers of Education who were 
from his constituency, but who had failed to bring such an important reform in the education 
sector in order to alleviate the burden of once called ‘the rat race’ at the level of Standard VI. 

Today,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  not  only,  on  this  side  of  the  House,  but  all  the 
stakeholders are proud of the task taken up by the hon. Minister, Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-
Luchoomun, who is handling alone the Ministry which was once driven by two Ministers of 
the Ramgoolam Government. 

I wish also to point out that thanks to the initiatives and measures taken by the hon. 
Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  to  give  cash  awards  to  encourage  the 
students coming from the poor families to further improve in their studies so as to be able to 

 

91 

get a job, be it in the public as well as the private sector rather than waiting their name to 
appear on the list of the famous local DSK. 

There are risks and uncertainties at the global level, if we do not choose an alternative 
path, more and more families will be left outside the mainstream, poverty will keep on rising 
and income inequality will widen further. If we continue with business as usual, we will be 
perpetuating the decay of our environment and quality of life. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, however, to make the hard choices and put our country on 
the right path ahead, major changes are required in the way things are done as well as the 
things we do. On peut le dire haut et fort, on this side of the House, that we totally agree to 
the statement 27 on page 3 of the Budget Speech 2016-2017. I quote – 

“Where we have to be bold we must be bold.” 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  ten  key  strategies  as  elaborated  by  the  Minister  of 
Finance and Economic Development cater for the new era of development.  The empowering 
of more and more of our citizens to become entrepreneurs to have a wider participation and 
better sharing of the wealth we create as a nation. 

The measures taken in the Budget 2016-2017 will benefit, broaden the fiscal incentive 
to new and existing businesses which will address the need to take the country safely through 
the crisis which the world keeps changing and we must adapt. Every sector of the economy is 
having its own specificities and we are doing things differently, we give maximum support to 
the SMEs. It is a revolutionary measure that addresses both access to and cost of finance. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  dealing  with  the  root  causes  of  poverty,  this  Budget  is 
concretely  launching  the  Marshall  Plan  against  Poverty,  a  major  innovative  approach  in 
dealing with the problem of poverty. This Government through the Minister of Finance and 
Economic Development has decided to go for a more direct approach in extending support to 
the  very  poor  families  leaving  in  conditions  of  absolute  poverty  by  acting  urgently  and 
directly.  The  support  will  be  comprehensive,  designed  to  lift  in  a  meaningful  way,  living 
conditions  and  quality  of  life  of  those  unfortunate  families;  in  other  words,  this  historic 
measure will eradicate absolute poverty in Mauritius. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, there must be an abiding commitment to the values of our 
society:  compassion,  kindness  and  generosity.  These  values  will  be  the  cornerstone  of  our 
actions to eradicate absolute poverty, to support families who live at the margin and to pull 
up all those whose life is grounded in poverty and trapped at the lower rung. This Budget 

 

92 

aims to empower these families to break away from the poverty cycle and stand on their own 
feet. It is not only a problem of material well-being but human dignity as well on improving 
educational achievements. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, to encourage students from poor families to achieve higher 
levels of education, Government will give them a cash award for successfully completing the 
grade 9 level, the School Certificate and the Higher School Certificate or equivalent technical 
qualification. A second chance will be given to students from poor families for exam re-sit at 
the School Certificate and Higher School Certificate levels. Their examination fees will be 
borne by Government. This Government has managed the economy not only for growth but 
also for uplifting the life of every citizen and a better life for all our citizens. 

One of the key metrics of our success in achieving growth for the greater good will be 
the narrowing of the gap between the rich and the poor. Mauritius has reached a stage of its 
development that we need to push it forward and not pull it down. 

M. le président, il ne faut pas oublier que, dans notre Budget 2015-2016, nous avons 
soulagé  le  fardeau  du  peuple  dès  les  premiers  jours  de  l’installation  de  ce  gouvernement 
suivant les dernières élections générales en augmentant la pension de vieillesse, la pension 
des veuves et des invalides à R5,000. Nous avons mis – 

• 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

R9  milliards  de  revenus  additionnels  pour  les  familles  sur  la  pension  et  la 
compensation salariale ; 
R200 millions d’économie sur les factures d’eau ; 
R310 millions de subsides pour le SC et la HSC ; 
R240 millions pour les jeunes diplômés chômeurs ; 
R340 millions pour les petits planteurs ; 
R250 millions de dons pour les familles à faible revenu pour couler la dalle ; 
R85 millions d’économie sur les SMS. 

Voilà,  M.  le  président,  quelques  exemples  pour  démontrer  comment  nous  avons 
amélioré  le  pouvoir  d’achat  des  familles  de  façon  conséquente.  C’est  un  effort  colossal  et  
nous en sommes fiers parce que nous croyons dans un socialisme à visage humain dans la 
justice sociale et dans le partage équitable du gâteau national. Le prix du gaz a connu une 
baisse conséquente. Nous sommes plus que jamais un gouvernement du peuple qui travaille 
pour le peuple et qui est avec le peuple. Les Mauriciens savent que nous tenons à cœur leurs 
intérêts et c’est la raison pour laquelle ils continuent à nous soutenir massivement.  

 

93 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it is now abundantly clear that, following the presentation of 
the Budget, we are at the dawn of a new era which sets the path for sustained, equitable and 
all  inclusive  economic  prosperity  for  our  country.  We  shall,  of  course,  leave  no  stone 
unturned in our resolve to ensure that we serve the people; not only those who have put their 
trust in this Government, but the whole nation and to create a truly smart Mauritius where the 
welfare of the nation will be at the very centre of every action we take. 

This  Budget  contains  a  good  mix  of  seemingly  development  measures  that  could 
restore confidence and social justice through a series of measures to further better our welfare 
system. The effect of this approach is the feel-good factor, a necessary condition in creating a 
climate  of  social  stability  and  an  enabling  environment  for  investment which  will  create  a 
new mindset in Mauritius, a different mindset for the adoption of new technologies. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  this  Budget  provides  some  major  projects  in  our  regions 
which are in the Public Sector Investment Programme such as the Bel Air Mediclinic which 
will cater for more than 50,000 inhabitants in the East and South East regions of our country. 
On the same line, the Pont Lardier Water Treatment Plant is one of the long awaited solutions 
to the water supply in the East and South East regions of our country. 

In line with the commitment to support and to lift families out of poverty, at Unité, 
Sebastopol, Camp de Masque and Melrose, more than 500 housing units will be constructed 
to  allocate  a  decent  shelter  just  to  mention  a  few  of  them  but  rather  these  projects  will 
definitely  allow the Constituency  No. 10 to be on the same level of development together 
with the country. Therefore, let us all work together, hand in hand, to achieve our destiny. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I will further add that every Mauritian is proud of you, hon. 
Pravind Jugnauth. Let me, therefore, congratulate and thank the hon. Minister of Finance and 
Economic  Development,  our  leader,  leader  of  the  MSM  Party,  the  same  party  which  was 
once called the small party in this very august Assembly but today, I wish to pass on this kind 
of information to the hon. Member who is not here, hon. Shakeel Mohamed, que la roue a 
tourné and he is very well aware that the same small party is actually the locomotive of this 
Alliance Lepep as well as this Government.  

Before I conclude it will be very unfair if I would not comment on the matter where 
the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  with  great  pleasure  announced  the 
setting up of not only an embassy in Riyadh but also a consulate in Jeddah. 

 

94 

Hon. Pravind Jugnauth had proudly honoured the commitment taken by the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister Sir Anerood Jugnauth during the electoral campaign in December 2014 which 
reminds me of what the Vice-Prime Minister, hon. Showkutally Soodhun, who is not here, 
usually states and I quote –  

‘Pran jaye par vachan na jaye’ 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, allow me on behalf of everyone who will visit Saudi Arabia 
and especially those going to perform Hajj to thank hon. Pravind Jugnauth and the Rt. Hon. 
Prime Minister Sir Anerood Jugnauth for their noble consideration. 

Furthermore, I would like to ask hon. Uteem, who is not here, to, at least, salute with 
due respect the effort made by the Vice-Prime Minister hon. Showkutally Soodhun instead of 
just  criticising.  Allow  me  to  wish  the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  hon.  Showkutally  Soodhun,  a 
quick recovery from his illness. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development, 
hon.  Pravind  Jugnauth,  has  displayed  an  avant-garde  mindset  and  a  very  dedicated  and 
innovative approach to give our country a new hope for a better future and the Budget has 
enunciated many bold measures that lay the foundation for the second economic miracle that 
is well cherished by our hon. Prime Minister. 

With these words, I thank you for your attention. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mrs Monty! 

(6.50 p.m.) 

Mrs M. C. Monty (Third Member for Port Louis North & Montagne Longue): I 
would like, first of all, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, to thank you for allowing me to intervene on 
this present budget and to extend my warmest congratulations to the hon. Minister of Finance 
and Economic Development for his Budget Speech delivered, I must say, in a more relaxed 
atmosphere as the tone was set right at the start. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the hon. Minister of Finance made it clear that we are really 
starting a new era and a special way to look at the whole nation in all its needs and at the 
country in its need for sustained development and change. Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, if Budget 
Speeches have for long been un grand oral understood by a rare few, this time after more 
than  two  hours  of  delivery,  a  meeting  was  held  to  reach  out  to  the  others  the  budgetary 

 

95 

measures explained in our mother tongue.  I wish, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, to congratulate 
again the hon. Minister of Finance for having chosen to tread on a new road for having made 
those  first  steps  on  the  avenue  of  newness  and  for  having  opened  the  gates  of  hope  and 
change. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, this Government wants to positively leave its imprint in the 
political  history  of  this  country.  We  have  been  elected  to  work  for  the  continuous 
development  of  our  motherland  and  its  people.  The  Government,  through  the  Ministry  of 
Finance,  wishes  to  prove  that  it  does  not  only  want  its  nation  to  be  in  a  high  state  of 
development, but together with the poor and the needy, with its inspired and motivated youth, 
being guided towards success through learning, help them grow and develop their talents in 
fields that will better serve the country.  

This vision, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, is not a blurred one. Our society needs its youth 
to meet all the exigencies of a modern Mauritius. Through this budget, a clear signal has been 
given,  no  more  mismatch.  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  this  present  budget  covers  numerous 
fields  from  green  and  blue  economy,  to  a  full-fledged  digital  society,  from  new  tourist 
attractions to small and medium enterprises with a National SME  Incubator Scheme, from 
road security to rethinking of energy supply, from bio-agriculture to poverty alleviation, to 
name but a few, no stone has been left unturned and new avenues of hope opened. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, if development is about transforming the lives of people and 
not  just  transforming  economies,  as  rightly  pointed  out  by  Joseph  Stiglitz  in  his  book 
‘Globalisation  Work’,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  would  have  successfully  woven  the 
tapestry of change with the necessary colours and threads. In the conception of this budget, a 
new beginning had to be envisioned, en rupture avec un passé lourd de stagnation et non 
avec la réalité telle que ce budget a été lourdement et négativement commenté. We needed to 
shake off the dust, if not remove the sticky mud of the past to be able to move from a state of 
high decay to a new state of wellness and development. It was necessary to wear new lenses 
and  have  the  necessary  paradigm  shift  to  envision  a  better  future  for  our  country  and  its 
people. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the hon. Minister has proved that this Government build with 
the mind and also create with the heart as Criss Jami rightly said. We only have to look at the 
different measures proposed to alleviate poverty. It is clearly seen that a reassessment of all 
those at the lower rung of the social ladder has been made to better respond to the needs of 

 

96 

the poorest and to the most needy. This Government does no longer want its people to live 
under  absolute  poverty  and  the  financial  threshold  for  the  benefit  of  allocation  has  been 
positively reviewed. The measures concerning poverty alleviation go even to the pre-primary 
sector  where  Government  help  increases  by  Rs500  in  favour  of  young  children  in  need.  I 
highly appreciate the fact that the same spirit of care to our infant is maintained. We will 
recall that hon. Xavier-Luc Duval, the then Minister of Social Integration decided to set up 
les crèches in various deprived areas of our country, thereby helping working mothers and 
favouring social integration of our young children. 

Toutefois, je souhaite que la petite enfance reçoive plus d’attention et je fais un appel 
à  la  ministre  de  l’Education  pour  que  la  puériculture  jusqu’ici  enfants  pauvres  du  vaste 
chantier  d’éducation  reçoivent  surtout  et  aussi  toute  l’attention  nécessaire.    Nos  jeunes  ne 
sont pas généralement attirés par ce premier stage au niveau de l’éducation et le nombre de 
puéricultrices dans la panoplie de service à la petite enfance reste toujours insuffisant et se 
fait de plus en plus vieillissant. Des mesures incitatives et motivantes pourraient mieux attirer 
les  jeunes  vers  cette  première  étape  dans  l’éducation  de  nos  enfants  sur  qui  repose  notre 
société de demain. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  another  measure  which  I  would  like  to  mention  is  the 
extended School Feeding Programme to meet the needs of our  youngsters in ZEP schools.  
However, students needing food are not found only in ZEP schools and those coming from 
the ZEP schools do not disappear from our educational fields when they finish the primary 
cycle.    Their  needs  do  not  change,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  when  they  make  the  leap  to 
secondary education.  They still come from the same family background and often from the 
same deprived area.  But it is also a sad and unknown reality that many secondary students 
come to school with empty stomachs. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  it  is  not  the  region  that  should  necessarily  determine 
entitlement for age benefit.  For example, if a child is driven to a ZEP school in a BMW, does 
he  really  need  assistance?  That  is  the  question.    Regions  do  not  necessarily  determine 
eligibility for help or assistance though it may generally be the case. A child in a star school 
in Quatre Bornes, for example, may be coming to school with an empty stomach.  Surveys 
will definitely help to identify hardship cases and my plea to both the Minister of Finance and 
the Minister of Education is to have a special eye for those unknown children in their covert 
needs. We cannot imagine, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, a blooming Mauritius, a smart Mauritius 

 

97 

with all facilities and help given to its people and where the needs of the most needy students 
are not ignored completely because unknown. 

M. le président, dans la sagesse des décisions prises, ce budget vient éclairer ce souci 
bien pesé qu’aucun développement économique ne pourrait se faire sans le développement 
humain.  Offrir  un  éventail  de  possibilités,  favoriser  le  développement  des  aptitudes 
techniques, accompagner les parents dans leurs difficultés économiques, les aider encore plus 
au  niveau  de  l’éducation  de  leur  enfants,  en  prenant  en  charge  les  frais  d’examens  de  fin 
d’études  secondaires  vient  motiver  le  parent  à  permettre  à  son  enfant  de  poursuivre  ses 
études.  

C’est une mesure qui vient soutenir le parent à un moment décisif dans son parcours 
parental et dans une période financièrement difficile où il faut encourir les frais d’examen. 
Vient  ensuite  une  mesure  que  je  salue  particulièrement,  étant  témoin,  du  degré  de 
désintéressement  que  peuvent  atteindre  certains  éléments  sur  certains  étudiants  faute 
d’encouragement et d’encadrement familial, celle de la prime financière offerte aux jeunes, à 
tous  les  démunis  qui  seront  fortement  récompensés  s’ils  fournissent  les  efforts  nécessaires 
pour atteindre un certificat de fin d’étude au niveau, d’abord, du Grade 9, et ensuite au niveau 
du SC et du HSC. Quoi de plus motivant, M.  le président! 

J’accueille  aussi  favorablement  ces  mesures  visant  à  alléger  la  pauvreté  car  elle 
soulagera ceux qui se trouvent au bas de l’échelle et aussi les mandants de ma circonscription 
qui en bénéficieront également. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, bringing the technology to the store step of knowledge and 
allowing young children to benefit from the use of tablets at an early age is a most laudable 
initiative.    Nevertheless,  educators  must  try  to  find  ways  and  means  to  provide  more 
interaction among our young children and activities should be rendered compulsory so as to 
avoid the risk of our children developing too much individualism. 

M. le président, nos enfants ont souffert d’un système trop élitiste, trop académique, 
le côté technique, s’il y a été introduit aussi, a laissé nos enfants sur le pavé après leurs trois 
années à l’IVTB, nettement insuffisant comme formation. Le volet technique prendra certes 
un certain nouvel élan, un meilleur statut avec l’introduction du nine-year schooling.  

However,  our  educational  system  has  for  long  been  too  academic  or  technical  and 
now we should cater for multiple intelligences.  We have many born artists in schools, even 
though  we  do  not  want  illiterate  artists,  our  nation  itself  is  highly  literate,  bilingual  or 

 

98 

multilingual.  Multi-talented  artists  will  now  have  to  be  encouraged  and  supported  in  the 
development of their talents. 

Nos mœurs ont besoin d’être adoucies, M. le président, par la musique. Nous avons 
besoin  de  nous  occuper  de  la  santé  sociale,  psychologique  et  culturelle  de  nos  enfants.  Le 
ministère de l’environnement, des administrations régionales, du tourisme, des arts et de la 
culture  peuvent  ensemble  apporter  cette  différence  et  faire  que  nos  enfants  arrêtent  de  ne 
regarder que du béton. 

M. le président, je faillirai à ma tâche en tant que rare parlementaire femme de cette 
assemblée, si je ne mentionne pas ce que propose l’honorable ministre des finances en ce qui 
concerne la place devant être accordée à une femme au sein du conseil d’administration de 
toutes  compagnies  publiques  listées  en  bourse,  de  la  mise  en  place  d’un  Parliamentary 
Gender Caucus, le premier en son genre, et la provision faite à cinq ministères importants 
pour effectuer des analyses sur le genre par rapport au service offert tout en élaborant des 
réponses  politiques.  De  plus,  un  indice  sur  le  développement  du  genre  sera  introduit  pour 
mieux évaluer le progrès en ce qui concerne l’égalité à ce sujet. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  this  Government  means  business  and  intends  to  fix  many 
areas of different legislations that need to be closely analysed and amended accordingly.  The 
numerous Acts to be reviewed during this financial year clearly specify the decision to bring 
change,  to  plug  loopholes  and  translate  into  reality  this  new  era  of  development;  another 
proof that we are not at all en rupture avec la réalité, but we really want to better serve the 
nation and better suit the needs of our present and near future and better fit the exigencies of 
our time. 

To  end  my  speech,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  would  like  to  quote  Brooke  Foss 

Westcott who said - 

“Great occasions do not make heroes or cowards; they simply unveil them to the eyes 
of men.” 

And  this  Budget  presentation  has  been  that  occasion  for  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development.  May he be thanked for having turned on the ignition key for a safer, 
more inclusive and brighter Mauritius.   

On these words, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I wish to leave the floor.  Thank you and 
wish  to  extend  my  thanks  to  all  the  hon. Members  of  this  august  Assembly  for  their  kind 
attention. 

 

99 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Boissézon! 

(7.06 p.m.) 

Mr  E.  Boissézon  (Third  Member  for  La  Caverne  &  Phoenix):  Merci  M.  le 
président,  de  me  permettre  d’intervenir  lors  des  débats  du  Appropriation  (2016-2017)  Bill 
2016.    D’emblée,  je  féliciterai  l’honorable  ministre  des  finances  pour  la  présentation  du 
budget 2016-2017 acclamé par tous.   

Nous avons l’habitude de citer des personnes connues, des sommités mais aujourd’hui 
je citerai A. M., une dame retraitée, âgée de 55 ans, interrogée par le quotidien ‘l’Express’. Et 
elle a cela à dire – 

« C’est un budget qui apporte de bonnes nouvelles. Je suis contente de l’annonce de la 
baisse du prix de gaz ménager, des facilités pour les citernes d’eau et les mesures pour 
les handicapés et les enfants défavorisés. » 

M. le président, au cours de son intervention lors des débats relatifs à la présentation 
du budget 2015-2016, le leader de l’opposition a terminé son allocution avec une prophétie 
apocalyptique pour le pays en ajoutant – 

« (…) mon intime conviction est que le pays ne s’en sortira qu’avec un gouvernement 
qui parle un langage de vérité à la population et qui prenne avec lucidité et courage et 
dans  autant  de  consensus  que  possible  des  décisions  parfois  difficiles  qu’il  faut 
prendre, mais indispensables pour permettre au pays de prendre un nouveau départ et 
de donner un nouveau souffle à la croissance et à la création d’emplois. » 

M.  le  président,  l’honorable  ministre  de  finances  a  pris  son  temps  pour  écouter  les 
différents composants de l’économie mauricienne, les ONG, les syndicats, la mauricienne et 
le mauricien, et tout un chacun est content aujourd’hui d’avoir été écouté. 

A la Pierre Mendès France, il a utilisé un langage de vérité économique pour parler à 
la nation. Il a bien fait comprendre à la nation que nous étions dans une impasse économique 
et qu’il fallait se réinventer pour pouvoir s’adapter aux conditions économiques internes et 
externes  pas  toujours  glorifiantes.  Cela  ne  l’a  pas  empêché  de  préconiser  des  mesures 
courageuses  avec  beaucoup  d’accent  pour  le  social,  une  volonté  profonde  d’éradiquer  la 
pauvreté.  

Aujourd’hui nous redonnons espoir à tous les mauriciens.  Nous mettons en œuvre un 
plan  à  long  terme  qui  repose  sur  des  investissements  judicieux  et  sur  une  conviction 

 

100 

inébranlable selon laquelle il est possible de réaliser des progrès pour faire de Maurice une 
République à la grandeur de ses ambitions, soit un high income economy nation. 

M.  le  président,  l’année  dernière,  le  précédent  ministre  de  finances  nous  avait 
prévenus que le pays était à la croisée des chemins. C’était un wake up call. Il demandait à la 
nation de se réveiller et de sortir de cette zone de confort éphémère créé pour l’endormir et 
l’entraîner  vers  une  ruine  certaine  alors  que  certains  devenaient  plus  riches  et  les  pauvres 
beaucoup plus pauvres. Des signes d’éveil furent notés pendant l’année écoulée et certaines 
améliorations  notables  furent  notées.  Aujourd’hui  nous  parlons  de  budget  de  relance.  Un 
budget  dont  les  mesures  vont  créer  un  espoir  pour  tous  les  mauriciens:  plus  d’ouverture, 
renverser  le  déclin  des  investissements,  une  plus  grande  discipline  fiscale  et  une  prudence 
financière.   

Les mesures annoncées dans le discours du budget démontrent que nous avons mis de 
l’ordre  dans  la  maison  que  nous  avons  héritée  et  que  nous  établissons  des  bases  solides 
constituant le socle de notre prospérité. 

Je  note  avec  plaisir  le  fait  que  l’entreprenariat  soit  la  stratégie  prioritaire  du 
gouvernement. Les petites et moyennes entreprises, malgré leur nombre élevé, plus de 75,000 
unités dispersées à travers le pays, est une grande méconnue. Le Mauricien ne réalise pas de 
la contribution de ce réseau d’entreprises à l’économie nationale. Dans la zone de l’OCDE, 
les PME jouent un rôle majeur dans la croissance économique et ce sont elles qui créent la 
plupart des emplois nouveaux. Plus de 95% des entreprises de cette zone sont des PME qui 
représentent 60% à 70% de l’emploi dans la plupart des pays de l’OCDE. A mesure que les 
grandes  entreprises réduisent leurs effectifs et  externalisent de plus en  plus de fonction, le 
poids des PME dans l’économie s’accroît. 

Si nous voulons d’une croissance accrue, nous devons produire plus, démontrer plus 
d’efficience,  être  innovant,  et  surtout  avoir  une  approche  plus  professionnelle,  car  c’est 
mondialement  connu  que  moins  de  50%  des  petites  entreprises  nouvelles  s’offrent  une 
pérennité,  et  un  petit  pourcentage  seulement  constitue  le  noyau  d’entreprises  devenant  des 
leaders de l’innovation et des performances aux normes industrielles. Cet état de fait freine 
les  entrepreneurs  potentiels  liés  au  fait  que,  dans  le  même  temps,  ils  ont  à  faire  face  à 
l’insuffisance  de  financement,  difficultés  d’exploitation  des 
technologies,  capacités 
managériales limitées, faible productivité, lourdeur de la réglementation à  évoluer dans un 
contexte de compétitivité mondialisée, où la technologie devient prépondérante. 

 

101 

Ce  gouvernement,  conscient  des  problèmes  précités,  a  introduit  des  mesures 
additionnelles pour catalyser le développement de ce secteur économique important. Evoquer 
toutes les mesures prendrait trop de temps à la Chambre. Aussi, je vais énumérer quelques-
unes. 

Bien souvent, des entrepreneurs s’aventurent dans la formation d’une entreprise avec 
l’apport de leur savoir-faire technique, un capital précaire, du matériel rudimentaire, et une 
faible connaissance de la jungle commerciale dans laquelle ils évolueront. 

Le  National  SME  Incubator  Scheme  est  une  aide  pour  les  soutenir  lors  de  cette 
période de rodage. L’augmentation du nombre d’entités à travers le pays est un signal fort 
pour  le  gouvernement,  et  montre  le  désir  réel  de  promouvoir  le  développement  des  PME. 
Certains  entrepreneurs  ont  trouvé  le  temps  d’incubation  trop  court.  Il  serait  nécessaire  de 
revoir la stratégie adoptée et d’apporter des améliorations nécessaires. Il faudrait aussi nous 
assurer que les accompagnateurs aient, au-delà des capacités techniques de gestion, un fort 
bagage  pédagogique,  afin  de  prodiguer  le  savoir-faire  nécessaire  pour  la  gestion  d’une 
entreprise. 

Dans plusieurs pays, le nombre d’entreprises dirigées par des femmes augmente. Des 
obstacles subsistent néanmoins, et si l’on veut cibler efficacement les mesures à prendre, il 
est indispensable de mieux connaître et promouvoir l’entreprenariat féminin et son rôle dans 
la  société  et  dans  l’économie.  Le  SME  Incubator  est  nécessaire,  voire  primordial,  pour  la 
survie des petites et moyennes entreprises ; sa présence est la clé maîtresse pour la réduction 
des faillites dans ce secteur. 

La  suppression  des  trade  fees,  le  comptoir  rapide  pour  les  micro-entreprises,  le 
leasing des équipements et le Leasing Equipment Modernisation Scheme qui permettra aux 
entrepreneurs d’acquérir des équipements et du matériel de pointe sont de bons points pour 
l’avancement et l’épanouissement des PME. 

Comme  je  l’ai  dit  avant,  l’entrepreneur  se  lance  dans  l’aventure  avec  très  peu  de 
liquidité.  Combien  de  petites  entreprises  se  sont  écroulées  sous  les  dettes,  incapables 
d’honorer les échéances, alors qu’elles avaient des factures en attente chez de gros clients qui 
ont imposé des conditions de paiement, tels que 90 jours après facturation, etc. 

Le  service  de  factoring  sera  d’une  grande  aide  au  cash-flow  des  entreprises 

concernées et les aidera à plus de vigilance dans la gestion de leurs débiteurs.  

 

102 

La fusion du NRF Equity Fund et du SME Partnership Fund ne sera que bénéfique 
aux PME. Il sera sûrement important d’adopter une approche consensuelle au moment de la 
fusion, afin de dissiper toutes les craintes de certains qui craignent que leurs intérêts soient 
lésés. 

Pour  clore  ce  chapitre  sur  l’entreprenariat,  je  citerai  Monsieur  Amar  Deerpalsing, 
président de la Fédération des Petites et Moyennes Entreprises. A première vue, il  y a des 
mesures en faveur des PME. Elles vont encourager l’investissement qui va déboucher sur une 
croissance  plus  élevée  et  soulager  l’économie.  Elles  vont  pallier  le  problème  du  chômage. 
C’est une manière d’inviter ceux qui se retrouvent sans emploi à se lancer dans la création 
des PME. 

M. le président, la deuxième stratégie de la nouvelle ère de développement choisie par 
l’honorable ministre des Finances est la création ou plus précisément la réduction du taux de 
chômage. Il est un fait que ce n’est pas au gouvernement de créer des emplois. Sa vocation 
est de créer un environnement propice pour la création d’emplois rémunérateurs, glorifiants, 
et stables. 

Je  note  que  le  gouvernement  fait  un  effort  considérable  en  retirant  plus  de  15,000 
jeunes des affres du chômage en leur procurant la possibilité d’acquérir un savoir-faire dans 
les secteurs offrant le plus d’emplois, et surtout un savoir-être, si nécessaire, pour postuler à 
des  postes,  dépendant  de  leur  aspiration.  Nous  savons  qu’à  Maurice,  les  entrepreneurs  se 
plaignent du manque de savoir-faire et d’expérience dans la supervision, plus communément 
appelé middle management, d’où un manque de productivité. Il serait intéressant de mettre un 
plan  de  formation  en  entreprise  pour  les  jeunes  cadres,  comme  le  plan  proposé  pour  les 
ingénieurs  afin  qu’ils  acquièrent  l’expérience  nécessaire  à  leur  enregistrement  comme 
ingénieurs professionnels. 

M.  le  président,  tous  les  ans,  lors  de  la  présentation  du  budget,  nous  entendons  le 
même refrain de l’opposition : les mesures préconisées ne favoriseront pas l’investissement ; 
ainsi,  pas  de  création  d’emplois.  Pas  une  année  ne  passe  depuis  10  ans  sans  que  nous 
n’entendions ce refrain. Aujourd’hui, l’opposition doute de la capacité de ce gouvernement 
d’atteindre une croissance de 4.1%, et encore plus, de créer des emplois. L’argument présenté 
est que l’investissement du secteur public n’a cessé de chuter depuis 2008 pour atteindre le 
chiffre de 17.5% du produit national brut en 2015. 

 

103 

L’investissement  du  secteur  privé  n’a  cessé  de  baisser  depuis  2008  quand  il  avait 
atteint 20.3% pour atteindre 12.7% en 2015. Oui, le gouvernement ne nie pas ce chiffre, mais 
ne fait pas de fuite en avant. Le ministre des Finances a pris la décision courageuse d’investir 
le gouvernement dans un vaste plan d’investissement public malgré le fait que le pays soit 
déjà endetté. J’entends déjà des voix qui s’élèveront pour dire au public du montant de la 
dette qu’il y a sur leur tête, mais je citerai le ministre des Finances – 

“We must look beyond the short-term and make investments that would strengthen 
growth and raise productivity.   

These investments must come from both the public and private sectors.” 

L’Etat investira R 34.9 milliards pour ce présent exercice financier et R 153 milliards pendant 
les cinq ans à venir.  Permettez-moi d’énumérer  certains.   

1. 
2. 

3. 

4. 

R 35 milliards dans le secteur d’eau pour accroitre la capacité de stockage.   
R 25 milliards  dans le secteur énergie renouvelable, nous offre la possibilité 
de créer des emplois bien rémunérés, de diminuer notre facture d’importation 
de fuel, et surtout, elle sera d’un apport important dans notre entreprise 
d’économie verte.   
R 25 milliards pour améliorer le système de transport.  Les réseaux routiers 
n’arrivent plus à répondre aux besoins du trafic. Tout en mettant l’emphase 
d’un besoin d’un plan stratégique de développement urbain, il s’avère qu’un 
système de transport de masse est nécessaire.  Un mode de transport moins 
polluant, plus rapide, en prenant en ligne de compte les interminables 
congestions et surtout une réduction substantielle de  notre importation de 
carburant.  
 R 6.6 milliards dans le Port pour l’approfondissement du Canal Anglais et 
l’achat de portique plus performant.   

L’Opposition  semblait  mettre  en  doute  l’investissement  privé.    M.  le  président,  au 
 
début  de  l’année,  la  Chambre  de  Commerce  et  de  l’Industrie  avait  publié  le  rapport  de 
l’indice  de  confiance  des  entrepreneurs  pour  l’année  2015  et  une  hausse  de  6%  avait  été 
notée,  comparée  à  l’année  2014.    M.    Padayachy,  le  Manager  de  la  division  d’analyses 
économiques et recherche de la MCCI avait fait remarquer que nos taux de croissance d’alors 
étaient 
  Il  préconisait  un  besoin 
d’investissement.    Il  parlait  d’un  investment  led  growth  et  suggérait  un  taux  de  25% 

trop  faibles  pour  une  relance  de 

l’économie. 

 

104 

d’investissement  du  secteur  privé.    Le  secteur  privé  n’avait  pas  investi  car  il  y  avait  une 
tendance à la désinflation, une politique de baisse de prix et, qui dit baisse de prix dit baisse 
de profit, d’où l’incapacité à investir et par ricochet à booster la croissance et créer l’emploi. 

La MCCI a pris l’engagement de suivre de près l’évolution du taux d’investissement 
 
au cours de l’année et de ceux à venir.  J’ai confiance au partenariat du secteur privé et je 
citerai M. Arnaud Dalais, Chairman of Business Mauritius.  Je cite – 

 

« C’est  un  vrai  budget  de  réforme  courageuse.    Nous  avons  noté  cette  volonté  de 
réforme dans la facilitation des affaires.  Nous apprécions également l’effort fait par 
rapport à la pauvreté.  Le secteur privé travaillera de concert avec le gouvernement.  
Entre le secteur privé  et public, c’est un vrai partenariat essentiel pour   l’avenir  de 
Maurice.  Dès que possible, Business Mauritius entamera des consultations pour voir 
dans quelle mesure le secteur privé participera à ces efforts de réformes. » 

 
Je suis sûr que les investissements et l’emploi seront à l’ordre du jour, ainsi dans le 
moyen  terme,  le  pays  bénéficiera  d’infrastructure  de  pointe  et  moderne,  nécessaire  à  notre 
entrée dans les sphères du high income ecomomy ; dans le court terme, la construction et la 
mise en place des infrastructures vont créer les emplois nécessaires pour réduire le nombre de 
chômeurs.    Selon  l’adage  économique,  quand  l’industrie  de  la  construction  est  en  bonne 
santé, l’économie du pays se porte bien. Nous avons noté une croissance de 1.6% en 2006 
après cinq années de contraction dans le secteur de construction.  Avec d’autant de projets 
d’infrastructure,  les  incitations  à  la  construction  domestique  et  logements  sociaux,  nul  ne 
doute  que  le  gouvernement  a  créé  l’environnement  propice  pour  l’épanouissement  de  ce 
secteur. 

M. le président, j’aurai voulu parler des mesures sociales de ce budget.  Elles sont en 
fusion, les unes plus courageuses et bienfaisantes que les autres. Je ne prendrai pas le temps 
de la Chambre, car beaucoup a été dit et beaucoup sera dit. Mais, je ne pourrais me taire sur 
l’allocation de subsistance d’un minimum de R 2,720 et au seuil maximum de R 9,520 pour 
une famille de deux adultes et trois enfants.  Ajouté à cela, l’application du salaire minimum 
au cours de l’année confirmera que le gouvernement ‘Lepep’ est un very caring government, 
comme l’a si bien dit l’honorable Premier ministre. 

M. le président, je parlerai sur la NDU et le Citizen Advice Bureau.  Comme PPSs, 
 
notre  mission  est  d’avoir  des  consultations  avec  la  population  dans  les  circonscriptions  où 
nous sommes affectées. Nos responsabilités sont – 

 

105 

• 

• 

• 

• 

assurer un lien de communication entre le gouvernement et le public, 
informer, sensibiliser le public du programme et de la politique 
gouvernemental ; 
garder un contact permanent avec les responsables des CAB se trouvant dans 
les circonscriptions qui nous sont allouées ; 
établir une liste de projets d’infrastructurelles à implémenter dans les 
circonscriptions précitées, et 
suivre la mise en place de ces projets en coordination avec les officiers 
responsables de la  NDU. 

Lors de notre entrée dans nos nouvelles fonctions, nous nous sommes attelés à préparer une 
liste  de  projets.    Ce  fut  une  douche  froide  quand  nous  avons  appris  que  nos  projets  ne 
pourraient être entrepris faute de financement, car le gouvernement précédent avait vidé les 
caisses et encouru des dettes pour des vastes projets électoraux. 90% de notre budget capital 
fut englouti à repayer ces dettes.   

Du  peu  de  financement  disponible,  la  NDU  a  entrepris  de  construire  des  drains  et 
 
entrepris  l’asphaltage  des  rues  pour  un  montant  total  de  R  37.4  millions  dans  les 
circonscriptions Nos. 19 et 20.  Durant le cours de l’année, un dialogue et un partenariat a été 
établi  entre  la  NDU  et  la  municipalité  de  Beau  Bassin/Rose  Hill  et  le  District  Council  de 
Rivière Noire pour nos projets à implémenter au cours de l’année financière 2016/2017.   

 
Priorité  sera  donnée  à  la  construction  de  drains.    Une  attention  particulière  sera 
donnée  aux  régions  à  risques  comme  celles  s’étendant  de  Chebel/Pavé  d’Amour  à 
Coromandel, de Hermitage à Coromandel qui est considérée comme une zone sinistrée.  La 
NDU  supervisera  un  projet  d’agrandissement  de  la  route  Berthaud  dès  que  le  processus 
d’achat par le ministère des Terres sera effectué ; le document pour le lancement des appels 
d’offres  est  déjà  prêt.    Ce  tronçon,  déjà  utilisé  par  les  automobilistes,  une  fois  agrandi, 
décantera le trafic entre Rose Hill/ La Louise à Quatre  Bornes. 

Le fonctionnement des Citizen Advice Bureaux (CAB) sera revu pour les rendre plus 
 
accessibles  au  public.    Il  faut  dire  que  ces  bureaux  n’ont  pas  suivi  les  développements  de 
communication  de  cette  dernière  décennie,  alors  que  la  mission  même  des  CAB  est  la 
communication avec la population.  Un grand effort devra être fait dans ce domaine.  Des 
cadres devront être formés afin de répondre aux attentes des habitants.  Dans les jours qui 
viennent, des sessions de brain storming seront organisées avec les principaux stakeholders 
de la région pour mieux comprendre les besoins et aspirations des habitants. 

 

106 

M.  le  président,  je  serai  très  bref  pour  ma  conclusion.    Une  façon  aussi  de  dire  au 

 
revoir au Président Barack Obama en disant -  

 

 

‘A new era of development! Yes, we can! We will make it happen!’ 

Merci. 

Mr Roopun: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I move that the debate be now adjourned. 

Dr Husnoo rose and seconded.  

Question put and agreed to. 

Debate adjourned accordingly. 

ADJOURNMENT 

The  Prime  Minister:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  move  for  the  adjournment  of  the 

House to tomorrow Friday 05 August 2016 at 3.00 p.m. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

The Deputy Speaker: The House stands adjourned.  

Hon. Ameer Meea! 

(7.31 p.m.) 

MATTER RAISED 

HASSEN SAKIR ROAD - SEWERAGE SYSTEM 

Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port  Louis 
East): Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am raising an issue, which relates to the Ministry of Public 
Utilities.  I am glad that the hon. Vice-Prime Minister is here so that I can address this issue.  
It is a problem regarding the sewerage system mixing with water on a canal in a residential 
area on a street called Hassen Sakir Road, ex-Pagoda Street. 

In fact, this is an old problem.  It has been here for two years or so. I must say that I 
have, myself, intervened on two occasions on this issue. The Wastewater Authority has done 
the needful and the problem has been fixed.  But a week ago, this problem has arisen again, 
whereby the sewerage system is being mixed into water and in a canal in front of houses and 
this long canal runs down up to Paul et Virginie Street where there is a mosque.  There is a 
foul smell coming on the street because of this leak of the sewerage system. 

 

107 

So, I would kindly ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister to look into the matter so that 

needful could be done. 

Thank you. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):  Well, I will certainly do that almost immediately. By tomorrow, I will look 
into it. 

At 7.32 p.m., the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Friday 05 August 2016 at 

3.00 p.m. 

