No. 21 of 2016 

 

 

 

1 

 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

(UNREVISED) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

 

FRIDAY 05 AUGUST 2016 

 

 

 

 

2 

 

CONTENTS 

 

 

 

PAPERS LAID 

QUESTION (Oral) 

MOTION 

BILL (Public) 

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

3 

THE CABINET 

 

(Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

 
Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 
KCMG, QC  
Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 
GCSK  
Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Hon.  Ivan  Leslie  Collendavelloo,  GCSK, 
SC 
Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK 

 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 
Communications 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 
Utilities 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 
International Trade 
 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha, GCSK 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan, SC 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 
Sinatambou 
Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 
Perraud 
Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain, GCSK 

of 
Minister 
Empowerment 
Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation  

Integration 

and  Economic 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 
Family Welfare 
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 
Institutional Reforms  

 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

 
Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 
Cheong, MSK 

Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 

4 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 
Institutions 
Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands 
 
Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms, 
Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 
Disaster and Beach Management 
Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and 
Training 

 

 

 

 

 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Gopall, Mr Navin  

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 21 of 2016 

 

Sitting of 05 August 2016 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 3.00 p.m. 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 

 

 

7 

PAPERS LAID 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table – 

A.    Prime Minister’s Office ‒ 

The  Transfer  of  Prisoners  (Conditions  for  Transfer)  (Miscellaneous  Provisions) 
Regulations 2016. (Government Notice No. 159 of 2016) 

B.    Ministry of Finance and Economic Development ‒ 

Mauritius in Figures 2015. 

C.    Ministry  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 

Scientific Research ‒ 
The Annual Report of the Mauritius College of the Air for period 01 January 2012 
to 
11 July 2012. 

D.    Ministry of Health and Quality of Life ‒ 

(a)   The  Medical  Council  (Continuing  Professional  Development)  Regulations 

2016. (Government Notice No. 160 of 2016) 

(b)   The  Dental  Council  (Continuing  Professional  Development)  Regulations 

2016. (Government Notice No. 161 of 2016) 

E.    Ministry of Agro-Industry and Food Security ‒ 

The  Annual  Report  and  Audited  Accounts  of  the  Irrigation  Authority  for  the 
financial years 2014 to 2015   

F.    Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection ‒ 

(a)   The  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Price  of  Taxable  and  Non-Taxable 
Goods) (Amendment No. 2) Regulations 2016 (Government Notice No. 162 
of 2016). 

(b)   The Rodrigues Consumer Protection (Control of Price of Taxable and Non-
Taxable  Goods)  (Amendment  No.  21)  Regulations  2016  (Government 
Notice No. 163 of 2016). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

8 

ORAL ANSWER TO QUESTION 

POVERTY ERADICATION & MARSHALL PLAN AGAINST POVERTY – SUMS 

EARMARKED 

The  Leader  of  the  Opposition  (Mr  P.  Bérenger)  (by  Private  Notice)  asked  the 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to poverty eradication, he 
will state the –  

(a) 

number  of  adults/households  who/that  will  be  entitled  to  the  payment  of  a 
monthly subsistence allowance under the new proposed scheme, indicating the 
–  

(i) 

(ii) 

criteria that will determine the quantum thereof payable thereto, and  

sums provided in the Budget for the payment thereof over the period 
01 December 2016 to end June 2017, and  

(b) 

programmes  and  actions  in  the  Marshall  Plan  Against  Poverty  that  will  be 
implemented in 2016/2017, indicating the sums provided in the Budget for the 
implementation thereof. 

The  Minister  of  Social  Integration  and  Economic  Empowerment  (Mr  P. 
Roopun): Madam Speaker, with your permission, I will reply to this Private Notice Question. 
I  wish  to  thank  the  hon.  Leader  of  Opposition  for  giving  me  the  opportunity  to 
elaborate and shed light on the proposals contained in the Budget Speech with regard to the 
payment of a Subsistence Allowance and the implementation of the recommendations made 
in the Marshall Plan against Poverty. 

Eradication  of  absolute  poverty  has  always  been  the  priority  of  priorities  of  this 
Government since our taking over in December 2014. The Government Programme clearly 
states at paragraph (20) thereof the elaboration of a medium to long term Marshall Plan to 
combat poverty and social exclusion. 

This  was  further  reaffirmed  in  the  Budget  Speech  of  last  year  and  also  in  the 

Economic Vision Statement of the Prime Minister. 

The  Marshall  Plan  is  a  reality  today,  since  we  have  even  made  provision  for  the 

implementation of the flagship recommendations contained in the Plan as from this year. 

With regard to part (a), I wish to inform the House that, as at to date,  the income 
threshold for the absolute poor is Rs6,200 per household per month irrespective of the family 

 

9 

size  for  Mauritius  and  Rs5,000    for  Rodrigues.  Presently,  there  are  13,267  households  in 
Mauritius and 1,400 households in Rodrigues who are registered  and found eligible in the 
Social  Register  of  Mauritius  (SRM)  for  support  under  the  National  Empowerment 
Foundation’s (NEF) programmes and the Child Allowance respectively.  

The monthly household  threshold of Rs6,200 which was determined in 2012, is no 
longer  adequate  and  has  already  served  its  purpose.  In  our  bid  to  find  a  fairer  and  more 
equitable  threshold,  we  have  reviewed  it  taking  into  consideration  international  prevailing 
methodologies  for  the  determination  of  an  appropriate  poverty  threshold  for  Mauritius 
including  Rodrigues.    As  per  international  poverty  line  of  USD  1.25  a  day  per  person,  it 
would  have  been  lesser  than  what  we  are  providing.  At  that  level,  the  proportion  of 
households as per Statistics Mauritius (SM), in absolute poverty, is less than 1,000.  

However, we have calculated the new Poverty threshold taking into consideration all 
incomes derived by the poor households which stands at Rs2,720 per adult per month. This is 
40 % higher than the World Bank threshold of US Dollar 3.10 Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) 
equivalent to Rs1,938 per person  per month for developing countries. For obvious reasons, 
children under the age of 16 have been considered half of that amount. 

The  proportion  of  poor  households,  based  on  the  World  Bank  threshold,  is    1.73% 
equivalent  to  6,400  families  or  2.7%  of  the  number  of  poor  persons  representing    34,200  
persons based on total income of the household including Rodrigues. 

I wish to inform the House, that the above mentioned figures are mere estimates and 
the actual figures can only be determined after a full-fledged survey which my Ministry will 
carry  out  in  collaboration  with  other  stakeholders  as  from  next  week.  For  Rodrigues,  the 
survey will start at the beginning of September 2016.  

The whole survey is expected to be completed by end of October this year which will 
be followed by home visits with a view to calculating the assessed income through a revised 
Proxy Means Test. 

We  are  confident  that  payment  of  this  income  support  will  be  effective  as  from 

December 2016. 

I  seize  this  opportunity  to  seek  the  collaboration  of  all  Members  to  sensitize  poor 
people  of  their  Constituencies  who  fall  within  the  new  poverty  threshold  to  register 
themselves at the Registration Centres that will be communicated in the Press. 

With regard to part (a) (i), the House will note that the  eligibility threshold per adult 
per  month    is  Rs2,720  while,  depending  on  the  family  size,  the  maximum  threshold  for  a 
household will be Rs9,520 per month. For the benefit of Members, I am circulating a copy of 

 

10 

the new thresholds. Just as an example,  I may state that for one adult and two children the 
new threshold will come to Rs5,440, for two adults and two children, the new threshold  will 
be  Rs8,160  and  for  two  adults  and  three  children  it  will  come  to  Rs9,520.  The  sum  to  be 
disbursed will be the difference between the threshold and the assessed income. For example, 
for a household of two adults and two children, the new threshold being Rs8,160 per month. 
If the assessed income of the household stands at Rs5,000 per month, the additional amount 
eligible to be paid to this household will be the difference between the assessed income and 
the new threshold, i.e. Rs3,160 per month.  

As I stated earlier, the new threshold is fairer and more equitable as larger families 

will now qualify for support as compared to the current uniform threshold of Rs6,200 . 

Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  all  support  provided  by  NEF  is 
already subject to a social contract which is a mutual agreement between the beneficiary and 
NEF.  This  monthly  Subsistence  Allowance  is  a  new  scheme  to  empower  the  vulnerable 
households  under  the  social  contract  which  will  run  for  two  years  and  will  be  reviewed 
accordingly. 

With  your  permission,  Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  we  have 
already secured the assistance of UNDP to review the existing social contract with a view to 
making it more appropriate and effective. In addition, the UNDP Team will also assist in the 
restructure  of  NEF  and  the  setting  up  of  an  appropriate  Management  Information  System 
(MIS)  for  better  monitoring  and  evaluation  of  individual  households  who  will  be 
accompanied and handheld during this period of two years. 

I am confident that with these new measures, we are adopting a holistic approach in 
our fight against the scourge of absolute poverty. The households will no longer be left on 
their own as they will always be supported by a Case Management Officer of the NEF. 

Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  part  (a)  (ii)  -  payment  of  monthly  Subsistence 
Allowance, the amount as provided in the Budget is Rs200 m. for Financial Year 2016/2017 
and Rs300 m. for Financial Year 2017/2018. 

With regard to part (b), the Marshall Plan has made a series of actionable programs to 
be  implemented  over  the  short,  medium  and  long  term  by  several  Ministries  including, 
amongst others, Education, Housing, Labour, Environment, Social Security, Gender, Youth 
and Sports, Health. 

As  the  House  is  aware,  several  of  these  actions  have  already  been  initiated  in  the 
Budget Speech for those eligible under SRM. Provision made in Financial Year 2016/2017 is 
as follows - 

11 

Rs 200 Million 
Rs 60 Million 
 

Subsistence allowance based on the new  poverty threshold 
Educational support  as follows - 
- A one off School  Completion  Premium of  - 

 

1. 
2. 
 

•  Rs15,000 for students successfully completing the Grade 9 

level under the nine year schooling; 

•  Rs25,000  for  students    successfully  completing  School 

Certificate or equivalent vocational qualifications; 

•  Rs35,000  for  students  successfully  completing  Higher 

School Certificate or equivalent vocational qualifications - 

This  amount  will  be  credited  in  a  savings  account  opened  in  the 
name of the child and can only be accessed when the latter reaches 
18  years.  This  amount  can  be  used  by  the  child  to  pursue  further 
education or set up a small business. 
 
Community based school to be implemented in five ZEP schools on 
a pilot basis by the Ministry of Education; 
 
Crèche Voucher Scheme, i.e. an increase from Rs1,500 to Rs2,000 
per child; 
 
Cash grant for purchase of  school materials as follows - 
Rs1,500 for Pre-Primary and Primary students, and 
Rs2,000 for Secondary including Pre-Voc and Tertiary students; 
 
to offer a second chance for students for exam resits at SC and HSC 
levels under the Vote of the Ministry of Social Security; 
 
Funeral  Grant  will  be  increased  from  Rs4,950  to  Rs10,000  under 
the Vote of the Ministry of Social Security; 
 
in respect of fire victims to enable them to secure accommodation 
for a maximum period of six months, i.e. Rs5,000 per month under 
the Vote of the Ministry of Social Security; 

3. 

Rs3 Million  

4. 

Rs4 Million 

5. 

Rs30 Million  

6. 

Rs10 Million 

7. 

Rs15 Million 

8. 

Rs350,000 

 

12 

 

 

9. 
 

 Review of CSR by the setting up of a National CSR Foundation whereby, at least, 50% 

of CSR funds collected will be channelled to the Foundation; 

 

10.  Rs10 Million for recruitment of 50 Case Management Officers and Psychologists at the 
NEF, including Rodrigues, in the context of the reorganisation of the core activities of 
the case workers; 
 

11.  Rs200  Million  for  the  New  Decent  Shelters  Programme.  A  Committee  is  currently 

working on its implementation. 

 

Madam Speaker, I am confident that the series of measures enunciated in the Budget 
Speech,  and  which  we  are  implementing,  will  undoubtedly  bring  about  substantial 
improvement in the living conditions of those in extreme poverty. 

Mr Bérenger: I am quite surprised that it is the Minister of Social Integration who is 
replying to the PNQ. I refer to paragraph 299 of the Budget Speech, where it is announced 
that  a  new  monthly  subsistence  allowance  scheme  will  be  set  up,  and  it  says  ‘(…)  a  new 
scheme  under  which  every  adult  on  the  Social  Register  will  be  entitled  to  a  monthly 
subsistence  allowance  (…)’  and  so  on.  My  first  question  to  the  Government  is:  Will  that 
monthly subsistence allowance be paid, as is spelt out in the Budget Speech, to every adult or 
to every household? 

Mr Roopun: Madam Speaker, as I stated, it is going to be paid to households on the 

basis of the number of persons within that family. 

Mr Bérenger: In the Budget Speech, it is said ‘every adult’, and when you turn it into 
household, it divides by two.  So, can I ask again?  Are we going to stick to what is said in 
the  Budget  Speech;  that  every  adult  will  be  paid  that  allowance?    Or  will  it  be  every 
household? 

Mr Roopun: Madam Speaker, the threshold is per adult and the payment will be per 

household. 

Mr Bérenger: In the Budget Speech, the Minister says to every adult.  Now, we have 
been  told  that  there  is  now  going  to  be  a  full-fledged  survey  and  so  on.  I  want  to  have  a 
figure. How many adults as from 01 December are going to benefit from that new allowance? 
Can  I  remind  the  Minister  that,  in  the  Estimates,  for  his  own  Ministry,  Ministry  of  Social 

 

13 

Integration and Economic Empowerment, there is no question of a survey.  It is said there is 
no question of a survey, and I quote – 

 “(…)  amongst  the  main  achievements  for  financial  year  2016/2017,  registration  of 
13,267  households  with  a  monthly  income  of  less  than  Rs6,200  under  the  Social 
Register of Mauritius.” 

So, my second question is: Are we now going to carry out a survey or as promised by the 
Minister of Finance, all these adults, all the 13,217 people who are on the Social Register of 
Mauritius will be paid as at 01 September this new allowance? 

Mr Roopun: Madam Speaker, first of all, allow me to lay a copy of the table which I 
mentioned earlier.  I wish to clarify one thing.  When I came at the Ministry, there was no 
Social Register, although - the ancient Government - since a few  years ago, it was clearly 
stated that all beneficiaries of the NEF should be registered under the SRM.  The SRM was 
based  under  a  threshold  of  Rs6,200  per  family,  and  this  dates  back  to  2012.  It  was  this 
exercise that I carried out last year. This has been completed. Under this exercise, the amount 
of Rs13,000 and something was found out, and it was on this basis that we effected all our 
interventions last year.  But the House will realise that this new threshold is something which 
has been announced in this very Budget, and the whole calculation has now changed.  It is 
per capita based on a totally different mechanism.  The amount itself has increased. It is for 
this  purpose  that  a  fresh  exercise  will  necessarily  have  to  be  carried  out  if  we  want  to 
implement the new measure under this Budget. 

Mr Bérenger: My point is simple, Madam Speaker.  We have had a speech from the 
hon. Minister of Finance who says that every adult on the Social Register of Mauritius will be 
paid this new allowance.  The Minister concerned has said that there is an existing Social 
Register with 13,267 households, and the Speech said that adults are going to be paid.  So, 
my question was simple.  I do not want to hear about the new survey.  Carry out the number 
of surveys!  But there is, according to your own Ministry - the Attorney General is going to 
advise the other one!  Keep to your place! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

(Interruptions) 

 

14 

Mr Bérenger:  My simple question is … 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, it is a shame what is taking place! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

Order! 

I am on my feet! I have said order! 

Order! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Bérenger:    We  have  13,267  households  on the  Social  Register  which  the  hon. 
Minister has set up.  Are they going - every adult - to be paid this special allowance?  Yes or 
no? 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  Can  I  call  the  House  to  order,  please!    Hon.  Leader  of  the 
Opposition, you will have to ask your question to the Minister, and it is up to the Minister to 
reply.  Whatever happens in between is no concern of the House. 

To the Minister! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

This is what I am telling the Minister. He has to reply to your question, but whatever happens 
in the Chamber is no concern of anybody. 

Mr Roopun: Madam Speaker, I wish to repeat again.  I am sure that the hon. Leader 
of the Opposition will appreciate that whatever is in the Budget is done at the level of the 

 

15 

Ministry.    Of  course,  we  are  consulted,  but  we  should  realise  that  these  are  two  different 
exercises. The first exercise carried out is, in fact, per household, but here we want to help the 
poorest among the poor.  A new mechanism is being established where it is going to be per 
capita instead of being per household, with a cap of Rs9,520. 

Mr Bérenger: I do not think it is worth carrying on, Madam Speaker.  We have seen 
that  it  is  pure  bluff  as  far  as  the  eradication  of  poverty  is  concerned.    I  am  not  carrying 
onward. 

It should be a shame on him! 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

Order!  

 (Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

No,  this  is  not  acceptable!    Hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition,  whatever  you  said  is  not 
acceptable! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition,  please  withdraw  those  words  ‘bous  to  lagel’,  which  have 
been said!   

Please!  Please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger:  Madam Speaker, you have ruled!  Yes, I withdraw!  You have ruled! 
In the recent past, when the Prime Minister said ‘shut up!’ to somebody, you have ruled that 
it is parliamentary.  So,  shut up! 

(Interruptions) 

 

16 

Madam  Speaker:    No!  Hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition,  I  am  just  drawing  your 

attention to the fact that whatever the Prime Minister said, he had withdrawn.  

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Leader of the Opposition, have you finished… 

(Interruptions) 

…others have questions! 

Hon. Osman Mahomed, you have a question! 

Mr Mahomed:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  My question pertains to the Marshall 
Plan. Now, in the Budget Speech, more specifically at paragraph 289 on the Marshall Plan, 
provision is being made for Rs50 m. for 1,000 housing units.  My first question is: does that 
pertain to the Marshall  Plan, and if so, what is  the size of houses that is being  envisaged, 
because in the past when the Marshall Plan was being initiated, the question was to provide 
larger houses because the hon. Minister rightly mentioned larger families are being catered 
for, and whether the roof, instead of being Corrugated Iron Sheet (CIS) at the moment, will 
be in concrete?  Because we are talking about Rs500,000 per housing unit? 

Mr Roopun:  The previous social housing was of an area of 31 m2.  This is being 
increased up to 50 m2, depending upon the size of the plot and it is going to be in concrete.  
This is our intention: a concrete building up to 50m2.   

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Ramful! 

Mr Ramful:  May I  refer the hon. Minister to the Household Budget Survey 2012 
where the poverty line for two adults and two children, the average household income, was 
calculated at Rs13,330.  Now, with the new calculation that the hon. Minister has tabled, for 
two adults and two children, the monthly income threshold has been reduced to Rs8,160 and 
in 2012, there were 33,800 households which were within that threshold.  Now, with this new 
calculation,  wouldn’t  there  be  a  number  of  those  households  which  would  be  outside  the 
bracket? 

Mr  Roopun:    Madam  Speaker,  today  with  this  measure,  we  are  concerned  with 
extreme  poverty,  absolute  poverty  and  the  other  threshold  relates  to  relative  poverty.    We 
want, first of all, to deal with the poorest among the poorest, that is, those in extreme poverty 

 

17 

with this provision in our Budget.  We are not, at this stage, concerned with those who are in 
relative poverty.  For those, we will have to seek other mechanisms.  

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Barbier! 

Mr Barbier:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  In his reply, the hon. Minister stated that 
Rs3  m.  will  be  allocated  to  the  community-based  schools  and  it  concerns  five  schools,  I 
suppose, in the ZEP zone.  May I know from the hon. Minister whether these schools have 
already been identified, and if so, whether he will give us the list of schools which have been 
identified? 

Mr Roopun:  The list has not yet been finalised.  It is being worked out at the level of 
the Ministry of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific Research.   

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Ganoo! 

Mr  Ganoo:    Madam  Speaker,  I  would  like  to  ask  the  hon.  Minister  the  following 
question. Reference is, in fact, made to the Social Register in the Budget Speech by the hon. 
Minister. Do we have a Social Register?  Because there are questions which have been asked 
in this very House under the previous Government, and we were told that this is a dynamic 
register, and that people come in and get out and there is, in fact, nothing as a Social Register. 
Isn’t  this  a  confusing  situation?  Why  does  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development make mention in his speech about 6,400 families?  He mentioned that there are 
some 6,400 families still living below the absolute poverty threshold and in the Estimates, 
reference is made to about 13,000 families in the same category as has just been mentioned 
by the hon. Leader of the Opposition.   

Mr Roopun:  I wish, once again, to clarify this issue which, I think, is very pertinent.  
The 13,000 was based on the threshold of Rs6,200 per family and it was on this basis that we 
conducted  the  registration  last  year.    And  now,  it  is  completely  a  new  mechanism  that  is 
going to be put into place, based on this threshold per adult equivalent of Rs2,720. It means 
that within the first list of 13,000, we will have to revalidate and find out, because within that 
register we did not take into consideration the number of persons per family, but it was based 
essentially on the household.  We are coming with a completely new system of calculation 
which is fairer and which, we believe, is going to target most specifically those who are the 
poorest among the poor.  

 

18 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon Rutnah! 

Mr  Roopun:    Excuse  me,  Madam  Speaker!    So  far  as  the  Social  Register  is 
concerned, the one which has been prepared and which is mentioned in the Supplement under 
my Ministry, we do have a Social Register right now which is with the Ministry of Social 
Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions, and I may add also that in this Social 
Register, we have been able not only to have a list of those families, but we know exactly per 
village how many households are on this Register.  We know in each and every Municipal 
Council,  in  each  Ward,  which  are  those  families.    We  have  also  worked  with  Statistics 
Mauritius to know specifically, geographically where they are situated, and even within each 
village, it has been divided amongst enumeration areas and we know exactly where they are.  
Now, we wish to ascertain that there is no exclusion error.  The exercise is going to be carried 
out with the help of the community, and then with this database, for the first time, we will be 
able to come with a proper and clear way of fighting poverty.  But, in the meantime, we had a 
new policy designed through this Budget. We will have to adjust and take into consideration 
these new factors, and then, we are going to proceed with our strategy as planned earlier.  

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Rutnah! 

Mr Rutnah:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Will the hon. Minister agree with me that 
in order to eradicate absolute poverty, it is not only about the amount of money allocated to 
poor families, but in line with paragraph 302 of the Budget Speech, at page 41, where this 
Government  proposes  to  introduce  major  programme  to  empower  these  families  to  break 
away from poverty cycle and stand on their own feet, that is, other than monetary terms, this 
Government  undertakes  to  bring  other  sorts  of  programmes  in  order  to  empower  these 
families? 

Mr Roopun:  In fact, Madam Speaker, the payment of this income support is the first 
step towards empowerment.  We want, first of all, to ensure that those families have the strict 
minimum for their daily needs, and from there, then comes the major challenge.  The major 
challenge is to take all those families out of assistance and try to empower them.  This is 
where  the  new  role  of  the  National  Empowerment  Foundation  (NEF)  is  going  to  be  very 
important.  This is why we are enlisting the support of further field workers who are going to 
manage the families.  They are going to hand-hold those families and try to take them out of 

 

19 

poverty, help them in different manners, try to train them, be at their side, support them and 
ensure  that  they  graduate  out  of  poverty  and  they  become  independent  and  they  fully 
integrate in society, and can participate fully in economic and other social activities designed 
for each and every Mauritian. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr Bérenger:  I don’t have any further question. 

Madam Speaker:   You don’t have any further question.  I am sorry then, because the 

privilege is for you. Time is over! 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10 (2) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move that all the business on today’s Order 

Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to 

PUBLIC BILL 

Second Reading 

THE APPROPRIATION (2016-2017) BILL 2016 (No. XVII of 2016) 

Order  read  for  resuming  adjourned  debate  on  the  Appropriation  (2016-2017)  Bill 

2016 (No. XVII of 2016). 

Question again proposed. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Roopun! 

(3.31 p.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Social  Integration  and  Economic  Empowerment  (Mr  P. 
Roopun): Madam Speaker, with your permission, may I continue on the same trend and start, 
first of all, by expressing my deep sense of pride to rise in support of the Budget presented by 
the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development to the nation last Friday. 

 

20 

This exercise has, from all accounts, raised the spirits of our countrymen and has been 
acclaimed unanimously by Mauritians of all walks of life, including, various hon. Members 
from the other side. 

This, in itself, is a rare feature.  En effet, Madame la présidente, c’est intéressant de 

voir que le leader de l’opposition trouve ce budget intéressant. 

Such consensus, however, has not been obtained by sheer accident. 

When  hon.  Pravind  Jugnauth  returned  at  the  helm  of  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and 
Economic  Development,  we  all  know  that  everything  was  set  for  the  presentation  of  the 
Budget on 06 June. 

On assuming office, he could have stuck to the schedule and proceeded as planned.  
However, instead of taking the route of facility, the hon. Minister preferred to have a fresh 
look all over again.  He ensured that everything fits perfectly within the philosophy of this 
Government and our Vision 2030.  And in so doing, he also gave due consideration to the 
most important exercise of this House.  He had further brainstorming sessions and meetings 
and he has worked relentlessly for the last 8 weeks towards the elaboration and finalisation of 
this Budget.  This has proved, once again, Madam Speaker, the sincerity of purpose and the 
commitment of the hon. Minister in his endeavour to propel the economy on a high growth 
trajectory  to  create  jobs,  to  reduce  inequality  and  eliminate  poverty.    For  this,  Madam 
Speaker,  he  deserves  all  our  admiration  and  gratitude  as  he  has,  once  again,  shown  his 
profound dedication and sense of leadership.  To borrow an expression from the hon. Leader 
of the Opposition, let me say that this fourth Budget of hon. Pravind Jugnauth was really a 
“coup de maître”. 

Madam Speaker, since we assumed office in December 2014 to date, what were our 
objectives? What have  we done?  Our utmost priority was to bring the economy from the 
backburner  to  the  centre  of  our  preoccupation  and  lay  firm  foundations  for  a  renewed 
prosperity while ensuring social justice. 

During our last Budget, we proved that it was possible to increase substantially social 
allocations of the most vulnerable without any increase in taxation.  We came with a no tax 
budget  and  set  the  scene  right  to  answer  to  all  challenges  the  country  has  to  face.  
Unfortunately, barely 9 days after our last Budget, we were engulfed with a big mess, the so-
called BAI Saga.  We had to take all timely measures to avert irreversible damages to our 
economy, already battered after the passage of the last Government. 

 

21 

Despite the doom and gloom scenario propounded by the Opposition, we remained 
resolute  and  for  the  municipal  elections  which  followed,  the  population  renewed  their 
confidence and gave us an overwhelming victory. 

Madam Speaker, there will always be debates about what was the best course to deal 
with the BAI Saga. But, as a Government, we had to act there and then and thrash out issues 
as they were unfolding.  For anybody, it is easy to be wise after the event. But everyone in his 
right mind will agree that bold decisions had to be taken ever since 2013, but no one dared. 

Fortunately,  Madam  Speaker,  for  this  country,  the  most  difficult  has  now  been 
handled  and  this  chaotic  situation  is  now  behind  us.    We  have  successfully  been  able  to 
protect  most  depositors  and  policyholders  while  safeguarding  jobs.    Our  economy  showed 
resilience and the way the Government tackled the whole issue has enhanced our credibility 
on the international scene.  Whatever a few may say, we should acknowledge the personal 
dedication of hon. Minister Bhadain in tackling this very delicate situation, Madam Speaker. 

The main spokesman of the Opposition, in his speech, mainly raised two issues – 

He was very critical towards the ex-Finance Minister on the figures he had projected.  
The figures turned to be over optimistic. In any event, Madam Speaker, optimism is better 
than pessimism. 

However, everybody can surmise what would have been the situation without the BAI 
Saga,  the  growing  uncertainty  in  the  World  Economy,  the  slowdown  in  China  and  other 
emerging markets like South Africa or Brazil.  Despite all odds, the economic performance of 
Mauritius has been much more than honourable. 

Madam Speaker, hon. Uteem also mentioned that there was underspending on Capital 
Budgets.  It’s good to know what has been the modus operandi of the last Government on this 
score.  When we arrived, there were over Rs1.3 billion of outstanding payment at the NDU.  
Once funds had been secured, it came to light that for projects in hundreds, some dating as far 
back as 2011, claims could not be processed as  procedures had not been followed.  There 
were cases where we did not have any indication about the exact contract amount. At times, 
there  was  no  indication  about  the  duration,  about  the  exact  scope  of  work,  required  test 
results were missing and all this mess had to be cleared before effecting payment. 

I cannot blame Members of the Opposition, of the MMM or even the new Members 

of the Labour Party for asking questions but this was the Augean Stable we had to clean. 

 

22 

All hon. Members will appreciate that we could not dish out millions of rupees unless 
we are sure of the genuineness of those claims and I understand there are still some backlogs 
to clear.  But we all realise that the necessity of timely implementation of projects is vital and 
I would also join to urge all concerned of the necessity to act with diligence in the execution 
of all projects. 

Coming back to our present Budget, Madam Speaker, I do not want to quote too many 
figures.    Yesterday,  hon.  Seeruttun  gave  us  an  insight  and  it  is  clear  that  the  economic 
indicators  have  improved  in  most  sectors  though  we  agree  that  there  is  still  room  for 
improvement. 

Just to come back with a few examples – 

• 

• 

• 

• 

The MBC which was fraught with Rs1.2 billion worth of debts has this year 
registered an operating profit of around Rs80 m. 
Casino of Mauritius a real “pannier persé” which had been in the red zone 
since 2008 with a loss of Rs121 m. is expecting to end its financial year with a 
profit. 
Likewise for the DBM  which is now starting to make profits while lately it 
had bad debts of over Rs300 m. 
The  same  can  be  said  about  Air  Mauritius  which  is  flying  back  into 
profitability. 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  Madam  Speaker,  most  of  the  criticisms  leveled  towards  this 
Government  were  based  on  unfounded  premises,  but  little  was  it  realised  that  we  were 
focusing on systemic changes instead of superficiality. 

We were not diagnosing the symptoms but we were concentrating more on how to 

address the root causes of the dysfunctions in many public enterprises. 

On a totally different note, Madam Speaker, we should also acknowledge that after 
decades of chaos, this Government has also been successful in tackling the delicate issue of 
street  hawkers.    Similarly,  the  Terre  Rouge-Verdun  link  road  is  now  operational.  
Uncertainty, which has been looming regarding the DTAA with India, has now been settled 
and our financial sector can now develop activities with more substance and generate further 
employment. 

 

23 

Madam Speaker, due to time constraint and so  as not to be repetitive, allow me to 

come straightaway to my Ministry. 

I would like, at the very outset, to thank the hon. Minister of Finance for the special 
consideration  he  has  given  in  this  Budget  for  the  fight  against  extreme  poverty.  I  am  also 
grateful  and  glad  that  all  the  measures  announced  regarding  poverty  alleviation  are  being 
fully endorsed by hon. Members from both sides of the House.  

We  should  give  credit  to  hon.  Pravind  Jugnauth  who,  as  Minister  of  Finance,  has 
always  had  a  soft  corner  for  the  most  vulnerable  and  in  all  his  four  Budgets  we  have 
testimony for that. Again, this time he launched the Marshall Plan by coming with a measure 
which is nothing less than revolutionary. 

Allow me, Madam Speaker, at this juncture, on behalf of the whole Government, to 
express once again, our deepest gratitude to the UNDP for their support in the elaboration of 
the Marshall Plan. After a first draft obtained in November last year, the final version was 
received  in  March  this  year,  but  due  to  the  far  reaching  financial  implication  of  its 
recommendations, it had to be considered by the Ministry of Finance in the context of this 
Budget.  

Let me hasten to add, however, that the collaboration with the UNDP is still ongoing 
with regard to the implementation as we wish to have their technical support with regard to 
four issues, namely - 

restructure of NEF; 
Impact Assessment of NEF Activities; 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii)  MIS System for NEF, and  
(iv) 

elaboration of a Social Contract 

In  so  far  as  NEF  is  concerned  Madam  Speaker,  glaring  dysfunctionalities  in  the  service 
delivery was apparent and a profound reform and reorientation was imperative. Despite the 
fact that the precedent Government had, itself, took a policy decision that only households 
registered in the SRM would be eligible to the services provided by NEF, the latter continued 
to use its own database. This was manifestly demonstrated during the distribution of school 
materials  so  much  so  that  in January  2015,  when  we  assumed  office,  it  came  to  light  that 
some 50% of children attending ZEP schools had been excluded in that exercise.  

Another  concrete  example  is  the  construction  of  social  houses.  Out  of   750  houses 
constructed, more than 150 remained unoccupied for various reasons such as lack of water 
and electricity connection; no absorption pit and even for personal reasons some preferring to 
continue renting a house rather than to move in. This shows a blatant lack of follow-up on the 

 

24 

part of the NEF and necessary actions are being taken in order to remedy this disturbing state 
of affairs. In addition, due to lack of proper monitoring, more than 90% of beneficiaries who 
have to pay a monthly instalment of Rs500 are in arrears. This represent an amount of over 
Rs5 million while there are also instances where not a single instalment has been repaid. As a 
result, a tracking system has now been set up at the level of NEF to recoup all outstanding 
sums.  Concerning  construction  of  CIS  houses,  lots  of  abuse  and  corruptive  practices  have 
been noticed and same was discontinued. 

The  Gros  Cailloux  Housing  Estate  project  is  illustrious  of  the  absence  of  proper 
implementation  which  led  to  excessive  costs  overrun. The  project  initiated  as  far  back  as 
2011 was estimated at around Rs40 m.; the works were completed only in 2015 and by then it 
has cost Rs51.6 m.  It was only after the houses had been erected that it was realised that the 
main  door  was  unfortunately  too  narrow.  I  am  not  the  one  who  tested  it,  I  must  tell  you. 
Additional costs had to be incurred to remedy this situation. After handing over, the housing 
units  contained  a  lot  of  snags.  Provisions  had  not  been  made,  for  example,  for  individual 
electricity and water supply and a lot of other additional costs such as access road and drains 
were not included in the project design. 
  
Another service of the NEF is training and placement. It was noted that most of the 
training and placement of beneficiaries were not from the SRM list. No proper record was 
kept of the beneficiaries. Life Skill Training was intermittent and without any defined goals. 
Monitoring  and  evaluation  of  the  services  provided  by  NEF  was  cryingly  inexistent.  It  is 
against  this  background  that  it  was  resolved  that  prevailing   programmes  should  be 
completely overhauled with clear objectives and strategies put in place to ensure clarity and 
coherence of purpose. Both Qualitative and Quantitative changes have been brought. 

The Ministry of Good Governance was in the first instance approached to carry out an 
overall  assessment  of  the  services  provided  by  NEF.   9  reports  were  submitted  between 
March and December last year and all of them were damning. Various acts of omissions and 
commissions  have  been  revealed  by  the  internal  control  reports.  Many  cases  have  been 
reported to ICAC.  

Not acting promptly, Madam Speaker, to steer the course of NEF northwards would 
have  meant  settlement  for  complacence  and  acquiescence. Appropriate  actions  were  taken 
towards situating responsibility. This led to the institution of disciplinary actions against the 
Chief Administrator and the Financial Manager who both have been shown the exit door.   

I  am  not  going  to  pick  holes  in  the  functioning  of   NEF  before  December 
2014.  Nonetheless to say that NEF was like a “bateau sans gouvernail” and this will be an 

 

25 

understatement,  Madam  Speaker.   That  is  why  the  reorientation  of   NEF  including  the 
conditions  of  service  of  its  employees  has  always  been  a  priority  of   priorities.  And,  as 
mentioned earlier, the UNDP will provide consultancy on this matter and the final reports are 
expected to come out by end of November.   

As  the  House  may  realise  meeting  our  targets  turned  out  to  be  a  really  tough 
task.  Faced with many challenges, my Ministry left no stone unturned and the achievements 
are encouraging.  

With regard to database of NEF, we decided that a fresh survey should be carried out 
to determine the eligibility of households as per SRM criteria. Accordingly, we started the 
survey of beneficiaries in July last year and by March this year we were able to establish a 
credible and reliable register. Earlier on, I mentioned about what has been the result and, of 
course, with the change in threshold as announced in the reply and in the Budget Speech, a 
new  survey  will  now  be  conducted  as  from  next  week  and  this  will  last  till  end  of 
August. After  home  visits  of  new  applicants,  we  are  confident  to  generate  a  new  Social 
Register by end of October thus enabling payment of Income Support as from December. 

With  regard  to  the  social  housing  policy,  two  fundamental  changes  have  been 
brought.  There  is  a  paradigm  shift  in  this  policy:  namely  shift  to  fully  concrete  houses; 
increase of size of house from 31 up to 50m2 depending on the land size for owners of lands 
or  having  obtained  legal  permissions.  The  cost  of   a  housing  unit  will  increase  from 
Rs274,000 to above Rs750,000.  

Furthermore,  NHDC  has  agreed  to  allocate  10%  of  its  houses  to  be  constructed 
islandwise to landless families in the Social Register. We are also exploring the possibility of 
having  recourse  to  prefab  houses  to  bring  down  the  costs  but  without  compromising  on 
durability and safety. In this connection, expression of interests have been launched. 

As announced in the Budget, fire victims in the Social Register will receive a monthly 
allowance of Rs5000 up to six months to rent a decent dwelling pending a final determination 
of their situation. And I should thank the Minister of Finance for this, as this was among our 
main  concern.  Many  victims  were  being  sheltered  in  community  centres  without  proper 
access to basic sanitary facilities.   

The  issue  of  school  materials  being  subject  to  criticisms  in  terms  of  quality  of  the 
materials as well as deserving beneficiaries being excluded had to be dealt with diligently and 
in this respect, steps taken towards improving the system bore promising results.  Quality of 
materials was improved and it was subject to control by the Mauritius Standard Bureau.  

 

26 

As  a  first  step,  the  initial  list  was  reviewed  to  include  all  missing  ZEP  students. 
Subsequently, after finalisation of the Social Register, the cost has been drastically reduced 
from about Rs70 m. to Rs40 m. while complaints received were negligible. With regard to 
Rodrigues, we resorted to cash allowance and the response was positive.   

With the Marshall Plan now launched, the Poverty Observatory set up at the level of 
my Ministry is being finalised in order to create a permanent and independent platform for all 
relevant stakeholders to sustainably address the issue of poverty in all its forms. It will also 
act  as  an  advocacy  group  in  the  fight  against  poverty  and  create  linkages  with  the  SADC 
Regional Poverty Observatory for sharing of information and best practices. The Observatory 
will also conduct surveys and publish relevant reports on poverty.  

In  October  last  year,  my  Ministry  signed  a  MoU  with  the  International  Poverty 
Reduction Centre in China, based in Beijing. This Centre is the only institution of its kind in 
China,  and  has  assumed  a  prominent  and  influential  role  as  a  platform  for  exchanging 
information  and  encouraging  international  collaboration  on  poverty  reduction.  It  has  also 
built  a  commendable  track  record  as  a  centre  for  training,  research  and  high-level  policy 
dialogue and will hence help us with the running of the Poverty Observatory. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  do  not  propose  to  come  back  on  the  new  monthly  subsistence 
allowance  which  has  been  the  subject  of  the  PNQ,  but  to  drive  the  House  on  the  most 
important  part  of  my  intervention.  I  do  not  want  to  repeat  what  has  already  been  stated 
regarding that issue.  I wish, of course, to state what we believe is most important and in line 
with our objectives.  What we want is that the poor be helped to move out of the poverty trap. 
In  this  aspect,  empowerment  is  the  bridge  that  has  to  be  crossed  if  we  want  our  poor  to 
integrate the mainstream society.   

Access to education has proved to be a powerful tool of empowerment.  Provision of a 
decent shelter and training the poor to acquire appropriate skills will definitely help them to 
climb the social ladder. The provision of an income support, as provided in the budget will, 
undoubtedly, give a soothing balm to those underprivileged and destitute.  This will allow the 
household to concentrate on the empowerment programmes.  

The income support is not unconditional, as it is subject to the beneficiary entering 
into  a  social  contract  for  empowerment  such  as  sending  kids  to  school,  joining  skill 

 

27 

development  programmes  and 
Empowerment will be the backbone of our interventions. 

tapping  employment  opportunities  offered 

to 

them. 

We  all  know  that  today  knowledge  and  talent  management  are  being  laid  at  the 
forefront to keep pace with the ever fast changing society with technological revolution and 
we are living in a digital era. We want to make sure that no one is left behind. At the heart of 
this change, lies education which is the catalyst factor to drive all the development change at 
the human and societal levels. 

Bearing  this  in  mind  and  notwithstanding  the  present  conditional  cash  transfer 
payable to a maximum of three children to improve school attendance, we are going a step 
further to ensure that  wards of poor households have the opportunity to become successful in 
life  by  integrating in the knowledge-based world. I talked also about the initiative we have 
taken regarding the school premium. Just to add, we have also the voucher system scheme, 
which is going to put into place in replacement of the previous system, where we were giving 
school materials.  Now, we are going to give a cash grant in lieu of school materials and we 
hope that this will be easier both for Government and for the beneficiaries, so that everything 
will be done in a timely manner and families will, of  course, make best use of these facilities 
as it was before. 

 We  also  note  that  with  the  Nine-Year  Schooling  there  are  going  to  be  further 
interventions  as  I  mentioned  the  community-based  education  and  so  on.    I  do  not  want  to 
dwell further on that, Madam Speaker, for the time being.  

Just to add, Madam Speaker, in the light of the new Marshall Plan, the Ministry of 
Social  Integration  and  Economic  Empowerment  is  being  called  upon  to  effect  the  overall 
coordination across all line and in different Ministries for the implementation and monitoring 
of the Plan through the Poverty Observatory. 

So far as the NEF is concerned, its core activity will be the provision of operational 
support at the community level for the management of social contracts with beneficiaries. To 
this end, there is going to be a reorientation of the NEF and as I stated, the UNDP is working 
in this direction and we hope to have recommendations by the end of November. 

Another  crucial  measure  announced  in  the  budget  is  the  setting  up  of  the  National 
CSR  Foundation.  The  removal  of  CSR  guidelines  created  some  confusion  here  and  there. 
Vehement representations have been made across by NGOs to the effect that they are getting 

 

28 

difficulties to access funding from the CSR companies to sustain their activities and projects. 
Hence, their very existence is threatened.   

It was also being argued that it kills the spirit of social advocacy and activism which 
is of paramount importance in a democratic society.  In line with the outcry that the removal 
of guidelines has created opacity in the use of CSR Funds, we have now come with a new set 
up by the establishment of a CSR foundation which will undoubtedly help in bringing more 
transparency  and  ensure  that  the  CSR  funds  are  being  utilised  judiciously  towards  the 
upliftment of the poor and their integration into the mainstream society. At the same time, we 
hope that it will give a new impetus to the private sector and the civil societies to synergise 
their efforts and to participate actively in the nation-building. 

This foundation will function under the aegis of my Ministry and will be managed by 
a Board comprising of representatives from both the public and the private sectors. The core 
objectives of the foundation have been highlighted at paragraph 340 of the Budget Speech 
where  it  is  clearly  mentioned  that  the  top  priorities  are  poverty  alleviations,  educational 
support and social housing which are in line with Goal 1 of the SDG. 

Madame la présidente, ce gouvernement s’est fixé un objectif précis, celui d’éliminer 
la pauvreté absolue d’ici la fin de son mandat. De par la pluri-dimensionnalité de la pauvreté, 
c’est sur plusieurs fronts que nous menons ce combat. 

Ceci s’explique, en effet, par la provision dans ce budget d’une pléiade de mesures 
financières  et  matérielles,  des  moyens  nécessaires  pour  avoir  accès  à  un  toit  décent,  des 
incitations  pour  encourager  la  scolarisation  ou  encore  divers  formations  professionnels  et 
techniques pour faciliter l’employabilité de tous ceux se trouvant dans le Registre Social. 

Ces mesures, Madame la présidente, sont sans précédent et révolutionnaires. Mais ce 
gouvernement est entièrement conscient que la pauvreté est un phénomène complexe qui ne 
peut  être  réduit  qu’à  une  simple  expression  monétaire  et  matérielle.  On  reconnait 
parfaitement que la pauvreté est aussi un sentiment d’exclusion. C’est le sentiment terrible de 
ne compter pour personne, de n’être représenté et de n’être écouté par personne. Ce que la 
pauvreté met en lumière, avant tout, c’est la perte du lien social.  

Pour  ces  familles  qui  connaissent  la  pauvreté,  l’enjeu  n’est  pas  simplement  de  leur 
venir en aide même si c’est, bien entendu, nécessaire et vital. C’est aussi et surtout de les 

 

29 

accompagner  jusqu’à  leur  retour  au  cœur  même  de  la  société  et  par  la  suite,  les  rendre 
autonomes. C’est dans ce contexte qu’on a adopté une approche de responsabilisation totale 
et d’encadrement des populations à la base dès la conception et la mise en œuvre des actions 
de développement. 

Ainsi, pour conclure, Madame la présidente, je lancerai un appel solennel. Je demande 
la collaboration de tout un chacun, les membres de cette auguste Assemblée, les membres de 
la presse, le secteur privé et public, les ONGs, les collectivités locales, les responsables des 
villages, la communauté dans son ensemble sans oublier nos ainés qui regorgent de sagesse, 
d’expérience de vie et de valeur.  

En  effet,  chaque  attitude,  chaque  geste  compte  pour  combattre  la  misère  et 
l’exclusion. Il existe de multiples manières d’agir, quelles que soient nos compétences et nos 
disponibilités.  

Madame la présidente, je prie pour que chacun d’entre nous aille au contact de ceux 
vivant dans la pauvreté, de les écouter, d’être proche de leurs préoccupations et surtout de 
leur garantir que pour eux aussi l’ascenseur social fonctionne encore. 

C’est  la  seule  façon  de  garantir  à  toutes  et  à  tous  qu’ils  ont  leur  place  dans  la 

République de Maurice.  

Je vous remercie, Madame la présidente, pour votre attention. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Osman Mahomed! 

(4.02 p.m.) 

Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis Central):  
Madam  Speaker,  I  have  been  following  the  Government  speeches  and  statements  offered 
both inside and outside the House. What do they add up to?  Scarcely, a can of beans! For 
they  tried  to  tell  us,  this  Budget  exercise  is  a  social  Budget  and  often  times  a  budget  de 
rupture. 

If the Government believes that their muddled thinking will move us hey presto into a 
new era of development, they must be living in a different world, a different planet. Perhaps, 

 

30 

that is where they go to in all their foreign travels and in those private jets. Off to Neverland 
to be with Sheikh Peter Pan. 

Madam Speaker, the most talked about social measure of this Budget is the reduction 
of  the  price  of  cooking  gas  which  represents  a  saving  of  Rs40  a  month  for  an  average 
household. We are talking about Rs1.30 per day, which was long overdue. We have heard it 
in this House - better late than never.  Ene ti l’economie! But on the other hand, the price of 
sugar  has  gone  up.    Now,  only  this  morning  I  was  talking  to  the  ladoo  seller  who  was 
complaining  that  he  has  to  increase  the  price  from  Rs12  to  Rs14.   Consumption  has  gone 
down and so has his business. 

Madam Speaker, on the next day following the presentation of the Budget, the special 
adviser of the hon. Minister Finance and Economic Development, Mr Gérard Sanspeur made 
a  highly  political  statement  on  radio  to  the  effect  that  he  was  surprised  that  previously 
nothing was done to the 6,400 families who were still living below poverty line. Now, this is 
a scandalous statement! This afternoon, we hear the hon. Minister being very critical about 
his  predecessor,  for  it  is  an  undeniable  fact  that  it  is  under  the  Prime  Ministership  of  Dr. 
Navin Ramgoolam… 

 (Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order! 

Mr Mahomed: …that the Trust Fund for Vulnerable Groups was established and that 
this was subsequently upgraded in a full-fledged Ministry of Social Integration and Economic 
Empowerment in 2010. Hon. Ms Sewocksingh reminded us yesterday… 

(Interruptions) 

…that  hon.  Xavier-Luc  Duval  was  the  first  appointed  Minister  of  that  Ministry  under  the 
Labour led alliance. When hon. Duval moved to the Ministy of Finance, Mr Surendra Dayal 
took over that Ministry… 

(Interruptions) 

Hold  on!  Pas  pressé!  Here  are  some  figures  as  at  October  2014.    From  the  National 
Empowerment Foundation, submitted in the context of the National Day for the eradication 
of poverty.  I take housing; CCIS, Concrete cum Corrugated Iron Sheet houses, from 2011 to 

 

31 

2014 with some spill over in 2015, a total of 1,475 units almost equally distributed between 
Mauritius and Rodrigues were produced.   

Now,  CIS,  Corrugated  Iron  Sheet,  what  we  call  ‘tôle-du  bois’;  3,171  houses  were 
completed.  It will take too much time for me to list all the figures.  I am instead going to 
table the report at the end of my speech.  In there, anyone who is keen to learn about the truth 
will see that there has been implementation of several… 

(Interruptions) 

…infrastructural projects in areas where there were pockets of poverty and there have also 
been several child development programmes be it at pre-primary and primary schools’ level.  
Now, I wonder what the bilan of the National Empowerment Foundation has been over the 
last 19 months.  Now, they can’t keep on taking credit for what was done by the previous 
Government.  When your cupboard is empty and you need to rely on your neighbours, don’t 
criticise them.   

Madam  Speaker,  I  will  now  move  to  the  so  called  ‘budget  de  rupture’.    Now,  if 
rupture there has been, one can sum it up to the total refrain from using the words ‘economic 
miracle’ anymore.  A term that for long, and although I am not an economist, that word does 
not even exist in economics.  But on the basis of which ‘l’Alliance Lepep’ has been elected 
over  the  last  general  elections.    In  last  year’s  Budget,  there  were  highly  politicised  and 
gloomy statements about the situation that this Government has inherited at the last general 
elections and after 19 months, yesterday, we hear again, hon. Mahen Jhugroo talking about 
the former Prime Minister.  

(Interruptions) 

Now, go and ask the people what do they think of the performance of this Government!   

(Interruptions) 

There  has  been  a  net  deterioration  in  the  economic  situation  since  this  Government  took 
office. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order! 

 

32 

Mr Mahomed:  Now, if I need to rest my case with an example, it is …. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order!  Please, order! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Mahomed:    ….  undeniably  the  construction  sector,  a  most  straightforward 
barometer  for  the  economy,  is  the  fact  that  there  are  200  unemployed  engineers  at  the 
moment in the country and the Government is launching a scheme for the placement of 200 
trainee  engineers  in  public  bodies  at  a  time  when  engineers  of  the  Ministry  of  Public 
Infrastructure themselves do not have their plate.  We are not constructing schools, neither 
hospitals, nor stadiums… 

I will keep Heritage for later! 

Icing on the cake! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Order! Allow the hon. Member to proceed!  When others had intervened, he was silent and 
listening to you, okay!  Now, it is his turn! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mahomed:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  We are not constructing stadiums as 

the previous has done in the past.  

In the last sondage de popularité, the current Government lost 19 points because of 

three main reasons: performance as regards the economy; mishandling of the BAI affair… 

(Interruptions) 

 

33 

…and the number of Ministers who have had to step out of their Ministries because of alleged 
act of corruption.  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Toussaint! 

Mr Mahomed:  Madam Speaker, Members  will recall that the first présentation de 
rupture  made  by  this  Government  was  the  Government  Programme  2015-2019  itself, 
‘Achieving  Meaningful  Change’,  followed  by  Budget  2015,  ‘Mauritius  at  the  Crossroad’.  
Then  came  the  ‘Economic  Mission  Statement’  presented  by  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister 
himself,… 

…which I attended.  So, I am talking on connaissance de cause. On 22 August 2015… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah! Don’t interrupt! 

Mr Mahomed:…the title of which is ‘Achieving the Second Economic Miracle and 
Vision  2030’.  Last  week,  we  had  Budget  the  2016-2017,  ‘A  New  Era  of  Development’. 
Although  I  agree  that  il  faut  reculer  pour  mieux  sauter,  we  cannot  possibly  continuer  to 
reculer et ne jamais sauter. We are certainly at crossroad, but this Government seems to be 
without a map. 

Quatre présentations de relance en 19 mois ! Now, if you need un aveu d’échec, this 
is one! When I see this situation, I cannot refrain myself from thinking about the former US 
President  Harry  Truman,  whom,  when  completed  his  mandate  as  President  of  the  United 
States  of  America,  was  questioned  by  a  journalist  about  what  was  the  one  person  that  he 
wanted to meet, but got never to meet while he was in office. His reply was a one-handed 
economist.  Puzzled,  the  journalist  asked  why  a  one-handed  economist.  He  said,  “because 
throughout my term in office, I had economists coming in front of me and telling me, on the 
one hand, there is this and, on the other hand, there was that. And look what has happened to 
me!” 

So, if this Government…. 

(Interruptions) 

The point is… 

 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

34 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mahomed: …at the crossroad, this Government is advised on all options, either 

they turn left or right, but don’t go backward! 

Madam  Speaker,  the  way  in  which  this  Budget  has  been  presented  pressed  some 
serious issues insofar as long term and medium planning is concerned. Currently, planning is 
being done in a fragmented and dispersed manner. This results in lack of proper coordination, 
inadequate  policy  and  project  analysis,  and  coherence  in  the  elaboration  of  an  overall 
macroeconomic development framework, which slows down implementation and execution, 
as evidenced by the percentage of capital spending yearly, around half of what was projected, 
was spent last year. 

On  account  of  the  absence  of  an  efficient  and  effective  monitoring  system,  to  my 
view, this is why we are going back to offer incentives in this Budget, to support or to try to 
develop  new  sectors,  creating  distortions  in  the  economy  and  creating  even  more 
exasperation that certain operators are being favoured. I think I should also mention that the 
general  perception  is  that  forecasting  and  economic  projections  are  totally  absent  at  micro 
level. 

Countries  like  India,  South  Korea,  Malaysia,  Singapore  and  many  EU  countries, 
including  France,  are  still  maintaining  a  certain  degree  of  planning  in  support  of  their 
development. Here, we see too many captains in charge of finance and so-called governance 
who have no feel for the merits of systemic planning. They just make up their brief as they go 
along.  This  is  not  just  my  view,  but  that  of  the  World  Bank  as  well,  which  has  recently 
expressed concern on the absence of planning in our budgetary framework. The core mandate 
of the Ministry of Finance and Economic Developing is budgeting and ensuring that fiscal 
discipline is complied with. 

In  the  newspaper  articles  that  have  appeared  over  the  weekend,  experienced 

journalists have been writing, and I quote - 

« Le budget est un exercice avant tout comptable qui ne semble passionner que les 
opérateurs économiques. » 

While  focusing  on  its  core  mandate,  I  am  of  the  view  that  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development, which cannot effectively deliver on a planning framework, should 

 

35 

entrust the same to a more appropriate body within Government, and I am going to come to 
my first suggestion. 

The  PRB  Report  of  2016  has  made  provision  for  a  Strategic  Policy  and  Planning 
Department with a view to charting out a well-defined direction and vision. As a concerned 
patriot, I am today proposing that this PRB proposition be given serious consideration.  If not, 
we are going to have yet another ad infinitum budget de relance next year. 

The above being said, I will now move to some specific sectors as they are presented 

in the Budget. 

Madam Speaker, if there is one domain in this Budget that to my view departs from 
the  work  that  has  been  done  so  far,  as  is  viewed  in  the  Budget  presentation,  is  the  Blue 
Economy.  All  along,  previous  governments  and  the  present  one  used  the  term  ‘Ocean 
Economy’,  be  it  in  the  Government  Programme  2012-2015  and  even  in  the  current  2015-
2019 Programme, more specifically at paragraph 216, which rightly led to the creation of the 
Ministry styled Ocean Economy. The term used in the Budget marks a radical departure from 
established policy. Now, there is a vast conceptual difference between ‘Blue Economy’ and 
‘Ocean Economy’. Those who have prepared this Budget Speech have failed to realise that 
the difference which, to my view, may ultimately be sending the wrong signal, is one of these 
few cases in which a rose, if called by any other name, does not smell as good. 

Let me explain myself. In Blue Economy, the focus is primarily on conservation, and 
in  Ocean  Economy,  it  is  about  economic  development,  but  in  a  sustainable  manner,  as 
prescribed by ‘Maurice Ile Durable’, the over-arching sustainable development policy of the 
previous  Government  of  which  Ocean  Economy  is  one  of  the  four  main  programmes  of 
implementation. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

Mr Mahomed: Mauritius like other SIDS has always had a fishing industry. We have 
been aware of the importance of maintaining our lagoons for tourism and more recent years 
talked of seafood hub, but the idea behind ocean economy is that we need to move to the next 
level. An integrated approach to developing an ocean economy that encompasses all ocean 
related industries and services, existing ones and new ones that can still promote, and this is 
what it is all about. 

 

36 

Now, this is what precisely we did in July 2013, during the national dialogue on the 
Ocean  Economy,  which  ultimately  culminated  in  a  roadmap  on  the  Ocean  Economy.  The 
Cabinet of Ministers took note of the roadmap on 25 October 2013, and the roadmap was 
published by the Prime Minister’s Office in December 2013. This is the roadmap. I am going 
to table it at the end of my speech. It is a document that sets the way forward and which, 
whilst in an integrated approach to all ocean economic activities, came forward with seven 
clusters of activities, which I shall now list for the benefit of the House. 

(i) 

seabed exploitation for hydrocarbon and minerals; 

(ii) 

fishing, seafood processing and aquaculture; 

(iii) 

deep ocean water application, commonly referred as seawater air conditioning, 
whose  future  is  now  threatened  due  to  the  proposed  movement  of  several 
Ministries to the Heritage City. To my view a catastrophe to Port Louis, but, I 
am not going to talk about it now I am going to come to that later.  

At this stage if you ask me, there is no need to even start the Heritage City Project. 

(Interruptions) 

(iv)  marine services; 

(v) 

seaport related activities; 

(vi)  marine renewable energies, and 

(vii) 

ocean knowledge. 

I remember when the previous Government first evoked the term ‘Ocean Economy’ 
as  a  pillar,  the  members  on  the  other  side  of  the  House  said  we  are  now  talking  about 
poissons and goémon and that we … 

I will tell you later! 

Madam Speaker: No! 

(Interruptions) 

 (Interruptions) 

 

37 

Mr  Mahomed:  And  now,  what  do  we  see  in  this  Budget?  That  we  are  restricting 
ourselves to aquaculture development, fish processing  and, of course, we have the famous 
bambaras … 

Sorry about that, but I have to mention it! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, with this… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Mind your language please!  

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mahomed: Madam Speaker, we do not need to reinvent the wheel. All we need 
to do is to build up on this roadmap. Madam Speaker, this roadmap generated a lot of interest 
at  international  conferences,  including  the  SAMOA  SIDS  Conference  of  September  2014, 
which I attended, and during which… 

(Interruptions) 

… I witnessed how all oceans economy roadmap documents that we brought along with us 
for promotion purposes went like hot cakes. Just to give you an idea how much international 
interest was generated on this! 

Madam Speaker, I shall now talk about public transportation, a major concern today. 
In reply to Parliamentary Question No. B/425 put by me to hon. Minister Bodha on 17th May 
this year, we learnt that Government would be reconsidering the Light Rail Transit Project 
and I am glad that the Budget makes provision for financing or part financing for the Metro 
Express. I am glad because the Labour Party has worked extensively on this and, had we been 
in power… 

(Interruptions) 

Had we been in power, the project would have been almost completed today! 

(Interruptions) 

 

38 

Never  mind!  Never  mind,  we  call  it  the  Metro  Express  instead  of  the  Light  Rail  Transit. 
However,  I  have  a  few  concerns  to  raise  here  today.  Paragraph  176  of  the  Budget  makes 
mention of ‘a new mass transit system’ with its network of Urban Terminals to be known as 
the Metro Express. Now, why the word ‘new’? Does the word ‘new’ entail that we are going 
for a new project with new technology, with new alignment and revised number of stations? 
If this is the case, then we are in for a long shot.  A slow boat to China, if I should quote one 
of my engineering professors at the National University of Singapore! 

Madam  Speaker,  successive  Governments  have  spent  more  than  Rs800  m.  on 
consultancy services for the light rail transit since donkey years, 1999. Huge sums of money 
have  also been spent on land acquisition for the project by the previous Government. The 
project was shovel ready and was waiting only for the signature of the final document for 
implementation. 

Furthermore, the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands has been 
making public statements to the effect that he now shall hold or has held negotiations with the 
Public  Infrastructure  Development  Fund  of  Saudi  Arabia  for  implementation  of  the  Metro 
Express Project on a build-operate-transfer (BOT) basis. 

(Interruptions) 

I will come to that! My further concerns are as follows. Well, I will not dwell on 20 October 
2014, letter of hon. Pravind Jugnauth to Shri Modi Ji because this is, I think, behind us now. 
But still, there is Indian funding and Saudi funding - from what I read from the papers.  Up to 
now, there is nothing wrong with that. 

However, the recent photos showing the Vice-Prime Minister hon. Soodhun in front 
of a private jet raises some serious concerns regarding ethics. It raises some ethical issues to 
my  view.  In  fact,  one  of  the  weekly  papers  talked  about  it  extensively  the  day  before 
yesterday.  

My second concern is how much will a train ticket cost if it were to be implemented 
on a build-operate-transfer (BOT) basis, when we know the previous Government had made 
it clear that the price of the train ticket will not be more than the current bus fare. This was to 
be  ensured  by  a  system  of  cross  subsidisation  from  income  generated  by  commercial 
activities that were to occur around the 19 stations. 

 

39 

My third concern is there is an absence of a bold plan with bus and taxi system that is 
well  regulated  and  safe;  there  is  also  an  absence  of  a  car  population  policy  that  aims  at 
encouraging the use of public transport instead of private cars, like –  

(i) 

road pricing, and 

(ii) 

slowing down the importation of cars. 

The hon. Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport has been referring to a plan à 
trois étages in the aftermath of the Parliamentary Question that I had asked him. Well, I don’t 
quite see it at the moment in the Budget presentation and I look forward to him enlightening 
us during his speech. I look forward to that! 

Furthermore,  I  would  like  to  point  out  that  the  revised  taxation  on  cars  and 
construction of additional roads are not good signs of sustainable land transport management. 
Now,  as  former  Managing  Director  of  the  National  Housing  Development  Company 
(NHDC), I will now touch on social housing - it is a pity that the hon. Minister is not here. 
But, still  I have to say  it. The Government Programme 2015-2019 states that Government 
will increase housing supply and home for the economically and socially disadvantaged by 
constructing some 10,000 social housing units during this present mandate. After 19 months 
in  power,  the  present  Government  is  still  inaugurating  housing  units  that  have  either  been 
constructed or started by the previous Government under the 1,000 acres of land acquired in 
2007 under the deal with the Mauritius Sugar Producers Association. 

In the previous Budget 2015-2016 funds, were provided to the Ministry of Housing 
and  Lands  for  the  construction  of  1,000  units  and  funds  were  also  provided  for  the 
construction  of  700  units  in  the  next  two  years  for  vulnerable  families  under  the  National 
Empowerment Foundation (NEF). I am referring to last year’s Budget. My questions are as 
follows –  

1. 

Construction  of  how  many  housing  units  has  been  initiated  by  the  NHDC 
anew over the last Budget year? 

2. 

How many units by the National Empowerment Foundation? 

I look forward to hear the hon. Vice-Prime Minister on the progress there. 

 

40 

Regarding the sales of municipal land to house dwellers at nominal price of Rs2,000, I 
must point out that there is a tremendous backlog at the Ministry of Housing and Lands for 
actual purchase, following amendments brought to the State Land Act to allow for this first 
time as a history measure for the sale of State land - it was the first time that it was done in 
2007 - whereby 30,000 units are still concerned. 

My last Parliamentary Question on the backlog was replied by the hon. Minister of 
Youth and Sports, hon. Yogida Sawmynaden, because the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, Minister 
of Housing and Lands was on mission. But, I look forward to listening from him on how he 
intends  to  clear  that  backlog,  because  people  out  there  are  impatiently  waiting  for  their 
contract for the purchase their plot at Rs2,000 dating back to 2007! 

Now,  talking  about  hon.  Sawmynaden,  who  said  in  his  speech  that  the  Labour 
Government has done a lot of harm to the youth of the country, I certainly would like to react 
to that. Now, go and see what has become - I use my Constituency as an example here - the 
four football grounds that the Labour party has constructed over the last five years preceding 
the general election. Now, if you are too busy to go, please read this letter, which I am going 
to table after my speech. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Member, you should address yourself to the Chair and not to 

the Minister, please! 

Mr Mahomed: Yes. That has been signed by 25 teams of the Ward IV region in Port 
Louis  -  I  believe  he  was  from  Ward  IV  region  when  he  was  a  child  -  deploring  the 
degradation of these facilities that they have been experiencing over the last 19 months and 
for  which  they  are  now  paying  much  higher  fees  in  order  to  play  football  under  this 
Government.   

At a time when synthetic drug is plaguing the Constituency, yet the hon. Minister of 
Health  and  Quality  of  Life  says  that  the  problem  is  not  alarming.  I  have  a  Parliamentary 
Question coming on Tuesday and it is about drugs in school.  I look forward to the reply on 
this. 

Now, talking about my Constituency, I deplore the replacement of some 180 kms of 
old and defective pipes across the island.  That project singularly excludes my Constituency. I 
have raised questions regarding the water problem in Tranquebar and Vallée Pitot - either on 
Parliamentary  Questions  or  at  Adjournment  Time.    But,  here,  I  must  thank  hon. 

 

41 

Collendavelloo,  who,  on  each  occasion,  addressed  the  problem  that  I  have  brought  on  the 
CWA,  be  it  for  the  water  fountain  at  Tranquebar  or  the  replacement  of  defective  pumps 
which has since enhanced the water supply in Tranquebar and Vallée Pitot. 

I will now talk about Heritage City and I shall end on this note.  Let me mention my 

immediate reaction on hearing its downscaling as mentioned in the Budget Speech. 

(Interruptions) 

No, when the Budget Speech was pronounced. 

Madam Speaker: Please, do not interrupt! 

Mr Mahomed: It is going to lead to a half-baked project and I was wondering if its 
implementation was still viable on account of the offsite infrastructure that will nevertheless 
still be needed for a much smaller project. 

Madam Speaker, in an earlier Parliamentary Question this year, I had asked the hon. 
Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms, what guarantee 
he would give to the House that Stree Consulting, the master planner, would not create an 
equal mess as the one we have had in Ébène. 

(Interruptions) 

And I believe that a damning report has been debated in Cabinet this morning; it is in the 
papers.    It  is  publicly  articulated  that  a  due  diligence  on  Stree  Consulting  is  being  very 
vehemently requested, whose fees are very high and the selection of which - well, without a 
selection process actually - is tantamount to serious poor governance issue from the Ministry 
of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms itself.  What a case of the 
kettle calling the pot black!  In Creole, la mare moque la boue. 

(Interruptions) 

Another way of putting it! 

One can read in the press this morning, and I quote – 

« Les  lacunes  majeures  dans  la  manière  dont  Heritage  City  est  conçue  et 
développée à travers Heritage City Co. Ltd. » 

(Interruptions) 

 

42 

Madam Speaker: Please, hon. Shakeel Mohamed, I have drawn your attention to the 

fact that you should not interrupt! 

Mr Mahomed: Comme écrit dans son introduction –  

(Interruptions) 

« Si le nécessaire n’est pas fait à ce stade, cela mènera à une escalade majeure du 
coût pour devenir un embarras majeur pour le gouvernement. » 

Going further, I quote – 

« Stree Consulting a déjà empoché R 150 millions en dépit des manquements 
relevés dans son plan. Maintenant, elle veut qu’on étende son contrat pour R 
600 millions additionnels (…) » 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Member, can I ask you from what you are quoting? 

Mr Mahomed: From l’Express. 

Madam Speaker: From l’Express of this morning. 

Mr Mahomed: Yes. 

Madam Speaker: So, you can your responsibility. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Mahomed: As  a  responsible Parliamentarian, whom the people have elected,  I 
cannot  possibly  solely  rely  on  press  reports  for  my  word,  although,  I  do  not  doubt  the 
integrity and good faith of our journalists.  So, I am most formally asking that a copy of the 
said  report  be  immediately  tabled  in  this  august  Assembly  just  like  I  am  tabling  all  the 
documents that I have mentioned at the beginning of my speech. On this note, I thank you for 
your attention. 

Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for half an hour. 

At 4.39 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 5.15 p.m. with Madam Speaker in Chair. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Hurreeram! 

 

43 

Mr  M.  Hurreeram  (First  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien):  Thank 
you, Madam Speaker.  From our first days as a nation, we, the Mauritian people had only our 
resolve and determination to make our country a land of opportunities. We struggled at the 
beginning. We stumbled and we lacked the leadership, but the Mauritian people did not give 
up.  They chose an able leader in the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, who has 
a vision and the will to make our island the centre point of the region.  He with his team have 
delivered a yet to be equal economic miracle.  

Time flew and we had false dawns incarnated by the Labour Party.  We saw the juicy 
contracts awarded to special friends. We saw the décadence and we had enough.  And the 
political  miracle  of  December  2014  took  place.    The  year  2015  has  been  marked  by  the 
cleaning up winning out.  Call it as you wish!  A necessary step to have a fertile soil to sow 
the seeds of progress and the 2015-2016 Budget did just that.   

Today, this Government is laying the foundation for another economic vision which 
will  again  bring  Mauritius  to  the  forefront  as  an  economic  powerhouse  in  the  region  and 
again be an example of social welfare.  C’est dans le feu que le fer se trempe et devient acier.  

(Interruptions) 

C’est dans la douleur que l’homme trouve la révélation de sa force.  This quote beautifully 
describes the leader of MSM, the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development. 

(Interruptions) 

He has shown time and time again that he truly qualified to lead and is the right custodian of 
the future of our country. We thank the hon. Minister and his dedicated team for this Budget 
and that is the Budget that has the merit of establishing a renewed  feel  good factor in the 
population. At this very time, I am talking to this august Assembly… 

(Interruptions) 

this Budget is being widely acclaimed outside.  I am very much afraid to say it, my very good 
friend hon. Osman Mahomed is cut off from the reality. 

(Interruptions) 

Even  some  of  the  naysayers  are  describing  this  Budget  as  a  social  one.  While  those  de 
mauvaise  foi  are  just  too  blinded  by  their  own  petty  agenda  to  say  that  this  Budget  lacks 

 

44 

ambition  or  are  making  it  out  as  insufficiently  growth  oriented.    Well,  they  missed  out 
important fact!  

Listening to my friend, hon. Osman Mahomed, it is like I was hearing the prophet of 
doom and gloom. Lot of the documents he has been tabling, we understand maybe he has 
been attending lot of conferences, lot of travelling, lot of per diem… 

(Interruptions) 

But  10  years  in  power  nothing  has  been  translated  into  action.  This  Government  is  a 
Government action! 

(Interruptions) 

This Prime Minister is a proactive Prime Minister. 

(Interruptions) 

This  Prime  Minister  is  a  Prime  Minister  who  can  take  decisions.  This  Prime  Minister  is 
holding the destiny of this country. 

(Interruptions) 

My good friend has also been claiming to be smarter than smart, to be whiter than white.  Let 
us recall the MID Fund has guaranteed to pay Sarako more than Rs250 m. from public funds 
over 15 years.  Rs250 m.!  

(Interruptions) 

And this was done just to guarantee the majority of his party in power.   

(Interruptions) 

We also recall the Rs100 m. fund in coffers of his then Leader and his still current leader.  If, 
as  he  says,  he  has  a  duty  of  patriot  towards  this  country,  he  should  have  resigned 
immediately. 

(Interruptions) 

 

45 

He has been talking about NHDC which he has been chairing also.  We all remember in this 
House. NHDC, instead of giving housing to poor people, to needy people, has given NHDC 
houses to minors in Trou-aux-Biches.   

(Interruptions) 

If this is how a country should be run, I’ll rather resign immediately and go! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Mahomed:    On  a  point  of  order,  I  think  my  colleague  has  got  the  timeframe 
wrong. At that time, the alleged allocation of housing units was done to minors; I was not the 
Managing Director of the NHDC. 

Not Chairman as well! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

An hon. Member:  Madam Speaker, this is not a point of order! 

Madam Speaker:  It is not for you to rule out.  

(Interruptions) 

Either you come and take my seat! It is for me to rule out. It is a point of clarification! 

Mr  Hurreeram:    Madam  Speaker,  anyway,  listening  to  my  good  friend  and  other 
Opposition  orators,  it  is  clear  that  they  have  missed  important  facts.  Allow  me,  with  your 
permission, to enlighten them. All budgets are social in that the ultimate purpose is to create 
the necessary wealth to ensure that we all, as Mauritians, are better off tomorrow than we are 
today. 

In the 2016-2017 Budget, one is for the people because it lays down the foundations 
for that better future we all aspire to. This budget is a strategic one. It revolves around several 
important axes - 

(i) 

(ii) 

our people; 

our economy, and 

 

(iii) 

 our future. 

46 

This budget addresses several key questions like how to create internal wealth, how to create 
more opportunities and how do we tackle the growing international uncertainty. We have to 
admire the hard work and the intellect that has gone into the drafting of this budget and how 
each of the axes I mentioned and the questions are addressed. 

This  budget  shows  that  this  Government  believes  that  our  biggest  asset  is  us,  the 
people,  our  youth,  our  hard  working  population.  Several  measures  taken  in  this  budget 
comfort  us  that  we  cannot  reach  the  next  level  without  investing  in  our  people  and  in 
education.  Free  education  does  not  always  mean  access  to  education  when  hurdles  of  life 
always push our youngsters out of the system creating a widening gap between the elite and 
the less fortunate. 

The  nine  years  compulsory  schooling  is  the  mean  to  ensure  that  our  children,  the 
future  workforce  have  enough  academic  baggage  to  allow  them  to  contribute  more 
productively to the future of Mauritius. We would not only have the infrastructure in form of 
smart cities, but we will have smarter and adequately trained people and individuals to run 
those smart cities. Young graduates will also be able to gather important experiences through 
the Youth Employment Programme. This budget makes provision to take on board, at least, 
2,000 of these dynamic youngsters. A major milestone in achieving a stellar economy goes 
hand-in-hand with providing a high quality of life to the citizens of this country. 

This  budget  brings  together  a  set  of  laudable  objectives  like  investing  in round the 
clock water supply, makeover of the judicial ecosystem, strengthening our human resource 
value, investment in modern equipment and vehicles, enforcing and toughening up the battle 
on drugs. The aim is to create an environment and individuals equipped to face the numerous 
issues which have affected or can affect our society. 

No society can truly be flourishing and happy even if a small part of it is poor and 
miserable.  Here  again,  this  budget  has  made  a  bold  statement,  the  eradication  -  yes, 
eradication - of absolute poverty, a commitment that no other Government has taken. This 
alone shows that hon. Pravind Jugnauth is, indeed, a leader who does not live in an ivory 
tower or busy filling his coffers and is committed to the population of this country. 

The backbone of a budget is strategic planning. I agree with my friend, hon. Osman 
Mahomed, it is strategic planning, but he has not got it right and a philosophy to uplift and 
better  the  lives  of  people,  alleviating    the  sufferings  and  the  poor  living  conditions  of  the 

 

47 

downtrodden  is  among  basic  fundamentals.  This  Government  has,  through  this  budget, 
initiated such bold and laudable measures to cater for the social and financial needs of the 
people of the lowest rung of the ladder. Let me cite a few examples. Much has already been 
said, Madam Speaker, but allow me just to cite a few - 

• 
• 
• 

• 

• 
• 

• 

The downward revision of the LPG; 
The removal of Value Added Tax on a number of items; 
The construction of housing projects for the needy amounting to Rs1 billion in 
addition to the 800 housing units with a renewed focus on affordable housing; 
Cash  reward  to  needy  children.  This  is  really  innovative  upon  successful 
completion of stages in their studies; 
Payment of examination fees in case of resit for needy students again; 
Increase of grants for crèche vouchers and in ZEP schools. Again, here, the 
attempt  is  to  correct  the  dysfunction  that  ejects  students  from  the  education 
system; 
Also, exemption of registration duties for first time buyers of a plot of land to 
encourage our youth to go and get their houses; 

The support of this Government in favour of people with severe disabilities also need to be 
appreciated. 

Madam Speaker, this Government, through this budget, has once again addressed the 
issue  of  poverty  alleviation  in  such  a  majestic  way.  The  whole  population,  including  our 
opponents have been pleasantly surprised to learn that henceforth the financial assistance to 
our  compatriots  living  in  dire  conditions  would  know  an  unprecedented  increase  of  up  to 
Rs9,520. This measure in itself would genuinely alleviate the suffering of poor people. 

This House has also been apprised of a series of measures announced for the needy by 
a revamped CSR Programme. A lot has been said about this Government’s ambition to create 
a second economic miracle. We know who are those who doubt and we know who are those 
who are sceptical. 

But,  Madam  Speaker,  Government  has  a  firm  belief  in  its  own  capability.  Having 
studied the economic shift and given it a direction, in 2015, this budget set the course towards 
an objective and economic revolution. Never ever had we got a budget that created such ease 
for investment! Despite the pressure to adapt to the ever evolving and uncertain international 
landscape,  Mauritius  continues  to  have  one  of  the  most  reasonable  tax  regime  worldwide. 

 

48 

This budget continues on this track and announced a number of fiscal initiatives to boost the 
various economic sectors. 

With  this  budget,  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  has 
significantly contributed towards the building of the Mauritius International Financial Centre 
as a robust jurisdiction. A number of pro-business measures announced in the budget indicate 
that expanding the economic space, economic activity and value creation are key priorities. 
For  example,  concrete  measures  to  help  re-boost  the  manufacturing  sector  through  a  40% 
subsidy  towards  air-freight  for  textiles  for  three  years,  the  Agriculture  Land  Management 
System  and  promotion  of  other  agro-processing  activities  will  also  give  a  new  life  to  the 
agricultural sector. 

This budget, Madam Speaker, has also envisioned the creation of new sectors such as 
the petroleum hub and a goal and a diamond exchange, the setting up of blue economy is 
ambitious  but  yet  realistic.  These  new  economic  zones  will  surely  hoist  employment 
opportunities.  

After the SME Bank providing the starting capital of new SME’s, the introduction of 
a tax holiday and the removal of the trade licence under Rs5000 for most SMEs and other 
investment  areas  will  also  come  as  a  breather  for  our  existing  local  businesses  who  only 
require the right push to become successful and job creators. 

A few years ago, hon. Pravind Jugnauth presented the vision of the duty-free island 
concept. Today with the abolishment of excise duty on a number of products leaving only a 
few which are subject to tax, Mauritius has moved closer to that economic model which will 
be  a  sustainable  pillar  in  the  future.  The  skills  and  the  infrastructure  issue  having  been 
addressed,  this  Budget  also  humanely  tackles  the  inefficiencies  of  the  public  sector  by 
providing  the  required  funds  for  its  modernisation  through  ICT  and  processing  re-
engineering. 

When this Government talks about budget de rupture and I hope here I truly enlighten 

again my very good friend hon. Osman Mahomed, it is not about discontinuation… 

(Interruptions) 

…  it  is  to  him  that  I  am  replying  -  from  the  previous  Budget  by  our  Government,  but  a 
welcome  change  from  nonsense  and  inefficient  measures  that  the  previous  regime  made  a 
habit to present. We remember taking food out of our kids’ mouths… 

 

49 

(Interruptions) 

We remember taxing our hard earned houses. 

(Interruptions) 

We  remember  taxing  our  saved  money.  It  is  rupture  from  this  type  of  Budget,  Madam 
Speaker! 

(Interruptions) 

Budget de rupture also means, Madam Speaker, innovation, a new approach, a paradigm shift 
which are all in this Budget, Madam Speaker. The way to turn our economy around is not by 
making rich people poorer, it is by making poor people richer, Madam Speaker. It means to 
have a cohesive strategy and yes, this Budget is a strategic Budget. 

In my maiden speech, Madam Speaker, I had envisioned an evolution of Mauritius to 
a techno hub which is both smart and connected, a vision for a Mauritius 2.0. I also made the 
observation  that  we  should  implement  a  legal  framework  and  associate  with  international 
patent offices to protect the intellectual properties. I am pleased to note that this Budget has 
taken  up  these  initiatives.  This  Budget  embodies  the  cohesion  and  leadership  of  this 
Government. Thank you to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister. 

(Interruptions) 

It is right and just and it shows vision. A vision where we invest in our future while 
living  within  our  means  where  we  make  sacrifices,  but  we  do  not  bear  the  burden  alone, 
where we provide for our citizens and broaden horizons for our children. Let us now create a 
new era of development. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you for your attention. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

(5.35 p.m.) 

Dr.  Z.  Joomaye  (Second  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  &  Souillac):  Thank 
you, Madam. This is the second Budget presented by the Government of l’Alliance Lepep. It 
is presented by the third person in this Government to act as Minister of Finance in less than 
two years of office. This fact in itself tends to give the impression that, to some extent, there 

 

50 

has  been  trial  and  error,  a  big  disillusion  and  a  comeback  raté,  but  taking  all  aspects  into 
consideration, it is better to realise early and take action early. Now, action has been taken 
and we have a fresh Minister of Finance. 

It would have been unfair and not realistic if straightaway we would have said in the 
Opposition that this Budget does not contain anything good. Finding interesting points and 
measures does not mean that there is an agenda behind its interpretation. We will criticise in a 
constructive way what we think is not good, what is wrong and where we think that enough is 
not being done. 

This Budget is a social one. Some measures are welcome and will benefit the most 
vulnerable of our compatriots. The removal of duty on several commodities will definitely 
help  the  families  living  under  the  poverty  threshold.  The  decrease  in  the  price  of  gas  for 
domestic use was long overdue, but still, it had not been done. Providing for construction of 
additional social lodging and renovation of the NHDC apartments can only help to improve 
the daily life of several Mauritian families. 

Apart from the social measures, Madam Speaker, we fail to have visibility upon how 
the economic measures announced would stir up investment and restore the confidence in the 
business community. Madam, several questions have to be asked still. Do we have a clear 
strategy when it concerns economic diplomacy? Is the BOI functioning as it should have been 
otherwise would the FDI decrease? Does it not need a revamping or a rethinking? Are our 
embassies  and  missions  being  used  optimally  as  trade  focused  institutions?  Do  we  lack 
expertise in promoting Mauritius as a business hub? We understand that new advisory posts 
will be created in our missions abroad. Let us hope that it will be the right, deserving and 
productive persons who will be appointed and this would not be used as gratification for a 
happy few.  

What about Africa? Where is our African strategy? What has it produced till now? Or 
is  it  only  loose  talks  during  Budget  time?  How  can  we  expect  to  have  better  visibility  in 
Africa when not a single representative of Mauritius attends important Summits of SADC, 
COMESA or even the African Union? 

(Interruptions) 

Important travels need to be done! Does the Government have a clear foreign strategy and 
does it speak as one voice when it comes to negotiate with other countries? When it concerns 

 

51 

major issues which can jeopardise the future of a whole sector, do we send the right person to 
negotiate with a clear mandate and designated targets to achieve? 

Madam  Speaker,  the  answer  is  no  and  this  is  where  the  Government  has  failed  till 
now.  There  has  been  a  lack  of  economic  leadership.  The  new  Minister  of  Finance  has  to 
give… 

(Interruptions) 

…  a  sense  of  direction.  I  won’t  say  new  because  there  was  not  any!  This  is  his  biggest 
challenge. Since 2014 we have been served with quite a few slogans as has been said by my 
colleague hon. Mahomed ‘Towards Second Economic Miracle’ then ‘Achieving Meaningful 
Change’’ last year it was ‘Mauritius at the Crossroads’, just after that we had ‘Vision 2030’’. 
Now the Budget is entitled ‘A New Era of Development’. I hope it is not just a slogan creux 
this time… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, it is very important that our Minister of Finance realises the needs of 
the  health  sector.  A  healthy  population  is  a  productive  population.  A  lot  of  progress  is 
constantly being done in the practice of medicine. Technology is advancing fast. New drugs 
are more effective, but more costly. Diagnostic devices are permanently being updated and 
need renewal to keep up with international standards.  

It is highly appreciable that this post of expenditure has been increased by 12%.  It is 
now the duty of the Ministry of Health to ensure that this sum is optimally spent to secure - I 
quote from the Budget Speech - 

“(…) an efficient and effective health care system.” 

But the main question remains.  How do we improve delivery of service in our public sector?  
A lot of money is being injected.  Yet, if we do a satisfaction survey among patients in public 
hospitals,  the  satisfaction  rate  would  be  very  low.    The  objectives  of  all  governments 
regarding health sector are the same.  The mission statement and strategic direction cannot be 
challenged.  But, Madam Speaker, can we continue to have 8.5 million attendances in our 
public institutions every  year?  There is obviously too much pressure on the public health 
care system. Modern medical service … 

 

52 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please, can you have some respect for the hon. Member and for the 

Chair, at least? 

Dr. Joomaye: … comprise timely diagnosis, followed by appropriate treatment.  This 
is rewarded by satisfaction and gratitude by the patient only if there is communication and 
compassion.  To communicate, the health care professionals need time.  Structured as it is, a 
consultation in the public sector lasts only a few minutes.  Recruiting more staff is part of the 
solution.  But the real way forward is the decentralisation of dispensation of health care.  The 
future is public/private partnership, which would allow optimisation of human and technical 
resources.  I have read that the Ministry of Health is going in that direction, but let us see 
what will happen. 

To  reduce  attendances  and  better  select  and  screen  patients  who  attend  regional 
hospitals, the only solution is to implement the long overdue family doctor system quoted in 
the  Governmental  Programme,  but  not  a  single  word  in  this  Budget.  This  would  further 
address  the  unemployment  problem  among  young  doctors  and  diminish  the  burden  of  the 
permanent establishment. 

Providing for the upgrading of infrastructure and acquisition of new equipment is the 
mission of every government, and same goes for vaccination programmes, which have been 
catered for in the Budget. Even if the reference to cancer has not been very extensive in this 
Budget Speech, we welcome the provision made for the construction of a new Cancer Centre.  
We need a new approach, more global, taking into consideration all aspects of this pathology.  
The comfort of the patient can be enhanced, even if sometimes fatality cannot be avoided. 

In line with this, the introduction of a Palliative Care Department is a must.  Modern 
oncology,  Madam  Speaker,  is  all  about  precautious  diagnosis,  which  improves  chances  of 
remission and rates of survival.  Latest tools like the Intensity modulated radiotherapy and 
PET  scan  should  be  made  available.  Prevention  programmes  should  not  be  neglected 
regarding risk factors of cancer.  On the other hand, the control of the use of pesticides in the 
agro-industry is mandatory.  The increase in price of alcohol and tobacco is fully justified.  
These are two main causes of cancer. 

Madam  Speaker,  one  major  threat  that  is  continuously  and  dangerously  gangrening 
our  society  is  substance  abuse.    It  is  of  national  interest  that  we  have  a  coherent  strategy 

 

53 

towards harm reduction.  It should not be a passionate debate, but a constructive one.  We are 
facing  several  challenges.  New  drugs  are  on  the  market.    The  consumption  pattern  has 
changed.    Drug  dealers  are  constantly  modifying  their  strategies.    Our  children  and 
youngsters are dying after consuming synthetic drugs, amongst others.  On ne peut continuer 
à nous voiler la face.  The Observatoire de la drogue needs to be more productive and give 
us the exact situation on the ground.  NATReSA has been amputated of all limbs and closed 
down.  The New Harm Reduction Unit is still crawling. 

The Methadone Exchange Programme and Needle Exchange Programme for which 
Mauritius has been quoted as example for Africa, for having curbed HIV/AIDS and Hepatitis 
C, has been considerably slowed down and changed.  The new Suboxone Programme is still 
under evaluation.  The global approach is wrong.  En matière de drogue, le tout répressif ne 
marche  pas.  La  stigmatisation  ne  permet  pas  d’avancer.  On  doit  comprendre  que  le 
toxicomane est un malade avant tout.  Nous devons impérativement restaurer la confiance et 
le partenariat qui existent avec les ONG. 

It is important, Madam Speaker, that the drug addicts who should to quit be given a 
real chance. We need to have appropriate and realistic rehabilitation programmes. The goals 
of any programme would be to – 

reduce consumption of drugs - ideally become drug-free; 
reduce needle sharing; 
reduce criminal activities associated with addiction, and 
maintain and improve social and familial behaviour. 

• 
• 
• 
• 
Our Methadone Dispensation Programme has found several problems. Dispensation 
centres have been closed down and transferred to Police stations. Often due to protest and 
complains from the neighbourhood, dispensation of methadone in Police stations is a huge 
deterrent for drug addicts. Thinking through, we could inspire ourselves from what is being 
done in Canada or in Germany regarding methadone substitution programmes and in the US 
regarding Suboxone.  In these countries, methadone is dispensed in accredited and registered 
community pharmacies. 

The  programme  remains  government  driven,  but  the  dispensation  done  under  the 
supervision of local pharmacists. I refer to a study published long time back in the American 
Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse. This study reports one-year follow-up data of 96 patients 

 

54 

who received methadone at selected community pharmacies instead of traditional programme 
dispensaries. The outcomes are comparable to those reported for traditional programmes; that 
means that the results were the same. Security measures were not a problem on dispensation.  

The  results  indicate  that  most  patients  can  begin  methadone  maintenance  at  a 
pharmacy without a period of stabilisation at a programme unit. Of several factors studied, 
arrest record, both preceding and during treatment, based on official police data, was a single 
factor significantly associated with unemployment and continuation in methadone treatment. 
In conclusion, community pharmacy dispensing of methadone is a useful means of operating 
a methadone treatment programme. 

Madam  Speaker,  we  have  more  than  300  pharmacies  and  our  pharmacists  are 
respected professionals. We should trust them. Offenders regarding the Dangerous Drug Act 
are  rare.  I  firmly  believe  that  the  responsibility  of  the  dispensation  of  methadone  or  other 
substitution therapy can be entrusted to our pharmacists. The prescription could be given by 
designated  and  trained  addiction  medical  practitioners  according  to  a  regional  distribution. 
This is evidence-based medicine. I can make available a report from the Ontario College of 
Pharmacists  about  how  the  programme  is  structured  and  implemented  there.  This  is  a 
proposal, and it can be tailor-made and adapted to our local context. 

The  burden  of  drug  addiction  cannot  rest  on  the  shoulders  of  the  State  and  the 
Government  only.  It  concerns  everyone.  We  need  national  solidarity  and  involve  all  the 
stakeholders. 

Most  of  us,  Madam  Speaker,  are  parents  in  this  House.    Imagine  if  one  of  our 
children, and God forbid, get caught in the trap of substance abuse.  And if we manage to 
convince him or her to  get out of the hell of drugs, not anyone of us here, in this House, 
would find it comfortable to accompany an adolescent to a Police station every day to collect 
his dose of methadone.   For those who have the means, they  would send their children in 
rehabilitation centres abroad. That is why we need to rethink and change the whole system. 

Methadone  has  to  be  dispensed  elsewhere  than  in  Police  Stations.  We  have  to 
continue  to  empower  the  Suboxone  Programme  which  can  give  better  results  for  the 
reinsertion of former drug addicts into social and professional life. I am not standing here, 
Madam Speaker, to seek political mileage out such an important issue. 

 

55 

I  will  conclude  that  we  urgently  need  to  have  a  National  Drug  Policy  whose 
definition,  according  to  the  European  Monitoring  Centre  for  Drugs  and  Drug  Addiction, 
would  be  a  system  of  laws,  regulatory  measures,  courses  of  action  and  funding  priorities 
concerning  illicit  psychoactive  drugs  and  promulgated  by  Governmental  entity  and  its 
representative.  It is seen as a vision of a Government to manage the drug topic in its country 
in terms of demand, supply and harm reduction.  

Thank you for your attention. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Dr. Husnoo! 

(5.52 p.m.) 

The Minister of Local Government (Dr. A. Husnoo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  
I would just like to say a few words about my colleague who has just spoken before me.  I 
think it was a very good speech with a lot of research articles. However, I would just mention 
one or two words about the Methadone treatment.  In fact, as you are aware, I was for the 
Methadone treatment.  I still believe in the Methadone treatment, but there are quite a few 
problems as you all know.  

Madam  Speaker,  the  distribution  of  Methadone, as  it  was  being  done  before  in  the 
middle of a residential area, was not the solution.  You would agree with me, it was not the 
solution. It was creating a lot of problems; in my Constituency as well.   Finally, we decided 
to move for want of a better place to the Police Station and it has proved itself. Okay, there 
are  still  problems!    I  know  that  in  my  Constituency  and  in  Roche  Bois,  it  was  still  in the 
residential  areas,  but  it  has  moved  a  few  weeks  ago  to  a  different  place.  We  know  the 
problems that the residents had to face with the distribution of Methadone every morning in 
the residential areas. Because these people sometimes, let’s face it, they just stay there all the 
day  long  every  now  and  then.    The  hon.  Member  knows  the  problem.    That  is  why  this 
Government had to take this step of distributing it in the Police Station.  This is one thing.  
The Government is not stopping at that level.  The hon. Member knows the programme that 
is being done at Mahebourg where, instead of putting the drug addicts on Methadone, they 
are being put on Suboxone now.  The trial has started and after two weeks’ treatment, they 
are  being  weaned  off  onto  Naltrexone.  So,  Government  is  trying  to  find  new  method  of 
treatment. The hon. Member is aware of it.  I mean, we have been giving Methadone for the 
last 10 years.  

 

56 

As we know, once they are on Methadone, they tend to stay on Methadone for a long 
time. Some people have even been on that for the last 10 years. How long do we continue?  
We have to find other ways of treating such patients. That is what this Government is doing 
and we are doing it in the South, in Mahebourg. 

(Interruptions) 

Exactly, that’s what he is doing! I think it was a good speech. Congratulations again !  

 

Madam Speaker, I would like to come to one or two points that my colleague… 

(Interruptions) 

…hon. Mahomed said earlier with regard to municipal housing estates. When the Bill was 
passed for the State lands to be given to tenants, there were some problems and we are still 
having some problems.  In fact, I get the impression the hon. Member said that we should 
think twice about it for those people who are on municipal housing estates, but I don’t think 
we should reconsider it.  You know the problems that these people are getting: they have a 
housing estate, the land is not on their name and if they want to make some repair to their 
houses, to take a loan or whatever, they encounter difficulties.   So, that is why we are going 
in this direction. 

Madam Speaker, I would wish, at the very outset, to associate myself with those, who, 
before me, have been supportive of the Budget presented by my colleague, the hon. Minister 
of Finance and Economic Development.  Ce budget est intéressant. Oui, c’est intéressant! In 
fact, the choice of this term is more than  appropriate when we take into consideration the 
economic  environment,  which  is  far  from  being  positive  when  has  been  presented:  the 
economic  growth  is  slowing  down  to  3.4  %,  unemployment  rate  at  7.6  %,  budget  deficit 
estimated at 3.3 % and public debt at 55.6 %. Further, on the international front also, as we 
all know, the situation is not so brilliant, with events such as Brexit and the change to the 
global  business  environment.  All  these  international  features,  unfortunately,  provide,  so  to 
say,  a  backdrop  of  uncertainties,  and  have  an  adverse  effect  on  our  current  economic 
situation. 

However, the Minister of Finance and Economic Development has skilfully traced the 
road map to accelerate the engine of growth, to enhance investment and create the conditions 
for sustainable development, poverty eradication, job creation  and more social justice for the 

 

57 

poor,  with  some  very  bold  people-centred  budgetary  measures.  On  this  side  of  the  House, 
Madam Speaker, we know where we are heading and we are confident that we shall live to 
the  expectations  of  the  people  and  make  the  country  prosper  further  still.  People  from  all 
walks of life have supported this Budget. They know we mean business. They know we shall 
leave  no  stone  unturned  to  make  things  happen  and  fast,  within  a  framework  of  good 
governance and economic transparency. 

The hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development has articulated this Budget 
on  10  well  thought  out  strategies  which  will,  undoubtedly,  unlock  opportunities  for  the 
relevant  stakeholders  to  overcome  challenges,  innovate,  cope  with  change  and  seize 
opportunities to perform better. 

On the social front also, a number of interesting measures to support poor families 
and  low  income  earners  have  been  announced.  These  include,  among  others,  a  monthly 
allocation of up to Rs9,520 for a family of five to address the issue of absolute poverty in the 
country;  a  100  %  increase  in  the  monthly  income  limit  for  eligibility  under  the  NHDC 
Housing  Scheme  from  Rs10,000  to  R  20,000  and  a  cash  grant  ranging  from  Rs15,000  to 
Rs35,000  to  encourage  students  from  poor  families  to  achieve  higher  level  of  education. 
Measures like these,  I am sure, will lay to rest any misgiving or doubt anybody may have 
about the intention of the Minister of Finance and Economic Development, about his aim and 
commitment to helping the very poor and needy section of our community. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Jhugroo, it is for me to see whether there is much noise or 

not, and not for you! Excuse me! 

(Interruptions) 

Dr. Husnoo: Madam Speaker, the strategy for the country to move towards a fully-
fledged  digital  society  needs  to  be  stressed.  Digital  divide  should  no  longer  be  acceptable 
when we see how fast technology is evolving worldwide. We need to build an IT culture that 
will  not  only  support 
the  spirit  of 
entrepreneurship. Our school and university students should shift their mind-set from being 
jobseekers to job-creators.  I strongly believe that the measures announced to accelerate the 
creation of a digital society will be greatly beneficial, especially to our younger generation, as 

innovation  but  also  encourage  and  promote 

 

58 

this will provide them the opportunity for being creative with the desire, skills and belief to 
make a difference. 

Madam Speaker, this Budget reflects the philosophy and the fundamental principles 
of this Government, advocating the people to move to a new era of development – yes, to a 
new era of development.  The Minister of Finance and Economic Development has set the 
tone in his  Budget Speech, by stating that “where we have to be bold,  we must be bold”.  
These  words  exactly  describe  the  budget  measures  announced  and  the  strategic  direction 
identified. 

In the face of international economic and political challenges, fluctuations in foreign 
currencies  and  other  international  threats,  we  have  no  choice  but  to  look  for  new 
opportunities. We need to think out of the box. We need not only to encourage the setting up 
of new innovative enterprises but also invest in smarter education and professional skills. We 
need to build a more solid economy so as to continuously improve the quality of life of our 
people whilst ensuring that we save for our future generations. To this end, I strongly believe 
that  the  introduction  of  the  concept  of  “Regulatory  Sandbox  Licence”  in  our  business 
environment  is  a  laudable  initiative  and  I  am  confident  that  the  captains  of  Industries  will 
make use of this tool, which will, no doubt, boost investment and provide opportunities for 
job creation. 

I will also add that this Budget should encourage all of us to remain prudent in our 
expenditures, be it in our Ministries and Departments or even at home and ensure that each 
rupee is spent in a responsible manner. 

I also wish to highlight the fact that in this Budget everybody has been taken care of: 
the people, the business community, the tourists, the foreign investors, the labour force, all 
of us stand to gain from this Budget. 

Madam Speaker, I shall now comment on some of the measures and issues which are 

of direct relevance to my Ministry. 

As  the  Minister  of  Local  Government,  I  am  fully  aware  of  all  the  challenges  and 
difficulties that prospective economic operators have to face prior to starting their business. A 
number of measures have been announced in the Budget to ease these economic operators to 
start their businesses. 

 

59 

To start with, the process for the determination of Building and Land Use Permit is 
going to be greatly simplified and modernised.  Applications will be examined by the Permits 
and Business Monitoring Committee only and will not need to be referred, either to me, as 
Minister, in some specific cases, or to the Executive Committee in all cases, as it is at present. 
We are going to have only one Committee looking after; it is the PBMC, because now they 
are  taking  too  much  time.  This  simplification  of  process  will  enable  applications  to  be 
quickly processed and determined. 

The approval of the Minister will no more be required for granting Building and Land 

Use Permit except for places of worship. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  would  like  to  point  out  that  since  2011,  the  Minister  of  Local 
Government’s approval was required prior to issuing the Building and Land Use Permit for 
all developments along mountain reserve, river reserve or a motorway, or for use as a night 
club,  private  club  or  carrying  out  any  activity  licensed  under  by  the  Gambling  Regulatory 
Authority.    This  process  was  lengthy  and  involved  additional  resources  leading  to  the 
determination of such applications well beyond a month after their submission at the relevant 
Council by the applicants.   

In  line  with  the  budgetary  measures  announced,  my  Ministry  is  working  on  the 
amendments  to  be  brought  to  the  Local  Government  Act  in  the  forthcoming  Finance 
(Miscellaneous) Bill for such applications to be determined, within the statutory timeframe of 
14 working days by the Permits and Business Monitoring Committee of the Council without 
the approval of the Minister of Local Government.  

Also,  previously  the  applications  for  Building  and  Land  Use  Permit  required  the 
approval  of  the  Executive  Committee  of  the  Council.    While  recognising  that  our  local 
councillors need to be aware of developments in their areas, it is also important to ensure that 
there  are  no  unnecessary  steps  or  procedures  at  the  level  of  processing  and  determining 
development  applications.    Whenever  the  Executive  Committee  of  the  Council  was  not  in 
concurrence with the recommendations of the Permits and Business Monitoring Committee, 
the matter was being referred to the Minister of Local Government for determination, thus 
adding more processes and resulting in further delays for the determination of the application.  
With  a  view  to  simplifying  this  process,  I  fully  concur  with  the  proposed  measure  of 
removing the requirement for obtaining the stand of the Executive Committee in the process 

 

60 

of determining an application for an Outline Planning Permission or Building and Land Use 
Permit.  

Henceforth,  applications  for  Building  and  Land  Use  Permit  will  be  processed  and 
determined only by the Permits and Business Monitoring Committee. The decisions of this 
Committee  will  no  more  require  either  the  approval  of  the  Executive  Committee  or  my 
approval. To this effect, the Local Government Act 2011 will be amended. I have no doubt 
that  this  measure,  aiming  at  accelerating  the  issue  of  Building  and  Land  Use  Permits  will 
greatly contribute in the ease of doing business in the country. 

Madam Speaker, in the past, applicants have had to interact with the officers of the 
Councils  at  several  stages  of  their  applications  to  provide  additional  information  and 
documentations or clearances. This process not only lengthened the processing time, but also 
added  on  the  list  of  practical  difficulties  for  the  developer.  With  the  proposed  measure, 
applications  are  going  to  be  verified  by  competent  personnel  of  the  local  authorities  and 
request  for  additional  information  which  may  be  required  within  a  certain  statutory  time 
frame of eight working days only. So, if somebody deposits his application and something is 
missing, the Council would have to inform them within eight working days.  No more than 
that. 

Furthermore,  developers  will  also  be  able  to  submit  their  applications  for  Building 
and  Land  Use  Permit,  by  using  the  online  Portal  of  the  Local  Authorities.  Such  online 
applications will remove human interference – very important - and will save them both time 
and money, as well as enable them to submit their applications on a 24hours /7days basis.  
This Portal will be enhanced so as to allow for online interaction between applicants and the 
local authority - I mean online, not personal - as well as to provide a tracking mechanism on 
the  status  of  applications.  Because  now  when  somebody  puts  in  an  application,  after  one 
month they don’t know what is happening to their application. Now, if it is online, you can 
track  your  application,  you  know  at  what  stage  it  is.    Upon  approval  of  the  applications, 
payment  of  relevant  fees  will  also  be  allowed  electronically,  thus  relieving  the  applicant 
further trouble.  I am also waiting on a proposal to make the online application more user-
friendly. 

The  application  mechanism  will  be  further  simplified  and  modernised  to  make  it 
mandatory  for  Building  and  Land  Use  applications  for  non-residential  development  to  be 
made online. 

 

61 

Madam  Speaker,  SMEs  everywhere  contribute  to  GDP  growth,  employment  and 
innovation to a large extent. We are all aware that SMEs create dynamism in a society as they 
provide  a  range  of  services  and  products  that  are  essential  to  our  day-to-day  living.  They 
constitute  a  fast  growing  part  of  our  economy.  So,  we  should  give  more  attention  in 
improving  the  business  environment  of  the  SMEs  and  encourage  them  to  do  well  and 
succeed. In this context, with a view to allowing the economic operators to consolidate their 
businesses, a number of measures have been announced in this Budget. A major boost is the 
exemption from the payment of annual trade fees by the economic operators who pay a trade 
fee of Rs5,000 or less annually. This measure, Madam Speaker, will indeed give an added 
impetus to the small and medium enterprises. Some 75,000 traders out of 80,000 operating 
now will be exempted from the payment of the trade fee. Imagine, Madam Speaker! Now, we 
have  80,000  traders  across  the  island  and  75,000  of  them,  nearly  90%  of  them  will  be 
exempted from the payment of trading fee. 

We  are  doing  that  just  to  make  the  life  of  these  people  of  the  SMEs  a  bit  easier. 
Examples  of  traders  who  will  benefit  from  this  measure  are,  for  example,  owners  of 
Automotive  workshops,    owners  of  Beauty  Care  Centre,  Cyber  Café,  Dental  Mechanic, 
General Retailer Foodstuff and Non-food stuff, Pastry shop and so on. I am confident that 
this  measure  of  my  colleague,  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development,  will 
definitely promote further economic development, particularly for those falling in the lower 
economic brackets. 

Madam  Speaker,  our  economy  relies  a  lot  on  tourism  sector.    With  a  view  to 
encouraging  the  entertainment  industry  and  other  leisure  activities,  the  levy  of  admission 
charges  by  local  authorities,  which  stood  at  10  per  cent  of  the  admission  fees  to  parks, 
gardens, zoos, fairs, exhibition halls etc., will be abolished. This levy amounts to 10 % on the 
turnover and you would agree with me this is quite excessive. So, we are going to abolish this 
levy on the admission tickets. 

Madam  Speaker,  we  have  noted  that,  with  the  recent  development  trends,  new 
commercial  developments  have  moved  away  from  the  town  centres  leading  to  our  urban 
areas slowly losing their attraction for shoppers and visitors, thus reducing the revenues for 
shop  keepers,  small  businesses  and  market  traders.  There  is,  therefore,  an  urgent  need  to 
regenerate our urban areas.   

In this context, the proposed investment in the new mass transit system along with a 
network  of  modern  integrated  urban  terminals  comprising  parking  facilities,  food  courts, 

 

62 

commercial spaces, dedicated hawker areas and green spaces will  address the key challenges 
that lie ahead of us to develop our towns and villages into a more balanced, sustainable and 
inclusive manner.  The new mass transit system will also help to reduce the road congestion, 
and other adverse environmental impacts of thousands of motor vehicles converging to the 
City of Port  Louis during the week days. Madam Speaker, in addition to the efforts being 
made to smarten our existing towns, the development of new ‘Smart Cities’ will definitely 
change the look of our urban and rural areas.   

Madam Speaker, since the coming into operation of the Local Government Act 2011, 
all new constructions and additions to existing immovable properties in the City of Port Louis 
and the four other Municipal Council areas are not being subject to the levy of general rates 
unlike those put up before December 2011 due to a loophole in the Local Government Act 
2011 which is currently in force.  Can you imagine a number of these newly built high rise 
buildings in Ebène, in Port Louis and in other cities are not paying any general rates at all at 
present! This situation has not only led to an important shortfall of revenue for the Municipal 
Councils,  but  has  also  created  an  unfair  situation  where  owners  of  immovable  properties 
existing  before  2011  were  charged  for  general  rates,  whilst  owners  of  new  buildings  after 
2011 are not paying any rate. 

The Budget is addressing this issue and legislative amendments would be made in the 
forthcoming Finance Bill to enable the Government Valuer to value these buildings and all 
new buildings to be put up in urban areas and work out updated valuation list for the purpose 
of enabling urban councils to levy rates on all immovable properties in their administrative 
jurisdiction. This measure will, obviously, result in additional revenues accruing to the Urban 
Local Authorities. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  provision  of  accessible  social  and  community  infrastructure 
contributes  to  the  quality  of  life  for  all  and  it  is  important  that  such  facilities  be  provided 
concurrently with the development of new buildings and neighbourhoods. In this respect, an 
amount  of  Rs120  m.  will  be  put  at  the  disposal  of  the  Local  Authorities  for  the 
implementation  of  new  local  infrastructure  and  we  would  ensure  that  our  citizens  benefit 
from same in the shortest possible delay. My Ministry would facilitate the Local Authorities 
to  implement  local  development  projects,  such  as  construction  of  new  village/social  halls, 
sports amenities, children gardens and leisure parks /green spaces, thereby  catering for the 
well-being of all categories of end users.  

Madam  Speaker,  I  have  to  mention  this  as  well,  I  have  received  repeated 
representations from the inhabitants of Constituencies Nos 2 and 3 to the effect that there is a 

 

63 

shortage of sports infrastructure for the youth of these regions. I have relayed my concern on 
this issue to my colleague the Minister of Finance and Economic Development. I am glad that 
he has agreed to make a provision for the consultancy study in respect of the construction of a 
Multipurpose Sports Complex at Plaine Verte which will provide the inhabitants with modern 
indoor  sports  and  leisure  activities.  We  need  our  youth  to  work  and  contribute  towards 
building a prosperous nation and not falling prey to the social ills and becoming a burden for 
their families and the society. 

I  am  also  glad  to  note  that  provision  is  being  made  for  the  funding  of  three  major 
capital projects for the local Authorities namely, the renovation of the Port  Louis Theatre, 
Consultancy  for  the  renovation  of  the  Plaza  Theatre  -  Phase  III  and  the  renovation  of  the 
Town  Hall  of  Curepipe.  This  demonstrates,  Madam  Speaker,  the  commitment  of  this 
Government to preserve our ancient and historic buildings.  The House may wish to note that 
the Municipal City Council of Port Louis is currently preparing the bidding documents for the 
first  phase  of  the  renovation  of  Port  Louis  Theatre;  the  renovation  of  the  Administrative 
Block  of  Plaza  Theatre  (Phase  II)  is  also  in  progress.    The  Municipal  Council  of  Beau 
Bassin/Rose  Hill  will  shortly  start  working  on  the  Expression  of  Interest  for  consultancy 
services  for  the  Phase  III  of  the  project.  As  regards  the  restoration  and  renovation  of  the 
Town Hall of Curepipe, the Municipal Council of Curepipe is currently carrying out a survey 
of the existing building and will subsequently initiate procurement procedures for the project. 
Madam  Speaker,  following  the  floods  which  occurred  back  in  February  2016  and 
which affected several localities across the country, a priority list of drain- related projects 
has been established.  These works would be undertaken by both the Local Authorities and 
the National Development Unit. An amount of Rs304 m. has been earmarked over the next 
two financial years for the construction of drains by the Local Authorities. 

However,  we  are  all  aware  that,  with  the  climate  change,  we  cannot  predict  which 
locality may be affected by the next torrential rains or flash floods. We cannot construct all 
the drains at one go. So, we will proceed on a priority basis. Moreover, it is worth noting that 
the Land Drainage Authority would be set up in due course and the Local Authorities would 
provide their full cooperation to that Authority. 

Another measure which is going to help our citizens living on the Municipal Estates – 
we have about 30 Municipal Housing Estates in Port Louis, Beau Bassin, Quatre Bornes and 
Curepipe. Madam Speaker, in 2013, the State Land Act was amended with a view to giving 
to those families, who have a housing unit on leased land belonging to the State, the option to 
buy the land at Rs2,000 per lot. In a spirit of equity, we consider that this measure should be 

 

64 

extended  to  those  families  having  their  housing  units  on  the  Municipal  land  as  well. 
Previously,  as  I  mentioned,  this  measure  applied  to  State  land,  but  now  we  are  going  to 
extend this measure to people living on Municipal land. The Local Government Act will thus 
be amended accordingly and owners of housing units on Municipal Housing Estates like Les 
Casernes in Curepipe and Sookdeo Bissoondoyal in Port Louis will have the option to buy 
the plot of land on which stand their housing units at the nominal price of Rs2000 per plot. 

Madam Speaker, one of the salient characteristics of this Government is that we dare 
to  take  bold  decisions  for  the  benefit  of  this  country.  We  are  all  aware  of  the  numerous 
problems which the hawking activities in the City were causing to the road users, registered 
traders, market traders, tourists and to the pedestrians.  

To this end, with a view to managing and curtailing illegal hawking activities in the 
city, the Municipal City Council of Port Louis has, in collaboration with the Police, put up in 
place  appropriate  mechanisms,  since  December  2015,  to  control  hawking  activities.  There 
was a need to control and manage the situation by containing the influx of hawkers so as to 
prevent a chaotic situation, besides ensuring the security of our citizens as well as that of the 
tourists, alleviating traffic problems and maintaining law and order. Moreover, there was also 
a need to ensure fair competition and safeguard the interest of the shop owners and traders.  

Madam  Speaker,  as  a  short-term  measure,  pending  the  long-term  solution  in  the 
context of the implementation of a Road Decongestion Programme for Port Louis, which is 
currently  being  worked  out  at  the  level  of  the  Ministry  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land 
Transport and which will cater for the hawkers also, temporary sites have been set up with 
necessary  amenities  and  placed  at  the  disposal  of  registered  hawkers.  From  feedback 
received, the pedestrian flows as well as the traffic flow are much more fluid these days.  

Madam Speaker, if you would allow me, I shall now turn to the Mauritius Fire and 
Rescue Service. With the growing development in the southern part of the country, a state-of-
the-art  Fire  Station  is  required.    In  this  context,  a  new  Fire  Station  would  be  constructed, 
soon, at Rose Belle.  It will provide fire and emergency cover to the localities in the Districts 
of  Savanne  and  Grand  Port  and  it  would  also  assist  the  Saint  Aubin  and  Mahebourg  Fire 
Stations in case of major disasters.  

It is expected that this new Fire Station would not only serve the local community but 
also the International Airport, the Omnicane Smart City, the Rose Belle Business Park and 
the neighbouring localities.  Moreover, the response time to the incident site would be greatly 
reduced in that part of the country and it would also serve to decentralise the service offered 
by the Mauritius Fire and Rescue Service. 

 

65 

Moreover,  as  regards  the  relocation  of  the  Quatre  Bornes  Fire  Station  project  to  a 
more suitable site having better access to the road network,  procedures are underway for the 
acquisition of  land  in the region of Sodnac. The Mauritius Fire and Rescue Service plays an 
important role in fire fighting and rescue exercises, as well as during natural disasters. In this 
context,  besides  the  recruitment  of  100  additional  fire-fighters  to  reinforce  the  existing 
manpower of the service, efforts will be made to equip the service with high-tech vehicles 
and  equipment  to  respond  to  emergencies,  such  as  flooding  and  other  natural  disasters, 
technological disasters, seasonal crop and vegetation fires. Water tenders and high volume 
water pumps, personal protective equipment and other fire fighting gears will be purchased to 
improve  emergency  response  to  fire  outbreaks,  rescue  operations  and  other  types  of 
emergencies.  

Moreover,  the  Mauritius  Fire  and  Rescue  Service  has  already  set  up  a  Special 
Operations Division which comprises of three specialised units, namely: the Technical Recue 
Unit,  the  Swift  Water  Rescue  Unit  and  the  Hazardous  Materials  Response  Unit.  They  are 
staffed by highly trained personnel and specially equipped to operate at unusual and highly 
hazardous  incident  sites,  where  the  threat  to  life  is  very  high.  This  Special  Operations 
Division will provide backup support to station crews during major incidents and disasters.  

Madam Speaker, the Mauritius Fire and Rescue Service is entrusted with the duty of 
taking all necessary steps for  inter alia protecting life, property and the environment in case 
of emergency and in that context it may cooperate with any entity that provides a service in 
case  of  emergency.  The  implementation,  by  the  Police,  of  a  new  Integrated  Emergency 
Response  Management  system  that  links  the  SAMU,  the  Fire  Services  and  other  agencies 
with a project value of Rs50 m. is, therefore, a very good initiative. In any major accidents, as 
we are aware, one or two minutes can make the difference between life and death. So, such 
an  agency  which  is  going  to  pull  together  the  expertise  of  the  SAMU,  Police  and  the 
Mauritius Fire and Rescue Service is most welcomed. 

Madam Speaker, The Minister of Finance and Economic Development has titled this 
budget as “A New Era of Development”. Feedback from all quarters indicates that the public 
at large has welcomed the measures enunciated in the budget which will, no doubt, contribute 
in opening up the economy and bringing in more relief to the poor and the needy. 

 With  this  budget,  we  are  indeed  paving  the  way  for  the  country  to  respond  to  the 
main challenges for a sustainable growth and prosperity. I am confident that, in the short and 
medium  terms,  we  are  going  to  witness  major  transformations  in  the  socio–economic 

 

66 

landscape  of  the  country  and  each  and  every  citizen  of  this  country  will  stand  to  benefit 
therefrom. 

Before resuming my seat, Madam Speaker, allow me to congratulate the hon. Minister 
of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  once  again  for  the  way  he  has  crafted  the  budget 
which clearly translates the vision of the Government to create an intelligent, forward moving 
and caring society. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Prime  Minister  has  set  the  vision.  The  hon.  Minister  of 
Finance and Economic Development has provided the economic planning and the financial 
means. The population at large has accepted the budget.  What is left now is for us to roll up 
our sleeves, get down to work and implement the measures announced in the budget.  If we 
don’t deliver, Madam Speaker, I am sorry to say we won’t have anybody else to blame. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

D21/TAKE030AF/5 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Benydin! 

(6.27 p.m.) 

Mr  T.  Benydin  (First  Member  for  La  Caverne  &  Phoenix):    Madam  Speaker, 
allow me, first of all, to sincerely congratulate hon. Pravind Jugnauth, Minister of Finance 
and Economic Development for the excellent measures spelt out in the Budget Speech for 
2016/2017.  

It  goes  without  saying  that  the  Budget  Speech  has  been  acclaimed  widely  by  the 
population  to  yet  give  further  a  real  meaning  to  the  intrinsic  values  of  social  justice  and 
equitable  distribution  of  income  and  solidarity  measures  for  the  have  nots  and  the  middle 
income group in spite of the spectre of Brexit, global economic slowdown and turmoil in the 
advanced countries. 

 Madam Speaker, if we  have to give a score to the Budget Speech of hon. Pravind 

Jugnauth, certainly his score is … 

10 points on 10 points! 

(Interruptions) 

 

67 

(Interruptions) 

Passed with distinction! Tel père, tel fils, goes the saying! 

Le  ministre  des  Finances  a,  sans  nul  doute,  reçu  l’approbation  et  la  bénédiction  de 
notre  Premier  ministre  et  Leader  de  l’Alliance  Lepep,  pour  la  présentation  des  grandes 
orientations  et  des  mesures  contenues  dans  le  discours  du  budget.    Avec  les  mesures 
courageuses tant sur le plan économique que sociale, l’honorable Pravind Jugnauth a réussi à 
redonner  confiance  et  rétablir  le  feel  good  factor  aux  citoyens  de  notre  pays.  Même  les 
adversaires les plus acharnés et coriaces et ceux qui ont l’habitude de tout critiquer ont dû se 
taire  sinon  de  faire  des  commentaires  très  limités  à  l’instar  du Leader  de  l’Opposition  qui 
qualifie  ce  budget  d’intéressant.    D’autres  qualifient  ce  budget  d’innovant  aves  des 
composantes  innovatrices  qui  visent  à  booster  notre  économie,  éliminer  la  pauvreté  et 
redessiner  une  nouvelle  architecture  de  développement  pour,  entre  autres,  reformer  les 
services publics, éliminer les gaspillages et gagner la bataille de la modernisation surtout avec 
le  Metro  Express,  l’agrandissement  du  réseau  de  fibre  optique  et  le  full-fledged  digital 
society. 

Madame  la  présidente,  le  Leader  du  Parti  Travailliste,  en  panne  d’arguments 
plausibles, a dû prendre cinq jours pour donner ses réactions.  Il a même été battu par mes 
confrères syndicalistes, qui ont commenté le budget avec promptitude et qui ont apprécié le 
volet social de ce budget. 

Madame la présidente, ce budget est aussi le fruit d’une politique de dialogue social et 
de  consultations  avec  plusieurs  stakeholders  et  la  société  civile.  À  cet  effet,  je  cite  ma 
collègue, Jane Ragoo, sur ses commentaires faites à l’hebdomadaire ‘Week-end’ du 31 juillet. 
Je cite – 

« Dans l’ensemble, c’est un budget avec beaucoup de points positifs. J’apprécie que la 
voix de la société civile ait été écoutée dans la majeure partie des mesures.»  

Même ‘l’Express’ du samedi 31 juillet, fait les commentaires suivants dans sa rubrique sur le 
budget, je cite – 

 « On a cru qu’il allait augmenter les taxes, dont la TVA. Mais Pravind Jugnauth n’a 
pas été impopulaire comme il l’avait laissé entendre à la presse. » 

 

68 

Madam Speaker, hon. Pravind Jugnauth - a bit of literature - he came back as Minister 
Finance and Economic Development.  He saw and he conquered. Indeed, Madam Speaker, he 
conquered the hearts of  thousands of Mauritians with his courageous and daring measures 
through his 10-pronged strategies geared at ushering a new era of development. I would like 
to mention, inter alia - 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

fostering a wave of modern entrepreneurs; 

creating more job opportunities for all; 

entering a new economic cycle; 

reforming business facilities;  

lifting the quality of life for one and all; 

addressing the root causes of poverty, and 

ensuring macroeconomic stability and social public finances. 

Madam Speaker, by coming forward with a comprehensive action, plan to deal with 
the root causes of poverty the hon. Minister Finance and Economic Development confirms 
the  commitment  of  our Government  to  empower  those  who  are  economically  at  the  lower 
rung of the ladder and to contribute to make Mauritius a more equitable society. By launching 
the Marshall Plan against poverty, the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development 
has given a clear signal that market opening measures and economic consultations should not 
necessarily  predominate  over  social  ones  and  that  the  social  dimensions  should  be  an 
essential component in any development process.  

While  recognising  that  an  effective  State  should  ensure  high  and  stable  economic 
growth, it has also a bounded duty to raise the capacity of people, especially the vulnerable 
and  marginalised  groups  through  universal  access  to  education,  health,  shelter,  decent 
employment,  social  services  and  also  the  promotion  of  gender  equality.  To  this  effect,  the 
provision of necessary  funds to set up a Parliamentary Women Caucus regrouping women 
MLAs from all political parties to discuss issues and policies pertaining to the promotion of 
women in our society, undoubtedly translate Government’s policies to eliminate all forms of 
discrimination based on sex. 

 

69 

Madam  Speaker,  whilst  appreciating  the  strategy  to  broaden  the  fiscal  incentives 
given to SMEs, priority must as well be given to raise the productivity of the informal sector 
and  to  integrate  it  into  the  economic  mainstream  and  to  enhance  the  competitiveness  of 
entrepreneurs. 

Equally  important,  is  a  coordinated  recovery  for  a  more  sustainable  growth  in  jobs 
and  income.  To  this  end,  the  second  strategy  of  the  Budget,  that  is,  to  create  more  job 
opportunities for youth, men and women is very commendable as Government is expecting, 
through various measures, to create employment to around 21,400. 

Madam Speaker, it is also of growing importance that the green and blue economy 
can  also  boost  the  economy  and  can  have  job  recovery  through  large-scale  and  labour 
intensive  investment  in  green  infrastructure  such  as  renewable  energies  and  transport 
decongestion schemes while addressing, at the same time, environmental issues. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to improving the quality of life of vulnerable groups of 
society  and  to  enhance  social  safety  nets,  this  Budget  highlights  numerous  measures  to 
eradicate  absolute  poverty  urgently.  We  have,  for  reference,  the  new  schemes  relating  to 
monthly  subsistence  allowance  of  adults  on  the  Social  Register  which  will,  henceforth,  be 
higher than the present threshold of 6,200, that is, a maximum of 9,520 for a family of two 
adults and three children. 

The  reduction  of  the  retail  price  of  cooking  gas  from  Rs300  to  Rs270  for  a  12  kg 
cylinder is another major breakthrough and unprecedented action to give relief to households. 
The grant of cash award to students of poor families to achieve higher education, strengthen 
Government’s  political  will  towards  capacity  building  and  empowerment  to  improve 
vulnerable families out of the poverty cycle. 

Madam  Speaker,  insofar  as  fundamental  public  sector  reform  is  concerned, 
particularly emerging of like-minded institutions translate effectively Government’s action to 
re-engineer a new model of economic development which fosters quality public services, to 
avoid duplication and arrive at greater coherence and synergy. We, therefore, look forward 
that  public  sector  reforms  will  stimulate  the  creation  of  high-quality  employment  across  a 
wide sector as it is a fact that quality public services can make a vital contribution to social 
cohesion and equity which alongside effective administration strengthen and provide better 
services to our citizens.  

 

70 

Madam Speaker, it is a fact today that many young persons still favour public sector 
employment since they believe that jobs in the public sector have better social status as well 
as better wages and fringe benefits, and above all, job security. But the reality is that public 
sector employment represents less than 85,000 on the strength of our labour force. Therefore, 
it is imperative that jobs have to be created in the private sector, particularly with the series of 
incentives and facilities that are being rendered to them for expansion. It is essential also that 
labour standards have to be respected and barriers have to be removed in the private sector to 
change  the  perception  held  by  young  people  that  public  sector  employment  is  good  and 
private sector employment is bad. 

Madam  Speaker,  in  this  context,  the  legislation  that  has  recently  been  passed  to 
guarantee  a  national  minimum  wage  to  workers  in  all  sectors  of  the  economy,  will 
undoubtedly contribute to bring a new mind-set and attitude to workers and jobseekers. The 
more  so  that  reforms  in  labour  legislation  based  on  the  descent  working  agenda  can  also 
usher social peace and eliminate all apprehensions regarding job security in the private sector. 
It is  also relevant to underline that despite strong  gains in level of  educational attainment, 
young people still face lower chances of finding employment because of their relatively job 
specific work experience vis-à-vis other older applicants.  To do away with this experience 
constraint,  there  should  be  a  policy  of  implementation  of  implication  to  combining  school 
with  work  experience  and  including  jobs  search  skills  and  career  guidance  programmes  in 
educational institutions to encourage school to work transition. In some countries, strategies 
that encourage gaining of work experience, while in school, have yielded positive results in 
lowering  the  experience  gap  and  made  it  easier  for  youth  to  find  employment  after 
graduation.  

The YEP programme, Madam Speaker, is therefore central to personal development 
of young men and women. I would like, to this effect, to quote from an ILO document on 
Global Employment Trend for Youth.  I quote – 

“A  lack  of  decent  work,  if  experienced  at  an  early  age,  often  permanently 
compromises  a  person’s  future  employment  prospects  and  frequently  leads  to 
unsuitable labour behaviour patterns that last a lifetime.” 

The same document also highlights the productive potential of  young labour – not Labour 
Party – and stresses and focussing on youth make sense to a country from a cost benefit point 
of view. 

 

71 

Madame la présidente, sur le plan social, surtout en ce qui concerne le Plan Marshall, 
il faut souligner les diverses mesures visant à soulager les groupes vulnérables et à éliminer 
les  causes  profondes  de  la  pauvreté,  notamment  la  construction  et  la  finalisation  de  1,900 
logements sociaux de 50 mètres carrés, le plafond d’éligibilité pour la NHDC social housing 
qui passe de R 10,000 à R 20,000, l’augmentation du meal allowance pour les écoles ZEP de 
R  40  à  R  60,  le  doit  au  Basic  Invalidity  Pension  pour  les  enfants  avec  des  disabilities  de 
moins de 15 ans. 

D’autre part, Madame la présidente, nous accueillons également la décision de revoir 
le  Corporate  Social  Responsibility  Framework  dans  un  souci  de  plus  de  transparence  et 
d’efficacité,  la  mise  sur  pied  d’un  National  CSR  Foundation  géré  conjointement  par  les 
secteurs privé et public, avec de nouveaux critères de  contribution des  entreprises, 50% la 
première  année,  75%  pour  l’année  suivante,  est  de  bonne  augure  et  aidera  les  ONG  et  la 
société  civile  à  présenter  des  projets  pour  combattre,  entre  autres,  la  pauvreté,  aider  à  la 
construction  de  logements  sociaux,  et  surtout,  dans  les  campagnes,  visant  à  combattre  les 
fléaux de la drogue et d’aider les familles en difficulté. 

Madam Speaker, one such measure that is of personal interest to me - and I am sure 
my  colleagues  from  the  NDU  -  in  this  Budget,  is  the  announcement  of  the  reform  of  the 
Public Service, and as a Parliamentary Private Secretary, that of the NDU, and in particular 
the Citizens Advice Bureau, commonly known as ‘CAB.’ Since its inception in the late 80s, 
CAB has played a significant role in the upgrading of the quality of life of our fellow citizens. 

A glimpse in the history of CAB can shed more light to understand its significance 
even today. At that point in time, the Mauritian territory was divided into municipal zones 
looked after by the Municipal Councils, the rural areas which fell under the responsibility of 
District Councils,  and also there was what we call the “no man’s land”, left on their own as 
orphans. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, the then hon. Prime Minister, conceptualised the setting up of 
CAB  offices  throughout  the  island  with  the  objective  of  bringing  development  at  the 
doorsteps of the citizens and in particular in the “no man’s land” areas. 

During  the  first  half  of  the  90s,  regional  development  reached  its  peak  under  the 
leadership  of  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  recorded  statistics  of  colours  spoke  for  themselves. 
However, with the taking over of the Labour Party in 1995, things started to fall apart, the 
more  so  with  the  detachment  of  the  Citizens  Advice  Bureau  from  the  Prime  Minister’s 
Office. By that time, the CAB started to lose height with the advent of mobile phones, IT 

 

72 

facilities and private radios. People found it easier to post their complaints on Facebook or to 
phone the private radios instead of calling at the CAB offices. 

Madam Speaker, it is rightly so that the announcement of the revamping of the CAB 
can contribute to the eradication of poverty and to socioeconomic development process and 
welfare of citizens. 

Despite all the criticisms that are being heard about CAB, I am satisfied that the CAB 
offices  under  my  responsibility  and  those  of  my  colleagues  do  respond  to  the  calls  of  the 
public,  and  we  are  leaving  no  stone  unturned  to  upgrade  the  quality  of  life  of  our  fellow 
citizens.  We  are  addressing  the  issue  of  flooding  by  providing  drains  where  required, 
upgrading  of  road  networks,  equipping  the  children’s  playgrounds  and  upgrading  sports 
infrastructure  wherever  the  need  is  felt,  among  others,  while  taking  into  consideration  the 
budget allocated to us. 

Madam Speaker, the introduction of an Advisory Committee, with the participation of 
the private sector at the level of each CAB, can help to revamp the services offered. Public 
exposure  of  CAB  and  well-defined  role  and  responsibilities  of  CAB  office  can  help  the 
citizens to better understand the work and limits of Government’s activities. 

CAB has, so far, only an intervention capacity, and it is, therefore, the duty of other 
service providers to play their part in meeting the expectancies of the general public. We need 
a better of synergy and coordination with organisations such as community and social welfare 
centres. They  do not have necessarily to be shaken up by  private radios to react to public 
demands. Public officers have a moral duty to perform their work with collaboration of the 
CAB office. After more than a quarter of a century today, CAB is again under the aegis of the 
Prime Minister’s Office with again, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, who is the Prime Minister, and he 
wants things to improve. 

In the past, the glory days of CAB was contingent upon the close monitoring by a PPS 
Council on its day-to-day business, short term and long term visions. Everything pertaining to 
the smooth running of the CAB was channelled through the PPS Council who had in return to 
report directly to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister at regular intervals. As such, the objective of 
CAB was viewed and reviewed to meet the target fixed in service delivering, that is, the CAB 
which was one of the main antennas of the Prime Minister’s Office. 

Madam  Speaker,  it  is  my  humble  request  to  propose  the  re-introduction  of  an 
Advisory Committee with involvement of the grassroots, which is a sine qua non condition to 

 

73 

put  man  at  the  centre  of  development  and  the  resetting  of  the  PPS  Council.  This  can 
contribute, Madam Speaker, to bring back the golden days of the CAB and return its lettre de 
noblesse, hopefully. CAB offices given the necessary boost and support can be the agent of 
change  we  want  to  see.  CAB  can  help  to  build  up  an  active  citizenship  network,  and  the 
numerous problems registered  at the CAB office can be the stepping-stone towards policy 
formulation for regional and national changes. 

Before  ending,  I  would  like  to  thank  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development  and  all  Ministers  of  the  Government  concerned  for  developments,  and  with 
regard to Constituency No. 15, La Caverne/Phoenix, I would like to mention the construction 
of the new ENT Hospital in Vacoas. Thank you, Mr Minister of Health and Quality of Life 
for setting a new hospital in Vacoas, in our constituency, and the constituency where our Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister also resides - we should not forget about that. 

(Interruptions) 

Yes,  No.  16!  Also,  I  would  also  like  to  thank  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development,  and  hon.  Ivan  Collendavelloo.    I  think  he  heard  the  pleas  of  the  citizens  of 
Highlands  who  are  actually  facing  some  difficulties  regarding  sewerage  problems.  I  have 
seen in the Budget already a sum has been earmarked for sewerage projects in Highlands. I 
would like to thank him for that. Thank you very much. We note also that there is the setting 
of a pilot Agri-Business Park in Highlands over an area of 100 acres. 

With these words, Madam Speaker, I thank the House for the kind attention extended 
to me. To end on a good note, I will say, again in a Shakespeare mood, ‘here is a Budget 
when come such another.’ 

Thank you very much. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Callichurn! 

(6.51 p.m.) 

The Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training (Mr S. 
Callichurn): Madam Speaker, it is with great pleasure that I am commenting on this Budget. 
At the very outset, I would like to congratulate the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development, hon. Pravind Jugnauth, for having shined on the occasion and lived up to the 
expectation of the population. 

 

74 

Madam Speaker, the dilemma of any national budget is to allocate limited resources 
to  unlimited  demands,  hence,  the  need  for  prioritization.  The  Budget  is  an  opportunity  to 
review  our  national  economic  and  social  objectives.    This  Budget  is  the  fruit  of  wide 
consultations with all cross sections of the population.  The Hon. Minister of  Finance and 
Economic  Development  has  proved  that  economic  imperatives  can  be  met  without 
jeopardizing social needs.  He has presented a Budget that whips the economy, consolidates 
our  Welfare  State,  creates  new  opportunities  for  the  youth  and  opens  new  landscape  for 
development which surely will propel us to a high income society. 
As you are aware, Madam Speaker, impressive cyclical and structural challenges have 
 
repeatedly  shaken  the  economy  violently.  Dealing  with  the  precarious  state  of  most 
macroeconomic fundamentals, the adverse consequences of Brexit on the important sectors of 
the economy, together with the volatility, uncertainty and unpredictability of global growth 
and trade must, no doubt, have been a Herculean task. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  Minister  has  rightly  stated  that  our  traditional  sectors  face 
headwinds.  Textile and clothing are facing serious challenges.  Both the sugar and non-sugar 
agriculture are struggling to attain a reasonable level of food security.  Financial Services are 
facing new challenges.  The average growth of the ICT sector has declined and moderated to 
6%. 

Madam Speaker, of course we should reckon that some events have been favourable 
to the economy.  For instance, the grant from India, low interest rates, the falling prices of oil, 
gas, and coal.  However, these by far are outnumbered by the current challenges. 

Navigating through such an economic setting, and aware that he will be judged on his 
economic  stewardship,  leadership,  vision  and  audacity,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic  Development  has  risen  to  the  occasion  and  has  been  daring  and  bold  and 
financially responsible to confront many of the structural deficiencies. 

Bold,  decisive,  innovative  measures  and  structural  reforms  have  had  to  be  taken.  
Public  spending  has  had  to  be  rebalanced  towards  productive  investments  and  wasteful 
expenditures  have  had  to  be  curtailed.    Some  of  the  subsidies  and  grants  have  had  to  be 
revisited for more efficiency and equity. 

In  the  absence  of  such  good  mix  of  policies  and  measures  to  address  the 
macroeconomic imbalances, sectoral weaknesses, eroding competitiveness, rising inequalities 
and emerging challenges, there will be no desired annual growth, no significant job creation, 
no desired increase in GDP per capita and no shared prosperity.  Focusing on some sectors is 
crucial given our limited resources. 

 

75 

Madam Speaker, indeed this much awaited Budget has unsurprisingly been positively 
acclaimed and welcomed by almost all stakeholders except for the Labour Party, be it by the 
private sector, business community, the trade unions, social workers and most importantly by 
the civil society. 

While  espousing  the  philosophy  and  principles  outlined  in  this  Government’s 
electoral manifesto, the 2016-2017 Budget provides bold steps to break free from traditional 
approaches which are no longer responsive to current and emerging economic challenges and 
to the high aspirations and expectations of the population.  This Budget heralds a new era of 
development, hinging on ten key focus areas; one of which is directly related to my portfolio, 
namely, the creation of more job opportunities for all. 

Madam Speaker, I have followed with keen interest the interventions of hon. Ramful 
and hon. Uteem.  Hon. Uteem in his intervention mentioned that unemployment rate is high 
among the youth and women. This is a fact which cannot be denied. But when we look at the 
trend of unemployment rate among these sections of the population, over the past decades, 
we  will  realise  that  practically  nothing  was  done  to  remediate  the  situation.    We,  in  this 
Government, are doing our utmost best to address the problem at its root. We are tackling the 
problem of mismatch by introducing tailor made courses to match the needs of the industry.  
We are creating new training programmes to empower the unemployed. In this Budget itself 
we have introduced  a new Skills Development programme which  will provide training for 
some 4,000 young people in fields that are in demand, I must precise. 

Hon. Ramful has been very critical, but his criticism has not been constructive.  

(Interruptions) 

Unfortunately, he is not here. He was the president and he presided over the HRDC for two 
years.  I give him the benefit of doubt for the first year 2013. The time he took to settle, I 
agree. But, in 2014, Madam Speaker,… 

(Interruptions) 

In 2014, a Budget of Rs316 m. was provided to HRDC and out of these Rs316 m., several 
millions  were  provided  for  training  programmes.  Do  you  know  how  much  were  actually 
spent? Very less! I have figures here. 

(Interruptions) 

Out of the Rs10 m. which was allocated for Apprenticeship Scheme, only Rs6 m. was used! 
Out of Rs1 m. for Training Cluster and Coordinating Training for SMEs, none was used! 

(Interruptions) 

 

76 

If I go through the list, you would see that not even a quarter was used from the money which 
was provided to him under his Chairmanship at the HRDC. So, he cannot be more royaliste 
que le roi, dirai-je. When you criticise, it must be constructive criticism. 

Another  fact  that  hon.  Ramful  said  is  that,  here,  our  Government  is  creating 
precarious jobs through the Youth Employment Programme (YEP). He argued that the Youth 
Employment Programme serves no purpose in view of its short duration.  He added that it 
disguised short duration employment.  Let me remind him that YEP was introduced in 2013, 
then nobody from his Party raised objections or criticised the programme at that time. 

(Interruptions) 

At  that  time,  it  was  right  and  perfect  to  do  so  and  now  the  same  programme  suddenly 
becomes useless and purposeless in his eyes.  I think… 

(Interruptions) 

I do not think it is proper for me to use this word, but I will say it anyway ‘ki grand paquet li 
fin cassé là-bas’. 

On the contrary, I must congratulate the then Minister of Finance, hon. Xavier Duval 
for the laudable initiative of introducing Youth Employment Programme (YEP) as a measure 
to improve employability skills of our youth.   

Madam  Speaker,  let  me  clarify  and  set  records  straight.  In  the  skills  mismatch 
dilemma, the private sector has consistently harped that our unemployed youth do not have 
employability  skills.    In  fact,  the  Youth  Employment  Programme  is  perfectly  designed  to 
enable  our  youth  to  acquire  these  employability  skills  through  on-the-job  training  and 
exposure to workplace environment.  Allow me to add that a substantial percentage of those 
who join the Youth Employment Programme have now acquired full-time employment. 

Since  the  launching  of  YEP  in  January  2013  up  to  December  2014,  some  8,471 
youths were placed out of a total number of 20,541 registered, which represents a percentage 
of 41.2% and those were placed by the previous Government in two years.  It is worthy to 
point out that since I took office as from January 2015 to July 2016, some 7,810 youths have 
been  placed  out  of  a  total  number  of  14,902  registered  under  this  programme,  which 
represents a percentage of 52.4% and that is only in 19 months and we have seven months 
more  to  go.  Talking  about  failure!  He  has  failed!    It  is  he  who  has  failed  in  his  duty  as 
Chairman of HRDC. 

 

77 

Madam Speaker, the YEP was initially conceived for placement and training of youth 
in  the  private  sector.    In  view  of  the  prevailing  high  rate  of  youth  unemployment, 
Government  decided  to  extend  the  programme  to  the  Civil  Service  and  parastatal  bodies.  
Under  the  proposed  scheme,  1,000  unemployed  youth  have  already  been  placed.  The 
initiative of the Minister of Finance and Economic Development to increase the number of 
beneficiaries under the YEP to 2,000 is, therefore, laudable. 

Youth  unemployment  is  a  worldwide  phenomenon.    One  of  the  major  reasons  for 
youth  unemployment  is  skills  mismatch,  which  is  an  ongoing  challenge  impacting  on  all 
sectors of the economy. There is a need for rethinking and re-engineering of our institutions 
as past policies have failed.  There is room for coordination and for more collaborative efforts 
among institutions to address the skills mismatch issue. 

I  understand  that  my  colleague,  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources, 
Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific  Research,  has  already  initiated  action  on  revamping  the 
Career Guidance Service.  In the same vein, my Ministry is coming up with the establishment 
of professional career counselling services under the National Employment Agency. 

The introduction of the National Skills Development Programme in specific sectors 
such as ICT, Tourism and Hospitality, Nursing and Paramedics, and Construction and other 
industries, is one of the first measures to address the problem of mismatch. 

Madam  Speaker,  I,  therefore,  commend  the  proposal  of  setting  up  of  a  Skills 
Development  Authority  as  a  Regulator  in  the  sector,  which  will  focus  on  technical  and 
vocational education and training. With the measures announced in the budget, Government 
is  addressing  the  skills  mismatch  issue  in  a  holistic  manner.    Therefore,  “A  Culture  of 
Continuous Training and Development for a Decent Job for All” will be fostered.  

Furthermore, Madam Speaker, to address the problem of mismatch, Government has 
introduced the Dual Training Programme (DTP) which is tailor-made to meet the demand of 
the private sector.  This programme is inspired from the German dual system which combines 
on-the-job training with institution-based learning to provide the trainee with the necessary 
skills and knowledge.  

Madam Speaker, funds were provided for the training and placement of 300  young 
persons.  Aggressive marketing campaigns were carried out with some 200 employers. It is 
noted  with  concern,  however,  that  since  July  2015  to  date,  only  20  companies  have 
participated in the programme and just some 100 trainees have been placed.  Questions must 
be  asked,  Madam  Speaker,  why  this  reluctance  on  the  part  of  the  private  companies  to 
support Government’s initiative in spite of several financial incentives provided to them.  

 

78 

It  should  be  understood  that  Government  alone  cannot  address  the  skills  mismatch 
and training challenge. Social partners have to assume their responsibility and should work 
hand in hand with the Government to address the problem of unemployment.  I exhort the 
private sector to avail themselves of the incentives in place and also those provided in the 
current budget in order to facilitate the creation of jobs.  Here, I must put emphasis on the fact 
that job creation is the concern of all and as true patriots, those in the private sector should 
play their part to achieve this goal.  

Another programme which was introduced to address unemployment among women 
above 30 years is the ‘Back To Work programme’. The programme was initiated to enrol 600 
women to facilitate their integration in the world of work.  Again,  I fail to understand the 
reluctance  of  women  to  join  this  programme  despite  having  a  high  rate  of  unemployment 
among them. The figures speak for themselves. Since June 2015 to date, 92 employers have 
participated in the programme and some 304 women have been placed.  

Hence,  to  boost  up  this  programme,  my  Ministry  is  contemplating  to  introduce  the 
concept of home-based working - “work from home".  This should enable more women to 
gain employment. 

Madam Speaker, history will judge us on our actions and not on our ability to deliver 
speeches.  And this Government will go down in history as the only one having the courage 
to  tackle  once  for  all  the  challenge  of  poverty.    We  have  promised,  in  our  Government 
Programme  to  alleviate  poverty  and  today  the  budget  provides  concrete  and  well-thought 
policy measures to address the issue. 

We cannot dream of joining the high-income League of Nations but, at the same time, 
hiding an oasis of poverty.  We do not believe in the duality of development, one for the rich 
and one for the poor.  We are charting the way for an inclusive society. 

We  had  to  break  the  cycle  of  poverty  and  the  budgetary  measures  are  targeted 
precisely to do so.  When the poor cannot keep their body and soul together and cannot have 
a  square  meal,  any  pro-poor  policy  is  doomed  for  failure.    This  is  where  we  make  the 
difference. 

With  the  social  allowance  of  Rs9,250  per  family  and  an  additional  Rs2,000  for 
children  at  the  Crèche,  we  are  physically  liberating  the  poor  family  from  daily  worries  of 
basic  human  needs.    Thus,  we  are  removing  the  barriers  and  shackles  of  poverty  and 
empowering poor families to join the mainstream development. 

This  Government  and  specially,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development will go down in history as the one who dared to rise the challenge for poverty 

 

79 

alleviation. In our poverty alleviation strategy, all institutions will be galvanised to create the 
enabling environment by setting up reach out targeted programmes. Our institutions will have 
to  join  hands  to  meet  the  challenge.  The  Budget  further  provides  for  cash  incentives  to 
students from poor families to excel in their studies as we firmly believe that education is the 
panacea for development and the gateway to move out of poverty. 
  
Madam  Speaker,  I  now  turn  to  measures  which  concern  my  Ministry.  You  would 
concur that employment is at the core of our development strategy, as opposed to it being 
simply a by-product of the growth of our country. In collaboration with the private sector, we 
are assessing all possible ways and means of using the development of industries in the fight 
against poverty. 

For the financial year 2016-2017, my Ministry has been allocated a budget of Rs613 
million which represents an increase of about Rs184 million.  This is indeed a feat, Madam 
Speaker  not  witnessed  for  several  decades.  These  additional  resources  allocated  to  my 
Ministry will be used judiciously.  

Madam Speaker, this is particularly pertinent as the slowdown in economic growth is 
a global phenomenon where the unemployment rate is prone to increase and existing jobs are 
being threatened. Nevertheless, this Government rose to the challenge and implemented bold 
and broad measures to counter the situation. This is evidenced by the sharp decrease in the 
unemployment  rate  from  8.7%  in  the  first  quarter  of  2015  to  7.6%  for  the  same  period  in 
2016. This shows that measures taken to address unemployment are yielding positive results. 
Madam Speaker, despite positive strides taken, this Government is not resting on its 
laurel. It is embracing new activities to leapfrog into the digital arena. The removal of VAT 
on  3D  printers  is  a  powerful  positive  signal  to  promote  emerging  sectors  and  to  spur  job 
creation.  My  Ministry  will  continue  to  play  its  forceful  role  of  facilitator  of  training  and 
counselling to prepare the future labour force. 
  
There is need to foster an enabling environment for training to take place with a view 
to enhancing job creation and promoting employment facilitation. In this context, I shall soon 
present to the House a National Employment Agency Bill, to provide for the establishment of 
the National Employment Agency to address demand and supply needs of the labour market.  
The National Employment Agency will mark a  paradigm shift from the traditional, 
reactive system of managing the labour market to a more proactive and sustained one. It will 
emphasize on one-to-one counselling session with jobseekers to understand and respond to 
their specific needs, design customised training programmes to enhance their employability 

 

80 

skills, conduct research and labour market surveys to identify labour market trends and skills 
gap. 

A new system, that is, a National Interactive Information Dashboard, will also be set 
up  within  the  framework  of  the  National  Employment  Agency.  Same  will  harness  Labour 
Market information for research and analysis for formulation of appropriate policies. It shall 
be a real-time user interface, conveying information regarding the labour market, inclusive 
areas of economic interests and the employment situation. 

The  National  Employment  Agency  will  be  based  on  the  French  model  of  ‘Pole 
Emploi’. To that end, our endeavours with the employment authorities of France have been 
ongoing; and the Vacoas Employment Information Centre has already been transformed into 
the prototype office. This prototype office will be replicated across the island.  

The  National  Employment  Policy  is  yet  another  endeavour  of  ours  to  enable  the 
country to achieve its employment goals of decent and productive work for all. A coherent, 
integrated and well-designed employment policy will cut across all sectors of the economy 
and will address both labour demand and supply to tackle employment related problems. 

Madam  Speaker,  on  the  employability  front,  my  Ministry  is  pursuing  a  number  of 
Government  to  Government  agreements  for  enhanced  opportunities  for  placement  of 
Mauritians abroad.  I am informed that a number of job opportunities exist for Mauritians in 
Africa and other countries. Circular migration is gaining increased prominence as a means to 
fill labour-market needs and to move towards enhanced mobility of labour. Efforts are being 
made  to  encourage  Mauritians  to  work  abroad.  Over  the  past  3  years,  the  number  of 
placements  overseas,  effected  by  recruitment  agencies,  has  increased  more  than  two-fold 
from  1300  in  2013  to  nearly  3200  in  2015.   In  particular,  in  the  Maritime  Sector,  2,038 
workers have been placed by private recruitment agencies in 2015 to March 2016. Therefore, 
the opportunities for employment on cruise ships are being optimally tapped. In this context, 
1000  young  people  will  be  trained  by  MITD  as  waiters. More  than  700  have  already 
registered and training programmes have already started for them. 

Madam Speaker, the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister has announced Government’s intent to 
improve business facilitation and expedite delivery of permits. To this end, my Ministry has 
already  embarked  on  the  e-path  with  the  modernisation  and  review  of  the  existing  work 
permit  system.  As  at  date,  the  e-work  permit  system,  enabling  the  online  submission, 
processing  and  delivery  of  permits,  has  already  been  commissioned.  Concurrently,  the 
processes  involved  therein  have  been  successively  streamlined  such  that  the  time  taken  to 
process and deliver permits has known a significant reduction from 30 to 21 days. 

 

81 

Madam Speaker,  I now  turn to the  Labour  and  Industrial Relations Division of my 
Ministry.  You  will  concur  with  me  that  industrial  peace  and  harmony  is  essential  for 
economic development and prosperity.  I am pleased to report that, since  I took office, my 
Ministry has taken appropriate initiatives to ensure industrial peace is maintained. I hasten to 
add that this would not have been possible without the collaboration of our trade unionists. I 
seize this opportunity to express my appreciation for their exemplary support. This is proof of 
the  success  of  social  dialogue.  In  line  with  the  philosophy  of  this  budget,  I  am  coming 
forward with a series of measures to better protect workers’ rights. 
  
Madam Speaker, during the UN General Assembly in September 2015, decent work 
and the four pillars of the Decent Work Agenda – employment creation, social protection, 
rights at work, and social dialogue – became integral elements of the new 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development. Goal 8 of the 2030 Agenda calls for the promotion of inclusive 
and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent work, and will 
be  a  key  area  of  engagement  for  ILO  and  its  constituents.   In  fact,  decent  work  has  now 
become a universal objective and has been included in major human rights declarations. 

Madam  Speaker,  Mauritius  being  a  strong  proponent  of  democratic  principles  and 
ILO  ideals  has  already  successfully  completed  the  First  Generation  Decent  Work  Country 
Programme in December 2015.  I am glad to inform the House that my Ministry has, in close 
collaboration  with  the  ILO  and  other  social  partners,  embarked  on  the  formulation  of  the 
Second Generation Decent Work Country Programme which will focus on the following four 
pillars namely, employment creation, rights of workers, social protection and social dialogue 
with gender equality as a cross cutting objective. 

Madam Speaker, National Minimum wage stands high on the Government’s Agenda. 

More so, it forms part of our strategy to combat poverty and income inequality. 

 

 
The National Minimum Wage Consultative Council Act which has been passed in the 
National  Assembly  has  been  proclaimed  and  gazetted  and  will  take  effect  as  from  01 
September 2016.  The Council will provide for the first time a national minimum wage in the 
private  and  public  sector  and  is  aimed  at  combating  poverty  by  improving  the  living 
conditions of the lowest paid workers. Arrangements have already been made to accommodate 
the  Office  of  the  Council.    The  Ministry  will  shortly  set  up  the  Council,  which  will  be 
operational soon. 

 

82 

In our Government Programme, we had taken the commitment to review our labour 
laws.    In  this  context,  I  have  already  embarked  on  wide  consultations  with  stakeholders  to 
consolidate the fundamental rights of workers and ensure better protection of workers’ rights. 
I  also  intend  to  reinforce  freedom  of  association  and  negotiating  rights  in  line  with  ILO 
Conventions.  The dispute settling mechanism for a timely and more effective settlement of 
disputes will also be reviewed. I shall shortly  

proposed amendments to the Employment Rights Act and the Employment Relations Act. 

Madam Speaker, with a view to further protecting the rights of workers in respect of 
their  retirement  benefits,  consideration  is  being  given  for  the  introduction  of  a  “Portable 
Severance Allowance Scheme”.  It will enable every worker to benefit from a compensation 
on reaching retirement age, irrespective of the number of employers with whom he or she has 
worked. 

 
I also intend to take appropriate measures to promote the development of collective 
bargaining  and  voluntary  negotiations  in  all  sectors  of  employment  following  the 
recommendations of the ILO Committee on the Application of Standards at its 105th session 
in 2016.  To this end, the provisions of the Employment Relations Act will be reviewed to 
facilitate  negotiations  of  trade  unions  and  independent  and  voluntary  negotiations  in  this 
respect. 

Madam Speaker, my Ministry also proposes to revisit the criteria for enlistment of the 
present unemployment benefits under the Workfare Programme.  Presently, a worker whose 
employment has been terminated without a valid reason has to wait for his claim to be lodged 
at the Industrial Court to benefit from the Transition Unemployment Benefits.  This process 
causes  much  hardship  to  these  workers  who  have  lost  their  jobs  and  are  left  without  any 
financial assistance.  I am, therefore, proposing that all workers be allowed to be admitted 
straightaway into the Workfare Programme.   

Madam Speaker, further to the report of the US Department of State on Trafficking in 
Persons, my Ministry is taking concrete measures to combat trafficking in respect of migrant 
workers.   In this respect, the Special Migrant Workers’ Unit will be reinforced in order to 
increase the number of inspections by three fold.  A Migrant Mobile Squad will also be set up 
to  monitor  employment  of  migrant  workers  to  track  down  labour  trafficking.    The  present 
approach and policies to combat human trafficking will be reviewed and improved.  

 

83 

 
Along the same line, My Ministry is collaborating with the Passport and Immigration 
Office and will be issuing ID cards to all migrant workers.  This will enable our enforcement 
authorities to exercise control and tighten the monitoring of migrant workers in Mauritius.  
As a matter of fact, this policy will significantly curtail illegal and unethical practices in the 
recruitment and employment of migrant workers in Mauritius.  

Furthermore, with a view to better protect migrant workers, awareness campaigns at 
the  workplace  will  also  be  organised  and  conducted  in  their  native  language  in  order  to 
sensitise them of their rights and responsibilities with special emphasis on the risk of human 
trafficking.  

My Ministry will also arrange for the publication of simplified version of our labour 

legislation in the main languages of migrant workers. 

Madam  Speaker,  my  Ministry  has  already  embarked  on  a  crackdown  programme 
against child labour all over the island. For the past months, some 800 surprise inspections 
have been carried out, mainly in the informal sector.  In this regard, the collaboration of the 
Brigade Des Mineurs, Child Development Unit, Ministry of Social Security, Police Officers, 
Municipal Councillors, NEF, NGOs and Force Vive has been solicited. 

 
My  Ministry  will  also  launch  sensitisation  campaigns  through  media,  including 
radio  programmes,  short  video  clips  on  television  and  the  distribution  of  pamphlets  and 
posters. 

It is also envisaged to create a hotline at the Ministry so as to allow members of the 

 
public to provide anonymous information to better track child labour. 

  
Madam Speaker, the Labour and Industrial Relations Division of my Ministry has so 
far done a marvellous job despite a reduced labour force.  For instance, during the Financial 
Year 2015/2016, 1,432 inspections were carried  out and 1,262 cases were dealt with  at the 
Industrial  Court  by  the  Labour  Inspectorate,  whereby  a  total  amount  of  Rs96,868,000  was 
recovered on behalf of the workers of this country.  Furthermore, 5,943 laid off workers were 
admitted  in  the  Workfare  Programme  and  approximately  Rs325  m.  have  been  paid  as 
Transitional Unemployment Benefits to workers whose employments have been terminated. 

  
Nevertheless,  I  am  taking  remedial  action  and  reviewing  the  present  organisational 
structure of the Labour and Industrial Relations Division to provide for the setting up of an 
Inspection  Squad  which  will  result  in  a  wider  coverage  as  regards  inspections  to  ensure 
compliance with our labour legislation. 

 

84 

Madam Speaker, the Occupational Safety and Health (OSH) Division of my Ministry 
has the mandate to ensure that every employee is provided with a safe and healthy working 
environment  at  every  workplace  through  the  enforcement  of  appropriate  legislation  on 
occupational safety and health, covering both the private and the public sector.  This Division 
also  promotes  a  national  safety  and  health  culture  through  awareness  campaigns  and 
undertakes several activities so as to enhance safety and health in the country. 

 
This budget has proposed several measures that  will lead to the creation of jobs in 
different sectors of the economy.  Creation of jobs, Madam Speaker, means more workers, 
more workplaces which will require safe and healthy working conditions. 

 

 
Furthermore, the Occupational Safety and Health Division of my Ministry has carried 
out  4,773  inspections  at  places  of  work,  including  factories  in  different  sectors  of  the 
economy.  It has investigated into nine notifiable fatal accidents and 190 non-fatal accidents. 
It is worth mentioning that through the sustained and concerted effort of the OSH Division, 
accidents are on a downward trend over the years and the fatality rate which was 2.55 in 2010 
has decreased to 1.23 in 2015.  But, I am aiming at a higher standard of occupational safety 
and health in the country and I will take all measures possible to reduce further the number of 
occupational  accidents.    Occupational  Safety  and  Health  Division  is  also  taking  measures 
such as prosecution and prohibition orders against employers who are  not complying  with 
Occupational Safety and Health legislation. 

The  OSH  Division  also  plays  a  key  role  in  promoting  a  national  safety  and  health 
culture, which I believe is a prerequisite if we want to move higher up in the safety ladder.  In 
this  regard,  it  has  conducted  198  training  sessions  at  its  training  centre  and  delivered  136 
training sessions on sites, which have led to the sensitisation of 6,675 persons on different 
safety and health topics.  

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker,  there  will  be  several  major  construction  projects  throughout  the 
island including the Metro Express, development of Small and Medium Enterprises through 
entrepreneurship,  setting  up  of  an  oil  refinery  and  onshore  storage  facilities  at  Albion, 
development  of  the  gold  business,  setting  up  of  bicycle  and  motorcycle  plants  and 
pharmaceutical village.  The development of the tea sector, agro-business, dairy industry and 
aqua-culture  is  also  most  welcomed.    But  we  should  ensure  safe  and  healthy  working 
conditions at all these work sites as occupational accidents and diseases will affect the quality 
of  life  and  well-being  of  those  employees  and,  by  extension,  that  of  their  families,  which 

 

85 

implies an increase in the cost of production of those enterprises, thereby impacting on the 
productivity and competitiveness. 

Madam  Speaker,  as  you  are  aware,  a  substantial  number  of  migrant  workers  are 
presently employed in different sectors of the economy.  There have been many criticisms 
regarding their living conditions. Let me inform the House that from July 2015 to June 2016, 
my  officers  conducted  some  1000  inspections  which  represent  an  all-time  record  for 
inspections in employees’ lodging accommodations.  
I am pleased to note that several posts have been created in the Occupational Safety 
 
and  Health  Division.  This  will  definitely  give  an  impetus  to  the  Occupational  Safety  and 
Health  Division  to  ensure  proper  enforcement  of  the  occupational  safety  and  health 
legislation in force and lay particular emphasis on the sectors I have mentioned previously. 
With the additional resources, I am setting up an “Employees Lodging Accommodation Unit” 
and a “Construction Unit” to ensure proper enforcement of the legislation in the construction 
sector and employees lodging accommodations. 

However,  I  wish  to  point  out  that  the  development  of  the  above  new  sectors  will 
require capacity building of my staff and, in this context, I am planning to enlist the support 
of  the  ILO  under  the  second  generation  Decent  Work  Country  Programme  and  other 
international  institutions  as  far  as  practical.    In  fact,  it  is  well  known  that  OSH  is  a 
multidisciplinary  technical  field  and  taking  into  consideration  the  number  of  technical 
regulations that have recently been made by the OSH Division, emphasis will have to be laid 
on capacity building.  

Let me conclude, Madam Speaker… 

(Interruptions) 

The  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  has  indeed  come  up  with  bold 
measures.    However,  questions  are  being  put  regarding  the  implementation  of  those 
measures.    I  am  convinced  that  all  the  measures  announced  in  the  Budget  will  be 
implemented,  given  the  seriousness  and  commitment  which  this  Government  has  so  far 
shown and is showing.  However, it is imperative that all stakeholders play their roles.  I am 
therefore  making  a  special  appeal  to  all  actors  to  collaborate  for  the  successful 
implementation of the measures announced. 

Madam Speaker, I seize this opportunity to thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for his 

visionary leadership and guidance in the preparation of the Budget. 
This Budget sets the scene for a new era of development.  

 

86 

I,  therefore,  add  my  endorsement  to  the  Budget  2016-2017  and  I  thank  you  all  for 

your attention. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Armance! 

(7.37 p.m.) 

 Mr  P.  Armance  (First  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West):  Thank  you, 
Madam Speaker.  First, before  I comment on the Budget,  I would like to join all my other 
colleagues to congratulate the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development for the 
Budget  he  put  to  the  House  on  29  July  2016  and  my  friend  hon.  Callichurn  for  his  long 
speech in this House today. 
Madam  Speaker, 

this  Budget  2016-2017  announces  a  number  of  positive 
development,  enlarging  the  space  for  wealth  and  economic  value  creation  and  provides  a 
general  feel-good  factor  among  the  population.  Considering  the  unfavourable  international 
economic  setting,  this  Budget  provides  us  with  the  tools  to  clearly  define  our  future  as 
Government or, may I say, as a responsible Government. The new era of development will 
definitely be the key to a successful and brighter future for our country. 

Madame la présidente, ce budget offre une opportunité d’avenir à nos entrepreneurs. 
Les petites et moyennes entreprises vont bénéficier de 8-year tax holiday et je pense que ce 
sera un atout majeur pour pouvoir développer et promouvoir les SMEs. On parle souvent de 
donner l’assurance aux jeunes. On parle souvent d’encadrement de nos jeunes. Ici, je vois une 
réelle opportunité pour nos jeunes d’être des entrepreneurs de demain et mettre leur savoir-
faire  au  service  de  notre  communauté  et  de  bénéficier  des  avantages  multiples  qu’offre  le 
gouvernement  à  travers  ce  budget.  Le  fast  track  desk  for  micro  enterprises  deviendra  le 
facilitateur qui manquait au SMEs pour la bonne mise en place de leurs projets. 

Dans la même foulée, Madame la présidente, la création d’emplois qu’offre ce budget 
aiderait certainement à combattre le chômage qui persiste à Maurice surtout parmi nos jeunes. 
Je salue favorablement l’initiative du ministre de pourvoir 2000 emplois à travers le Youth 
Employment Programme ainsi que les 7,200 postes dans le service civil. Nombreux sont des 
jeunes diplômés qui peinent à trouver un emploi pour débuter leur carrière. Il ne faut pas être 
parenté  à  un  ministre  ou  avoir  des  connections  politiques  pour  aspirer  à  un  emploi.  Je 
souhaite que nos jeunes diplômés tout comme ces 200 jeunes ingénieurs pourront saisir les 
opportunités  qui  leur  seront  offertes  pour  mettre  leurs  connaissances  acquises  après  de 
nombreuses années d’études au service de l’île Maurice. 

Madame  la  présidente,  dernièrement  l’ancien  gouvernement  avait  pour  projet 
d’implémenter une centrale à charbon à Pointe aux Caves, projet connu sous le nom du CT 

 

87 

Power. Avec le support et la collaboration de mon collègue, le ministre des Services publics, 
ce  projet  a  été  abandonné  et  j’en  suis  très  reconnaissant  étant  moi-même  un  habitant  qui 
aurait  été  exposé  à  ce  mal.  L’annonce  dans  le  budget  2016-2017  des  projets  d’énergies 
renouvelables tels que la création du Renewable Energy Company, la production d’énergie 
avec  l’utilisation  du  photovoltaïque,  l’agrandissement  des  centrales  hydroélectriques  et  de 
projet waste energy placera Maurice sur la carte mondiale des producteurs d’énergies vertes. 
Certains  continuent  à  parler  de  blackout  alors  que  le  budget  annonce  une  grande 
réforme  dans  notre  production  d’énergie  allant  même  jusqu’à  prendre  des  mesures  avant-
gardistes  pour  contredire  ce  fameux  blackout.  Dirigeons-nous  tous  ensemble  vers  une  île 
Maurice verte où les habitants se sentiront à l’abri de la pollution. 

Madame la présidente, je suis un habitant de Port Louis depuis ma naissance. Je rêve 
toujours de revoir la capitale se transformer en un espace agréable pour circuler où tous les 
marchands ambulants et autres commerces ont les espaces dédiés. 

J’accueille favorablement la construction dans notre capitale ; la gare Victoria offrira 
un nouveau visage à notre Port Louis. J’ai eu l’occasion de voir la présentation du ministre 
des Infrastructures publiques. J’ai hâte de voir sortir de terre ce projet, venant ainsi alléger 
mes mandants qui sont pour beaucoup des marchands ambulants, et régulariser leur situation. 
Nul  doute  que  Port  Louis  sera  une  ville  où  notre  culture  ne  sera  pas  négligée.  Outre  les 
recreational zones, je note une culture zone où on pourra se retrouver dans nos pensées les 
plus anciennes de notre ville. 

Port  Louis  a  besoin  de  nouveau  souffle.  Port  Louis  a  besoin  d’une  nouvelle 
orientation  en  gardant  ses  valeurs  ancestrales.  Je  regrette  cependant  que  le  projet  de 
décongestionner la région de Grande Rivière ne soit pas décrit dans le budget. On se bat tous 
les jours contre les embouteillages pour entrer et sortir de la capitale. Je souhaiterais que le 
ministère de tutelle considère de mettre en chantier très prochainement l’ouverture du vieux 
pont  du  Grande  Rivière  et  autre  mesures  qu’il  a  annoncées  pour  pouvoir  vaincre  cet 
embouteillage monstre dans cette région de Port Louis. Certes, avec la construction du link 
bridge de Sorèze à Coromandel, on verra diminuer le nombre de véhicules à Grande Rivière. 
Cependant, Grande Rivière reste un point de transition incontournable pour rejoindre Pointe-
aux-Sables, Petite Rivière, et la région de Pailles. 

Madame la présidente,  certaines régions de ma circonscription souffrent  depuis des 
décennies  de  la  distribution  d’eau.  Malgré  l’annonce  dans  le  budget  2015  du  projet  de 
remplacement des tuyaux pour avoir une distribution d’eau plus régulière, certains endroits 

 

88 

de ma circonscription sont toujours laissés à leur soif. Je souhaite que le ministre aille au plus 
vite avec ces remplacements. Ce fut une promesse électorale de fournir l’eau à nos électeurs. 
Comme on le dit si souvent, l’eau c’est la vie, et un foyer sans eau s’expose à beaucoup de 
difficultés. 

Madame  la  présidente,  recruter  900  policiers  sera  certes  un  atout  pour  le  law  and 
order.  La  création  d’une  Training  Academy  aidera  ces  policiers  à  répondre  mieux  à  nos 
attentes, mais, Madame la présidente, je souhaiterais surtout saluer la décision d’allouer R115 
millions  sur  les  deux  prochaines  années  pour  la  fourniture  d’équipements  modernes  à  nos 
policiers  afin  de  leur  permettre  de  servir  efficacement  la  nation.  De  nos  jours,  la  drogue 
synthétique fait ravage, surtout parmi nos jeunes. Plusieurs barons de la drogue sont toujours 
à fructifier leur argent à travers la vente de leur saleté. Ayant une police qui peut répondre à 
l’attente  du  peuple,  de  pouvoir  nettoyer  nos  régions  de  la  drogue,  faisons  en  sorte  que  la 
police  mauricienne  devienne  l’exemple  dans  l’océan  Indien  pour  combattre  la  drogue  et 
surtout  en  ce  moment  où  la  synthétique  bat  son  plein,  et  cela  même,  selon  certains 
journalistes, dans nos écoles et autres institutions. 

Madame  la  présidente,  jour  après  jour,  on  note  la  dégradation  de  nos  plages,  la 
dégradation  des  coraux  entourant  nos  lagons.  Nos  plages  longtemps  classifiées  parmi  les 
meilleures au monde, souffrent aujourd’hui de l’érosion. C’est le moment propice pour agir ; 
agir avant que ce ne soit trop tard et que les dommages ne soient irréversibles. Injecter plus 
de R 100 millions pour réhabiliter et protéger de l’érosion, c’est une mesure qu’a annoncé le 
ministre des Finances pour honorer nos engagements pris pour la COP 21. La circonscription 
No. 1, Madame la présidente, a des possibilités de plage énormes. De Sable Noir à La Pointe, 
on y retrouve des plages non exploitées par le secteur touristique, et on note des dommages 
énormes par rapport à l’érosion. J’espère que le ministère concerné viendra avec des projets 
pour  remédier  à  la  situation  dans  les  plus  brefs  délais  pour  ouvrir  cette  partie  de  l’île  aux 
touristes et autres investisseurs. 

L’item  233  du  budget  parle  du  cancer,  ce  mal  qui  ronge  peu  à  peu  plusieurs 
Mauriciens. Madame la présidente, j’ai perdu des amis, des membres de la famille, rongés par 
le cancer. Les soins palliatifs sont une approche qui améliorent la qualité de vie des patients 
et leurs familles confrontées aux problèmes liés à cette maladie mortelle par la prévention, et 
le soulagement de la souffrance aux moyens d’indentification précoce et d’évaluation et le 
traitement de la douleur et d’autres problèmes physiques. 

 

89 

Madame  présidente,  avant  de  conclure  mon  discours,  je  souhaiterais  élaborer  les 
mesures concernant notre prise de position pour vaincre la pauvreté. Dans la circonscription 
No.  1,  Madame  la  présidente,  il  existe  plusieurs  poches  de  pauvreté.  Je cite  notamment  la 
région de Baloram Lane, certains endroits de Pailles, Cassis et de Pointe-aux-Sables. On y 
retrouve la misère dans tous ses états, surtout les enfants qui sont laissés à un avenir sombre. 
Je me fais aujourd’hui le porte-parole de ces personnes de ma circonscription qui ne jouissent 
pas d’un encadrement adéquat pour sortir de la pauvreté absolue. Parmi les mesures, je note 
favorablement - encourager nos enfants à se tourner vers l’éducation à travers des cash prize, 
subvention  des  frais  d’examen  du  SC  et  HSC,  augmentation  du  meal  allowance  pour  les 
écoles ZEP. 

Madame la présidente, semaine après semaine, je reçois mes mandants au CAB ou à 
mon  bureau,  et  je  peux  affirmer  avec  certitude  qu’un  des  problèmes  majeurs  de  ma 
circonscription, c’est un toit décent pour les familles au bas de l’échelle. Récemment, on a vu 
des cas où des gens dorment au sol, où des enfants n’ont jamais connu le confort d’un lit, où 
le toit d’une maison peut s’effondrer à n’importe quel moment sur la tête de ses habitants. 
Ces gens-là, Madame la présidente, on peut les rajouter à la longue liste des personnes qui 
connaissent la pauvreté. Je ne peux rester insensible à la démarche du ministre de pouvoir 
construire 800 maisons pour les démunis et 1,900 maisons additionnelles de 50 m².  

Récemment, j’ai eu l’occasion de visiter le Perseverance Island aux Seychelles. C’est 
un  exemple  de  développement  intégré  pour  aider  à  vaincre  la  pauvreté.  Il  y  a  même  des 
écoles, des crèches, des facilités de loisirs et autres sur un seul complexe résidentiel. Un toit 
pour  tous,  Madame  la  présidente.  Même  les  personnes  qui  touchent  actuellement  entre  R 
10,000 et R 20,000 y auront droit maintenant puisque la limite a été revue dans ce budget. 

Pour conclure, Madame la présidente, j’accueille favorablement l’idée du ministre des 
Finances d’avoir un women caucus pour le Parlement mauricien. Je propose au ministre des 
Finances d’inclure en même temps un youth caucus, car les jeunes c’est l’avenir de demain et 
leur voix mérite d’être entendue et considérée. 

Merci, Madame la présidente. 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Madam Speaker, I move that the debate be now adjourned. 

Mr Koonjoo rose and seconded. 

 

Question put and agreed to. 

Debate adjourned accordingly. 

90 

 

ADJOURNMENT 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move for the adjournment of the House to 

Monday 08 August 2016 at 11.30 a.m. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned. 

Hon. Uteem! 

(7.47 p.m.) 

MATTER RAISED 

POLICE OFFICERS - PROMOTION 

Mr R. Uteem (First Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis Central): Thank 
you, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise a matter which concerns the Police Force.  It is 
addressed to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister. 

As the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is aware, since 22 December 2015, there has been the 
assignment of duties of around 76 Police Officers to the post of Chief Inspector, Assistant 
Superintendent and Superintendent of Police.  These Police Officers were on probation for a 
period of six months, which has come to an end at the end of June.  Since the end of the 
month of June, their extra duty  allowance has been  cut and their  assignment has not been 
confirmed  into  a  promotion.  This  is  causing  distress  to  the  Police  Officers  and  also 
undermine their authority vis-à-vis members of the public and their junior. 

So, may I make a humble request to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, if he can take up the 

matter with the Commissioner of Police as regards the promotion of these Police Officers. 

Thank you. 

The Prime Minister: Yes, Madam Speaker, I will take it up with the Commissioner 

of Police. 

 

91 

At 7.51 p.m., the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Monday 08 August 2016 at 

11.30 a.m. 

