No. 04 of 2016 

 

1 

 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

 

TUESDAY 19 APRIL 2016 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

2 

CONTENTS 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

PAPERS LAID 

QUESTIONS (Oral) 

MOTION 

STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS 

BILLS (Public) 

ADJOURNMENT 

QUESTIONS  (Written) 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

 
Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 
KCMG, QC  

Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 
GCSK  
Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

 
Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development, Minister 
for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 
Communications 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon.  Ivan  Leslie  Collendavelloo,  GCSK, 
SC 
Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 
Utilities 

 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

International Trade 
 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha, GCSK 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan, SC 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 
Sinatambou 
Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 
Perraud 
Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain, GCSK 

Minister 
of 
Empowerment 
Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation  

Integration 

and  Economic 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 
Family Welfare 
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 

 

4 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

 
Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 
Cheong, MSK 

Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 

Institutional Reforms  
Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 
Institutions 
Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands 
 
Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms, 
Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 
Disaster and Beach Management 
Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and 
Training 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Gopall, Mr Navin (Temporary Transfer to 
RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 04 of 2016 

 

Sitting of 19 April 2016 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

MISS DARSHINEE SEETUL – CLERK ASSISTANT – APPOINTMENT 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Members, I am pleased to introduce Miss Darshinee Seetul 

who has recently been appointed Clerk Assistant. 

Miss Seetul joined the Civil Service in 2005 as Clerical Officer and was posted at the 
Public  Service  Commission.  In  2009,  she  joined  the  Judiciary  as  Court  Officer  until  she 
joined the National Assembly. 

Miss Seetul holds a Bachelor of Laws Degree from the University of Mauritius. 

On  behalf  of  the  House  and  in  my  own  name,  I  extend  a  warm  welcome  to  Miss 

Seetul and wish her a successful career. 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table – 

  PAPERS LAID 

 

A    Office of the President ‒ 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The Annual Report 2015 of the National Human Rights Commission.  

B.   Prime Minister’s Office ‒ 

(a)  The  Annual  Report  2013  of  the  Mauritius  Broadcasting  Corporation.  (In 

Original) 

(b)  The  Mauritius  Broadcasting  Corporation  (Collection  of  Licence  Fees) 

(Amendment 
 of Schedule) Regulations 2016.  (Government Notice No. 94 of 2016)  

C.   Ministry of Health and Quality of Life ‒ 

(a)   The Report of the Director of Audit on the Financial Statements of the Trust 

Fund for Specialised Medical Care for the year ended 31 December 2014.  

(b)   The Dental Council (Medical Institutions) (Amendment No. 2) Regulations 

2016. (Government Notice No. 95 of 2016). 

D    Ministry of Local Government ‒ 

(a)   The City Council of Port Louis (Streets and Squares) (Amendment No. 2) 

Regulations 2016. (Government Notice No. 87 of 2016). 

(b)   The  District  Council  of  Black  River  (Fees  for  Classified  Trades) 

Regulations 2016 (Government Notice No. 88 of 2016). 

(c)   The District Council of Flacq (Fees Dues and other charges for Classified 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

8 

Trades) Regulations 2016 (Government Notice No. 89 of 2016). 

E.   Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection ‒ 

(a)   The Rodrigues Consumer Protection (Control of Price of Taxable and Non-
Taxable  Goods)  (Amendment  No.  11)  Regulations  2016.  (Government 
Notice 
86  
of 2016) 

(b)   The  Consumer  Protection  (Consumer  Goods)  (Maximum  Mark-Up) 

No. 

(Amendment) Regulations 2016. (Government Notice No. 91 of 2016)  

(c)   The  Consumer  Protection 

(Consumer  Goods) 

(Maximum  Price) 

(Amendment) Regulations 2016. (Government Notice No. 92 of 2016) 

(d)   The  Consumer  Protection  (Price  and  Supplies  Control)  (Amendment  of 

Schedules) Regulations 2016. (Government Notice No. 93 of 2016) 

F.   Ministry of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training ‒ 

The  Employment  Relations  (Amendment  of  Schedule)  Regulations  2016. 
(Government Notice No. 90 of 2016)  

 

ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

HERITAGE CITY PROJECT 

The  Leader  of  the  Opposition  (Mr  P.  Bérenger)  (by  Private  Notice)  asked  the 
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms  whether,  in 
regard to the Heritage City Project, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the State 
Land Development Company Limited and Heritage City Company Limited, information as to 
– 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

(f) 

if a consultant has been appointed to prepare a Master Plan for the Highlands 
Project, including the Heritage City; 

if a feasibility study is available therefor; 

if an EIA has been obtained therefor; 

if Stree Consulting of Dubai has been appointed for the design thereof without 
any tender procedure and, if so, indicate the terms of appointment thereof; 

if the contractors therefor have been pre-qualified, and 

the latest funding proposals therefor. 

The Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms 
(Mr S. Bhadain): Madam Speaker, the House will be aware that the Highlands Project dates 

 

9 

back  to  2003  when  Halcrow  prepared  a  concept  Master  Plan  for  the  whole  site  of  2,179 
Arpents (920 Hectares) at Highlands. 

With the change in Government in 2005, the project was re-actualised and CRISIL was 
commissioned to prepare a pre-feasibility study report on the Highlands Project. Based on the 
findings of CRISIL report, a transaction advisor was recruited and a tender was launched for 
the selection of a master developer.  In 2008, 2 master developers were shortlisted, namely 
BLOOM and MAHINDRA. 

From 2008 to 2014, nothing much happened, Madam Speaker, probably because the 
then government decided to go for the NeoTown Project, for reasons which are best known to 
themselves. In 2015, this Government reconsidered the Highlands Project and the realisation 
of  the  whole  Highlands  City  Project  would  have  spanned  over  a  period  of  10  years  in  a 
phased manner. 

On 09 October 2015, Government decided that my Ministry would be responsible for 
the development of the Heritage City Project on a plot of land of 336 Arpents  which is 141 
Hectares situated opposite Ebene Cybercity, at Minissy, on the left of Bagatelle Dam. In this 
context,  on  18  December  2015,  Government  approved  the  setting  up  of  Heritage  City  Co. 
Ltd.,  a  wholly  State-owned  company,  for  the  implementation  of  the  Heritage  City  Project 
within a time frame of three years as from 2016.  

The  Heritage  City  will  be  an  ‘ellipse  shape’  symbolising  the  unity  of  public  and 
private  dimensions,  with  an  International  Convention  Centre  placed  at  the  fulcrum  of  the 
ellipse, joining the public buildings and the commercial half. The objective of Government is 
to  create  an  integrated  development  for  the  current  and  future  working  generations  in  a 
‘work, live and play’ environment, that serve a range of people including: students,  young 
professionals,  families  with  children,  retired  persons  and  high  net  worth  investors  in 
Mauritius. 

The  Heritage  City  represents  the  synthesis  of  the  civic  world  and  the  commercial 
domain, public spirit and local community. It will unify a complex mix of uses, people and 
institutions  and  involve  the  construction  of  a  new  iconic  Parliament  Building;  Prime 
Minister’s  Office;  six  Government  office  buildings  with  high-end  ICT  and  E-Governance 
infrastructure and data centres; a new international convention centre; mixed-use retail and 
commercial  centres;  and  affordable  mid-scale,  upper-scale  apartments,  town-homes  and 
villas. 

10 

 
Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed that the State 
Land  Development  Company  Ltd.  (SLDC)  invited  proposals  on  02  October  2015  for 
consultancy services for the development of the Highlands Smart City Project comprising of 
2,179  Arpents,  including  the  336  Arpents  for  the  ‘Administrative  City’  which  was  later 
renamed as the ‘Heritage City Project’’. In the Request for Proposals, it was clearly indicated 
that  the  ‘Administrative  City’  can  either  be  located  near  the  Côte  d’Or  Roundabout  or 
downstream  of  the  Bagatelle  dam.  At  close  of  the  deadline  for  submission  of  proposals, 
eleven (11) bids were received from local and international consortiums. A Bid Evaluation 
Committee  was  set  up  by  the  SLDC  and  independent  evaluators  from  the  Professional 
Architect Council and the Institution of Engineers Mauritius were enlisted to form part of the 
Committee. 

Based on the recommendations of the Bid Evaluation Committee, I am informed that 
the  SLDC  has  retained  the  services  of  Luxconsult  (Mtius)  Ltd.  for  the  preparation  of  the 
Master Plan of the Highlands Project. In respect of the Heritage City, the Heritage City Co. 
Ltd. will retain the same consultant as part of the same contract and in line with the advice 
received from the Solicitor General. 

The Master Plan for the Heritage City has been entrusted to Stree Consulting, a Dubai 
based  consulting  firm  on  the  basis  of  a  Government  to  Government  agreement  with  the 
Government of Dubai in accordance with section 3 of the Public Procurement Act. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, a feasibility study for the Heritage City Project 
which  consists  of  the  list  of  requirements  from  all  relevant  Ministries,  the  concept  Master 
Plan, cash flow and financial forecasts, including impact on GDP growth and national debt, 
the legal due diligence report, the value-for-money assessment, the proposed scope of works 
and  the  arrangements  for  funding  were  submitted  to  the  High-Powered  Committee  as 
required by the provisions of Section 3 of the Public Procurement Act. 

The innovative financial modelling is one which involves minimal public funding and 
maximal equity participation through redeemable shares. It is a project that is going to create 
value, the benefits of which will accrue to the Government. 

With regard to part (c) of the question, Madam Speaker, the EIA forms part of the 
terms of reference of the consultancy services and I am informed that Luxconsult (Mtius) Ltd 
has been selected by SLDC, as I stated before, to conduct this exercise. 

11 

 
With  regard  to  part  (d)  of  the  question,  following  the  G2G  Agreement  which  was 
entered  into  by  the  Government  of  Mauritius  and  the  Emirate  of  Dubai,  the  statutory 
procedures set out under Section 3 of the Public Procurement Act have been followed. After 
examination  of  the  reports,  the  High-Powered  Committee  has,  on  23  February  2016, 
submitted its report to Cabinet for the procurement of professional services of Stree in the 
context  of  the  proposed  G2G  arrangement  with  Heritage  City  Co.  Ltd.  for  an  amount  not 
exceeding USD 4.3 m. for the detailed Master Plan; engineering design of the Government 
offices; the schematic design including infrastructure design,  ICT infrastructure, renewable 
energy component of the six government buildings. 

Following the formulation of the detailed Master Plan and the schematic design, local 

and international tenders will be launched for construction works to start. 

With  regard  to  part  (e)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  Heritage  City  Co.  Ltd. 
invited  application  for  pre-qualification  of  contractors  for  the  project.  The  notice  was 
published in the Press as from 10 March 2016. The deadline for submissions of applications 
was 28 March 2016. 

Twenty-eight applicants, Madam Speaker, collected the pre-qualification documents 
from Heritage City Co. Ltd. and 18 of them have submitted applications for pre-qualification. 
The evaluation of these applications is ongoing. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  the  services  of  local  consultants, 
contractors, sub-contractors and labour will be a priority. This, Madam Speaker, will bring 
the much awaited impetus to boost our local construction sector and create jobs. 

With regard to part (f) of the question, the project value for the construction of a new 
Parliament Building, Prime Minister’s Office, the Government buildings; Civic and Cultural 
facilities; the Pedestrian Spine and infrastructure for the whole site is estimated at USD 375 
m. which is approximately Rs13 billion. 

 
With regard to the private residential and commercial phase of the project, this will be 
under  the  “Vente  en  Etat  Futur  d’Achèvement”  (VEFA)  model  and  will  include  mid-scale 
apartments;  upper  scale  apartments;  town-homes;  villas;  two  hotels;  and  mix-use  retail 
facilities. The cost for this part is also estimated at USD375 m.  

The New International Convention Centre will in addition cost around USD50 m.  

12 

 
The total project value is therefore estimated at USD800 m., i.e. USD375 m.: for the 
public buildings and infrastructure; USD375 m.: for the private residences and commercial 
buildings; and USD50 m.: for the International Convention Centre. 

Madam Speaker, the Government buildings and infrastructure will require financing 

of up to USD375 m., which will be raised by Heritage City Co. Ltd as follows –  

(i) 
a  syndicated  loan  of  around  Rs2.9  billion  which  is  USD  83  m.  from  a 
consortium of leading local banks on terms and conditions which Heritage City Co. 
Ltd is currently finalising with these banks. Three banks have already confirmed their 
participation  of  up  to  Rs2  billion  and the  fourth  bank  will  be  concluding  shortly.  I 
must  say,  Madam  Speaker,  that  this  is  in  line  with  Government’s  objective  of 
mopping up the existing liquidity which is also available with banks in Mauritius; 

(ii) 
the issue of Cumulative Redeemable Preference Shares with a defined Coupon 
rate  for  a  total  amount  of  Rs10  billion  which  is  USD292  m.  Two  foreign  States 
namely  Saudi  Arabia  and  India  have  been  presented  with  the  financial  model, 
agreements in principle have been obtained, the terms of which are being finalised 
and of course, for confidentiality purposes, Madam Speaker, cannot be disclosed at 
this stage.  

Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  the  private  residences  and  commercial  buildings, 
these  will  be  pre-sold  under  the  VEFA  model.  I  also  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  the 
implementation of this project will contribute positively to an increase in GDP growth by an 
estimated: 0.2% in 2016; 0.8% in 2017; 0.9% in 2018; 0.4% in 2019 and 0.3% in 2020. This 
will have the benefit of reducing the ratio of public sector debt to GDP, which is in line with 
our  mandatory  obligations  under  the  Public  Debt  Management  Act,  as  well  as  the 
commitments that have been given to the IMF. 

I wish to emphasise the fact that the previous Government has heavily burdened the 
State  finances  to  such  an  extent  that  today,  it  is  almost  impossible  to  borrow  more  for 
executing  public  sector  projects.  There  is  therefore,  no  alternative,  but  to  come  up  with 
innovative  mode  of  financing  which  will  enable  us  to  bring  the  much  required  capital 
projects,  more  so  that  these  projects  are  required  at  this  stage  to  bring  an  impetus  to  our 
economy. This project will boost the construction industry  without taking public funds for 
raising  the  capital.  Residential  units  will  be  self-financing.  Rental  of  the  Government 
buildings will be paid to Heritage City Co. Ltd. which is a State-owned enterprise and after a 

 

13 

defined period of time, Government will be the owner of these buildings and will not have to 
pay rent going forward. This will also, Madam Speaker, create a new environment for the 
public sector which is conducive to the advancement in new technology and e-governance 
which will significantly reduce the cost of inefficiencies in the public sector and deliver better 
quality service by public sector organisations. It will also create data centres for necessary 
backups and new methodologies for the public sector to operate in line with the principles of 
e-governance.  

It is an intelligent way of financing a project that will allow us to do what we have set 

 
out to do, which is going towards the second economic miracle. 

Mr  Bérenger:  I  heard  the  hon.  Minister  say  that  Luxconsult  has  finally  been 
appointed as a consultant for the Highlands projects including the Heritage City Project. Can 
I know the date when SLDC appointed Luxconsult? 

Mr  Bhadain:  The  selection  process  has  been  ongoing  over  a  period  of  time  and  I 
believe that SLDC has communicated its decision to Luxconsult. I don’t know the exact date, 
but it was recently. 

Mr  Bérenger:  As  far  as  the  feasibility  study  is  concerned,  can  I  know,  at  least 
pending  the  studies  now  going  to  start,  who  has  estimated  the  total  project  to  be  worth 
USD800 m., that is, Rs3 billion roughly? Who has made that estimate? Is it based on at least 
pre-feasibility study? 

Mr  Bhadain:  Yes,  there  has  been  a  whole  team  working,  Madam  Speaker.  An 
independent financial consultancy firm was also retained, that was BDO, to have a look at all 
the figures and to validate the figures. International construction rates have been used in the 
estimates  for  the  construction  of  the  project  and  I  can  also  say  that  it  is only  USD375  m. 
which is required for the Government buildings, the new Parliament, the Prime Minister’s 
Office and the infrastructural works. The other USD375 m., as I have stated before, will be 
financed  through  the  VEFA model  which  is  pre-selling  those  residential  and  commercial 
apartments. 

Mr Bérenger: As far as the EIA is concerned, I understand from what I have heard 
that it is again Luxconsult that will be in charge of preparing the EIA, but already we have 
been  presented  with  models,  with  the  outlines  of  the  Heritage  City.  Can  I  know  who  has 
advised  Government  as  to  where  exactly  to  place  that  development  being  given  security 

 

14 

problems with the Bagatelle Dam not far away? Who has advised Government in that choice 
that has already been put forward? 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, the EIA process will follow its course as per the law 
and it is in the terms of reference of the consultant to do a number of things and the whole 
procedures for the EIA part is listed in the terms of reference which will be conducted by 
Luxconsult,  appointed  by  SLDC  and  for  which  the  State  Law  Office  has  advised  us  that 
Heritage City Co. Ltd. does not have to repeat this exercise and waste time and we can go 
with that terms of reference of Luxconsult. 

With regard to the site, as I have explained in the earlier part of my answer, the survey 
and a pre-feasibility study were already done for the Highlands Project and that dates back 
from 2003 up to 2008. Bagatelle Dam being where it is, the project in itself was going to be 
both on the left-hand side and the right-hand side of Bagatelle Dam on a total plot of 2179 
Arpents.  

The Heritage City Project will be based on the left-hand side between the motorway 
and Bagatelle Dam. 336 Arpents which was initially for the overall project was earmarked for 
the  Police  Academy.  So,  it  has  been  changed  to  the  Heritage  City  Project  on  those  336 
Arpents. 

Mr  Bérenger:    It  is  not  the  same  site  that  is  being  used  as  in  the  2000-2005 
Government.  Not  at  all!  Both  the  Dam,  in  fact,  has  moved  and  the  project  has  moved. 
Therefore,  I  would  wish  to  know,  at  this  stage,  what  specialised  advice  Government  has 
received that there is no problem with the site chosen as at now? 

Mr Bhadain: I must say, Madam Speaker, that, at this stage, as we speak, there are 
geotechnical  tests  which  are  being  performed  on  the  land  and  Heritage  City  Co.  Ltd.  has 
already appointed the relevant people to do those tests and the topographic design of the site 
is being looked at. At this stage, we are awaiting the conclusions of those geotechnical tests 
and also looking at the whole topography of the land. But, as I said before, I don’t think there 
is any specific reason as to why this land would not be appropriate for such development at 
this stage. But, we are moving fast. We are working quickly. 

Mr  Bérenger:  If  I  can  move  to  Stree  Consulting,  which  I  understand  has  been 
appointed  without  tender  procedures  because  it  is  a  Government  to  Government  project. 

 

15 

Which Government are we talking about?  The Government of Mauritius is one thing.  Is it 
the Government of Dubai or the United Arab Emirates? 

Mr Bhadain:  It is Dubai, Madam Speaker, following the Prime Minister’s delegation 
visiting Dubai.  I was, myself, part of the delegation and also hon. Vice-Prime Minister.  We 
had  meetings  with  the  representatives  of  the  Government  there  and  they  decided  that  they 
were going to provide the assistance of somebody who is very well qualified into this field. 
On that basis, a due diligence report has been conducted on the company, on the person, and 
has been submitted to the High-Powered Committee.  I must say that there was a legal due 
diligence  which  has  been  done  by  a  law  firm  in  Dubai  also,  AC&H  Legal  Consultants, 
together  with  all  the  relevant  documents,  as  required  by  law,  have  been  presented  to  the 
High-Powered  Committee.    I  must  also  say,  Madam  Speaker,  that  the  High-Powered 
Committee took two days to scrutinise everything and examine all the documents which have 
been submitted.  They had additional questions, explanations have been provided and at the 
end of the process, the High-Powered Committee, being satisfied, has actually sent its report 
to Cabinet which has been duly approved. 

Mr Bérenger: I hear with surprise the hon. Minister saying that Stree Consulting is 
well-known, is equipped and so on.  Is he aware – I am sure that he is – that it is nowhere to 
be found on the Internet and not one architect in Mauritius or outside Mauritius knows of that 
very – according to the hon. Minister – qualified consulting firm? 

Mr  Bhadain:    Well,  it  is  the  person,  Mr  Saeed  Ahmed  Saeed,  who  is  the 
representative of Stree Consulting.  He has been working with one of the largest developers 
in Dubai, Nakheel, I believe, he was in the Executive Management Team, if not, the Chief 
Executive  himself,  for  a  number  of  years  and  has  been  working  on  so  many  projects 
according  to  the  due  diligence  report  and  also  according  to  what  the  High-Powered 
Committee  has  scrutinised  and  approved.    He  worked  on  the  Palm  Island  Development  in 
Dubai.  He worked on Jumeirah Islands.  His team worked on Petronas Towers in Malaysia 
and also in terms of the New World Trading Centre in US.  He has a wealth of expertise in 
this field.  I believe that based on the concept Master Plan, which has been designed, he is 
creating something fabulous for Mauritius. 

Mr  Bérenger:    Can  I  know  whether  the  hon.  Minister  has  been  made  aware  of 
forceful protests by the architects of Mauritius who feel insulted by this whole saga and is he 
prepared to table copy of the letters that have been sent to others? 

 
Mr Bhadain:  I am sorry, Madam Speaker, which letters are we referring to? 

16 

Mr  Bérenger:    I  have,  in  my  hands,  a  letter  from  the  Mauritius  Association  of 

Architects dated 25 March, which says in one paragraph, and I quote – 

“Despite our protest that the tender requirements are totally unreasonable (…) 
the start of the project.” 

They’ve  protested  that  the  consultant  has  been  chosen  without  proper  procedures  and  that 
they have had no chance as local architects to participate. 

Mr  Bhadain:    Madam  Speaker,  with  great  respect  to  the  hon.  Leader  of  the 
Opposition,  we  cannot  say  without  proper  procedures  being  followed  because  we  have 
followed  section  3  of  the  Public  Procurement  Act,  which  details  a  process  and  this  whole 
process  has  been  followed,  stringent  due  diligence  has  been  conducted,  not  only  by  my 
Ministry,  by  other  professional  firms,  the  High-Powered  Committee  has  scrutinised 
everything, Cabinet has looked at everything.  This is where we are and we are moving very 
fast on this project.  So, proper procedures have been followed.  Also, I can reassure the hon. 
Leader of the Opposition and also through him the local architects that they will be involved 
in the project. 

Mr Bérenger: We have been informed that this Stree Consulting will be paid for – if 
I heard correctly – USD4.3 m. which is not cheap money.  Can I know how this figure has 
been arrived at?  It is a percentage of what?  How has it been arrived at? 

Mr Bhadain: It is based on the proposals which have been submitted and the relevant 
letters  of  engagement  which  were  attached  to  the  proposals  and  submitted  to  the  High-
Powered Committee.  Part of the assessment of the High-Powered Committee is to establish 
whether there is value for money.  This value for money assessment has been conducted by 
the  Secretary  to  Cabinet,  the  Financial  Secretary,  the  Solicitor  General  and  they  have 
concluded  that  this  is  definitely  value  for  money  especially  bearing  in  mind  the  type  of 
development, what is being brought in this project, Madam Speaker.  I must say that this is 
going to be one development which is going to be conducted in Mauritius after many years 
because in the last ten years, we have not seen anything like that.  It is going to be done in a 
way whereby this is going to be a jewel not only for Mauritius, but for the whole of Africa.  I 
must also correct one thing, Madam Speaker, if I may.  The Architect’s problem which was 

 

17 

referred to and the letter referred to by the hon. Leader of the Opposition was with SLDC and 
not Heritage City Co. Ltd. 

Mr Bérenger:  A copy  has been sent to  you, as Minister responsible for Financial 
Services,  to  the  hon.  Prime  Minister,  to  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  to  everybody 
including the Leader of the Opposition.  Regarding the issue of pre-qualification, I heard that 
18 firms have taken out the required documents.  Can I know how many local firms are found 
therein? 

Mr Bhadain:  I very much believe, Madam Speaker, that we are talking about local 
firms.  These are local firms and the advertisement was placed in the local newspapers, unless 
I am mistaken on this issue.  I will probably get the answer in a few minutes.  But these are 
local firms.  Yes, the majority are local firms out of the 18, three are foreign and the rest are 
all local firms. 

Mr Bérenger:  Can we have the names of those foreign firms? 

Mr Bhadain:  Well, I can certainly table the names of the local firms as well as the 

foreign firms to the National Assembly in all transparency, Madam Speaker. 

Mr Bérenger: Can I know from the hon. Minister whether it is still scheduled that 

work will start as stated by both Cabinet and the Minister concerned in August this year? 

Mr Bhadain:  This is the challenge that we have undertaken to achieve and I have no 
doubt whatsoever that we will be able to start construction works in August, unless there is a 
major problem.  This is the objective.  This is what we are going to work for and this is what 
we shall do. 

Mr Mahomed:  The hon. Minister mentioned about mopping up excess liquidity as 
the one of the windfall advantages of the Heritage City Project.  Now, there is one domain 
where  there  is  excess  is  floor  space  in  Port  Louis  and  in  Ebene  and  where  prices  have 
dropped dramatically to Rs20 in Port Louis and Rs30 approximately in Ebene, fully-fitted.  
May I know from the hon. Minister what is the estimated rental that we are expected to pay 
for  governmental  buildings  on  land  that  belongs  to  us  until  such  time  the  building  will 
become ours? 

Mr  Bhadain:    Madam Speaker,  firstly  let  me  say  that  if  we  get  Rs20  and  Rs30,  I 
mean, we would go and take that deal straightaway.  I do not know where the hon. Member is 

 

18 

getting those figures from.  My Ministry is in Ebene and we are paying rent and we know 
what  price  we  are  paying.    It  is  certainly  not  Rs30.    Having  said  that,  Madam  Speaker,  I 
believe what is important to understand is why is it that the whole project is an innovative 
way  of  financing?  One  thing  we  know  is  that  we  cannot  use  debt  finance  in  terms  of 
increasing the national debt too much because we have already given commitment to the IMF 
and  we  are  already  bound  by  the  provision  of  the  Public  Debt  Management  Act.    So, 
therefore, we are coming with an alternative way of raising finance where Heritage City Co. 
Ltd. will issue cumulative preference shares which will basically bring in the finance together 
with the syndicated loan of the local banks to start the project and then, at the end of the 
process,  when  the  project  is  completed,  those  buildings  will  be  rented  by  Ministries,  the 
Prime  Minister’s  Office.    The  rental  income  of  Heritage  City  Co.  Ltd.  will  be  the  rental 
expenditure of Government on the other side.  So, it is going from one Government pocket to 
another Government pocket.  Now, in terms, of the pre-selling on the VEFA model, all the 
commercial and residential units, the VEFA profits will also accrue to Heritage City Co. Ltd, 
which  is  100%  Government  owned.    Now,  with  that  money,  those  redeemable  preference 
shares will be redeemed over time.  So, it is a very intelligent way of financing a project in a 
situation where the previous Government have left us with so much debt that we cannot even 
contemplate borrowing to do projects in Mauritius.   

At the end of the process, when those shares will be redeemed, then those buildings 
will be freehold, meaning that the Government  of Mauritius will not have to pay any rent 
after 15 years or so and will enjoy the rental of those buildings for free. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Don’t interrupt, hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr Bhadain: If I may finish on this, Madam Speaker, we must also consider that this 
project is going to provide the public sector with the much awaited progress and development 
in the field of technology - because when we look at the Government buildings today and 
where  public  officials  are  working,  whether  it  is  Emmanuel  Anquetil  or  NPF  or  all  these 
other buildings, now you will have a conducive environment - create that ecosystem for the 
young generation who are going to come and work for the public sector, in this environment 
where you will have all the principles of e-governance, all the technology which is there and 
also the data centres. 

 
Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Leader of the Opposition, last question! 

19 

No comment, please!  Order! 

Order, please! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

No comment, I have said! Hon. Ameer Meea, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Please! Hon. Ameer Meea! Yes, hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr Bérenger: I have to sit down, then you sit down, then I stand up!  

(Interruptions) 

It’s tiring! 

This concerns the last part of my question.  We have heard a lot about public debt and 
so on, that this is a very imaginative way of getting round it. What is going to be guaranteed 
by  Government  and  that,  therefore,  will  go  into  the  public  debt?    Can  we  have  a  straight 
answer?  What will be guaranteed? The money borrowed from local banks? The shares that 
will be issued? The money that will be obtained - from what we have heard  - from Saudi 
Arabia and India? Secondly, this is spéculation immobilière.  Who is going to take the risk if 
the residential part thereof ends up like we have seen at St Jean and in other places? Who will 
bear the risk? Government, finally?  How will all this go into the public debt? 

Mr Bhadain: This appears to be another Private Notice Question, Madam Speaker. 
There are so many questions in one question. Well, first and foremost, what has happened in 
Saint Jean, Le Meritt and all of that was bad planning, and it was done in the wrong model. 
Here, we are talking about an innovative model where Government is going to be renting and 
Government is paying to Government, and the money is being used to repay the redeemable 
preference shares. With regard to who is going to buy, I must say that we have a number of 
initiatives that we are putting in place, including the FSC creating the concept of overseas 

 

20 

family corporation, which is going to allow people to come and buy property in this area, plus 
you have all the public officials. I stated in my answer! We are talking about students, we are 
talking about people with children and families, we are talking about young professionals and 
public officials.  

(Interruptions) 

With regard to the other issue raised by the hon. Leader of the Opposition as to the 

risk, but this is risk free! I can’t see where the risk is. What is the risk? 

(Interruptions) 

He is talking about Government guarantee. Government is not giving any guarantee. That is 
why  I  believe  that  the  model  has  not  been  understood,  because  it  is  the  rental  agreements 
from Government, Government paying to Government, which is the guarantee.  There is no 
Government  guarantee  being  given!  On  top  of  that,  if  we  look  at  the  Public  Debt 
Management Act, cumulative preference shares is classified as equity not as debt… 

(Interruptions) 

But this is in the law!  I can also reassure the hon. Leader of the Opposition that we have 
talked to the IMF about this and the IMF approves that this is equity. There is no need to 
make any speculation. 

Madam  Speaker:  Time  is  over!  Hon.  Members,  the  Table  has  been  advised  that 
Parliamentary Question No. B/203, in regard to the speed cameras, will now be replied by the 
hon.  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport,  Parliamentary  Question  No. 
B/204,  in  regard  to  the  sale  by  levy,  will  now  be  replied  by  the  hon.  Minister  of  Social 
Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions. Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

 

 

 

 

 

 

21 

BANK OF MAURITIUS - CHIEF HUMAN RESOURCE - APPOINTMENT 

(No. B/201) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in 
regard to the post of Chief Human Resource, he will, for the benefit of  the House, obtain 
from the Bank of Mauritius, information as to the – 

(a) 

(b) 

qualifications requirements therefor, and  

name of the incumbent thereof, indicating the - 

(i) 

date of appointment, and  

(ii) 

qualifications thereof.  

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that, in accordance 
with  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  Act,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  is  not  subject  to  the  direction  or 
control of any other person or authority.  In this respect, matters relating to the recruitment, 
appointment  and  promotion  of  staff  rest  exclusively  within  the  purview  of  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius.  It would, therefore, not be appropriate to provide the information requested by the 
hon. Member. 

Madam  Speaker,  however,  I  am  informed  by  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  that  ICAC  is 
conducting  an  inquiry  into  the  appointment  of  the  Chief-Human  Resource.    The  Bank  has 
provided ICAC with all the information necessary for the inquiry. 

Mr Bérenger: Can I know when ICAC started the inquiry? 

The Prime Minister: Well, ICAC has started the inquiry. I can’t say exactly on what 

date, but the inquiry is on. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Sesungkur! 

PUBLIC TRANSPORT - UNCIVIL BEHAVIOUR  

(No. B/202) Mr D. Sesungkur (First Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to the public transport, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from 

 

22 

the Commissioner of Police, information as to the number of reported cases of alleged anti-
social  behaviour  of  which  women,  students  and  elderly  persons  have  been  victims  when 
making use thereof over the past five years, indicating the actions taken/that will be taken, if 
any, to ensure the protection of the abovementioned categories of users thereof against such 
behaviour. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, by using the term ‘anti-social behaviour’ in 
regard to public transport, I presume that the hon. Member is referring to offences such as 
assault, insult, incivility and attempt upon chastity towards passengers. 

I  am  informed  by  the  Commissioner  of  Police  that,  since  2011  to  date,  there  have 
 
been  134  cases  of  such  offences  reported  to  the  Police  by  women,  students  and  elderly 
persons. 

I am also informed by Police that, in order to reduce these offences, the Motorway 
and Traffic Field Division and the Divisional Traffic Police of the Traffic Branch carry out 
regular patrols in order to attend to complaints and incidents related to the transport sector.  
Furthermore,  the  Brigade  pour  la  protection  des  mineurs  assists  regular  Police  in  dealing 
with problems concerning students. 

In addition to the above, I am informed by the Ministry of Public Infrastructure and 
Land  Transport  that  the  National  Transport  Authority  (NTA)  has  taken  disciplinary  action 
against bus drivers, bus conductors and operators in 33 cases of uncivil behaviour towards 
passengers during the past five years as follows - 

in 25 cases, there has been suspension of licences;  
three cases have been struck out, and  
five cases have been dismissed. 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
I am also informed by the NTA that 211 cases of offences other than misbehaviours 
have also been heard and the licences of bus operators and bus crews have been suspended.  
In each case where there has been a failure to pick up students and old-aged pensioners, the 
free travel compensation for five days, amounting to Rs15,000 paid to the operator, has been 
retained. 

In  order  to  curtail  anti-social  behaviour,  I  am  informed  that  the  National  Transport 

Corporation has embarked on a customer care training programme for bus crews. 

Mr Sesungkur: Madam Speaker, is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister aware that similar 
anti-social behaviours have been noted around  bus stations like Central Flacq,  La  Gare du 

 

23 

Nord, Rose Hill, and if he will ask the Commissioner of Police to take severe action against 
those?  It has been reported that those anti-social behaviours often come from students. 

The Prime Minister: I have already answered this. It is in my answer. 

Mr  Jhuboo:  Madam  Speaker,  in  UK,  they  have  a  special  Division  called  the  BTP 
(British Transport Police) which is in charge of offenders on buses, trains and coaches. Could 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister consider having a special unit at the level of the Police? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I can pass on this message to the Commissioner of Police. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo! 

Mr  Ganoo:  May  I  ask  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  to  look  into  the  cases  of  bus 
employees  who  are  subject  to  assaults  or  to  anti-social  behaviour,  especially  female 
conductors? Recently, there was a case where a bus conductor was assaulted, nearly losing 
one of his eyes with a cutter used by one of the passengers who was drunk. Can the Rt. hon. 
Prime  Minister  see  to  it  that  the  law  be  strengthened  and  protect  more  employees  of  the 
transport sector who are subject to assaults or to anti-social behaviour? 

The Prime Minister: Not only women, students and elderly persons are subject of 
assault,  there  are  also  many  cases  of  assault  and  insults  towards  bus  drivers  and  bus 
conductors. Since 2011 to date, there have been 262 cases of assault and insult on bus drivers 
and conductors which have been reported against only 134 cases mentioned in my reply with 
regard to women, students and elderly. And, of course, the serious case just mentioned, the 
Police is taking action. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

SPEED CAMERAS - OPERATION 

(No. B/203) Mr D. Sesungkur (First  Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to the speed cameras, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the 
Commissioner of Police, information as to if - 

(a) they are all fully operational and, if not, why not, and  

(b)  a  study  has  been  carried  out  to  ascertain  if  the  use  thereof  has  generated  the 

expected outcome of reducing the number of road accidents. 

 

24 

(Withdrawn) 

SALE BY LEVY – NATIONAL SOLIDARITY FUND - ASSISTANCE 

(No. B/204) Mr D. Sesungkur (First  Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether,  in  regard  to  the  Sale  by  Levy,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain 
information from the - 

(a) National Solidarity Fund, as to the composition of the Committee that considers 

disbursements therefrom, indicating the -  

(i)  criteria  used  for  the  granting  of  assistance  and  for  the  determination  of  the 

quantum thereof, and  

(ii) number of requests for assistance received, considered, turned down/ granted 

and quantum disbursed, and 

(b) Bank of Mauritius, as to where matters stand regarding the proposed setting up of 
an Asset Management Company to provide, inter alia, for the replacement of the 
Sale by Levy procedure. 

(Withdrawn) 

TELEPHONE TAPPING 

(No.  B/205)  Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis East) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister 
of Finance and Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development 
Unit whether, in regard to telephone tapping, he will state if the National Security Service or 
any other specially formed cell is resorting thereto under the direct orders of the Executive. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, the answer is no.   

I wish to point out that Mauritius is an Etat de droit where the fundamental rights and 
freedom  of  any  individual  are  guaranteed  by  our  Constitution.    Indeed,  Section  3  of  the 
Constitution guarantees the right to the protection for the privacy of one’s home and other 
property which includes the privacy of communication made within the home, including any 
communication requiring the use of telephone apparatus. 

 

25 

However,  Section  12  of  the  Constitution  makes  provision  for  interference  with  our 
fundamental  rights  under  certain  circumstances,  such  as  in  the  interest  of  defence,  public 
safety, public order, public morality or public health. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  Commissioner  of  Police  that  where 
information is required for the purpose of enquiry and criminal proceedings, an application is 
made  before  a  Judge  in  Chambers,  to  intercept,  withhold  or  disclose  to  the  Police,  a 
communication message. 

 Thereafter, the Judge’s Order is forwarded to the public operator directing the latter to 

disclose the name and address of the alleged offender.   

Mr  Mohamed:  Madam  Speaker,  thank  you  very  much.  I  will  ask  you,  Madam 

Speaker, to bear with me. I have two more questions, just only two. 

Madam Speaker: One by one, please! 

Mr Mohamed: One by one. I apologise if it is a bit long, but then again, it has to be 
explained very carefully. Could the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, in light of the answers he has 
just given, explain to the House how does he reconcile his answer with two facts: number 
one, that all the licences that are issued, be it for Internet or be it for use of mobile phones by 
the network operators or even landlines; each of the licences contains a clause whereby the 
licensee  is  obliged  to  make  available  on  demand  to  ICTA,  the  Authority,  full  access  to 
gateways,  switching  centres,  transmission  centres,  servers,  routers,  recordings,  scrutiny  for 
visual and even operational inspection? Secondly, how does he reconcile that with the fact 
that in Orleans Street there is an empty building with a specialised IT Unit which has parallel 
landlines that are operating for precisely listening purposes and recording purposes? That is 
one question. 

 (Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, the hon. Member spoke of the conditions that 
have been put in the licences and what not. Well, if the conditions are there, people have to 
comply with the conditions and these conditions do not date yesterday. Everything this hon. 
Member is mentioning had been there for years while he was in Government together with 
the previous Government. 

 

26 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 
The Prime Minister: Why did he not have it done away with? 
Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Leader of the Opposition! 
Mr Bérenger: Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister since he is telling us that there is 
no telephone tapping except with a Judge’s Order, can I know since the last elections how 
many such Judges’ Orders have been obtained? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I need a specific question for that. 

Mr Baloomoody: Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he is aware that the 
Chairperson  of  ICTA  travelled  to  India  recently  and  recruited  three  consultants  for  phone 
tapping? 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: That is not a question for the Rt. hon. Prime Minister. 

The Prime Minister: I am not aware. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, last question, hon. Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed: Just to pick up from where the Rt. hon. Prime Minister left off, true it 
is,  but  then  again,  he  is  here  for  change  and  I  rely  on  him  for  change.  Now,  the  second 
question would be very simple. How does he reconcile what he has just said - first answer 
and second answer - to the fact that some individuals from the National Security Services in 
May  2015  went  to  Copenhagen  -  nothing  to  do  with  the  KGB  operatives  -  and  met  with 
Israeli operatives, and those Israeli operatives were contacted for the purposes of purchase of 
equipment, for mobile equipment, in order to listen into conversations? Those three  Israeli 
operatives came… 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Mohamed,  please,  put  your  question!  You  are  providing 
information instead of asking your question. You are not there to provide information. Ask 
your question! 

Mr Mohamed: Let me finish, this is laying the foundation. This is trite knowledge. 
Now,  those  three  operatives  came  to  Mauritius  to  commission  that  equipment  in  a  Nissan 
panel van and this van is found very often before the houses of Members of the Opposition 
and some Members of Government. 

 

27 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, I am sorry, I have to interrupt you. I have told you 
that  the  object  of  asking  a  question  is  to  get  information,  whereas  you  are  providing 
information. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed: The question is very simple: how does the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
reconcile that this Government has clearly been accepting and approving collaboration with 
Israeli  operatives  to  listen  in  to  Members  of  the  Opposition  and  some  Members  of 
Government as well? 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

The Prime Minister: I am not aware of this whole business which is being mentioned 
by  the  hon.  Member.  If  the  hon.  Member  comes  with  a  specific  question,  I  will  get 
information and come with an answer. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

FOREIGNERS – NATURALIZATION 

(No.  B/206)  Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis East) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister 
of Finance and Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development 
Unit whether, in regard to the foreigners, he will state the number thereof who have obtained 
naturalization  since  December  2014  to  date,  indicating  in  each  case,  the  reasons  why  the 
Mauritian citizenship has been granted thereto. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, in accordance with Section 9 of the Mauritius 
Citizenship Act, the Minister may grant a Certificate of naturalization to foreigners who have 
resided in Mauritius for aggregate periods amounting to not less than five years during the 
last seven years and for a continuous residence period of 12 months immediately preceding 
their applications.  

Pursuant to section 9 (3) of the Act, a continuous residence period of not less than two 
years may also be accepted, where applicants cannot satisfy the above-mentioned residence 
criteria; but have invested an amount of not less than 500,000 US Dollars in Mauritius.   

 

28 

Moreover, the Minister may also grant a Certificate of Naturalization to a foreigner, if 

he is satisfied that it is in the public interest to do so. 

Accordingly, 13 foreigners have obtained naturalization since December 2014 to date.  
Five of them have satisfied the residence criteria and the other eight applicants have invested 
heavily in our hotel, tourism, property development and textile sectors, leading to the creation 
of more than one thousand direct jobs.  

Mr  Mohamed:  I  thank  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  for  his  answer.  Would  it  be 
possible for him to let the House know - and that is a prelude to my second question - how 
long does it really take for such nationality or citizenship to be granted from the moment of 
application, on average, ever since the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is Prime Minister once again? 

The Prime Minister:  Well, how long does it take, it depends on the officers and it 

depends also when the file comes to the Prime Minister.  I can’t give an exact timing. 

Mr  Mohamed:  Could  the Rt. hon. Prime Minister inform the House that there is  a 
French national going by the name  of Mr Touati who applied for a passport on 25 May 2015 
and  was  granted  that  passport  five  days  later  on?    A  French  national,  M.  Féderic  Joseph 
Touati, applied for a Mauritian passport on 25 May 2015 and was granted the passport five 
days later on.  And this is the same gentleman who visited the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to 
make an exposé of this beautiful Eco-City project in Plaisance. 

Madam Speaker:  Yes, the hon. Member has made his point! 

The Prime Minister:  I don’t know what the hon. Member is insinuating, but if this 

was done rapidly, well, I say: “Bravo”.  

(Interruptions) 

In all cases, it should be done like this, not in the past when they were sleeping on so many 
files. We have more than 500 files… 

(Interruptions) 

…which were left there and I am dealing with them. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  No comments! 

 

29 

The  Prime  Minister:  Mr  Féderic  Joseph  Touati  and  Mrs  Ariel  Cécile  Touati  born 
Sabapathee, French nationals, were naturalised on 07 May 2015.  They have invested about 
Rs100 m. in property development.  

Madam Speaker:  Last question! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed: In the light of what was just given - and I thank him for the details - 
could  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  inform  the  House  whether  this  very  same  person  had 
applied for naturalisation or Mauritian citizenship in the past and when did he apply for the 
nationality before it was granted to him?  The point I am trying to get at, my information is 
that it was once upon a time turned down for very important national security reasons. 

(Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister:  I am not aware of that, why was it turned down, whether it was 

turned down.  But I didn’t turn it down.  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Rutnah! 

(Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister:  Well, the exact date when he applied, I don’t have it.   Come 

with a specific question, I will give the date!  

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Fowdar! 

FOND DU SAC – DRAINS – CONSTRUCTION  

(No. B/207) Mr S. Fowdar (Third Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or) asked 
the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether, 
following the floods of February 2016, he will – 

(a) 

state - 

 

30 

(i)  where matters stand regarding the construction of a Cut-Off drain in Fond 
du  Sac,  indicating  the  expected  start  and  completion  dates  and  estimated 
costs thereof, and  

(ii) 

the number of households of Fond du Sac and of Camp Carol registered as 
victims thereof, indicating when compensation will be paid thereto, and  

(b) 

for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Prime  Minister’s  Relief  Fund, 
information as to the quantum of the contributions of the private sector thereinto 
in the aftermath thereof. 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker,  I  am informed by the  National Development 
Unit that in view of prevailing site conditions and topography of the land, implementation of 
short term measures such as the construction of small drains and absorption drains will not 
alleviate the problem of flooding at Fond du Sac. 

Consequently,  Invitation  for  Proposals  for  Consultancy  Services  for  the  Design  and 
Construction  of  Flood  Mitigating  measures  at  Fond  du  Sac  was  launched  by  the  National 
Development Unit on 01 April 2016 and the closing date for the submission of bids is 17 
May 2016.  The National Development Unit has resorted to Consultancy Services in view of 
the complexity of the flooding problem in that locality and the need for long term measures to 
address the problem permanently. 

At this stage, it cannot be established that the work will comprise only a cut-off drain.  
The scope of works and measures to address the flooding problems as well as the cost of the 
project will be known after the detailed designs are carried out by the selected Consultant. 

Remedial works may, inter alia, comprise of a combination of cut-off drains, collector 

drains, detention ponds and roadside drains. 

In  respect  of  part  (a)  (ii)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  by  the  Ministry  of  Social 
Security,  National Solidarity  and Reform  Institutions that 192 households were affected in 
Fond  du  Sac  and  524  persons  were  registered  as  victims.    As  regards  Camp  Carol,  20 
households were affected and the number of persons registered as victims was 70.  All heads 
of  household  for  the  two  regions  were  paid  the  allowance  for  flood  victims  at  the  rate  of 
Rs165 per day per person for a maximum of three days as set out in the First Schedule of the 
Social Aid Regulations 1984. 

 

31 

As regards part (b) of the question, no contribution has been made by the private sector 

to the Prime Minister’s Relief Fund, in the aftermath of the floods in February 2016. 

Mr  Fowdar:    Madam  Speaker,  can  I  ask  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  if  in  case  the 

private sector wants to contribute directly to the victims, can they do that? 

The Prime Minister:  If they want to contribute directly, if they want to give charity, I 

have no objection. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Jhugroo! 

PMO – MR K. R - SALARY & ALLOWANCES 

(No. B/208) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to Mr K. R., Senior Adviser attached to the Prime Minister’s Office since 
July 2005 to December 2014, he will state the – 

(a) 

net monthly salary and allowances drawn, and  

(b)  Boards on which he served as representative of the said Office thereon, indicating 

in each case, the - 

(i) 

date of appointment thereto;  

(ii) 

allowances drawn therefor, and  

(iii)  number of overseas missions undertaken in connection therewith, indicating 

the countries visited and expenditure incurred therefor. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, the net monthly salary and allowances drawn 
by  Mr  K.  R.  before  his  resignation  on  12  December  2014  was  Rs195,000,  excluding 
travelling allowance. 

In  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  Mr  K.  R.  was  not  serving  on  any  Board  as 

representative of the Prime Minister’s Office.   

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Jhugroo! No! Next question, hon. Uteem! 

 

 

32 

BANQUE DES MASCAREIGNES - BAI CO. (MTIUS) – ALLEGED TRANSFER OF 

FUNDS 

(No.  B/209)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of 
Finance and Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
whether, in regard to the alleged transfer of funds by the Banque des Mascareignes to the 
BAI  Co.  (Mtius),  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Commissioner  of 
Police, information as to if an inquiry has been carried out thereinto and, if so, indicate the 
outcome  thereof,  including  the  number  of  arrests  effected  in  connection  therewith  and  the 
charges lodged, if any. 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that on 03 April 2015, Police have instituted an enquiry in regard to the alleged transfer of 
funds from Banque des Mascareignes to the BA Investment Co. (Mtius) Ltd. 

During the course of the investigation, the Police have arrested four suspects and have 
provisionally charged them with the offence of “conspiracy to make false entries” in breach 
of section 109 (1) of the Criminal Code (Supplementary) Act and section 97 (21) (a) of the 
Banking Act 2004. 

The enquiry is still in progress. 
Mr Uteem:  Madam Speaker, may I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether 
the four suspects who have been arrested, do they all come from the same bank or are there 
other people not related to the bank who have been arrested? 

The Prime Minister:  Yes, they all come from the same bank. 
Mr Uteem:  Can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister inform the House why is it that there is a 
conspiracy by a bank to give money to the BAI, no one from BAI is arrested; Beebeejaun is 
not arrested, Taher is not arrested, the CEO and the CFO are not arrested? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  I  will  ask  the  hon.  Member  to  come  with  a  specific 

question on that. 

Mr Bhagwan:  Can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister inform the House whether there were 
instructions given to the Police to make an arrest on Mr Saleem Beebeejaun and Mr Taher 
and,  ultimately,  there  has  been  political  interference  so  that  these  two  people  be  refrained 
from being arrested and these instructions came from Senior Ministers of Government? 

The Prime Minister:  That is not correct. 

 

33 

Mr Uteem:  May I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister if anyone at the Bank of Mauritius 

has been interviewed being given that it concerns a bank? 

The Prime Minister:  Well, I don’t know whether anybody has been interviewed.  I am 

not aware. 

Madam Speaker:  Last question, hon. Bhagwan! 
Mr Bhagwan:  I hope the Rt. hon. Prime Minister won’t be angry.  Is it not a fact that 
Mr  Beebeejaun  has  not  been  arrested  because  he  has  been  actively  campaigning  for  the 
MSM, for the municipal election and he is now an active Member of the MSM? 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

Order! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Jhugroo, allow the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to reply, please! 

And silence! 

Hon. Jhugroo! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The  Prime  Minister:  I  always  thought  it  was  otherwise  because  he  was  a  staunch 

Labourite. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Lesjongard! 

RIVIÈRE NOIRE – LARCENY – ARREST 

(No.  B/210)  Mr  G.  Lesjongard  (Second  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in  regard to Rivière Noire, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the 
Commissioner of Police, information as to the number of reported cases of thefts committed 
thereat over the past three months, indicating – 

(a) 

the number thereof in which foreign nationals are the victims, and 

 
(b) 

34 

in each case, the number of suspects arrested, indicating if most of them are 
drug addicts. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  with  your  permission,  I  will  reply  to 
Parliamentary Questions B/210, B/211 and B/213 together as they relate to the same subject 
matter. 

I presume that the hon. Member is referring to reported cases of “larceny” which is 
defined  under  sections  301  to  311  of  the  Criminal  Code  Act  as  the  term  “theft”  is  not 
provided for in our legislation. 

Madam Speaker,  I am informed by the Commissioner of Police that the number of 
reported cases of larceny in the region of Rivière Noire from January to December 2015 is 
52.  

Out of the 52 cases - 

(i) 

(ii) 

13 are under enquiry; 

33 cases have been filed pro-tem;  

(iii) 

5 are pending court decision, and  

(iv) 

1 case has been completed and the accused has been sentenced to six months 
imprisonment.  

From January to 14 April 2016, 16 cases of larceny have been reported in the same 

region and all cases are under enquiry.  

Out of these, three have been reported by foreign nationals.  Three suspects have been 

arrested and none of them is a drug addict. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  Commissioner  of  Police  has  also  informed  that  from  January 
2015 to 14 April 2016, 125 cases of larceny in the region of Tamarin have been reported to 
the Police. 

Out of the 125 reported cases  - 

(i) 

(ii) 

73 cases are under enquiry; 

45 cases have been filed pro-tem; 

(iii) 

4 are pending court decision, and  

 
(iv) 

35 

3 cases have been completed. In two cases, accused have been fined Rs2,000 
each and in one case, the accused has been fined Rs1,000. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  am  also  informed  by  the  Commissioner  of  Police  that  a 
Community  Policy  Forum  was  held  by  the  Police  at  the  Black  River  Police  Station  on 
30 March 2016 with members of the local community from various villages falling under the 
jurisdiction of the Police Station. 

During the meeting, matters pertaining to crime prevention measures, implementation 
of the Neighbourhood Watch Scheme and the reinforcement of the Police Public Partnership 
with a view to curbing down larceny in the region were discussed. 

The  Community  was  also  informed  of  the  different  measures  that  are  being 
implemented  by  the  Police  to  ensure  the  security  of  the  inhabitants  in  the  region,  among 
others - 

(i) 

at least four Police vehicles doing mobile police patrols round the clock.  It is 
to be noted that there are also 17 vehicles for the whole district of Black River 
which can be made available to any of the Police Station of the district in case 
of emergency, and 

(ii)  maintaining the light bar on the police vehicles  continuously so as to indicate 

visible Police presence to reassure the community. 

The Community was also reassured that additional measures were being taken by the 
Police  to  address  the  upsurge  of  larceny  cases  reported  at  the  Black  River  Police  Station, 
namely - 

(i) 

reinforcement of the Police strength in the region from the Divisional Support 
Unit,  the  SMF,  the  Special  Support  Unit  and  the  Emergency  Response 
Service, among others, to increase Police presence in the region; 

(ii) 

road blocks at strategic places, and 

(iii) 

the introduction of Hotspots policing and Bottleneck Operations. 

As  regards  larceny  being  reported  from  the  seaward  side,  the  community  was 
informed that to address the issue, the NCG personnel has increased the number of patrols 
along the coastal areas. In addition, a patrol vessel with a crew of 20 coast guards has been 
anchored in Black River Bay to monitor all seaborne activities. 

36 

 
Mr  Lesjongard:  Madam  Speaker,  I  haven’t  heard  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister 
confirm whether that Senior Police Officer made a statement to the inhabitants of that area 
that he was facing problems to cope with the situation because of the lack of vehicles and he 
made a statement where he said that he told the inhabitants that they should go back to their 
houses before 6 p.m. Did he make that statement during that meeting? 

The Prime Minister: I don’t know whether anyone made that statement, but I have 
just mentioned all the measures that have been taken. If he made it, I don’t know when he 
made it. It could have been much before. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon Jhugroo, you will continue with your comments? Yes, hon. 

Jhuboo! 

Mr Jhuboo: I would like to thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for all the measures 
taken. Could the Rt. hon. Prime Minister see to it that cameras are installed in the regions of 
Tamarin and Black River, as it is the case in Flic-en-Flac? 

The Prime Minister: If the hon. Member could come with a specific question, I can’t 

say what happened in Flic-en-Flac. 

Mr Mohamed: Madam Speaker, since it seems that there is - following the question 
of  hon.  Lesjongard  -  a  serious  deterioration  in  the  matter  of  law  and  order  in  that  part  of 
Mauritius, at least, does… 

(Interruptions) 

We will come with other specific questions on those other parts. But, with regard to this part, 
is this the reason why the PMSD leader, the hon. Deputy Prime Minister, has been mandated 
to himself chair this Committee to sort out serious problems with regard to law and order 
which Government is not managing to sort out? 

 (Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister: The hon. Member must say thank you… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

37 

 
The  Prime  Minister:  …for  all  the  steps  we  are  taking  because  the  Deputy  Prime 
Minister is a Minister of this Government and he is entitled to do what he has been asked to 
do. 

RIVIERE NOIRE - POLICE OFFICERS & INHABITANTS - MEETING 

(No.  B/211)  Mr  G.  Lesjongard  (Second  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in  regard to Rivière Noire, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the 
Commissioner of Police, information as to if a meeting was held on 30 March last between 
the inhabitants thereof and officers of the Police Station thereof in the course of which the 
said Police Officers averred that they - 

(a)  

(b)  

cannot effect regular patrol thereat due to lack of vehicles, and  

guarantee the security of the inhabitants after 6.00 p.m. and, if so, indicate if 
remedial measures will be taken in relation thereto. 

(Vide reply to PQ No. B/210) 

RIVIÈRE NOIRE - THEFT & LARCENY - INQUIRIES 

(No. B/213) Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in 
regard to Tamarin and Rivière Noire, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the 
Commissioner of Police, information as to the number of reported cases of theft and larceny 
thereat since January 2015 to date, indicating - 

(a)   where matters stand as to the inquiries carried out thereinto, and 

(b)   measures taken or that will be taken to curb the incidence thereof. 

(Vide reply to PQ No. B/210) 

AIR MAURITIUS LTD. – BOARD GOVERNMENT REPRESENTATIVE 

(No. B/214) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether,  in  regard  to  Air  Mauritius  Ltd.,  he  will  state  the  names  of  the  representative  of 

 

38 

Government sitting thereon, indicating the capacity in which the said person is representing 
Government on the Board thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

Madam Speaker: The Table has been advised that PQ B/214, addressed to the Rt. 

hon. Prime Minister, has been withdrawn. Time is over! Next question, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

DR. A. G. JEETOO HOSPITAL – MS R. B. – DEMISE 

(No. B/222) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  whether,  in  regard  to  the  demise  of  Ms  R.  B. 
following a surgical operation for the removal of the gall bladder in September/October 2015 
at the Dr A. G. Jeetoo Hospital, he will state if an inquiry has been carried out thereinto and, 
if so, indicate – 

(a) 

(b) 

who carried out the said inquiry, and 

the outcome thereof. 

Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed 
that,  following  the  recommendation  of  a  preliminary  investigation,  the  Inquiry  Committee 
was set up on 06 January 2016. 

The Inquiry Committee was chaired by the then Acting Regional Health Director of 

Jawaharlal Nehru Hospital and having as members - 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

one Consultant-in-charge Internal Medicine from Victoria Hospital; 

one Consultant-in-charge General Surgery from Victoria Hospital, and 

one Assistant Permanent Secretary to act as Secretary. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, the Inquiry Committee has, on 22 March 2016, 
recommended  that,  in  view  of  the  shortcomings  identified  in  the  management  of  that 
particular  case,  they  will  be  referred  to  the  Medical  Council  for  appropriate  actions.  The 
Medical  Council  has  been  informed  accordingly  on  14  April  2016  and  the  outcome  is 
awaiting. 

Dr. Sorefan: Madam Speaker, is the hon. Minister aware that the cause of death was 
attributed  to  pulmonary  and  cardiac  of  origin,  whereas  there  was  also  an  autopsy  on  that 
patient  which  confirmed  otherwise,  that  the  doctor  who  did  that  mismanaged  and  did  the 
laparoscopy differently by clipping the biliary duct and that caused the death of that patient? 

39 

 
Mr Gayan: Well, Madam Speaker, I have just said that there was an enquiry that was 
set up, shortcomings were identified and this is the reason why it has been referred to the 
Medical Council. 

Dr. Joomaye: Madam Speaker, I would like to know from the hon. Minister if he is 
aware that there have been several deaths following that type of surgery at Dr. A. G. Jeetoo 
Hospital and what are the measures that have been taken to prevent this from happening? 

Mr Gayan: Well, I am not aware whether there have been several deaths, but what I 
have asked all the doctors and surgeons, Madam Speaker, is that they should be working in 
teams instead of working individually. Unfortunately, this has been the practice in Mauritius 
that they work individually.  They should follow the international practice that they should 
discuss the case as a team and perform surgery as a team. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Does the hon. Minister find it proper that 
the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life did the enquiry on its own hospital doctors? Like 
he  mentioned,  some  consultants  who  did  the  primary  enquiry,  did  the  enquiry  on  its  own 
doctors. Does not that tantamount to judge and party the Ministry of Health and Quality of 
Life doing enquiry on its own doctors?  

Mr Gayan: Well, Madam Speaker, I am informed that the procedure, whenever there 
is  an  allegation  of  professional  misconduct,  is  to  have  an  internal  enquiry  and  once  the 
findings are  given and there are indications of any shortcomings, then the enquiry and the 
recommendations of the responsible officer are referred to the Medical Council which is the 
statutory disciplinary body according to the PSC Regulations. 

Mr Baloomoody: I have a general question. Can I ask the hon. Minister whether he 
will  see  to  it  that  in  case  of  alleged  medical  negligence,  at  least  the  next  of  kin  of  the 
deceased get access to the medical file at the hospital so that if ever they want to take private 
action they can? Now, it is very difficult to get access and sometimes it is very costly. 

Mr Gayan: Well, of course, there is a procedure for accessing the medical records of 
any patient and the procedure has to be followed. I understand that there is a fee also that has 
to be paid. Should there be a case in Court, the witnesses will come and they will depone on 
the medical records. 

 
Madam Speaker: Last question on this issue, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

40 

Dr. Sorefan: Doing an internal enquiry by the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life, 
there is always an element of cover-up because it is doctors to doctors. This is the case.  We 
know  it  we  have  been  here,  in  Mauritius.  Will  the  hon.  Minister  consider  setting  up  an 
independent enquiry by independent persons, doctors to do the enquiry for this case and for 
other  cases?    The  hon.  Minister  knows  very  well  because  there  is  a  circular  that  he  has 
circulated for senior doctors to do laparoscopy. In this case, it was done by a junior doctor. 
Will the hon. Minister set up an enquiry from an independent body? 

Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, I need to follow the rules and the rules say that after an 
enquiry  is  conducted  in-house  and  there  has  been  no  cover-up  because  shortcomings  have 
been listed and in the light of the shortcomings the matter has been referred to the Medical 
Council.  This is the procedure that we need to follow. After the Medical Council has had 
another look at the records, it may decide to refer the case to the Medical Tribunal and if the 
Medical Tribunal comes to any conclusion, then the PSC will act on it. But, I do appreciate 
that the shortcomings do exist in this case. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ameer Meea! 

AUTO CYCLES & MOTORCYCLES – NOISE EMISSION 

(No.  B/223)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port Louis East) asked the Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms, Minister 
of Environment, Sustainable Development, and Disaster and Beach Management whether, in 
regard to loud noise emissions, he will state – 

(a) the number of contraventions booked and convictions secured in respect of auto 

cycles and motorcycles therefor over the past two years, and  

(b) if the sound level meters procured for the detection thereof are now operational 

and, if not, why not. 

The Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training (Mr S. 
Callichurn): Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, I wish to inform the 
House  that  the  number  of  contraventions  established  by  Police  in  respect  of  loud  noise 
emission by auto/motorcycles for the past two years up to end of March 2016 is as follows – 

 
For the year 2014 

For the year 2015 

 

 

 

 

 

 

41 

 

 

For the year 2016 (up to end of March 2016)  262 

 

Total 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

784 

1281 

------- 

2327 

The  number  of  persons  convicted  for  using  auto  cycles/motorcycles  with  modified 

silencers for the same period is 1846. 

With regard to part (b)  of the question, following several tests carried out with the 
Sound Level Meters, it was ascertained that the equipment could not be used to measure the 
noise  emission  for  auto/motorcycles  with  modified  silencers.  Moreover,  no  proper  reading 
could be obtained. Contraventions are being established based on excessive noise perceived 
by the ears of the officer establishing the contravention and upon verification of the exhaust 
pipe that is if the vehicle has been fitted with an extension or the silencer has been altered for 
causing excessive or greater noise. 

I wish to inform the House that section 83(3) Use of Silencers of the Road Traffic Act 

(Construction and Use of Vehicles) Regulations, 2010 provides that – 

 “No person shall –  

(a) fit on the exhaust pipe of a motor vehicle any extension or other device likely to 

cause excessive or unusual noise; or  

(b) alter the silencer in such a way that the noise caused by the escape of the exhaust 

gases is made greater by the alteration.” 

The said legislation also provides that any person who contravenes this section of the 
law  shall  commit  an  offence  and  may  on  conviction  be  liable  to  a  fine  not  exceeding 
Rs10,000. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Speaker, I know the hon. Minister is not the substantive 
Minister, so my comments are not directly to him, but if he could pass on the message to the 
substantive Minister when he comes back. This issue has been canvassed in this House on 
several occasions, Madam Speaker, and the last time I myself put this Parliamentary Question 

 

42 

was in February last year, that is, more than a year and in the reply, the previous Minister 
stated and I quote –  

“Ene  opération  coup  de  poing  will  be  undertaken  by  the  six  teams  of  Police  de 
l’Environnement throughout the island for a period of two weeks.” 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker,  he  himself  was  blown  up  in  the  Holi  powder  saga  and  there  has 

never been any opération coup de poing. 

Madam Speaker: What is your question? Ask your question! 

Mr Ameer Meea: My question is to the fact that we just heard that the sound level 
meters cannot be used. This was the case since several years. Why is it that these sound level 
meters are not being replaced by proper sound level meters that can be admissible in Court? 

Mr Callichurn: Madam Speaker, I am in a position to answer the question. I do know 
that the hon. Member himself has asked several questions on this particular issue in the past 
and as regards the opération coup de poing, I am informed that… 

 (Interruptions) 

… seven teams of Police de l’Environnement carry out regular checks across the island to 
target motor vehicles causing excessive noise. An awareness campaign is also being done on 
a regular basis and I need to add that the strength of the Police de l’Environnement has been 
increased by 15 additional Police officers. Now, they have a total of 42 officers. 

As regards the second issue raised by the hon. Member, the difficulties that are being 

encountered are - there are seven shortcomings which have been observed –  

(i) 

since the very start of December 2015, difficulties were encountered with the 
use  of  the  sound  level  meters  on  auto/motorcycles  on  our  roads  for  the 
enforcement with respect to that measure in decibel for vehicles with modified 
silencers; 

(i) 

the sound level meters could not give a proper result as some motorcycles 
and auto cycles with modified silencers are not fitted with RPM meter; 

 
(ii) 

43 

even motorcycles fitted with RPM meter, the exhaust pipe of the motorcycles 
is  so  modified  or  altered  and  causing  excessive  noise  that  the  sound  level 
meter could not measure the noise level; 

 (iv)     the time taken for each test varies from 20 to 25 minutes which is considered  

to be time consuming and too lengthy for a road site test, and 

(v)  the Enforcement Officer could not determine precisely whether auto cycle of  
motorcycle has a two-stroke or four-stroke engine which is necessary for the 
test. 

Mr Mahomed:  I did ask a question last year as well, B/786 on the subject matter.  
Now, in his reply again, from that opération coup de poing, the hon. Minister has explained a 
three-pronged approach – 

(i) 

purchasing equipment (noise meters) immediately; 

(ii)  garages that do modifications of silencers will be warned severely, and  

(iii)  he went to the extent of saying that motorcycles that do emit high level of sound 
will  be  ceased  and  confiscated  and  that,  on  the  same  date,  he  has  sent  a 
reminder to the Commissioner of Police. 

May we know from the hon. Minister - whom I reckon is not the substantive Minister - what 
has become of these démarches? 

Mr  Callichurn:    Well,  the  former  Minister  did  make  recommendation  to  the 
Commissioner  of  Police  on  21  July  2015,  with  a  view  to  amend  the  Road  Traffic  Act  to 
address the issue the hon. Member just mentioned.  We are awaiting the views of the Ministry 
of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport and a reminder has been sent recently.  I have 
also been informed that a meeting will be held this Thursday to address those issues. 

Mr Uteem:  This question is addressed to the hon. Minister and he will be able to 
answer  it  because  it  concerns  his  Ministry.    The  hon.  Minister  referred  to  officers  now 
listening  to  the  noise.    May  I  know  whether  his  Ministry  has  been  contacted  to  provide 
training to these officers and whether he has looked into the possibility of any occupational or 
health hazard in officers doing that? 

 
Mr  Callichurn:    Unfortunately,  I  am  not  in  a  position  to  answer  this  particular 

44 

question. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:    The  hon.  Minister  stated  so  many  problems  associated  to  the 
sound  level  meter.    Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  why  not  considering  a  ban  on  modified 
silencers importation? 

Mr Callichurn:  As I said earlier, those aspects are being looked into and there is a 

meeting on Thursday regarding this particular issue. 

Mr Mohamed:  Just to pick up from where hon. Uteem had left off.  Could the hon. 
Minister consider the possibility of using very qualified staff at the level of his Ministry and 
the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life, who are in possession of equipment to measure 
noise levels and there are also regulations pertaining to that. I am sure this is what the hon. 
Uteem meant.  There are regulations pertaining to noise at work that is already there and it is 
working very well, maybe he could use this experience to try to bring it to his colleague’s 
attention. 

Mr Callichurn:  If it is possible, why not. 

PORT LOUIS FIRE STATION - RELOCATION 

(No.  B/224)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the    Minister  of  Local  Government  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
Mauritius Fire and Rescue Services, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, 
information as to where matters stand as to the project for the – 

(a) upgrading of the Port Louis Fire Station, and  
(b)  construction  of  a  new  fire  station,  headquarters  and  training  academy  at  Riche 

Terre, indicating in both cases the expected start and completion dates thereof. 

Dr. Husnoo: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the House, that it is not being 
envisaged  to  upgrade  the  existing  Port  Louis  Fire  Station.    My  Ministry  is,  instead,  in 
collaboration with the Ministry of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport and the Mauritius 
Fire and Rescue Services, exploring the possibility of relocating the Port Louis Fire Station at 
the Immigration Square in the context of Port Louis Redevelopment Project.   

It  is  also  being  proposed  that  the  Head  Office  of  the  Mauritius  Fire  and  Rescue 

Services would be relocated thereat.   

45 

 
As  a  matter  of  fact,  consultations  have  already  started  regarding  this  project  and  a 
meeting  was  held  on  04  April  2016  at  the  Ministry  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land 
Transport,  whereby  the  Mauritius  Fire  and  Rescue  Services  was  requested  to  submit  their 
detailed requirements. 

I am informed by the Mauritius Fire and Rescue Services that it has already submitted 
the project details to the Ministry of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport on 11 April 
2016 for consideration at its end. 

As regards part (b) of the question, that is, the proposed construction of Riche Terre 
Fire Station, this project will be considered at a later stage, when necessary funding would 
have been identified. 

As I mentioned before, given the massive investment required, that is, about half a 
billion rupees, this project will be implemented later as part of the overall development of the 
Jin Fei and the associated Port Development. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:    Madam  Speaker,  in  a  past  PQ  dated  March  2015,  the  hon. 

Minister stated and I quote – 

“I am informed that a plot of land of the extent of 16 arpents and 30 perches at 
Riche  Terre  has  been  vested  in  my  Ministry  for  the  construction  of  a  Fire 
Station”. 

Now,  we  just  heard  the  hon.  Minister  stating  that  it  would  be  relocated  in  Immigration 
Square.  So, may we know which is which because, according to last week’s reply, the hon. 
Minister also stated that the marchands ambulants will be relocated in Immigration Square?  
So,  what  are  we  going  to  do?    What  is  the  project  and  what  is  the  time  frame  for  this 
relocation? 

Dr.  Husnoo:    Madam  Speaker,  I  explained  last  time  when  I  answered  the  same 
question that the Riche Terre Project is going to come later.  It is not going to take care of 
Port  Louis,  it  is  for  the whole  Riche  Terre,  the  Port  and  surrounding  areas.    Now,  we  are 
talking  about  the  Port  Louis,  this  one  is  for  the  Port  Louis  area.    That  is  why  there  is  a 
difference between the two. 

Mr Mahomed:  The Immigration Square is a very small place, in fact.  May we know 
from the hon. Minister the extent that has been earmarked for the construction of this Fire 
Station that he is referring to? 

Dr. Husnoo:  Actually, at Immigration Square, we have 10 acres of land and part of it 

… 

(Interruptions) 

46 

 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea, do not ask questions from a sitting position! 
Dr.  Husnoo:  Anyway,  just  as  I  mentioned  now,  the  Mauritius  Fire  and  Rescue 
Services has submitted the details to the Ministry of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 
just on 11 April.  Just recently!  So, we are still working on this. 

Mr Mohamed: I would like to put a very simple question to the hon. Minister.  Has a 
traffic impact assessment exercise been carried out with regard to the proposal of relocating 
the Fire Station at Immigration Square and, if it has been carried out, - because the avenues 
and the streets leading to it are quite narrow as he is well aware of - could he consider tabling 
that traffic impact assessment report? 

Dr.  Husnoo:    Madam  Speaker,  this  subject  about  the  exit  for  the  fire  lorries  was 
discussed as well.  They have decided that they are going to have dedicated exit for the fire 
lorries so that they can have easy access to the motorway.  

Mr Ameer Meea:  The hon. Minister just stated that the Immigration Square is 10 
acres.  May I ask him, if he is ready to table a site plan with the extent of the size land of 
these 10 acres that we are talking and even if he does not have it now, he can table it later? 

Dr. Husnoo:  Madam Speaker, this is what I have been told by the Ministry of Public 

Infrastructure and Land Transport.  I do not have the exact … 

(Interruptions) 

We will think about it and we will decide later.  Thank you.  

Madam  Speaker:    The  Table  has  been  advised  that  the  following  PQs  have  been 
withdrawn, PQ B/232, PQ B/246 and PQ B/252.  I suspend the sitting for one and half hours. 

At 1.03 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 
On resuming at 2.35 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair 

TORRENTIAL RAIN/NATURAL CALAMITIES – EMPLOYEES - RELEASE 

(No.  B/225)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and 
Training whether, in regard to torrential rainfalls, he will state if consideration will be given 
for proposed amendments to be introduced to the existing legislation with a view to provide 
for the obligation on employers to release the employees thereof in cases of warnings therefor 
issued by the Mauritius Meteorological Services and, if so, when and, if not, why not. 

Mr  Callichurn:  Madam  Speaker,  a  warning  for  torrential  rain  is  issued  by  the 
Mauritius Meteorological Services when 100 mm of rain is registered in less than 12 hours 
and the rain is expected to continue. 

47 

 
Provision  has  now  been  made  at  section  16(2)  of  the  National  Disaster  Risk 
Reduction and Management Act for the National Crisis Committee to address issues relating 
to  natural  calamities.    The  National  Crisis  Committee  is  empowered  to  take  appropriate 
measures, including evacuation of persons at risk.  

The National Risk Committee can, after consultation with the Prime Minister, make 

such orders to evacuate premises and protect persons. 

Any  person  who  contravenes  any  order  issued  under  section  42  of  this  Act  shall 
commit an offence and shall, on conviction, be liable to a fine not exceeding Rs100,000 and 
to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years. 

Madam Speaker, in view of the above, the need to legislate to provide for the release 

of employees on account of torrential rain is not felt. 

I wish to assure the House that I shall hold meetings with social partners to sensitise 

them on the need to release employees in case of torrential rain and other natural calamities. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Speaker, the aim of this Parliamentary Question was due 
to the fact that some employers categorically refused to release their employees on Friday 10 
February 2016 despite the appeal of Government and the Mauritius Employers’ Federation. 
Therefore, can I ask the hon. Minister if he has received representations in this context? 

Mr  Callichurn:  No  representations  have  been  made  to  my  Ministry  to  that  effect.  
But I would like to add that, subsequent to the last torrential rain on 10 February 2016, when 
officers had to be released from work as from 11 a.m. on that day, Government has decided 
that an appropriate protocol be devised for the public sector to cater for such situations. The 
Ministry  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms  is  formulating  this  protocol  in 
consultation with stakeholders concerned.  I am informed that this protocol will also apply for 
the private sector. 

Mr Baloomoody: As matters stand now, when there is a cyclone class 2 warning, all 
employers have two hours to release the workers. Why can’t we have this system in case of 
torrential rain, be it in the private and public sector? 

Mr  Callichurn:  As  I  said,  a  protocol  is  being  devised  and  the  private  sector  will 

follow. 

 

48 

GOVERNMENT-MSPA AGREEMENT –LAND TRANSFER 

(No. B/226) Mr D. Sesungkur (First Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) 
asked the Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security whether, in regard to the Agreement 
signed  between  Government  and  the  Mauritius  Sugar  Producers  Association  on  22  April 
2008  for  the  transfer  of  2000  acres  of  sugar  lands  to  the  State  over  a  period  of  ten  years, 
ending  in  2017,  he  will  state  the  extent  of  land  acquired  since  September  2015  to  date, 
indicating the – 

(a) 

(b) 

use made thereof, and 

names of the beneficiaries thereof. 

Mr  Seeruttun:  Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  out  of  the  2,000 
arpents of sugar cane lands earmarked for transfer to the State under the said Government-
MSPA  Agreement,  1,153  arpents  would  be  released  for  agricultural  development  and  847 
arpents for housing and other social infrastructure projects. 

As at to date, 910 arpents have already been acquired, whilst procedures are now well 
engaged for acquisition of another lot of 694 arpents, which accounts for a total land area of 
1,604 arpents, representing 80% of the total lot agreed upon by the two parties. 

As regards land acquisition over period running from September 2015 to date, I am 
informed that 147 arpents were acquired, that is, 130 arpents for agriculture and 17 arpents 
for housing and other social infrastructure projects. 

With  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  land 
acquisition procedures were finalised for the 147 arpents in March and April 2016 and these 
lands will be released for the following purposes - 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

66  arpents  at  Britannia  for  creation  of  an  exclusive  zone  to  promote  food 
production under bio-farming systems; 

64  arpents  at  Camp  Marcelin  and  Plaine  Magnien  for  crop  and  livestock 
production under conventional farming systems; 

12 arpents at Goodlands, Argy and Souillac for social housing, and 

5 arpents at Chebel for construction of a SME park. 

49 

 
Regarding  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  proposals  for 
agricultural  projects  from  prospective  applicants  are  being  screened  and  would  shortly  be 
evaluated by the State Land Committee set up at the level of my Ministry for the selection of 
eventual beneficiaries. 

Mr Sesungkur: Madam Speaker, with regard to the lands which have already been 

transferred, can the hon. Minister confirm if they are fully in use as at to date? 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, lands that are being leased are usually meant to be in 
operation, that is, under cultivation. They are given six months to start their activities, and I 
have given strict instructions that if ever lands are still abandoned, we are going to retrieve 
them and give them to those who are really willing to cultivate on those lands. 

Mr  Mahomed:  Madam  Speaker,  insofar  as  social  housing  is  concerned,  the  most 
important criterion is the location of a plot of land and insofar as agriculture is concerned, the 
most important criterion is the quality of the land.  What measures are being taken at the level 
of the Ministry to ensure that the land that we obtained is not marginal land? 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, I believe one of the reasons why this took so long is 
- it has been nearly 10 years now since this agreement was signed between the MSPA and the 
Government - because of that issue of finding the appropriate land, be it for agriculture or for 
social and other infrastructural projects. So, the process of analysing whether it is good for 
agriculture or for housing projects is a lengthy procedure.  That is why I believe it has taken 
so long in identifying the land, to make sure that whenever land is vested to the Government, 
be it at my Ministry or the Ministry of Housing and Lands, it is land appropriate for those 
particular projects earmarked for. 

Mr Bhagwan: Madam Speaker, can I know from the hon. Minister whether he has 
been made aware that land given to individuals for agricultural purposes has been subleased? 
There  is  a  sort  of  business  going  on.    Initially  it  was  marginal  land,  but  then  it  has  been 
converted for planting and given to individuals.  Can the hon. Minister say whether there are 
cases where same are being subleased and whether he will make the proper inquiry? 

Mr  Seeruttun:  Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  those  2,000  arpents  land  whereby 
those that have been vested to my Ministry to be given to growers, only cooperative societies 
are entitled to benefit from those lands, but it is true that other State lands were given to some 
individuals in the past, whereby they have sublet them, to what I call true planters, and I can 

 

50 

give an example about what happened in the region of Plaine Sophie whereby there was one 
Adviser  to  the  former  Minister  of  Agriculture  who  obtained  a  large  plot  of  land  and  was 
subletting it to true planters at a higher fee, but we have already retrieved those lands and 
given them to those true planters. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Fowdar! 

Mr Fowdar: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Can I ask the hon. Minister whether he has 
already  worked  out  on  the  criteria  to  be  used  for  SME,  small  investors?  What  will  be  the 
criteria for the granting of land? 

Mr Seeruttun: With regard to SME projects, this is not under my purview. The land, 
like I said, within the 2,000 arpents that are to be vested to the Government, the plots that are 
for SME projects or housing projects are vested with the Ministry of Housing and Lands and 
from there on, depending on the projects which are to be adopted, the criteria are set by the 
Ministry concerned. 

Madam Speaker: Last question, hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Minister give us the name of the Adviser who got the lease 
of  that  particular  plot  of  land,  what  amount  he  paid  to  the  Ministry  and  what  amount  he 
claimed for the sublease of that particular land, and whether this case can be referred to the 
Ministry of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms? 

Mr Seeruttun: The name of the Adviser is one Mr Rampal. I have not got the exact 
surface area of land that he had benefited, but probably  I can  come back to that at a later 
stage. 

BARACHOIS - LEASES 

(No.  B/227)  Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis East) asked the Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, Shipping 
and  Outer  Islands  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Barachois,  he  will  state  the  number  of  leases 
thereof granted or renewed since January 2015 to date, indicating in the case of Mauricoast 
Ltd., the date of - 

(a) application for the grant of a lease therefor, and  

(b) issue of the lease therefor.   

With  regard  to  part  (a)  of  PQ  B/250,  the  application  from  Mauricoast  Ltd.  was 

 
B/250 altogether. 
With regard to part (a) of PQ B/227, I wish to inform the House that since January 
 
2015,  no  lease  has  been  granted  or  renewed  by  my  Ministry  in  respect  of  any  promoter.  
However, authorisation to carry out aquaculture activities has been given to four promoters at 
four barachois on the merits of project. 
 
Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that, as such no lease or concession has 
been  granted  to  Mauricoast  Ltd.  for  the  use  of  the  existing  barachois  at  Poudre  D’Or.  
However authorisation to carry out aquaculture farming was given to Mauricoast Ltd. on 17 
September 2015. 
 
received at my Ministry on 22 June 2015.   
 
including land area of six hectares. 
Concerning  part  (c)  of  PQ  B/250,  Mauricoast  Ltd.  will  carry  out  the  culture  of 
 
valuable aquaculture marine species, namely sea cucumber, oyster and crabs.  The promoter 
has  hired  the  services  of  a  consultant,  namely  Dr.  Dev  Vaitilingon,  Director  of  AADCO 
Projects Malaysia, to assist in the implementation of the project. Furthermore, the project will 
be closely monitored by officers of my Ministry.  
 
Ministry, after which, Government was apprised of same. 
 
September 2015 to implement the project.  
 

Regarding  part  (b)  of  PQ  B/250,  the  barachois  covers  a  total  area  of  52  hectares, 

With regard to part (c)(i) of PQ B/250, the project was discussed at the level of my 

Regarding  part  (c)(ii),  Mauricoast  Ltd.  was  authorised  by  my  Ministry  on  17 

 
Mr Koonjoo: Madam Speaker, with your permission, I am replying to PQ B/227 and 

51 

With regard to part (d), a set of conditions is attached to the authorisation as follows – 
the proposed project shall be carried out in the Grand Barachois (Bassin 
Humbert) at Poudre d’Or of an area of approximately 52 ha; 

i. 

ii.  the project shall be undertaken on a pilot basis for an initial period of five 

years and may be renewed on mutual consent; 

iii.  the Company shall apply to this Ministry for collection of oysters spats for 

the project; 

iv.  the  Company  shall  submit  to  this  Ministry  data  on  physico-chemical 

parameters and production on a monthly basis; 

 

52 

v.  the Company shall not make use of any chemicals for the culture; 
vi.  the Company shall provide its own security services; 
vii. officers of the Ministry shall be given easy access to the facilities at sea or 

on land as and when required for monitoring the project; 

viii.  the  Company  shall  comply  with  directives  that  may  be  issued  by  the 
Ministry  to  safeguard  and  protect  the  marine  environment,  prior  to  and 
during the implementation of the project; 

ix.  the Company shall comply to the Fisheries & Marine Resources Act 2007 

(amended) 

x.  the Company shall have its own quarantine facilities for imported oyster 

spats; 

xi.  the above conditions may be amended and new conditions may be added at 

any time should a need arise; 

xii.  the  barachois  shall  remain  the  property  of  the  Ministry  of  Ocean    

Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, Shipping and Outer Islands, and 

xiii.  Mauricoast  Ltd.  would  have  to  seek  all  necessary  clearances  from 

relevant authorities. 

Furthermore I wish to inform the House that since the project would be carried on a 
pilot basis, the barachois shall remain the property of my Ministry and there is no lease or 
concession involved and, as such, payment of fees does not arise. 

Mr  Mohamed:  Initially,  could  the  hon.  Minister  explain  at  what  stage  did  his 
Ministry consider it appropriate or not to inform the business community or interested parties 
in Mauritius of the availability of that plot of ocean and land for concession purposes on a 
pilot basis, so that others also could have made proposals to his Ministry in order to be able to 
avail themselves of the possibility and the opportunity of carrying out such a trade? If he did 
not follow me, did he ever inform the members of the public? 

Mr Koonjoo: Madam Speaker, the Barachois are the property of the Government and 
we  don’t  make  publicity  for  that.  Anybody  interested  in  going  in  the  aquaculture  for  any 
product is welcome. 

Mr  Rutnah:    Madam  Speaker,  can  the  hon.  Minister  enlighten  the  House  as  to  the 
number of employment this project is likely to generate and the amount of foreign investment 
that this project is anticipating to bring into our country? 

 

53 

Mr  Koonjoo:  Madam  Speaker,  the  Mauricoast  project  is  supposed  to  be  financing 
about Rs100 m. and, naturally, exactly we can’t say how many jobs will be created, but it 
should be more than 20 jobs.  

Moreover,  I  want  to  mention,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  that  we  have  got  other 
promoters,  even  foreign  promoters,  who  came  recently  and  we  signed  a  Memorandum  of 
Understanding for a project sponsored by a South African company, and they are going to 
invest Rs1.4 billion, which will definitely create lots of jobs.  

Apart  from  that,  we  have  another  company  which  is  also  interested  and  we  are 
supposed to sign another MoU with the foreign country.  They are supposed to invest more 
than  Rs200  m.  Apart  from  foreign  countries  we  also  have  local  companies  such  as 
Mauricoast  Ltd  and  other  companies  from  Mauritius,  which  are  interested  to  launch  into 
aquaculture.  Many of them are waiting for clearances to be given by the Ministry. 

Mr Bhagwan:  I will come back to the question put by hon. Mohamed, when he asked 
the hon. Minister about the question of making known to the public that these barachois are 
there and whoever is interested, they can come with a project.  I would like to know why, in 
that particular case, it has been left to anybody who is interested to come with a project.  I 
think it should have been the duty of the Ministry to say where we have such and such types 
of barachois and if anybody wants to come with a project, as it is done as an Expression of 
Interest.  Why such procedure has not been adopted? 

Mr  Koonjoo:  Madam  Speaker,  the  companies  I  mentioned,  are  investing  lots  of 
money.  It  does  not  mean  that  we  have  closed  the  practice  of  aquaculture  to  other  people, 
especially the fishermen. This is open for them also and I am negotiating with a bank so that 
we can get a blue loan also for this kind of activity. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Don’t ask questions from a sitting position, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Jhuboo! 

Mr  Jhuboo:    Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Minister  mentioned  that  the  promoter  is 
prepared to invest over Rs100 m., up to Rs1.5 billion.  Can the hon. Minister re-confirm to 

 

54 

the House that the visibility of the project is only on a five-year basis so that the promoter is 
prepared to invest over Rs1 billion with a visibility of only five years? 

Mr Koonjoo:  I just mentioned, Madam Speaker, that it is initially for five years and 

can be renewed if all conditions are met. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. The hon. Minister just stated that the 
company is investing Rs100 m. and it has been given 52 hectares of water and land.  Is it the 
practice at his Ministry that for such an investment and for five-year period, no fee is being 
charged by his Ministry for such a project?  Because the company is investing Rs100 m., is 
surely  expecting  a  return  on  this  investment  which  should  be  in  million.    So,  is  it  normal 
practice for his Ministry not to charge any fees on such a project? 

Mr Koonjoo:  Madam Speaker, the practice, as at now, is what I said.  In future, we 
might look as to whether people, especially foreigners, can be charged a sum of money.  But I 
don’t think we can make it equally for the small people, for the fishermen in Mauritius or any 
other person. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Osman Mahomed! 

Mr  Mahomed:    Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  Picking  up  from  the  question  of  hon. 
Jhuboo, is the project 100% equity financed or is there any debt involved which will entail 
using the land, which I do understand is not leased as yet, as collateral? 

Mr  Koonjoo:    As  at  now,  I  can’t  reply  this  question  whether  it  is  equity-based  or 
anything  like  that,  but  if  a  company  is  coming  and  showing  good  faith  and  they  have  got 
money, we check and we give the permission for them to carry out their projects. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 
Dr. Sorefan:  Yes.  The hon. Minister mentioned Rs100 m. as investment, has there 
been a financial due diligence on that company with assets to take a loan from bank (proof of 
funds) or at the end of five years … 

- the same company has benefitted Rs20 m. or Rs25 m. and then close the shop and go, and it 
is the bank which loses the money? 

(Interruptions) 

 

55 

Mr Koonjoo:  Madam Speaker, when five years are over, we will definitely look into 

that. 

Madam Speaker:  Last question, hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed:  The decision has been taken already to give something which the hon. 
Minister  said  ‘is  not  a  lease,  but  that  can  be  renewed’.    That  is  something  which  I  fail  to 
understand.  But, however, can the hon. Minister tell us that prior to giving this - whatever it 
is called - land for free, this ocean for free to some members who are connected to his party 
and  his  constituency,  could  he  explain  that  committee  that  studied  the  project  under  the 
application, did they, at any stage, look at a document which is called a proof of funds that 
comes to establish and prove that the Rs100 m. that they say they will invest, exists, and if he 
did look at that document, can he table this document now? 

Mr Koonjoo:  Madam Speaker, I believe that my officers, when they look at a project 
like this, they definitely make a due diligence to see whether the person has got money or not.  
It is a project which is creating employment, which is bringing… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Don’t make comments, I said, from a sitting position!  If you have 

got a question, you stand up and ask the question! 

But he is already replying to your question.  Allow him to reply! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Koonjoo:    As  I  said,  Madam  Speaker,  we  are  here  to  provide  jobs,  to  create 
investment and to attract foreign investment as well as local investment. I don’t think that we 
are going to find out any soft or any false pretext not to accept promoters coming to invest in 
Mauritius. 

Madam Speaker:  Do you have a question, hon. Bhagwan?  Last question! 

Mr Bhagwan:  From what we have heard that this company has received a red carpet 

treatment,… 

(Interruptions) 

 

56 

… can the hon. Minister confirm to the country, to the nation and to the taxpayers that this 
company has received such a treatment, barachois free of charge and other facilities because 
the promoter is a very close relative of one of the Members of Government, who is a PPS? 

Mr Koonjoo:  Madam Speaker, there is no red carpet in my office to receive promoters 

either from Mauritius or from foreign countries. 

(Interruptions) 

I  don’t  know  whether  the  hon.  Members  have  got  red  carpet  reception  or  they  have  been 
receiving in the past. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Don’t make comments, please! 

Mr  Koonjoo:    I  don’t  know  about  that.    The  hon.  Member  in  front  of  me  was  a 
Minister, I don’t know whether he was giving red carpet to foreign people or I don’t know 
what.   

(Interruptions) 

As at now…. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Jhugroo! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Koonjoo:  Every person…. 

I have said no cross talking, please! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order! Hon. Bhagwan, order please! Order!  

Allow the hon. Minister to reply! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

57 

Would  you  continue  with  your  comments  or  would  you  allow  the  hon.  Minister  to  reply?  
Hon. Shakeel Mohamed, I am talking to you! 

Hon. Rutnah, you will start now! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Koonjoo:  Yes,  Madam  Speaker.  We  are  determined  to  move  ahead  with  our 

projects and I don’t believe that we have got anything about Mr… 

the person who was… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed, it seems you do not take any heed to what 

I have said. 

Mr  Koonjoo:  The  person  is  Mr  Boygah,  not  madame  Boygah.  Alright!  And  Mr 

Boygah has all the rights in this country to invest and create employment. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Jhugroo! 

FRUITS AND VEGETABLES – PESTICIDES 

(No.  B/228)  Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis  East)  asked  Minister  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
fruits and vegetables, he will state the number of tests and surveys carried out to determine 
the  level  of  pesticides  contained  therein  with  a  view  to  ensure  that  they  are  fit  for 
consumption  on  the  local  market  and  for  export,  indicating  the  standards  that  are  applied 
therefor. 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, I am advised that tests for the detection of pesticides 
residues in fruits and vegetables have been carried out by my Ministry since 1995. As from 
2009,  samples  are  being  collected  at  farm  gate  level  to  ensure  traceability  for  remedial 
measures.  

The  analysis  is  undertaken  as  per  the  guidelines  of  the  Codex  Alimentarius 
established  by  the  Food  and  Agriculture  Organisation  (FAO)  and  the  World  Health 

 

58 

Organisation  (WHO).  The  Maximum  Residue  Level  (MRL)  as  set  up  by  the  FAO  Codex 
Alimentarius is being used as reference standard for the monitoring of pesticide residues in 
local fruits and vegetables. 

As from 2009 to date, 2903 samples covering some 60 different vegetables and fruits 
varieties have been collected and tested for pesticide residues. 4.6% of these samples were 
found  to  be  above  the  Maximum  Residue  Level.  On  average,  416  samples  of  fruits  and 
vegetables are being collected annually for testing. 

Madam Speaker, as regards the determination of the level of pesticides on vegetables 
and  fruits  for  export,  I  am  informed  that  previously  such  tests  were  not  being  carried  out. 
Following the alert received in June 2015 from the Rapid Alert System for Food and Feed of 
the  European  Union  regarding  the  excessive  use  of  ethephon,  a  fruit  ripener  on  two 
consignments of pineapples exported to the Netherlands, I have given instructions to the Food 
Technology  Laboratory  for  tests  to  be  carried  out  to  determine  the  level  of  ethephon  on 
pineapples for export and also for local consumption. The Food Technology Laboratory has, 
in January 2016, with the assistance of experts from EDES developed the protocol for this 
test.  Samples  of  pineapples  are  now  being  collected  from  both  exporters  and  at  farm  date 
level for testing by the Food Technology Laboratory. 

Madam Speaker, the Food Technology Laboratory is presently equipped with one Gas 
Chromatography  Mass  Spectrometer  (GCMS)  and  one  Liquid  Chromatography  Mass 
Spectrometer  (LCMS)  which  were  donated  in  2010  by  the  EU  and  the  COMESA 
respectively. These two equipment are out of order since March 2016 and for the time being 
tests  on  pesticide  residues  cannot  be  carried  out.  Some  samples  have  been  sent  to  the 
Government  Analyst  Division  of  the  Ministry  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  for  analysis. 
Provision will be made in the next Budget for the acquisition of sophisticated equipment for 
the  analysis  of  pesticide  residue.  In  the  meantime,  my  Ministry  is  contemplating  the 
possibility  of  having  recourse  to  private  laboratories  to  increase  the  number  of  tests  on 
pesticide residue level. 

Madam Speaker, as the House is also aware, Government is promoting the production 
of bio foods which will necessitate less chemical inputs in vegetable and fruit cultivation. A 
number  of  fiscal  and  financial  incentives  are  now  being  given  to  farmers  engaged  in  bio 
farming activities under the SME Incentive Scheme. Moreover, my Ministry is working in 

 

59 

collaboration  with  the  FAO  on  the  setting  up  of  the  legal  and  institutional  framework  to 
facilitate the introduction of organic agriculture in Mauritius. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr  Mohamed:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker  and  I  thank  the  hon.  Minister  for  his 
answer. In the recent past, as the hon. Minister must be aware, Madam Speaker, there have 
been studies carried out and sponsored by l’Agence Française de Développement (AFD) as 
well  as  well-known  newspaper  group  on  the  level  of  pesticides  and  chemicals  present  in 
foods and vegetables. The hon. Minister has just talked about the pineapples that have been 
alerted at the  entry of the European Union. At the same time,  I have seen the Ministry of 
Agriculture’s website that talks about tests having been carried out on pineapples following 
this precise alert from the European Union. How come the European Union found that, in 
batches of pineapple, the level of pesticides was alarming and, therefore, could not enter the 
European Union as opposed to that, the same laboratories in Mauritius, under the aegis of the 
Ministry of Agro-Industry, has never been able to find that pesticides are of an alarming level 
whenever they have tested for pineapples? There is a serious issue. I would like to have an 
explanation for that. 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, I have, in my reply, stated that the tests for ethephon 
on  pineapples  have  just  only  started.  Whatever  carried  out  before  and  we  had  to  set  up  a 
protocol  to  carry  out  the  test  and  with  the  help  of  the  people  from  the  EDES,  we  have 
established the protocol and it’s only in January 2016 that this test is possible at the level of 
our Ministry and ever since we are carrying out those tests. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Osman Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed: Thank  you, Madam Speaker.  In  fact, in the Minister’s reply to my 
question  B/400  last  year,  on  the  two  consignments  of  pineapples  that  were  subsequently 
destroyed in the Netherlands, he did mention a few things, namely the protocol and I am glad 
it  is  being  implemented  as  from  January.  But  the  hon.  Minister  also  mentioned  about 
MauriGAP in his reply Good Agriculture Practices which was published as MS 184-1. May 
we know from the hon. Minister the status on this? 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, I am glad to inform the House that on Thursday we 

are going to launch the MauriGAP 1 Standard. 

(Interruptions) 

 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

60 

Dr.  Sorefan:  May  we  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  whether  he  has  an  idea  about 

importation of pesticides? Has this gone up or down in the recent years? 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, we have the Dangerous Chemicals Control Act that 
regulates all the chemicals that could be introduced in Mauritius and which falls under the 
aegis of the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life. I have not got the data to say whether it 
has gone up or down, but, with regard to the use or abuse of chemicals in agriculture, we, 
being  a  Government  responsible  and  concerned  about  the  use  of  those  chemicals  in 
agriculture, that’s why we are promoting and doing everything that we can to get farmers, 
growers to go more towards bio food production instead of keeping on injecting chemicals in 
the soil to produce food be it vegetables or fruits. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The hon. Minister just stated - and that is 
the real problem - that local planters put a lot of pesticides and they need to be educated. He 
has just mentioned that the Government is coming forward with measures, yet last week he, 
himself, replied that for SME there have been only 20 projects approved with less than Rs75 
m.  committed.  So,  may  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  what  concrete  measures  does  his 
Ministry/this Government intend to take to subsidise the cultivation of clean bio products so 
that  not  only  the  foreigners,  but  also  the  locals  don’t  absorb  pesticides  whenever  they  eat 
food? 

Mr  Seeruttun:  Madam  Speaker,  only  last  Friday,  I  went  to  get  the  approval  of 
Cabinet with regard to incentives being given to producers to go towards bio farming. The list 
of incentives, be it for loan facilities, be it for that exemption, all these are measures that have 
been proposed to those who are going into that kind of agricultural practices.  

It  is  something  that  is  going  to  take  time  because  changing  habits  of  farmers  is 
something which is difficult, but we are committed to that and we are doing our best.  Since 
we  have  been  in  Government  last  year,  we  have  been  promoting  that  type  of  agricultural 
practices and we feel that people are now more conscious about the problems associated with 
pesticides,  be  it  the  consumers  or  the  farmers.  So,  this  is  something  that  we  are  fully 
committed to make sure that in the future people are being provided with vegetables that are 
safe and sound for consumption. 

 
Madam Speaker: Last question, hon. Rutnah! 

61 

Mr Rutnah: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Can the hon. Minister consider setting up 

legislative framework in order to sanction those who abuse the use of pesticides? 

Mr  Seeruttun:  Madam  Speaker,  in  fact,  we  are  coming  up  with  some  regulations 
with  regard  to  the  use  of  those  chemicals  in  line  with  the  Dangerous  Chemicals  Control 
Board Act. So, in the near future we are going to come up with those regulations to address 
that problem.  

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Jhugroo! 

VALUATION DEPARTMENT – PROPERTIES ASSESSMENT 

(No. B/229) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the assessment of properties, 
he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Municipal Councils, information as to 
the  difficulties  which  the  Valuation  Department  is  encountering  when  conducting  the 
exercises  therefor  with  regard  to  the  issue  of  ‘local  rate’  and  ‘general  rate’,  indicating  if 
consideration  will  be  given  for  the  advisability  of  introducing  amendments  to  the  Local 
Government Act to remedy thereto. 

Dr. Husnoo: Madam Speaker, my Ministry has been informed by both the Municipal 
Councils and also the Valuation Department of the difficulties which they are encountering 
for  the  alteration  and  the  maintenance  of  the  valuation  list  in  respect  of  the  immovable 
properties and the calculation of the local rates payable accordingly. 

The  Attorney  General’s  Office  has  advised  my  Ministry  that  to  address  these 

difficulties, necessary amendments would have to be brought to the Local Government Act. 

The House may wish to note that my Ministry has already issued drafting instructions 
to the Attorney General’s Office for the necessary amendments to be brought to the Local 
Government  Act,  which  would  be  included  in  the  forthcoming  Finance  (Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Bill.  

The House may  further  wish to note that the Attorney General’s Office  has further 
advised that the proposed amendments shall be made to have effect retrospectively so that 
local rate may be levied for unclaimed periods. 

 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

62 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Can  the  hon.  Minister  inform  the  House  how  many  cases,  from 
different Local Authorities, have been unattended at the Valuation Office since 2011 to date 
because they cannot operate with the local rate? 

Dr.  Husnoo:  Madam  Speaker,  actually  all  those  who  were  paying  the  rates  before 
2011  are  still  paying  the  rates.  But,  for  those  new  buildings  which  came  after  2011,  they 
could  not  collect  the  rates.  Since  2011,  it  has  not  been  collected  and  that  is  why  we  are 
changing the law and we are including it in this forthcoming financial period.  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Is  the  hon.  Minister  aware  that  cadastral  values  should  have  been 

determined before applying the local rate? 

Dr. Husnoo: Yes, it should have been, but unfortunately, it has not been done so far 

and that is why we are changing the law. 

Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Minister state what formula is being applied now by Local 

Authorities to claim local tax on any new house or building? 

Dr. Husnoo: In fact, we are using the same law as the 1989 law. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Quirin! 

INDIAN OCEAN ISLAND GAMES - COMOROS ISLAND – PARTICIPATION 

(No.  B/230)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the next Indian Ocean Island 
Games,  he  will  state  if,  as  the  host,  Government  has  taken  any  initiative  to  ensure  the 
participation  of  the  Comoros  Island  thereto  following  the  walk  out  effected  by  the 
representatives thereof from the last meeting of the Conseil International des Jeux and, if not, 
why not. 

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, the invitation to participate in the Indian Ocean 
Islands Games is made by the Conseil International des Jeux (CIJ). According to the Charter 

 

63 

of the Games, participation in the games has to be confirmed one year prior to the holding of 
the games.  

The  hon.  Member  would,  therefore,  no  doubt  agree  that,  at  this  stage,  the  question 
does not arise.  However, I would like to reassure the House that every member of the CIJ 
will do their utmost that all member islands be present pour la grande fête des dixième jeux 
des îles de l’Océan Indien.  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr Bérenger: Can I ask the hon. Minister - I am sure he is aware that there has just 
been  an  election  for  a  new  President  in  the  Comoros  last  week  and  there  will  be  a  new 
Government - therefore, the political dimension of this, if we are to have successful Indian 
Ocean games, that there must be a diplomatic move and that we should do that together with 
Madagascar and Seychelles to encourage the Comoros, one way or the other, to rejoin? 

Mr Sawmynaden: I do totally agree with the hon. Leader of the Opposition. Because 
this  is  the  10th  Indian  Ocean  Island  Games  and  the  40th  anniversary  of  the  Indian  Ocean 
Island Games, we will make it a must that Comoros will participate. But, at the moment there 
is no sign from Comoros saying that they will not participate. So, let us keep fingers crossed 
that they will come. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Quirin! 

Mr Quirin: Madame la présidente, j’ai bien écouté la réponse du ministre mais nous 
savons tous comment et dans quelles conditions les membres de la délégation des Comores 
avaient quitté, en février dernier, la réunion du CIJ. Donc, le ministre peut-il nous dire, du fait 
que les Comores jusqu’à présent n’ont donné aucun signe, qu’ils allaient participer et qu’ils 
maintiennent que l’organisation des jeux de 2019 leur revienne.  Vu cette situation, ne serait-
il  pas  bon  que  le  ministère  des  Sports  à  travers  le  ministre,  à  travers  la  COI  et  la  CJSOI 
entame des démarches de façon à faire les Comores revenir à de meilleurs sentiments et nous 
assurer de leur participation en 2019 ? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  As  informed,  Madam  Speaker,  at  the  moment  la  question  ne  se 
pose pas parce que la confirmation de la participation vient une année avant. Concernant le 
walk out des Comores, ça a été le cas pendant les Jeux des Iles. Malgré cela ils ont participé à 

 

64 

l’Ile de la Réunion le 20 octobre.  Le 20 octobre à l’Ile de la Réunion, ils ont effectué un 
deuxième walk out pour revenir à Maurice en février pour effectuer un troisième walk out.  

 (Interruptions) 

Mais là on a essayé de prendre contact avec le président du CNO et ils ont dit qu’ils sont 
préoccupés avec les élections et on va voir après les élections. Maintenant je suis sûr que les 
Comores vont participer aux jeux.  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed: After having listened to the total lack of respect in the answer of the 
hon. Minister for a friendly country of the Indian Ocean, my question to him is as follows: 
could  the  hon.  Minister  inform  the  House  how  he  intends  to  mend  things  with  Comoros 
following his actual statement in this august Assembly and following the fact that Comoros 
representatives of Government coming to Mauritius had blamed him, the hon. Minister, for 
them  wanting  and  having  no  other  choice  than  to  walk  out  because  of  his  lack  of  respect 
towards that delegation? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, I think this gentleman is going out … 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Don’t impute motives! 

Mr Sawmynaden:  I am just stating the facts of what happened. If the hon. Member 

does not understand English what can I do? 

(Interruptions) 

He is trying to do a political move out of it and I would not say what has been said on radio! I 
think this is not correct. I am sure that Comoros will participate in the games. So, we will 
have to wait! We cannot say in advance whether they will or will not participate! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Yes! 

Mr Bérenger: From the tone that has just been used in the direction of our brothers 
and sisters from the Comoros, can I put it to the hon. Minister that it is not correct if we want 

 

65 

to bring them in and will he agree with me that, in fact, in Réunion la Charte des Jeux fut 
violée par la France et la Réunion, the Comoros people might have overreacted, but the basis 
of the problem is that la Charte des Jeux a été violée par la France et la Réunion and we 
have to get over that? 

Mr Sawmynaden: La Charte des Jeux is governed by the CIJ. Actually, it is not the 
Government it is the CIJ who is the one who puts all the rules of the game. So, what can we 
do, what can we say? We are trying to pacify things, but everything depends on the CIJ and I 
am sure all the members of the CIJ want Comoros to participate.  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah! 

Mr  Rutnah:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  Can  the  hon.  Minister  tell  the  House 
whether he will use all his best endeavours to open a line of talk with the Comoros and other 
interested islands in order to ensure and encourage Comoros to participate? I know the hon. 
Minister has got no control on a walk out or no walk out by the athletes, but at least to open 
the dialogue and take the lead. 

Mr Sawmynaden: I am monitoring the situation very closely. I spoke to the CNO of 
Mauritius  and  they  told  me  that  Comoros  answered  to  them  that  they  are  in  full  election 
campaign and after the elections they will come back to them. So, now that the elections are 
over, I think that things will be much better. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Quirin! 

BASKETBALL - FRENCH COACH  

(No.  B/231)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to basketball, he will state if the 
French Coach, C. T., is still in post as the Directeur Technique National thereof and, if not, 
indicate the reasons therefor. 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Madam  Speaker,  the  French  Coach,  C.  T.,  was  employed  as 
National Technical Director in basketball by my Ministry as from 11 May 2015 on an initial 
one year contract.  His services were made available to the Mauritius Basketball Federation.   
The  contract  of  employment  of  Mr  C.T.,  was  terminated  on  12  April  2016  as  the 
Mauritius  Basketball  Federation  informed  my  Ministry  that  its  Managing  Committee  had 
decided that the services of Mr C.T. would not be required by the Federation. 

 
Mr  Quirin:  Peut-on  savoir  si  c’est  le  ministère  de  la  jeunesse  et  des  sports  qui  a 

66 

recruté Monsieur Charles Tassin, le DTN? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Yes,  Madam  Speaker.    The  Ministry  has  employed  Mr  Charles 

Tassin, as the DTN, to be put at the service of the Federation. 

Mr  Quirin:  Donc,  peut-on  savoir,  avec  le  non-renouvellement  du  contrat  de  M. 
Tassin, qu’adviendra-t-il du centre de formation de basket-ball, le projet que M. Tassin avait 
mis en place? Est-ce qu’il y aura un suivi? Est-ce que quelqu’un d’autre prendra la relève? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Le projet continue et la fédération est en train de chercher un autre 

DTN. 

Mr  Quirin:  Madame  la  présidente,  il  y  a  un  dénommé,  Monsieur  Christophe 
Saubestre, qui apparemment a été appelé à prendre la relève de Monsieur Tassin. Est-ce que 
le ministre peut confirmer cette information ? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Monsieur Christophe Saubestre était en train d’épauler Monsieur 
Tassin dans sa tâche, à titre bénévole, et quand Monsieur Tassin est parti, il continue d’aider 
la fédération de basket mauricien jusqu’à ce que la Fédération recrute le nouveau DTN. 

Mr Quirin: Madame la présidente, une dernière question. Vu le niveau du basket-ball 
à Maurice et la raclée, que nos différentes sélections nationales, a prise à la Réunion lors des 
derniers Jeux des îles, le ministre peut-il nous dire si un plan de travail a été mis en place 
avec l’aide de la Fédération, bien sûr, en vue des jeux des îles de 2019 et, si tel est le cas, de 
nous donner plus de détails. 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  C’est  une  des  raisons  pour  laquelle  le  Centre  National  de 
Formation a été réouvert après avoir fermé ses portes pendant plusieurs années et on a déjà 
commencé  le  travail  pour  la  relance  et  surtout  avec  l’objectif  des  10ème  Jeux  des  îles  qui 
arrive en 2019. Alors, le travail est en très bonne voie et on attend maintenant le nouveau 
DTN. 

ZEP SCHOOLS – HOT MEALS 

(No.  B/232)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 
Research whether, in regard to the implementation of the Hot Meals in the Zone d’Education 
Prioritaire schools Project, she will state where matters stand. 

(Withdrawn) 

HIGH LEVEL ATHLETES - PROFESSIONAL REINSERTION 

(No.  B/233)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Youth  and  Sports  whether,  in  regard  to  the  after  career  high  level 

 

67 

athletes,  he  will  state  if  his  Ministry  has  set  up  a  programme  to  ensure  the  professional 
reinsertion thereof and, if so, give details thereof. 

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that in accordance 
with Finance and Audit, (Trust Fund For Excellence in Sports) Regulations 2001, the Trust 
Fund For Excellence in Sports (TFES) which operates under the purview of my Ministry, has, 
as one of its objectives, to design, finance and implement projects and schemes for the benefit 
of retired sportsmen and sportswomen who need support and financial assistance in order to 
embark on the other professional activities. 

Of late, it has been noted that this objective has not been fulfilled by TFES which is 
only financing a handful of high level athletes in their studies at secondary and tertiary levels. 
Consequently, my Ministry is coming up with a new scheme for athletes, while training for 
the  respective  sports,  will  also  embark  on  technical  and  vocational  training  as  appropriate 
with a view to increase  their employability  and,  at the same time, helping them to sustain 
their  families  once  they  retire  as  athletes.  In  this  context,  tertiary  institutions  as  well  as 
technical and vocational Institutions have already been approached with a request for offering 
scholarship to athletes to pursue career oriented studies. 

Mr  Quirin:  Madame  la  présidente,  l’honorable  ministre,  dans  sa  réponse,  vient  de 
nous dire qu’il y a un projet en préparation. De ce fait, peut-il nous dire quel est le délai qu’il 
s’est imposé pour rendre public le contenu de ce projet, vu qu’il  y a pas mal d’urgence et 
surtout du fait qu’il y a pas mal de projets qui ont été annoncés par le présent gouvernement, 
le ministre des sports lui-même, telle que l’académie de football? Peut-on savoir si ce sera un 
projet similaire et qu’on aura à attendre des mois et des mois? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, as mentioned in my answer, this project came in 
2003  with  the  Trust  Fund  for  Excellence  in  Sports.    Unfortunately,  the  Trust  Fund  for 
Excellence in Sports did not take care of that aspect particularly. So, this is why today we are 
coming  up  to  see  how  we  can  help  these  retired  athletes  or  those  coming  to  pursue  a 
professional activity after their retirement. 

Mr Aliphon: Est-ce que l’honorable ministre peut nous dire si le Trust Fund a déjà 

traité des cas similaires qu’on lui demande? 

Mr Sawmynaden: As mentioned, the Trust Fund has not treated any case for retired 
athletes.  They have been only looking after high-level athletes in their studies for secondary 
and tertiary levels.  They stopped to that.  They did not go further. 

Mr  Quirin:  Madame  la  présidente,  je  vais  prendre  un  cas  particulier,  celui  de 
Monsieur Bruno Julie, notre seul médaillé olympique à ce jour. L’honorable ministre peut-il 

 

68 

nous  dire  pourquoi  -  malgré  les  nombreuses  sollicitations  auprès  de  sa  personne,  même 
auprès de  son ministère  pour être embauché  comme  Sports Coach, vu qu’il a l’expérience 
voulue pour former les jeunes boxeurs - rien n’a été fait à ce jour? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, the case of Mr Bruno Julie falls into the case that 
should have been taken care of by the Trust Fund.  Yes, I met Mr Bruno Julie several times.  
We  asked  him  to  submit  his  certificates  so  that he  can  train  athletes  and  I  have  asked  the 
Federation as well to do same.  So far, we have not received any.  We are still waiting.  I have 
also told the Federation that they can employ him, in the meantime, but nothing yet. 

Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Minister inform the House who is the Chairperson of the 
Trust  Fund  and  since  when?    What  are  the  conditions  of  work,  salary,  allowance  and 
everything? 

Mr Sawmynaden:  There is a new Chairperson since 2015, but the CEO of the Trust 

Fund for Excellence in Sports is Mr Michael Glover since 2003. 

HERITAGE CITY - PROJECT VALUE 

(No.  B/234)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central)  asked  the    Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 
Reforms whether, in regard to the proposed construction of the Heritage City, he will state 
the – 

(a) project value thereof, and  
(b) how it will be financed. 
Mr  Bhadain:  Madam  Speaker,  I  refer  the  hon.  Member  to  the  answer  that  I  have 

given to the PNQ this morning. 

Mr  Uteem:  This  morning,  the  hon.  Minister  mentions  in  respect  to  the  recruiting 
Stree Consulting of Dubai that there is going to be a USD4.3 m. and that is G-to-G through 
Government to Government with Dubai.  So, may I know from the hon. Minister whether this 
sum of USD4.3 m. to be paid to the firm, is a grant that we will receive from Dubai? 

Mr  Bhadain:  No,  it  will  be  paid  by  Heritage  City  Co.  Ltd.  out  of  the  funds  of 

Heritage City Co. Ltd. 

Mr Jhuboo:  Madam Speaker, a real estate project is commercially viable once the 
promoter has signed un Contrat de Réservation Préliminaire (CRP).  It is only then that the 
banking institutions give their Garantie Future d’Achèvement (GFA) and then give … 

Can the hon. Minister give the assurance to the House that Government will not go 
ahead with the New Parliament and the Ministries until and only until the commercialisation, 
the  pre-selling  of  the  real  estate  component  is  completed?    From  what  I  have  given  to 

 

69 

understand,  through  the  PNQ,  is  that  the  sale  and  the  proceeds  of  the  villas  and  the 
commercial component will alleviate the burden of the 13 billion on the administrative parts? 
Mr  Bhadain:  Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Member  should  come  with  a  substantive 
question on that if he wishes to do so.  I think he is confused between how Smart Cities are 
being developed and how Heritage City model is being developed.  The hon. Member should 
know that because I believe there is Cap Tamarin which is being implemented by Mr Jhuboo, 
himself. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Madam  Speaker,  this  morning,  the  hon.  Minister  stated  to  the 
House  that  Rs10  billion  will  be  financed  by  Saudi  Arabia-India  through  redeemable 
preference shares and that this will be financed by the rental that Government will pay and 
the  income  that  the  company  will  generate  will  be  used  to  finance  the  interest  of  the 
preference shares.  Can I ask the hon. Minister - Rs10 billion - the capital amount at the end 
when it will be repaid to Saudi Arabia, to India, where will this money come from? 

Mr Bhadain: Well, I believe the hon. Member is very confused as to what was said 
this  morning.  What  I  said  this  morning  was  that  there  are  two  foreign  States  which  have 
basically  been  approached  and  there  are  agreements  in  principle  in  terms  of  the  financing 
with regard to that.  As I have said this morning, this is confidential.  I cannot go into the 
details at this stage. 

(Interruptions) 

There is no need to laugh about it.  It is true. However ... 

(Interruptions) 

I do! Wait! 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea, allow the hon. Minister to reply!  Don’t talk 

from a sitting position! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhadain: Ecouter!  To presser! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea, please! You’ve asked your question.  The hon. 

Minister has to reply.  Allow him to reply! 

 

70 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhadain: Well, I think he is confused by design. Madam Speaker ... 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, allow him to reply!  Then, you will 

ask your question. 

(Interruptions) 

I think I have to rule. I won’t allow anybody to make comments from a sitting position.  If 
anybody has a comment to make, please stand up and say so. 

Mr Bhadain: What has been explained this morning, Madam Speaker, is that when 
we are talking about the redeemable preference shares, it is going to be Heritage City Limited 
which  is  going  to  redeem  those  shares  out  of  the  money  which  flows  into  Heritage  City 
Company Limited.  And where does that come from? That comes, of course, from the rental 
income which is going to be paid by the Ministries and also in terms of the VEFA profits 
through the selling of the residential and commercial. 

Now, if the hon. Member would actually think about it, he would soon realise that it is 
a cash flow over time, meaning that you don’t have to wait at the end to repay Rs10 billion, 
as he is saying, because the shares will be redeemed as the money is flowing in, and this is 
the whole concept based on a cash flow forecast going forward. It is not like you are taking 
money, you are putting it here, you are going then to construct and then, at the end, you are 
taking money to repay after 10 years. It does not work like that. 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister has been going on and on that there is 
no guarantee, it won’t come up into our public debt management figures. But isn’t it the case 
that,  for  this  project  to  work,  the  Government  must  undertake  and  commit  to  lease  those 
offices  for  a  period  of  time?    So,  we  are  in  the  same  case  like  Betamax  where  the 
Government  and  the  population  had  at  the  end  of  the  day  to  guarantee  payment  to  the 
promoters. 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, when I say they don’t understand, they get angry! 

(Interruptions) 

 

71 

What does that have to do with Betamax?  We all know what Betamax was. Betamax was not 
even in compliance  with the Procurement Act. This is under section 3 of the Procurement 
Act.  When we are looking at the concept of Heritage City, we said there are six Government 
buildings, the PMO and Parliament.  Of course, Parliament will be occupied by people who 
are in Parliament, PMO by the Prime Minister and his staff, and Government buildings!  Who 
is going to pay the rent?  Of course, they will pay the rent!  But you are paying it to Heritage 
City  Company  Limited,  which  is  another  pocket  of  Government  which  will  be  used  to 
redeem  the  shares.  It  is  a  very  innovative  way  of  financing  a  project  as  a  result  of  the 
situation that we are in, which is our national debt cannot be increased due to what the legacy 
of the Labour Party was. 

Mr Mahomed: Madam Speaker, the Master Plan for Ebene was done by an Indian 
company, and they made up a total mess of Ebene, with cars being parked all over the place. 
Now, what guarantee will the hon. Minister provide to us today, with the USD 4.2 million 
that is going to be paid by the Heritage Company Limited, that this foreign consultant will 
not make an equal mess at Heritage City? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker ... 

Madam Speaker: Order! Hon. Rutnah! Hon. Jhugroo! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Rutnah, do you want to go home? 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, the Master Plan for the Ebene project ... 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr  Bhadain:  The  Master  Plan  for  the  Ebene  project  had  nothing  wrong  with  it, 
Madam Speaker. What was wrong is how the Labour Party has given land to their cronies in 
the Ebene Cyber City and then how money ... 

(Interruptions) 

 

72 

This is speculation!  This is spéculation foncière!  This is where land, which was bought for 
Rs4-5 m. arpent, is now today being sold for Rs20 m. arpent, and this is where Mr Naugah 
has been giving all the land which belongs to the State to all the cronies of the Labour Party!  
I can give names if they want! 

 (Interruptions) 

This is what is wrong!  In this case, this is a very transparent project which is being done in a 
way  whereby  everything  is  visible,  accountable.  We  have  had  three  press  conferences, 
Madam  Speaker,  where  the  designer,  Mr  Saeed  Ahmed  Saeed,  was  even  brought  to 
Mauritius, and basically the whole press was given the opportunity to question him as to how 
the project is being designed and in terms of the whole concept of the public-private thing. 
How much more transparency do you want? You can’t compare that with all the corruption 
which has been going under the Labour regime! 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Madam  Speaker,  I  don’t  understand  the  opacity  around  this 
project.  For a Minister who boasts about good governance and transparency, is he ready to 
table this cash flow forecast for which he is telling us that only the rental money would be 
used to repay this Rs10 billion loan amount? 

Mr Bhadain: Absolutely.  Everything which is disclosable will be disclosed and will 

be tabled. However, ... 

Let me tell you one thing. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order please! Order! Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Bhadain: When you are talking about opacity ... 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Ameer  Meea,  I  am  addressing  you!    Order,  please!  Hon. 

Mohamed, you have a question? 

Mr Bhadain: It is so easy. Madam Speaker, I just want to finish the answer.  

 

73 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea, I have told you several times that you should 

not make comments from a sitting position. I have been very patient with you. 

(Interruptions) 

Order, please! 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, opacity means that ... 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! I have drawn your attention several times to the fact 

that you should not make comments as well. 

Mr  Bhadain:  Madam  Speaker,  opacity  means  that  you  cannot  see  through.  In  this 
particular  case,  all  the  tables,  all  the  figures,  the  cash  flow  forecast,  everything  has  been 
disclosed  when  Mr  Saeed  Ahmed  Saeed  was  invited  to  make  a  presentation  to  the  whole 
press  of  Mauritius,  and  basically  everything  was  explained.    At  that  time,  it  was  even 
broadcasted  by  the  MBC  and  they  were  saying  the  MBC  was  basically  broadcasting  what 
should not be broadcasted.  At least, if they had watched it, they would have seen! 

Madam Speaker: Last question, hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  We are talking about the financing of the 
Heritage  Project.    May  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  whether  he  has  factored  in  all  the 
infrastructure cost that would be involved?  Already, it is a nightmare travelling to Ebene. 
Now, we are going to have a new City next to Ebene, where we will have a new road. So, has 
that also been factored in that projection? 

Mr Bhadain: Absolutely!  Everything has been factored in.  Let me reassure the hon. 
Member.  There will be no parking problem in Heritage City as has been seen in the Ebene 
Cyber City, and this stands out of the fact that land which was earmarked for parking and for 
landscaping has been given to cronies of the Labour Party. Over there ... 

(Interruptions) 

74 

 
Mr Mohamed: On a point of order, Madam Speaker!  He cannot keep on imputing 
motives on Members of the Labour Party by throwing his hand in our direction! He should 
withdraw that! 

He can’t do that! 

He has no right to do that! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, I have said several times ... 

 (Interruptions) 

Order, please! I am on my feet! I have said several times that, to maintain the decorum and 
the  dignity  of  this  House,  any  hon.  Member  should  not  use  offensive  language  to  another 
Member. And this is my ruling. 

Mr Mohamed: Will he withdraw it? 

Madam Speaker: No, I have already given my ruling ... 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Mohamed, please sit down! I am making an appeal to all Members of this House not to 
use offensive language to another Member.  It is not good as you should uphold the dignity of 
this House. 

Mr Bhadain: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  In terms of the parking facilities which 
will  be  available  in  the  Heritage  City  Project,  there  are  underground  parking  for  all  the 
Government office buildings and also, of course, for the new Parliament, Madam Speaker, 
and then there will be also the ground parking which has all been earmarked as part of the 
infrastructural plan which is there. 

Now, over and above,  I mentioned this morning that there is a Pedestrian Spine as 

well and, of course, the Government parks. You will have also the new… 

 

75 

(Interruptions) 

Absolutely, the new jet d’eau! It is going to be a dancing fountain, very much similar to the 
one  in  Dubai,  probably  not  the  same  size,  but  it  is  going  to  be  there;  you  will  have  the 
Heritage Square where Mauritians will be able to go and hang around and it is being designed 
into a 24-7 structure concept.  In fact, this will be a place which will be visited not only by 
Mauritians, but also by tourists, Madam Speaker. All of that has been taken care of. 

This development is coming through, it will happen in three years’ time. This is the 
commitment  that  I  have  given  to  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  and  it  will  happen.  Now, 
whether the Opposition likes it or don’t like it - they have a grievance procedure agenda - we 
have a governing agenda. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Leopold! 

LES SALINES - AUCTION FISH MARKET  

(No. B/235) Mr J. Leopold (Second Member for Rodrigues) asked the Minister of 
Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, Shipping and Outer Islands whether, in regard 
to the auction fish market located at Fort Williams, Les Salines, in Port Louis, he will state 
where matters stand as to the operation thereof, indicating if the premises housing same are 
being used for the original purpose for which they were built and, if not, indicate the reasons 
therefor.    

Mr Koonjoo: Madam Speaker, the Fish Auction Market, which was constructed in 
June 2011 and aimed to serve as a platform for the auctioning of fish and fish products, could 
not  be  operationalised  despite  two  Expression  of  Interest  (EOI)  exercises  launched  by  the 
then  Ministry  of  Fisheries  at  both  local  and  international  levels  in  November  2011  and  in 
May 2012 respectively. 

In  view  of  the  lack  of  interest  by  operators  to  use  the  Fish  Auction  Market  for  its 
original  purpose,  and  taking  into  consideration  the  repeated  criticisms  of  the  Director  of 
Audit, last year my Ministry invited Requests for Proposals from operators for the lease of 
the building of the Fish Auction Market on an ‘as is where is’ basis to carry out activities 
related to the seafood sector.  

Following an evaluation exercise, one of the four proposals received at my Ministry 
has  been  selected.    The  contract  between  my  Ministry  and  the  selected  operator  is  being 
finalised at the level of the State Law Office. 

 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leopold! 

76 

Mr  Leopold:  May  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  whether  with  the  promotion  of  Ocean 

Economy such structure will be needed in the Republic of Mauritius? 

Mr Koonjoo: Necessarily,  yes, Madam Speaker, we will need such auction market 

and maybe more than that. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Leopold! 

RODRIGUES - FIBRE OPTIC CABLES 

(No. B/236) Mr J. Leopold (Second Member for Rodrigues) asked the Minister of 
Technology,  Communication  and  Innovation  whether,  in  regard  to  the  proposed  laying  of 
fibre optic cables for the connection of Rodrigues Island, he will state where matters stand.     

Mr Sinatambou: Madam Speaker, it was announced in the Budget Speech 2015/2016 

that, I quote - 

 “(…)  as  our  ICT  sector  moves  up  the  value  chain,  Mauritius  will  have  a  third 
international  gateway  through  the  installation  of  a  new  submarine  cable.  This  will 
connect both Mauritius and Rodrigues to the rest of the world.”  

In this context, a Steering Committee was set up on 11 June 2015 at the level of my 
Ministry to oversee the implementation of the project. Following a decision of the Steering 
Committee on 16 July 2015, my Ministry launched an Expression of Interest on 08 October 
2015 to gauge the interest of potential investors for the implementation of the new submarine 
cable. An evaluation was carried out in December 2015 and, in a report dated 31 December 
2015, 11 local and international potential investors were identified.  

In  line  with  the  announcement  made  in  the  Budget  Speech  2015-2016  and  the 
favourable interest expressed by potential investors in the project, and in order not to incur 
significant  mobilisation  cost  twice,  that  is,  once  for  the  leg  Mauritius-Rodrigues,  and  a 
second time to connect Mauritius to the rest of the world with a third submarine fibre optic 
cable, my Ministry is of the view that the project of having a third submarine cable linking 
Rodrigues and Mauritius to the rest of the world should be activated expeditiously and the leg 
Rodrigues-Mauritius be implemented as a priority, to the extent that this is technically and 
practically  feasible.  This  approach  will  ensure  that  Rodrigues  is  connected  to  a  new 
submarine fibre optic cable within the shortest possible timeframe. 

 

77 

Madam  Speaker, 

I  have,  on  Monday  28  March  2016,  met 

five  major 
telecommunications operators, namely Mauritius Telecom, Emtel, MTML, Axian Telm and 
BICS  (Belgacom),  with  a  view  to  confirming  their  interests  to  invest  into  the  project  and 
discuss  on  the  future  course  of  action.  I  have  insisted  on  the  need  to  expedite  the 
implementation  of  the  new  submarine  fibre  optic  cable  with  the  leg  Rodrigues-Mauritius 
being  implemented  in  a  first  phase,  to  the  extent,  as  I  said,  that  this  is  technically  and 
practically feasible.  

On 01 April 2016, Government has decided to set up a Ministerial Committee to look 

into the various alternatives for implementation of the project. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr Bérenger: Can I know whether there has been any reaction from the Mauritius 
Telecom and the other firms concerned? Have they said,  yes, that they  will put money in, 
what  kind  of  money  and  is  Government  for  its  part  investing  in  that  project  or  leaving  it 
completely to the telecoms companies? 

Mr Sinatambou: As a matter of fact, Madam Speaker, all five telecommunications 
operators have manifested a clear intention to invest into the fibre cable. It is still open to 
Government to be part of it. However, it will, of course, be subject to whether the whole sum 
for the fibre-optic cable being raised or not. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leopold! 

Mr Leopold: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As the hon. Minister may be aware that as 
an interim measure pending the laying of fibre-optic cables connecting Rodrigues, we have a 
bandwidth of 200 MB which is about to expire and in the Budget Speech there have been 
mentioned that there will be 500 MB of bandwidth given to us. So, I just want to know where 
matters stand in that respect. 

Mr Sinatambou: Well, I am afraid I don’t have the information here with me, but I 
will be happy to communicate to the hon. Member and give him the required information. 
Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

 

78 

Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Minister confirm to the House whether the implementation 
of the project of fibre-optic cables is being contracted out, and, if so, is he aware that among 
the people doing the work we have got many ‘braconniers’? 

Mr  Sinatambou:  Well,  from  the  list  of  potential  investors  which  have  actually 
manifested themselves, the Bid Evaluation Committee actually selected 11 out of 13. I would 
strongly  suspect  that  they  would  be  wrong  and  they  would  have  taken  ‘braconniers’  on 
board. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ramano! 

QUATRE BORNES MARKET -  COVERING 

(No.  B/237)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 
asked the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the Quatre Bornes Market, he 
will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Municipal  Council  of  Quatre  Bornes, 
information as where matters stand as to the proposed covering thereof. 

Dr. Husnoo: Madam Speaker, I am informed that the Municipal Council of Quatre 
Bornes has decided to go ahead with the covering of part of the fair at St. Jean Road, Quatre 
Bornes with  steel structure at the estimated cost of Rs15 m.  

I  am  further  informed  that  the  bidding  documents  are  under  preparation  and,  once 
ready, they will be submitted to the Central Procurement Board for launching of the bidding 
exercise. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ramano! 

Mr Ramano: Madame la présidente, ce marché est fréquenté par pas mal de touristes. 
Est-ce  que  je  peux  demander  au  ministre  de  s’assurer  que  l’infrastructure  soit  faite  d’une 
façon correcte pour pouvoir être présentable aux touristes et aussi aux Mauriciens? 

Dr. Husnoo: Sure, Madam Speaker, I am going to look into that. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr.  Sorefan:  The  hon.  Minister  has  mentioned  ‘will  be  partly  covered’.  May  we 

know why, because all the fair traders there should be treated equally?  

 

79 

Dr. Husnoo: Madam Speaker, part of the land is the ex-railway track corridor which 
belongs to the Ministry of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport, whereas another part is 
found on land from Societé Central Park. That’s why it is partly covered for the time being. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Osman Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed: Thank  you, Madam Speaker. The hon. Minister made mention that 
the document is being finalised. Now, would the hon. Minister be in a position to confirm 
whether the roof structure caters for basic sustainable development building principles like 
natural ventilation, natural lighting and rain water harvesting, and if this is not the case, that 
he ensures that this be so? 

Dr. Husnoo:  I am sorry, I cannot answer this question. But I can try to find the reply 

later on.  I will let the hon. Member have the reply later on. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Rutnah! 

Mr Rutnah:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Can the hon. Minister enlighten the House 
as to since how long Quatre Bornes Market has been in a dilapidated condition and that now 
he is undertaking to renovate it? 

(Interruptions) 

Dr. Husnoo:  I have been in Quatre Bornes for the last 20 years and, as far as I know, it 

was in that state. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed:  Is the hon. Minister aware that - he has been talking about 20 years - 
for almost 15 years now, the hon. Deputy Prime Minister has been Member of Parliament for 
that Constituency, and that it is this very same Constituency that he is making reference to 
wherein the stadium is found? 

Dr. Husnoo:  This is not a question; this is a statement. 

Madam  Speaker:  No,  hon.  Shakeel  Mohamed,  I  don’t  think  the  question  is 

appropriate.  Look at the question!  It says – 

 “(…) in regard to the Quatre Bornes Market, (…) obtain from the Municipal 
Council of Quatre Bornes, information as to where matters stand (…)”. 

 

He said where matters stand. 

80 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed:  Therefore, Madam Speaker, may I rephrase it?   

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No. 

Mr Mohamed: Therefore, in relation to the …. 

(Interruptions) 

Message là ine passé, to pas encore comprend même toi! 

... stadium which was made reference to by hon. Rutnah, is he aware that there was a project 
thereon  of  maybe  transferring  the  Quatre  Bornes  Market  to  that  particular  locus  and  that 
project was approved by the actual Deputy Prime Minister? 

Madam Speaker: Again, hon. Shakeel Mohamed, the question relates to where matters 

stand as to the proposed covering thereof. 

Mr Mohamed:  Madam Speaker, may I please stand up with your permission? 

Madam Speaker:  Let me finish! 

Mr Mohamed: Please, finish. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: So, you have to ask questions within this question! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Mohamed:  Madam  Speaker,  the  reason  why  I  put  the  question  -  and  that  is 
something which has always been the practice in this august Assembly - is that it arises out of 
a question put by another hon. Member, answered by him.  He has opened the door.   

That is why I am entitled to put it. 

(Interruptions) 

 

81 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Shakeel Mohamed, this is my ruling.  It is on the proposed 
covering, so if  any question that  you have on the proposed  covering thereof, will be dealt 
with. 

Hon. Rutnah! 

Hon. Ramano, next question! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Rutnah, do you want to go home early? 

(Interruptions) 

QUATRE BORNES FIRE STATION - RELOCATION 

(No.  B/238)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 
asked the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the Quatre Bornes Fire Station, 
he will state if he is aware of the inconveniences caused by the location thereof within the 
premises of the Municipal Council of Quatre Bornes and, if so, indicate if consideration will 
be given for the advisability of the relocation thereof. 

Dr. Husnoo: Madam Speaker, I have been informed of the inconveniences which are 
being  caused  by  the  siting  of  the  Quatre  Bornes  Fire  Station  within  the  premises  of  the 
Municipal Council of Quatre Bornes.   

In fact, my Ministry is working in joint collaboration with the Ministry of Housing and 
Lands and the Mauritius Fire Rescue Service for relocating the Quatre Bornes Fire Station to 
another site.  

In fact, I can inform the House that the Ministry of Housing and Lands has, following 
joint site visits with the Mauritius Fire Rescue Service, identified a plot of land along Avenue 
Tulipes, Quatre Bornes for relocation of the Quatre Bornes Fire Station.  

The proposed project “Relocation of Quatre Bornes Fire Station” was submitted to the 
Project Plan Committee (PPC) for consideration and I am glad to inform the House that this 

 

82 

project, estimated at Rs60 m. has already been recommended by the PPC and approved by 
the Government on 26 February 2016.  The project would be included in the Public Sector 
Investment Programme for year 2017/2018.   

The Mauritius Fire Rescue Service has accordingly informed the Ministry of Housing 
and Lands to make necessary arrangements for the acquisition of the identified plot of land 
along Avenue Tulipes.   

Therefore, once the land is acquired and the fund identified or earmarked, the project 

would go ahead. 

Mr  Ramano:  Madame  la  présidente,  est-ce  que  je  peux  savoir  dans  quel  délai  que 

l’honorable ministre pense que ce projet aboutira? 

Dr.  Husnoo:  As  I  mentioned,  this  project  has  been  included  in  the  Public  Sector 
Investment Programme for 2017/2018 because there are lots of paperworks to be done, that’s 
why. 

Dr. Sorefan:  The hon. Minister has mentioned a plot of land at Avenue Tulipes, that 
is, Tulipes, St Jean Road probably. Is the hon. Minister aware that this is a private land?  Is 
the hon. Minister going to go through compulsory acquisition? Because this plot of land has 
already  been walled by  the proprietor.   I don’t see where the hon. Minister is heading for 
because I think this private owner is maintaining his land. 

Dr. Husnoo: We have contacted the Ministry of Housing and Lands and they are going 

to do the necessary.   

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Ramano! 

SIR GUY ROZEMONT STADIUM - RENOVATION 

(No.  B/239)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Local  Government  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Sir  Guy  Rozemont 
Stadium in Quatre Bornes, he will state if he is aware of the derelict state thereof and, if so, 
indicate if the renovation thereof is being envisaged. 

Dr.  Husnoo:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  Municipal  Council  of  Quatre 

Bornes that the Guy Rozemont Stadium in Quatre Bornes is not in a derelict state.  

 

83 

However, I am informed that there are some minor repairs to be effected to the toilet 

blocks and the gates, besides the reinstatement of a few concrete columns. 

Mr  Ramano:  Madame  la  présidente,  peut-être  que  l’honorable  ministre  pourra 
m’accompagner afin de faire un site visit ensemble.  Il n’y a même pas de gradins, même pas 
de fencing là-bas et la situation est vraiment dans un derelict state.  L’honorable ministre des 
sports peut-il le confirmer? 

Dr. Husnoo: Madam Speaker, obviously, I accept the invitation. We can do a site visit 
together  with  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister  when  he  comes  and  the  Minister  of  Financial 
Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms.  

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Dr. Sorefan!  

MAURITIUS/RUSSIA - DOUBLE TAX AVOIDANCE AGREEMENT 

(No. B/240) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked the 
Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade whether, in regard 
to the Mauritius Embassy in Russia, he will state if the Ambassador thereof – 

(a) 

is renegotiating the Double Tax Avoidance Agreement signed between the 
Republic of Mauritius and the Republic of Russia, and  

(b)  has informed his Ministry of the name of the company which is responsible for 

the promotion of tourism towards Mauritius. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, as regards part (a) of the question, Mauritius 

is not … 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order, please! 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo  …renegotiating  the  Double  Taxation  Avoidance  Agreement 
with the Russian Federation.  It is recalled that this Agreement was signed on 24 August 1995 
and  Mauritius  completed  its  ratification  procedure  the  same  year  whereas  the  Russian 
Federation did not.   Accordingly, the Agreement could not be brought into force.  

On  28  December  2015,  our  Mission  in  Moscow  informed  that  our  Ambassador  had 
called on the Deputy Director of the Federal Taxation Services of the Russian Federation to 
discuss  Mauritius  being  classified  as  a  jurisdiction  that  does  not  disclose  information  on 
offshore financial transactions, the so-called black list.  

 

The Deputy Director informed as follows - 

84 

(i)  Mauritius does not have any agreement with the Russian Federation on taxation 

matters and … 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order, please!  Order! 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  …  the  OECD  Agreement  on  Automatic  Exchange  of 

Financial Account Information was not yet in force.  

(ii)  Mauritius could be removed from the Russian list with immediate effect if it 
agrees to sign a Bilateral Agreement giving three years’ retroactive effect to the 
OECD  Agreement  on  Automatic  Exchange  of  Financial  Account  Information 
which I signed last year.   

It is considered inappropriate to give retroactive effect to the OECD Agreement. 

As regards part (b) of the question, the Mauritius Tourism Promotion Authority, I am 
told,  appointed  a  consultancy  firm  known  as  Aviareps  Russia  as  consultant  for  Public 
Relations Services in Russia on 31 July 2015, following an international tendering exercise. 

Dr. Sorefan:  Regarding the agency that is trying to promote Mauritius in Russia, can 
the hon. Minister inform the House how much is being paid for promotion?  I would also like 
to know whether the hon. Minister is aware that the percentage of tourists from Russia has 
gone down recently to about 50%? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  I  would  suggest  that  the  hon.  Member  puts  a  substantive 

question to the Minister concerned. 

Mr Mohamed:  Could the hon. Minister… 

…give, following his answers… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  No interruptions, please! 

(Interruptions) 

85 

 
Mr Mohamed: Following the answers that have just been given by the hon. Minister 
that are very clear and concise, could he, at least, give the assurance to the House that since 
he  has  only  recently  said  that  he  is  the  most  honest,  plus  droit  qu’il  y  a  dans  ce 
gouvernement, that no one else apart from him, will take care of this dossier? 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Ask your question, hon. Mohamed! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Can he put the question again? 

Mr Mohamed: The question is: can he give assurance to the House that since he has 

stated recently that he is the one who is the most honest… 

Madam Speaker: Now, don’t come and put in other things in your question. Come 

straight to your question! 

Mr Mohamed: That is we are going straight to my question, that he will ensure that 

no one else, who is not as straight as him, will take care of this file? That’s the question. 

Madam  Speaker:  I  don’t  think  the  question  arises,  hon.  Shakeel  Mohamed.  Any 

other question, hon. Dr. Sorefan. Next question, hon. Uteem. 

BAI CO. (MTIUS) - SPECIAL ADMINISTRATORS - FEES 

(No.  B/241)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 
Reforms  whether,  in  regard  to  the  BAI  Co.  (Mtius),  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House, 
obtain from the  Financial Services Commission, information as to the fees claimed by the 
special  administrators  and  any  consultants  appointed  therefor,  indicating  the  aggregate 
amount thereof paid thereto as at to date. 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, I will refer the hon. Member to the reply I made to PQ 

B/378 on 01 September 2015 in respect to the Special Administrators appointed… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Order! 

 

86 

(Interruptions) 

Order, I have said! Don’t lose the time of the House. Yes, hon. Bhadain, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, I refer the hon. Member to the reply I  made to PQ 
B/378 of 01 September 2015, in respect to the Special Administrators appointed by the FSC 
on 30 April 2015, namely Mr Mushtaq Oosman and Mr Yogeshrai Basgeet. In fact, what they 
had claimed as fees, Madam Speaker, as ex-Special Administrators, was Rs85,160,973 and 
what has been paid by the FSC is Rs27,600,000 because the FSC decided to cap the fees at 
Rs28 m. 

Now,  on  top  of  that,  I  am  also  informed  that  they  also  claimed  legal  fees  and 
disbursements  for  Rs51,754,410  which  apparently  I  understand  was  to  be  paid  to  Clarel 
Benoît Chambers - Mr Clarel Benoît and Mr Rishi Pursem and the amount which has… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah, last time I am drawing your attention. 

Mr Bhadain: So, what was actually… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed, you too. 

Mr Bhadain: What was actually paid, Madam Speaker… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah, it seems that you don’t understand what I have just 

said. Are you trying to usurp the authority of the Chair? 

Mr Bhadain: What was actually paid, Madam Speaker, was Rs8,962,260. So, out of 

the total figure of Rs136,915,383 claimed, what has been paid is Rs36,562,260. 

With  regard  to  the  current  Special  Administrators,  the  agreed  fees  would  be 
Rs12,075,000, that is, VAT inclusive. So, I guess it’s Rs11 m. plus VAT and what has been 
paid to date, Madam Speaker, is Rs6,210,000 VAT inclusive. 

I also understand that with regard to legal fees which have been paid to ENSafrica 
with Mr Thierry Koenig appearing in Court in the two cases, one is the case lodged by the 

 

87 

Special Administrator against Mauritius Union Assurance and I believe there is another case 
of hon. Shakeel Mohamed representing a particular client. The total fees… 

Not him! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Now, is the hon. Member asking questions in this case? Do you 

want me to order the hon. Member out? This is the last warning I give the hon. Member. 

Mr Bhadain: The total amount is Rs4,069,450 which is VAT inclusive. That’s what 

has been claimed and paid to date. 

Mr  Uteem:  May  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister,  with  respect  to  the  Special 

Administrators, has any amount been claimed for sub-contracting out the work to BDO? 

Mr Bhadain: Not that I am aware of Madam Speaker. I have actually asked the FSC 
to provide me all the details and the details which have been provided are what I have stated 
to the House. 

Mr  Uteem:  BDO  has  been  appointed  financial  transaction  adviser  to  the  NIC.  So, 
may I know from the hon. Minister what percentage will they receive on the sale of assets by 
NIC? 

Mr  Bhadain:  No.  For  this,  Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Member  must  come  with  a 
substantive question. Because when we are talking about Special Administrator, it’s under the 
Insurance Act and the Special Administrator is appointed by the FSC and dealing with the 
National  Property  Fund  Ltd.  (NPFL).  If  there  are  any  transactions  regarding  being  a 
transaction adviser with a National Insurance Co. Ltd., then the hon. Member must come with 
a substantive question and I will answer. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed: The hon. Minister has talked about a crazy number just now in terms 
of fees claimed by Chambers of a well-known Barrister in Mauritius – I don’t want to take 
the name again. I don’t think that is proper – and then it was capped at around Rs20 or so 
million at some stage by the Financial Services Commission, instead of Rs50 or so million 
that was being claimed or Rs80 or so million – God knows the crazy amount of money. Now, 
could the hon. Minister inform the House, Madam Speaker, whether the capping by the FSC 
was done before receiving the bill or was it done after receiving the bill? 

88 

 
Mr Bhadain: Well, as far as I am aware, Madam Speaker, the letter of engagement 
said that fees would be agreed from time to time. On that basis, the FSC has decided that 
money,  which  would  eventually  have  gone  to  Super  Cash  Back  Gold  and  Brahma  asset 
investors, should not be wasted in paying unnecessary fees to professionals when basically 
the amounts which are being claimed are astronomical and on that basis the FSC has taken a 
decision to cap the fees at Rs28 m. and, as Minister, I fully endorse that. 

Madam  Speaker:  The  Table  has  been  advised  that  the  following  PQs  have  been 
withdrawn: PQs Nos. B/257, B/258, B/203, B204, B/269. Am I being given more PQs which 
have been withdrawn? B/247, B/243 and B/244. Time is over! 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10(2) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that all the business on today’s 

Order Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun)  rose 

and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS 

PORT LOUIS – SQUATTERS 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun): 

Madam Speaker, thank you very much for giving me the opportunity. 

The House will recall that I made a statement on 01 September 2015 on squatters over 
the whole island wherein mention was made of the presence of 347 squatters in the region of 
Port Louis. The House will also recall that, in my reply to PQ B/537, I informed that a cut-off 
date  of  01  July  2015  has  been  adopted  so  that  the  issue  of  squatting  can  be  effectively 
monitored and addressed. 

Out of the 347 squatters, 25 have not been considered for regularisation as they had 
vacated the site or constructed partly on private land and partly on the State land or started 
squatting after the cut-off date. 

Madam  Speaker,  as  at  date  there  are  322  squatters  as  follows  in  these  following 

regions - 

 

89 

•  Monseigneur Leen 
•  Military Road, Vallée Pitot 
•  Alma Street,Vallée Pitot 
•  Vallée Pitot Block 1 
•  Tranquebar 
•  Camp Yoloff, Nicolay 
•  Motorway Reserves, Roches Bois 
•  La Cure - Sir Robert Scott Avenue 
•  La Cure - Jhelum Road 
•  La Cure - Marjolin Road 
•  Vallée des Prêtres 

I wish to inform the House on the progress achieved regarding the regularisation of 
the 322 squatters in Port Louis. 77% of the number of squatters representing 247 squatters is 
being regularised. My Ministry is still awaiting documents from the remaining 75 squatters in 
order to proceed with their regularisations.  

Out  of  the  322  squatters,  106  squatters  are  being  regularised  in  situ,  24  are  being 
relocated at Batterie Cassée, Roche Bois where there are 24 plots of State land.  10 are being 
relocated in a new parceling at Monseigneur Leen where 10 plots of State land are available.  
182 are being relocated at Pointe aux Sables where 192 plots of State land are available. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to reiterate the commitment of this Government to address the 
problem of squatting in an efficient and effective manner, while at the same time, providing 
the  squatters  security  of  tenure  and  rendering  them  eligible  for  loan  facilities,  thus 
empowering them. 

With  due  consideration  to  the  cut-off  date  of  01  July  2015,  my  Ministry  has  also 
decided to regularise, in situ, the situation of squatters who have constructed concrete houses 
on  State  land  in  order  to  avoid  demolition  of  their  buildings.    In  so  doing,  a  number  of 
variables have been accounted for, namely, the squatters’ financial incapacity to build another 
house, availability of existing infrastructure in the region and social cost to Government in 
the event of demolition. 

The relocation of some of the squatters has been found to be inevitable in view of the 
fact that some of the sites occupied such as Motorway Reserves, “en bas la rivière” and Cité 
la Cure constitute environmental risks for the safety and security of the families living thereat 

 

90 

and  the  sites  occupied  at  Tranquebar  and  Monseigneur  Leen  are  required  for  Government 
projects. 

A delay of three months is being given to the squatters to move to their new location 
as from the issue of the letter of intent.  The relevant Ministries in which the vacated sites are 
being vested are being requested to take possession of their respective sites as soon as these 
are vacated and ensure that necessary measures are taken to prevent further squatting. 

Madam Speaker, a Drawing of Lots exercise was carried out on 30 November 2015 
for  the  allocation  of  lots  to  the  squatters  in  Tranquebar  for  their  relocation  to  Pointe-aux-
Sables. A second similar exercise was carried out on 15 April 2016 for all the other squatters 
in the region of Port Louis. 

With a view to preventing speculation and ensuring an effective use of the housing 
facilities  granted  by  Government  and  adhering  to  the  concept  of  ‘un  toit  pour  tout  un 
chacun’, the following additional conditions have been inserted in the Lease Agreement - 

(i) 

(ii) 

should the lessee be found to have sold or transferred or assigned his leasehold 
interests, the lessee shall not be eligible for any assistance or allocation for a 
lease over another portion of State land or a NHDC Unit, and 
the  lessee  shall  not  be  entitled  for  the  purchase  of  the  State  land  within  ten 
years as from the date of the signature of the present lease.  The purchase may 
only  be  considered  after  the  ten  years  period  subject  to  compliance  with 
provisions of legislations in force. 

Madam Speaker, an appropriate mechanism to ensure transparency, equity and proper 
monitoring of the regularisations of squatters is being put in place at the level of my Ministry. 
I  want  to  reassure  the  House  that  I  am  dealing  with  the  issue  of  squatting  with  all 
consideration that it warrants while at the same time being firm and resolute in our action to 
combat illegal occupation of State land.  

With your permission, Madam Speaker, I am now tabling details on the 322 squatters 

in the region of Port Louis. 

Thank you very much. 

  
(4.17 p.m.) 

 

MITD – ASSESSMENT/EXAMINATIONS - RESULTS 

The  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 
Scientific Research (Mrs L. D. Dookun-Luchoomun): Madam Speaker, further to the point 

 

91 

raised by hon. Ameer Meea on the release of results by the Mauritius Institute of Training 
and  Development  in  respect  of  the  National  Certification  Level  3  in  Electrical  Installation 
Work, I wish to inform the House that I have taken up the matter with the MITD and have 
been  advised  that  the  final  assessment  has  been  conducted  in  December  2015  and  results 
declared on 22 March 2016. 

As  for  the  National  Certificate  Level  4  in  Electrical  Installation  Work,  final 
assessment was held in June 2015 and results declared on 18 April 2016. All candidates are 
being informed accordingly. 

I  have  impressed  upon  the  MITD  to  henceforth  arrange  for  the  timely  release  of 

assessment/examinations results to candidates. 

THE NATIONAL AGENCY FOR THE TREATMENT AND REHABILITATION OF 

Second Reading 

SUBSTANCE ABUSERS (REPEAL) BILL 

(No. III of 2016) 

Order  read  for  resuming  adjourned  debate  on  the  Second  Reading  of  the  National 
Agency for the Treatment and Rehabilitation of Substance Abusers (Repeal) Bill (No. III of 
2016). 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

(4.19 p.m.) 

Dr.  Z.  Joomaye  (Second  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  &  Souillac):  Thank 
you,  Madam  Speaker.  The  repealing  of  the  National  Agency  for  the  Treatment  and 
Rehabilitation of Substance Abusers Act 1996 amounts to the closing of the NATReSA. This 
agency was created at that time and it was under the responsibility of the Ministry of Social 
Security.  

The main objects of the agency have been stated last week by the hon. Minister, but I 

wish to remind the House about the main objects of that agency - 

(i) 

 it  was  to  coordinate  and  facilitate  efforts  at  national  level  towards  the 
implementation of programmes for the prevention of substance abuse and the 
treatment and rehabilitation of substance abusers;  

(ii)  mobilise resources locally and overseas for the treatment and rehabilitation of 

substance abusers; 

 
(iii) 

(iv) 

92 

set up and manage institutions for same as well as provide after-care services, 

advise, guide, help voluntary social organisations engaged in the prevention of 
substance abuse as well as treatment and rehabilitation. 

NATReSA was controlled by a Board composed of a Chairperson and representatives 
of the Prime Minister’s Office, the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life, the Ministry of 
Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions, the Commissioner of Police and 
the  Commissioner  of  Prisons.  Moreover,  were  also  on  the  Board,  members  of  the  NGOs, 
trade unions and members of the public. 

NATReSA  was  receiving  funds  from  the  Government  and  was  reallocating  same 

funds to NGOs involved in prevention of substance abuse as well as rehabilitation.  

Under the umbrella of the NATReSA were functioning several institutions, some of 
which  are  very  well-known,  highly  performing  and  have  been  contre  vents  et  marées 
delivering different services to drug addicts. Among these institutions are - 

•  Centre de Solidarité Pour Une Nouvelle Vie in Rose Hill ; 
•  Dr Idrice Goomany Treatment Centre in Plaine Verte; 
•  Help Addiction Centre of the Hindu House; 
•  Amar Seva Sangam Centre in Vacoas; 
•  Centre d'Accueil de Terre Rouge; 
•  Etoile d'Espérance in Quatre Bornes; 
•  ACTRESA controlled by the Human Service Trust, 
•  Lacaz A, a drop in centre in St George Street, Port Louis; 
•  Chrysalide in Bambous; 
•  Groupe Renaissance in Mahebourg; 
•  CRAC  and  Centre d’Alcoologie in Rodrigues  

All these institutions depend and are funded by the NATReSA.  

Closing  down  NATReSA  has  several  implications  on  the  functioning  of  these 
organisations  and,  definitely,  jeopardise  their  very  existence.  This  is  causing  a  lot  of 
apprehension among their staff regarding their employment first and foremost. 

Madam  Speaker,  since  December  2014,  the  time  when  this  Government  came  into 
power and hon. Minister Gayan took office, we fail to understand the whole drug policy and 
the strategy concerning treatment and rehabilitation of drug addicts in our country.  

93 

 
There has been  gross mismanagement and some decisions taken have been beyond 
any logic. The Methadone Programme implemented since 2006 has been abruptly stopped. 
This same programme has benefited thousands of drug addicts. Our country has been praised 
in a report from the UNAIDS in April 2015. Together with the Needle Exchange Programme, 
the success of the Methadone Programme in Mauritius is quoted as an example in Africa.  
This, in light of very good results obtained in management of drug addicts, as well as helping 
to reduce the dissemination of HIV/AIDS and Hepatitis C, which are two major threats to 
public health. 

Madam Speaker, stopping the Methadone program and replacing it by Suboxone and 
Naltrexone is not the appropriate solution. These are all substitution therapies. In a developed 
country, the practitioners need all these tools to propose a tailor-made solution to each and 
every drug addict. Our stand, Madam Speaker, is that the Methadone Programme should not 
be stopped, it should be maintained alongside with the Suboxone and Naltrexon programme. 
These tools should be given as different possibilities to give better services and increase the 
rate of successful treatment and decrease the number of relapse after treatment. 

Drug addicts who are willing to quit drugs are not second-class citizens. They should 
be treated with due respect and compassion. The attitude of the hon. Minister towards these 
drug addicts is highly condemnable as well as his attitude towards those involved in NGOs. 
This is causing big frustration and demotivation. 

Madam  Speaker,  we  need  the  NGOs  working  in  the  field  of  drug  abuse.  Some  of 
these NGOs had recently, through the press, criticised the hon. Minister and asked him to step 
down  on  the  ground  of  gross  incompetency.  We  feel  that  in  retaliation,  the  hon.  Minister 
wants to control their voice. Closing down NATReSA will bring all its activities under the 
Harm Reduction Unit of the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life. The hon. Minister en 
utilisant  la  carotte  –  the  Minister  or  those  who  will  come  later  –  et  le  baton  will  have 
absolute  control  over  those  NGOs,  which  I  doubt  will  no  longer  be  able  to  utter  a  single 
criticism against Government’s action. We are fully conscious that all these NGOs are not 
fully 100% efficient and do not deliver uniformly, but there are ways and manners to deal 
with  them.  Exercising  due  diligence  and  better  control  on  their  activities  before  funding 
would have been a more intelligent way forward. 

We are not saying that NATReSA was a perfect agency or was the ultimate response 
to  the  needs  of  our  country  as  far  as  treatment  and  rehabilitation  of  substance  abuse  is 

 

94 

concerned, but it was there and had its track record especially in implementing educational 
programmes in schools and creating awareness in the population at large. 

Madam Speaker, the questions today are these ones – 

• 

is it better to close down NATReSA and bring its activities under the Harm 
Reduction Unit of the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life? 

•  will this Unit do better? 
•  who will create awareness and lead educational programmes?  
• 

is it a pure strategy of the Government to control the NGOs? 

I have no doubt that any Government would want to reduce the proliferation of drugs, but let 
us  think  together.  Don’t  we  have  a  better  solution?  We  all  know  that  drug  addicts  and 
authorities do not go together. It is a question of incompatibility. So, how can we explain that 
methadone  has  been  dispensed  at  some  points  in  police  stations?  This  has  been  the  best 
deterrent  for  drug  addicts  towards  quitting.  It  sends  the  wrong  signal.  It  sends  the  wrong 
message. 

Drug  addiction  is  a  global  issue  including  law  and  order,  criminality  and  public 
health. Mismanaging and choosing the wrong policies will have major negative impact on the 
future generations. 

Madam  Speaker,  time  has  changed.  The  youth  culture  has  changed  as  well.  New 
drugs are on the market. The addiction pattern has changed. Even drug traffickers and dealers 
are  changing  their  methods  to  import  and  distribute  their  drugs.  We  have  to  change  our 
mindset as well. It is about high time to develop a new strategy whose main aim would be 
drug demand reduction, innovate new educational and prevention programme which would 
change behaviour and perception. 

Madam  Speaker,  just  closing  down,  NATReSA  is  not  an  appropriate  solution. 
Moreover, since December 2014, this agency has been condemned to a slow death as all the 
technical key posts have been deliberately kept vacant in order to make it unoperational.   

NATReSA has been delivering in the past when it was given all the means. It is also 
important to point out that in the previous report of the Director of Audit, it is spelt out that 
the finance and transactions have been fully compliant until now. We agree that the agency 
needs  to  be  restructured  and  strategies  re-engineered  rather  than  winding  up  a  complete 

 

95 

reorganisation  towards  result-orientated  objectives  taking  into  account  new  substitution 
techniques.  More actual and penetrating means of communication needs to be implemented. 
We  are  also  waiting  in  this  context  for  the  conclusion  of  the  Commission  sur  la  Drogue 
chaired by the former judge, Mr Paul Lam Shang Leen.   

Madame la présidente, depuis l’avènement de  ce nouveau  gouvernement, toutes les 
décisions prises en matière de lutte contre la toxicomanie ont été irréfléchies et prises à la 
légère,  sans  tenir  compte  des  risques  et  conséquences  sur  les  dangers  que  représente  la 
prolifération de la drogue sur la santé publique et la criminalité. Nous sommes en désaccord 
total sur ce sujet avec le gouvernement.   

Before  ending,  Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  appeal  to  the  hon.  Minister  to  make  a 
special effort and do his best to give satisfaction to the former employees of NATReSA as far 
as their redeployment is concerned.  

I also wish to recommend him to pay special attention to the new Harm Reduction 
Unit so that it becomes fully operational and be in a position to do a better job than the late 
NATReSA. 

Thank you for your attention. 

 (4.29 p.m.) 

Mr J. Leopold (Second Member for Rodrigues):  Madam Speaker, NATReSa is the 
National Agency for the Treatment & Rehabilitation of Substance Abusers.  But I have got 
questions about why we are repealing this law. My question is: why this law was crafted at 
the  first  place  and  the  rationale  behind?  Why  such  an  important  law  for  the  prevention, 
treatment and rehabilitation of substance abusers is being repealed? Is there a problem with 
the Board which governs NATReSA? Or is there a problem with the prevention, treatment 
and rehabilitation of substance abusers itself? If there is a problem somewhere, is it because 
of the act which governs NATReSA or is it just because those people who were at the very 
top of NATReSA did not have the required skills to set appropriate strategies in the attempt 
of making the Republic a drug free nation, and to those who are taking them, stopping using 
them and, in turn, be productive in the family, at work and in the society. 

The NATReSA is meant to do just that. So, where is the problem? The problem is not 
with the law.  I believe that the Government had waited for too many  years to address the 

 

96 

managerial problems of  NATReSA and now it is at its lowest point and the solution is to 
repeal  the  law,  but  to  be  replaced  by  what.  Mauritius  needs  a  national  drug  strategic 
framework to tackle all forms of drug abuse on all fronts.  

It is the responsibility of the Government through the Ministry of Health and Quality 
of  Life  to  monitor  the  agency  and  to  make  sure  that  it  is  effective,  come  with  proper 
guidelines and policies.  

The principles of effective treatment of drug addicts are very complex. It affects the 
function of the brain and behaviour, therefore, the treatment has to address all the needs of 
the person who suffers from drug addiction, that is, not just his or her drug use.  

When  we  are  dealing  with  treatment  programme,  it  is  not  ordinary  treatment. 
Treatment involves teaching them steps that they can take to reduce infection like HIV/AIDS, 
Hepatitis B and C, tuberculosis and over infectious diseases.  

Repealing this law, Madam Speaker, will kill all the NGOs which are doing such an 
important  job  in the  prevention  and  rehabilitation  of  substance  abusers.  Government  alone 
will not be able to do such a big task. 

As I have said earlier, the treatment of drugs abusers are very complex and it takes 
time; it is long term. The only way of dealing with drug addicts is that of a multi-disciplinary 
approach, with proper expert intervention in the prevention, treatment and rehabilitation.  We 
have to involve the civil society; the Government needs to go on the board and the employer 
as well.  Now we are repealing this law and those NGOs which are doing a very good job in 
the field of drug addiction will not be properly funded, and people with drug problem will 
face great difficulty to integrate into society by rehabilitation. 

It is the role of NGOs to help the Government with the rehabilitation of drug addicts 
and alcoholism, as at hospital level we cannot do rehab because it needs special settings and 
the  treatment  is  long  term,  as  I  have  said,  and  they  need  special  attention.    Just  as  other 
chronic  diseases  such  as  diabetes,  it  is  an  example  of  illness,  which  even  after  years  of 
successful medical treatment carries risk of recurrence.  In the same way, there will always be 
the possibility for people who suffer from addiction to relapse. 

A solid rehabilitation programme is, therefore, of importance.  It is proven that those 
who follow rehabilitation programmes are those who will achieve sobriety, have fewer run-in 

 

97 

with law, experience fewer relapses, enjoying better relation with family  members, friends 
and colleagues, than those who do not participate in treatment. 

I understand that there are many NGOs which are not doing their job properly in this 
field.    But  there  are  others  which  are  doing  ok,  and  they  need  the  full  support  of  the 
Government.  Being a Member of the Rodrigues Anti-Drug Group myself, I know NATReSA 
very well, and I know that NATReSA was not setting their target properly. 

Coming to Rodrigues, Madam Speaker, we have a very effective NGO, with years of 
experience,  with  expertise  approach  in  the  prevention,  treatment  and  rehabilitation  of 
substance abusers.  I am myself a former President of the Crac Anti-Drug Group, the Centre 
Alcoologie, which is the only one looking after people with drug addiction and alcoholism.  
Till now, it is still doing such a very good job, with an extensive programme in rehabilitation, 
with  the  required  facilities.    NGOs  which  are  effective  should  not  be  penalised  with  the 
repealing of this law.  If NATReSA had failed to deliver, all that it has to do is to address the 
problem and set things right. 

The Rodrigues Anti-Drug Group had proven to be effective over more than 20 years 
of  experience  in  dealing  with  the  management  of  drug  addiction  and  alcoholism.  The 
Rodrigues Anti-Drug Group is presently managing a 14-bedded treatment and rehabilitation 
centre, which is found at Mont Lubin, just next to the Mont Lubin Area Health Centre.  They 
put that there strategically, so that if emergency treatment is needed, it is very close to the 
hospital. 

Let me tell you, Madam Speaker, that 25% of our patients come from the main island 
Mauritius.  They  come  to  Rodrigues  for  three  to  four  weeks  for  detox  and  most  of  them 
extend  their  stay,  so  as  to  allow  themselves  to  follow  the  well-established  rehabilitation 
programmes in place there.  One of the other reasons why they prefer to do their detox in 
Rodrigues  is  that,  during  their  treatment  and  withdrawal  stage,  they  are  more  likely  to 
maintain  their  abstinence,  as  those  drugs  that  they  are  hooked  on  are  not  available  in 
Rodrigues, therefore, giving them a better chance to kick out their bad habits. 

With 80% occupancy in our Centre Alcoologie, we have a success rate of 72%.  We 
do that evaluation every six months.  Our rate of success is due to our so-called reinsertion 
programme.    Such  activities  include  cultivation  of  land,  woodwork,  rearing  of  animals, 
amongst others, in nature, as they can reintegrate in the society and become a better person. 

98 

 
One other thing which I want to point out is that most workers who have problems 
with  alcohol  in  Rodrigues,  when  they  are  at  the  point  to  have  problems  at  work  due  to 
absenteeism, for example, before drastic measures are taken by employers, they often refer 
those people to our centre for detoxification, giving them a chance.  As you know, addiction 
is always associated with lots of underlying problems.  So, they give them the chance to get 
rid of their addiction in the attempt to keep their job, preventing social problems, job losses, 
and the spread of family due to economic problem.  

Madam Speaker, I am of strong opinion that the Ministry of Health sees to it that the 
required funds be granted to the only anti-drug groups which is doing such an excellent job 
on the island, so as to continue to set appropriate strategy to combat the usage of illicit drugs 
and alcoholism.  The funds will also be used to promote and train people in special fields, so 
as to look after drug addiction and alcoholism. 

Out of that Rs40 m., which is earmarked to prevent and treat drug abusers, I think that 
the fact that Rodrigues has proved to be working excellently in the field of the treatment of 
drugs and substance abusers, it needs to have a fair share based on its effectiveness in this 
Rs40 m. 

I am now making a humble appeal to the Minister of Health and Quality of Life that 
his Ministry provides appropriate funds, so as to be able to keep the Crac Anti-Drug Group 
afloat. With the event of the autonomy in Rodrigues, we have a Commission for Health, and I 
can suggest that the funds be siphoned to the Commission for Health, so that we continue to 
have a better management of drug addicts and alcoholism in Rodrigues. 

Madam Speaker, all we need is to keep our Anti-Drug Group functional, so as to be 
able  to  continue  with  our  programme,  and  the  end  result  will  be  to  change  the  attitude  of 
patients towards drugs through treatment, prevent them from relapsing, making them operate 
normally in society, thus reducing the risk of diseases, crimes and unemployment. 

I thank you for your attention, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rughoobur! 

 (4.41 p.m.) 

Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand Baie & Poudre d’Or): Thank you, 
Madam  Speaker.  Madam  Speaker,  let  me  at  the  very  outset  pay  tribute  to  all  those  public 

 

99 

officers, social  workers  and volunteers who have over the  years spent their lifetime in the 
fight against substance abuse. 

Since my intervention on this Bill will be based mostly on the fight against illicit and 
dangerous  drugs,  allow  me,  Madam  Speaker,  to  pay  tribute  to  all  our  citizens  who  are 
involved  in  the  rehabilitation  of  drug  addicts,  fighting  for  a  better  preventive  strategy, 
denouncing drug traffickers often at the  risk and perils of their life and  fighting the mafia 
responsible for the proliferation of dangerous drugs around the island. Among the long list of 
prominent  personalities,  we  have  our  own  sitting  Prime  Minister,  Mr  Ally  Lazer,  Mr 
Samioullah  Lauthan  and  many,  many  others  whose  commitment  and  dedication  have 
contributed at different times of our country’s history to save our youth from this fléau.  

The Bill in front of this House, Madam Speaker, aims at winding up the NATReSA 
and transferring its scope and responsibilities to the Harm Reduction Unit of the Ministry of 
Health and Quality of Life. There is no doubt that the hon. Minister is motivated with good 
intentions and I commend his commitment to – 

Firstly,  ensure  that  every  cent  spent  in  rehabilitation  of  substance  abusers  and 

prevention programmes bring the desired and expected results.  

Secondly, that there is absolute transparency in the management of public funds.  

Thirdly,  that  there  is  optimisation  of  resources  and  effective  reallocation  within  his 

Ministry to promote a result-oriented approach.  

Fourthly, show all the stakeholders involved in this whole process of prevention and 

rehabilitation of substance abuse that both his Ministry and this Government mean business. 

Madam  Speaker,  there  is  growing  concern  among  the  population  on  the  important 
issue relating to the consumption of synthetic drugs affecting our youth. Since the beginning 
of this year I have personally witnessed two suspected cases of death following consumption 
of  synthetic  drugs  in  the  same  region  in  my  Constituency.  Only  yesterday,  in  Cap 
Malheureux, a young man in his early 20s got himself hanged and, according to information 
around, the main reason of his act was to be attributed to his inability to free himself from his 
addiction to synthetic drugs. We cannot remain insensible to the call of the increasing number 
of families who are suffering due to the proliferation of synthetic drugs in the country. 

 

100 

Madam Speaker, once again, the fight against drug trafficking, drug proliferation and 
substance  abuse  is  a  fight  that  is  not  the  sole  responsibility  of  the  Ministry  of  Health  and 
Quality of Life or the Government. It is a battle that will be won with the collaboration of the 
community at large, with the participation of the Government, the Police force, the NGOs, 
local  authorities  and  every  citizen  of  this  country.  There  is  a  need  for  urgent  action  as  it 
appears that during the last decade there has not been much progress and, in fact, an absolute 
disregard to this whole issue of combat contre la drogue.  

May I remind the House that in as far as September 2004 the United Nations Office 
on  Drugs  and  Crime  collaborated  in  the  preparation  of  a  Master  Plan  on  National  Drug 
Control for the Republic of Mauritius and we can read the following in the report, and I quote 
- 

“In  mid-2000,  there  were  a  number  of  deaths  attributed  to  Subutex  overdose. 
According to drug abusers, a new substance has been introduced on the market during 
the past year. It is referred to as "La Dame Blanche" or "White Lady" and is being 
increasingly used by drug abusers. 

Analysis  of the said substance has shown that it contains  a very low percentage of 
heroin coupled with a significant percentage of adulterants, such as paracetamol and 
caffeine.  

Treatment Centres have noticed that the age of initiation to use and abuse of drugs has 
decreased  to  reach  as  low  as  11  to  13  years  old  and  that  an  increasing  number  of 
women are also using drugs.” 

That was as far back as 2004 when already traces of synthetic drugs were apparent, 
but  unfortunately,  there  have  not  been  enough  initiatives  by  the  authorities  during  the  last 
decade and the situation has deteriorated from bad to worse. 

Madam  Speaker,  in  the  same  report  NATReSA  was  entrusted  with  a  series  of 
responsibilities eventually for the smooth implementation of a series of recommendations on 
prevention and rehabilitation and it is very unfortunate that it failed lamentably in addressing 
them. Worse, Madam Speaker, almost all of the recommendations found in that report, either 
preventive or repressive, have been totally ignored in spite of the fact that it contains a long 
list of valid measures against drug trafficking, control, prevention and rehabilitation.  

 

101 

I would suggest that a copy of the report be perused by the Harm Reduction Unit of 
the  Ministry  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  in  view  of  implementing  this  series  of  valid 
recommendations contained therein.  

Madam  Speaker,  there  is  also  the  need  to  understand  the  reasons  for  which  an 
organisation like the NATReSA could not fulfil its mission. The hon. Minister mentioned that 
it had been given every support and the necessary resources to fulfil the objectives for which 
it was set up, but why is it that it failed? This country badly needs an appropriate structure, a 
structure that can successfully implement an appropriate strategy on prevention of substance 
abuse and rehabilitation.  

I am convinced that the hon. Minister will ensure that the Harm Reduction Unit of his 
Ministry will be well structured with the right person at the top and a team of professionals 
who can deliver timely and with the commitment that the job requires.  

Secondly,  that  there  is  availability  of  adequate  resources  in  view  of  the  growing 

demand for preventive measures and measures for rehabilitation.  

Thirdly, that there is extensive collaboration with the community at large in view of 
assessing  the  requirements  for  intervention  in  the  different  parts  of  the  country.  In  this 
context, a close collaboration of the local authorities is most welcoming.  

I have to inform the House that in my own Constituency the elected Members have 
decided  to  set  up  a  working  committee  in  close  collaboration  with  the  District  Council  of 
Rivière du Rempart along with the various stakeholders, Police, the SILWF representatives, 
NGOs,  youth  organisations  to  define  a  strategy  of  prevention  against  the  proliferation  of 
synthetic drugs in some specific regions in the North. The Ministry of Health and Quality of 
Life will be invited to participate in the initiative.  

Fourthly, that it helps in the creation of a National Drugs Observatory that will help in 
providing vital information such as the type of synthetic drugs in the market, the common 
effects, the key ingredients it is made up of and which dose causes what effect. It is currently 
impossible  to  have  such  information  timely  and  by  the  time  they  are  available,  Madam 
Speaker, the drug traffickers succeed in developing new versions that are more harmful than 
the previous ones.  

 

102 

Fifthly,  that  it  collaborates  with  the  Forensic  Science  Laboratory  and  ensures  that 

there is regular analysis of the type of drugs in the market and the findings are made public.  

Sixthly, that there is reliable information at all times on the list of NGOs involved in 
the Prevention of Substance Abusers and Rehabilitation, but also their scope of work and a 
regular evaluation of the results.  

Seventh, better management of funds and collaboration with foreign organisations in 
view of procuring financial assistance available and support on training and empowerment 
for our resource persons.  

Madam Speaker, this Bill is for the winding-up  of an organisation that  was mainly 
responsible to conduct the fight against substance abuse. I am sure that the Harm Reduction 
Unit of the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life will require the support of the Ministry of 
Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific Research.  

Allow me, Madam Speaker, to make an appeal to the hon. Minister of Education and 
Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific Research.  This House is well aware of 
her  dedication  to  come  up  with  a  system  of  education  that  is  transparent,  accessible,  non-
discriminatory  and  feasible  through  the  nine-year  schooling.  I  propose  that  there  is  the 
creation of a separate unit both at the level of her Ministry and at the level of the PSSA in 
view of sensitising the children at pre-primary, primary and secondary levels on the effect of 
the different types of illicit drugs in the market.  

The National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA), in a recent report confirmed that most 
illicit drugs used start in the teenagers. In the same report, examples of the different types of 
programmes that are available for students are also mentioned, and I quote - 

“Caring School Community Programme (Formerly, Child Development Project).  

This  is  a  universal  family-plus-school  programme  to  reduce  risk  and  strengthen 
protective  factors  among  elementary  school  children.  The  programme  focuses  on 
strengthening  students’  sense  of  community,  or  connection  to  school.  Research  has 
shown that this sense of community has been key to reducing drug use, violence, and 
mental health problems, while promoting academic motivation and achievement.” 

Madam  Speaker,  I  therefore,  invite  the  hon.  Minister  of  Education  and  Human 
Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific  Research  to  consider  the  inclusion  of  an 

 

103 

awareness programme for students from pre-primary to secondary and gradually at the level 
of Tertiary as well, on the whole issue of substance abuse starting with illicit drugs. These 
awareness programmes might take some time to design and implement in collaboration with 
foreign  organisations  having  proven  expertise  in  the  field,  but  I  am  convinced  that  such 
initiatives will be highly beneficial in the fight against substance abuse in the long run.  

Since  my  intervention  is  mainly  based  on  illicit  drugs  and  the  social  and  economic 
consequences for a country, I have to say a few words on the ADSU and its responsibility as 
an agent for prevention against substance abuse. 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Member,  please  don’t  go  extensively  into  this.    We  are 
debating this Bill and I believe that you should go within the precincts of the Bill, don’t go 
too much into the detail of ADSU.  

Mr Rughoobur:  Madam Speaker, I will be concluding, but I was about to come on 

this issue of ADSU and prevention.  This is the last part of my intervention.  

I have had the opportunity to interact with some officers of ADSU for more than a year 
now, especially in my Constituency. I believe that in spite of regular complaints on their poor 
performance, there is a need for the community at large to understand that the fight against 
proliferation of illicit drugs is the responsibility of each and every citizen of this country.  I 
make an appeal to the Commissioner of Police so that the ADSU is provided not only with 
adequate  means  in  terms  of  manpower  and  equipment,  but  that  every  district  has  a  well-
equipped Drug Prevention and Monitoring Unit that will be working closely with the Local 
Authorities  to  encourage  community  participation  in  the  fight  against  drug  abuse  and 
prevention. 

With these few words, Madam Speaker, I thank you all for your attention. 

Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for half an hour. 

At 4.55 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 5.30 p.m. with the Deputy Speaker in the Chair. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

 

104 

Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port  Louis  East):  
Thank you. Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it is always a pleasure and an honour to be able to rise 
and speak in your presence and I thank you for the opportunity. 

(Interruptions) 

And  as  you  see,  I  understand  the  importance  of  the  colour  blue  and  I  am  dressed  for  the 
occasion.  

Now, I have heard with much attention the address of the hon. Minister of Health and 
Quality of Life with regard to this National Agency for the Treatment and Rehabilitation of 
Substance Abusers (Repeal) Bill.  I have noted with concern and interest, how he chooses his 
words very carefully at the very outset of the presentation of this piece of legislation. He says, 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that “it is not with gaieté de cœur”.  He almost uses the words to try 
to convey the message that there is some sadness somewhere that he feels, that he expresses 
to  us  when  he  comes  here  to  announce  the  death,  the  killing,  the  destruction  of  an 
organisation like NATReSA. And it is not always easy to sit - as people who have worked 
from the very beginning with an organisation of this nature - by idly and listen to someone 
who comes to say that for all those years this organisation that had a specific mandate has not 
functioned and lay the blame on the organisation itself.  

I think it is unfortunate that the hon. Minister does not go into more detail and show 
intellectual honesty, because very often when one tries to show intellectual honesty as to the 
real reason why an organisation has not worked, it is not always politically correct to do so. If 
NATReSA  has  been  created  with  specific  functions,  clearly  it  has  been  done  so  and  been 
under the aegis for a long time of a specific Ministry. And what Ministry is that?  It is the 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life.   

I belong to the Labour Party that was in Government once upon a time. People do not 
expect me, therefore, to stand up and say: “Well, the Labour Government is responsible and 
the Minister of Health and Quality of Life and all the Ministers of Health and Quality of Life 
of the Labour Government are responsible”. If there is responsibility to take, it should not fall 
at the feet and on the shoulders of the staff of NATReSA, if at all there is any responsibility 
for any fault or wrongdoing, it falls squarely on the shoulders of all Ministers of Health and 
Quality of Life who have come and gone, and who are still here. 

 

105 

That is the truth. If someone is functioning as a Minister of Health and if, under his control, 
his authority, his Ministry, there is an organisation that is not functioning, he is responsible. 

When  an  organisation  does  not  work  allegedly,  so  we  have  the  responsibility, 
therefore, to make it work. And, what the hon. Minister has chosen to do and, what not only 
the hon. Minister has chosen to do, but Government collectively has decided to do is to go 
forth with the elimination of an organisation in lieu of analysing what exactly is wrong, what 
exactly  is  not  working,  what  exactly  is  lacking,  what  exactly  could  be  done  in  order  to 
improve the situation, how could we make things better. Oh, no! They have decided to come 
with  the  weapon  of  massive  destruction  and  just  obliterate  the  very  existence  of  an 
organisation that has, let me say, done a very good work. 

All  organisations,  all  Governments,  all  institutions,  at  some  point,  have  to  reinvent 
themselves. That’s undeniable. But it is easy for us, as politicians, to come and say that it is 
the  organisation  that  has  not  done  well.  The  organisation  has  not  met  its  mandate.  The 
organisation  is  to  blame.  The  people  at  the  organisation  are  responsible.  As  politicians, 
sometimes what we have to do is stop blaming the others and turn the mirror vis-à-vis us and 
see what we have done as politicians that was not enough or what we have not done. 

It  is  all  too  often  that  civil  servants  or  people  and  staff  of  NATReSA  and  other 
institutions  alike  are  made  the  scapegoat  for  lacunas  in  Ministers  administering  those 
organisations.  That  calls  upon  those  people  to  become  frustrated.  That  calls  upon  other 
organisations to feel that frustration because, in lieu of sitting down with NGOs, listening to 
them and finding out what exactly is the problem, the hon. Minister has decided not to. He 
can come forward here, Mr Deputy Speaker, and say: “Well, you know, I have listened to 
people.  I  have  opened  my  ears,  I  have  opened  my  mind  and  I  have  listened  to  all  other 
suggestions and proposals and in light of those suggestions and proposals, I have decided to 
shut down NATReSA.” If he says that, then he will be the one who not necessarily I will 
believe. For sure, I will not believe him. I will not base myself on my opinion of what this 
whole scenario calls for, but I’ll base myself on what I learn when I talk to other NGOs, when 
I read what NGOs talk about, their complaints, how they are very upset with the fact that all 
communications have broken down from the moment that the hon. Minister of Health and 
Quality of Life has taken office. 

It is important for us to understand the background, what exactly has provoked this 
piece of legislation. Par coincidence, I have come across a piece of statement that was made 

 

106 

in  public  by  one  Ragini  Rungen  of  Lacaz  A.  In  that  statement,  she  clearly  says  that  each 
decision  that  is  taken  by  the  hon.  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  is  done  in  the 
absence of consultation with NGOs. 

The orator before me, on the Government side, is totally right when he said that this is 
not only the affair of one man, of one Government, but NGOs, civil society all together, we 
have to work towards eradicating this scourge. We have to work towards ensuring that people 
do  not  get  infected  even  more,  that  HIV/AIDS  does  not  increase  that  alternative  to 
methadone. If there is anything better that they are implemented with a proper method. It is 
all our responsibility, but it cannot, therefore, be implemented, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, if we 
have representatives of NGOs coming forward and saying that everything that is decided, is 
decided  by  the  Minister  himself  because,  according  to  her,  he  is  the  one  who  knows 
everything. He does not lend them his ears; that is what they say. And, to add it all, she says 
that  it  is  also  done  without  any  consultation  with  beneficiaries  of  those  programmes,  with 
people  with  HIV/AIDS  and  drugs  users.  Therefore,  the  very  people  concerned  by  those 
institutions, the very beneficiaries of those institutions are just cast aside. Their opinions do 
not count. It is not important to us to listen to them. It is only important, according to Ragini 
Rungen of Lacaz A, that the opinion of one hon. Minister, the Minister of Health and Quality 
of Life that matters and no one else. It goes even further, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, this is the 
important background behind this bomb that is being thrown upon this institution by the hon. 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life. And what is it? 

Nicolas Ritter! Who does not know what good work he does! Who does not respect 
him not only locally, but internationally, regionally! Who does not bow down to his courage! 
Who does not recognise that this is someone who does things, not in his own interest, but in 
the interest of the nation? And, it is good that we say it in this Assembly. Now, he says that 
the brutal reality is that the hon. Minister of Health and Quality of Life does not discuss with 
people who are concerned by those issues. He does not take the advice or opinions or points 
de  vue  of  those  organisations.  He  decides  alone.  Therefore,  not  one  person,  two  people 
known for their dedication! Today, here, I would like to underline and to pay homage, Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir, to those people, those NGOs, who day in, day out, there is no time for 
them. They do not look at the time of day or the time of night, but they are ready to help and 
help voluntarily without expecting anything in return. But instead of recognising that, family 
enough  when  Ragini  Rungen  makes  such  a  remark,  such  a  criticism  with  such  strength 

 

107 

against  the  hon.  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  life;  the  same  Minister  of  Health  and 
Quality of life and I will ask: is this a coincidence? 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, go back to the Bill. 

Mr Mohamed: I am coming to the Bill and the speech of the hon. Minister. I here 

refer to… 

The Deputy Speaker: I fail to see how this is relevant. 

Mr Mohamed: It is relevant. I’ll explain myself. I am looking, Mr Deputy Speaker, 
Sir, at the speech of the hon. Minister when he  basically  went as  far  as  to say that it was 
important for him. I read from his speech - in this particular Bill, he says - 

“It may be good for me to give the details of the grants and the bodies that receive the 
grants.” 

And, one of them is: Lacaz A. 

In other words, in my humble view, the way I read his speech, the way I listen to his speech, 
at no time does he recognise their good work, but he is trying to pass the message that they 
have not complied with their mission. He goes on to say that they will still be on board after 
things  change,  after  the  repeal  of  the  Bill,  but  they  will  have  to  comply  with  certain 
conditions in order to show to it that there is value for money. Fair enough! He goes on to say 
in his discourse that there is here an amount of money that is spent monthly of Rs1,400,000 
given to NGOs. This is what he says in his intervention for this Bill. He gives the impression 
that this is a lot of money that he has to bring under control in order to ensure that there is an 
alternative and solutions to drugs users, that there is rehabilitation, not only for drugs, but for 
alcohol or cigarette users as well.  

Is this too much money, Rs1,400,000 or so? Is it too much money to spend Rs40 m. 
or so a year? Sorry to say, in my humble view, it is not enough! In my humble view, I do not 
believe  Government  is  doing  well  quite  enough  financially  with  regard  to  helping  drug 
addicts and all those who are victims of any sort of substance abuse. We have to do even 
more and he cannot, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, use this in his intervention and try to attribute 
one’s way of judging how the methods are working and how the methods are not working, 
how  to  assess  the  efficiency  of  an  organisation  by  simply  reducing  it  to  what?  Facts  and 
figures, money! There is no price, as a nation, for us to get together to help those that are 
suffering the scourge of addiction. 

108 

 
He goes on to justify the shutting down of NATReSA that they have not satisfied their 
mission and he says: if they had done their job, they would have known and been able to 
detect synthetic drugs earlier on. And he says: then there would have also been no need for 
there  to  be  a  commission  of  enquiry  on  drugs.  But  the  hon.  Minister  seems  to  be  totally 
unaware  that  in  2013  and  2014,  I  recall  that  there  have  been  meetings  organised  by 
NATReSA together with the FSL, the ADSU and other institutions and the SLO where Mrs 
Green-Jokhoo, Counsel and other lawyers were present and Inspector Mohess of ADSU. We 
are talking as far back as almost two years back. And, what did they discuss during one of 
those meetings? Synthetic drugs! 

They  have a partnership agreement with the MITD for those following  methadone. 
They  have  several  partnership  agreements,  dialogues  on  lack  or  absence  of  situation, 
NATReSA’s  two  training  sessions  -  synthetic  drugs  and  other  types  of  drugs  and  FSL  at 
Réduit. In spite of all of this and the Strategic Plan of 2014-2016 which gives a vision and a 
direction, the hon. Minister comes here and tells us that, in fact, they have done nothing! How 
can  they,  therefore,  be  said  to  have  done  nothing  if  no  nominations  and  no  resources  are 
given to that organisation all along 2015? How come, therefore, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we 
are to believe that what the hon. Minister is suggesting is going to work? Why do we have to 
trust him that it is going to work? 

When I read facts and figures of this nature, for the first time in 10 years the incidence 
rate of people who inject drugs increased by 12%. We are talking about figures of 2016 when 
the hon. Minister of Health and Quality of Life is responsible for those organisations to see to 
it qu’il n’y a pas de recrudescence, to see to it that there is no increase in the incidence of rate 
of people injecting drugs. How come for all those  years it has gone down, when this God 
forsaken party known as the  Labour Government together with the PMSD were in power, 
how  come  every  time  the  figures  for  the  incidence  rate  of  people  using  drugs  have  gone 
down? How come when he has taken the helm of that Ministry, it has gone up? 

We have, therefore, to believe him when he says things are going to get better when 
he has been at the helm of things, things have gotten worse. How come? This is also a figure 
which is important to note! We judge someone on his performance. We judge a Government 
on its performance and I think that those figures need not be hidden. I read here: ‘it is to be 
noted that year 2015 saw an increase of 133% of female people who use intravenous drugs 
reached by needles and syringes programmes. 133% of female PWID increase in 2015! How 

 

109 

come, therefore, we are to believe that the solutions that they are giving this country in 2016, 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, will work when the fact is ever since they have been at the helm of 
those  organisations,  the  figures  and  the  statistics  have  proved  that  they  have  done 
lamentablement? 

 So,  show  me  why  should  we  believe  that  what  the  hon.  Minister  of  Health  and 
Quality of Life has proposed to Cabinet, approved by Cabinet, destroying this organisation 
instead of improving it, is going to work? So, therefore, my humble opinion is as follows: 
yes,  if  Government  decides  it  is  necessary  to  upgrade  an  institution,  we  are  all  for.  If 
Government decides it is necessary in order to give more resources, specialised training to 
that organisation and to see to it that they can perform, we are all for. If we are to ensure that 
they can adapt with the times and get additional training which maybe they did not get in the 
past enough of that quality, we are all for.  

But, what we are not for is because of the NGOs and the hon. Minister not getting on, 
because he has pinpointed those organisations in his address, he has mentioned their names 
and  how  much  money  they  get  and  basically  given  the  impression  that  they  have  done 
nothing  good,  because  he  does  not  get  on  with  them  and  there  is  a  breakdown  in 
communication so much so that those NGOs have even had to write to the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister.  They have even had to write to the hon. Deputy Prime Minister and have asked 
them to mediate this situation because it is with your experience and help, they say - of the 
hon. Deputy Prime Minister and the Rt. hon. Prime Minister - that they believe things could 
move forward. They have asked for experience. They have asked for people who are practical 
and they have recognised who is practical and who is not!  

So, this is the situation today. Let me say something else.  Even though, as the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister always said: ‘well, you were in Government, then why did not you do 
things then?’ Fair enough! This is a fair criticism. But, let me say something: for all too long, 
even when he was in Government before me, even when he was Prime Minister when I was 
still a baby in arms, I was still a young man running around… 

(Interruptions) 

… those types of organisations have suffered from one important fault. What is it? That each 
and every time, we have to accept where we are wrong and we have to give solutions to those 

 

110 

problems and we have to say it openly without the fear of criticising oneself and looking at 
ourselves in the mirror once in a while.  

The Labour Party has done a great deal in order to ensure that there is a drop in the 
level  of  HIV/AIDS,  in  order  to  ensure  that  the  people  in  Mauritius,  drug  users  get 
rehabilitation, in order to ensure that methadone is not only a programme, we are not only 
congratulated locally by NGOs for what the Labour Party did, but we are also congratulated 
internationally as well as the United Nations and the World Health Organisation. So, these 
are  realities  that  we  cannot  ignore,  but  what  we  have  to  admit  is  that  an  organisation  like 
NATReSA  is  not  the  only  one,  many  of  such  organisations  exist.    Each  and  every 
Government has forgotten to do something important, including the Labour Party in the past, 
that we have always had the Minister responsible decide to make political nominations at the 
head of that organisation! We are not saying that the person who was nominated would not 
do a good job. But, he is a political nominee. Be it the MSM, be it the MMM, the PMSD or 
us, whoever it be, we should walk away from those political nominations. If this is what this 
Government is all about, we are all for. 

Then, let me say I will not shirk away from accepting where we were wrong. I will 
come, together with my friends from this Labour Party, to propose solutions and we will give 
a helping hand if it is not to destroy an organisation.  What we will condemn is the refusal of 
anyone  to  realise  that  we  should  not  come  to  sort  out  a  problem  by  blowing  up  an 
organisation  when  we  can,  in  fact,  ensure  more  rapidly  that  there  is  cohesion  with  NGOs 
because we need every one of us to work together, Government, Opposition, NGOs and all 
experts  and  let  us  put  our  minds  together.  I  know  they  will  say:  ‘well,  we  have  got  the 
majority in Parliament, we decide’. As the hon. Minister of Health and Quality of Life always 
says: ‘Government decides’ and Government does whatever it wants. But the final request 
that I have is: yes, you have majority. Yes, you do and you decide.  Just do it right.  That is 
all I ask for. Just to do it right. 

Thank you very much. 

(5.52 p.m.) 

Mr  S.  Rutnah  (Third  Member  for  Piton  &  Rivière  du  Rempart):    Mr  Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, I will today seek to persuade this House that the decision of the hon. Minister of 
Health and Quality of Life to repeal NATReSA is one of the best decisions that he has taken 

 

111 

in the interest of our country, in the interest of our  youth and in the future interest of this 
country. 

Let  me  start  by  this.  Very  often  the  Opposition  parties  ask  about  the  bilan  of 
l’Alliance  Lepep  or  ask  about  the  bilan  of  such and  such  Ministries.  I  hope  the  press  will 
listen to this today. 

(Interruptions) 

He is the Health Minister who, since he came into power, built another Eye Hospital in the 
South. He is the Health Minister who provided a second Cardiac Centre in Mauritius. He is the 
Health Minister who …. 

(Interruptions) 

Let me talk about the bilan …. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Baloomoody, let me decide! 

Mr Rutnah: Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. Let me talk about the bilan.  He is 
the Health Minister who has been recruiting doctors. The doctors who are jobless today were 
students at the time when the former Labour Party was in power. When they returned with 
their medical degree - the former Labour Party was still in power - they were unemployed 
and the former Labour Party was still in power. This Government, through the leadership of 
Sir Anerood Jugnauth, is employing those doctors who have been unemployed. This is the 
bilan of the Minister of Health and Quality of Life. 

Coming to the Bill now, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. Why is there justification to repeal 
this Bill? Why?  Firstly, NATReSA, very clearly was not fulfilling most of its objectives as 
set out in section 4 of its parent’s Act. That is why, secondly, its functioning was limited to 
the  allocation  of  monthly  grants  to  NGOs.  This  is  what  NATReSA  was  doing  instead  of 
NATReSA going down the streets of Mauritius where drug pedlars have been infesting our 
youths with all kind of drugs, including synthetic drugs. What NATReSA was supposed to 
do?  NATReSA was supposed – 

(i) 

to coordinate and facilitate efforts at national level towards the implementation 
of  programme  for  the  prevention  of  substance  abuse  and  the  treatment  and 
rehabilitation of substance abusers; 

 
(ii) 

112 

 to  complement  existing  facilities  for  the  prevention  of  substance  abuse  and 
the treatment and rehabilitation of substance abusers; 

(iii)  mobilise resources locally and overseas for the treatment and rehabilitation of 

substance abusers; 

(iv) 

to  set  up  and  manage  institutions  for  the  treatment  and  rehabilitation  of 
substance abusers; 

(v) 

provide after-care services for the rehabilitation of substance abusers, and 

(vi) 

finally, advise, guide and help voluntary social organisations engaged in the 
prevention  of  substance  abuse  and  in  the  treatment  and  rehabilitation  of 
substance abusers. 

Exactly! 

 (Interruptions) 

What NATReSA was doing? NATReSA was like a cow and it was simply allowing 
itself to be milked by a number of NGOs who were, in fact, incompetent. The incompetency 
started from the very apex of  NATReSA coming down to the ground level. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, let us just think for a moment about the amount of money 
involved. I heard very intently, my very good friend, hon. Shakeel Mohamed, who quoted 
that the budget involved is apparently only Rs1,410,000. But if you take it on a yearly basis 
… 

(Interruptions) 

Exactly, this is what you fail to say. Rs14 m. a year and out of the Rs41,175,000 out of which 
Rs23,175,000 to meet the cost of the annual recurrent expenditure including fees payable to 
the Board and Rs18 m. allocated to 12 NGOs.  

(Interruptions) 

I know it hurts when we speak the truth. 

(Interruptions) 

I know it hurts. 

 
The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Member, please address the Chair! 

113 

Mr Rutnah: The reason it hurts is because the alliance of Labour Party/MMM is still 
on. That is why it is hurting because for all intents and purposes, they are campaigning as if 
there is a general election tomorrow. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea, let him speak, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Members, I decide who speaks. I have decided to let hon. Rutnah speak. Let him speak! 

Mr Rutnah: Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  Now, let me deal with some points 
that hon. Shakeel Mohamed has raised.  I think I must deal with them. He says: ‘there is some 
sadness somewhere to announce the death killing of an organisation like NATReSA’.  I am 
grateful that the hon. Minister being diplomatic as he is, has taken time and has swiftly and 
gently  dealt  with  this.  Had  I  been  in  his  place,  I  would  have  brutally  dealt  with  this  and 
thrown this away a long time ago. Why? Thankfully, we have the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
who  has  given  directives  to  everybody  in  the  Government  that  wastage  should  be  curbed 
because we do not want the legacy that was left by the Labour Party as we see in every sector 
of our economy. We do not want that. 

The word intellectual dishonesty was being used. You call this intellectual dishonesty! 

(Interruptions) 

Exactly! Dishonesty to whom? Dishonesty to who? To the people of Mauritius, is that what 
was being suggested. No, this is a classic example of honesty, transparency, good governance 
and kick those who are incompetent out of their position and replace them by what we call 
the Harm Reduction Unit.  

The Harm Reduction Unit, which is today leading the fight against what is happening insofar 
as drug abuse and substance abuse is concerned in our country.  

My  friend  also  said  that  all  past  Health  Ministers  are  to  be  blamed  for  what  has 
happened.    Let me  remind him that, when in 1996, NATReSA was introduced, it was not 
introduced  by  the  Minister  of  Health  then.  It  was  introduced  by  the  Minister  of  Social 

 

114 

Security and National Solidarity, and it was an agency that was working under the aegis of 
that  Ministry;  not  the  Ministry  of  Health.    So,  those  who  have  been  responsible  of  that 
Ministry in the past are to be blamed; not all the Ministers of Health. 

Obviously, those who have taken over, who have come on board since 2008 and have 
paid lip service to what was going on with our youth in our country in relation to substance 
abuse, are to be blamed and are to be made accountable of the situation where we are today. 

Had NATReSA been an effective organisation, had it been that effective organisation 
that  it  was  supposed  to  do,  we  would  not  have  had  substance  abusers  walking  around  the 
streets  everywhere.  We  would  not  have  had  those  sagas  in  front  of  Dr.  Idrice  Goomany 
Centre. We would not have had people loitering around all the agencies that were providing a 
substance and drug alternative like methadone. 

Now,  what  was  happening  when  drug  users  were  going  to  centres  to  obtain 
methadone?  Everybody knows this, the population knows this.  Some people were taking 
methadone  and  actually  not  treating  themselves  with  that  methadone.    They  were,  in  fact, 
selling it to others. They were introducing drugs to others.  It is a known fact, and I know he 
knows it very well.  Most of my friends who, today, sit on the other side from Constituency 
No. 1, No. 2 and No. 3 are aware of these facts because Idrice Goomany is in Plaine Verte. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Quirin! 

Mr Rutnah: The Minister, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, has been accused that he took 
decision  without  discussing  with  NGOs.  Oh!  Mr  Nicolas  Righter.  I  call  him  Righter.  Mr 
Nicolas Righter who I call, but Ritter, so they say. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed: On a point of order! The hon. Member should have respect for the 

name of someone. 

The Deputy Speaker: Sit down. I will take your point of order. Hon. Quirin, there is 

a point of order... 

(Interruptions) 

 

Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Hon. Ameer Meea, I am warning you! 

115 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Ameer Meea!  Hon. Mohamed, please take your point of order. 

Mr  Mohamed:  The  point  of  order  is  very  simple.    I  mean,  he  is  talking  about 
someone who is not in this august Assembly, and the minimum that we owe to anyone is not 
to deform and play around with his name as though it is a joke. That is the minimum. And 
now he cannot plead ignorance. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, it is true that it is not upholding the decorum 
of the House to name people in a negative way, but you have been the one introducing his 
name first.  However, hon. Rutnah, I don’t know if it is a slip of the tongue or otherwise, but 
please refrain from deforming the name of people. Consider this a warning. 

Mr Rutnah: Thank you for your assistance, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, and I apologise 
for calling him Righter instead of Ritter. My friend said the brutal reality is that the Minister 
does not discuss and take views.  Now, let me remind him what the hon. Minister said in his 
discourse. He said this – 

“Madam Speaker, shortly after I took office as the Minister of Health and Quality of 
Life, I initiated a cost benefit and cost effectiveness assessment of all parastatal bodies 
falling  under  my  Ministry.    NATReSA  was  one  of  them.  In  the  course  of  the 
assessment, the following came to light (...)” 

Then, the hon. Minister  gave a number of failures and inadequacies of  NATReSA.  
So, this was not a haphazard decision simply to close NATReSA; deal with it brutally. This 
was a decision that was taken by virtue of cost benefit analysis and by virtue of research, and 
a number of failures were identified.  What do we do?  Do we continue to inject money into 
NATReSA and wait when they are going to wake up from their dream in order to act on our 
streets?  No!  That would be intellectually dishonest.  The intellectually honest thing to do is 
to stop it straightaway, and this is what the Minister is doing. 

116 

 
The percentage figure of 133% of intravenous drugs users that was quoted earlier on 
increased in 2015.  How?  From where?  Where are these figures coming up from? These 
figures have been plucked out of somewhere simply to demonstrate that there has been an 
increase  in  substance  abuse  since  this  Government  has  come  into  power.    This  is  the 
impression that was given in this House today, and that is plainly wrong.  It is plainly wrong, 
because  the  increase  in  substance  abuse  has  been  going  on  for  a  while  and  the  Labour 
Government  that  was  in  power  since  2005  up  to  2014  did  pay  lip  service,  did  not  pay 
attention, and did not deal with the problems of drugs.  That is why there was degradation in 
our society, and that is why... 

... when we were campaigning, the Prime Minister ... 

(Interruptions) 

… promised a Drugs Commission. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, are you taking a point of order?  

Mr Mohamed:  No. 

The Deputy Speaker: Please don’t talk from a sitting position. 

Mr Rutnah: But I know ... 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, reality always hurts. 

(Interruptions) 

It does not matter; we have got thick skin, broad shoulders.  They can criticise as much as 
they like, but nothing will stop this Government to continue in its fight against those drug 
peddlers, drug importers and drug users. We want a country... 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Quirin! 

117 

 
Mr Rutnah: ... free of drugs, and we want a country that is going to progress.  On this 
note, I say, ‘Rest in Peace NATReSA,’ and the job will be done by the Harm Reduction Unit 
of the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life. 

Thank you for your attention. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. François! 

(Interruptions) 

(6.12 p.m.) 

Mr J. F. François (First Member for Rodrigues): Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I think it 

is a bit hard to take the floor after the stand of hon. Rutnah but, however, … 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Please, allow the hon. Member to talk! 

Mr François: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the reality of Mauritius today, is that, there is 
a serious problem with regard to the challenging, dynamic and multiform of substance and 
illicit drug abuse in our society. 

What is being done and needs to be done, are what shall govern our actions towards a 

healthy, clean, safe and drug free society. 

Can  we  achieve  this  delicate  mission,  with  the  various  numbers  of  illicit  substance 
and drugs cases, and abusers reported in our society today? What is the real target to clean 
this social pollution? 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I understand that the sole Government Institution at national 
level responsible for the prevention, treatment and rehabilitation of Substance Abusers is the 
National  Agency  for  the  Treatment  and  Rehabilitation  of  Substance  Abusers  (so-called 
NATReSA). 

The  main  objectives  of  NATReSA  as  elaborated  by  the  hon.  Minister,  stipulate 
clearly, what is expected from this Institution. Unfortunately, NATReSA, today, is subject to 
many criticisms for the weaknesses of its functionality to meet its objectives. What is truly 
needed  is  the  establishment  of  a  National  Institution  as  the  Apex  Authority  with  all  legal 
necessary powers with regard to Drugs Policies. 

 

118 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with due respect to the hon. Minister of Health and Quality 
of Life, I believe that the National Apex Institution should be set up at the level of the Prime 
Minister’s Office, to give a national dimension to deal with this serious and sensible national 
matter.  

This proposal applies to Rodrigues as well, hon. Baloomoody. 

(Interruptions) 

It is for the setting up of a Rodrigues Council On Drugs Abuse under the aegis of the Chief 
Commissioner’s  Office  as  the  main  coordinating,  monitoring  and  evaluating  body  for  the 
implementation of local drugs policies.  

However,  having  said  so,  I  will  restrict  my  intervention  on  this  Bill  to  mainly  the 
cause of Rodrigues in consequence to the repeal of NATReSA in the same line of thought as 
hon. Leopold. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in light of this Bill, I had consultation with CRAC Anti-Drug 
Group,  the  sole  NGO  affiliated  to  NATReSA  and  engaged  in  the  fight  against  substance 
abuse and drugs abuse in Rodrigues to have their views. 

The  vision  and  mission  of  the  Rodrigues  Regional  Government  and  CRAC,  with 

regard to substance and drugs abuse, is to promote a ‘Drug Free Rodriguan Society’.  

En  effet,  M.  le  président,  ‘Nou  Oule  Enn  Societé  Rodriguaise  Ki  Dire  Non  à  La 

Dépendance et L’Abus Des Drogues’. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  CRAC  Anti-Drug  Group,  was  created  by  a  group  of 
young students from the Rodrigues College in 1987, amongst which, Dr. Henri Agathe (today 
Adviser  to  the  Chief  Commissioner  on  Economic  matters)  and  I  myself,  are  the  Two-Co-
Founder Members of CRAC Anti-Drug Group in Rodrigues, the sole NGO fighting against 
drugs abuse in Rodrigues. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, courageously, we walked all around Rodrigues, without any 

logistics to inform the population about the consequences of drugs and substance abuse. 

Our drive to fight drugs and substance abuse strengthened after a residential training 
in 1987 in Mauritius, organised by the valuable collaboration of the ex-Trust Fund, Mr Sam 
Lauthan,  the  then  Chairman  of  Dr.  Idrice  Goomany  Centre  (Mr  Lauthan  who  is  actually 
Assessor on the Commission of Inquiry on Drug Trafficking in our Republic), the Group ‘A’ 

 

119 

de Cassis, the Centre de Rehabilitation de Terre-Rouge, Father Jean Maurice Labour from the 
Diocese of Port Louis, amongst others. 

Today, CRAC, to realise its vision for “A drug Free Rodrigues”, has as objective, “to 
mobilize and put together all resources, whether financial, infrastructural, technical and so 
on.” 

The  philosophy  of  the  group  states  that:  “Within  any  sufferer,  there  is  a  part  of 

ourselves, thus giving a helping hand to him/her is helping ourselves.” Beautiful! 

Amongst its activities performed are: individual psychotherapy, Occupational therapy, 

Group therapy and Family therapy. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, CRAC is accomplishing a fantastic job in Rodrigues and is 
today,  a  national  reference,  as  also  pointed  out  by  my  colleague,  hon.  Leopold,  a  former 
member of this organisation. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the hon. Minister, however, in his speech pointed out, that 
‘apart from the allocation of grants to the two NGOs in Rodrigues, NATReSA has not carried 
out  any  prevention  treatment  and  rehabilitation  programmes  for  substance  abusers  in 
Rodrigues’.  

Indeed,  NATReSA  with  regard  to  Rodrigues,  has  failed  to  play  its  role  fully.  The 
organisation has reported that they have never benefited from the funds voted by Government 
for the Prevention and Rehabilitation of Substance Abuse despite they submitted projects for 
NATReSA approval.  

The  local  organisation  also  complained  that  Rodrigues  has  received  no  Continuous 
Progress  Development  Training  for  the  last  six  years  for  their  personnel  to  cope  with  the 
evolution of our society, despite several requests forwarded to NATReSA. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, CRAC organisation, was very much worried in Rodrigues, 
despite the transitional provision of this Bill and was questioning, what will happen to them 
after the dissolution of NATReSA? Whether the Ministry will continue to support them?  

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  hon.  Minister  has  reassured  the  House  that  for  the  12 
NGOs, including CRAC, benefitting from a  grant from the NATReSA, arrangements have 
been made for them to receive their monthly funding from his Ministry. 

The NGO in Rodrigues, despite its remarkable results, NATReSA for the last 10 years 
has  been    discriminatorily  offering  them  a  meagre  Rs70,000  per  month  for  both,  paying 

 

120 

salaries  to  14  personnel  working  for  the  organisation  and  for  expenditure,  although  the 
consequent increase in cost of living in Rodrigues for those dedicated workers.  

You  will  also  note  that  the  organisation  does  not  benefit  any  CSR  directly  for 
prevention  purposes.  And  here,  I  also  appeal  for  an  increase  of  their  grant  and  financial 
support as raised by hon. Leopold. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the organisation, CRAC Group, manages two centres namely 
at St Gabriel, where the centre is very active in the fight against drug by offering Day Care 
Services, Counselling and Rehabilitation to drug users and alcoholics.   

The second  centre of the Mt  Lubin, Centre D'Alcoologie Paille En Queue, offers a 
residential treatment programme for alcoholics and drug addicts and outpatient facilities for 
alcohol  and  drug  abusers,  inpatient  detoxification  and  relapse  prevention  programmes  to 
alcoholics and drug abusers. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, as Rodrigues society aims totally for a ‘drug-free society’, I 
have  to  point  out  that  we  are  not  for  the  use  of  drug  substitutes.  We  believe  that  any 
substance abuser shall be able to free himself or herself from drugs without any substitutes.  

Rodrigues  has  proved  that  patients,  especially  those  coming  from  Mauritius  on 
treatment, are being rehabilitated, without any substitute. “Enn mari joli sevrage sans enn 
lotte la drogue. Extraordinaire!  Et, nou, à Rodrigues, nou oulé enn société Rodriguaise ki 
dire ‘non’ à la dépendance. » 

M. le président, je pense que ce modèle Rodriguais de la réinsertion et la réhabilitation 

qui est unique, peut être répliqué sur toute la République. 

(Interruptions) 

I didn’t mention that, but I said it: “We do not want to use any drug substitute.” I think the 
message is clear! 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, coming to the real situation in Rodrigues, there is an increase 
in prevalence of cannabis use, followed closely by alcohol abuse which is a gateway to drugs. 
However, an insignificant prevalence of hard drugs is around.  

M. le président, soyez quand même rassuré que l’OPR, mon parti sous le leadership de 
Serge Clair, dans notre volonté politique, est engagé dans la lutte contre le trafic et l’usage 
des drogues illicites à Rodrigues, comme si bien écrit dans notre manifeste électoral. 

 

121 

L’OPR  est  contre  toutes  formes  de  drogues  qui  mettent  en  danger  et  qui  font  mal  à 

l’homme et la femme rodriguais.  

De  plus,  l’OPR,  nous  disons  ‘non’  à  la  légalisation  et la  dépénalisation  du  gandia, 
contrairement à ce qui est écrit dans un quotidien cette semaine concernant la  réclamation de 
la légalisation du gandia à Rodrigues, par un natif de l’île Maurice qui vit à Rodrigues suite à 
la visite à Rodrigues de la ‘Commission of Inquiry on Drug Trafficking’.  

D’ailleurs, il faut souligner que c’est l’OPR et le Chef Commissaire, Serge Clair, mon 
Leader, qui avait demandé à l’honorable Premier ministre pour que la Commission siège à 
Rodrigues.  In that regard, I do hope that the Commission of Inquiry on Drug Trafficking had 
a fruitful mission from their public hearing in Rodrigues.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I have some statistics from the Police; I won’t go into details, 
but it is quite interesting to note that there is a decrease in 2014 and 2015 in the number of 
cases for cultivation of cannabis, the number of persons arrested and others. But however, 
from information I gathered, it has been observed that there are known drug traffickers from 
Mauritius  visiting  Rodrigues  regularly,  I  am  not  quite  sure  on  what  ground  and  for  what 
purpose.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir,  I have to say it here, loud and forceful: “Nou  napa oulé ki 

banne trafiquants la drogue bien connu dan Moris, vine sali (…).” 

The  Deputy  Speaker:    Hon.  François,  Creole  is  not  yet  an  official  language.    So, 

please refrain from using it! 

Mr François:  Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. I think it is quite clear to put it like 

that: “Pour venir salir et pourrir la société rodriguaise.” 

In that connection, I call for the vigilance of the Commissioner of Police, to enhance 
law enforcement and control of arrivals and departures of passengers both at the airport and 
the port in Rodrigues.  

The  Customs  Department  vigilance  is  required,  as  well,  for  the  enhancement  of  the 

prevention, detection and repression of drug trafficking at the port and the airport.  

 

122 

I have to add, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that there should be regular national crack down 
operations,  incognito  missions  and  thorough  investigation  on  alleged  potential  cases  of 
‘blanchiment de l’argent” in Rodrigues. 

On the other hand,  I  have to put on record the  good work of the Police Community 
policing in Rodrigues, which is well appreciated by the population and it is a good platform 
in the fight against drug and prevention for the Rodriguan population. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, illicit drugs and substance are abused by different segments of 
our  population.  In  Rodrigues,  it  is  worth  to  note  that  the  Regional  Government,  in 
collaboration with CRAC Anti-Drug Group and the secondary school institutions have put in 
place two organisations, a Steering Committee for the Youth and a Monitoring Mechanism to 
control abuse of licit drugs such as tobacco and alcohol, which are the main substances of 
abuse amongst students and the youths. 

It is also noted that there is not much new substance introduced on the market referred 
to as synthetic drugs and designer drugs. From statistics I have, in 2014, there were no cases 
on possession of synthetic drugs and in 2015, ADSU reported five cases pending FSL report. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I can only hope that the objectives of NATReSA, will be now 
fully operational with a result-oriented strategy and all transitional provisions of the Bill are 
achieved by the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life for a better drug policy and strategy 
with regard to prevention, treatment and rehabilitation.  A better coordination is expected as 
well in the interest of the drugs and substance abusers. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  Rodrigues  and  the  CRAC-Anti  Drug  Group,  reiterate  their 
commitment towards a drug-free Rodrigues Society and await a new mindset and that more 
resources  and  facilities  are  expected  for  the  proper  functioning  of  the  NGOs  with  the 
signature of a new MoU between the institutions. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, to conclude for now, I wish well, the Ministry of Health and 
Quality of Life and the new institution to take over the responsibility of NATReSA and that 
Government, in its policies against illicit substance and drug control and abuse, continues to 
prioritise the fight for the treatment, rehabilitation of substance abusers and against abusers.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that is my contribution and I thank you for your kind attention. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Boissézon! 

123 

 (6.29 p.m.) 

Mr E. Boissézon (Third Member for La Caverne & Phoenix): M. le président, merci 
de me permettre d’intervenir lors des débats relatifs au projet de loi National Agency for the 
Treatment and Rehabilitation of Substance Abusers (Repeal) Bill.  

J’étais présent dans cette auguste assemblée quand le projet de loi National Agency for 
the Treatment and Rehabilitation of Substance Abusers Bill fut lu pour la deuxième fois en 
1996.  Tous les intervenants étaient optimistes.  La nouvelle loi devrait remplacer le Trust 
Fund for the Treatment and Rehabilitation of Drug Addicts de 1986. L’honorable ministre de 
la sécurité sociale d’alors, et non ministre de la santé, comme l’honorable Mohamed l’a dit, 
Mlle. Jocelyne Minerve devait dire, je cite – 

“The  new  organisation  will  be  required  to  act  as  an  umbrella  organisation  to 
coordinate national efforts to fight substance abuse and provide informative back up 
and appropriate service.” 

Vingt ans après l’histoire se répète. Nous sommes en présence d’un projet de loi qui 
conduira  à  la  résiliation  d’une  loi  existante.  Dois-je  dire  que  nous  avons  un  sad  day 
aujourd’hui ou adopter une position positive et se dire que nous avons pris une décision qui 
nous permettra de mieux préparer l’avenir? 

M.  le  président,  la  fermeture  de  NATReSA  était  déjà  écrite.  En  2011,  Madame  la 
présidente,  quand  elle  était  alors  ministre  de  la  santé,  avait  émis  des  réserves  sur  le 
fonctionnement de  cette institution. En juin 2011, à l’occasion d’une  fonction relative à la 
journée internationale contre l’abus et le trafic de drogues, vous aviez fait remarquer qu’après 
un moment d’observation, qu’elle souhaiterait rendre la NATReSA et l’ONG… 

The  Deputy  Speaker:  Hon.  Boissézon,  please  don’t  bring  the  Speaker  into  this 

debate. 

Mr Boissézon: No, she was then the Minister. 

The Deputy Speaker: I know, but she is now the Speaker. 

Mr Boissézon: She was then the Minister. 

The Deputy Speaker: But she is now the Speaker. 

124 

 
Mr  Boissézon:  Okay!  Le  Dr.  Faysal  Sulliman,  ex-responsable  du  programme  de 
méthadone du ministère de la santé, a été catégorique. Pour lui, la NATReSA n’avait plus sa 
raison d’être et ne servait plus à rien. 

En 2013, monsieur Vishu Bundhun, alors directeur de la NATReSA, avait toutes les 
peines du monde pour répondre aux critiques formulées contre son organisation, prétextant 
un  manque  de  ressource.  Les  critiques  formulées  sont  les  mêmes  que  celles  émises  par  le 
ministre et les membres du gouvernement. Je ne prendrai pas le temps de la Chambre pour les 
manquements énumérés. 

M.  Danny  Philippe,  coordonnateur  de  l'ONG  Leadership  and  Empowerment  for 
Action  and  Development  (LEAD):  ‘Le  gouvernement  doit  aujourd’hui  créer  une  agence 
digne de ce nom, qui puisse juguler le problème de la drogue à Maurice.  La NATReSA a 
fauté  parce  qu’elle  n’a  pas  pu  s’adapter  aux  changements  dans  ce  domaine.  L’agence  est 
restée  statique  alors  que  le  monde  de  la  drogue,  la  réhabilitation  et  la  prévention  ont 
grandement changé ces dernières années.’  

Je citerai un article du Mauricien du 16 janvier 2016, le lendemain de la décision de 
fermer la NATReSA par le Conseil des ministres le 15 janvier. Je citerai monsieur Nicolas 
Ritter, champion de l’honorable Mohamed - 

 «Nicolas Ritter, directeur exécutif de l’ONG Prévention, Information et Lutte contre le 
Sida (PILS)» 

Et je cite – 

« A PILS nous n’avons pas travaillé directement avec la NATReSA mais il est certain 
que  la  dissolution  de  l’agence  n’est  qu’un  aspect  du  problème  de  la  toxicomanie  à 
Maurice.  Il  est  vrai  que  la  NATReSA  était  devenue  simplement  une  agence  de 
décaissement  de  l’argent  de  l’État  mais  il  faut  maintenant,  au  ministère  de  la  Santé, 
adopter une approche plus globale concernant ce problème. » 

Les personnes que j’ai citées sont unanimes. La NATReSA a failli à sa mission. Elle 
était devenue simplement une agence de décaissement. En bref, le gouvernement a eu raison 
de dissoudre la NATReSA. Et, je noterai ici que quand le gouvernement a décidé de fermer la 
NATReSA, - contrairement à ce qu’a dit l’honorable Dr. Joomaye - il a décidé de préserver 
tous les droits des travailleurs. Et là, je cite la loi, la section 4(2)(b) – 

 
“(b) 

125 

Subject to paragraph (e), every person who at the commencement of this Act 
is employed on the permanent and pensionable establishment of the Agency 
shall be entitled to – 

(i) 

to  be  transferred  to  the  permanent  and  pensionable  establishment  of 
the  Ministry  on  terms  and  conditions  which  shall  be  not  less 
favourable than those of his previous employment;” 

Si  la  NATReSA  n’existe  plus  aujourd’hui,  la  mission,  qui  était  sienne,  n’a  pas  été 
accomplie  et  doit  être  atteinte.  Aujourd’hui,  débute  une  nouvelle  ère.  Le  gouvernement 
effectue un paradigm shift. Pendant 30 ans, soit les 10 ans du Trust Fund et les 20 ans de la 
NATReSA pendant lesquels nous eûmes droit à une situation gouvernement financier, ONG 
exécutant.  Aujourd’hui,  nous  sommes  dans  une  situation  où  le  ministère  de  la  Santé  est 
décideur, planificateur, exécutant. 

M. le président, dans le plan stratégique préparé conjointement par le ministère de la 
Santé  et  la  NATReSA  en  2014,  cette  organisation  s’était  fixée  comme  vision  to  make  the 
Republic  of  Mauritius  a  drug  free  society  et  comme  mission  to  create  awareness  on  the 
harmful  effects  of  licit  and  illicit  drugs  and  promote  healthy  lifestyles  through  preventing 
programmes and to support drug users through effective treatment and rehabilitation. 

Est-ce que le ministère de la Santé est prêt à prendre ce challenge ? Je pense qu’il a 
les  moyens  et  que  le  Harm  Reduction  Unit  et  le  Substance  Abuse  Unit,  qui  seront  créés, 
seront à la hauteur des taches qu’on attend d’eux. Aujourd’hui que le ministère de la Santé 
prend les choses en main, il doit prendre en considération les points suivants – 

•  avoir une approche plus globale concernant le problème de la toxicomanie; 
•  être le maître d’œuvre dans le combat contre la drogue, la réhabilitation, la 

prévention et l’éducation des jeunes; 

•  créer une meilleure collaboration des différentes agences, notamment le ministère, 
la  douane,  la  police,  les  organisations  non-gouvernementales,  les  institutions 
scolaires. 

M. le président, le rapport mondial sur les drogues 2015 de l’Office des Nations Unies  
contre  la  drogue  et  le  crime  est  alarmant.  La  situation  générale  mondiale  en  matière  de 
production et d’usage de drogue illicite et de leurs conséquences sanitaires a peu évolué. Les 
conséquences  sanitaires  de  l’usage  illicite  de  drogue  restent  un  sujet  de  préoccupation 

 

126 

mondiale  car  une  large  majorité  des  usagers  problématiques  de  drogue  n’ont  toujours  pas 
accès à un traitement. 

Le  cannabis  demeure  la  drogue  de  prédilection  à  l’échelle  mondiale.  Cultivé  dans 
presque  tous  les  pays  du  monde,  on  estime  qu’entre  130  à    190  millions  de  personnes  en 
fument au moins une fois par an. La hausse de la culture mondiale du pavot à opium et de la 
production  d’opium  jusqu’à  des  niveaux  records  devraient  encore  avoir  des  répercussions 
importantes  sur  le  marché  mondial  des  opiacés.  Cela  suscite  des  inquiétudes  quant  à 
l’ampleur du défi que présentent les groupes criminels organisés de plus en plus complexes et 
évolutifs  pour  les  services  de  détection  et  de  répression.  On  estime  qu’un  total  de  246 
millions de personnes, soit une personne sur 20, entre 15 et 64 ans, a consommé de la drogue 
illicite en 2013. Cela représente une hausse de 3 millions de personnes par rapport à l’année 
précédente. Mais du fait de l’accroissement de la population, l’usage de la drogue illicite est, 
en fait, resté stable. Alors qu’il y a une femme sur trois toxicomanes, seulement un sur cinq a 
accès au traitement. 

Divers  pays  signalent  que  les  nouvelles  substances  psychoactives  continuent  de 
proliférer sur le marché  en termes de quantité  comme de diversité. En  décembre 2014, un 
total de 541 nouvelles substances psychoactives avaient été signalées par 95% de territoires 
au système d’alerte précoce de l’ONUDC. Les produits de synthèse continuent de représenter 
la majorité des nouvelles substances psychoactives signalées en 2014. Le nombre croissant de 
nouvelles substances psychoactives disponibles dans le monde entier montre que le marché 
des drogues de synthèse se diversifie de plus en plus. 

Alors, M. le président, je suis en présence du plan stratégique 2014-2016 énoncé par 
l’honorable Mohamed. J’ai parcouru ce texte et il ne fait pas mention de drogue synthétique. 
Encore un échec de la NATReSA.  

Ces  quelques  paragraphes  du  rapport  apocalyptique  précité  ne  devraient  pas 
décourager les officiers du ministère de la Santé et de la qualité de la vie mais plutôt leur faire 
comprendre  l’ampleur  de  la  tâche  qui  les  attend.  Maurice  ne  sera  pas  épargné  par  les 
marchands de mort. Ils n’ont pas de conscience. Ils n’hésiteraient pas à injecter des doses de 
drogue à leurs propres enfants juste pour l’appât du gain financier  facile. Le ministère devra 
se mettre à l’écoute du monde et de la société pour être au courant de l’évolution du trafic de 
la  drogue,  être  prêt  à  s’adapter  aux  changements,  ne  pas  se  contenter  de  rester  dans  les 
bureaux et donner des directives. 

127 

 
Il est un fait indéniable que la drogue est un fléau mondial et qu’un État ne pourra 
lutter  seul  contre  les  prédateurs  mondiaux.  Maurice  est  membre  de  plusieurs  organisations 
mondiales et régionales  telles que l’Organisation Mondiale de la Santé, la SADC, l’Office 
des Nations unies contre la drogue et le crime, la COMESA et la Commission de l’Océan 
Indien.  Leur  collaboration  technique,  échange  de  données,  partage  d’expériences  et 
financières devraient être sollicités. 

M.  le  président,  que  doit-on  faire  pour  éradiquer  l’usage  de  la  drogue  à  Maurice ? 
Premièrement,  l’extinction  de  l’approvisionnement et  deuxièmement,  l’extinction  de  la 
demande  par  le  traitement.  La  première  action  est  la  réduction  en  empêchant  la  drogue 
d’entrer  dans  le  pays.  Ally  Lazer,  travailleur  social  se  pose  une  question  depuis  plusieurs 
années et il n’a pas trouvé de réponse. Nous sommes un petit pays, nous avons un port et un 
aéroport,  comment  se  fait-il  qu’il  n’y  ait  jamais  de  pénurie  de  drogue  à  Maurice  et  qu’on 
n’arrive pas à stopper leur arrivée?  

Il  est  regrettable  que  nous  n’ayons  pas  suffisamment  de  renseignements  sur  les 
agissements des trafiquants alors que le nombre de consommateurs augmente. J’ai été triste 
quant  à  l’attitude  de  certains  ONG  qui  ont  déposé  devant  la  Commission  d’enquête  sur  la 
drogue. Derrière chaque drogué il y a un trafiquant et ce trafiquant sera l’âme satanique qui 
sera  présente  pour  faciliter  la  rechute  du  pauvre  drogué  sans  suffisamment  de  volonté.  Le 
ministère  doit  amener  les  ONGs  à  collaborer  à  sa  base  de  données  quant  aux  sources 
d’approvisionnement. 

De  temps  en  temps,  nous  apprenons  avec  sensation  qu’une  saisie  de  drogue  a  été 
effectuée dont les valeurs ne cessent d’augmenter. Au fond, ce n’est que le tip de l’iceberg et 
nous avons des frissons rien qu’en pensant à l’ampleur de la demande et de l’argent engagé 
dans cet  enfer où la vie humaine n’a pas de prix. Deuxièmement, si nous voulons réaliser 
notre  vision  d’un  drug-free  State,  le  gouvernement  devra  élaborer  un  programme  de 
traitement de drogués capable de les sortir de la dépendance vers l’indépendance. 

M. le président, aucun drogué ou toxicomane ne pourra se sevrer seul. Certes, il doit y 
avoir quelques exceptions à la règle générale mais nous devons nous concentrer sur ceux qui 
veulent  se  soustraire  des  effets  de  la  drogue  mais  qui  ont  besoin  d’aide.  Le  sevrage  ne 
consiste pas seulement à administrer des médicaments à un toxicomane ou drogué et le tour 
est joué. Pour l’héroïne  ou la cocaïne, les signes sont surtout physiques  avec des douleurs 
violentes et psychiques, angoisse, insomnie. C’est là que dans un premier temps la présence 

 

128 

d’un médecin est essentielle et permet de résoudre la plupart du temps ce passage difficile. Le 
personnel médical doit accompagner un sevrage en douceur tout en limitant ses effets, mais 
c’est aussi de tout mettre en œuvre pour prévenir une rechute. 

Le  toxicomane  devra  résister  à  la  tentation  de  reprendre  la  drogue  qui  soulagera 
immédiatement tous les signes de sevrage. Pour la famille et l’entourage la tâche n’est pas 
aisée. Le drogué souffrira du manque aigu de drogue. Les parents doivent être formés pour 
soutenir sans culpabiliser, être présent sans être étouffant, aider sans conseiller outre mesure. 
D’autre part, il y a le traitement des maladies infectieuses telles que le VIH et l’hépatite C et 
les affres de surdose qui doivent être faits en parallèle. 

M.  le  président,  parallèlement  au  traitement  psychologique,  la  consommation  de  la 
drogue  n’est  pas  un  vice  comme  l’on  pourrait  sommairement  croire.  La  drogue  est 
l’anesthésie  dont  la  personne  croit  avoir  besoin  pour  se  soulager  d’une  douleur  socio-
affective telles le sentiment d’abandon, la difficulté de trouver un sens à sa vie en général, 
souhaité s’intégrer à un groupe, réduire les tensions psychiques, attirer l’attention des parents. 
Le travail psychologique… 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Boissézon, sorry to interrupt. Can you come back to the 

subject and discussion, that is, to repeal on the Bill? 

Mr Boissézon: Yes, but  I think that the treatment forms part of the way  to reduce 

drug consumption and I think that… 

The Deputy Speaker: It does… 

Hon. Boissézon… 

 (Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Boissézon:  Autre  point  que  nous  devons  considérer  lors  de  la  réinsertion  des 
consommateurs de drogue est l’emploi. L’oisiveté est la mère de tous les vices. Nous devons 
préparer un plan de réinsertion des victimes de la drogue. Bien souvent, après leur sevrage les 
consommateurs  de  drogue  recherchent  une  autonomie.  Ils  veulent  une  vie  digne  et 
satisfaisante  et  pour  atteindre  cet  objectif  ils  doivent  trouver  un  emploi  afin  d’avoir  une 

 

129 

indépendance  totale.  Au  départ,  ils  n’ont  pas  les  mêmes  chances  que  les  autres  postulants 
parce qu’ils n’ont pas de qualification, un manque d’éducation et une érosion d’aptitude suite 
à la prise des drogues. 

M.  le  président,  je  crois  que  le  ministère  doit  impérativement  mettre  un  organisme 
capable de mobiliser certains employeurs afin de pouvoir canaliser les demandeurs d’emploi. 
Consulter les ministères concernés… 

The Deputy Speaker : Hon. Boissézon… 

Mr Boissézon : Oui, je termine. 

The Deputy Speaker: Allow me to step in. 

Mr Boissézon : Oui, je termine. 

The Deputy Speaker: I have been very lenient in letting you go out of subject. The 

subject remains repealing this Bill. So, please come back to the subject. 

Mr Boissézon: M. le président, nous sommes à la croisée des chemins. La répression 
sera plus apte après les conclusions de la commission d’enquête par le Juge Paul Lam Shang 
Leen.  Le ministère de la Santé a revu sa stratégie concernant la lutte contre la drogue, les 
ONGs devront revoir leur rôle pour plus d’efficience. Ainsi la vision pour un drug-free State 
pourra se concrétiser. 

Merci. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Members, Madam Speaker will now resume her seat. 

At this stage, Madam Speaker took the Chair. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo! 

(6.53 p.m.) 

Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River): Madam Speaker, when 
I listened to a few of my hon. friends intervening before me, I had realised that this debate 
today could derail a little in some way.  Today, in fact, on ne fait pas le procès du ministre 
Gayan.  We are not only debating on the whole issue of substance abuse, what is the situation 

 

130 

in the world or in the country and the temptation to enlarge the debate, but I will, for my part, 
try to refrain from deviating from the issue which is before this House today, that is, whether 
the NATReSA Act should have been repealed or not.  In fact, this is a repeal Act, Madam 
Speaker.   

The Government is proposing to do away with this institution and this is on what, I 
think,  we  should  pronounce  ourselves.    I  will  also  try  to  refrain  from  what  has  been  said 
before me because we are all aware now that when the NATReSA Bill was adopted in the 
House in 1996, it repeals the existing Treatment and Rehabilitation of Drug Addicts Trust 
Fund Act. The NATReSA was set up to replace the previous Trust Fund which has not been 
performing  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  stakeholders  and  the  Government  of  the  day.  I  think 
somebody said it before me; the Trust Fund was under constant attack in those days subject to 
severe  criticisms  from  various  quarters.  But  strangely,  Madam  Speaker,  the  reasons  put 
forward to do away with the Trust Fund are quite similar to those advanced by the present 
Minister today, to do away with the NATReSA.  

In fact, I was present in 1996 when the NATReSA was set up and when the Bill was 
adopted by the House. I even intervened, but I had to peruse the speech of the then Minister, 
Ms  Minerve  while  she  was  introducing  the  Bill.    She  spelt  out  the  reasons  that  the  then 
Advisory Committee had put forward to justify the doing away of the Trust Fund, namely the 
failure  of  the  Trust  Fund  in  the  implementation  of  effective  prevention,  treatment  and 
rehabilitation  programmes  at  the  national  level.  She  also  mentioned  the  seriousness  of  the 
absence  of  an  integrated  approach  resulting  in  the  disorderly  organisation  of  the  various 
programmes. The then Ministerial Committee recommended that a new agency should be set 
up  which  will  have  a  national  mandate  for  dealing  with  substance  abuse,  prevention  and 
treatment of substance abusers, hence, therefore, the setting up of the NATReSA in 1996.  

When the hon. Minister was introducing the Bill last Tuesday, Madam Speaker, he 
gave several reasons to justify the repeal of this institution. He gave, I think, 10 reasons. He 
listed those reasons and I am just quoting one or two sentences used by the hon. Minister. I 
quote – 

“I am sure that the whole House will agree with me that the NATReSA has 
been  a  major  disappointment  in  the  realm  of  prevention,  treatment  and 
rehabilitation of substance abuse in the country.” 

 

He also said and I quote – 

131 

“NATReSA  has  been  focusing  on  prevention  programmes  which  have  not 
evolved over the years, and  

NATReSA did not have its own treatment and rehabilitation programme.” 

In fact, Madam Speaker, little did - those who proposed the setting up of NATReSA 
at that time after taking so much pain to spell out clearly in the Bill the objects of the Agency 
and taking so much pain to elaborate the powers of the Board - they know that NATReSA 
would one day be closed down for the very reasons that it was set up. 

Madam Speaker, I have been personally involved in many debates and participated in 
many debates on the drug issues. Since 1991, when I was Attorney General and the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister was then Prime Minister of the MMM/MSM Government,  I contributed in 
amending the law in many ways. It was in those days, for example, that the first amendment 
came before this House to freeze drug assets as an asset of drug traffickers. I remember that 
we amended the Dangerous Drugs Act to disallow those convicted of those drugs offences to 
enjoy  certain  privileges  which  other  convicted  persons  could  enjoy.  We  amended  the 
Constitution to prevent a convicted or charged for drug offence to be released on bail and this 
amendment  to  the  Constitution  was  struck  down  as  we  all  know  before  the  Judicial 
Committee of the Privy Council. So, for a long time now, we have been involved with drug 
issues.  

As I said today, I am not going to make the procès of the Minister. But I have to say 
that I have my own reservations and doubts on the advisability and soundness of winding up 
the NATReSA for several reasons, Madam Speaker.  

Yes,  in  some  way  the  NATReSA  has  been,  as  alleged  by  the  hon.  Minister,  a 
disappointment, but we must delve into the reasons as to why the situation has evolved in the 
way  that  it  has  evolved.  But  let  me  say,  firstly,  the  reasons  why  I  do  not  agree  with  the 
reasoning of the Minister and Government.  

NATReSA  was  set  up  to  act  as  a  broad  based  and  multi-sectoral  agency,  which 
included representations of different Ministries – somebody has said it before me  – Social 
Security, the Prime Minister’s Office, the Commissioner of Prisons, the Ministry of Health, 
four representatives of NGOs, representatives from the employers and representatives from 

 

132 

the trade unions.  The underlying philosophy behind setting up this type of Agency and to 
quote the words of the previous Minister, Ms Minerve – 

“To  act  as  an  umbrella  organisation,    to  coordinate  national  efforts  to  fight 
substance abuse and provide information back up and service intervention.” 

In  other  words,  Madam  Speaker,  the  Bill  was  introduced  to  foster  the  collaboration  of  all 
partners  involved  in  substance  abuse,  prevention,  in  the  treatment  and  rehabilitation  of 
substance abuse.   

In  her  speech,  it  was  clear  that  the  Bill  would  enable  the  new  organisation  to 
coordinate  and  monitor  in  a  systematic  manner  programmes  being  implemented  by  the 
various Ministries, organisations and Force Vives and the NGOs.  NATReSA was, therefore, 
set up to operate as an apex body with the objective of unifying, harmonising the different 
operations  and  activities  of  the  Ministry  and  the  NGOs.    This  was the  essence,  the  raison 
d’être of the NATReSA.  This is what obtains in several jurisdictions, Madam Speaker.   

I  heard  hon.  François  saying:  ‘we  should  have  a  body  under  the  Prime  Minister’s 
Office’.    Okay,  we  do  away  with  the  NATReSA.    So,  the  idea  is  to  have  a  body  which 
coordinates  all the different Agencies or Ministries.   In  fact,  I am sure the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister would have forgotten that. In 1992 or 1993, I remember, as Attorney General, we 
came  up  with  such  a  proposal  and  this  apex  body  was  set  up  under  the  Prime  Minister’s 
Office, long years before the NATReSA saw the light of the day in 1996. 

It was in 1992 or 1993.  The Prime Minister’s Office was to steward, lead a multi-
facetted  body  with  those  coordinating  ambitions,  in  order  to  promote  the  fight  against 
substance abuse. 

Madam Speaker, when we say all this, what is the course of action that the Minister is 
proposing  today  after  having  signed  the  death  warrant  of  NATReSA?  The  Minister  is 
proposing the setting up of a comprehensive Substance Abuse Unit, which will - I grant him 
that, honestly - revamp the Harm Reduction Unit of the Ministry of Health, that is, a recast, a 
revamped Harm Reduction Unit. 

Nevertheless,  whatever  the  unit  the  hon.  Minister  will  set  up,  it  will  be  a  body 
comprising  of  only  public  officials  working  under  the  directives  of  the  Minister  or  the 

 

133 

Permanent Secretary. This body or unit will be deprived of its broad-based and multi-sectoral 
dimensions which were the aim behind the setting up of the NATReSA. 

Madam Speaker, the fight against drug abuse, as we have just heard, is a complex, is a 
national enterprise, requiring efforts from all the stakeholders on a national level.  It cannot 
be  the  war  waged  by  one  unit  comprising  of  only  government  officials.    However  well-
motivated these public officials may be, the war against substance abuse has a multi-pronged 
dimension and must be based on a multi-pronged approach.  The ingredients of this approach 
are  sensibilisation,  prevention,  repression,  treatment,  rehabilitation,  as  we  all  know.  
Therefore, the  conditions for a successful  campaign  and a successful war are multifarious, 
hence  the  reason  why  the  war  cannot  be  left  in  the  sole  hands  of  public  officials  or  the 
executive. 

If it is true that repression, for example, falls under the exclusive jurisdiction of the 
police  and  the  judiciary,  it  goes  without  saying,  Madam  Speaker,  that  with  regard  to  the 
treatment, rehabilitation dimension, this cannot and should not be left only in the hands of the 
executive, but on the contrary, as it is the norm in other jurisdiction, other stakeholders, the 
NGOs, the force vives, civil society, should have a word, should take an active part in these 
programmes. This is why technicians and social workers in the field of substance abuse refer 
to harm reduction, demand reduction, and supply  reduction. Supply  reduction refers to the 
part played by the police, the judiciary, the legislature, whilst demand reduction pertains to 
the  field  of  prevention,  treatment  and  rehabilitation,  and  harm  reduction  refers  to  the 
dispensing of drug substitute like methadone and so on. 

The Minister, today or last Tuesday, has also justified his decision to close down the 
NATReSA by highlighting the different ways this organisation failed, its inefficiencies, the 
extent to which it has been a burden to taxpayers.  The Minister mentioned, in his speech, 
inherent weaknesses and dysfunctioning at all levels of the NATReSA. 

I hold no brief for the NATReSA.  I agree, I subscribe and endorse the view that the 
NATReSA was suffering from many inefficiencies, many flaws in many ways.  The Minister 
even mentioned that a previous assessment on NATReSA was carried out by the officers of 
the Ministry under the previous Government in 2012 and this led to no major improvements, 
and that he himself in mid-2015 had another assessment carried out and, unfortunately, this 
assessment also yielded no result. 

134 

 
Madam Speaker, I cannot again, unfortunately, endorse the reasoning of the Minister 
and his Ministry.   I say so, because if the  NATReSA failed to fulfil its mission under the 
previous Government especially, I ask myself the question: who is to be blamed?  Because 
when we look at the law, Madam Speaker, we see that section 15 of the Act reads as follows 
– 

“Powers of Minister 

(1) The Minister may give such written directions of a general character to the 
Board, not inconsistent with this Act, as he considers necessary in the public interest, 
and the Board shall comply with those directions.” 

To  me,  the  ineffectiveness,  the  dysfunctioning,  the  injudicious  use  of  public  funds, 
alluded  to  by  the  hon.  Minister,  for  these  long,  long  years,  was  the  result  of  the  previous 
Minister under the past Government to exercise the powers conferred upon him by the law to 
monitor and to preserve the proper and effective functioning of the NATReSA. 

To  my  mind,  Madam  Speaker,  granted  that  the  hon.  Minister  may  have  been  right 
with  regard  to  some  of  his  criticisms  concerning  certain  flaws  in  the  functioning  of  the 
NATReSA,  according  to  me,  the  hon.  Minister  should  have  remedied  the  situation  by 
implementing corrective measures himself and directing his Ministry to exercise tighter and 
stricter financial control over the organisation. 

I  must  say,  again  with  regret,  that,  since  January  2015,  there  has  been  no  director 
appointed to lead the organisation, and this was confirmed by a question put in this House by 
hon. Quirin in September 2015.  Since January 2015, there was no director at the head of this 
organisation. So, this is eliminating totally an agency which had been an effective tool during 
its golden days - and I will come to the golden days of the NATReSA very briefly.  What the 
Minister is doing today, as they say in French, c’est jeter le bébé avec l’eau du bain, Madam 
Speaker. 

According to my information, things have been different; from what the hon. Minister 
has told us.  I have a different picture of what happened, in fact, during all these years, during 
these decades, and how the situation did evolve.  I don’t know if the hon. Minister was fed 
with  the  proper  information,  but  in  fact,  from  my  information,  the  Ministry  had 
systematically,  over  the  years,  failed  to  give  its  full  support  to  enable  the  NATReSA  to 
deliver  and  fulfil  its  mission.    The  NATReSA  had  only  three  technical  staffs.    It  was 

 

135 

operating with 16 members of staff only when the number of posts on the establishment of 
NATReSA was 29.  It was, therefore, never fully staffed.  The agency has never been led by a 
director on its establishment, but a director recruited on contract. 

The NATReSA had known more than six directors in the past years, on contract, and I 
have documents with me when, on two occasions, at least, the Board of NATReSA requested 
the Ministry - I am talking, of course, of the past Government - had requested the Ministry to 
have the MAB or the public sector governance to conduct inquiries, to set up investigation on 
the agency, but the Ministry then never responded, never took any decision in that direction.  
I  have  with  me  two  letters  dated  July  2009  and  October  2011,  Madam  Speaker.    In  those 
letters, the Chairman of the NATReSA pleaded to the Chief Executive of the Ministry then, 
and  mentioned  indecent  wastage  of  public  funds,  forgery  of  logbooks,  détournement  of 
original objective of activities. 

“The Board unanimously agreed that a letter be sent to you for the setting up of a full-
fledged enquiry by the Management Audit Bureau or any appropriate authority so as 
to shed light on all these issues.” 

But nothing was done. The Ministry never pursued the matter.  

In  2011  also  the  same  thing  took  place,  the  Board,  the  Chairman  denouncing 

irresponsible officers.  

“The Board, therefore, agrees that a full-fledged enquiry be carried out by the Office 
of the Public Sector Governance of the Prime Minister’s Office in order to help us to 
put an end to unacceptable abuses, malpractices and wastage of public funds.” 

But again, there was nothing which came out of these requests of the Board of the 
NATReSA in those days. Therefore, Madam Speaker, even the assessment referred to by the 
hon. Minister of 2012 which dealt with the financial staff and administrative problems of the 
agency  and  it  was  up  to  the  Ministry  then,  after  the  assessment  was  carried  out,  the 
responsibility devolved on the Ministry to monitor and implement those recommendations, 
but the then administration and the Ministry lacked the political will to do so and that is why 
no improvement took place.  

Therefore, Madam Speaker, when  we look at all these reasons  and there is another 
fundamental reason also, the NATReSA - I use the word of the hon. Minister - migrated from 
one Ministry to another, from Social Security to the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life 

 

136 

and each Minister taking office came up with his own idea, a new policy. So, I think it is 
unfair that the NATReSA is now made to bear the responsibility that no improvement has 
taken place, as we had heard from different Members on the other side of the House.  

Madam  Speaker,  I  talk  of  the  golden  days  of  the  NATReSA.  I  think  somebody 
mentioned this before me. Even with regard to the Master Plan of 2004-2009, this is what I 
can read in the preface signed by hon. Minister Lauthan who was the then Minister of Social 
Security, I quote: 

“I commend the NATReSA and all the other agencies and NGOs for their inputs and 
unparalleled support from which this document has emerged.” 

And when we look at the document, Madam Speaker, we see that the National Drug Control 
Master Plan was drafted by a core team consisting of the following members: Dr. Sulliman, 
Coordinator, Medical and Research Unit of the NATReSA.  This document was reviewed by 
a  Committee  consisting  of  the  following  persons:  the  Chairman  of  the  NATReSA,  the 
Officer-in-Charge and so on and so forth. Even the Strategic Plan of 2012 and 2014; and on 
this issue, I was really shocked to hear what the hon. Minister had to say. This is what the 
hon. Minister said in his speech - 

“The  Harm  Reduction  Unit  of  my  Ministry  had  worked  out  a  strategic  plan  for 
NATReSA in 2014 (…)” 

Which it has not implemented! In fact, it should have been NATReSA (National Agency for 
the Treatment and Rehabilitation of Substance Abusers) working out the strategic plan for the 
Harm Reduction Unit. I have a copy of this document with me, Madam Speaker, and it was 
the  Strategic  Plan  of  2014-2016  -  I  see  that  it  was  the  NATReSA  which  drafted  this 
document.  Therefore,  Madam  Speaker,  NATReSA  had  come  up  with  several  positive 
objectives in the past. In 2008, it was the NATReSA which proposed, for the first time, the  

setting up of an Observatoire Régional de Vigilance concerning illicit drugs and substance 
abuse.  

So, when we take into account what had taken place, Madam Speaker, my point is 
that  the  hon.  Minister,  according  to  me,  should  have  had  a  new  look,  should  have  recast, 
should have revamped this organisation, seen to it that his Ministry exercise stricter control to 
prevent any wastage of public funds. I think this body, which I mentioned in the beginning of 
my speech, which is a multisectoral body, should have continued to operate in order to help 

 

137 

the  Ministry  in  its  fight  against  drug  abuse.  I  think  there  is  another  reason  also,  Madam 
Speaker, why the Ministry has been ill-advised to repeal the 1996 Act.  

I come to the Commission of Inquiry on Drug Trafficking which had been set up in 
July 2015, and as part of the Terms of Reference of the Commission of Inquiry presided by 
Mr Lam Shang Leen, we can see that this Commission of Inquiry has been tasked to enquire 
into the operational effectiveness of the various agencies involved in the fight against drug 
trafficking, into the need for fostering linkages and coordination among the various agencies 
and  other  local  regional  entities  dealing  with  drug  related  matters  for  strategic  directions. 
Since  the  Commission  of  Inquiry,  therefore,  would  have  enquired  or  is  enquiring  into  the 
effectiveness of the various agencies, I think it would have been more proper to have allowed 
this Commission of Inquiry to conduct an enquiry into the performance of NATReSA and 
leave it to the Commission to decide upon the future agency. Why was the Commission of 
Inquiry deprived of this possibility of enquiring into NATReSA? I must inform the House 
also,  I  have  had  information  that  NATReSA  has  been  summoned  to  appear  before  the 
Commission of Inquiry.  

I  have  a  copy  of  the  summon  with  me,  I  can  show  it  to  the  hon.  Minister  in  case 

nobody has showed it to him – 

 ‘Commissioner of Inquiry on Drug Trafficking in Mauritius Summons to Witness.  

You  are  hereby  summoned  to  appear  before  the  Commissioner  appointed  by  the 
President to enquire into all aspects of drug trafficking (…),’ 

This letter is addressed to - I will not give the name - the Officer-in-Charge, NATReSA, Max 
City Building, Poudrière Street, Port Louis.  

So,  NATReSA  was  summoned  as  a  witness  and,  from  what  I  have  been  told,  the 
Ministry did not allow this Officer-in-Charge to go and depone, and he never went to depone 
before the Commission of Inquiry. I think this is wrong. Even though Government had taken 
the decision in January of this year, I think, the Cabinet decision announced that NATReSA 
would be done away with, but even though this decision was taken in January - the law has 
not been passed yet, it is today that we are passing the law and, as I said, NATReSA will be 
done away with today, after the law would have been voted and signed by the President and 
so on. I think the Ministry or the hon. Minister should have allowed this representative of 
NATReSA to depone before the Commission of Inquiry. It would have given a chance to the 
Commission  of  Inquiry  to  pronounce  itself  upon  the  effectiveness  of  this  agency  and  the 

 

138 

reasons why NATReSA has suffered from so much inefficiency, as we have been told by the 
hon. Minister.  

Madam Speaker, I will end with what I have said at the beginning, on a point on the 
drug issue. Madam Speaker, I will make an appeal to the hon. Minister. I know this is not a 
debate on the drug issue.  I  am fully  conscious of that  and  I  don’t  want  to embark upon  a 
debate on the drug issue. 

But  I  will  just  make  an  appeal  to  the  hon.  Minister  because  we  know  that  since  the 
Minister  has  taken  office,  his  relationship  with  the  NGOs  has  not  been  very  conducive  in 
terms of collaboration and dialogue. It is clear that with the winding up of the NATReSA, the 
NGOs  will  be  sidelined,  will  be  overpowered  and  will  have  less  say  now  in  the  different 
programmes set up to fight against substance abuse. 

Madame la présidente, les travailleurs sociaux sont au premier rang et sont témoins de 
l’impact des politiques publiques.  Ils sont la source d’information d’une grande valeur pour 
les décideurs publics. Ils sont les témoins privilégiés des causes de problèmes mais aussi des 
failles  dans  l’implémentation  des  politiques  publiques.    Étant  donné  que  l’argent  investi  à 
travers  les  ONGs,  il  nous  faut  tous  nous  assurer  que  l’État  et  ce  secteur  travaillent  en 
complémentarité. Donc, c’est pourquoi je fais un appel à l’honorable ministre Gayan de ne 
pas  rompre  cette  tradition  de  notre  système  de  gouvernance  qui  est  de  travailler  en  étroite 
collaboration et en proximité avec les ONGs. 

Sadly enough also, we have heard how the different NGOs have been appealing to the 
hon.  Minister  or  to  the  Ministry  urgently  for  a  new  Master  Plan  on  prevention  to  be 
elaborated which will be an indispensable tool in their daily fight against drug abuse.  There 
is  no  denying  the  fact,  Madam  Speaker,  that  with  the  input  of  the  NGOs  and  other 
stakeholders, we would have a more holistic and comprehensive Master Plan. This is why I 
appeal to the hon. Minister to rope in all the NGOs and come up with this new Master Plan as 
urgently as possible because we all know, Madam Speaker, what is happening in the country 
today. I don’t have to go as long as hon. Boissézon has gone on the situation. 

(Interruptions) 

Because in two words, we can say that with the flooding of the new drugs in our country, it is 
clear that we are entering into a new era in the struggle against drug abuse. I think all of us 

 

139 

read  in  ‘Le  Mauricien’  newspaper  about  this  article  on  this  young  man  called  ‘Ronaldo’ 
which appeared this week.  

In fact, the young face of drug addiction urges our country to develop new strategies to 
fight  against  a  complex  and  multi-dimensional  problem  which  is  creating  havoc  among 
families,  parents  and  social  workers.    I  am  sure  we  all,  as  MPs,  know  about  this.  In  my 
Constituency, in all the  cités,  I am sure  you have heard about that, Madam Speaker, what 
ravage,  as  we  say,  these  synthetic  drugs  are  doing.    A  lady,  last  week,  told  me  -  I  won’t 
mention the cité - she was going through the cité, she is a resident of the cité, and she saw a 
young man of about 13 to 14 years who was shooting another child of about 8 to 9 years old.  

(Interruptions) 

And I swear, Madam Speaker, this is what has been reported to me by a lady living in one of 
these cités. We can just imagine. This is not a political issue.  The drug issue concerns all of 
us, Madam Speaker, and it would seem that the battle against the drug scourge is a lost one 
because  in  spite  of  all  efforts  that  all  past  Governments  have  been  doing  with  the  help  of 
other  agencies,  and  this  is  the  case  for  the  world,  that  we  are  fighting  the  battle  against 
substance abuse. 

More  than  ever,  Madam  Speaker,  we  need  actions  which  are  based  on  a  long  term 
vision  driven  by  honest  evaluation  and  assessment  of  the  measures  taken  in  the  past.  To 
succeed in this endeavour, we need, Madam Speaker, this platform, call it NATReSA, call it 
any other name you want, but we need a platform which will regroup experts, social workers, 
psychologists, doctors and NGOs to solve such a complex societal ill. This is why, Madam 
Speaker, today to me it is a sad day for the thousands of toxicomanes.  It is a sad day for all 
these  thousands  and  thousands  of  toxicomanes  who,  unfortunately,  are  to  be  found  in  our 
country when the hon. Minister, by a stroke of a pen, is sending to the gallows an instrument 
which  if  properly  reviewed,  recast,  revamped,  could  have  provided  solace  to  those 
innumerable drug abusers who are primarily sick people. 

I have done, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Gayan! 

 (7.27 p.m.) 

 

140 

Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, allow me, first of all, to thank all the hon. Members who 
have participated in the debates pertaining to the Bill before the House. I would like to thank 
not only the hon. Members on this side of the House, but also the hon. Members on the other 
side of the House. I am very thankful to the hon. Members on this side of the House who 
have  made  my  task  very  easy  in  summing  up  this  Bill.  They  have,  in  fact,  addressed  the 
House and mentioned many of the things that I ought to have mentioned when I was going to 
sum up this Bill. So, that relieves me of that unnecessary task of coming again on issues that 
have already been addressed.  

But, let me say, Madam Speaker, first of all, that this Bill is not the Bill of the Minister 
of Health and Quality of Life personally. This is a Bill which has come before the House as a 
result of repeated reports on the work and performance of NATReSA over the years. There 
have been reports prepared by established firms like Deloitte & Touche, Appavoo Associates, 
plus reports by my Ministry and it is not that I woke up in the morning and I said - as hon. 
Shakeel Mohamed said - “I am going to murder NATReSA”.   

That’s not what happened.  

(Interruptions) 

In  fact,  it  was  something  that  ought  to  have  happened  some  years  back.  But  when  I 
became  Minister  -  and  I  said  so  in  my  speech  on  the  Second  Reading  -  I  gave  time  to 
NATReSA to come up to speed and to fulfil the mission that it had under the NATReSA Act.  
We gave them time; we gave them resources and we entrusted them with the task of helping 
those who, unfortunately, have succumbed to this terrible scourge of dangerous drugs.  

I had reports prepared not only by those who are in the Harm Reduction Unit, but I had 
reports prepared also by those who are not connected at all with the Harm Reduction Unit. It 
is only when I was satisfied that there was no other option than to murder NATReSA that this 
Bill came to the House. 

(Interruptions) 

In fact, Madam Speaker, I wish to reassure the House on a few things which have been 
mentioned.  First  of  all,  my  dear  friends  from  Rodrigues,  the  fact  that  NATReSA  will  no 
longer exist, does not mean that the funding to the NGOs will cease also. The funding will 
continue and arrangements have been made at the level of the Ministry that the funding will 

 

141 

continue under new arrangements made by the Ministry. So, this is not a fight between the 
Ministry and the NGOs. This is not a fight between the Minister and the NGOs.  

In fact, Madam Speaker, when I became Minister, when we knew that the methadone 
situation was getting out of hand, we had to do something about it. And that something was a 
decentralisation. I had lots of consultations with all the NGOs. Several consultations! And it 
was  agreed  that  we  had  to  decentralise.  Why  did  we  choose  the  compounds  of  the  Police 
stations?  We went all round the country looking for places other than Police stations for the 
distribution of methadone. I went to Barkly because the Ministry of Health and Quality of 
Life has a building in Barkly.   

When  we  went  there  with  my  officers  and  the  Police  Officers,  the  people  from 
Résidence Barkly came out protesting that we were going to put a site for the distribution of 
methadone  there.  It’s  not  that  I  wanted  to  put  methadone  in  the  compound  of  the  Police 
Stations. Never! But, we had no other option. It had become so critical with regard to anti-
social behaviour that something had to be done and it had to be done fast. I will challenge 
anybody on the other side of the House to say that they want methadone to be distributed as it 
was  being  done  in  the  past.  I’ll  challenge  anyone  of  them!  Because  it  has  worked,  it  is 
working. They keep saying that we have stopped the methadone treatment. Of course, not! 
The Press keeps saying that we have stopped the methadone treatment. It has never stopped! 
We still have about 5,000 people on a daily  basis receiving their treatment. 5,000 Madam 
Speaker! We have read lots of things in the papers which are inaccurate. 

Last  Tuesday,  I  had  the  visit  of  Dr.  Catherine  Gaud  who  is  the  Head  of  Harm 
Reduction Unit in Reunion. She works very closely with PILS. She came to see me at the 
office. I asked her: what was the situation in Reunion? She was talking to me about all the 
harm reduction things. I had also asked Dr. Mété who had written lots of critical articles in 
the papers about our harm reduction and decentralisation. I asked Dr. Mété, in Reunion, when 
I  was  there:  how  many  patients  do  you  have  on  methadone  in  Reunion?  250,  Madame  la 
présidente! Here, we have 5,000 to manage on a daily basis. It’s not the same situation at all. 
So, it is alright for the papers to write and for people to say all sorts of things, but the reality 
on the ground is different. This is why we had to do what we did. I, again, challenge anyone 
to say: ‘Yes, go back to the old system.’ No one will accept that. 

142 

 
Let me, Madam Speaker, address some of the issues which have been raised by the 
Members,  on  the  other  side.  Hon.  Shakeel  Mohamed  said  that,  with  the  programme  of 
substance abuse being practised at the Ministry, the number of people with HIV has gone up. 
I have a report, Madam Speaker, on statistics, on HIV/AIDS, as at end of February 2016. I 
am  going  to  table  it  because  we  do  not  come  here  to  this  House  to  mislead  anyone  or  to 
engage in demagogy. We are responsible Ministers and we come here because we believe in 
what we are doing. This is what the report says – 

“During  the  month  of  February  2016,  21  new  cases  of  HIV/AIDS  were  registered 
among the Mauritian population by the Virology Laboratory Services of the Ministry 
of Health and Quality of Life. The monthly average of new cases were 46 in the year 
2006-2010 compared to 26 in the year 2011-2015. For the first two months of 2016, 
the average stood at 22 cases.” 

It is going down, Madam Speaker, despite all the campaign that is being waged. There are 
other statistics. I am going to table it so that no one will say that we are misleading the House 
for doing what we are doing. Next time, I will urge hon. Members, before brandishing figures 
and statistics in the House, to be careful; to be careful about what they say and the assurance 
with which they say what they say. So, I am tabling this in the House, Madam Speaker. 

Let me also say, Madam Speaker, that I do not need to have quarrels with the NGOs. 
But I expect NGOs which are non-governmental bodies - the NGO means non-governmental 
organisation, we are Governmental organisations - to have a role to play and I am very, very 
satisfied about the role the NGOs play in Rodrigues. There, they are real NGOs. 

(Interruptions) 

They do not depend on funding from Government to do what they do. They go door-to-door 
and they do not have CSR. They generate their own funds to come to the rescue of those who 
happen to be involved in substance abuse. 

Madam  Speaker,  it’s  very  easy  for  people  to  say  all  sorts  of  things  about  Minister 
Gayan and the NGOs. I am going to table this as well, Madam Speaker. I have in my hands a 
letter  from  Dr.  Idrice  Goomany  Centre,  dated  13  March  2015,  giving  a  list  of  clients  for 
induction of the Methadone Substitution Therapy for BSH ward and Ste Croix. I have a list of 
49 persons. I am going to table it because it is important that the House knows what goes on 
in the NGOs. The number of names that are mentioned twice is alarming. I am tabling this as 
well,  Madam  Speaker.  It  is  important  that  we  know  all  this  because  when  the  Minister  of 

 

143 

Health says something, he says it on the basis of evidence and this is what I ask of the NGOs, 
like  the  problem  we  had  with  the  Needle  Exchange  Programme,  to  be  responsible  and 
transparent.  

You  will  recall,  Madam  Speaker,  in  the  House, there  were  PQs.  When  the  number 
they  used,  being  used  monthly,  jumped  from  10,000  to  35,000  and  then  jumped  again  to 
65,000, I said I may have a big public health issue on my hands, and I need to know what’s 
happening. When I asked questions, the Minister is bad, is wicked; he is trying to get into 
things  that  he  does  not  need  to  get  into.  Ultimately,  if  something  goes  wrong  with  public 
health,  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  will  hold  me  responsible,  as  I  needed  to  know  what’s 
going on. When the needles jumped from 10,000 to 65,000, there must be a reason. The hon. 
Members, on the other side, keep talking about the NGOs in glowing terms. The Government 
of Mauritius, the Ministry of Health, Madam Speaker, is doing much more than the NGOs 
with  regard  to  substance  abuse.  We  have  more  sites  where  we  distribute  needles  than  the 
NGOs. Not only that, we pay the NGOs to distribute needles. Rs50,000 a month. We need to 
know all this because they paint such a rosy picture about the NGOs. I don’t fight the NGOs 
because  I  want  to  fight  them,  but  I  want  them  to  be  accountable,  I  want  them  to  be 
responsible and I want them to show results, especially when public funds are involved. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, let me also add that hon. Ganoo, for all his experience - I am sorry, he is a 
good  friend  -    said  that  the  Minister  or  the  Ministry  had  prevented  NATReSA  to  go  and 
depone before the Commission of Inquiry. How can any Minister, any person say to anyone 
who has got a summons not to attend? How can that be? From somebody who is a lawyer, 
how can he come and say that in the House? It is totally untrue! In fact, the NATReSA will 
appear at the end of April 2016 before the Commission of Inquiry. 

(Interruptions) 

No, they can still go and talk about their experience or whatever they have done. 

But, to come and say that the Minister has decided to ask NATReSA to ignore a summons of 
the Commission of Enquiry, I will be committing an offence myself. 

So, let us be very clear about all this. It is not a fight between the Minister and the 
NGOs. It is a fight for the soul of our youth. It is a fight to make Mauritius drug-free. At the 
very time that we are having this debate in this House, Madam Speaker, in New York at the 

 

144 

United Nations, there is a meeting going on drugs. A summit where all the major countries 
are  represented  and  do  you  know  what  they  are  discussing  there,  Madam  Speaker?  It  is 
important that we know all this because when I say that NATReSA has not lived up to its 
expectations, it is because drugs today is not only heroin, is not only the things that we hear 
about cannabis and all this. With the problems in the Middle East, Madam Speaker, in Syria - 
Syria used to be a great manufacturer of pharmaceutical products, but with the war in Syria, 
all the pharmaceutical factories have been turned into producers of drugs! And, many of the 
jihadists,  the  terrorists  are  taking  what  is  called  ‘chemical  courage’  to  fight  in  the  war  in 
Syria! And, the trade name, Madam Speaker, of that ‘chemical courage’ is Captagon. That 
drug masks pain, fear and hunger and it is believed that the Paris attackers last year were all 
taking Captagon.  

So, when we speak of drugs, when we speak of dangerous drugs, of NATReSA, we 
expect a body that is being funded publicly to be at the forefront to show us the way and to 
tell us where the problem lies. We should not be the ones to be telling them what to do. Hon. 
Ganoo was right when he said it was going to be the apex body. But, it did not play the part 
of an apex body. When we come to the House to say that we need to repeal the NATReSA 
Act, it is because we are convinced that the Harm Reduction Unit of the Ministry which will 
be beefed up, which will be under new leadership, will be able to meet the challenges of the 
drug situation in the country. 

Substance abuse is a big problem, Madam Speaker, and we need everybody. I agree 
with hon. Ganoo that this is not a fight that we alone can fight in Government. It is a fight 
where the NGOs must also fight. Madam Speaker, late last year, there was a team that came 
from UNAIDS to do a survey on the methadone distribution. I accompanied them at 6.00 in 
the  morning  to  the  distribution  sites  and  the  NGOs  were  supposed  to  be  there.    If  the 
methadone has not worked, it is because the NGOs failed to provide the psychosocial support 
that they were supposed to give to all the drug addicts. And, I got the UNAIDS people to note 
that when they went to all the sites where the NGOs ought to have been, there was no one!  

The NGOs must be part of the solution, but they cannot be part of the solution if they 
stay in their big office somewhere in Port Louis! They have to be sur le terrain. They have to 
be there where the action is. They have to be there where the targeted population is and this is 
what makes the NGO an NGO. An  NGO cannot be bureaucratised. The Head of an NGO 

 

145 

cannot  become  a  CEO.  NGOs  cannot  only  do  advocacy.  NGOs  must  get  their  feet  on  the 
ground and do the work that is expected of them. 

This  is  why,  Madam  Speaker,  we  have  come  to  the  House  with  this  Bill.    Madam 
Speaker, hon. Ganoo spoke about the NGOs, we have set up a National Drug Observatory 
with all participants, with the NGOs and I am sad to have to say, Madam Speaker, that when 
the NGOs went before the Commission of Enquiry on Drugs, when they were asked to give 
information  to  the  Commission  so  that  it  could  do  its  work  in  the  national  interest,  not  a 
single person denounced anybody! I hope that the names given by the social worker, Mr Ally 
Lazer, will provide some light in the fight against drug trafficking. 

Drug trafficking is bad. No one can say that he/she is immune from drugs. Anyone 
can be a victim and anyone’s child can be a victim. This is why we all need to support the 
fight against drugs. The NGOs who are in touch with the people who are taking drugs must 
have information and they must share that information in the national interest and they don’t 
do it! My fight, Madam Speaker, before I sit down, is not to fight the NGOs, my fight is to 
fight drug trafficking and to make Mauritius drug-free. 

With these words, I commend the Bill to the House. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Members, the hon. Minister of Health and Quality of Life has 
stated in his speech that he is tabling a list of patients on methadone or substitution therapy 
from Dr. Idrice Goomany Centre. In my own judgement I do not think that I can accept this 
document  in  view  of  the  fact  that  names  should  be  kept  confidential.  I  will  therefore  not 
accept the document and it would not be rendered public. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Gayan: But I wanted to make the point. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Bill read a second time and committed. 

 

 

 

 

146 

COMMITTEE STAGE 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

THE NATIONAL AGENCY FOR THE TREATMENT AND 
REHABILITATION OF SUBSTANCE ABUSERS (REPEAL) BILL 

(NO. III OF 2016) 

The  National  Agency  for  the  Treatment  and  Rehabilitation  of  Substance  Abusers 

(Repeal) Bill (No. III of 2016) was considered and agreed to. 

On  the  Assembly  resuming  with  Madam  Speaker  in  the  Chair,  Madam  Speaker 

reported accordingly. 

Third Reading 

On  motion  made  and  seconded,  the  National  Agency  for  the  Treatment  and 
Rehabilitation of Substance Abusers (Repeal) Bill (No. III of 2016) was read the third time 
and passed. 

ADJOURNMENT 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  that  this  Assembly  do  now 

adjourn to Tuesday 26 April 2016 at 11.30 a.m. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun) rose 

and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned.  

At 7.55 p.m. the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Tuesday 26 April 2016 at 

11.30 a.m. 

 

WRITTEN ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

STATE BANK - GOVERNMENT SHAREHOLDING 

(No. B/212) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of 
Finance and Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
whether, in regard to the State Bank of Mauritius Ltd., he will state the – 

 
(a) 
(b) 

147 

present shareholding of Government therein, and 
names of the representatives of Government serving on the Board thereof, 
indicating the – 
(i) 

highest price per share thereof as traded on the Stock Exchange of 
Mauritius in 2014; 
current price per share thereof as traded on the Stock Exchange of 
Mauritius, and 
reasons for the percentage change in price per share between 2014 and 
to date. 

(ii) 

(iii) 

Reply: As regards part (a) of the question, I am informed that the Government has no 

shares in the State Bank of Mauritius Ltd. In fact, it is wholly owned by SBM Holdings Ltd. 

Concerning part (b) of the question, Directors of the Bank are elected in their own 
name on a  yearly  basis  by the shareholders  at the Annual Meeting in accordance  with the 
Bank’s Constitution and therefore there is no representative of Government as such on the 
Board. 

Concerning parts (c), (d) and (e) of the question, the State Bank of Mauritius Ltd is 
not a listed company and its shares are not traded on the Stock Exchange of Mauritius and 
therefore the question does not arise. 

CUREPIPE & MIDLANDS – LARCENY – INQUIRIES 

(No.  B/215)  Ms  M.  Sewocksingh  (Third  Member  for  Curepipe  &  Midlands) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to Constituency No. 17, Curepipe and Midlands, he will, for the benefit of 
the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to the number of reported 
cases of larceny committed thereat since 2015 to date, indicating – 

(a) 

(b) 

where  matters  stand  as  to  the  inquiries  carried  out  thereinto,  indicating  the 
number of arrests effected in connection therewith, and 
the measures taken or that will be taken to curb the incidence thereof. 

Reply: I am informed by the Commissioner of Police that from the year 2015 to 14 

April 2016, 743 cases of larceny have been reported to Police in Constituency No. 17. 

 
In  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I  am  also  informed  by  the  Commissioner  of 

148 

Police that - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

(v) 

(vi) 

enquiry is ongoing in 500 cases; 

the advice of the Director of Public Prosecutions has been sought in 11 cases; 

in 63 cases, the offenders have been fined or sentenced to Prison; 

13 cases are still being prosecuted in Court; 

9 cases have been dismissed;  

147 cases have been disposed by Police as offenders were unknown or could 
not be traced, and 

(vii) 

185 persons have been arrested. 

In regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed that the Police is doing its utmost 

to curb down the cases of larceny in the region.  The measures taken include - 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

the setting up of Neighbourhood Watch Schemes and sensitisation of residents 
on home security, Target Hardening, Elimination of Opportunity Factors and 
reporting  of  suspicious  persons  and  suspicious  activities  through  Crime 
Stoppers Hotline Number 148; 

preventive mobile patrols by CID, ERS, SSU, bike patrol and other Units; 

organisation of fora with Community representatives; 

field counselling for targeted population at work, and 

aggressive  stop  and  search  operations  targeting  suspicious  vehicles  and 
persons loitering in the region. 

Furthermore, as from 11 April 2016, with a view to reassuring the community and in 
addition to the current deployment, Police has launched an island-wide operation known as 
Operation  “Knock  &  Roar”,  involving  various  composite  teams  from  Divisional  Police, 
ADSU, SSU, CID, FIO, GIPM, NCG Commandos, Police Dog Unit and ERS on different 
days  and  at  staggered  times  both  by  day  and  night.    The  aim  of  the  operation  is  to  keep 
Habitual  Criminals  and  notorious  persons  frequently  engaged  in  unlawful  activities,  under 
strict Police supervision with a view to ensuring safer neighbourhoods. 

 

149 

CUREPIPE – CLOSED CIRCUIT TELEVISION CAMERAS 

SURVEILLANCE SYSTEM – INSTALLATION 

(No.  B/216)  Ms  M.  Sewocksingh  (Third  Member  for  Curepipe  &  Midlands) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether,  in  regard  to  the  proposed  installation  of  Closed  Circuit  Television  Cameras 
Surveillance System in the town centre of Curepipe, he will, for the benefit of the House, 
obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to where matters stand. 

Reply: I am informed by the Commissioner of Police that the project of installation of 

CCTV Street Surveillance System in Curepipe has been put on hold. 

In  fact,  whilst  there  is  no  doubt  that  CCTV  Surveillance  System  is  an  effective 
deterrent against crime, it has been noted that with the emergence of new technologies in the 
field  of  surveillance,  offenders  are  also  adopting  new  modus  operandi  to  commit  criminal 
activities.    Police  has  thus  decided  to  look  into  the  whole  concept  of  CCTV  Surveillance 
System, afresh.  The ensuing project will be implemented in a phased manner throughout the 
island. 

MR H. R. & MRS F. R. – ARREST & BAIL 

(No.  B/217)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National 
Development Unit whether, in regard to Mr H. R. and Mrs F. R., he will, for the benefit of the 
House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to – 

(a) 

(b) 

charges lodged against them, and 
bail conditions thereof, and 

the  dates  on  which  they  were  respectively  arrested  and  released  on  bail, 
indicating the – 
(i) 
(ii) 
where  matters  stand  as  to  the  inquiry  carried  out  in  relation  to  the  charges 
levelled  against  them  by  the  complainant,  indicating  if  the  latter  has 
withdrawn his complaint against them. 

Reply:  In  regard  to  parts  (a)  (i)  and  (ii)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  by  the 
Commissioner of Police that on 02 February 2016, the hon. Vice-Prime Minister and Minister 
of Housing & Lands made a declaration to the CCID to the effect that Mr H. R and Mrs F. R 

 

150 

had  posted  information  on  Facebook  which  he  believed  was  false  and  prejudicial  to  his 
person.    Police  initiated  an  enquiry  in  the  course  of  which  Mr  H.  R.  and  Mrs  F.R.  were 
arrested on 03 February 2016.  A provisional charge of “Using telecommunication service for 
the purpose of causing inconvenience to a person” was lodged against both of them.  They 
appeared before District Court on 04 February 2016, and were released on bail on the same 
day, upon furnishing a surety of Rs2,500 and recognisance of Rs25,000, each. 

As for part (b) of the question, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police that the 
complaint has not been withdrawn and the enquiry is ongoing.  Upon completion thereof, the 
case file will be referred to the Director of Public Prosecutions. 

PRISONS SECURITY SQUAD  

(No.  B/218)  Mrs  D.  Selvon  (Second  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to the Prisons Security Squad, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain 
from  the  Commissioner  of  Prisons,  information  as  to  if  the  dismantling  thereof  is  being 
envisaged and, if so, indicate the reasons therefor. 

Reply:  I  am  informed  by  the  Commissioner  of  Prisons  that  the  dismantling  of  the 
Prisons Security Squad is not envisaged, as it plays an important role in maintaining security 
in the Prisons. 

MINISTRIES & PARASTATAL BODIES – CONTRACTS – 

BENEFICIARIES 

(No.  B/219)  Mrs  D.  Selvon  (Second  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to the Ministries and parastatal bodies, he will give a list of the contracts 
allocated by each one of them since December 2014 to date, indicating in each case, the – 

(a) 
(b) 
(c) 

value thereof; 
name of the beneficiary thereof, and 
date of allocation thereof. 

Reply: In view of the enormous administrative cost involved in the exercise, I deem it 

inappropriate to have so much resources wasted. 

 
If  the  hon.  Member  has  any  specific  issue  in  mind,  she  may  come  up  with  a 

151 

substantive question. 

RADIO STATIONS (PRIVATE) – LICENSEES 

(No. B/220) Mr M. Gobin (First Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to the private radio stations, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain 
from  the  Independent  Broadcasting  Authority,  a  list  of  the  licensees  thereof,  indicating  in 
each case the – 

(a) 
(b) 

shareholding thereof, and 
directorship thereof. 

Reply: I am tabling the information requested by the hon. Member. 

ST LOUIS & MORCELLEMENT GUIBIES – FOOTBALL GROUNDS  

(No.  B/221)  Mr  J.  C.  Barbier  (Fifth  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to the projects for the installation by the National Development Unit of 
lighting  systems  respectively  at  the  football  grounds  of  St  Louis  and  of  Morcellement 
Guibies, in Constituency No. 1, Grand River North West and Port Louis West, he will state 
where matters stand. 

Reply:  I  am  informed  by  the  National  Development  Unit  that  the  project  for  the 
lighting of the football ground at St Louis, Pailles is in the list of projects to be implemented 
during the next financial year in Constituency No. 1. 

As regards the lighting of the football ground at Morcellement Guibies, Pailles, it is 
presumed  that  reference  is  being  made  to  the  football  ground  at  Morcellement  Raffray, 
Pailles.  In  this  respect,  I  am  informed  that  the  NDU  had  already  issued  project  brief  to 
Consultants under the Framework Agreement for Consultancy Services on 12 February 2016. 

The  evaluation  of  proposals  is  presently  in  progress.  The  project  is  expected  to  be 

awarded to the selected Consultant by the end of April 2016. 

REHABILITATION YOUTH CENTRES – WORKING CONDITIONS 

152 

 
(No.  B/242)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions whether, in regard to the Rehabilitation Youth Centres, she will state if she has been made aware  of  the  protests  made  by  the  staff  thereof  regarding  their  working  conditions  thereat and, if so, indicate the actions that have been taken by her Ministry in relation thereto. 


Reply: I wish to inform the House that no protests, per se, have been made by the 
staff members of the Rehabilitation Youth Centres. However, since my assuming of office as 
Minister  of  Social  Security,  National  Solidarity  and  Reform  Institutions,  I  have  effected 
several meetings with staff members posted there.  

The RYC staff raised concern about the working conditions that prevail at the RYCs. 
During discussions held at the last meeting, I had with them on Wednesday 13 April 2016 at 
RYC (Girls), the RYC staff members raised concerns pertaining to their working conditions 
as follows - 

(i) 

(ii) 
(iii) 

(iv) 

(v) 

(vi) 
(vii) 

difficulty to deal with girls having persistent negative attitude and aggressive 
behaviour; 
need for  additional staff for the RYCs; 
possibility  of  continuous  training  programme  and  refresher  courses  for  the 
staff; 
proposals  for  the  enlistment  of  additional  psychologists  for  counselling 
services; 
possibility for priority access to medical treatment in Government hospitals for 
the RYC inmates in order to reduce waiting time; 
temporary separation of difficult cases to prevent any mass upsurge, and 
organisation  of  more  frequent  outdoor  activities  for  the  inmates  including 
outings. 

To address some of the problems raised, the following actions have either been or are 
being undertaken to improve the working conditions of the RYC Staff as well as the living 
environment of the inmates - 

(i) 

(ii) 

eight  Trainee  RYC  Officers  (4  Male  and  4  Female)  have  been  recruited  in 
September 2015; 
inmates  with  difficult  and  aggressive  disposition  have  been  housed  in  a 
separate unit temporarily; 

 
(iii) 

(iv) 
(v) 

153 

outings,  sports  and  other  outdoor  activities  are  being  organized  as  often  as 
possible; 
additional psychologists are being recruited to work on sessional basis, and 
repair works for an amount of Rs532,180 have been effected last year to the 
building and to replace damaged items of furniture and equipment following 
an incident. 

Furthermore, arrangements are being made to effect the following works - 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 

the replacement of defective water pump and the water tank; 
replacement of all broken window panes; 
upgrading of toilet facilities; 
consolidation of flush doors and replacement of locks, and  
painting of the building housing the RYC Girls. 

 
With a view to enhancing the living conditions of the inmates, it is proposed to set up 
a multipurpose amenity  on the 3rd floor of the RYC Girls Building to provide the inmates 
with adequate leisure and in-door recreational facilities. They will be able to enjoy reading, 
having access to computer facilities, having meditation, and prayer sessions. 

I have  reason to believe that the proposed  arrangements will go towards creating  a 
more conducive working environment for the staff as well as improving the living conditions 
of the inmates. 

CEB - STAND-BY GENERATION CAPACITY CHARGE  

(No.  B/243)  Mr  G.  Lesjongard  (Second  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to 
the  Stand-by  Generation  Capacity  Charge  for  grid  connected  solar  photovoltaic  and  wind 
farm systems, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Central Electricity Board, 
information as to the reasons why the tariffs set out therefor in Schedule 1 to the General 
Notice No. 3011 of 2014 are no longer applicable. 

 

(Withdrawn) 

FLACQ – SUPER U – SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEM 

(No.  B/244)  Mr  G.  Lesjongard    (Second  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to 
the Super U of Flacq, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Central Electricity 
Board, information as to the date on which it submitted its request to the Central Electricity 

 

154 

Board for the operation of a solar photovoltaic system for its own consumption and using the 
Central Electricity Board grid as back-up supply, indicating – 

(a) the date of approval thereof, and  
(b) if it is the first to benefit from the non-applicability of the tariffs set out therefor in 

Schedule 1 to the General Notice No. 3011 of 2014. 

 

(Withdrawn) 

 

RIVIERE DES ANGUILLES & SOUILLAC - MULTI-SPORTS COMPLEX 
(No.  B/245)  Mr  B.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to Constituency No. 13, 
Rivière des Anguilles and Souillac, he will state if there is any project for the construction of 
a  multi-sports  complex  thereat  and,  if  so,  indicate  the  expected  start  and  completion  dates 
thereof and, if not, if consideration will be given for the implementation of a project therefor. 

Reply:  I have to inform the House that, as at present, my Ministry does not have any 

project for the construction of a multi-sports complex in the Constituency No. 13. 

I would like to invite the hon. Member to submit to my Ministry any proposal he has 

for such a project or smaller projects which can be implemented in Constituency No. 13. 

 

MINISTRY OF FINANCIAL SERVICES, GOOD GOVERNANCE AND 

INSTITUTIONAL REFORMS – OFFICE RENOVATION 

(No.  B/246)  Mr  B.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms 
whether, in regard to the renovation of his Office at Ebène, he will state the – 

(a) name of the contractor thereof, and  
(b) cost thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

BRITISH AMERICAN INVESTMENTS – ALLEGED PONZI SCHEME 

(No. B/247) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 
Reforms  whether,  in  regard  to  the  British  American  Investments  which  were  presented  by 

 

155 

Government on Friday 03 April 2015 as being a vast Ponzi scheme, he will, for the benefit of 
the House, obtain information as to if any complaint has ever been filed by policy holders 
thereof  prior  thereto  for  non-payment/non-reimbursement  and,  if  so,  indicate  the  number 
thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

 
 

FIU – CHAIRPERSON - APPOINTMENT 

(No.  B/249)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms 
whether,  in  regard  to  the  Financial  Intelligent  Unit,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House, 
obtain therefrom, information as to if Mr K. T. has been appointed Chairperson of the Board 
thereof and, if so, indicate – 

(a)  when and 
(b)  his terms and conditions of appointment. 
Reply:    There  is  no  such  body  known  as  the  Financial  Intelligent  Unit.  If  the  hon. 
Member is referring to the Financial Intelligence Unit, set up under the Financial Intelligence 
and Anti-Money Laundering Act of 2002, then under section 12(2) of the Act, the President 
of the Republic, acting on the recommendation of the Prime Minister made in consultation 
with the Leader of the Opposition, appointed Mr K. T. as Chairperson of the FIU on 22 April 
2015, for a period of three years, with an all-inclusive monthly fee of Rs54,600. 

 

MAURICOAST LTD – EX-BARACHOIS - LEASE 

(No.  B/250)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and  Outer 
Islands whether, in regard to Mauricoast Ltd. represented by one Mr Y. B., he will state if a 
lease or concession has been granted thereto for the use of an ex-Barachois at Poudre d’Or 
and, if so, indicate - 

(a)  when the application therefor was received at his Ministry;  
(b) 
(c) 

the extent of land concerned therewith;  
the description of the project to be implemented thereat, indicating  
(i) 
(ii)  when approval therefor was obtained, and  

if same was discussed at the level of Government, and  

 
(d) 

156 

the terms and conditions of the lease/concession agreement, including the amount 
payable to Government. 

(Vide reply to PQ No. B/227) 

 

CEB – TRANSMISSION AND DISTRIBUTION MANAGER - 

APPOINTMENT 

(No.  B/251)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to 
the  post  of  Transmission  and  Distribution  Manager,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House, 
obtain from the Central Electricity Board, information as to the – 

(a)  qualifications requirement therefor, and  
(b)  name of the incumbent thereof, indicating - 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 

his date of appointment thereto; 
the qualifications held, and  
if  he  had  been  subject  to  an  inquiry  in  the  past  and,  if  so,  indicate  the 
outcome thereof and the post he occupied at the material time. 

Reply: With regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed by CEB that the holder of 

the post of Transmission and Distribution Manager should, as a minimum – 

(i) 

(ii) 
(iii) 

hold  a  Degree  in  Electrical  or  Electrical  and  Electronics  or  Power  System   
Engineering,   
be registered with the Council of Registered Professional Engineers, and 
reckon at least eight years’ relevant work experience at Middle Management 
level (scale 9 or higher). 

With  regard  to  part  (b),  the  name  of  the  present  incumbent  is  Mr  Chavansingh 

Dabeedin. 

The latter has authorised CEB expressly to disclose to me and to the House all details 

of his personal data which are as follows – 

In answer to part (b) (i) of the question, Mr Dabeedin is the Corporate Administration 
Manager of the CEB since 09 September 2008 but was requested by the Board, as an interim 
measure to occupy the post of Transmission and Distribution Manager as from 01 June 2015.  

Mr Dabeedin is born on 09 September 1966. 
In answer to part (b) (ii) of the question, Mr Dabeedin is registered with the Council of 
Registered Professional Engineers (CRPE). He holds a Bachelor in Technology with Honours 
in Mechanical Engineering 2nd. Class, 1st Division of the University of Mauritius.  

 

157 

He also holds a Masters in Business Administration in Marketing of the University of 

Mauritius.  

The additional qualifications, namely - 
(a)  MSc (with distinction) -Electrical Power Systems, Univ. of Bath ,U.K 
(b)  Member of the Institution of Electrical Technology, (MIET), U.K 
(c)  Member of the Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, (MIEEE), USA  
(d)  Member of the Institute of Diesel and Gas Turbine Engineers, (MIDGTE), UK 

also appear in his records. 

Mr Dabeedin joined CEB on 08 June 1995 as Cadet Engineer. He was appointed Junior 
Engineer  on  24  August  1995.  Since  then  he  was  promoted  in  progressively  responsible 
position. He rose to the rank of Corporate Administration Manager, a post to which he was 
appointed on 09 September 2008. 

On 21 November 2008, Mr. Dabeedin was appointed General Manager on two years 

contract.  

In  the  wake  of  an  enquiry  into  the  procurement  of  660,000  Compact  Fluorescent 
Lamps, on 12 November 2010, Mr. Dabeedin made a request to step down from his position 
as General Manager to allow the Board of Enquiry to operate independently. The request was 
approved by the Board and he reverted to his substantive post of Corporate Administration 
Manager.  

As  regards  part  (b)  (iii)  of  the  question,  on  10  February  2011,  Mr.  Dabeedin  was 
suspended  from  duty.  This  was  after  an  enquiry  in  the  matter  of  the  procurement  of  the 
660,000 lamps. 

Thereafter, disciplinary proceedings were held against Mr. Dabeedin. He was charged 
under four counts of gross negligence and/or gross misconduct in the discharge of his duties 
as  General  Manager.  The  disciplinary  proceedings  started  on  14  March  2011.  For  that 
purpose,  CEB  had  requested  Late  Judge  Honourable  S.  Bhaukarally  to  hold  these 
proceedings. 

In the course of these proceedings, the charges were withdrawn and he was reinstated in 

his post of Corporate Administration Manager on 04 July 2012 

 

CEB – METER READERS - RECRUITMENT 

(No.  B/252)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to 

 

158 

the last recruitment exercise for the posts of Meter Readers, he will, for the benefit of the 
House, obtain from the Central Electricity Board, information as to – 

(a)  when the posts were advertised; 
(b) 
(c) 

the number of applications received therefor;  
if the candidates had to undergo any written test and, if so, when and, if not, why 
not;  

(d)  when  interviews  were  carried  out,  indicating  the  names  of  the  members  of  the 

interviewing panel, and  

(e)  number of persons recruited, indicating their - 

names;  

(i) 
(ii)  addresses; 
(iii)  qualifications, and 
(iv)  respective posting. 

(Withdrawn) 

FISHERMEN INVESTMENT TRUST – BOARD MEETING 

(No. B/253) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW and Port Louis West) 
asked    the  Minister  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and  Outer 
Islands whether, in regard to the Fishermen Investment Trust, he will, for the benefit of the 
House, obtain therefrom, information as to the – 

total assets thereof. 

composition of the Board thereof;  

(a) 
(b)  date of the last Board Meeting thereof, and  
(c) 
Reply:  The  Fishermen  Investment  Trust  Act  provides  for  a  Board  constituted  of  11 
members. The current Board of the FIT, however, is composed of only five members for the 
following reasons - 

(a)  

the  term  of  office  of  the  three  fishermen’  representatives  -  two  representatives 
from Mauritius and one from Rodrigues - who are elected for a term of two years 
on  the  board  of  the  FIT  expired  in  April,  2014  and  the  precarious  financial 
situation of the FIT did not permit the organisation of fresh elections due to the 
high costs involved;  

(b)  

the Chairman resigned on 22 December, 2014; 

(c) 

the  representative  of  the  Outer  Islands  Development  Corporation  left  his 

 

159 

employment and has not been replaced on the Board, and  

(d)   one of the members who was nominated for his experience in financial matters, 

passed away in July 2015. 

The five Board members of the FIT are - 

(a)  one representative from my Ministry responsible for the subject of fisheries;  
(b)  one representative from my Ministry responsible for the subject of shipping;  
(c)  one representative from the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development, and  
two  other  members  who  have  been  nominated  for  their  experience  in 
(d) 
administrative, economic, financial or commercial matters or in matters relating 
to the fishing industry. 

For the information of the House, I would like to highlight that the FIT has been facing 
severe financial difficulties since 2014. A new business plan is currently being worked out 
for the FIT and a decision will be taken on its future in the context of the forthcoming budget 
preparations. Action will be taken for the reconstitution of the FIT Board accordingly. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed that the last meeting of the FIT 

Board was held on 17 October, 2014. 

As regards the total assets of the FIT, these comprise of six floating fish cages at Grand 
River South East, two fishing boats, office furniture and fittings and other assets used for fish 
processing, the total estimated net book value of which amounts to around Rs5 million. 

I am tabling the names of the members of the FIT Board and the details of the assets of 

the FIT. 

FISHERY ADVISORY BOARD  

(No. B/254) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW and Port Louis West) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and  Outer 
Islands  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Fishery  Advisory  Board,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the 
House, obtain therefrom, information as to the – 

composition thereof, and  

(a) 
(b)  date of the last meeting thereof, indicating the decisions taken thereat. 
Reply: I am informed that there is no such Board operating under the purview of my 

Ministry 

 
 

 

160 

STATE LANDS, ISLANDS & LAGOONS - LEASE 

(No.  B/255)  Mrs  D.  Selvon  (Second  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in regard to the State 
lands,  islands  and  lagoons,  he  will  give  a  list  of  the  plots/extent  thereof  which  have  been 
leased out to individuals and companies since December 2014 to date, indicating in each case 
the –  

(a) date of the lease; 
(b) names of the lessee/s thereof, and  
(c) derived/anticipated benefits thereof for the country. 

Reply: The information requested for by the hon. Member with regard to State lands 
is  being  compiled  by  my  Ministry  and  will  be  placed  in  the  Library  of  the  National 
Assembly. 

With  regard  to  the  lease  of  islands  and  lagoons,  no  lease  has  been  drawn  up  over 

islands, islets and lagoons since December 2014. 

CEB – POWER OUTAGES - COMPLAINTS 

(No.  B/256)  Mrs  D.  Selvon  (Second  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to 
the power blackouts that have affected the country since 01 January 2015 to date, he will for 
the benefit of the House, obtain from the Central Electricity Board, a list thereof, indicating – 
            (a) in each case the causes thereof, and  

(b) the number of complaints received regarding the effect of power supply failures 

on domestic electrical installations. 

Reply: It is not correct to refer to blackout which is a complete collapse of the power 

system.  

However, in all electrical networks over the world, there are power outages caused by 

faults in the system.  

I  am  informed  by  the  Central  Electricity  Board,  that  there  have  been  237  faults  in 

2015, and 51 from January 2016 to date. These faults were due to - 

1.  trees and branches touching part of CEB’s bare 22 kilo Volts network; 
2.  lightning on CEB’s power system causing  equipment failures such  as transformers, 

insulators, terminations, cables and fuses; 

3.  short circuiting of CEB’s network due to foreign objects such as dry branches, bats, 

magpies, monkeys; 

4.  accidents involving vehicles hitting electric poles, leading to outages; 

 

161 

5.  felling of trees by third parties in close proximity to CEB’s network; 
6.  other calamities such as bush fire and sugar cane fire; 
7.  natural calamities such as cyclones, and 
8.  overloading/saturation  of  CEB’s  transformers  due  to  undeclared  loads  of  existing 

customers. 

It should be underlined that the frequency of outages in Mauritius is one of the lowest 
in  Africa  and  is  comparable  to  many  developed  nations,  both  in  terms  of  numbers  and 
duration. 

I  am  tabling  a  detailed  list  of  faults  island-wide  that  have  resulted  into  outages 

indicating the causes of these faults.  

With regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed by the Central Electricity Board 
that from 01 January 2015 to date, it has received 705 complaints from domestic customers 
concerning damaged electrical appliances.  

CEB has been found liable in 364 cases. It has in place an insurance cover to cater for 

such cases. 

 

MONOSODIUM GLUTAMATE - BAN 

(No.  B/257)  Dr.  Z.  Joomaye  (Second  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac)  asked  the  Minister  of  Industry,  Commerce  and  Consumer  Protection  whether,  in 
regard to monosodium glutamate, he will state – 

(a) if the banning of the importation thereof has been recommended by the Ministry of 

Health and Quality of Life, indicating – 

(i) if this measure has been extended to all imported food containing same, 

and  

(ii) the number of countries where similar measures have been applied, and  

(b) if any complaint has been registered from any local consumer thereof in relation 

thereto. 

(Withdrawn) 

MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND QUALITY OF LIFE - CORONARY 

ANGIOPLASTY - STENTS 

(No.  B/258)  Dr.  Z.  Joomaye  (Second  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the cardiac 
patients who underwent coronary angioplasty in 2015, he will state the number of - 

 

162 

(a) drug-eluting stents used during that period, and  
(b) stents purchased by his Ministry over the same period. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

NATIONAL PRICE CONSULTATIVE COUNCIL – SETTING UP 

 (No. B/259) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Industry,  Commerce  and  Consumer  Protection  whether,  in  regard  to 
consumer protection, he will state the - 

(a) measures taken, if any, to inform consumers of the evolution of the retail prices of 
commodities since the publication of the last report of the Price Observatory Unit 
in August 2015, and 

(b)  composition  of 

the  National  Price  Consultative  Council,  indicating 

the 
recommendations, if any, of the Council in relation thereto and in relation to the 
price of goods and, if not, why not. 

Reply:  Regarding  part  (a)  of  the  question,  the  activities  of  the  Price  Observatory, 
which was set up in 2011, have consisted principally of collecting prices every month from 
some 20 outlets on around 75 items, for the publication of a monthly comparative chart of 
prices. 

However, in 2015 after an evaluation, it was found that after four years of existence, 

the Price Observatory had the following weaknesses - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

(v) 

brand names, which are linked to the quality of goods, were  not taken into 
account as only lowest prices were recorded; 
prices were collected towards the end of the month, when promotional sales 
usually take place, and thus did not reflect the real situation;  
prices  were  published  some  five  days  after  the  collection  of  prices  and  the 
outlets were not necessarily offering the same prices as those published in the 
price charts; 
brochures are published regularly by outlets, principally to inform consumers 
about prices, and 
consumers find it more economical and practical to shop at outlets situated 
near  their  residence  than  to  travel  a  long  distance  to  access  outlets  where 
baskets of the 75 items were found to be cheaper by the Price Observatory.   

As the Price Observatory was no longer serving its purpose, it was decided to come 

up with another mechanism that would better address the needs of consumers. 

163 

 
Consequently, the National Price Consultative Council was set up and held its first 
meeting  in  September  2015.  It  provides  advice  on  the  formulation  and  implementation  of 
policies  relating  to  consumer  protection  and  any  matter  relating  to  the  price  of  goods  and 
services.    The  Council  also  ensures  the  cooperation  and  participation  of  consumers  and 
consumer associations in matters which affect their interests. 

The National Price Consultative Council, which comprises representatives from the 
public  and  private  sectors  and  consumer  associations,  has  a  broader  scope  than  the  Price 
Observatory and does not limit itself to price collection.   

I am tabling a copy of the composition of National Price Consultative Council.   
The  recommendations  proposed  by  the  National  Price  Consultative  Council  pertain 
mainly to campaigns on price affixing, sensitization of consumers to over-indebtedness, and 
factors which may influence prices.  

In  spite  of  existing  laws,  many  traders  fail  to  affix  price  labels  on  goods.  Such 
practice is very recurrent in local vegetable markets/fairs where traders fail to display price 
tags.  Over-indebtedness  is  a  cause  of  national  concern.  Households  are  often  unable  to 
identify  priorities  in  deciding  over  family  expenses.  Consumers  have  to  be  sensitised  on 
factors which may influence prices so as to enable them to buy wisely and intelligently.  

 

CONSUMER PROTECTION AND FAIR TRADING BILL - AMENDMENTS 
(No. B/260) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Industry,  Commerce  and  Consumer  Protection  whether,  in  regard  to 
consumer protection, he will state - 

(a)  where  matters  stand  as  to  the  proposed  amendments  to  be  introduced  to  the 

Consumer Protection Act, and  

(b)  if  consideration  will  be  given  for  the  advisability  of  setting  up  an  Office  of 
Ombudsperson  therefor  and  of  a  Grocery  Supply  Code  of  Practice  for  the 
retailers, as is the case in the United Kingdom. 

Reply:  Regarding  part  (a)  of  the  question,  a  draft  Consumer  Protection  and  Fair 
Trading Bill had been prepared in 2015. It was found to be too cumbersome and would not 
address the Mauritian specificities and context and expectations of consumers. In September 
2015,  Government  decided  to  set  up  a  Ministerial  Committee  to  review  that  draft.  The 
Committee  has,  instead,  recommended  that  a  new  simplified  practical  version  of  the 
legislation, which could be implemented more effectively, be drafted. 

 

164 

The  Ministerial  Committee  has  held  a  few  meetings  and  set  out  guidelines  for  the 

drafting of the new Bill. 

A  Technical  Committee,  comprising  officials  of  my  Ministry  and  the  State  Law 

Office, has held working sessions to that effect.  

 
As regards part (b) of the question, the Technical Committee has not yet finalised its 
recommendations. But I am advised that the Committee would propose a framework for the 
resolution of disputes and complaints which might take the form of an Ombudsperson Office 
or otherwise.  

Regarding the Grocery Supply Code of Practice of U.K for the retailers, this would be 
dealt with separately, so that the consumer legislative framework remains consumer friendly. 

 However,  we  have  to  be  considerate  of  suppliers  who  are  the  losers  in  the  market 
chain and who are not protected by any legislation. We will need to carry  out a survey of 
suppliers whose margin of profit is very narrow compared to that of large retailers with whom 
they work.  

The introduction of a legislation to arbitrate disputes between retailers and suppliers 

will be dealt with separately and not in the Consumer Protection and Fair Trading Bill.  

The ultimate objective is that the protection and welfare of consumers are enhanced. 

NINE YEAR BASIC CONTINUOUS SCHOOLING PROGRAMME - 

IMPLEMENTATION 

(No. B/261) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 
Research  whether,  in  regard  to  the  implementation  of  the  Nine  Year  Basic  Continuous 
Schooling Programme, she will state the - 

(a) estimated number of students per zone that would be seeking admission to Grade 7 
in  the  year  2018  and  the  estimated  number  of  seats  per  zone  that  would  be 
available, and  

(b)  stand  of  the  private  aided  and  unaided  secondary  schools,  including  that  of  the 

Bureau de l’Education Catholique in relation thereto. 

 

165 

Reply: With regard to part (a) of the question, I wish to highlight at the outset that the 
Nine  Year  Continuous  Basic  Education  (NYCBE)  reform  project  provides  for  seamless 
schooling for a period of nine years during which learners are expected to acquire appropriate 
levels  of  literacy,  numeracy,  life  skills  and  values,  develop  their  talents  and  unleash  their 
potential.  

With  regard  to  the  first  cohort  of  pupils  that  will  be  taking  the  Primary  School 
Achievement Certificate (PSAC) assessment in 2017, of which all pupils will be eligible for a 
seat in Grade 7 in January 2018, the estimated number of pupils, as per official statistics, and 
based on enrolment figures when this cohort of pupils was enrolled at Std IV level in 2015 
(last year), is a total of 16,355 pupils for the four Zones.  

On the other hand, based on data provided by the Zones and the PSSA, the supply of 
seats in secondary  schools for admission to  Form  I (2016) totals 19,265 seats for the  four 
Zones  and  this  represents  the  estimated  number  of  seats  to  be  made  available  in  Grade  7 
(2018). 

I am tabling the information on supply and demand of seats on a Zonal basis. 

It  is  clear  that  the  total  number  of  seats  that  will  be  made  available  in  the  135 
Regional Secondary Schools (56 State and 79 Private aided), exceed the demand thereof by 
some 3,000 seats, and this in spite of the fact that all pupils of Grade 6 (first assessment at 
PSAC) in 2017 will transit to Grade 7 in January 2018.  

In reply to part (b) of the question, as from May last year (2015), my Ministry had 
engaged in consultations with a wide cross-section of stakeholders of the Education sector on 
the policy orientations of this Reform Project and its eventual implementation.  

There has been general consensus on the broad contours of the Nine Year Continuous 

Basic Education Project.  

Several  consultative  sessions  have  been  held  under  my  Chair  with  the  Bureau  de 
l’Education Catholique (BEC) authorities, the Federation of Managers (FOM) and Rectors of 
secondary  schools,  and  they  have  assured  of  their  entire  support  to  the  Ministry  in  the 
implementation  of  this  important  project.  The  main  points  raised  by  them  during  the 
discussions have been clarified and taken on board.  

I wish to highlight that the BEC had submitted its views on this reform project by way 
of  a  memorandum  dated  30  September  2015  and  had  clearly  stated  that  ‘the  Catholic 
education sector welcomes the reform proposal of the Ministry’. It is even mentioned in the 

 

166 

memorandum  that  the  BEC  believes  that  the  reform  will  better  serve  the  children  of  the 
Republic  and  will  allow  for  their  integral  development  and  equitable  social  and  economic 
integration in society. 

I wish to point out that my Ministry has a policy of constant dialogue, in a regular and 
structured manner, with our education stakeholders; and that this dialogue is being pursued 
further in the implementation process of the Nine Year Continuous Basic Education reform 
project. 

CPE EXAMINATIONS – GRADE ACCELERATION 

(No. B/262) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 
Research whether, in regard to the Certificate of Primary Education Examinations, she will 
state if there exists any policy that would allow the students currently in standard V to take 
part therein and, if so, indicate the criteria applicable therefor. 

Reply:  In  the  current  educational  system,  the  Certificate  of  Primary  Education 
Examinations is normally taken at the end of six complete years of primary schooling, from 
Standard  I  to  VI.    This  is  clearly  provided  for  in  Regulation  14(1)  of  the  Education 
Regulations which reads as follows - 

“Except  in  the  case  of  a  pupil  who  repeats  any  class  under  regulation 
11(1), the full course of study in a Government or aided primary school shall cover 
six complete school years, from Std I to VI inclusive, at the end of which the pupil 
may sit for the CPE examination.”  

 Although  the  above  Regulation  makes  mention  of  Government  and  aided  primary 
schools, the same principle is to be adopted normally in private fee-paying primary schools, 
which follow the same curriculum as the government and aided schools.   

There is, as such, no broad and overarching policy that would allow pupils currently 

in Standard V to take part in the CPE examination.   

Allow me to remind the House that 2016 is the last year of the CPE as a national end-
of-cycle examination. With the introduction of the Nine Year Continuous Basic Education 
and  the  Primary  School  Achievement  Certificate  Assessment  (PSAC)  as  from  next  year, 
admission to Grade 7 will be solely on a regional basis. The ‘engouement’ or the craze  of 
some parents for their children to enter into the existing National Colleges may well motivate 

 

167 

them to seek grade acceleration and thus make a case for their children to sit for CPE this last 
year.  

I  have  been  informed  that  one  private  school  has  even  set  up  of  special  classes  to 

coach Standard V pupils for CPE examinations this year.  

However,  allowing  this  to  take  place  across  the  board  will  certainly  do  more  harm 
than good to the children.  We are all aware of the excessive competition generated by the 
CPE: none of us would wish to see our children further overstretched at an early age.   

There are levels of complexities to be hierarchically mastered in the learning process 

and it is never recommended for young learners to rush the fences, to “brûler les étapes”. 

If at all some pupils are ever to be allowed to seek grade acceleration to take part in 
the CPE exams, it will only be after careful scrutiny, or on a case to case basis upon provision 
of full justification. 

GRNW, BELL VILLAGE, SOREZE  - ROAD RESURFACING  

(No.  B/263)  Mr  J.  C.  Barbier  (Fifth  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the road 
resurfacing  programme  for  Constituency  No.  1,  Grand  River  North  West  and  Port  Louis 
West, he will state if he will consider the advisability of giving prior attention to the region of 
Soreze in view of the bad conditions of many roads thereat. 

Reply: As the House may be aware, the RDA is responsible only for classified roads.  
I am informed by the Authority that the resurfacing works of classified roads in Constituency 
No. 1 of an extent of 400 metres were effected in March 2016 along A1 Road from Grand 
River Nord West to Bell Village for the amount of Rs2,521,256. 

  As  regards  other  roads  which  are  in  the  region  of  Sorèze,  these  are  not  classified 
roads and therefore do not fall under the purview of the RDA except for the Motorway M1 
which is in good condition.  

I am further informed by RDA that road resurfacing works along Rouget Avenue, La 
Perle Avenue, Sorèze and Pailles are included in the Programme of Works of the National 
Development Unit for the next financial year. 

MORCELLEMENT RAFFRAY, PAILLES - RIVER - CLEANING 

(No.  B/264)  Mr  J.  C.  Barbier  (Fifth  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Local  Government  whether,  in  regard  to  Morcellement  Raffray,  in 

 

168 

Guibies, Pailles, he will state if urgent consideration will be given for the cleaning of the river 
running thereat with a view to avoid risks of flooding in the region thereof. 

Reply: I am informed by the City Council of Port Louis that the river at Morcellement 
Raffray in Guibies, Pailles is in a general state of cleanliness and there is free flow of water 
thereat. 

I am, however, been informed that there is at certain points, presence of aquatic plants 

and natural vegetation on its border which do not cause any flooding. 

I am further informed that regular cleaning of the river is carried out throughout the 

year by the Council and any urgency that may arise is addressed immediately. 

PAILLES - COMPULSORILY ACQUISITION 

(No.  B/265)  Mr  J.  C.  Barbier  (Fifth  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in regard to the plots 
of  land  situated  in  the  vicinity  of  the  State  Secondary  School,  in  Pailles,  which  were 
compulsorily acquired and presently lying idle, he will state - 

(a) the name of the previous owners thereof;  

(b) the reasons why same were compulsorily acquired;  

(c) the price at which they were compulsorily acquired, and  

(d)  where  matters  stand  as  to  the  implementation  of  the  project  in  consideration  of 

which they were compulsorily acquired. 

Reply: I wish to inform the House that, following a request from the then Ministry of 
Education  and  Scientific  Research,  12  plots  of  land  of  an  aggregate  extent  of  about  one 
Arpent  situate  in  the  vicinity  of  the  State  Secondary  School  in  Pailles  were  compulsorily 
acquired by Government in October 2002 under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act. 
The said plots of land were vested in that Ministry in November 2002. 

With regard to parts (a) and (c) of the question, I am tabling the names of the previous 
owners of the plots of land compulsorily acquired and the prices at which they were acquired.  

As  regards  part  (b)  of  the  question,  the  compulsory  acquisition  was  made  for  the 

public purpose of the extension of the State Secondary School in Guibies, Pailles.  

With  regard  to  part  (d)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  there  is  a  public  road 
known as Avenue Condé No.1 which separates  the land acquired and the State Secondary 

 

169 

School.  In order to implement the proposed extension of the school, provisions were made in 
year 2002 for the closure of the said road in accordance with the Roads Act. However, strong 
representations were received from the inhabitants of the locality against the closure of that 
road.  

Consequently,  in  June  2010,  the  Ministry  of  Education  and  Human  Resources 
informed  my  Ministry  that,  in  order  to  avoid  any  public  outcry,  the  project  would  be 
implemented  within  the  existing  school  compound  and  accordingly  that  Ministry  was 
releasing the acquired land for any other Government project. 

In  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the  Land  Acquisition  Act,  in  case  the  land 
acquired  is  not  used  for  a  Government  project,  my  Ministry  should  have  envisaged  a  sale 
back option at market value to the initial owners of the acquired land. In the present case this 
procedure was not followed.  

Part of the State land acquired of an approximate extent of 27 perches was approved 
for lease as from 17 June 2013 on a year to year basis to “UBS Transport Limited” for the 
parking  of  buses  at  an  annual  rental  of  Rs45,000  on  the  proviso  that,  should  Government 
require the land for any purpose, the lessee would have to vacate the land within a period of 
one month without any claim for compensation. 

Another part of the land of an approximate extent of nine perches is being illegally 

occupied. The remaining plot of an approximate extent of 64 perches is lying waste. 

I have already instructed officers of my Ministry to carry out a thorough investigation 

and appropriate remedial measures will be taken accordingly. 

 

BEAU BASSIN & PETITE RIVIERE - WATER PIPES - REPLACEMENT 

(No.  B/266)  Mr  A.  Aliphon  (Third  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to 
the project for the replacement of the old water pipes under the Building Mauritius Fund, he 
will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Central  Water  Authority,  a  list  of  the 
regions identified in Constituency No. 20, Beau Bassin and Petite Rivière therefor, indicating 
the timeframe set out for the implementation thereof. 

170 

 
Reply:  I  am  informed  by  the  Central  Water  Authority  that  the  following  pipe 
replacement projects are being implemented under the Build Mauritius Fund in the regions of 
Beau Bassin and Petite Rivière -  

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

the replacement of 28 km of pipeline in Rose Hill. Works are expected to 
start in October 2016; 

replacement of 13 km of pipeline in Beau Bassin. Works are expected to 
start in March 2017;  

replacement of six km of pipeline from Bosquet reservoir to Coromandel 
to improve water supply in the regions of Petite Riviere, La Tour Koenig 
and  Coromandel.  The  contract  has  already  been  awarded.  Works  are 
scheduled to start this month, and 

the renewal of seven km of distribution mains in the regions of Canot and 
Gros Cailloux where works are scheduled to start in July 2016. 

 

ALBION BRIDGE - EMBELLISHMENT & REHABILITATION 

(No.  B/267)  Mr  A.  Aliphon  (Third  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
Albion Bridge, he will state if consideration will be given for the – 

(a) widening and increase of the height thereof, and  
(b) embellishment and rehabilitation thereof, including replanting on the wetlands in 

the vicinity thereof. 

Reply: I am informed by the Road Development Authority that, the Albion Bridge is 
an  old  concrete  bridge  which  is  found  along Albion  Road  (B78).    It  has  a  carriageway  of 
width 6.3m which is fairly adequate for a two-way traffic.  

The bridge is located in a wetland area and is prone to flooding during heavy rainfalls 

 
as was the case in March 2013 and February 2016.     

As regards part (a) of the question, the widening and increase of the height is highly 
recommended both for the security of vehicles as well as for pedestrians.  However, this may 
take some time as a survey has to be undertaken on site for eventual land acquisition. 

As regards part (b) of the question, I am informed by the Ministry of Agro Industry 
and Food Security, that a survey of all wetlands found in the vicinity of the bridge will be 

 

171 

carried out by the National Parks and Conservation Service to assess the conservation value 
of these wetlands. A replanting programme will be worked out accordingly to preserve the 
wetlands ecosystems. 

ALBION – BAKER BRIDGE – LIGHTING & REHABILITATION 

(No. B/268)  Mr A. Aliphon (Third Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms, Minister of Environment, 
Sustainable  Development,  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
Baker Bridge near the Club Med Hotel, in Albion, he will state if consideration will be given 
for – 

(a) an upgrading of the lighting system thereat, and  
(b) embellishment and rehabilitation thereof, including replanting on the wetlands in 

the vicinity thereof. 

Reply: I am informed that the Baker Bridge and its vicinity do not form part of the 

proclaimed Albion public beach.  

However, a site visit carried out on 14 April 2016 revealed that lightings fixed on the 
handrails of the bridge were damaged. The Black River District Council has been requested 
to consider carrying out the necessary repairs and upgrading of the lighting system. 

With regards to part (b) of the question, consideration will be given by my Ministry 

for the rehabilitation and embellishment in the vicinity of the Bridge.  

In  so  far  as  replanting  on  the  wetlands  is  concerned,  the  advice  of  the  Ministry  of 
Agro Industry and Food Security would be sought as the area is already covered with heavy 
vegetation. 

PLAZA THEATRE – EVENTS – NOISE POLLUTION 

(No. B/269) Mr P. Armance (First Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the Plaza Theatre in Rose Hill, he 
will – 

(a) for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Municipal Council of Beau Bassin 
and  Rose  Hill,  information  as  to  the  number  of  events  held  in  the  courtyard 
thereof since December 2014 to date, and  

(b) state if his Ministry is aware of the inconveniences being caused by the holding of 
events in the courtyard thereof to the inhabitants living in the vicinity thereof and 
in  the  region  of  Montmartre  in  terms  of  noise  pollution  and,  if  so,  indicate  if 
appropriate measures will be taken in relation thereto. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

172 

RESIDENCE VALLIJEE - NURSERY 

(No.  B/270)  Mr  P.  Armance  (First  Member  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West)  asked 
Minister of  Local Government whether, in regard to the Nursery at Residence Vallijee, he 
will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Municipal  Council  of  Port  Louis, 
information as to – 

(a)  since when it is closed, indicating the reasons therefor;  
(b)  if consideration will be given for the re-opening thereof and, if not, why not, and  
(c)  if  the  recruitment  of  a  Nursery  Officer  therefor  has  been  provided  for  or  if 
consideration  will  be  given  for  the  matter  to  be  referred  to  the  National 
Empowerment Fund for necessary actions to be taken at their end therefor. 

Reply:  I am informed by the City Council of Port Louis that a request was received 
in April 2011 from the National Empowerment Foundation for the ground floor of the Dr. 
James  Burty  David  Municipal  Centre  at  Residence  Vallijee  which  was  unoccupied  at  that 
time, to be put at the disposal of the Foundation for the running of a Day Care Centre for 
babies. 

The  Council  agreed  to  the  request  of  the  Foundation  and  on  03  June  2011,  a 
Memorandum  of  Understanding  was  signed  between  the  Council  and  NEF  for  a  period  of 
three years.  Thereafter, on 21 October 2011, the NEF started the operation of the Day Care 
Centre.  On  03  April  2014,  NEF  requested  for  a  renewal  of  the  Memorandum  of 
Understanding and the Council decided not to renew same as the Municipal  Infant School 
found  in  a  nearby  old  and  decrepited  municipal  building  would  be  transferred  to  the  Dr. 
James Burty David Municipal Centre. 

I am informed that on 01 April 2015, the NEF restituted the space to the Council and 

on 07 January 216, the latter started running an infant school thereat. 

With regard to the last part of the question,  I am informed that the Council has no 
intention  to  run  additional  new  nurseries  besides  the  six  nurseries  already  operational  and 
therefore  the  question  of  re-opening  the  nursery  at  Residence  Vallijee  as  well  as  the 
recruitment of nursery staff do not arise.  

 

CAMP CHAPELON - FOOTBALL GROUND - CHANGING ROOM 

(No. B/271) Mr P. Armance (First Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the construction of a changing room 
attached  to  the  football  ground  of  Camp  Chapelon,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House, 

 

173 

obtain from the Municipal Council of Port Louis, information as to the name of the contractor 
therefor, indicating the - 

(a) contract value thereof; 
(b) contractual start and completion dates thereof, indicating the effective date when 

works started and the reasons why they have been put on hold, and  

(c) if the contractor has been paid the full contractual value thereof or any payment is 

outstanding for works not completed as at to date. 

Reply: I am informed by the City Council of Port Louis that Kam Construction Ltd 
was  awarded  the  contract  for  the  construction  of  a  changing  room  attached  to  the  football 
ground at Camp Chapelon for the contract value of Rs2,240,374.80, inclusive of VAT. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, the start date of the project was 28 August 

2012 and the expected completion date was 23 February 2013. 

I am informed that the contract was not put on hold by the Council, but instead the 

Contractor stopped the works without giving any valid reasons as at April 2013. 

As far as part (c) of the question is concerned, I am informed that the contractor was 
not paid the full amount but only for the value of works carried out on site, i.e Rs776,239.99 
which represented approximately 40% of the contract value. 

 

POINTE AUX SABLES – SEWERAGE SYSTEM 

(No. A/5) Mr P. Armance (First Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the  Vice  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  whether,  in  regard  to 
Kensington, in Constituency No. 1, Grand River North West and Port Louis West, he will, for 
the benefit of the House, obtain from the Waste Water Management Authority, information 
as to - 

(a)  the  number  of  times  incidences  of  overflow  of  waste  water  thereat  have  been 

reported thereto since several years, and  

(b)  if  it  is  aware  that  it  has  now  become  a  settlement  of  more  than  one  hundred 
households and, if so, if consideration will be given for the implementation of an 
appropriate sewerage network system thereat. 

Reply:  With  regard  to  part  (a),  I  am  informed  by  the  Wastewater  Management 
Authority that Kensington is not within any of its sewered area and no incidence of overflow 
has  been  reported  to  it.  However,  it  has  received  petitions  from  inhabitants  requesting  for 
connection to a wastewater network of the Wastewater Management Authority. 

174 

 
With regard to part (b),  I  am informed that the Wastewater Management Authority 
carried  out  a  Pre-Feasibility  Study  for  the  Pointe  Aux  Sables  Sewerage  Project,  which 
includes Kensington, Terrasson,  Verger Mangue, Debarcadère and Petit  Verger. The study 
showed that there are about 110 houses at Kensington. 

Given  the  high  investment  for  the  implementation  of  a  sewerage  network  in  the 
region, estimated at about Rs2 billion, the WMA is considering the implementation of the 
project in phases, subject to availability of funds. 

 
 

 

 

