No. 33 of 2015 

 

1 

 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

 

TUESDAY 06 OCTOBER 2015 

 

 

 

 

2 

CONTENTS 

 

 
 

PAPERS LAID 

QUESTIONS (Oral) 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

MOTION 

BILLS (Public) 

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 
KCMG, QC  
Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 
GCSK  
Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 
Communications 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo, GCSK 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 
Utilities 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 
Sinatambou 
Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 
Perraud 
Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 

Integration 

and  Economic 

of 
Minister 
Empowerment 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 
International Trade 
Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 
Family Welfare 
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance, 
Institutional  Reforms,  Minister 
Technology, 
Communication and Innovation 
Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 

of 

 

Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, 
QPM 
Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 
Cheong, MSK 
Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 

4 

Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 
Institutions 
Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands 
Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 
Disaster and Beach Management  
Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms 

Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and 
Training 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Gopall, Mr Navin (Temporary Transfer to 
RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 33 of 2015 

 

Sitting of 06 October 2015 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 

 

 

7 

PAPERS LAID 

 
 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, the papers have been laid on the Table - 

 
 

A. Prime Minister’s Office – 

. 

 

.  

 

. 

 Certificate  of  Urgency  in  respect  of  the  National  Flag  Bill  (No.  XV  of 
2015).  
(In Original)  

B. Ministry of Finance and Economic Development - 

 

 

(a) 

  

(b) 

(Amendment  of 
The  Statutory  Bodies  Pension  Funds 
Schedule)  Regulations  2015  (Government  Notice  No.  183  of 
2015).  

The Statutory Bodies Family Protection Fund (Housing Loan) 
(Amendment) Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 184 
of 2015). 

C. Ministry of  Local Government  – 

 

 

(a) 

   

(b) 

The Municipal Town Council of Beau Bassin Rose Hill (Fees 
for  Classified  Trades) 
(Amendment)  Regulations  2015 
(Government Notice No. 188 of 2015). 

The Municipal Council of Vacoas-Phoenix (Fees for Classified 
Trade)  (Amendment)  Regulations  2015  (Government  Notice 
No. 189 of 2015). 

 

   

(c) 

   

(d) 

8 

The  Municipal  Town  Council  of  Vacoas-Phoenix  (General 
Rate)  (Amendment)  Regulations  2015  (Government  Notice 
No. 190 of 2015). 

District 

Council 

The 
(Cemetery/Crematorium)  Regulations  2015 
Notice No. 191 of 2015). 

of 

Pamplemousses 
(Government 

   

(e) 

The  District  Council  of Pamplemousses  (Disposal  of  Refuse) 
Regulations 2015. (Government Notice No. 192 of 2015). 

D. Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection  – 

 

 (a) 

   

(b) 

   

(c) 

The  Rodrigues  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Price  of 
Taxable  and  Non-Taxable  Goods)  (Amendment  No.  24) 
Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 185 of 2015). 

The  Rodrigues  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Price  of 
Taxable  and  Non-Taxable  Goods)  (Amendment  No.  25) 
Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 186 of 2015). 

The  Rodrigues  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Price  of 
Taxable  and  Non-Taxable  Goods)  (Amendment  No.  26) 
Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 187 of 2015). 

E. Ministry of Gender Equality, Child Development  and Family Welfare 

– 

 The  Report  of  the  Director  of  Audit  on  the  Financial  Statements  of  the 
National Women’s Council for the year ended 31 December 2011.   

F.  Ministry  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 

Reform, Ministry of Technology, Communication and Innovation – 

 

. 

 

 

. 

. 

 

9 

 The  National  Identity  Card  (Extension  of  Validity  Period)  (Amendment 
No. 3) of Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 182 of 2015).  

ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

PORT LOUIS HARBOUR – MASTER PLAN  

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Ag. 
Prime Minister whether, in regard to the Port Louis Harbour, he will, for the benefit of the 
House, obtain from the - 

(a) Mauritius Ports Authority, information as to where matters stand concerning the -   

(i) implementation of a new Master Plan therefor;  

(ii) extension of the berths at the Mauritius Container Terminal;  

(iii) setting up of a new cruise ships quay thereat;  

(iv) refurbishment of cranes thereat, and  

(v) development of the Island Container Terminal, and  

(b)  Cargo  Handling  Corporation,  information  as  to  if  Dubai  Ports  World  has  been 
chosen  as  strategic  partner  therefor  and,  if  so,  indicate  the  conditions  of  the 
partnership and whether it has been discussed with the trade unions and the local 
private sector. 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I would like first of all to point out that, 
as the principal gateway of the country, Port Louis harbour plays a vital role in the national 
economy by handling about 99% of the total volume of external trade and through which all 
strategic imports such as food and petroleum products, raw materials for the textile industry 
and major exports such as sugar and textile, transit. 

 
Additionally, Port Louis by virtue of its location and the significant growth in traffic 
between  Asia,  Europe,  Africa  and  South  America,  is  ideally  located  for  container 

 

10 

transshipment  activities  and  therefore  represent  an  excellent  opportunity  for  enhanced 
economic development in Mauritius, particularly in the region of Port Louis.  

 
Our  strategic  objective  is  to  make  of  Port  Louis  harbour  a  well-equipped, 
professionally managed and constantly upgraded Port so as to maintain high productivity and 
enhanced service levels at competitive rates.  To this end, we will pursue a policy of constant 
improvement and opening to the outside world and encourage further investments so as to 
respond to the needs of shipping lines and other Port stakeholders. 

 
Madam Speaker, as regards part (a) of the question, I wish to inform the House that 
under  the  Ports  Act  1998,  the  Mauritius  Ports  Authority  is  required  to  prepare  and 
periodically  update  a  Port  Master  Plan  and  also  implement  the  recommendations  of  the 
Master Plan. The last Port Master Plan study was undertaken by Messrs Halcrow in 2009.  
Port Louis harbour has since then experienced a major change in the traffic pattern.  As from 
2009, the Port traffic registered an average growth of more than 10% annually. This was the 
result of major developments in the different sectors of the country’s economic activities and 
the increase in transshipment traffic. 

Most  of  the  projects  recommended  in  the  Port  Master  Plan  have  already  been 

implemented or are in the process of being executed.    

In  the  Port  sector,  it  is  foreseen  that  Port  Louis  harbour  has  the  potential  to  be 
developed  as  a  hub  for  containers  transshipment  and  petroleum  products  and  also  as  a 
destination for home porting of cruise tourism as well as other Port related activities. 

Following  a  tender  exercise,  the  bid  from  Messrs  Royal  Haskoning  of  Netherlands 
was retained.  The contract sum is Euro 489,500 plus MUR 3,640,000.  Royal Haskoning is 
an international consultancy firm with extensive experience in the preparation of Port Master 
Plans and development of Ports and harbours. 
 

The scope of services for the Port Master Plan Study include inter alia - 
(i) 
(ii) 

preparation of traffic forecast including a transshipment study; 
assessment of the potential of Port Louis harbour as a hub for transshipment, 
petroleum products and bunkering; 

(iii)  preparation of a land use plan of Port Louis harbour and other sites such as 

Terre rouge, Grande Rivière Nord Ouest and Albion; 

11 

 
(iv) 
(v) 
The Consultants have mobilised a team of experts in Mauritius since 01 September 

recommendation for future Port infrastructure requirement, and 
a risk assessment. 

2015.   

The  Consultants  have  engaged  consultations  with  Port  stakeholders  and  will  also 

assess projects already submitted to the MPA for consideration. 

The Preliminary Port Master Plan Report is expected to be submitted by December 

2015 and the final report by June 2016. 

The Port Master Plan will be the roadmap for Port land use development over the next 

25 years up to the horizon 2040. 

As regards part (a) (ii) of the question, the MPA is implementing the extension and 
strengthening  of  the  Mauritius  Container  Terminal  (MCT)  berth  and  associated  dredging 
works  so  as  to  accommodate  large  vessels  of  over  8,000  TEUs  (TEU:  20  foot  equivalent 
units)  and  the  increasing  container  traffic.    The  project  is  being  implemented  under  three 
separate packages and the status is as follows - 

a)  Bund construction 

In order to contain the dredged materials, MPA has embarked on the construction 
of bunds to enable land reclamation of about 35 ha at Fort William and 4 ha at 
Fort  George  respectively.    The  contract  for  the  construction  of  the  bund  wall 
package  was  awarded  to  Messrs  PAD  &  Co  Ltd.  for  the  total  amount  of 
Rs365,284,000.  Works on site started in August 2013 and have been completed. 

b)  Marine and Civil Works 

The  contract  for  the  marine  and  civil  works  was  awarded  to  JV  Strabag 
International Gibb/Archirodon in August 2014.  The works comprise - 

•  Extension of the existing MCT berth by 240m 
•  Strengthening of the existing 560m long berth 
•  Expansion of the Container Stacking Yard by 7.5 ha 

The  project  for  an  amount  of  Rs4.2  billion  will  be  executed  over  a  period  of  27 
months and is expected to be completed around March 2017. 

c)  Dredging Works Package 

 

12 

The work comprises the dredging of the Navigational Channel to 16.5 m below 
chart datum and associated land reclamation of about 35 ha at Fort William and 4 
ha at Fort George. 

Proposals  for  prequalification  were  received  at  the  CPB  from  four  potential 
contractors  and  following  assessment,  three  contractors  were  shortlisted.  The 
shortlisted contractors submitted their bids at the Central Procurement Board. The 
bid prices received exceeded the estimated cost by more than 80% and the bidders 
exercise has been cancelled. New bidding exercise has now been launched with a 
view of completing the works by end 2016.   

Expression of interest from nine potential contractors have been received by the 
Central Procurement Board and are presently being evaluated. 

The  whole  project,  i.e.  the  three  packages  detailed  above,  is  expected  to  cost 
around Rs5.7 billion.  Following commissioning of the project, the capacity of the 
terminal  would  increase  from  530,000  TEUs  to  750,000  TEUs  and  two  large 
vessels of about 9,000 TEUs capacity will be able to be accommodated at berth at 
any one time without any restriction. 

As  regards  part  (a)  (iii),  the  MPA  commissioned  the  cruise  jetty  at  Les  Salines  in 
January 2010 with a view to further improve the reception facilities at Port Louis.  MPA is 
proceeding with the construction of a cruise terminal building. 

MPA  will  proceed  with  the  appointment  of  a  consultancy  firm  by  end  of  October 

2015 and it is intended to complete the construction of the building by end 2017. 

As  regards  part  (a)  (iv)  of  the  question,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  Cargo 

Handling Corporation Ltd (CHCL) has five ship to Shore Cranes (Portiques). 

 Three  of  these  are  more  than  15  years  old  and  CHCL  was  having  problems  in  the 

maintenance of those cranes and same was affecting the overall productivity. 

Following an assessment of the three Hanjung Ship to Shore Cranes, the CHCL Board 

of Directors approved the repairs and refurbishment works for these on 25 January 2012. 

 

13 

Messrs MGM-OMG were appointed as Consultants following a restrictive bidding. 

Following  specifications  prepared  by  MGM-OMG,  bids  were  invited  through 
International Open Advertised Bidding under the aegis of the CPB and the Bid Evaluation 
Committee  recommended  that  the  contract  be  awarded  to  Messrs  Aliani  Project  SRL  - 
Tecnomontaggi Division at the cost of Rs160,887, 000. 

On site works started on 15 August 2014 and was completed on September 2015. 

As  regards  part  (a)  (v),  of  the  question,  the  development  of  the  Island  Container 
Terminal comprise of construction of breakwater, dredging of the navigational channel, land 
reclamation, construction of Access Bridge, berths and container stacking yard. 

However,  given  its  exposed  condition  and  its  proximity  to  the  Terre  Rouge  River 
Estuary (a Ramsar site) and the Baie du Tombeau residential area, a detailed technical and 
economic study is necessary. 

MPA  is  proceeding  with  the  techno-economic  Feasibility  Study.      The  African 
Development  Bank  is  funding  the  study  through  a  grant.    Expression  of  Interest  for  the 
selection of potential consultancy firms has been launched.   Proposals have been received 
from  45  firms  which  are  being  evaluated  by  the  MPA.  Shortlisted  consultants  will 
subsequently be invited to submit their proposal.  It is planned to complete the study by mid 
2017.     

 Madam Speaker, as regards part (b) of the question, I wish to apprise the House that 
no strategic partner has so far been selected for the CHCL Ltd.  The House may note that the 
issue of appointing  a strategic partner for CHCL has been on the table since 2001, with a 
view  to  increasing  productivity  and  efficiency  of  cargo  handling  facilities  at  Port  Louis 
harbour.  The project was at that time put on hold to enable CHCL Ltd. to attain financial 
stability.  A second initiative was started in 2005 with the objective to develop Port Louis 
Harbour  into  a  major  transshipment  hub  to  enable  the  capture  of  substantial  traffic  in  the 
region.  However, the exercise undertaken between 2007 to 2009 by the Consultant IFC to 
select an appropriate bidder proved to be inconclusive.  In fact, following a selection exercise 
only one bid was received and assessed as non-responsive and therefore non-compliant. 

14 

 
A  fresh  attempt  is  now  being  made  to  explore  avenues  to  give  a  new  boost  to  the 
activities of the CHCL Ltd.  In this context, a collaboration with DP World of Dubai is being 
examined. 

This Project consists of, inter alia - 

 (i)  development and operation of a Freeport, logistics park and other Port related 

activities; 

(ii)  development and investment in new and state-of-the-art port infrastructure in 
Mauritius and transformation of Port-Louis into a major logistics and maritime 
hub; 

(iii)  expansion  and  operation  of  current  and  future  cargo  handling  capacities  in 

Mauritius and Rodrigues based on market demand; 

(iv) promotion  and  marketing  of  Mauritius  as  a  platform  for  Port  related  and 

maritime activities in the Indian Ocean Region, and 

(v)  provision of a wide variety of new maritime and Port related services. 

We are of the view that there could be substantial benefits to be derived from such a 
collaboration in consideration of the fact that DP World is one of the largest marine terminal 
operators  in  the  world,  and  has  a  portfolio  of  more  than  65  marine  terminals  across  six 
continents,  including  new  developments  in  India,  Africa,  France,  UK,  Australia  and  the 
Middle East.  DP World also owns the Jebel Ali Free Zone, one of the world’s largest free 
zones which serves as a dynamic base for thousands of businesses from over 100 countries, 
sustaining  over  135,000  jobs  and  attracting  more  that  20%  of  the  United  Arab  Emirates’ 
foreign direct investment.  Over 80% of the shares of DP World are indirectly owned by the 
Government  of  Dubai,  with  the  remainder  of  the  company’s  shares  listed  on  the  Nasdaq 
Dubai stock exchange. 

The  Container  Terminals  operated  by  DP  World  in  Dubai  handled  a  container 
throughput of 15.2M containers in 2014 and Dubai was ranked 9th worldwide in Container 
Port ranking.  Worldwide DP World is the 4th largest Port Operator and handled some 70M 
containers in 2014.   

 
So far, the project has progressed as follows - 

15 

In early June 2015, the Sultan Ahmed Bin Sulayen, Chairman of DP World, together 
with  a  team  of  technical  experts,  effected  a  visit  to  Mauritius  and  had  meetings  with  the 
Prime Minister, the Minister of Finance and Economic Development, the Minister of Housing 
and  Lands  and  myself  to  elaborate  on  the  avenues  of  operations  between  the  two  parties.  
Meetings were also held with Government Officials. 

Subsequently,  in  September  2015  a  technical  team  from  DP  World  carried  out  a 
prospection  visit  in  Mauritius  to  discuss  with  stakeholders  and  to  collect  information.  
Working  sessions  were  held  with  MPA  and  CHCL  Ltd.    The  delegation  also  visited  the 
Mauritius Container Terminal and the proposed logistics park. 

From information received from the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development, 

the delegations also had meetings during their visit with the following stakeholders - 

(i)  Board of Investment; 
(ii)  Ministry of Fisheries; 
(iii)  Enterprise Mauritius; 
(iv)  Chamber of Commerce and Industry; 
(v)  Joint Economic Council; 
(vi)  MEXA; 
(vii)  State Development Company Ltd (SLDC). 

 A business plan is expected from DP World in November 2015. 

Madam Speaker, at this juncture, the project is still at discussion stage. 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, if I can start with the Master Plan, the new version 
thereof  is  being  prepared,  from  what  we  have  heard.  I  understand  that  they  called  for 
proposals,  that  the  tender  for  carrying  out  the  new  Master  Plan,  the  tender  was  issued  on 
March 2014. It is a long time back. The terms of reference must have been put out then. In 
the meantime, especially the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development has been 
talking about developing the whole of the harbour from Pointe aux Sables all the way to Baie 
du Tombeau. Obviously, that cannot have been included in the terms of reference of the Port 
Master Plan. So, can I know whether the terms of reference are being updated/completed in 

 

16 

view of this new vision of this whole area, from Pointe-aux-Sables to Baie du Tombeau, as 
being the new Port Louis Harbour area? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, as I understand, the terms of reference for 
the Master Plan are quite vast, including traffic forecast, use of land, potential for economic 
development, etc.  I am not aware that it needs to be changed.  What I can say is that all the 
projects that had been submitted to MPA have been given to the consultants, and they are 
also having discussions directly with these promoters to see how viable these projects are and 
how they can be incorporated in the Master Plan if they need to be incorporated in the plan. 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, as far as the extension of the berths at the Mauritius 
Container  Terminal  is  concerned,  I  listened,  of  course,  carefully  to  the  hon.  Ag.  Prime 
Minister,  and  the  impression  that  he  gave  was  that  everything  is  going  fine.    There  is  no 
problem at all.  My information is not to that effect.  My information is that the project has 
met with very serious problems to the extent that works had to stop at a moment.  Can we be 
enlightened on that? 

The Ag. Prime Minister:  I am aware, Madam Speaker, that there is delay of some two 
months in the completion of the project.  I am not aware whether the works have stopped, but 
I am aware that there is some delay.  

Mr Bérenger: Delay is delay!  My information is that there are big problems, that is, as 
the works have progressed, the piling and so on has been done – something like Bagatelle 
Dam saga – it has been found that very serious problems have been met with.  The Ag. Prime 
Minister said that he is not aware that works have stopped.  My information is that the works 
have stopped and that there are very serious problems.  I would like to be reassured that we 
are not heading for another Bagatelle Dam saga. 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, the note I have from my colleague is that 
works have not stopped and that, as I mentioned, there are some technical problems.  Works 
have not stopped.  There is a two-month delay, but everything else is going to plan. 

Mr Bérenger: My question, Madam Speaker, is whether works had stopped.  I did not 
ask  whether  works  have  stopped  at  present.    My  question  was  whether  the  situation  is  so 
serious that, in fact, works had stopped.   

 

17 

The Ag. Prime Minister: I am not aware. I am informed, Madam Speaker, that works 

had not stopped and have not stopped. I repeat, Madam Speaker; had not stopped. 

Mr Bérenger:  If I can move on, therefore, leaving the harbour as such to the Dubai 
Ports World issue or rather the strategic partnership. I listened again to the hon. Ag. Prime 
Minister and he said that no strategic partner has so far been chosen, but - if  I heard him 
correctly- that a fresh attempt at finding a strategic partner is being carried out and this now 
involves Dubai Ports World, DP World as they are known.  Can I know whether this aspect 
of DP World being taken on board by the Cargo Handling Corporation has been discussed 
with the recent delegation? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: The recent delegation from DP World Ltd! Madam Speaker, 
there have been a number of discussions, as I mentioned, with various Ministries. We don’t 
yet have a final or even a preliminary written proposal from DP World.  The last team that 
was here was here to collect information and gather as much information as possible, to come 
up with a proposed business plan to submit to Government in November.  It is at that point in 
time that DP World will have submitted something in writing as to exactly what it wants to 
do.  At the moment, I doubt whether they know themselves what they want to do because 
they wanted to gather all the information and come up with a firm proposal. 

Mr  Bérenger:  It  would  seem  from  what  I  have  heard  that  the  DP  World  delegation 
talked to the private sector, especially the Mauritius Chamber of Commerce and Industry and 
the Joint Economic Council.  Can I know why they did not meet with the trade unions also? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I think we have to get it right, in sequence. 
At the moment, we have an idea, but we don’t have a precise description of project proposal 
from DP World.  That project proposal has not been approved by Government yet.  So, it 
would be premature to go and talk to the unions.  Let the proposal come, let it at least be 
analysed and assessed by Government and, if it looks likely to go ahead, that will be the time 
that all the stakeholders will be put on board.  But I must say also that, at the preliminary 
discussions, the whole question of taking on board the labour force was discussed at length 
with the Sultan himself and the other members of the delegation and, obviously, it is clear 
that this issue is of paramount importance to the go-ahead of the project. 

 

18 

Mr Bérenger:  The Minister in charge of Port Louis Harbour is the Ag. Prime Minister.  
Can I know whether Government as a whole has considered the security dimension of this 
whole project? I am sure the hon. Ag. Prime Minister is aware that, some years back, when 
DP World acquired P&O, as a result of that acquisition, they became owners of operations 
across all around the United States, from Miami to New York and so on, and that raised hell – 
if that is parliamentary – in the United States.  And, in fact, the elected Members of Congress 
refused that, voted against that - quoting security reasons, terrorism reasons, and so on.  As a 
result, DP World sold all its interests in the United States. 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, the USA may have its reasons for having 
acted  that  way,  but  I  must  say  that  DP  World  operates  65  terminals  around  the  world, 
including Australia, Canada, Belgium and France. So, it is not something that is being sort of 
taken as an outcast.  Secondly, Madam Speaker, we are talking about the Mauritius Container 
Terminal  here.    It  is  only  part  of  the  Port.    The  rest  of  the  Port  or  the  other  terminals, 
including the general purpose terminals which will continue - at least, it seems at the moment 
– to be Government owned, continue as previously.  So, we are not talking about the whole 
Port  at  the  moment.    We  are  talking  part  of  the  Port,  which  is  the  Mauritius  Container 
Terminal, which handles amongst other things transhipment for the rest of the region. 

Mr Bérenger: The hon. Ag. Prime Minister was out of the country when the team from 
DP World visited Mauritius a few days ago.  They met the hon. Minister of  Finance who 
made statements to the local Press.  In fact, ‘L’Express’ of last Friday quoted the Minister.  
He must have liaised with his colleague.  Is he aware that, in that Press article which quotes 
the hon. Minister of Finance - more than a possibility - the probability of a strategic alliance 
with  DP  World  is  discussed  and  the  hon.  Minister  even  allows  himself  quite  threatening 
words in the direction of trade unions?  Has he had the opportunity of discussing that with his 
colleague? 

The Ag Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I have given the exact position as it stands.  
Obviously,  as  far  as  the  unions  are  concerned,  I  myself  raised  this  issue  with  the  Sultan 
himself and he assured me that he has tremendous experience in taking on board unions and 
labour force all around the world.  He told me himself that he was 100% confident to be able 
to come to a win-win situation with all the workers.  Let us not forget, Madam Speaker, that, 
after  all,  we  are  talking  about  a  much  bigger  Port.    We  are  talking  about  far  greater 

 

19 

employment,  directly  import  activities  and  also  in  the  hinterland  so  far  as  the  Freeport  is 
concerned.  We are talking about hundreds of additional jobs in the Port that can only satisfy 
people working there and living in the vicinity and indeed all over Mauritius.  We will have 
hundreds of jobs in the Port itself and thousands of jobs in the Freeport, if that develops as we 
expect.  That is in addition to the other developments that are happening.  For instance, we’ve 
discussed, I think, last week before, about the Chinese proposed project at Bain des Dames. 
So, all this is coming and offering great opportunities for everyone in the region to obtain 
well-remunerated and satisfying jobs. 

Mr Bérenger: I will have a last one. We have been talking about… 

Madam Speaker: Is that your last question, hon. Leader of the Opposition? 

Mr Bérenger: Yes. 

Madam  Speaker:  Because  there  are  other  Members  who  wish  to  intervene.  Hon. 

Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The hon. Ag. Prime Minister has said - 
if I understand correctly - that there will be a report submitted with regard to the global plan 
and the proposals that DP World would like to make to the Government of Mauritius and 
there are no exact ideas to what exactly they would propose as yet. Now, in that context, he 
has also said that there would be thousands of jobs that would be created. So,  could he tell us 
and how does he reconcile, therefore, not knowing exactly what the plan of DP World is, how 
exactly does he not know what the proposal would be? What exactly would be the thousands 
of  jobs  that  would  be  created,  in  what  category  or  for  what  type  of  workers,  for  men,  for 
women, what age group, what would be those thousands of jobs that would be created? 

(Interruptions) 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  we  are  talking  about  a  project.  I  think 
everybody understands. We are talking about a project that has not been submitted in writing, 
but  has  been  discussed.  So,  we  are  talking  about  what?  We  are  talking  about  the 
transshipment  hub,  we  are  talking  about  the  freeport  and  we  are  talking  about  developing 
cruise and other port related activities and, I must say, in order to look at it in a dispassionate 
way, we are dealing here with the fourth largest port operator in the world. It is not everyday 

 

20 

that  you  attract  this  sort  of  gold  chip  company,  if  I  may  say  so,  to  Mauritius.  We  have 
mentioned that it operates in Australia, Belgium and all that - great countries. So, it is not 
everyday. So, we have to have also some leeway, give it some time and invest our own time 
in allowing DP World to come to finalise its project. At the same time, Madam Speaker, this 
has been going on since 2001, various means of trying to find a strategic partner, because as a 
huge  potential  with  the  development  of  Africa  and  with  the  thousands  of  ships  that  are 
coming this way. So, that is the situation.  Obviously, as it stands, we are  going to create 
200/300  jobs  with  the  port  extension  as  it  stands.  Now,  when  we  are  talking  about  the 
freeport, if it comes online, and I have just mentioned in my reply, Madam Speaker, that in 
Dubai, there are 135,000 people working there. I don’t know whether men, women – I hope 
not children – working there. 

(Interruptions) 

There are 135,000 people! So, we are talking about 325 acres of land for this project. So, we 
can just imagine that this is going to create thousands of jobs for Mauritians, hopefully, who 
will want to go and work there. Same, for the cruise, same for everything. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  The  hon.  Ag.  Prime  Minister 
informed  the  House  that  DP  World  has  had  various  discussions  with  Ministries  and  the 
private sector. My question is: with regard to this new project, who will hold the majority of 
shareholding, will it be the Government or DP World? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Shareholding in what? So, this is the first thing. The project 
itself is of various parts. The shareholding has not yet been finalised at all. So, we do not 
know yet what are the financials, what is the investment. So, we wait for the business plan 
and  we  wait  for  the  proposal  of  DP  World  and  then  we  are  open  to  discussions  with 
Government. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody! 

Mr Baloomoody: The hon. Ag. Prime Minister just mentioned that there have been 
many consultations, but the unions are the ones who know the ins and outs of the Port. Why 
is it that there has been no consultation with the unions?  The more so that we know that the 

 

21 

project has been underlined and, as from this Friday, following the declaration made by the 
hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development,  there  is  much  concern  among  the 
unions about their future. 

The Ag. Prime Minister: I take this opportunity to reassure the House and reassure  
the workers at the Port that the whole idea of this project is to bring economic development 
and prosperity to the Port. That is the whole idea.  And the first people to benefit from that 
will, obviously, be the workers. So that is the whole point of it. As far as the discussions are 
concerned, there have been discussions to help them work out the business plan. Once that is 
finalised,  then  it  will  come  to  the  discussions  with  the  unions.  As  you  mentioned,  any 
statement that is made, tends to create some uncertainty here and there.  

Let  us  reduce  the  uncertainty  because,  at  the  moment,  we  don’t  have  any  final 
proposal  or  even  a  preliminary  proposal  in  writing  from  DP  World.  So,  it  is  premature  to 
cause uncertainty or unrest in the Port based on that. Once we have this, it will be public. 
This  is  what  we  are  talking  about;  the  proposal  will  be  put  to  the  unions  and,  as  I  have 
mentioned, they have guaranteed that they have excellent experience in getting everybody on 
board. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Leader of the Opposition, a last question! 

Mr  Bérenger:  We  have  been  discussing  at  length  DP  World  and  their  eventual 
involvement in the Port Louis harbour. As we know, Madam Speaker, in August, the hon. 
Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  was  in  Singapore  and  from  what  we’ve 
read, had discussions with the Minister concerned, Minister of Transport, but also the port of 
Singapore authority. So, can I know which is which? What did we discuss with DP World, 
what  did  we  discuss  with  the  port  of  Singapore  authority?  How  eventually  is  the  port  of 
Singapore authority to be involved in those developments? 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  Well,  I  have  seen  no  reference  in  the  papers,  Madam 
Speaker,  of the Singapore Ports Authority, but I’ll reassure my colleague, I am not aware  of 
what was discussed. 

 Madam  Speaker:  Time  is  over!  Hon.  Members,  the  Table  has  been  advised  that 

Parliamentary Question No. B/623 has been withdrawn. Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

 

22 

POLICE QUARTERS – LOCATION 

(No. B/614) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and 
National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Police Quarters, he will, for the benefit 
of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Commissioner  of  Police,  information  as  to  the  respective 
location thereof, indicating the number thereof which – 

(a) 

(b) 
(c) 

occupied and 
unoccupied 

are presently 
(i) 
(ii) 
have been converted into offices, and 
have been recommended for demolition, indicating the project earmarked for 
implementation on the site thereof, if any, in each case. 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of 

Police that there are 812 Police Quarters, including seven in Rodrigues. 

As regards parts (a) and (b) of the question, I am tabling the information requested by 

the hon. Member. 

As regards part (c) of the question, I wish to refer the hon. Member to PQ No. B/519 
wherein  I  stated  that  39  Police  Quarters  which  are  situated  at  Abercrombie,  Vacoas,  are 
vacant and in a bad state. As recommended by the Ministry of Public Infrastructure and Land 
Transport, they will be pulled down. 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Madam  Speaker,  is  the  hon.  Ag.  Prime  Minister  aware  that  many 
unoccupied Police Quarters have been left in abandoned state and whether a survey will be 
carried out in order to implement new project on these lands? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am submitting a full list and the  hon. 
Member will see where, in fact, the Police consider that major renovation works are required, 
but I must say that there is no money in the current Budget for this and so we would have to 
wait for the next financial year. 

Dr. Sorefan: Madam Speaker, since 2011, I asked a question and the same reply is 
going on for the next five years. With regard to a specific case, Police Quarters situated at 
Piton, will the hon. Ag. Prime Minister state if Government is envisaging to pull them down, 
being  given the old age and bad state, and to construct a new modern  Police Division for 
Headquarters on that land? 

 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Member, this is a specific question! 

23 

(Interruptions) 

Yes,  but  your  question  is  of  a  general  nature  and  this  is  a  specific  question  for  which  I 
understand the Ag. Prime Minister does not have the information.  Do you wish to reply? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: I am submitting it, but I can read it for the hon. Member - 

Piton  (Lower  Land):  there  are  9  Police  Quarters,  5  are  occupied  and  4  have  been 

converted into offices. 

Piton (Upper Land): for the 11 Police Quarters, 4 are unoccupied and requiring major 

renovation works and 3 have been converted into an office. 

I can submit this and the hon. Member can see. 

Madam Speaker: Next Question, hon. Rutnah! 

Mr  Rutnah:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.    Parliamentary  Question  No.  B/615, 

subject to correction of typographical error. 

 

DISTRICT COURTS – BAIL APPLICATIONS - HEARING 

(No.  B/615)  Mr  S.  Rutnah  (Third  Member  for  Piton  &  Rivière  du  Rempart) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to bail, he will, for the benefit 
of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Master  and  Registrar,  information  as  to  since  when  District 
Courts have ceased to hear applications submitted by provisionally charged accused for the 
granting thereof, indicating the – 

(a) reasons therefor, and  

(b) number of applications therefor heard by the Bail and Remand Court on a daily 

basis, since then. 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, in reply to part (a) of the question, I am 
informed by the Master and Registrar of the Supreme Court that the Bail and Remand Court 
first came into operation in the year 2000 under the Bail Act 1999 in order to allow easier 
access to justice to applicants under provisional charges and who are moving to be released 
on bail before their main cases are lodged. 

24 

 
 
I am also informed that the Bail and Remand Court, located at New Court House, Port 
Louis,  has  centralised  all  services  in  respect  of  bail  and  remand  applications,  inasmuch  as 
Chambers  of  all  legal  professionals,  the  Office  of  the  Director  of  Public  Prosecutions,  the 
Attorney General’s Office, as well as Police Headquarters are all located in Port Louis.   

Furthermore,  video-conferencing  facilities  introduced  since  November  2000,  have 
expedited bail hearings and resulted in improvement of security in all Courts since detainees 
no  longer  have  to  be  taken  from  Remand  Centres  to  Court  and  back.    Such  video-
conferencing facilities are available at Beau Bassin Central and New Wing Prisons, Grand 
River North West Prison, Eastern High Security Prison and Women Prison. 

Madam Speaker, the centralisation of all bail matters at the Bail and Remand Court 
has also reduced the risk of inconsistency in bail conditions, as used to be the case in the past 
when such matters were being dealt with by different Courts across the island. 
 
I am informed that as far as practicable, bail applications are fixed for hearing within 
a week of the motion being made depending on the calendar of the Court.  In order to meet 
the heavy workload at the Bail and Remand Court, the service is provided during weekends 
and public holidays since 2012, and there is more than one Magistrate sitting thereat. In most 
cases, Rulings are delivered on the same day. This was not the case when all bail applications 
under provisional charges were entertained by District Courts across the island.   
 
I am informed by the Master and Registrar of the Supreme Court that District Courts 
have not formally ceased to hear bail applications and therefore still retain their jurisdiction in 
such matters, although the Bail and Remand Court now hears most matters pertaining to bail.   
Madam Speaker, I understand that there have been complaints from certain quarters 
relating  to  the  delay  in  the  hearings.    However,  this  is  a  matter  which  falls  under  the 
Judiciary.    If  need  be,  once  the  Judiciary  has  adequate  infrastructural  facilities  across  the 
island,  to  accommodate  all  Court  personnel  including  Magistrates,  it  may  consider  the 
possibility  of  having  more  than  one  Bail  and  Remand  Courtroom.    In  the  meantime,  the 
Attorney General will initiate discussions so as to bring further improvements, as approved 
by the Judiciary. 

Madam Speaker, in regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed by the Master 
and Registrar that an average of 12 to 14 bail applications are dealt with on a daily basis by 
the Bail and Remand Court.  

Mr Rutnah: Is the hon. Ag. Prime Minister aware that as a result of a circular that 
has been sent to District Courts, Magistrates tend not to hear any bail hearing at all in any 

 

25 

District Courts in Mauritius and this is contrary to the very spirit and intendment of Section 3 
and Section 5 of the Constitution that deal with the liberty of citizens of this country? 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  aware  that  there  is  a  Ministerial 
decision  for  District  Courts  not  to  hear  bail  applications;  as  for  the  rest,  Madam  Speaker, 
whatever is the situation. 

Mr Ramful: Madam Speaker, given that we are dealing with the right of liberty of 
the individual, for the time being, at present, we have only one courtroom and one Magistrate 
sitting  at  a  time  to  hear  various  bail  applications.  Now,  would  the  Ag.  Prime  Minister 
consider  the  possibility  of  having,  at  least,  two  or  three  courtrooms  for  hearing  bail 
applications? 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  Absolutely,  Madam  Speaker,  we  are,  obviously,  as  a 
Government, concerned with civil liberties and the right to freedom as anybody else and the 
Attorney  General  has  begun  discussions  with  the  Judiciary  in  order  to  have  at  least  two 
courtrooms available. 

Mr Ganoo: My question will have been on the same line, Madam Speaker.  Although 
much  progress  has  been  made  as  regards  the  release  of  prisoners  and  detainees  since  the 
setting-up  of  this  Court,  yet,  there  are  many  complaints  from  Barristers  in  view  of  the 
backlog of cases since there is only one Court sitting and there are two Magistrates for the 
BRC, but, I think, in view of the logistics prevailing at the moment, lack of infrastructure and 
so on, may I appeal to the hon. Ag. Prime Minister to use his good offices so that the two 
Magistrates might sit at two different Courts at the same time at the new Court House? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, the Attorney General has agreed to look 

into the matter without hampering in any way the independence of the Judiciary. 

Mr Rutnah: Can the hon. Ag. Prime Minister, as a result of what we know about the 
bail situation, use his best endeavour to actually get rid of the whole system of provisional 
charge so that this matter comes into control? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: This does not arise from this question, Madam. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Jhugroo! 

 

 

26 

PMO - PROFESSOR A. S. – SERVICES 

 (No. B/616) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to Professor A. S., he will state 
the capacity in which Government retained the services thereof over the period July 2005 to 
December 2014, indicating in each case the –  

(a)  amount of fees/salaries and allowances paid out thereto, and  

(b)  number  of  visits  he  effected  to  Mauritius  in  connection  therewith,  further 

indicating -  

(i) the dates thereof;  

(ii) the purposes therefor;  

(iii)  the  expenditure  incurred  in  terms  of  air  tickets,  accommodation  and  other 

facilities, if any, and  

(iv) if Government car facilities had been provided thereto. 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, Professor A. S. was employed on contract 
at the Prime Minister’s Office as part-time Senior Adviser on Economic Matters.  He was, in 
fact,  employed  with  effect  from  16  March  2006  on  a  one  year  contract  which  was 
successively  renewed.    His  duty,  according  to  his  contract,  was  to  advise  the  then  Prime 
Minister on Strategic International and Economic issues.  He resigned on 14 December 2014. 

As regards part (a) of the question, Professor A. S. was being paid a fee of 16,000 
pound sterling per annum for his services, payable in two equal instalments. The total fees 
paid  to  him  for  the  period  March  2006  to  November  2014  amounted  to  142,667  pound 
sterling.    Professor  A.  S.  was  also  provided  with  air  tickets  and  accommodation  for  a 
maximum of three visits to Mauritius per year, including tickets and accommodation for his 
spouse and his three children for one trip only. 
 
In regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed by the Passport and Immigration 
Office that as from 16 March 2006 to 14 November 2014, Professor A. S. has, in all, effected 
44 visits to Mauritius. The expenditure incurred by Government on air tickets … 

(Interruptions) 

The expenditure incurred by Government on air tickets and accommodation were as follows - 

27 

: 
: 

Rs4,144,634 
Rs1,128,825 

 

 

 
Air tickets 
Accommodation 
I am not in a position to provide information on the expenses on air tickets for the 
 
years 2006 and 2007 and on accommodation for the years 2006 and 2011, as I am informed 
that such records are not available at the Private Office of the Prime Minister’s Office. 
 
his visits to Mauritius. 

A chauffeur-driven car was also put at the disposal of Professor A. S. during each of 

Madam  Speaker,  I  am  tabling  the  information  available  in  regard  to  expenditure 
incurred in terms of fees, air tickets and accommodation, together with the dates of the visits 
of Professor A. S. 

Mr Jhugroo: Will the hon. Ag. Prime Minister inform the House on what criteria the 
former  Prime  Minister  has  selected  Professor  A.  S.  to  serve  as  his  personal  Economic 
Adviser,  a  foreign  Economist  paying  fat  foreign  currency  when  he  had  so  many  local 
Economic  Advisers  like  Dr.  Rama  Sithanen,  Mr  Rajiv  Servansingh  and  Mr  Rajah 
Ramdaursing.  

Madam Speaker: Please, don’t mention names! 

 (Interruptions) 

The Ag. Prime Minister: The then Prime Minister never discussed the matter with 

me, Madam Speaker. 

Mr Jhugroo: Will the hon. Ag. Prime Minister state whether in addition to payment 
of a gros pactole from Government funds, Professor A. S. was also paid fees and allowances 
by State-related enterprises like SBM where he was paid Rs110,000 daily ... 

Madam  Speaker:  Don’t  provide  information,  hon.  Member;  you  should  ask  for 

information. 

Mr Jhugroo: ...for each sitting and free air tickets from Air Mauritius and enjoyed 
privileges like travelling to India and Myanmar at the invitation of the former Chairman of 
SBM. 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Member,  just  to  draw  your  attention,  allow  the  hon.  Ag. 

Prime Minister to reply! 

28 

 
The Ag. Prime Minister: What I can confirm, Madam Speaker, is that he was a 
member of the Board of the State Bank of Mauritius; I don’t have details of his remuneration. 
Mr  Jhugroo:  Will  the  hon.  Ag.  Prime  Minister  inform  the  House  whether  at  the 
invitation of the former  Prime Minister, Professor A. S. was  also paid first class ticket on 
Emirates with a stipend of 2,000 pound sterling which comes around Rs110,000 per day for 
holidays at Le Paradis Hotel in Le Morne with one of his girlfriends Ms D.M. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Okay. Hon. Jhugroo!   

(Interruptions) 

Mr Jhugroo:  …twice a year by the SBM. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Jhugroo, please! Ask your question! 

The Ag. Prime Minister: I am not aware of that particular episode. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Last question on this, hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Jhugroo: Will the hon. Ag. Prime Minister inform the House whether Professor 
A.  S.  had  submitted  any  report  or  recommendation  to  the  Government  on  the  Budget  or 
economic  issues  like  hoarding  foreign  currencies  in  unused  notes  in  private  safes  kept  at 
home? 

(Interruptions) 

The Ag. Prime Minister: On a serious note, Madam Speaker, we have not been able 

to trace any written reports by Professor A. S. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, one last question! 

Mr Mohamed: Madam Speaker, I thank you for that. Since the hon. Chief Whip has 
rightly put very interesting questions about the specific period of time and he is talking about 
public funds as though there was such a crime that has been committed, could the hon. Ag. 
Prime Minister just confirm that, at that time in question, those responsible for the finances of 
the country happen to be himself and hon. Jugnauth? 

 

29 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  my  friend  was  Minister  of  Labour  for 

some time. 

(Interruptions) 

And he ought to know that a budget is allocated for each Ministry at the beginning of the 
year,  a  global  budget  which  is  item-wise,  including  consultants,  and  that  the  Ministry  of 
Finance  and  Economic  Development  does  not  intervene  in  every  cent  that  is  spent.  I  am 
surprised that the hon. Member does not know that. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, next question! 

PRIME MINISTER (FORMER) - FOREIGN CURRENCY - SEIZURE 

(No. B/617) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the foreign currency notes 
seized at the residence of the former Prime Minister, in February 2015, he will, for the benefit 
of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to if the inquiry carried 
out thereinto has revealed the sources thereof and, if not, why not. 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of 
Police that the investigation in the case of foreign currency notes seized at the residence of 
the former Prime Minister in February last is ongoing, and the sources thereof are yet to be 
established. 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Can  the  hon.  Ag.  Prime  Minister  confirm  whether  the  US  Dollar 
currency notes seized were crispy, consecutively numbered, brand new ones and had never 
been in circulation within the monetary system? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, this is a Police enquiry. I don’t have any 

information. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Jhugroo! 
Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Ag. Prime Minister say whether he has any information 
about  how  the  new  dollar  notes  which  were  apparently  sent  from  the  US  to  Europe  have 
landed in the safe of the former Prime Minister in Riverwalk, Vacoas? 

(Interruptions) 

 

30 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Again, Madam Speaker, I am not aware. 
Madam Speaker: Last question! 
Mr  Jhugroo:  Can  the  hon.  Ag.  Prime  Minister  confirm  whether  these  US  Dollar 

notes have been declared to Customs when they were physically brought to Mauritius? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: I pass again, Madam Speaker. 
Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ramano! 

QUATRE BORNES - PROSTITUTION - ARRESTS 

(No.  B/618)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  Quatre  Bornes,  in  the 
vicinity  of  the  St  Jean  Road,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the 
Commissioner  of  Police,  information  as  to  the  number  of  arrests  effected  thereat  in 
connection  with  prostitution  related  offences  since  January  2015  to  date,  indicating  the 
additional measures, if any, that will be taken to curb the proliferation thereof. 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of 
Police that from January to 01 October 2015, three cases of prostitution related offences have 
been established by the Police in the vicinity of St Jean Road, and three persons have been 
arrested.  Two of them have been fined and the third one is awaiting Court decision. 

I am further informed by the Commissioner of Police that with a view to preventing 
and detecting offences related to prostitution in that region adequate measures are already in 
place. These are as follows - 

•  crack down and /or joint operations with the assistance of the Special Support 

Unit and the Special Mobile Force;  

•  regular patrols;  

•  making use of the 39 CCTV cameras which are operational in the region of 

Quatre Bornes - which I installed myself, and 

•  developing intelligence for targeted operations. 

The Police has now intensified control by effecting more patrols. 

Moreover,  the  Police  regularly  conducts  sensitisation  programmes  for  the  public, 
more particularly the youth, with the support of the Police Crime Prevention Unit, the Police 

 

31 

Family  Protection  Unit  and  the  Brigade  pour  la  Protection  des  Mineurs,  on  the  different 
types  of  sexual  offences,  including  prostitution.  I  am  informed  that  as  from  January  to  01 
October 2015, 2,325 persons in the region which includes Quatre Bornes and Sodnac have 
been sensitised by the Police. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  am  also  informed  by  the  Ministry  of  Gender  Equality,  Child 
Development and Family Welfare that officers of the Ministry are called upon to attend to 
cases related to prostitution in its six Family Support Bureaux across the country, to provide 
appropriate psychological counselling and legal advice. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ramano! 
Mr Ramano: Madame la présidente, le problème de la prostitution est flagrant dans 
cette région qui est à quelques mètres de la station de police. Est-ce que le ministre, qui est 
aussi le député, est d’accord pour vérifier s’il existe  un sentiment de complaisance de la part 
de certains policiers face à ce problème de prostitution sur la route royale de St. Jean? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: I am not able to obviously comment on complaisance, but I 
must  say,  looking  at  the  figures  submitted  by  the  Police  Department,  that  the  number  of 
crackdown operations which were, for instance, 37 in 2012, 21 in 2013, have been reduced to 
four  in  2014  and  three  up  to  now  in  2015.  Same  sort  of  trend,  Madam  Speaker,  as  far  as 
arrests  are  concerned,  so,  there  is  a  point  and  I  will  raise  that  with  the  Commissioner  of 
Police. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ramano! 
Mr  Ramano:  La  presse  de  ce  matin  fait  mention  de  l’arrestation  de  quelques 
personnes  relatives  à  ce  problème  de  prostitution  dans  le  Morcellement  St.  Jean,  plus 
précisément à l’Avenue Trianon. Est-ce que le ministre peut confirmer que parmi ceux arrêtés 
il y a aussi des policiers ou ex-policiers, ce qui explique cette impression de complaisance des 
habitants de Quatre Bornes vis-à-vis des policiers? 

The Ag.  Prime  Minister:  I  will raise the matter with the Commissioner of Police, 

Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

 

32 

Dr. Sorefan: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The hon. Ag. Prime Minister mentioned 
CCTV camera. Is he aware that most of them are not functional because I heard it from the 
Police Officers’ mouth?  They are not functional in the region where I work. 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, the CCTV cameras were installed some 
time ago. I am not aware that they are not working. If the hon. Member informs me so, I will 
check and see what is the problem. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo! 

Mr Ganoo: Can the hon. Ag. Prime Minister - especially as he is the MP for the area 
-  give  a  reason  to  the  House  why  Quatre  Bornes  is  the  most  preferred  town  for  these  sex 
workers? 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  Because  it  is  by  far  the  best  town  in  Mauritius,  Madam 
Speaker, that is why. But, as I mentioned quite seriously - it has the best MPs also - Madam 
Speaker,  it  is  apparent,  and  I  thank  the  hon.  Member  for  the  question,  that  the  amount  of 
crackdown operations - maybe since the closure of Ti Vegas the matter has dropped down in 
terms of priority, but I will raise that - is far less than it used to be and so are the number of 
arrests. So, I will raise it quite seriously with the Commissioner of Police. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Baloomoody! 

INDEPENDENT POLICE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION - SETTING UP 

(No. B/619) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the proposed setting up of an 
Independent Police Complaints Commission, as mentioned in the Presidential Address on the 
Government Programme, he will state where matters stand. 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  on  11  June  2015, 
drafting  instructions  were  given  to  the  Attorney  General’s  Office  to  review  the  existing 
legislations with a view to converting the Police Complaints Division of the National Human 
Rights Commission into a full-fledged Independent Police Complaints Commission.   

 As  already  enunciated  in  the  Government  Programme  2015–2019  and  the  Budget 
Speech 2015, the Independent Police Complaints Commission will be presided by a former 
Judge of the Supreme Court.   

 

33 

The Commission will be a body corporate separate from the National Human Rights 
Commission,  and  no  serving  Police  Officer  will  form  part  of  the  Independent  Police 
Complaints Commission. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  am  also  informed  that  the  preparation  of  the  relevant  Bill  is  in 

progress and it is intended to introduce same in the House in the near future. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ameer Meea! 

ROAD ACCIDENTS - HIT & RUN CASES  

(No.  B/620)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to road accidents, 
he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as 
to the number of reported cases of hit and run over the past two years, indicating -  

 (a) the number thereof in respect of which the vehicle drivers/cyclists have not been 

identified as at to date, and  

(b) if consideration will be given for a toughening of the penalties in relation thereto. 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  in  regard  to  road  accidents,  I  am 
informed by the Commissioner of Police that since 01 January 2013 to 30 September 2015, 
294 hit and run cases causing injury or death were reported to the Police, as follows - 

• 

• 

109 cases, including four causing death, in the year 2014; 

111 cases, including eight causing death, this year as at 30 September. 

In regard to part (a) of the question, in-depth enquiries have been carried out in all 
cases,  but  in  195  cases  the  drivers/cyclists  involved  in  the  accidents  have  remained 
unidentified.  However, these cases have not been closed definitely and any new clues may 
enable the Police to investigate further into these cases with a view to tracing out the drivers. 

Madam  Speaker,  with  a  view  to  reducing  road  traffic  violations  which  are  closely 
linked  to  the  number  of  road  accidents  and  casualties,  the  Police  has  taken  the  following 
additional measures to increase its visibility on the roads - 

(i) 

deployment of more riders of the Traffic Branch on the motorways and major 
roads across the country to deter such violations, and 

 

34 

(ii)  more frequent targeted operations are carried out during weekends in regions 

where there are high level of nightlife activities. 

Furthermore,  new  measures  being  envisaged  by  the  Ministry  of  Public  Infrastructure 
and  Land  Transport,  and  which  will  include,  where  necessary,  legal  amendments,  are  as 
follows - 

(i) 

(ii) 

the time delay to report an accident is being reduced from four hours to two 
hours; 

in certain instances of reckless driving, the offence might be qualified as motor 
manslaughter; 

(iii)  stiffening of the laws for hit and run, including provision for longer term of 

imprisonment; 

(iv)  driving under the influence of intoxicating liquor and drugs to be categorized as 

an arrestable offence; 

(v)  provisional suspension of licenses for serious violations; 

(vi)  studies are being carried out to relocate speed cameras in dark spots, and to use 
modern technology to detect effectively zone-speeding over a certain distance; 

(vii)  a focus on education of drivers and road users; 

(viii)  a National Road Safety Strategy 2015-25 is being developed to reduce the rate of 

fatal and serious injury accidents, based on the United Nations Safe System 
approach, and 

(ix)  establishment of a National Road Safety Commission chaired by the Prime 

Minister. 

The Commission will address the following three issues - 

(a) 

infrastructure and state of roads; 

(b) 

state of vehicles, and 

(c) 

focus on education, discipline, enforcement of laws and punishment. 

 
The  Commission  will  also  look  into  policy  issues  in  relation  to  any  review  of 

35 

penalties for road traffic offences. 

Madam Speaker, in the 2014 budgetary measures, I had announced the establishment of 
the  Insurance  Industry  Compensation  Fund  for,  inter  alia,  the  payment  of  compensation, 
subject to set criteria, to persons suffering from personal injury in traffic accidents where the 
tortfeasor or the vehicle which caused the injury  is untraceable.  The relevant Regulations 
have been worked out and are being finalised by the Ministry of Financial Services, Good 
Governance and Institutional Reforms. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  In many cases of hit and run, one of 
the problems is that the registration plates of vehicles are not clearly identified, that is, the 
registration  plates  are  sometimes  modified  so  that  people  or  policemen  cannot  catch  the 
registration  plates.  Therefore,  my  question  to  the  Ag.  Prime  Minister  is  to  ensure  that  the 
Police  carry  regular  checks  to  ensure  that  plates  of  vehicles,  especially  modified  ones,  are 
being checked? 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:    Madam  Speaker,  I  am  sure  hon.  Members  of  the  House 
would  have  noted  that  the  Police  presence  especially  on  weekends  have  been  stepped  up 
considerably  and  very  seriously.    During  the  Police  checks,  obviously,  the  licence  of  the 
driver is checked, insurance of the vehicle is checked and also the state of the driver, whether 
he has consumed alcohol or drugs is verified and if necessary, he is asked to use appropriate 
equipment.  I will also raise this matter of the licence plates. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr  Bérenger:    I  have  just  heard  that  195  cases  where  those  guilty  of  hit  and  run 
offences have not been identified and daily we see - these days - cases of hit and run.  We 
have been informed that the hon. Minister of Public Infrastructure with the State Law Office 
is actively preparing a law.   

Can  I  insist  that  that  law  should  also  include  people  who  take  part  in  a  cover-  up, 

repairing the car en catimini and so on, that this should be taken care of as well? 

The Ag. Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, we have noted the point. 

 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Ganoo! 

36 

Mr Ganoo:  I heard the hon. Ag. Prime Minister saying that Government is preparing 
legislation to set up an authority or a fund in order to compensate the victims of hit and run 
accidents.  Can I ask the hon. Ag. Prime Minister whether the Association of Motor Insurers 
has been taken on board and whether that authority will be funded only by State fund or will 
also the insurers contribute in that fund? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, this dates back to my last Budget.  In fact, 
yes, everybody has been taken on board and il y a un barème in terms of compensation and, 
as far as I remember, Madam Speaker, there is a contribution.  If someone takes an insurance 
policy,  there  is  a  small  contribution  made  to  that  fund  as  well  as  a  seed  fund  paid  by 
Government at the start.  

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Baloomoody! 

Mr  Baloomoody:    I  raised  the  issue  before.    The  hon.  Ag.  Prime  Minister  just 
mentioned that there are more riders on the road.  It is true, we see more riders during the 
day, but at night apparently, my information is that they do not have a shift at night.  Most of 
the  hit  and  run  cases  occur  at  night.    Can  I  ask  the  Ag.  Prime  Minister  to  ask  the 
Commissioner of Police to review the scheme of duty of these riders? 

The Ag. Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, I think this is a major national issue. I have 
raised the matter on many occasions with the Police and I only hope that they take on board 
Government’s concern and this House’s concern as to the seriousness, dynamism and energy 
that need to be put in terms of controlling; it is not an impossible task.  It just needs energy 
and dynamism and the Commissioner of Police is well aware of the wishes of Government in 
that respect. The Minister of Public Infrastructure and myself, we have had many meetings 
and we can only hope that not only during the day - as we can see now more and more - but 
also right through the early hours of the morning that the Police are active and vigilant. 

Madam Speaker:  Time is over.  Hon. Members, the Table has been advised that PQ 
B/642 in regard to all inclusive packages proposed to the tourists by tour operators addressed 
to the hon. Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport will now be replied by the 
hon. Ag. Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External Communications.  The Table has 
further been advised that PQ B/635 and B/650 have been withdrawn.  Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

 

37 

 

BAI LTD - SUPER CASH BACK GOLD - REFUND 

(No. B/624) Dr R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked the 
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms,  Minister  of 
Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the policy holders of the 
Super Cash Back Gold Plan of the former British American Insurance Co. (Mtius) Ltd., he 
will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the National Property Fund Ltd., information 
as to- 

(a) 

the number thereof who have not yet been refunded, indicating where matters 
stand as to the policies which are assigned in favour of other financial institutions, 
and  

(b)  when the debentures certificates will be issued. 
Mr Bhadain:  Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed 
by the National Property Fund Ltd that, as at date, out of 14,590 policyholders concerned, 
1,554 policyholders have not yet benefitted from a refund as follows – 

(i) 

771 of these policyholders have taken loans from banks, financial institutions and 
other organisations and have pledged their insurance policies accordingly; 

(ii)  773 policyholders have either not registered with NPFL, have not submitted 

complete documentation or are the subject to further due diligence work being 
conducted by NPFL and the Special Administrator; 

(iii)  55 policyholders are companies which do not meet the eligibility criteria for 

repayment, and 

(iv)  Five policyholders’ properties are subject to a freezing order from the Supreme 

Court of Mauritius. 

Madam Speaker, in respect of policies which have been assigned in favour of banks, 
financial  institutions  and  other  organisations,  this  category  includes  1,023  policies  out  of 
25,071  policies  which  are  held  by  771  policyholders.  I  am  informed  that  the  National 
Property Fund Ltd is having consultations with the relevant banks, financial institutions and 
other organisations which have granted loans to these policyholders who have pledged their 
Super Cash Back Gold Policies, with a view to finding an appropriate and acceptable solution 
for each case. 

 

38 

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed by the National 
Property Fund Ltd that a Press Communiqué will be issued in due course to inform the public 
of  the  dates  on  which  the  debentures  certificates  will  be  issued.    Meanwhile,  the  Special 
Administrator and NPFL, National Insurance Company Limited, the Ministry of Finance and 
Economic Development and my Ministry are working on possible solutions to enable earlier 
redemption,  so  that  the  sufferings  of  the  victims  of  the  BAI  Ponzi  scheme  are  further 
alleviated. 

Dr. Sorefan: Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister mentioned some 1,500 who have not 
been paid. Can the hon. Minister inform the House whether letters have been sent to each of 
them informing them of the status of their refund, why they have not been refunded, that is, 
on a personal basis rather than a communiqué? 

Mr Bhadain: No, Madam Speaker, letters have  not been sent individually to these 
policyholders,  as  far  as  I  am  aware,  but  I  do  know  that  many  of  these  policyholders  have 
either been in touch by phone or have actually turned up physically to the offices of NPFL.  
This issue is being looked at, as I have stated, and the Committee will soon find an answer to 
the problem. 

Mr  Mohamed:  Madam  Speaker,  could  the  hon.  Minister  confirm  -  according  to 
information that I hold and has been circulating around in Mauritius until recently - that all 
the  policyholders  of  the  former  British  American  Insurance  Company  (Mauritius)  Limited 
were  made  to  sign  a  document  before  the  entering  into  play  of  the  National  Insurance 
Company? In that document, there are two paragraphs where all the advantages and all the 
benefits of the policy are literally transferred to the National Property Fund Ltd.  One of the 
paragraphs of that document which all policyholders were made to sign, failing which they 
would not be allowed to receive any money, reads that – 

“From  the  effective  date,  the  policyholders  and  beneficiaries  shall  have  no  further 
rights against and obligations under the policy. Whenever and whoever arising, all of 
which  shall  vest  with  the  National  Property  Fund  Ltd.  and  the  policyholders  and 
beneficiaries shall accordingly be released from obligations - and worst - shall cease 
to enjoy any rights under that policy.” 

Is it the case that, as it stands, in order to go through the operation, which the hon. 
Minister describes as having had to be done, today, as we speak, in view of all the forms that 
those  people  have  been  made  to  sign,  they  cease  to  hold  any  rights  thereupon  and  their 

 

39 

beneficiaries  also  have  no  rights  whatsoever?    Because  they  were  made  to  give  all  those 
rights to the National Property Fund, as clearly stipulated in that document which they were 
made to sign. 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, it is perfectly normal that when Government decides 
to repay the victims of the fraud, whose money has been stolen, when they come and claim 
the  amount  which  Government  has  decided  to  repay  in  the  light  of  the  financial  crisis  or 
social crisis which could unfold, this person has to surrender the policy. It is very normal. In 
this case, it is like a thief going into somebody’s house, stealing the money and the person 
asking the Government to refund the money and, when Government is refunding the money, 
then you want to keep the loot as well. 

Dr. Sorefan: Madam Speaker, regarding debentures, as the hon. Minister is aware, I 
am sure, we have many Mauritians abroad who have their money in this Super Cash Back 
Gold.  Can the hon. Minister consider that those people who are abroad be informed on a 
personal  basis?    Because  they  do  not  get  real  access  to  communicate  that  the  Minister  is 
contemplating to go through it. 

Mr  Bhadain:  I  believe,  Madam  Speaker,  that  the  NPFL  has  also  issued  the 
communiqué on the worldwide net, on the internet, and this is one way, probably, for people 
who are not in Mauritius to be informed of these issues. I am sure, Madam Speaker, that the 
NPFL is doing their utmost best to get all these people having their money back because we 
understand how they have been suffering out of this fraud. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister just informed us that there are 
about 700 or so policies that have not been returned because they were pledged by financial 
institutions. My question is why is it that, with regard to the new debentures that are being 
issued, these people cannot pledge these debentures in turn to financial institutions. 

Mr  Bhadain:  There  are  two  aspects  to  this,  Madam  Speaker.  Firstly,  in  terms  of 
people who have pledged their insurance policies with banks and financial institutions.  What 
these people have, in fact, done, is that when they put their money into that insurance policy, 
they took that policy and went to the bank saying: “Can I have a loan out of this?” So, they 
got money and then they went and spent the money invested and they repaid on a monthly 
basis. When they are coming back to Government after what has happened with Super Cash 
Back Gold and are saying: “Give us our policy money back”, the issue is whether this has to 
be repaid to the bank or it has to be repaid to the person or whether part of the loan has been 

 

40 

repaid and partly the insurance policy has got some value left, for which that person has to be 
repaid. So, this is the exercise which NPFL is currently doing and it is taking the time that it 
is taking now. Now, with respect to debentures, I have stated before that we are trying to find 
solutions to even have an early redemption system, so that we can repay people even before 
the five years that we have said that the debentures would be redeemable at zero coupon for 
five  years,  20%  each  year.  We  are  trying  to  find  those  solutions,  and  we  want  the  BAI 
problem to go away as much as anybody else. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Joomaye, last question on this! 

Dr.  Joomaye:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  I  would  like  to  ask  the  hon.  Minister 
whether,  for  policyholders  pledge  in  favour  of  the  ex-Bramer  Bank,  these  would  be 
considered for refund at this moment. 

Mr Bhadain: Again, it is the same situation. What BAI has done is that they have 
taken the money and given the policies and then they told the people: “Go to Bramer Bank 
and you’ll have the money back via a loan.” So, now, we have to look at the loan and look at 
the insurance.  Then, there are issues regarding interests.  Of course, there will be an offset 
procedure, I believe, but I leave that in the capable hands of NPFL. 

PORT LOUIS  – ROAD DECONGESTION PROGRAMME  

(No. B/625) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the city of Port 
Louis, he will state if a decongestion plan has been developed therefor and, if so, give details 
thereof. 

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, as Members of the House are aware, Government will 
embark  on  a  vast  Road  Decongestion  Programme  as  from  July  2016.    Some  of  the 
components of the programme will address the problem of congestion in Port Louis given 
that there will be multiple entrances into Port Louis as follows – 

a tunnel at the level of Volcy Pougnet in line with Ring Road Phase 2 and 3; 
an entrance into Port Louis at De Caen through a Grade Separator, and 
a review of the bus stations at Victoria Square and Immigration Square. 

• 
• 
• 
Moreover,  the  Road  Decongestion  Programme  for  the  City  of  Port  Louis  will 

comprise several other components, namely – 

the Traffic Management Scheme; 

 
the relocation of hawkers; 

41 

the relocation of the administrative centre; 

the delocalisation of public offices to Highlands City, and 

the conversion of certain streets in the City centre into pedestrian ones. 

The implementation of these projects will reduce significantly the volume of traffic in 

Port Louis and thereby impacting on the congestion. 

Dr.  Sorefan:  May  we  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  what  is  the  role  of Mr  Gaëtan 

Siew in this Port Louis roads redevelopment? 

Mr Bodha: This is the Road Decongestion Programme. From what I understand, Mr 
Gaëtan Siew is working on the project of Port Louis 2030, which includes the whole Master 
Plan with the Port area. We are interested, in fact, with the traffic component of this 2030 
plan. 

Dr. Sorefan: In a news article, there is mention that there will be connection of the 
Caudan Flyover through Deschartes Street to A1, next to Line Barracks.  Can we know from 
the hon. Minister whether … 

Mr  Bodha:  The  most  important  thing,  Madam  Speaker,  is  that  about  10,000  cars 
enter Port Louis at the Port area in front of the Government House. So, from the traffic point 
of view, what we are trying to do is that the traffic coming from the South enter Port Louis 
further up, that is, at the level of Caudan and De Caen and the traffic coming from the North 
would enter Port Louis at the level of Immigration Square, thereby the traffic would be fluid 
at the level of the Port. 

GOVERNMENT OFFICE MANAGEMENT UNIT - SETTING UP 

(No. B/626) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the proposed 
setting up of a General Office Management Unit, he will state where matters stand.  

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, with a view to rationalising the use of office space for 
 
public services, Government decided then to set up the Government Office Management Unit 
under the aegis of my Ministry.   

 

The functions of the Government Office Management Unit are as follows - 

 
(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 

42 

To formulate policies and strategies regarding office accommodation for both 
owned and leased buildings; 
To develop and issue guidelines in respect of space requirements for various 
grades of officers; 
To issue a standard lease agreement containing standard compulsory clauses 
together with provisions for optional clauses; 
To formulate norms and standards of office buildings; 
To give final approval for the leasing of office accommodation; 
To build up and maintain a database containing relevant details of all rented 
and owned buildings by Government; 

(vii)  To build up and maintain a database of all potential landlords willing to lease 

their buildings to Government, and 

(viii)  To deal with all requests relating to office accommodation received from 

Ministries and Departments. 

Madam Speaker, several meetings were held with different stakeholders in order to 
decide on the appropriate structure and other requirements to this Unit to become operational.  
However, this Unit could not be set up as the staffing and other resource requirements were 
not provided to the Ministry. 

In spite of the above, Madam Speaker, my Ministry is already carrying out some of 

 
the functions of the Government Office Management Unit.  For instance -  

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

a Model Lease Agreement has been developed in consultation with the State 
Law Office and incorporated in the Standard Bidding Documents for renting 
of office space issued by the Procurement Policy Office; 

the final approval for leasing of office space is given to by my Ministry after 
ascertaining that the building is structurally safe and sound and fit for renting; 

a  software  has  been  developed  to  build  up  and  maintain  a  database  of  all 
rented  and  Government-owned  buildings.    The  software  is  actually  being 
finalised by the Central Information Systems Division, and 

(iv) 

dealing with all requests relating to office accommodation in rented buildings. 

43 

 
Madam Speaker, I am also informed that efforts were made to build up and maintain 
a database of all potential landlords willing to lease their buildings to Government.  However, 
this did not materialise as there were poor response from the landlords. 

Furthermore,  my  Ministry  has  also  prepared  draft  guidelines  on  office 
accommodation on rental premises.  Discussions thereon are being held with all stakeholders 
before their finalisation. 

Dr. Sorefan: Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister has not replied  - if I heard him right 
– as to when the Ministry is going to set up the General Office Management Unit. Is there a 
time frame? 

Mr Bodha: From the answer I have given, Madam Speaker,  in fact, the idea came in 
2000.  It  was  in  2004  that  some  of  the  Units  purposes  started  to  be  implemented  by  my 
Ministry. In fact, the Unit does not exist as such. So, maybe in line with what is being done 
with the Highlands Administrative City, we can think of setting up such a Unit so that we can 
monitor all the issues relating to accommodation by Ministries and Departments. 

Dr. Sorefan: Is the hon. Minister aware that the total expenditure incurred since 2010 
is around Rs2.9 billion and which is likely to increase in the near future? What steps have 
been taken to minimise the rental, especially when in the city we pay about Rs380 m. for year 
2014 to some 50 privately-owned buildings?  And to my information, the decision was taken 
by the then Government to rent about 10 floors from the Citadel Mall located very near here. 
Is the hon. Minister aware if this is true and what action will be taken by this Government? 

Mr  Bodha:  The  figures  given  by  the  hon.  Member  are  correct.  In  fact,  we  are 
spending around Rs600 m. on rent payment for office buildings in Port Louis and elsewhere. 
I think the answer to all this is the Highlands Administrative City. 

UNITED ARAB EMIRATES – VISA ENTRY 

(No.  B/627)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 
International  Trade  whether,  in  regard  to  the  United  Arab  Emirates,  he  will  state  where 
matters stand as to the talks engaged with the Government thereof to exempt the Mauritian 
nationals from the requirement of a visa entry therefor, indicating if they have - 

 
(a) been requested to reciprocate the visa exemption granted to their nationals when 

44 

entering Mauritius, and  

 (b)  requested  for  an  increase  in  the  number  of  direct  flights  between  our  two 

countries. 

Mr Sinatambou: Madam Speaker, I thank the hon. Member for his question and I am 
pleased, once again, to inform the House that Mauritius is one of the few countries in the 
world whose nationals do not require a visa prior to travelling to no less than 106 countries.  
However, it is to be noted that, out of those 106 countries, Mauritian nationals travel totally 
visa free to 81 countries and for the remaining 25 countries, visa is granted on arrival. 

As regards part (a) of the question,  I wish to confirm to the House that the United 
Arab  Emirates  Authorities  have  indeed  been  requested  to  reciprocate  the  visa  exemption 
granted to their nationals entering Mauritius.  

On  10  March  2015,  while  replying  to  Parliamentary  Question  No.  B/182  from  the 
First Member for Port  Louis Maritime and Port Louis East,  I actually informed the House 
that, in the context of his presence in Mauritius during our National Day Celebrations, I had 
met with the UAE Ambassador, H.E. Essa Abdullah Al Basha Al Nuaimi, and had raised the 
issue of visa exemption with him.  I even impressed upon him for an early conclusion of the 
visa exemption agreement. 

I can state to the House that on 17 February 2015, the Embassy of the UAE in Cairo 
informed  our  Embassy  in  Cairo  that  the  draft  Visa  Exemption  Agreement  was  still  under 
consideration and that the competent authorities would inform us of any development in due 
course.  

On 22 April of this year, our Mission in Cairo informed my Ministry that a reminder 

had been sent to the UAE Embassy in Cairo. 

On 28 June 2015, our Embassy in Cairo informed my Ministry that another reminder 

dated 22 June 2015 had been sent to the UAE Authorities by our Mission. 

On 06 July 2015, the Embassy of the UAE in Cairo informed our Embassy that the 
draft Visa Exemption Agreement is still under study, I quote, “by the concerned authorities in 
the United Arab Emirates” and that a reply will be provided in due course. 

I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  at  the  beginning  of  this  month  I  have  personally 
written  to  H.E.  Sheik  Abdulla  Bin  Al  Nahyan,  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  of  UAE, 
requesting him to expedite matters for an early conclusion of a reciprocal Visa Exemption 
Agreement. 

45 

 
As regards part (b) of the question, I did inform the House that Air Access Policy falls 
under the purview of the Prime Minister’s Office and that Government is currently reviewing 
its national Air Access Policy. In that respect, the National Advisory Council has already set 
up a Task Force under the chairmanship of the Secretary to Cabinet and Head of the Civil 
Service which is looking into the whole matter. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Speaker, in reply to Parliamentary Question B/182, as the 
hon. Minister just stated, he mentioned that the draft visa exemption submitted to UAE dates 
back as far as 05 February 2014, where the exemption agreement has been submitted there. 
Since then, there have been so many reminders and the hon. Minister himself just stated to 
the House that he met the Ambassador in his Office on 09 March of this year, that is, more 
than six months have now been elapsed. Until now, we have not seen anything substantial 
from UAE.  

My point is that the UAE, more specifically the Emirates Airline which is a hundred 
percent  control  Airline  Company  by  the  UAE,  Mauritius  there  were  only  three  flights  per 
week. 

Madam Speaker: What is the question of the hon. Member? 

Mr Ameer Meea: My question is now we have more than three flights per day. One 
of the arguments is that we have given so many in terms of landing rights to the United Arab 
Emirates, if this can be used as an argument so that we can have our Mauritian national when 
going to Dubai being exempted for visa. 

Mr Sinatambou: Madam Speaker, of course, all relevant points are being and will be 
taken with the authorities of the United Arab Emirates, but I think that the House ought to 
know  that  the  citizens  of  the  United  Arab  Emirates  have  been  waived  from  any  visa 
requirement since 1993. So, for the last 22 years, they have been coming here without visa. 
We  have  started  and  initiated  some  discussions.  I  think  we  should  give  enough  time  for 
matters to progress. 

Madam Speaker: Yes. Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr  Mohamed:  It  seems  as  though  with  regard  to  the  Arab  States,  I  mean,  if  I 
understand  correctly,  could  the  hon.  Minister  just  confirm  that  ever  since  he  has  been  in 
office, there have been at least five reminders, which is consistent and good work. At least we 
are  reminding  them.  So,  five  reminders  have  gone  and  also  with  regard  to  Saudi  Arabia, 

 

46 

another Arab country, a lot of reminders are going and nothing seems to be coming concrete, 
positive, structured, solutions are coming out apart from numerous  reminders that keep on 
increasing. So, could he please tell us when would the reminders stop and when could we get 
reassured  with  positive  results?  It  is  clear  that  the  reminders  don’t  seem  to  be  working. 
Maybe hon. Soodhun could help. 

Mr Sinatambou: I am afraid the hon. Member is totally mistaken, Madam Speaker. 
Let  me  just  remind  the  House  that  as  regards  Saudi  Arabia  we  had  a  question  about  the 
opening  of  the  Embassy  and  among  the  supplementary  questions  which  arose  is  that  the 
former Government, to which the gentleman belonged, actually wanted, did express in 2010 
that they were going to open an Embassy, but they themselves three years later said that they 
would not open it. So, it is very easy to now come and speak about reminders and reminders 
and on the issue of Saudi Arabia… 

(Interruptions) 

I think the hon. Member should allow me to finish. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Mohamed,  please!  Allow  him!  You  have  asked  your 

question. Allow him! 

Would the hon. Member allow the hon. Minister to reply, please? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Sinatambou:  Yes,  and  I  hope  that  the  hon.  Member  will  stop  interrupting, 
Madam Speaker. Let us say again!  The issue about Saudi Arabia which he has just raised is 
not an issue of reminder.  Already, we have informed the House, last week, that a General 
Cooperation Agreement has been signed at the United Nations… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! Next question! 

(Interruptions) 

 

47 

Mr  Sinatambou:  I  am  not  being  allowed  by  the  hon.  Member  to  reply,  Madam 
Speaker. Now, he just mentioned himself that we are speaking of reminders and he referred 
to last week’s question on Saudi Arabia.  

Madam Speaker: Indeed. 

Mr Sinatambou: And I am just reminding the House that last week we did explain 
that there is indeed what I called a diplomatic itinerary. Now, I believe that this had to go 
through  the  General  Framework  Agreement  on  cooperation  between  Saudi  Arabia  and 
Mauritius which has been signed less than two weeks ago. Now, coming back… 

(Interruptions) 

Coming back to the United Arab Emirates… 

(Interruptions) 

Will he stop interrupting, Madam Speaker?  

Coming  back  to  the  UAE,  the  reminders  are  three  reminders  in  10  months.  For  22 

years, they have done nothing. So, who are they to speak! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

(Interruptions) 

Would you allow hon. Dr. Sorefan to ask his question, please! 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  May  we  know  from  the  hon.  Minister 
whether he will confirm, as per newspaper article, that hon. Showkutally Soodhun will travel 
to Dubai in October to meet the Chairman and Chief Executive of Emirates Airline & Group, 
Sheikh Ahmed bin Saeed Al Maktoum to look into the abolition of visa for stay of less than 
15 days? If this is so, there won’t be a problem of reminders. Hon. Soodhun will do it. 

 (Interruptions) 

Mr Sinatambou: I am not aware, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea! Last question! 

 

48 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Yes.  Madam  Speaker,  now  that  Emirates  and  UAE  are  dealing 
with  this  Government  -  we  are  talking  now  -  Emirates  has  just  requested  Government  to 
increase their flights for December and January. They already have three daily flights. They 
also requested to increase the number of flights. Now, we are talking of this Government, this 
can be put on hold until we, Mauritians, get visa exemption from Emirates. 

Mr  Sinatambou:  I  think  we  should  start  realising  that  we  are  not  le  nombril  du 

monde. 

Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for one and a half hours! 

At 1.07 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 2.43 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Members, the Table has been advised that PQ B/651, B/652 

and B/653 have been withdrawn. Hon. Jhugroo! 

FACEBOOK SOCIAL MEDIA - FAKE PROFILES  

(No. B/628) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms, 
Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the facebook 
social  media,  he  will  state  the  measures  that  have  been/will  be  initiated  for  the  timely 
identification of the owners of fake profiles thereon in the light of the number of anonymous 
negative and communal and/or comments recently posted thereat and, if so, indicate where 
matters stand. 

Mr Bhadain:  Madam Speaker, in light of a number of anonymous harmful and racist 
comments  recently  posted  on  the  Facebook  social  media,  my  Ministry  has  had  working 
sessions  with  the  ICT  Authority  (ICTA),  the  National  Computer  Board,  the  Computer 
Emergency Response Team of Mauritius (CERT-MU) and the Cybercrime Unit of the Police 
Force to look into ways and means to prevent misuse of social media that tends to propagate 
harmful and unlawful contents that could disrupt the social harmony of our country. 

I am informed that procedures have been put in place for – 

(i) 

identification of the owner of the fake profiles and postings of harmful and 
racist comments, and  

 

(ii) 

49 

 prompt notification to CERT-MU for the removal of the harmful and racist 
comments.   

My  Ministry  is,  in  consultation  with  the  Attorney  General’s  Office  and  the  ICT 
Authority, in the process of making Regulations under the ICT Act, with a view to enhancing 
existing legal provisions on ways and means to tackle the curtailing of harmful and unlawful 
contents on the Internet and social networking websites in a comprehensive manner.   

A committee has also been set up within my Ministry with the assistance of the SLO 
for Mauritius to seek Mutual Legal Assistance from the State of California, so that in cases 
where  there  are  harmful  and  illegal  contents  on  Facebook  in  Mauritius,  not  only  those 
contents may be deleted, but the author of those contents will also be identified and evidence 
could also be gathered to prosecute the author, promptly. 

Mr Jhugroo:  Will the hon. Minister state whether there is any agreement or contract 
signed  between  the  Facebook  media  operator  and  the  Government  of  Mauritius  whenever 
there is any inquiry going on?  

Mr Bhadain:  As I have stated, Madam Speaker, there is no agreement which has been 
signed, but there are initiatives which have started with the State Law Office to seek mutual 
legal  assistance  with  the  State  of  California  and,  therefore,  we  will  be  able  to  achieve  the 
objectives which we are setting ourselves to achieve. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Ganoo! 

Mr Ganoo:  Madam Speaker, although I know that in view of the Standing Orders I 
cannot ask for a legal opinion, but can I ask the hon. Minister if making a false Facebook 
profile  is  illegal  in  itself  or  is  the  user  only  violating  the  terms  of  service  so  that  a  false 
Facebook depends, in fact, on the action, the utilisation made and the intention and it is not 
by itself illegal? 

Mr Bhadain:  We are working on a Regulation to that effect, Madam Speaker, but just 
to inform the hon. Member, section 18 (1) of the ICT Act 2001 as amended, states that one of 
the functions of the ICTA is to- 

“(…) take steps to regulate or curtail the harmful and illegal content on Internet and 
other information and communication services” 

50 

 

So, that would fall under that section. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Hurreeram! 

Mr  Hurreeram:    Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.    Will  the  hon.  Minister  inform  the 
House whether the agreement which is supposed to have with Facebook in order for them to 
provide the identification of the fake profile user, whether either the Police or the ICTA will 
be empowered to ask for that information so that eventually it is admissible in Court? 

Mr Bhadain:  As I have answered before, there is a committee which is looking into 
that, and it is not only ICTA, it is ICTA, CERT-MU, the National Computer Board and also 
the Police Cybercrime Unit.  So, that committee is actually addressing those issues and we 
are going to come up with a proper regulation under that section of the ICTA Act to basically 
address this issue, shortly. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Jhugroo:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Is the hon. Minister aware that there are 
many  countries  like  France  who  have  signed  contract  with  the  Facebook  operator  just  to 
safeguard the interest of the country? 

Mr Bhadain:  Yes, I am aware. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Ramano. 

EBENE - CULTURE HOUSE - CONSTRUCTION 

(No.  B/629)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 
asked the Minister of Arts and Culture whether, in regard to the proposed construction of a 
Culture House at Ebene, he will state – 

if a site has been identified therefor; 
the amount of funds earmarked therefor, and  
the Mauritian cultural sectors concerned with the proposed Culture House. 

(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Mr Baboo:  Madam Speaker, I wish to reply to parts (a) and (c) together.  A portion of 
land of an extent of 3.5 acres was identified and vested in my Ministry for the construction of 
the  Culture  House.    The  land  is  located  at  Réduit  Triangle,  Moka  behind  the  Apollo 
Bramwell Hospital.  

 

51 

In  November  2014,  a  team  of  Chinese  experts  comprising  inter  alia  engineers  and 
architects, visited Mauritius for a preliminary investigation of the site and concluded that the 
site was not appropriate.  

An  alternative  site  consisting  of  two  plots  of  land  of  1.5  acres  each,  adjacent  to  the 
above land was considered more suitable by the Chinese experts for the project.  However, 
these plots have been leased to the Hindi and the Urdu Speaking Unions.   

During a site visit held in November 2014, the Chairpersons of both Unions stated that 
they were agreeable to the proposal of the Ministry for the swapping of the land leased to 
them against the portion vested in my Ministry.   

However, it is to be noted that the project started since 1999 and over the years, there 
have  been  various  proposals  on  what  should  constitute  the  Culture  House  project,  that  is, 
which institutions will be housed there and at the same time provide facilities to artists.   

My Ministry is currently reviewing the Culture House project, in consultation with all 

stakeholders, with regard to the institutions to be accommodated therein.   

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed by the Ministry 
of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  that  the  Chinese  Authorities  were  approached  for 
financing  of  the  project.  During  the  visit  of  the  Chinese  delegation  in  November  2014, 
discussions were held with the Chinese experts on the total cost estimate and the mode of 
financing of the project.  No consensus has yet been reached.   

For the financial year 2015-2016, an amount of Rs1 m. has been earmarked to carry out 

preliminary studies on the Culture House project.   

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ramano! 

Mr  Ramano:  Madame  la  présidente,  nous  avons  célébré  cette  année  le  Bicentenaire 
des Archives Nationales qui se trouve dans le centre industriel de Coromandel. Les Archives 
Nationales se trouvent dans un état déplorable, et là nous parlons de l’histoire du pays.  Est-ce 
que je peux savoir du ministre quelles sont les mesures urgentes qu’il compte entreprendre 
pour préserver l’histoire même du pays ? 

Mr Baboo: Well, I do agree with the hon. Member. We have got several sessions of 
work  with  the  Ministry  of  Environment  and,  at our  level,  we  are  waiting  for  the  report  in 

 

52 

order to go ahead so that our main objective will be that we will put the Archives at Ebène in 
case the report is good. 

Mr Baloomoody: Can I know from the hon. Minister whether, as from now on, this 
Culture  House  will  be  financed  by  the  Mauritian  Government  itself  and  there  will  be  no 
finance by the Chinese authorities?. 

Mr  Baboo:  Well,  so  far,  I  don’t  have  the  answer  because  we  are  waiting  for  the 

report. Once we’ve got it, then we will go back to the Ministry of Finance. 

Mr Ramano: Est-ce que je peux savoir du ministre s’il y a eu des consultations avec 

les artistes du pays dans l’élaboration du projet ? 

Mr Baboo: Yes, we did have a work session with the artists regarding the Culture 

House at Ebène. 

Mr  Bhadain:  Hon.  Members,  the  Table  has  been  advised  that  PQ  B/632  and  PQ 

B/633 have been withdrawn. Next question, hon. Mohamed! 

MBC – EMPLOYEES – TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT 

(No.  B/630)  Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 
Reforms, Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the 
Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, 
information as to since December 2014 to date, the number of employees  

whose contract of employment have been terminated, and 
who have taken employment thereat. 

(a) 
(b) 
Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, I am infomed 
by the Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation that since December 2014 to date, the contract of 
employment of 10 employees were terminated. This includes the then Director General, Mr 
V. K. Pritam Parmessur. 

I am tabling a list submitted by the MBC of those 10 ex-employees, including names, 

position held and employment category. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, Madam Speaker, I am informed that the only 
person  who  has  been  employed  by  the  MBC  since  December  2014  to  date  was  Mr  V.  K. 
Pritam  Parmessur,  whose  services  were  no  longer  required  as  from  24  August  2015. 

 

53 

Therefore, excluding Mr Purmessur, the number of persons who has taken up employment at 
the MBC is zero. 

The MBC has, since 27 August 2015, advertised for nine positions, including Director 
General,  Deputy  Director  General  and  Director  of  News.  These  posts  will  be  filled  in  the 
coming weeks, if not days. 

Mr Mohamed: If the list has been tabled, maybe, I could have a look at it before I put 

my next question. Thank you. 

So, in my question which I have asked the hon. Minister, I would like to find out with 
regard to the list of those whose contracts have been terminated ever since December 2014, 
whether all of them have been communicated reasons for termination and, if so, what are the 
reasons? 

Mr Bhadain: Well, I do not have the specific information, Madam Speaker, but I am 
sure that if somebody had his/her employment terminated, then that person must have been 
told why. 

Mr  Mohamed:  I  have  in  my  hand  a  letter  which  was  addressed  to  Ms  Hemowtee 
Salaye  on  04  August  2015  and,  basing  myself  on  the  last  answer  just  given  by  the  hon. 
Minister, where he is sure that had someone’s employment been terminated, the reason would 
have  been  specified.  In  that  particular  letter,  the  Board  of  the  Mauritius  Broadcasting 
Corporation, after having put her on the roster, just a day before, she is sent a letter where her 
employment is terminated and no reason whatsoever is stipulated therein. Now, how does the 
hon. Minister reconcile his previous answer where reasons most probably would have been 
given when we see in this letter, no reasons are given. 

Mr Bhadain: Well, Madam Speaker, I don’t have a copy of the letter. 

Mr Mohamed: I give it to him, before he answers, he could look at it. 

Mr Bhadain: Yes. Please do! 

Madam Speaker: Meanwhile, hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: May I ask the hon. Minister what are the reasons why the Director 

General’s contract has been terminated? 

Mr Bhadain: His services were no longer required. 

54 

 
Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Minister state whether the MBC has been overstaffed due 
to the fact that the previous regime has recruited persons without proper mode of recruitment 
and qualifications, sometimes recruiting des petits copains, petites copines and earning high 
salaries? 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, I informed the House on the last occasion when a PQ 
was asked about the MBC that the MBC currently has 898 employees, that the MBC has run 
into debt of Rs1.2 billion and all the licence fees which are being paid by all the subscribers 
in Mauritius are not sufficient to pay only the salaries of the amount of people who have been 
thrust into the MBC by the previous Government. This Government has not, since December 
2014 until now, until this Government is in power, not one single person has been recruited, 
except for the Director General who has had his services terminated, which was the different 
approach which is being taken to streamline the MBC and to put those new procedures and 
methodologies in place and also to advertise for posts like Director General, Deputy Director 
General, Director of News, Human Resource and so on and so forth. I mean this is in line 
with good governance. 

Mr Bhagwan: In line with the reply which the hon. Minister has just given, can he 
inform the House when, at last, a full-fledged Board of the MBC will be appointed with all 
the representatives, as stipulated by the MBC Act? 

Mr Bhadain: Very soon, Madam Speaker. 

Mr Rutnah: Can the hon. Minister confirm whether, as at to date, the way the Board 
of  the  MBC  is  constituted,  does  actually  the  Board  itself  take  the  decision  of  whether  to 
terminate or not to terminate a contract and not the Ministry directly? 

Mr Bhadain: Of course, there is a Board which is there, but having said that, just to 

go back on the letter of hon. Mohamed, I can read out the letter. It says – 

“I am directed to inform you that the MBC Board has, at its meeting of 03 August 
2015, decided to terminate your services forthwith. You will be paid 3 months’ wages 
in lieu of notice, accrued benefits, as well as compensation as provided for by law.” 

If it is by law, it is by law, Madam Speaker, and it is being paid, probably. 

Mr Mahomed: I would like to ask the hon. Minister who is at the head of the MBC 

right now? 

 
Mr Bhadain: The Ag. Officer-in-Charge is Mrs Cheong, who is doing a very good 

55 

job. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, one last question! 

Mr  Mohamed:  The  hon.  Minister  has  done  something  which  we  have  all  done, 
Madam Speaker, which is read a letter and I am happy to see that he can read the letter very 
well and we have got the same information. I also know the Standing Orders which say that I 
cannot  insist  on  obtaining  an  answer  from  an  hon.  Minister  who  can  give  the  answer  he 
wishes, I bow to that. 

Madam Speaker: Ask your question. 

Mr  Mohamed:  But  my  question  is:  could  the  hon.  Minister,  please,  answer  the 
question and say: why is it that therein, in this particular letter - when he said that normally 
he  would  expect  them  to  provide  a  reason  for  having  put  someone  out  –  no  reason  is 
provided? Does he agree that this goes against his own statement when he was  giving his 
answer? 

Mr Bhadain: I can see my hon. friend is being very theatrical again. Now, it is very 

simple. 

(Interruptions) 

It is very simple. I do not go to such clubs… 

(Interruptions) 

But it is very simple. The services of the person, by reading the letter, it is very clear, Madam 
Speaker… 

It is coming. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed, it is up to the Minister to reply. Okay! 

You cannot insist. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, the answer is that the letter shows that the services of 
that person were no longer required and by law that person has been paid. Now this was done 
by the then Director General and he himself had his services terminated afterwards. 

 
Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Shakeel Mohamed. 

56 

 

DOMAINE LES PAILLES - EMPLOYEES – TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT 

(No.  B/631)  Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis East) asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to 
the  Domaine  Les  Pailles  Ltd.,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  State 
Investment Corporation, information as to the number of employees thereof whose contract 
of  employment  have  been  terminated  since  December  2014  to  date,  indicating  the  reasons 
therefor in each case.  

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker,  I  wish to refer the hon. Member to my 
reply to PQ No. B/435 of 08 September 2015, where I, inter alia, highlighted the precarious 
financial situation at Domaine Les Pailles, which has been making losses for years. In fact, its 
total losses had reached Rs443 m. by July 2015. The company was unable to generate enough 
revenue to cover even its operating costs and had become a heavy financial burden on the 
SIC. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  the  employees  were  offered  the  options  of 
staying  in  post  or  taking  voluntary  leave  against  payment  of  a  compensation.  After 
consultations  with  all  employees  and  their  Union,  all  parties  agreed  to  a  compensation 
amounting  to  two  months  salary  for  each  year  of  service.  Thus,  in  July  2015,  all  142 
employees opted for voluntary leave. 

Mr  Mohamed:  I  thank  the  hon.  Minister  for  his  very  clear  answer.    It  seems  as 
though that the reason for termination - if I read between the lines - is for economic reasons, 
since the precarious situation of the Domaine Les Pailles. Could the hon. Minister inform the 
House whether, with regard to the relevant sections of the law in the Employment Rights Act, 
which  talks  about  ‘last  in  first  out’  and  necessary  consultation  prior  to  the  decision  of 
terminating the agreement for economic reasons, there was prior consultation with the unions 
to discuss all the possibilities and then the last possibility being to terminate the agreement 
under the principle of ‘last in first out’? Have those conditions, which are statutorily imposed 
conditions,  been  adhered  to?    And  if  they  have  been  adhered  to,  could  the  hon.  Minister 
please give the House the dates of all those meetings and table the Minutes of Proceedings of 
those meetings to show that, indeed, to terminate their employment, the law was adhered to? 

57 

 
Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, there  was no termination of contract.  It 
was  a  voluntary  scheme  and  all  the  142  employees  opted  for  the  proposal  of  SIC.    They 
received two months of salary for each year of service. So, there was no firing; no one was 
fired. It was just a voluntary scheme and all accepted the scheme. 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Madam  Speaker,  can  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  confirm  to  the 
House whether the Casino of Domaine Les Pailles started making losses since the previous 
Government came to power and, if so, can we know why? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: The ambit question does not relate, but anyway, if the hon. 

Member comes with a substantive question, I will answer it. 

Mr  Rutnah:  Madam  Speaker,  can  the  hon.  Minister  confirm  whether  the  action 
taken by Domaine Les Pailles was motivated because this place was heavily overstaffed, thus 
contributing significantly to sustain losses and that it does, in fact, make business sense to 
actually provide the voluntary retirement scheme to those employees? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Well,  we  forget  about  the  type  of  personnel  who  was 
recruited there. Once again, it was like the Casino of Mauritius.  Most of them were political 
recruits, but that was not the reason why we acted this way. When I say that we lost Rs443 m, 
it is public funds. I put the question to the House.  Can we continue using public funds to bail 
out sick companies? 

Mr Mohamed:  I have one question for the hon. Minister.  We have heard, in his 
answer that he had communicated to the House only recently, about a new investor coming 
from China to pick up this company.  In those circumstances, I am sure that there must be - 
and  we  all  hope  that  there  must  be  -  some  development  agenda;  something  would  be 
prepared, some beautiful project there. Could the hon. Minister, together with his colleague 
from  the  Ministry  of  Labour,  consider  that  possibility  of  imposing  upon  or  asking  and 
requesting, but in a firm way - as he is used to and he has experience in that matter - the new 
promoters or the new company that will come up that, if ever they are to - I am sure they will 
- recruit new personnel for this new operation, they would give priority to those people who 
have been retrenched either voluntarily or otherwise, but who had no choice, but at least who 
collaborated with the idea of being retrenched and did not pose any difficulty? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, this will be done. 

SUBOXONE - IMPORTERS 

58 

 
(No.  B/632)  Mr  S.  Mohamed  (  First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis East) asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to Suboxone, 
he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Pharmacy Board, a list of the importers 
thereof, indicating if any loss thereof has been reported thereto. 

(Withdrawn) 

HALAAL FOOD - REGULATIONS 

(No.  B/633)  Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis East) asked the Minister of Health and  Quality of  Life whether, in regard to halaal 
food, he will state where matters stand as to the proposed amendments to be brought to the 
Food Act and the regulations made in relation thereto, indicating when the regulations that 
had been finalized last year would come into operation. 

(Withdrawn) 

MERS VIRUS – MAURITIAN PILGRIMS – SCREEN & FOLLOW-UP 

(No.  B/634)  Dr.  Z.  Joomaye  (Second  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac)  asked  the  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
emergence  of  the  virus  causing  MERS  in  Saudi  Arabia  which  has  recently  caused  several 
deaths, he will state - 

(a) 

 (b) 

to 
if  adequate 
accomplishing the Hajj 2015 in relation thereto, and  

information  have  been  given 

the  Mauritian  pilgrims 

the  measures  that  have  been  taken  to  screen  and  follow-up  the  pilgrims  on 
their arrival. 

The  Minister  of  Social  Integration  and  Economic  Empowerment  (Mr  P. 
Roopun):  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  the  Middle  East  Respiratory  Syndrome 
(MERS) is a viral respiratory disease caused by a novel corona virus (MERS- CoV) that was 
first identified in Saudi Arabia in 2012. Corona viruses are a large family of viruses that can 
cause diseases ranging from common cold to Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS). 

Since the virus was first identified, a protocol has been established for the screening 
of Hajj pilgrims.  As for the years 2013 and 2014, 296 and 87 specimens respectively have 
been tested and all of them have been found to be negative. For this year, as at 27 September, 
53 specimens have been tested and all of them have been found to be negative. 

59 

 
Since  September  2012  to  30  September  2015,  the  World  Health  Organisation  has 
been  notified  of  1,589  laboratory  confirmed  cases  of  Middle  East  Respiratory  Syndrome 
infection, out of which 567 related deaths have been noted globally. 

Madam Speaker, as regards part (a) of the question, I am informed that all pilgrims 
proceeding  for  Hajj  2015  have  been  offered  free  medical  check-ups  at  our  hospitals  and 
health centres during which they have been sensitized on the MERS Corona Virus disease. 

Furthermore, the Ministry has forwarded 1,200 pamphlets to the Islamic Cultural Centre 
for distribution to all Hajjis prior to their departure. This pamphlet gives information on the 
precautionary  measures  to  be  taken  by  those  visiting  and  returning  from  the  Middle  East 
countries. These include, inter alia - 

• 
• 
• 

hand hygiene; 
avoiding direct contact with patients suffering from influenza, and 
covering of mouth and nose while sneezing or coughing. 

The travellers are also informed of the disease and its symptoms, which include - 

• 
• 
• 

fever; 
cough, and 
respiratory distress. 

Details of hot lines for emergencies have also been included in the pamphlet.  A copy of 

the pamphlet is being tabled. 

In addition, all passengers travelling to affected countries in the Middle East are being 
informed  by  the  International  Vaccination  Centre  about  the  precautionary  measures  to  be 
taken during their travel. I am tabling a list of those countries. 

Madam,  Speaker,  as  regards  part  (b)  of  the  question,  at  the  outset,  I  would  like  to 
inform  the  House  that  all  Hajj  pilgrims  will  benefit  from  a  fast  track  service  without 
neglecting public health issues in view of the traumatic experience they encountered during 
the stampede in Saudi Arabia. 

 Furthermore, I would like to inform the House that, during a meeting chaired by the 
Vice-Prime Minister, hon. S. Soodhun, yesterday, where, inter alia, it has been decided that 
psychological support will be provided to the pilgrims in need of such care by the Ministry of 
Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions. 

I am further informed that - 

 
i. 

ii. 

iii. 

iv. 

v. 

60 

the Virology Department of the Central Health Laboratory at Victoria Hospital 
has the necessary expertise to test for MERS Corona virus. They have been 
provided with the necessary reagents to detect the virus;   
furthermore,  information  on  MERS  Corona  Virus  was  sent  to  the  Private 
Medical  Practitioners  Association  and  the  Private  Clinics  Association  for 
circulation among their members  to increase vigilance;  
all Hajj pilgrims on their arrival at the airport will be screened by Medical and 
Health Officers and nursing staff of the Ministry.  For this purpose, there is a 
thermal  scanner  at  the  airport  which  detects  any  incoming  passenger  with 
fever; 
counselling will be provided by Principal Public Health and Food and Safety 
Inspectors about the symptoms of the disease and measures to be taken in case 
of illness;  
all pilgrims will be closely monitored for a period of 14 days from their date 
of  arrival  by  Principal  Public  Health  and  Food  and  Safety  Inspectors  of  the 
respective regional health offices;   

Provision has already been made for isolating, if any, those infected with the virus in 

special wards at Souillac Hospital. 

Dr. Joomaye: Madam Speaker, I would like the hon. Minister to confirm whether the 

thermo scan at the airport is present and really functional.  

Mr Roopun: Yes, I am so informed. 

Mr  Leopold:  I  would  like  to  ask  the  hon.  Minister  whether  there  is  any  known 

vaccine for its prevention or if there is any treatment for the disease? 

Mr Roopun: I believe there is none. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Bhagwan! 

PARIS - EMBASSY OF MAURITIUS  - MR L.O. - APPOINTMENT 

(No. B/635) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade whether, 
in regard to Mr L. O., he will state the capacity in which the Embassy of Mauritius in Paris 
retained the services thereof, indicating the - 

(a) period thereof;  

 

61 

(b)  terms  and  conditions  of  appointment  thereof,  including  the  salaries  and  other 

fringe benefits drawn, and  

(c) official missions he undertook during his term of office, including the total amount 
of money paid out thereto in terms of air tickets, per diem allowances and other 
facilities extended thereto. 

(Withdrawn) 

EBENE CYBER CITY - LESSEES 

(No.  B/636)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms, 
Minister  of  Technology,  Communication  and  Innovation  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Ebene 
Cyber City, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Business Parks of Mauritius 
Ltd.,  information  as  to  the  number  of  plots  of  land  thereat  which  have  not  yet  been 
developed, indicating in each case the - 
(a) name of the lessee thereof;  
(b) date of allocation thereof; 
(c) project submitted therefor, and  
(d) quantum of money deposited therefor. 
Mr  Bhadain:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that,  as  at  date,  12  plots  of  land  at 
Ebene  Cyber  City  have  not  been  developed  yet.  I  am  hereby  tabling  all  the  information 
requested for by the hon. Member. 

The list of companies/entities are – 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

Mauritius Post Ltd. 
Cell Plus 
Mauritius Telecom  
Burford Investments 
State Bank of Mauritius 
Kingsgate Holding Ltd. 
Centreview Investment Ltd. 
Ebene Car Park Ltd. 
Cyberplex Ltd. 
B & S Park Ltd 
Indian High Commission 

 

62 

• 
• 

IBIZA Investment Ltd. 
Centreview Development Ltd (GAMMA). 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In reply to Parliamentary Question B/90 
of 24 February 2015, I drew the attention of the then Minister  to the chaotic situation within 
the cyber city area on these State lands with regard to illegal parking and hawking, and the 
then Minister stated that he was going to follow up and take immediate action. Can the hon. 
Minister  inform  the  House  what  is  the  situation  presently?  What  action  has  been  taken 
because this chaotic situation is still prevailing at the Ebene Cyber City?  

Mr Bhadain: Yes, Madam Speaker, I do agree with the hon. Member that there is a 
parking problem in the Cyber City and there is a Committee which has been set up which I 
chaired  myself  with  the  representatives  of  BPML  and  other  organisations  to  address  this 
issue. So, one of the issues which is being looked at is whether BPML can come up with a 
parking tower which is going to sort out the problem in the long-term. But, in the meantime, 
there  are  alternative  solutions  which  are  being  worked  on.  I  will  inform  the  House 
accordingly as soon as these are implemented. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed: To pick up from the last question which was put by hon. Bhagwan, 
there is a parking problem indeed and I am happy the hon. Minister himself recognises that. If 
memory serves me correctly, only recently a company was allotted a plot of land there and 
the previous regime had approved that a parking problem is real and the issue was to put up a 
parking  tower  at  their  cost  in  order  to  satisfy  those  urgent  requirements  of  proper  parking 
facilities, in order for pavements to be set free and for pedestrians to walk around in a more 
secure manner. What has happened to that particular issue?  Is that project going to go ahead 
soon, if the hon. Minister could please clarify matters? 

Mr Bhadain: Well, Madam Speaker, I don’t have all the details, but I can say on the 
list  that  there  is  a  company  called  Ebene  Car  Park  Ltd.,  No.  7  on  the  list  which  has  been 
tabled.  Probably this is the project that the hon. Member is referring to. I am not aware as to 
why  they  have  not  started  their  activities,  but  I  do  know,  as  I  said  before,  that  BPML  is 
looking into the building of a parking tower itself and also the hawkers’ problem, looking at 
one of the sites where all the hawkers can be moved to that one site with an infrastructure put 

 

63 

in there so that everybody who has to go and purchase food can actually go there, rather than 
having  all  the  hawkers  all  across  Ebene.  At  the  same  time,  BPML  is  also  looking  at  the 
cleaning  up  of  all  those  plots  of  land  where  there  are  bushes  which  have  grown  over  one 
metre high and it does not look nice at all. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: In my PQ No. B/90 of 24 February, I made mention of a Report of a 
Ministerial Committee where several shortcomings were found, especially with regard to the 
previous Chairperson - the previous Mr D.N.  Can the hon. Minister inform the House what 
action  has  been  taken,  whether  any  Police  action  has  been  taken  concerning  Mr  D.N., 
Executive Chairperson of the BPML and what is the situation now? 

Mr Bhadain: I don’t have this information at this present moment in time, Madam 
Speaker, but  I think everybody is aware as to the abuses which had taken place in BPML 
prior, by the previous regime and Mr D.N. who had been heading BPML at that time. I am 
sure that the enquiry which has been referred to the Police must be in progress. I also asked 
BPML to look at certain issues which they are currently looking at because we are also the 
Ministry of Good Governance, and once with have further details on that we will inform the 
House accordingly. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: One of the main problems which was brought to light  was the land 
speculation where names were put and then removed on lands which were supposed to be 
leased.  Can  the  hon.  Minister  inform  the  House  -  he  has  given  us  a  list  -  apart  from  land 
which has been vested to the Indian High Commission, whether these companies, which have 
been given land, have been given a time limit to develop these lands and what are the actions 
which are being taken to prevent further cases of land speculation within the Cyber City area? 

Mr Bhadain: Yes, I am aware, Madam Speaker, that under the previous regime there 
were a lot of extensions which were granted to these companies after the deadline had passed. 
On many occasions, those leases have been renewed again and again. I have asked BPML to 
look into that, now that we have a Government which is moving in line with all best practices 
and good governance and to tell these people: ‘look, you have to start construction, if you 
don’t  start,  then  we  will  have  to  take  the  land  back.  We  have  other  things  to  do.  We  are 
moving to Highlands now.’ 

 

64 

Madam Speaker: Last question, hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Jhugroo: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Can the hon. Minister confirm with regard 
to parking space whether all the promoters who constructed huge buildings there did abide by 
the  rules  and  regulations  that  are  governed  before  issuing  the  building  and  development 
permit? 

Mr Bhadain: I don’t think they have. I know that there are certain rules in terms of 
the height of the buildings and also the colour of the buildings. There should have been a 
harmony  in  the  Cyber  City,  but  under  the  previous  regime  some  people  have  painted  the 
buildings whatever colour they wanted, and they have developed universities and so many 
other  things  which  were  not  meant  to  be  in  a  Cyber  City  where  you  have  an  intelligent 
building,  you  have  fibre  optics  facilities  and  which  was  meant  to  be  a  Cyber  City.  But, 
hopefully, this is not going to happen with the new project that this Government is going to 
do - which is in Highlands. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: I have one last supplementary, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Next question! I think this question… 

Mr Bhagwan: One last, because… 

Madam Speaker: No! Hon. Bhagwan, I have given everybody the chance to ask a 
question. You have asked so many questions. I think it is fair for all those whose questions 
are on the agenda to have a question.  Next question! 

BATS POPULATION – CULLING  

(No.  B/637)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security  whether,  in  regard  to  bats,  he  will 
state the urgent measures taken to prevent the disastrous effects thereof on fruits, especially 
on mangoes and litchis. 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, let me first of all thank the hon. Member for having 
brought  this  question  to  this  House.    It  shows  that  the  damages  caused  by  fruit  bats  are  a 
matter of concern to all of us.   

 

65 

As a matter of fact, my Ministry has been receiving loads of complaints from fruit 
growers regarding the significant damages caused by fruit bats in commercial orchards and 
more significantly in backyards which mainly affect mango and litchi production.  

According to reports from the Food and Agricultural Research and Extension Institute 
(FAREI),  fruit  damage  recorded  for  the  year  2014  for  litchi  reaches  as  high  as  73%  in 
orchards whilst damage caused to mango is estimated up to 42% in backyards.  

I  am  also  informed  that  the  fruit  bats  have  now  started  to  affect  some  banana 

plantations. 

My Ministry has, in fact, been registering complaints from fruit growers since 2006.  
In that year, action was taken to reduce the bats population through a controlled culling on 
selected  private  orchards.    However,  the  culling  was  done  between  16.00  hours  to  18.00 
hours, but did not prove effective given that fruit bats normally fly at night.  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Seeruttun:  In 2009, a bird net fruit protection scheme was introduced whereby 
the price of bird net was subsidised up to 75% by Government. Each grower benefitted from 
the scheme for a maximum of 10 bird nets.  This scheme is still ongoing and as at to date, a 
total of 4,449 applications were entertained for a total amount of Rs29.5 m. 

However, despite the measures taken to protect fruit plantations from bats, the damages 
caused  are  increasing.  This  is  explained  mainly  by  the  significant  increase  in  the  bats 
population during the last years. 

The  Mauritian  fruit  bat  is  a  species  endemic  to  Mauritius  only  and  was  in  the  early 
1970s classified as “critically endangered”. With the gradual increase in the bats population 
over  the  years,  the  status  was  down  listed  to  ‘endangered’  and  is  presently  classified  as 
‘vulnerable’ by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN). 

A survey carried out in 2010 estimated the bat population at 55,000. The latest survey 
carried out by the National Parks and Conservation Service in November 2013 indicated that 

 

66 

the population has increased to around 90,000 and the population is likely to have increased 
further during the last two years. 

The  bat  population  is  normally  controlled  naturally  through  strong  cyclones.  As  we 
have  not  been  visited  by  strong  cyclones  during  the  past  decade,  the  bat  population  is 
continuing to grow and may have reached a pest level.  In view of the huge economic losses 
being  incurred  by  fruit  growers,  bold  and  urgent  action  is  required  to  reduce  the  bat 
population and hence reduce the damages caused to fruits.  

Government has, on Friday last, agreed to a campaign being launched as from the mid-
October for the controlled culling of bats in targeted farms found outside residential areas.  
The  exercise  will  be  carried  out  by  the  Special  Mobile  Force  in  collaboration  with  the 
National  Parks  and  Conservation  Service,  the  Veterinary  Services  of  my  Ministry  and  the 
FAREI.  The culling will take place over a period of three weeks, after which the situation 
will  be  assessed  and  the  strategy  reviewed.    All  measures  will  be  taken  to  ensure  that  the 
existence of the fruit bat is not threatened and, in this regard, a monitoring committee under 
the Chair of the Permanent Secretary has been set up to look into all modalities for the culling 
exercise.  

Madam Speaker, I am also informed that the damages caused to fruits in orchards is 
less than that caused in  backyards  and one of the reasons is that the installation of nets is 
extremely  difficult  on  tall  trees  found  in  backyards  and  tree  owners  are  very  reluctant  to 
prune their trees as this would reduce production of fruits for the first three to four years.  

My  Ministry  is  conducting  a  sensitisation  campaign  island  wide  to  encourage  fruit 
growers and members of the public to prune their trees for a maximum use of bird nets.  They 
are also being advised to plant dwarf varieties of fruit plants which are less susceptible to be 
attacked by bats.  Moreover, our native forests which are primary roosting and feeding sites 
for  bats  are  being  increased  and  appropriate  fruit  trees  such  as  Jack  Fruit,  mangoes  and 
guavas are being planted to provide food for bats. 

Madam Speaker, the measure which Government will be implementing, i.e. the culling 
of  bats,  may  attract  criticisms  from  conservationists  at  both  local  and  international  levels. 
While  we  are  conscious  of  the  need  to  protect  a  threatened  species  and  to  fulfill  our 
obligations  vis-à-vis  international  conventions,  mainly  the  Convention  on  Biological 
Diversity,  we  cannot  afford  to  maintain  the  status  quo  and  continue  to  see  fruit  growers 

 

67 

suffering considerable losses for consecutive years.  I hope that the public will not get carried 
away by the criticisms and will appreciate that by this action, we are ensuring that fruits will 
be  available  in  sufficient  quantity  and  at  reasonable  prices  during  the  forthcoming  fruiting 
season and at the same time ensuring that the endemic bat species does not disappear in the 
long run by taking all necessary precautions.  

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the hon. Minister for the action 
which he has initiated because we have seen, as rightly stated, that during the past years, this 
question of nets has not given the result that was expected.  Can the hon. Minister inform the 
House  whether  in  this  venture  of  using  the  Special  Mobile  Force,  the  assistance  of  the 
Minister  of  Environment  and  his  Ministry  has  been  sought  because  there  are  conventions 
where the Minister of Environment… 

…can be involved?   

(Interruptions) 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, it is indeed very true that the hon. Minister and the 

Ministry of Environment is also involved in that.... 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr  Seeruttun:  …  particular  issue  and  I  can  inform  the  House  that  we  have  had 
discussions over that issue and he is very willing to help and I am sure his contribution will 
be a very great value to the success of that particular exercise. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan:  I hope the hon. Minister won’t use a machine gun and the helicopter.  

(Interruptions) 

 

68 

Can  the  hon.  Minister  inform  us  about  the  criticisms  which  we  can  have?    Can  the  hon. 
Minister  inform  the  House  whether  the  Mauritian  Wildlife  Society  and  the  international 
Wildlife Foundation have been informed of the problem of Mauritius? 

Mr Seeruttun:  Madam Speaker, indeed, we have had discussions with the people from 
the Mauritian Wildlife Foundation and also we have written to the international organisations 
and, as you can expect, they are here and their mandate is to protect and for the conservation 
of protected species.  So, they are very reluctant to accept that kind of decision, but we have 
to, unfortunately, resort to that kind of decision because with the amount of bats in existence 
in this country at the moment, it has passed the level of being ‘endangered’ to the level of 
‘being a pest’.  So, that is why we are taking that kind of decision. 

Madam Speaker: Yes! 

Mr Bhagwan:  Can the hon. Minister at least inform these people that  it is allowed 
when these bats have become a pest? So, it is allowed for national convention that they be 
removed as we have had the problem of rhino in Kenya.  Can the hon. Minister also inform 
the  House  of  the  action  that  would  be  taken  by  the  SMF  and  so  on  as  from  October  or 
November?  Can he, at least, give a timetable to the population, especially those fruit growers 
who would earn their living at the end of December through the sale of these fruits?  Can 
these people be enlightened of the calendar of activities of the SMF? 

Mr Seeruttun:  Madam Speaker, as I said in my earlier reply that this exercise will 
start  in  mid-October.  A  committee  is  already  in  place  to  look  at  how  we  are  going  to  go 
forward with that exercise and it is going to last over a period of three weeks and to see how 
that kind of exercise is effective. We expect to reduce this population by 20%.  So, we expect 
to mobilise enough resources so that within the three weeks that we have set, we are able to 
attain that target. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the hon. Minister for his detailed 
answer. I was just wondering when he talked about the sensitisation campaign, whether that 
includes taking to the air, going in a helicopter and looking at the bats closely. 

 (Interruptions) 

 

69 

Because I guess this is a detailed appreciation from the air following the good footsteps of 
hon. Dayal.   

(Interruptions) 

Is that what it was about or will it take you further higher up?  I don’t know! 

Mr Seeruttun:  Madam Speaker, if the hon. Member is trying to be funny, I am not 
trying  to  be  funny  with  regard  to  an  issue  of  such  importance  especially  for  growers  and 
consumers. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

(Interruptions) 

The hon. Minister has mentioned subsidies being renewed to the tune of 75% for the nets and 
he has talked also for long-term to reduce the population of bats.  This is very good, but it is 
long-term. But the short-term, right now, we are talking on nets, is the hon. Minister aware or 
has his Ministry got the information that the bats are cutting the nets and this year, I learn, 
that the bats have got teeth? 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, like I just, in my earlier reply, stated that we have 
seen  that  even  with  the  Bats  Net  Scheme,  the  losses  have  been  on  the  increase,  it  shows 
clearly that the scheme has not worked.  That’s why we are coming up with the decision to 
cull bats. 

Madam Speaker: Last question, hon. Bhagwan. 

Mr Bhagwan: Madam Speaker, I am sure the hon. Minister must be aware that the 
whole population is concerned because we have fruit trees. The hon. Minister has informed 
us about les craintes de certaines organisations. Can  I  ask him if the population could be 
sensitised, through the MBC or radio, by arranging for programmes, at least, to further inform 
them what is being done in the interest of one and all? 

Mr Seeruttun: I take good note of that particular remark and I am sure the committee 

will look into that as well. 

 

70 

 

SOLAR WATER HEATER SCHEME – REGISTRATION EXERCISE 

(No.  B/638)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port Louis East) asked the Minister of Environment, Sustainable Development and Disaster 
and Beach Management whether, in regard to the Solar Water Heater Scheme, he will state 
the number of applications received during the last registration exercise therefor, indicating – 

the number thereof which have been approved and granted; 
the budget earmarked therefor, and 
when the next registration exercise will be held. 

(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Mr Dayal: Madam Speaker, as regards part (a) of the question, the last registration 

exercise for the Solar Water Heater Scheme was held on 11 and 12 July 2015. 

27,750 applications were received during this exercise. 

16,480 applications have been approved and grants are being disbursed as follows – 

•  Rs10,000 to 11,480 households earning less than Rs25,000 per month; 
•  Rs5,000 to 5,000 households earning more than Rs25,000 per month. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (b) of the question, an amount of Rs175 m. has 
been approved for the New Solar Water Heater Scheme and I thank the hon. Minister for that. 

As regards part (c) of the question, my Ministry is presently attending to those who 
have already applied and based on the processing of all applications a decision will be taken 
for the next registration exercise. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  if  he  is  aware  that  during  the  last 
exercise, old people had to queue up for a very long time and this has been a very difficult 
and tiring exercise for all those who have applied and Finally, not all of them have received 
their grant for the application that they have made? 

Mr Dayal: I am aware of the situation, but then Mr Bhadain gave directives. He had 
information  at  the  material  time  to  take  action  thereat  because  he  was  responsible  for  that 
exercise as the Chairman. I can assure the hon. Member that timely intervention was done so 
that each and every one queuing was registered. That exercise was carried out, but then to 
make sure that next time we won’t have this type of problem, I have directed the committee 
to look after other avenues in this connection. 

71 

 
Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Speaker, now, we just heard the hon. Minister stated that 
Mr Bhadain was in charge of the operation. Concerning the complaints that were received 
against the suppliers of the solar water heaters, may I know whether the hon. Minister has 
some  statistics  regarding  how  many  complaints  have  been  received  against  accredited 
suppliers and what has been the outcome of any inquiry? 

Mr Dayal: I need notice of this question. 

Mr Mahomed: Madam Speaker, may I ask the hon. Minister what are the measures 
that are being taken to  ensure that those who have benefitted from the  solar water heaters 
actually get them connected and running, because its connection is also quite costly. 

Mr Dayal: Rightly so, we are aware of this problem. Based on previous arrangements 
where we have found that the regime before us did not attend to the malady of this system, I 
am curing that system in a way, whereby I am making sure that we have a committee looking 
after the installation and the maintenance in a very timely manner. 

Dr. Sorefan: Can I ask the hon. Minister whether he has inspectors who are qualified 
in technical matters to see to it that those listed companies that supply the solar water heaters 
do  supply  them  as  per  the  specification  listed  in  his  Ministry  to  the  beneficiaries?  I 
understand  they  do  fiddle  inside  the  appliance  and  they  are  not  providing  the  required 
appliance to the beneficiaries. 

Mr  Dayal:  Madam  Speaker,  specific  attentions  are  given  to  the  fact  that  the 
appropriate  equipment  is  installed  based  on  specifications  and  we  have,  at  the  level  my 
Ministry, staff dedicated for this exercise. 

Mr Ameer Meea: May I ask the hon. Minister what is the eligibility criteria for an 
accredited  supplier  and  also  for  the  list  of  suppliers,  whether  any  sanction  has  been  taken 
against those who have default. 

Mr Dayal: This is being tackled at the level of the authority mandated to look after 

the whole process. 

(Interruptions) 

I think everybody knows it. 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Ameer  Meea,  your  question  is  very  specific.  I  think  the 

question which has just been asked is outside the ambit. 

 
Mr Dayal: Just to clarify matters, Madam Speaker, it is Mr Bhadain from the DBM 

72 

with his staff. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Mrs Monty! 

ZONE D’EDUCATION PRIORITAIRE HOT MEAL PROJECT - 

IMPLEMENTATION 

(No. B/639) Mrs M. C. Monty (Third Member for Port Louis North & Montagne 
Longue)  asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 
Scientific Research  whether, in regard to the Zone d’Education Prioritaire Hot Meal Project, 
she will state where matters stand as to the implementation thereof, indicating the time frame 
set thereof. 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the House that 
hot meals were being provided to pupils of the ZEP schools as from January 2013.  However, 
following a case of food poisoning which occurred at Bambous Government School on 07 
February  2013  and  an  analysis  effected  by  the  laboratories  of  the  Ministry  of  Health  and 
Quality of Life which showed presence of E-Coli beyond acceptable norms in some samples 
of meals taken, it was then decided to suspend the provision of hot meal in all ZEP schools. 

Subsequently,  alternative  arrangements  had  been  made  in  consultation  with  the 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life, for pupils of the ZEP schools to be provided with 
bread, butter, cheese, fruit and this was later supplemented with biscuits and fresh fruits. This 
arrangement is still in place to date. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  security  and  health  of  our  pupils  is  of  utmost importance  and 
taking  this  into  account,  my  Ministry  has  decided  to  invest  the  schools  with  proper 
infrastructure  and  facilities  so  that  provision  of  hot  meal  can  be  resumed  in  salubrious 
conditions and that all necessary sanitary and hygienic precautions are taken at every step in 
the production, storage, handling and distribution of a hot meal to our children. 

In  this  regard,  a  pilot  project  involving  four  ZEP  schools,  namely  Bois  des 
Amourettes  Government  School,  Cascavelle  Government  School,  Pointe  aux  Piments 
Government School and Aimé Cesaire Government School were undertaken where kitchens 
and eating areas will be constructed on the school premises. 

Construction works have already started at Cascavelle Government School and Bois 
des  Amourettes  Government  School  and  are  expected  to  be  completed  by  December  2015 

 

73 

and  February  2016  respectively.    For  the  construction  of  kitchens  of  the  remaining  two 
schools, same is still at the tendering stage.  

Madam Speaker, my Ministry is working out an implementation plan in respect of the 
four  pilot  schools  for  the  supply  of  hot  meals  under  appropriate  health  and  sanitary 
conditions. 

Madam Speaker, based on the feedback received from the pilot project, same will be 
replicated in other ZEP schools as far as possible. Other options would be envisaged for the 
provision  of  hot  meals  in  schools  where  space  is  not  available  to  put  up  additional 
infrastructure. The hot meal programme will resume once all the conditions for the provision 
of such meals under acceptable sanitary and hygienic norms and standards are complied with. 

Mr Baloomoody: Can the hon. Minister confirm that there is a pilot scheme for 

school which is working now? Are they being provided with hot meal? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  As  I  have  just  mentioned,  Madam  Speaker,  works  are 
still on and they are expected to be completed by December 2015 in one school and in 2016 
in the other school and in the other two schools tendering procedures are on. 

Mr Ganoo: Can the hon. Minister indicate to the House whether she has an idea of 

the cost that would be involved in terms of providing the hot meals only to the ZEP schools? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: In fact, the amount that had been planned to be used was 

Rs75 per student for 180 days. So, it will come to around Rs130 m. 

Mr Baloomoody: The hon. Minister is talking about the structure in the school, but 
can I know from the hon. Minister who will prepare the food and who will deliver the food to 
the children? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: I have just mentioned, Madam Speaker, that we have to 
make  sure  that  the  providers  will  satisfy  all  the  requirements,  namely  the  MS133HACCP 
standard by the Mauritius Standards Bureau to cater for the food and food related supplies. 

Mr  Baloomoody:  Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  whether  the  Parent-Teachers 
Association will be taken on board for the preparation of the meal and for the supply of the 
meal? 

74 

 
Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Presently, it is a decentralised system whereby the PTAs 
are involved in the choice of the food providers. However, when it will come to hot meals, 
we will have to ensure that proper sanitary and hygienic conditions are met. 

 

75 

MBC - NEWS DEPARTMENT - POSTS 

(No. B/640) Mr R. Bhagwan (First Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière)  asked the Minister  of  Technology,  Communication  and  Innovation  whether,  in  regard  to  the News Department of the Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to the – 

(a)  name  of  the  incumbent  of  the  post  of  Head  thereof,  indicating  the  terms  and 

conditions of employment thereof and;  

(b) number of Chief Editors and news editors/journalists posted thereat respectively, 

indicating in each case, the;  

(i) names;  

(ii) date of appointment, and  

(iii) terms and conditions of employment thereof. 

Mr  Bhadain:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  Mauritius  Broadcasting 
Corporation (MBC) that Mr Parsadee Jugdish Jatoo, Desk Coordinator (formerly Chief News 
Editor/Desk Coordinator), has been  assigned  as  Director of News of the MBC as from 22 
May 2015 by the then Director General, Mr V. K. Preetam Parmessur.  There is no ‘Head of 
News’ in post as such - the post of Director of News has been advertised and will be filled 
within a matter of days. 

The terms and conditions of employment are as set out in the Pay Research Bureau 

Report 2013. 

Madam Speaker, as regards part (b) of the question, there is no post of Chief Editor 
and  News  Editors/Journalists  at  the  Corporation.    With  the  PRB  Report  2013,  the  new 
appellations are as follows - 

•  Desk Coordinator – formerly Chief News Editor/Desk Coordinators 
•  Journaliste  Reporteur  D'Image  –  formerly  News  Editor  and  Senior  News 

Editor 

Madam  Speaker,  I  will  table  a  list  of  all  the  journalists  who  work  at  the  MBC  as 
requested by the hon. Member. I am informed that it exceeds 69 journalists who have all been 

 

76 

recruited in the past because since this Government is in power nobody was recruited at the 
MBC, but I will table the information in due course. 

Mr Bhagwan: Carapate change lichien. 
Madam Speaker: Please refrain from making these remarks from a standing position. 

Mr Bhagwan: This is a fact.  

 (Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Bhagwan: Madam Speaker, coming to the news department of the MBC, can the 
hon.  Minister  inform  the  House  whether,  as  Minister,  and  being  given  that  his  Permanent 
Secretary acts as Chairperson of the MBC/TV, he is satisfied that the MBC/TV is doing what 
it should be done to give a fair and balance reporting of all the political news activities in its 7 
p.m.  and  7.30  p.m.  news  daily  and  whether  there  is  no  discrimination  on  behalf  of  the 
Opposition party politics? 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, we are doing our utmost best to achieve that level of 
fairness. In fact, since the Director General of the MBC, services were no longer required, 
there has been a new methodology which we have tried to put in place with regard to news 
broadcasting and even for covering the activities of Ministers, PPS and even representatives 
of different Constituencies.  There has been a methodology which has been put in place in 
terms  of  assessing  the  news  worthiness  for  the  public  to  know  really  whether  a  particular 
issue is of concern to them and then this is broadcasted on TV. Now, we are trying to change 
things, we are trying to make things better. We know how things were done in the past, not 
only under the Labour Government, but since MBC has existed, we know how it has worked. 
Now,  we  are  also  advertising  for  the  posts  of  Director  General,  Deputy  Director  General, 
Director of News; this is new. It has never been done, it is innovation and we do hope that we 
will  get  the  successful  candidates  with  the  required  level  of  competence,  we  will  take  the 
MBC into a different dimension in terms of bringing them in line with best practices as we 
have worldwide in developed countries. Of course, there are improvements to make, people 
who have been trained to operate in a particular manner are not going to change overnight. 
This is not the on/off taquet which has to be pressed ... 

 (Interruptions) 

 

77 

and then everything is changed. It is not like that. So, there is a whole process of training 
people,  of  getting  them  to  understand  the  new  concept.  It  is  a  paradigm  shift  and  it  will 
happen, but it will happen with time, with the new team in place who will basically do the job 
as  they  should  and  I  believe  it  is  going  to  work  like  everything  else.    This  is  what  this 
Government is trying to do. 

Mr Bhagwan: The hon. Minister has talked of taquet and on and off. Can the hon. 
Minister inform us whether his office where he has his Chairperson in his SICOM Building, 
Gooljaury Tower, whether this on and off cutting of the political broadcasting of the different 
political parties, how can the hon. Minister explain to the House that at the 6.00 p.m. news, 
you have one type of news which is being given, broadcasting of one activity of one political 
party, the MMM and then at 7.00 nothing and  at 7.30 another news item?  Is this the new 
methodology of the MBC/TV under your direction as Minister and your Chairperson who is 
your Permanent Secretary? 

Mr Bhadain: Well the Permanent Secretary … 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please don’t interrupt the hon. Minister, allow him to reply, if he 

wants to reply because you are diverting away from the question. 

Mr Bhadain: Just to inform the … 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan please! 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, there are a number of initiatives which are being put 

in place ... 

(Interruptions) 

Of course, things are going to improve going forward, hon. Uteem was invited in a 

programme on BAI. I understand my … 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: May we have some order please! 

 
Mr Bhadain: Non, du tout. Pas vrai sa. Pas coze menti, demand Reza. Zot ine faire 

78 

un joli programme. Pas coze menti. Tout dimoune ine guetter. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Minister, can you come back to your reply please! 

Mr Bhadain: Just to say also, Madam Speaker, it is good for the House to know that 
the hon. Member himself was invited at the MBC programme with hon. Minister Dayal on 
Environment and he refused to go. But the new processes, the new methodologies, the new 
procedures are being put in place. The MBC will indeed become one of the best TV stations 
in this part of the world, I have no doubt about it. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed: The hon. Minister has talked about the best TV station that it has to 
become  in  the  world  and  I  hope  so,  we  all  hope  so.  Could  he  consider  the  possibility  of 
another methodology which would be to ensure that there are no ties between himself, his 
Ministry and the Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation in that you have a Civil Servant from 
his Ministry who is chairing at this moment in time the Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation 
and this is the very same person who is going to chair the Board at the time of appointment of 
those  vacancies  that  have  been  publicised?  So,  there  is  clearly  no  independence.  What  I 
humbly suggest is for good governance - and he knows better than I do, I am sure.  Maybe, a 
humble suggestion would be that he cuts the tie and then the picture would be perfect. 

Mr Bhadain: I can assure the hon. Member that the Chairman of the Board of the 
MBC is not going to form part of the panel which is going to recruit the Director of News and 
all these other people who are there.  

Madam Speaker, efforts are being made. We all know what we are talking about when 
we talk about how things have been happening at the MBC. It is not a secret. Un secret de 
polichinelle. We know what the Labour Government has done to the MBC and how it was 
being used as Gestapo tool. Now things are being changed; things will be changed.  I think 
the hon. Member, himself, knows that efforts are being made and that these efforts will be 
fruitful going forward. I have no doubt! 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah, you have a question? 

 

79 

Mr Rutnah: Would the hon. Minister agree with me and confirm to the House that, in 
fact, there was an established culture for the last nine years or so at the MBC to broadcast 
without  any  impartiality  insofar  as  political  news  were  concerned  and  in  doing  so,  those 
people who were at the time Editors and News Editors and members of the Board are still in 
this  regime,  same  Editors,  same  journalists  with  the  same  endemic  culture,  and  that  this 
Government… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah, ask your question! 

Mr Rutnah: And that this Government is doing everything… 

Madam Speaker: Don’t make a speech! 

(Interruptions) 

Don’t interrupt the hon. Member!  Please, order! Order, I said! 

Please, ask your question! Don’t make a statement! 

 (Interruptions) 

Mr Rutnah: And this Government, Madam Speaker, is doing everything possible to 

bring MBC back to its… 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah, what is your question? Ask your question! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Rutnah: That this Government is doing everything to bring back the old glory 

that MBC had. 

Mr  Bhadain:  Absolutely.  Madam  Speaker,  as  I  have  already  stated  to  the  House, 

there are… 

(Interruptions) 

898  people  who  are  working  at  the  MBC  right  now.  Since  December  2014  to  date,  ten 
persons had their employment terminated, which basically means that the 800 odd number of 
people who are working there were appointed before. The hon. Member is absolutely right. 

 

80 

So, all the News Editors and everybody who are there are people who were working before. 
Now, it is absolutely true to say also that we are doing everything to bring the MBC in line 
with best practices. We will continue to do that. 

Madam Speaker: Last question on this issue, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Since  the  hon.  Minister  has  mentioned  my  name,  I  was  invited 

supposedly by the MBC. 

(Interruptions) 

I say supposedly. I don’t take any instructions with Mr Joy Neeraye! Let me tell your friend! 
So, can … 

‘To pa ti la! De suite! To telephone exister.’ 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker,  since  the  hon.  Minister  has  mentioned  my  name,  that  I  was 
supposedly invited to participate in a programme, let it be known to the public through this 
National Assembly that we are not going to participate in any manipulated programme under 
the Bhadain Broadcasting Corporation. This should be… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

(Interruptions) 

I am going to suspend the session if there is no order! Hon. Bhagwan! 

(Interruptions) 

I am suspending the session! 

At 3.55 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 4.38 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

 

 

 

81 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

NATIONAL ASSEMBLY - STANDING ORDERS & RULES 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Members, it is a matter of regret that I have had to suspend 
the sitting in view of the unruly behaviour of hon. Members who have chosen to disregard the 
authority of the Chair.  Many hon. Members present in this House are  seasoned politicians 
who ought to be aware of the Standing Orders and Rules governing the conduct of business 
of the House. Standing Order 39(14) stipulates that, and I quote - 

“Whenever the Speaker, or the person presiding, rises during a debate, any Member 
then speaking […] must sit down and the Assembly […] shall be silent so that the 
Speaker […] may be heard without interruption.” 

This  is  one  of  the  most  elementary  rules  of  procedure  that  should  be  observed  by 
every hon. Member to show respect to the Chair. I wish to draw your attention to the fact that 
you are hon. Members and that your conduct should reflect  your status. Your conduct this 
afternoon does not in any way uphold the dignity and decorum of the House. Question Time 
is an important mechanism that allows for the oversight of Government action that has to be 
used judiciously by Members when asking questions and by Ministers when replying.  

I  have  observed  that  many  hon.  Members  use  Question  Time  to  make  gratuitous 
allegations,  provocative  remarks  and  gestures  from  a  sitting  position  which  disturb  the 
orderly conduct of the business of the House. 

Having said so, with a view to upholding the decorum and the dignity of the House, I 

will not hesitate to take action as appropriate.  

We will now continue with Question Time! Hon. Bhagwan! 

 

 

 

 

82 

 

MBC – ANIMATORS/PRODUCERS – TERMINATION OF CONTRACT 

(No.  B/641)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms, 
Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the Mauritius 
Broadcasting Corporation Television, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, 
over the period January 2015 to date- 

To (a) 

the  list  of  the  programmes  thereof  which  have  been  cancelled,  indicating  in 
each case, the reasons therefor, and  

(b) 

information as to the names of the animators or producers whose services have 
been terminated, indicating in each case, the - 

(i) 

(ii) 

date of termination of the contract of appointment, and  

reasons therefor. 

Mr  Bhadain:    Madam  Speaker,  if  I  may  on  point  of  order,  I  would  very  humbly 

request hon. Bhagwan to withdraw the word ‘manipulated’ which was used by him. 

Madam Speaker:  I will take the Minister’s point of order after Question Time. 

Mr Bhadain:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

Madam Speaker, with regard parts (a) and (b) of PQ No. B/641, I will be tabling the 
information requested for by hon. Bhagwan as it is a lengthy list of all programmes of the 
MBC, in due course.  

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Bhagwan. 

Mr Bhagwan:  I have a supplementary question, Madam Speaker.   Can I know from 
the hon. Minister why the services of Mr Bruno Raya, a well-known national artist, has been 
terminated?  He  was  presenting  a  very  popular  programme  on  television,  namely  ‘Live 
N  Direk’ Can I know whether it was for a specific reason? 

Mr Bhadain:  Madam Speaker, I believe the previous Director General of the MBC 
had  come  up  with  a  restructuring  plan  for  programmes  of  the  MBC  and  also  on  Radio 

 

83 

Mauritius.    Now,  what  had  been  implemented  was  according  to  that  plan  which  had  been 
looked  at  by  the  previous  Director  General.    I  am  not  aware  of  the  reason  as  to  why  a 
particular  programme  has  been  changed  to  another  programme,  but  I  can  assure  the  hon. 
Member and the House that the new team of the MBC, the new Director General, Deputy 
Director General and all the other staff will be recruited very soon as part of the management 
team; we will relook at all of this.  

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Bhagwan:    Madam  Speaker,  despite  the  fact  that  the  management  of  previous 
Director has taken the decision, the fact that Mr Bruno Raya, I mentioned his name because 
he  is  a  well-known  national  artist  who  has  served  the  country  and  who    is  from  my 
Constituency  along  with  Mr  Ram  Joganah  who  was  giving  a  programme  of  ‘Balad  dan 
Vilaz’, can the hon. Minister, at least, enquire on these national artists, and being the fact that 
they have been given three days’ notice without any reason for their services to be terminated 
after having worked for many, many years at the MBC/TV?   Can the hon. Minister make an 
enquiry and see to it that justice is done to these artists?  

Mr Bhadain:  Madam Speaker, I wouldn’t want to get into the affairs of the MBC like 
that.  I will let the new management team which will be appointed very soon to look into the 
matter, but I take on board what has been said.  

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Ramful! 

ALL-INCLUSIVE PACKAGE – TAXI OPERATORS - REPRESENTATIONS 

(No.  B/642)  Mr  D.  Ramful  (Third  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien) 
asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the all-
inclusive  package  proposed  to  the  tourists  by  the  tour  operators  which  also  includes  the 
provision  of  transport,  he  will  state  if  he  has  received  representations  from  taxi  owners  in 
connection therewith and, if so, indicate the actions that will be taken in relation thereto, if 
any. 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, with your permission, I shall reply to this 

question. 

 
I  would  like  to  inform  the  House  that  on  13  August  2015,  the  Federation  of  Hotel 
Taxis’ Association remitted a petition to my colleague, the Minister of Public Infrastructure 

 

84 

and Land Transport. The petition contained a number of representations purportedly affecting 
the business activities of taxi operators and which included the all-inclusive package offered 
by hotels. 

Madam Speaker, the House will appreciate that Government immediately after, set up 
a Ministerial Committee under my Chair to look into the representations of the Federation 
and to make recommendations.  

The other members of the Ministerial Committee are my colleagues - 

-  The hon. Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport; 

-  The hon. Minister of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment; 

-  The hon. Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection;  

-  The hon. Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reform, and  

-  The hon. Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training. 

The Ministerial Committee has, so far, met on two occasions, namely on 07 and 14 
September 2015, during which the representatives of taxi operators, AHRIM and AIOM were 
each heard. 

Both sides have shown an interest to collaborate with a view to alleviating highlighted 

problems. Accordingly, a number of proposals have been mooted such as - 

(i) 

(ii) 

Review of the allocation of taxis based at hotels; 

Grouping of taxis based at hotels into zones; 

(iii)  Reintroduction of taximeter for taxis based at hotels and the airport; 

(iv) 

Introduction of  desk for taxi operators inside hotels; 

(v) 

Affixing of taxi fares at the reception of all hotels; 

(vi) 

Training of taxis operators based at hotels by the Tourism Authority, including 
training in language skills;  

(vii)  Amendment  of  legislation  to  differentiate  between  leased  contract  cars  and 

chauffeur-driven contract cars; 

85 

 
(viii) 

Introduction of legislation to - 

(a)  Ban commission; 

(b) Oblige taxi operators based at hotels to be well-dressed and wear uniform, 

and  

(c)  Compel  taxi  operators  to  offer  reasonable  care  and  assistance  to  clients 

entering or leaving the taxi. 

Madam Speaker, I must point out that the Ministerial Committee is still pursuing its 
assignment  and  will,  upon  conclusion  of  its  deliberations,  make  recommendations  to 
Government. 

Madam Speaker:  Yes, hon. Ramful! 

Mr Ramful: Would the hon. Ag. Prime Minister agree that this all-inclusive package is 
benefitting  only  a  few  stakeholders,  namely  the  hotels  and  the  contract  car  owners  to  the 
prejudice of the taxi owners who are based at these hotels? Does the hon. Ag. Prime Minister 
consider the desirability of bringing legislation to make it compulsory for hotels to hire taxis 
that are found at their base? 

The Ag. Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, when a tourist takes a package holiday in 
Mauritius, usually it includes the transfer from the airport to the hotel whether it is an all-
inclusive package or a normal package.  That is normal, not only in Mauritius but everywhere 
around the world.  Now, the question of all-inclusive package usually means that you have 
your food, your full board, local drinks, etc. paid for but, in addition, the tour operator may 
have  pre-sold  some  excursions  to  the  tourists.    Now,  some  of  that  are  absolutely  normal 
international  practices.    But,  as  far  as  the  Committee  is  concerned,  we  are  also  concerned 
with the welfare of the taxi owners and we can understand that it is no fun at all if you are 
just waiting outside the hotel and you see business coming in and out, for instance, by normal 
contract cars, not limousine being chauffeur-driven, and that, I think, my colleague, the hon. 
Minister of Public Infrastructure is determined to put a stop to that - taxis from other bases 
coming and picking up people in the hotels.  So, we are looking at the whole thing to find a 
middle way because some of the practices are absolutely normal international practices and 
we wouldn’t wish Mauritius to be on a different level to what is offered elsewhere but, at the 
same time, we believe that things like, perhaps, having a taxi desk inside the hotel premises 
would go a long way to offering a fair chance to the taxi drivers to offer their services.  At the 

 

86 

same time, Madam Speaker, and I will finish on that, it is also not normal for taxis dealing 
with  tourists  not  to  have  a  taxi  metre,  because  I  can  understand  the  reluctance  of  some 
tourists  to  go  into  a  taxi  when  they  don’t  know  on  what  basis  the  fare  will  be  charged  or 
whether they have been offered a fair fare or not a fair fare.  That is something also that we 
need to look.  We need to have a system that is both conducive to encouraging the tourists to 
use the taxis and, at the same, ensuring that the taxi drivers are discriminated against. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The hon. Ag. Prime Minister has talked 
mainly about the issue of hotels.  There is one aspect in relation to this particular question 
that I would like to draw his attention to, whether he could look into the possibility of sorting 
out the same type of disorder that exists at the level of the Port area.  The Port areas Taxi 
Owners Association also have tour operators that come there where cruise ships accostent.  
They take a lot of tourists and go away and the taxi owners end up with nothing.  They are 
not even allowed to go inside the Port area to collect passengers and give the choice to the 
passengers  to  take  a  taxi,  whereas  tour  operators  with  their  buses  are  allowed  inside, 
discriminating against taxi drivers.  I recall there was a meeting some time in 2014 where 
promises were made.  Could the hon. Ag. Prime Minister, please look into it that the promise 
is kept. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, we have understood your question! Hon. Shakeel Mohamed, 

please, we have understood your question. 

The Ag. Prime Minister: I will look into it, Madam Speaker. That problem has been 

raised a number of times. I will look into it and see what can be done. 

Mr Fowdar: In fact, I was going to ask the hon. Ag. Prime Minister to look into the 
possibility of having a taxi desk within the hotel. This is thing done.  I thank the hon. Ag. 
Prime Minister for that. I would also request the hon. Ag. Prime Minister to review the role of 
canvasseur which is another troublemaker for the taxi drivers and to see whether their role 
could be reviewed in order to ease up matters for the taxi drivers. 

The Ag. Prime Minister: The matter of the taxi desk has been mooted and will be 
taken as much forward as we can. Canvasseur is not the issue. Most of them do not have a 
permit,  but  they  ply  their  trade  and  offer  services,  Madam,  Speaker.  So,  the  whole  thing 
needs to be looked at to find an acceptable win-win solution. 

87 

 
Mr Ganoo: The hon. Ag. Prime Minister gave a long list of proposals that have been 
mooted out and so on as a result of the different meetings. This is not the point. The point of 
this question and the main complaint of the taxi drivers which drove hundreds and hundreds 
of  them  to  come  down  the  streets  in  Port  Louis  is  because  they  are  facing  an  unfair 
competition. 

Madam Speaker: What is your question, hon. Ganoo? 

Mr Ganoo: My question is: in view of the fact that it is the NTA itself, which is a 
Government agency, which provides the licence to these taxi drivers on the different basis in 
front of the hotels, the taxi drivers can understand that when the tourists come, the operator 
provides a mode de taxi.  When a rich tourist needs a Limousine, it is Okay, but he cannot be 
deprived of his living and allow operators to come and drive the tourists when the tourists are 
leaving the hotels instead of retaining the services of taxis. 

Madam Speaker: You have asked your question, hon. Ganoo! 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, this is exactly what I said, that is, part of 
it is quite acceptable, but part of it is not and we are looking at it. This is exactly what I said. 
But I must also inform the House that there has been a very friendly way of allocating taxis to 
hotels. The normal ratio is, I think, one taxi for four rooms. Now, in some hotels, you have 
one taxi for 10 rooms and in some hotels one taxi for maybe one or two rooms, in which case 
never can the taxi driver  - if it is one taxi for two rooms and, if say, the hotel is not full, 
anyway, how on  earth is the taxi driver ever  going to  get his living? So, what  I think my 
colleague will do is reallocate the taxis so that they all respect sort of the one to four norms so 
that they have a better chance of earning a living. So, it is also a fact that there has been a 
misallocation of taxis to hotels. 

Madam Speaker: Last question on this, hon. Ramful! 

Mr  Ramful:  May  I  request  the  hon.  Ag.  Prime  Minister  to  see  to  it  that  this 
committee that has been set up comes up with proposals as soon as possible so that we can 
find a solution to this problem? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Yes, I think we agree with that. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ramful! 

 

 

 
BUS REPLACEMENT MECHANISM – SEMI-LOW FLOOR BUSES  

88 

(No. B/643) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the Bus 
Replacement Mechanism for the replacement of existing buses by semi-low floor buses, he 
will state if he has received representations from the Bus Owners Association in connection 
therewith and, if so, indicate the actions that will be taken in relation thereto, if any. 

Mr  Bodha:  Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  the  bus  replacement  mechanism,  I  am 
informed that the construction and use of semi-low floor buses are provided for, under the 
Road Traffic (Construction and Use of vehicles) Regulations 2010 which said that semi-low 
floor buses should be used instead of the high floor buses as is presently the case. 

However,  provisions  of  the  new  regulations  were  not  implemented  as  there  were 

representations from bus operators to the effect that they were facing financial difficulties. 

In  order  to  assist  them  the  bus  replacement  mechanism  was  set  up  in  2014.    This 
mechanism provides for a subsidy of Rs1 m. and VAT exemption to bus operators holding a 
road service licence on the purchase of a semi-low floor bus. Under this scheme, operators 
were  eligible  for  the  subsidy  to  purchase  a  bus  either  to  implement  a  new  licence  or  in 
replacement of his existing bus. 

On 30 September 2014, bus operators were informed, through a press communiqué 
that,  henceforth,  the  provisions  of  the  Road  Traffic  (Construction  and  Use  of  Vehicles) 
Regulations 2010 would be enforced. 

As  at  to  date,  30  such  buses  have  been  acquired  as  follows:  the  Rose  Hill  Bus 
Transport Services Ltd: 18, the NTC 2, TBS Ltd: 2, MBT Ltd: 1, and one by an individual 
bus operator. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  National  Transport  Authority  that  in  June 
2015,  the  Bus  Owners  Co-operative  Federation  made  representations  to  the  effect  that 
individual bus operators were facing difficulties to replace their standard buses by semi-low 
floor buses due to the following – and they gave the following reasons, Madam Speaker - 

•  The  replacement  of  a  60-seater  bus  will  necessitate  additional  buses  with 
additional  labour  and  additional  operating  costs  in  view  of  the  (2  x  2)  seating 
layout with a total of 44 seats. 

 
•  The buses are heavier than conventional buses and as such, they consume more 

89 

diesel; 

•  Being a new type of bus, its cost effectiveness was doubtful; 

•  The actual bus stands and the conditions of the roads especially in rural areas 
where humps are found might not be suitable to accommodate semi-low floor 
buses, and finally 

•  Drivers would need to be trained to drive those semi-low floor buses. 

Madam Speaker, my Ministry has examined these representations together with the 
National Transport Authority and we have found out that most of them are unjustified and 
cannot be entertained. 

In fact, it was noted that bus companies were already operating those semi-low floor 
buses  on  all  routes  of  Mauritius,  except  in  intra  urban  ones  and  in  Rodrigues,  with  good 
performance in terms of fuel consumption, comfort and passenger satisfaction.  Furthermore, 
road tests carried out by the National Transport Authority have, in fact, confirmed that these 
types  of  buses  could  ply  on  most  routes  except  in  intra  urban  ones  and  in  Rodrigues. 
Moreover, semi-low floor buses with a seating  capacity of 50  and standing capacity of 12 
exist on the market. In fact, the NTC is in the process of purchasing 100 such buses. 

Madam Speaker, it would be contrary to our policy of bus fleet modernisation, if we 
were to entertain favourably the representations of the Bus Owners Co-operative Federation. 

Members of the  House  would agree with me that if we want to have  an attractive, 
efficient, cost effective and modern public transport geared towards customer satisfaction, we 
can  no  longer  continue  with  the  poor  quality  of  services  provided  by  some  individual 
operators.  In  fact,  many  shortcomings  have  been  reported  to  my  Ministry,  the  NTA  and 
through the press that individual bus operators fail to pick up students and old age passengers 
on bus stop even when seats are available. Moreover, they often break routes or fail to respect 
timetables  thus  causing  much  hardship  to  travelling  passengers.  At  times,  passengers  are 
made to alight one bus and board other buses for a single trip. Sometimes we have a speeding 
exercise and sometimes we have a slow motion exercise at other times. 

Madam  Speaker,  my  Ministry  has  embarked  on  a  public  transport  modernisation 
programme in order to encourage our citizens to shift to public transport and individual bus 
operators are requested to contribute to our vision of a modern bus transport system.  Our 

 

90 

endeavours are in line with the world trend which is to provide comfortable semi-low floor 
buses  to  commuters.    Many  European  countries  have,  in  fact,  already  shifted  to  low  floor 
buses,  while  the  Delhi  Transport  Corporation  has  renewed  most  of  its  fleet  with  semi-low 
floor buses. 

In Mauritius, the bus replacement is far too slow. To provide new opportunities for 
bus  operators  to  renew  their  fleet,  we  have  already  initiated  a  series  of  measures  with  the 
introduction of the smart line project. New buses will ply along dedicated routes with new 
bus shelters, a new passenger information system as well as with Wi-Fi and a GPS system. 

Madam Speaker, I am, however, making an exception for Rodrigues and intra-urban 
routes in view of the topography and geometry of the roads in Rodrigues and the narrowness 
of  the  roads  in  our  cities.  My  Ministry  is  amending  accordingly  the  Road  Traffic 
(Construction and Use of Vehicles) Regulations, 2010. 

Mr Ramful: The hon. Minister has made mention of road tests that have been carried 
out. May I know from the hon. Minister whether a report has been done by the NTA and if he 
can table a copy of the report? 

Mr Bodha: Yes. The report has been done, in fact, and I can table the report. 

Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Minister inform the House, with regard to a bus conductor 
refusing to pick up a student or an old person at a bus stop, what action is being taken against 
the bus driver? 

Mr Bodha: In fact, warnings are given and in some cases we have the suspension of 

the permit for a short period of time.  

Mr Ganoo: The hon. Minister has talked about disciplining the individual operators, I 
don’t  think  anybody  has  a  quarrel  with  him  on  that  aspect.  Since  the  hon.  Minister  has 
himself  given  the  figure  that  in  spite  of  the  Rs1  m.  grant  or  subsidy  provided  to  these 
operators, only one of them has bought one of these semi-low floor buses so far, doesn’t that 
mean that the case of these individual operators is a good one and imposing upon them the 
purchase  of  these  semi-low  floor  buses  will  mean  the  death  of  this  community  which  is 
already suffering a lot in terms of operating cost? 

Mr  Bodha:  There  are  three  reasons  to  this,  Madam  Speaker.    First  of  all,  we  are 
paying  a  subsidy  of  Rs50,000  to  each  bus  every  month  even  though  students  are  not 
travelling. The second thing is semi-low floor buses have not been bought by operators, but 

 

91 

they have not bought the other bus either because the rate of renewal of the fleet is only 4%. 
The third reason, Madam Speaker, is that we must have a standardised system, we have to 
make the public transport more attractive. And in one study we have come to the conclusion 
that in 75% of cases, it is either Government or the private sector which is paying for the fare. 
When it comes to the individual operators, we have so many complaints as regards the free 
transport  and  we  know  exactly  what  happens  about  the  buses  going  to  the  garage  at  five 
o’clock, not respecting the timetable, not respecting the speed limits. I think that some order 
has to be put. I am very conducive to the fact that we should sit down and see how to help 
them to be able to integrate a modern land transport system. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Sorefan, last question! 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  May  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister 
whether the policy of the low-floor buses was, in the first place, to help the old-age pensioner 
to get in, to move because those buses that we have now are paid by the Government and the 
old-age pensioner can hardly climb the bus. Probably, that was the policy, in the first place, 
for the low-floor buses. 

Mr Bodha: That is why we have to come to the semi-low floor buses. There is one 
thing which is very important. In fact, we never had buses in Mauritius, there were chassis of 
lorries which have been converted into buses without specifications and standards. It is now 
that we are having the semi-low floor buses, that is, buses made for land transport to allow 
for handicapped people and old-age pensioners. Now, we are moving from the high-floor to 
the semi-low floor buses. In Europe, the system is already moving to low-floor buses. In fact, 
you move from the ... 

You move from the station to the bus.  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Time is over! The Table has been advised that PQ No. B/646 has 

been withdrawn. A point of order, hon. Bhadain! 

Mr Bhadain: Yes, Madam Speaker. On a point of order, I would humbly request hon. 
Bhagwan  to  withdraw  the  word  ‘manipulated’  which  was  used,  imputing  motives  and 
inferences  that  I  would  have  been  manipulating  programmes  of  the  MBC  which  is  a  very 
serious allegation and which is totally false, Madam Speaker. 

 
Madam  Speaker:  I  have  taken  note  of  your  point  of  order.  I  will  consult  the 

92 

recordings and I’ll come back with a ruling. 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10 (2) 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that all the business on today’s Order Paper 
be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

Mr Jhugroo rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

PUBLIC BILLS 

First Reading 

On motion made and seconded the National Flag Bill (No. XV of 2015) was read a 

first time. 

Madam Speaker:  I suspend the sitting for half an hour. 

At 5.06 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 5.45 p.m. with the Deputy Speaker in the Chair. 

Second Reading 

THE ROADS (AMENDMENT) BILL  

(No. XII of 2015) 

Order for Second Reading read. 

The Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport (Mr N. Bodha): Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir, I move that the Roads (Amendment) Bill (No. XII of 2015) be read a 
second time. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the purpose of this amendment to the Roads Act section 27- 
discharge of water on roads and section 42 - soil erosion and refuse is to provide a fast and 
efficient  mechanism  to  the  Highway  Authority  to  address  the  issue  of  illegal  discharge  of 
water and refuse by owners and occupiers of lands on public roads and drains.  However, this 
is not an end in itself.  We need to have wide scale consultations with institutions like the 

 

93 

National Development Unit, the Local Authorities, the Ministry of Agro-Industry and Food 
Security  as  well  as  the  Ministry  of  Environment,  National  Emergency  Centre  and  Beach 
Authority and come up with a holistic solution to address all problems of land drainage in 
Mauritius. 

The  amendment  that  is  being  presented  now  is  addressing  only  two  specific  issues 
pertaining to roads. The rationale of this amendment, M. le président, c’est de responsabiliser 
les gens sur leur devoir envers les autres concernant les problèmes liés à la décharge illégale 
de l’eau, des ordures sur les routes et des drains. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it is to be pointed out that in the recent past, many  areas, 
such  as  l’Amitié,  Bel  Ombre,  D’Epinay,  Souillac  have  been  affected  by  floods  and  also 
Mauritius has witnessed a number of flash floods which have caused a lot of inconveniences 
to  the  population.    There  is  no  doubt  that  somewhere  these  occurrences  are  the  direct 
consequences of poorly planned private developments.  The consequences of climate change 
should  also  be  considered.    It  is  quite  important  that  while  acknowledging  the  need  for 
developments  to  boost  our  economic  growth,  it  is  imperative  to  ensure  that  all  planning 
precautions are taken so as not to adversely disturb the natural topography. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  illegal  discharge  of  water  from  private  developments 
onto the road surface and drains has been identified as one of the main causes of floods.  The 
existing drains, although properly designed initially to cater for road surface water only, soon 
became inadequate as a result of illegal connections or direct discharge from adjoining roads 
and lands.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it is a fact that the existing agricultural zones of Mauritius 
have their own internal drainage system which is a feature of their original topography.  But 
it  is  also  a  fact  that  major  areas  have  been  bulldozed  under  the  de-rocking  schemes.  In 
addition, other portions of agricultural land are being converted and are being developed into 
residential  morcellements,  hotels  and  Integrated  Resort  Schemes  and  Golf  Courses.    Such 
schemes, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, and developments also modify the existing drainage and 
topography.  From  2008  to  date,  several  new  floods  prone  areas  have  emerged  as  a 
consequence  of  these  activities.  In  the  North,  East  and  South,  some  villages  have  been 
flooded by water coming from these lands. Such waters get diverted into the roads and find 
their way into residential areas. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  another  situation  which  is  encountered  often  is  the 
maintenance of existing drains.  It has been observed that most of the times the drains are 
blocked  by  debris  and  other  wastes  from  adjoining  owners  and  occupiers  of  lands.  Had  it 

 

94 

been only for rain water it would have been easier to keep these drains in good functional 
conditions.  However, unfortunately this is not so. 

Provisions  exist  under  sections  27(1)(a)  and  42(1)  to  the  effect  that  no  occupier  of 
premises adjoining a road shall cause surface water from the premises to flow into a road or 
into a road drain and allow a highway authority to require the owner or occupier of a land 
adjoining  a  road  to  execute  such  works  as  will  prevent  soil  or  refuse  from  that  land  from 
falling, or being washed or carried, on to the road or into any road drain as to obstruct the 
road or choke the road drain. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the existing provision of the law defines the discharges of 
water and refuse on the road or into the road drains as punishable offences.  However, the 
existing law does not provide a fast mechanism to deal with these offences.  Sending a notice 
to  contravenants  by  the  Highway  Authority  has  not  produced  the  expected  result  because 
civil cases constitute a long process.  At the end of the day, those who contravene at the most, 
are liable, on conviction, to a fine of no less than 10,000 rupees and to imprisonment for a 
term  not  exceeding  12  months.  This  amendment  allows  the  Court  to  give  the  Highway 
Authority the authority to undertake any actions it feels appropriate to remedy the situation 
and thereafter have the costs recovered. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we cannot condone such a situation any further.  It cannot be 
business as usual, as floods represent a danger to human life.  It is, therefore, necessary for 
the Highway Authority to have the means to act fast.  This amendment allows the Court to 
give the Highway Authority the authority to undertake any actions it deems appropriate to 
remedy the situation and thereafter have the costs recovered. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it is anticipated that owners and occupiers will be discouraged 
to commit an offence under this act following this amendment or face the consequences. The 
public is warned that everyone will be accountable for his acts and doings. It is high time that 
everybody  should  act  responsibly  just  as  we  are  acting  as  a  responsible  Government  in 
bringing forward this amendment to the House. 

Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 
The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 

Collendavelloo) rose and seconded. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

 

 
(5.53 p.m.) 

95 

Mr R. Bhagwan (First Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière): M. le président, 
entendre  les  objectifs  de  cet  amendement  par  l’honorable  ministre,  rendre  illégal  tout 
déversement  non  autorisé  de  l’eau  pluviale  sur  les  routes  ou  les  road  drains  et  combattre 
l’érosion aux abords des routes, on ne peut qu’accueillir un amendement qui contribuera à 
accroître  la  sécurité  sur  nos  routes  et  réduire  les  dégâts  causés  par  l’absence  de  drains 
proprement dimensionnés et, par conséquent, des coûts d’entretien. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  we  have  witnessed  over  the  years,  grâce  à  de  mauvaises 
planifications à l’urbanisation, ce problème aigu de land drainage.  Cela me fait me rappeler 
qu’en 2002 il y a eu de grosses pluies, et le gouvernement d’alors avait commissioned GIBB 
& Partners pour faire une étude sur l’état de situation en ce qu’il s’agit de land drainage. 
Dans  ce  rapport  il  y  a  eu  des  recommandations  pour  la  création  d’un  Land  Drainage 
Committee.    Des  fonds  ont  été  alloués  à  la  NDU,  qui  était  responsable  de  mettre  en 
application les différents projets de land drainage à travers l’île Maurice. Malheureusement, 
il y a eu, après 2005, un stop, un ralentissement, pour plusieurs raisons. Il y a eu aussi, on 
peut  se  rappeler,  des  inondations  dans  le  nord.  Je  me  rappelle  toujours  de  l’ex-ministre 
Gokhool.  Il  y  a  eu  un  étudiant  décédé  dans  le  nord,  et  le  gouvernement  d’alors  avait 
commissioned le juge Domah pour faire un rapport et une enquête. 

(Interruptions) 

Oui, à Mont-Goût ! Et le Juge Domah, je crois en 2009, avait fait des recommandations, et 
j’en cite une -  

 “We recommend that the Ministry of Local Government carries out an audit of those 
local  authorities  which  have  fallen  short  of  their  statutory  duties,  more  specifically 
regarding  the  drainage  system,  land  development  and  waste  management  and  bring 
them to account.  At the same time, we urge the Ministry to reinforce its legislative and 
administrative  measures  to  effectively  deter  persons  from  engaging  in  unlawful 
activities  on  the  banks  and  reserves  of  watercourses,  illegal  constructions  and 
prejudicial practices with regard to refuse and garbage disposal. 

We  also  recommend  that  the  Ministry  urges  the  local  authorities  to  be  more 
imaginative and accommodating on the question of disposal of waste.” 

 

96 

Et puis, il y a eu en 2013 les flash floods dont nous avons tous été témoins, avec des 
pertes de vie. Ce projet de loi a été discuté à plusieurs niveaux et ici même, à travers des 
questions parlementaires, sur cette irresponsabilité. Je dis non seulement l’irresponsabilité des 
autorités  mais  aussi  de  la  population,  des  land  owners,  des  propriétaires  de  terrains. 
Aujourd’hui, nous sommes tous des élus. Il y a eu de grosses pluies avant-hier, je crois. Il y a 
pas  mal  d’endroits  où  il  y  a  eu  des  inondations faute  de  drains  mais  aussi  de  par 
l’irresponsabilité des propriétaires. 

Cet  amendement,  M.  le  président,  vient  à  point  pour  décourager,  pour  envoyer  un 
message fort, mais moi j’ai une crainte. What about implementation ? Nous savons tous par 
expérience.  On  parle  des  autorités.  L’honorable  ministre  parle  de  highway  authority.    Le 
highway  authority,  c’est  aussi  les  local  authorities  et  la  RDA,  les  Districts  Councils.  Que 
serait idéal ? Que l’inspectorat des municipalités, l’inspectorat des conseils de districts, mais 
aussi la RDA, le MPI, fassent des inspections dans le cadre de leur travail normal.  Ce qui ne 
se fait pas! 

Nous  savons  tous  qu’il  y  a  quelques  inspecteurs  dans  les  municipalités,  et  faute 
d’inspectorat il n’y a pas suffisamment d’inspection. Avec le nombre de morcellements ces 
jours-ci ! Je m’adresse à l’honorable ministre de l’Environnement aussi. Il y a le EIA, il y a 
des  norms  qui  sont  prescrits  dans  le  EIA.  Est-ce  qu’il  y  a  suffisamment  de  monitoring  au 
niveau  des  collectivités  locales,  au  niveau  du  ministère  de  l’Environnement  pour  s’assurer 
que les nouveaux propriétaires, les promoteurs fassent ce qu’il y a dans les conditions ? Ce 
qu’ils ne font pas ! Dans la majorité des cas, nous constatons qu’il n’y a pas suffisamment - il 
n’y a presque pas du tout – d’inspections pour agir contre ces irresponsables propriétaires de 
terrains ou des promoteurs. Ça, c’est un cas.  Je crois que l’honorable ministre aura à réunir 
toutes ces institutions pour leur demander de faire leur statutory duties. Sinon, ce serait peine 
perdue. 

Deuxièmement, l’honorable ministre aura à faire du PR auprès de la population, et se 
servir de la MBC à bon escient pour préparer des spots publicitaires, pour montrer où sont ces 
gens irresponsables. Il y a de grands promoteurs - je dis même de l’industrie sucrière - qui 
font des millions en faisant des morcellements. Ils font leurs morcellements, ils vendent des 
terrains et gagnent des millions, et laissent derrière eux ces problèmes aigus aux collectivités 
locales  et  à  la  population  de  l’endroit  qui  souffre  en  période  de  grosses  pluies.    Alors,  je 
demanderai  à  l’honorable  ministre  d’organiser  un  bon  PR  pour  attirer  l’attention  de  la 

 

97 

population.  L’honorable ministre vient de dire ‘It won’t be business as usual’.  Oui, mais 
quelles sont les amendes ? Maintenant on va mettre des juges en chambre. Quelles sont les 
pénalités? Il faut attirer l’attention de ces irresponsables.  

Troisièmement,  M.  le  président,  mettre  tout  sur  le  dos  des  propriétaires  de  terrains, 
mettre tout sur le dos des autorités locales n’est pas suffisant.  Il y a des autorités autres qui 
sont des irresponsables, et on parle de roads ! Aujourd’hui, il y a la CWA.  La CWA est en 
tête de liste. Médaille d’or ! Wastewater Management Authority, Mauritius Telecom, CEB ! 
Maintenant, il y a des promoteurs qui viennent pour installer les digital cables et qui font des 
fouilles. Et, finalement, qu’est-ce que ces contracteurs font? Mette ça dans canal! Là, il y a 
un manquement au niveau des autorités locales et aussi au niveau des agences. Je crois que le 
ministre aura intérêt à organiser une table ronde avec ces organisations paragouvernementales 
pour leur dire : «Voilà, la loi n’est pas seulement pour le public!» Il y a des Chief Executives 
qui  sont  grassement  payés. Il  y  a  des  Chairpersons  aussi  maintenant.    C’est  à  eux  d’aller 
voir. Nous sommes des députés, nous savons qu’il y a un problème à la CWA.   Il y a des 
centaines  de  cas  tous  les  jours  et  on  ne  respecte  pas  les  normes.  Ces  organisations  sont 
supposées  travailler  d’après  les  normes.    Une  fois  les  fouilles  terminées,  il  faut  faire  le 
ramassage avant de partir mais ils ne le font pas. Il y a aussi des contracteurs qui viennent 
faire de grands développements, ils viennent avec leurs pelleteuses JCB et camions remplis 
de trucs de drainage pour faire passer leurs déchets, puis ils partent; ils mettent même de la 
boue tout le long des routes.  Là aussi, il faut agir contre ces promoteurs et ces utilisateurs de 
heavy vehicles. 

Venir  avec  un  amendement,    c’est  très  bien  de  la  part  du  ministre,  mais  quid  du 
follow-up et quid d’agir en conséquence pour que, quand même, on puisse dire dans quelque 
temps qu’il y a un progrès.  Si venir seulement avec un projet de loi, avec des safeguards sur 
papier, pour prévenir afin qu’il y ait moins d’inconvénient, ce n’est pas suffisant.  We won’t 
achieve what we have been voted to do. C’est tout ce que j’avais à dire, M. le président.  On 
n’est  pas  contre  cet  amendement,  cela  va  dans  une  bonne  direction.    C’était  on  the  card 
depuis  l’année  dernière  après  les  grandes  inondations,  et  aussi  depuis  plusieurs  années.  
Certains amendements viennent à point,  I would say, an additional point, pour agir contre les 
irresponsables. J’espère que le ministre de Local Government et les autres ministres qui sont 
responsables des corps paraétatiques et des organisations vont agir en conséquence pour que 
ce projet de loi ne reste pas lettre morte ou ne soit voté à une séance du parlement seulement. 

98 

 
Je vous remercie. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Boissézon ! 

(6.04 p.m.) 

Mr E. Boissézon (Third Member for La Caverne & Phoenix): Mr Deputy Speaker, 
thank you for allowing me to intervene during the debate relating to the Roads (Amendment) 
Bill. 

I congratulate the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport for addressing 
the problems of blocked drains and flooded roads which have become acute. Et je note avec 
plaisir que cet amendement sur ce projet de loi fait l’unanimité dans cette Chambre. 

An essential feature of road construction is drainage, the very purpose of which is to 
remove water efficiently from the surface of roads and provide a safe passage for vehicles 
and pedestrians. Also, it is important to ensure, in exceptional rainfall, that they can cater for 
changes in the run-off of the neighbouring areas, other roads and low lying residential areas 
from being inundated. Highway and road drainage systems also impact on the road conditions 
where drainage is inadequate; it can cause structural damages to the very foundation of the 
roads,  notwithstanding  the  very  high  cost  of  repairs  and  maintenance.  Unfortunately,  Mr 
Deputy  Speaker,  very  often  the  drains  are  choked  with  debris  and  soil  dropped  by  some 
antipatriotic, selfish, insouciants, who do not have any respect for others.  

As the hon. Member before me said, some developers of morcellements  do not take 
appropriate measures to ensure that the rainfall is infiltrated within the morcellements and to 
ensure  that,  in  exceptional  cases,    the  collective  drain  on  the  highway  can  cater  for  the 
overflow. Drains are filled for entry convenience from the road to certain premises. Drains 
are obstructed by building materials during and long after the occupation of the building. 

In the past, Government has invested billions of rupees for the construction of drains 
and  storm  rain  drainage.    It  is  one  of  the  main  preoccupations  of  this  responsible 
Government. Government will invest billions for the construction of drains. This will be a 
vain  initiative  if  no  appropriate  action  is  taken  to  prevent  occupiers  and  proprietors  of 
premises to dispose water, soil and refuse in the drains or the roads. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, the Road Act categorises roads as follows – 

99 

 
•  Motorways or main roads shall be those roads so designated and classified by the 
Minister by Regulations, thus, for the time being falling under the accountability 
of the Road Development Authority. 

•  Urban and rural roads or roads within the boundaries of a town have been 

accepted as regular maintenance responsibility of the local authority. 

•  The same Act describes the highway authorities as in an authority responsible for 

the construction, care and maintenance of a road or class of road in accordance 
with the Act. 

I  am  pleased  to  observe  that  this  responsible  Government  is  providing  a  fast  and 
effective  mechanism  to  the  RDA  and  the  Local  Government  Authorities  to  address  illegal 
disposal of water, soil and refuse in the drains or roads. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  another  cause  of  flood  is  the  fact  that  individual  occupiers  of 
houses and buildings do not manage the rainwater run-off from their assets. One may think: 
what is the importance of one house? As if a glass of water in the sea! But when you take the 
added  surfaces  of  premises  in  a  street  and  the  prevailing  climatic  conditions  prevailing 
actually, snap floods and so on, bonjour les dégâts! 

Mr Deputy Speaker, today if one walks on a road in any town or village, he will see 
that a large majority of the occupiers of houses and premises dispose of the storm water on 
the roads and drains. They just fix a water pipe horizontally, as high as their roofs to conduct 
the water on the road.  Furthermore, worse, the  majority dispose of their grey  water in the 
drain  as  well.  This  is  one  of  the  causes  of  floods  and  water  stagnation  in  undulating  hilly 
roads, the water travelling down roads and floods low lying areas. This is also another cause 
of damages to the road as constant impact of water on the road surfaces erodes it and slowly, 
but  surely  digs  it.  It  is  a  danger  since  water  disposables  continue  long  after  the  rain  has 
stopped.  Pedestrians,  cyclists  and  motorcyclists  have  to  swerve  towards  the  middle  of  the 
road to avoid the pouring water, putting themselves in danger. In the case of grey water, that 
is, water from the kitchen and bathroom, I shall not take the time of the House to enumerate 
its  nuisance  effect  on  the  environment  and  sanitation,  leaving  it  for  my  colleague,  the 
Minister of Environment. 

The present Bill will prevent the present situation to prevail in towns and villages and 

I reiterate my congratulations to the Minister of Public Infrastructure for this. 

 
Mr Deputy Speaker, let us go to the objective of the Bill. The objective of the Bill 

100 

stipulate – 

“to  give  greater  powers  to  a  highway  authority  to  prevent  the  illegal  discharge  of 
water, soil or refuse from any private property on a road or into a road drain.” 

It means first - as it was rightly said by hon. Bhagwan – that the Highway Authorities 
had the power to prevent the situation. But what prevented them to do so? In fact, Mr Deputy 
Speaker, the law clearly stipulates that no occupier of premises adjoining a road shall cause 
surface water from the premises to flow on the road.  

One can ask himself: “How the prevailing situations have occurred?” I once asked an 
officer  from  the  Municipal  Council:  “Why  they  do  not  take  actions  against  those  who 
contravene?” He replied that there were ambiguities in the law and that it was difficult for 
them  to  implement  the  law.  Secondly,  the  enforcement  of  the  law  will  fall  under  which 
responsibility,  which  organisation?    The  Road  Authority  for  classified  roads,  the  local 
authorities!  We  have  heard  also  the  same  recital:  “We  are  out  of  resources  to  control  and 
implement the law correctly.” I shall not linger on frivolous reasons which have allowed this 
situation to prevail and welcome this Bill as there is no excuse to stop the disposal of water 
on the roads.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, this will be a very difficult task and one can imagine the number 
of notices for illicit discharge that will be issued in the days following the proclamation of 
this  Bill.  As  hon.  Bhagwan  rightly  said  before  me,  I  suggest  that  a  good  communication 
exercise must be done to inform the public at large of the law regarding disposal of water, on 
the consequences in case of contravention. A period of grace should be given to the occupiers 
who  will  be  in  illegal  situation  to  remedy  the  situation,  then,  apply  the  law  avec  toute  sa 
vigueur to all inhabitants. In such cases, the Officer of our authority cannot be lenient and 
start to pick and choose.  This will lead to chaos again. Everyone must respect the law; no 
one is beyond the law.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, what has been spoken so far are reactions towards un certain état 
des  faits.  The  procedures  to  ensure  compliances  are  long  and  costly  and,  very  often,  the 
difficulties thereon will be a deterrent for the Officers of the highway authority to enforce the 
law. 

101 

 
Once  we  shall  eradicate  the  to-day’s  non-compliances,  shall  we  continue  a  spiral 
movement to take action against illegal disposal of newcomers in the illicit circuit? I suggest 
that  we  take  proactive  actions  to  ensure  non-compliance,  to  ensure  that  the  owners  or 
occupiers  of  buildings  have  the  appropriate  means  to  collect  the  rains  which  fall  on  their 
premises. In our endeavour to be proactive regarding the non-disposal of water, refuse and 
soil, we should not wait to witness the disposal, but rather take necessary measures to ensure 
proper control on rainfall management.  Instead of applying the principle of the fear of the 
stick, we must start with the self-discipline awareness and implementation. We must educate 
the  population  at  large  of  the  importance  of  sustainable  drainage  system  what  they  call 
(SUDS).  In  some  countries  and  States,  they  call  it  best  management  practice  and/or  storm 
water control measures. Citizens must be informed of the need of self-infiltration into their 
premises and morcellements. Today, because of the impervious surfaces of premises, that is, 
the roof impermeable surface like slabs, pavement or concrete, no infiltration into the ground 
is done and as the premises are surrounded by a concrete wall, all the surplus water goes on 
the road. In these cases, the occupiers should ensure the capacity to infiltrate more than 80% 
of the storm water within their premises. In fact, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in certain States, 
there are standards and norms to follow for the collection of storm and rain water.  

Within the changing climate condition prevailing, the advent of flash floods, owners 
of large surface roofs should apply the principle of attenuation which consists of a reduction 
of runoff to reduce the peak flow rate and derive a persistence of smooth disposal.  

Furthermore,  they  should  implement  a  system  of  conveyance,  that  is,  a  controlled 

manner to transfer water from their premises to another site in proper soak pits.  

Citizens should be encouraged to store water for future use, an  experience that our 
brothers  of  Rodrigues  know  very  well.  In  America,  they  call  it  storm  harvest  and  money 
coming from the sky.  

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  today,  to  build  a  house  or  building,  one  has  to  conform 
himself to at least five Acts.  The Building and Land Use Permit Guide issued by the Ministry 
of Local Government stipulates that in accordance with Section 117 of the Local Government 
Act, every applicant for a BLP has to be in accordance with guidelines issued under the Local 
Government  Act,  the  Building  Control  Act,  the  Town  and  Country  Planning  Act,  the 
Environment Protection Act, and, in certain cases, the Sugar Industry Efficiency Act and if 
you  go  on  their  website  you  will  see  ‘for  technical  guidelines,  consult  the  website  of  the 

 

102 

Ministry of Housing and Lands.’ I will quote certain parts of those Acts, Section 29 of the 
Planning and Development Act 2004 says – 

“Where an applicant has or is likely to have a significant impact on roads or 
traffic management, he has to consult the Ministry responsible for the subject 
of road”. 

The Building and Control Act 2012, Section 16, Inspection during building work – 

“An  authorised  Officer  shall  carry  out  at  least  one  inspection  to  a  building 
under construction to ascertain whether the required permit has been obtained 
and, if so, whether the conditions of the permit are being complied with”. 

Are  we  sure  that  inspectors  are  doing  their  work  properly?  So,  just  go  to  the  root 
cause!  I  suggest  that  we  codify  the  law  to  have  a  single  one  which  will  provide  for  the 
promotion  and  uniformity  in  the  law  relating  to  the  erection  of  building  in  the  area  of 
jurisdiction  of  the  local  authorities  for  the  prescribing  of  basic  standard  and  for  matters 
connected therewith. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  in  South  Africa,  they  have  enacted  the  National  Building 
Regulation  and  Building  Standard  Act  which  forms  the  basis  of  how  buildings  in  South 
Africa  should  be  constructed  and  developed  to  suit  human  habitation.  The  legislation 
becomes  enforceable  in  1985  and  later  was  published  by  the  South  African  Bureau  of 
Standards as SANS 10400 

To remain within the scope of the objectives of the Bill, I shall speak of the water 

issue. SANS 10400-R - stormwater disposal.  

“Property  owners  are  responsible  for  the  removal  of  stormwater  from  their 
property. They may not simply discharge excess water onto adjacent land or 
into the street unless this is permitted by neighbours and/or the local council or 
municipality”. 

The  law  makes  it  compulsory  for  the  applicant  of  a  building  permit  to  submit  a 
stormwater system design. The rational design of this system, if required, must be undertaken 
by  a  competent  person  involving  a  process  of  reasoning  and  calculation  and  which  may 
include  a  design  based  on  the  use  of  standard  or  other  suitable  documents.  A  competent 
person required for stormwater system must be a civil engineer who is registered in terms of 

 

103 

the  Engineering  Profession  Act  as  professional  engineer  or  professional  engineering 
technologist. Alternatively, this person may have a tertiary qualification in civil engineering.  

Before  I  conclude,  I  wish  to  raise  the  attention  of  the  Speaker  regarding  the 
documents which have been circulated.  When we look at the documents relative to the Bill, 
section 3 (a), we can read - 

“Section 27 of the principal Act is amended -  

(a) in subsection (1)(a), by deleting the words “No occupier” and replacing them 

by the words “No owner or occupier”;” 

But when we look at the document which was circulated relative to the Act as it is 

today, we can read - 

“27. Discharge of water on roads  

(1) (a) Occupiers of premises adjoining a road shall not cause surface water from 

the premises to flow on to any road or into (…).” 

If we apply the words of the Amendment, we shall read - 

“No  owner  or  occupier  of  premises  adjoining  a  road  shall  not  cause  surface  water 
from the premises to flow on to any road (…).” 

I  think  we  have  to  see.  Perhaps,  it  is  a  typing  error,  but  the  hon.  Minister  will 
investigate, and at Committee Stage we shall have to see about this amendment, Mr Deputy 
Speaker, Sir. 

To conclude, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it is high time for our laws to become more 
stringent  so  as  to  deter  and  prevent  defaults.  According  to  the  prevailing  law,  a  notice  is 
served on offenders and it takes a long time to remedy the situation. With the Amendment 
that  is  being  proposed,  the  Judge  in  Chambers  will  have  the  power  to  cause  the  remedial 
works  to  be  carried  out  by  the  offending  party.  Alternatively,  the  highway  authority  can 
undertake the remedial work and recover the cost incurred.  

On the other hand, although not within the scope of this Bill, it is time to enforce that 
all new building permit applications should contain a rain and stormwater system and ensure 
that it is constructed and functional before issuing an occupational permit. 

 

Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

104 

(Interruptions) 

(6.25 p.m.)  

The  Minister  of  Local  Government  (Dr.  A.  Husnoo):  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I 
would like first of all to congratulate my colleague, the hon. Minister of Public Infrastructure 
and Land Transport for coming up with this important piece of legislation. I believe it will 
certainly  contribute  in  enhancing  the  environment  for  the  well-being  of  our  citizens  in 
addition to mitigating the potential pollution problem with illegal discharge of water, soil and 
refuse on roads and roadside drains. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  as  the  House  may  be  aware,  the  local  authorities  and  the 
National Development Unit have been spending significant amount of money in construction 
and  maintenance  of  drains  across  the  island.  The  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development has announced in his Budget Speech for the Year 2015/2016 that provisions are 
being made for a total of Rs1.3 billion for priority drain works. Let me point out the fact that 
local  authorities  are  on  their  part  spending  around  Rs150  m.  on  a  yearly  basis  for  the 
construction,  care,  maintenance,  improvement  and  cleaning  of  all  drains  within  their 
jurisdiction areas. As a matter of fact, they have each set up a dedicated unit and established 
regular programme for the cleaning and maintenance of drains. In addition, a roving team of 
men from my Ministry is also providing assistance to local authorities for the cleaning and 
maintenance of drains as and when required and in case of emergency.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the House has been informed that the objective of this Bill is 
to give powers to the highway authority to prevent illegal discharge of water, soil or refuse 
from any private property on a road or into a road drain. We may be asking ourselves why is 
it so important to have such a piece of legislation? There are so many reasons to that as my 
colleague, the hon. Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport, has highlighted in 
his presentation of the Bill to the House. In fact, we do not often realise that ocean pollution 
originates  on  land.  80%  of  pollution  to  the  marine  environment  comes  from  land.  Water 
pollution also starts as air pollution which later on settles into waterways and oceans. Soil or 
slits from fields or construction sites discharge into waterways can harm wildlife habitats as 
well. 

 

105 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we are all aware that drains are intended to take rainwater 
straight  to  the  sea  to  avoid  flooding.  Drains  which  are  contaminated  with  waste  and  fluid 
which  pollute  the  neighbourhood  can  create  health  risks  for  children,  kill  marine  life  and 
contribute to localised flooding problems. Therefore, it is very important for us to ensure that 
efforts and investments put in our roads and drains infrastructure systems are resources well 
spent.  However,  increase  in  both  manpower  and  capital  resources  for  sustainable 
environmental improvement are not enough if the powers of the authorities are limited and 
the penalties do not discourage contraveners. It is high time for all Mauritians to be careful 
and to act in a responsible way especially when our living environment is at stake. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  from  past  experience  we  have  noted  that  one  of  the  main 
cause  of  our  drain  system  blockage  is  refuse  accumulation  other  than  illegal  discharge  of 
water  and  soil.  It  is  high  time  for  the  relevant  authorities  to  initiate  legal  actions  against 
contraveners.  Currently,  the  different  environmental  regulations  drafted  by  the  local 
authorities make provision for the imposition of fine up to Rs25,000 upon contraveners in the 
event they are found guilty. I strongly believe that this proposed Bill will no doubt entrust 
both  the  local  authorities  and  the  Road  Development  Authority  with  additional  power  to 
initiate necessary actions against owners and occupiers of premises adjoining any road who 
cause surface water, soil and refuse from the premise to flow onto the road drains. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we all know very well that whatever may be the amount of 
penalty fine imposed upon contraveners would not rectify the damage already done to our 
environment. It is worth noting that this Bill is making the necessary provision to take care of 
such situation by empowering the relevant local authorities to have access to the premises and 
to put an end to this kind of offence. Furthermore, the Amendment also makes provision for 
the authority to claim from the owner or the occupier, the expenses and the cost incurred in 
putting an end to such offences. We believe that this measure will act as a deterrent to these 
practices. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, let me highlight that citizens are the essential resource of a 
nation. It is the responsibility of the State to draft and enforce laws and regulations which aim 
at  protecting  and  improving  the  living  environment  of  its  citizens.  But  however,  laws  and 
regulations  alone  are  not  going  to  make  a  better  living  environment  for  citizens.  By  just 
improving legislation, would not guarantee, maintain, proper drains. People have to be made 
aware  that  they  have  got  a  role  to  play,  to  assume  their  responsibilities  which  can, 

 

106 

undoubtedly, help to keep our country clean. Acting as responsible citizens, would definitely 
contribute significantly towards a better living environment. 

We are confident that with the enactment of this Bill, followed by a public awareness 
campaign, the population will be more conscious of the powers which are being entrusted to 
the Highway Authority.  This will make people act in a more responsible manner. By doing 
so, we shall leave a much better living environment as a legacy for our children and the future 
generation, hopefully. 

Thank you for your attention, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Mohamed! 

(6.33 p.m.) 

Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port  Louis  East):  
Thank  you  very  much,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  I  have,  at  the  outset,  to  thank  the  hon. 
Minister to come up with such piece of legislation to this Assembly.  

I recall that this was, indeed, a piece of legislation that had been worked upon for some 
time  now  and  I  am  happy  to  note  that  the  hon.  Minister  has  continued  the  work  of  his 
predecessor  actually,  because  I  am  informed  that  the  excellent  and  lot  of  thought  that  has 
gone into the preparation of this Bill, precisely because of issues that had risen in the past and 
the difficulties that the  authorities faced in order to bring  a solution, to  take action and to 
prevent  any  continuing  harm  being  done  by  occupiers  and,  in  this  particular  case,  owners 
when water is allowed to come onto the road.   

However, allow me to say that I am in agreement with the Bill, and the following words 
that I am going to pronounce, do not in any way mean that I am against the Bill. I am only 
here to make certain remarks and tell certain suggestions that go in line with the excellent 
proposal that the hon. Minister has made. 

When one looks at the law, I am sure that anyone would agree that it is in the interest of 
any  Government  and  also  in  the  interest  of  the  public  to  be  a  centralisation  of  all 
administrative works or decisions that need to be taken. Imagine a situation where you have a 
Highway  Authority  -  as  is  the  case  nowadays  as  defined  under  the  Roads  Act  -  that  talks 
about the definition under Section 2 of what a road is, that talks about section 3 or section 4 
that talks about all the classification of the roads and which are the authorities responsible for 

 

107 

classified roads, for rural or urban roads. You have, therefore, a situation where you have the 
RDA responsible for classified roads and, according to law, you have a situation where you 
have the local councils responsible for other roads.  

Therefore,  this  is  far  from  the  centralisation  process  that  could  bring  order  and 
discipline.  In my view, it has been tried and tested. Other authorities such as the RDA or the 
local councils have all taken their share of responsibility in order to maintain roads, in order 
to inspect roads, in order to ensure that laws are implemented and do not simply remain as 
black  ink  on  a  white  page.  But  it  has  not  worked  and  I  believe  that  we  have,  Mr  Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, to be honest with ourselves that it has not worked. Even if all officers from the 
Local  Councils  or  the  Road  Development  Authority  have  the  best  of  intentions,  it  has  not 
given perfect results.  

Very often we hear that people from Local Councils may have the best of intentions 
and views, but a lot is left over because they thought at one point that it was a classified road 
and vice versa. Very often, I have come across people from the Municipal Councils saying: 
“We  were  not  aware.  We  thought  that  it  was,  in  fact,  a  classified  road  and  was  not  our 
responsibility, but was the responsibility of the  Road Development Authority.” What  I  am 
trying  to  get  at  here,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  is  as  follows:  there  is  no  point  in  having 
excellent piece of legislation and I am sure the hon. Minister would agree with me, if one 
cannot implement it, there lies the difficulties. It is true that we have to start somewhere. It is 
true that we have to, at least, put it on paper and give the tools to officers to implement, but 
tools  will  not  only  be  limited  to  laws.  Tools,  in  my  humble  view,  should  extend  to  the 
structure of the enforcement authority itself that must change and there will be no change if 
we continue to have the RDA on one side being the Highway Authority as well as the Local 
Authorities being the Highway Authority. 

Imagine a scenario where there was one Highway Authority - not two - with the same 
system of verification with proper teams structured and sent out for inspection, that there was 
one cahier des charges which they would adhere to with how does one verify and how does 
one enforce and how does one implement as opposed to two different types. We would have 
only one labour force that would be trained and qualified in order to give quality because this 
is precisely what this Government is proposing. This is precisely what the hon. Minister is 
proposing: quality and safety and security on our roads. But the question I ask is: can there be 
such quality?  Can there be uniformity? Can there be security? Can there be peace of mind if 

 

108 

we have more than one Highway Authority? In my view, I humbly suggest that I believe it 
could have been done this time that this Roads (Amendment) Act should also have had an 
amendment to section 2 where the Highway Authority should not be as it is defined at section 
4. A Highway Authority should be only one and centralised. That is the first point I would 
like to make because I would like to contribute to the work. I would like to contribute to the 
discipline that everyone of us would like to instill in the creation of a safe environment for 
the people of this country. 

Now,  whenever  you  have  only  one  authority,  it  is  easy  to  find  who  is  responsible. 
Whenever  you  have  only  one  authority,  it  is  easy  to  know  which  number  to  call  for  the 
repairs, it is easy to know which number to call and what office to visit in order to make a 
complaint.    It  is,  therefore,  in  my  humble  view,  once  again,  not  only  necessary  for 
implementation, but it is also necessary for members of the public to have a peace of mind as 
regards the authority responsible for the roads around them. I come from a Constituency, hon. 
Dr.  Husnoo,  the  Minister  of  Local  Government  comes  from  the  same  constituency.    Hon. 
Abbas-Mamode  also  is  here.  I  do  not  forget  him.  There  are  four  hon.  Members  from  my 
constituency  and  I  am  lucky,  I  guess.    Imagine  the  Constituency  we  come  from,  which  is 
Constituency No. 3.  When one looks at all the constructions that have happened over the 
years, there is no one line of buildings. Some have extended, some have come so close to the 
border of the road, so much so the Local Authority now - I guess, the hon. Minister may be 
did not think that one day he will be Minister of Local Government at the time when he was 
elected in 2005, but so be it, he is.  

Now he faces a difficult situation. How does one ensure that the Municipal Council of 
Port Louis carries out proper work for proper drains, when you dig one centimetre square and 
you end up with so many confusions with regard to what exactly is under there?  Telephone 
lines, water pipes, fibre optics, and there are no plans for it! I am sure the hon. Minister is 
aware of what I am saying.  There is the need, therefore, for one authority to ensure that there 
is a standard and not multiple types of standards; one for the classified roads and one for the 
roads under the responsibility of the local authority. 

There  is  an  issue  which  was  raised  earlier  on  by  hon.  Boissézon,  which  is  an 
interesting point. I, myself, saw that, but I have read the document that was circulated. To be 
honest and fair, I do not believe that the hon. Minister has commited any wrongdoing, neither 
has  the  State  Law  Office.  When  I  read  the  section  of  the  Act  which  clause  3  of  the  Bill 

 

109 

proposes to amend - I realise that what I am doing here is normally for the Minister to do, but 
just to be fair and not to play politics, I would like to say it - it is, in fact, most probably, a 
typing error.  Because at no time when one looks at the original law, does the word ‘not’ 
appear. When one looks at the original law, the word ‘not’ does not appear. Therefore, there 
would be no double negatives. Had it appeared, hon. Boissézon would have been totally right.  
There would have been the need to correct one of the negatives. So, that being said, I am of 
the view that this is an issue that could easily be sorted out. 

There is something else which I have come across, which I would like to bring to the 
attention  of  the  hon.  Minister.  It  is  the  following.    I  was  once  upon  a  time  a  Member  of 
Constituency No. 13. The hon. Member representing that constituency is here and also we 
were neighbours in those days to Constituency No. 11 and No. 12. I remember the days - and 
I  am sure  a lot of Memberes here would remember those days -  when there were  a lot of 
floodings in the south of the country. I am not talking about the time when it happened in 
Port Louis, but flooding, serious floodings in the south of the country. We are talking about 
l’Escalier, Camp Tagore, Trois Boutiques, Mare Tabac. Only recently, a few months ago, the 
same type of flooding occurred.  Whenever it occurred when I was Member of Parliament 
before 2010 - I was a Member of Parliament of Constituency No. 13 - the same words were 
spoken by the inhabitants of those constituencies. 

Hon.  Henry  would  remember  that  it  was  the  first  time  that  they  had  seen  such  a 
déluge, that they never expected the water to rise so fast, that they had lost their belongings, 
that they had lost their immovables, that they had lost their family treasures – not necessarily 
value in terms of money, but important for them emotionally – and the same thing keeps on 
repeating itself. 

It happened again at the beginning of the  year, if I am not mistaken, a few months 
back.  Even at Mare Tabac there have been floodings. But each and every time that those 
floodings occur, it is not simply because an inhabitant has blocked a drain. Very often, we 
find  it  so  easy  to  blame  this  inhabitant,  this Mr  or  Mrs  or  young  man  or  young  girl  who, 
through negligence, threw some platic bag here and then someone else with a plastic bag and 
another plastic bag and some of the rubbish and let it go into a drain from his property. We 
find it so easy to blame this person, this individual. But we forget, in actual fact, that in all 
three situations and more, Mr Deputy Speaker, the cause for floodings that we have seen and 
experienced - all Members in this august Assembly have seen it when their constituencies 

 

110 

have been flooded - is because the sugar estates that own wide expanse of land have gone 
through the process of mécanisation.  

When they have gone through mechanisation, they have ensured that the land could 
take such mechanisation, for example, for irrigation. They have ensured that natural drains 
that exist on those plots of land are covered up. The courses of natural drains are changed and 
that  is  why  it  creates  a  fertile  ground  -  I  am  not  here  talking  about  fertile  ground  for  the 
agricultural sense of the word - to carry the water to the roads and, from the roads, into the 
houses of inhabitants of those localities. It is not the first time that inhabitants have said that. 
I  remember  the  days  when  hon.  Henry  who  was  in  Government  together  with  us  for  five 
years almost put questions concerning Constituency No. 12 and the need for the construction 
of proper drains, which the previous Government carried out. 

I  am  happy  with  this  new  law  because  I  believe  that  now  we  have  to  address  this 
issue, the issue of how do we interact with the sugar estates, how do we call the sugar estates 
to act as responsible citizens. Yes, there is the need for mechanisation. Yes, there is the need 
to  produce  more  sugar.  Yes,  there  is  the  need  to  increase  the  revenue  in  terms  of  sugar 
revenue. Yes, the cane industry must be encouraged. Yes! But no! It cannot be at the expense 
of the inhabitants of the locality. It cannot be at the expense of those inhabitants, because I do 
not know of only sugar estate that has been called to reimburse all those families that have 
lost refrigerators, clothes, photograph albums, that have lost their livelihoods, that have seen 
them flow away in drains, not created by men, but drains of muddy water taking everything 
before  their  eyes.  Never  have  I  heard  of  a  sugar  estate  or  sugar  company  being  asked: 
“Listen,  let’s  sit  down,  let’s  go  for  arbitration,  let’s  find  out,  because  you  are,  indeed, 
responsible for having changed the topograhy of that land in the name of mechanisation and 
you have been one of the main causes of the flooding and damage to people’s livelihoods.” 

We are all on the same page, be it the Members of Governent and Members from the 
Opposition. We all do not want our countrymen to suffer from the consequences of flooding. 
Only recently, in a friendly country, a friend of Mauritius, France, there were more than 17 
deaths  and  so  many  disappeared;  a  flash  flood.  Imagine  a  country  so  industralised  and 
developed and advanced as the Republic of France, having to go through such trauma that 
they have called for a state of emergency! 

The times are such that everything is changing in terms of climate.  Times are such 
that  we  have  to  prepare  for  the  worst.  That  is  why  I  commend  and  congratulate  the  hon. 

 

111 

Minister for what he is coming forthwith. Just a last little reminder, a humble suggestion to 
think about, if not now, but in the months to come - not years - that we could centralise what 
we call a highway authority. I repeat it, it is for discipline, for there to be one standard and for 
there to be only one number to call and for there to be only one institution to blame if things 
go wrong. So, I thank everyone of  you for  your attention, and I say good luck to the hon. 
Minister. 

Thank you. 

Mr Dayal: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I move that the debate be now adjourned. 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Debate adjourned accordingly. 

ADJOURNMENT 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I beg to move that this Assembly 

do now adjourn to Tuesday 13 October 2015 at 11.30 a.m. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Mr Bodha rose and seconded. 

The Deputy Speaker: The House stands adjourned.  

(6.52 p.m.) 

MATTER RAISED 

ROAD - HIT & RUN ACCIDENTS 

Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne and Black River): Mr Deputy Speaker, 
Sir, I thank you for allowing me to raise this specific matter at Adjournment Time. I have 
given notice to the hon. Ag. Prime Minister. I shall be very brief.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, this morning, in the course of Questions addressed to the Ag. 
Prime Minister there was one question which dealt with the hit and run cases and the Ag. 
Prime Minister gave some very interesting and alarming information as well regarding cases 
of hit and run in our country. From the answer that he gave to the House, in fact, during the 
past two years and the first nine months of this year, that is, starting 2013, 2014 and up to 
September of this year, there have been 294 cases of hit and run in our country, among which 

 

112 

there  have  been  17  cases  of  fatal  accident.  Dix-sept  cas  de  mort  d’homme!  Mr  Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, this is quite alarming.  

The Ag. Prime Minister also, at the end of his reply, informed the House that some 
time back Government had announced the setting-up of an Insurance Industry Compensation 
Fund for the payment of compensation to persons suffering from personal injury in traffic, 
that is, victims of hit and run accidents, and that the regulations are being worked out and will 
be finalised soon. Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in fact, this was one the points of my intervention. 
It  is  the  hallmark  of  a  modern  and  democratic  society,  of  a  caring  society,  of  a  society 
empreint de solidarité to set up a scheme which will, in fact, enable this process of restorative 
justice when somebody has been the victim of a hit and run, a blameless citizen, an innocent 
citizen  being  the  victim  of  a  hit  and  run  and  where  the  driver  or  the  motor  car  vehicle 
involved in the accident is untraceable. So, it is good for the State to come up with a Scheme 
in order to restore justice to that innocent victim.  

In  fact,  in  many  countries  of  the  world,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  in  India  for  example, 
since 1988 such a scheme was introduced to protect the rights of road accident victims, where 
the  identity  of  the  motor  vehicle  or  the  tort  feaser  cannot  be  established.  In  India,  the 
compensation  is  made  from  a  Solace  Fund  which  is  contributed  by  the  General  Insurance 
Industry under an agreed formula. In the UK also, one can claim compensation from a Motor 
Insurance Bureau (MIB) if one is injured because of an uninsured or hit and run driver. So, 
my appeal to the hon. Ag. Prime Minister is to see to it that these regulations, or a piece of 
legislation, in fact, be finalised as soon as possible and be introduced urgently.  

I will also deal with another category of innocent and blameless victims, Mr Deputy 
Speaker,  Sir.  In  fact,  I  entitle  my  intervention  as  the  Criminal  Injuries  Compensation 
Authority.    It  concerns  the  advisability  of  setting  up  such  an  Authority.  This  is  a  scheme 
which,  in  fact,  deals  where  somebody,  a  blameless,  an  innocent  citizen  has  been  also  the 
victim of a crime of violence. For example, an innocent citizen is walking down the street and 
a hold-up takes place in a bank nearby and he is unfortunately injured in the process of that 
hold-up and he becomes a victim of a crime of violence. 

In the UK, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, there is an Act which was introduced since 1995, 
the Criminal Injuries Compensation Act, which set up a scheme therefore for that category of 
blameless victims, people who are injured in criminal cases, in crimes of violence and the law 
there defines crimes of violence, including a physical attack, a sexual assault, an arson and 

 

113 

even  a  threat;  and  the  law  sets  up  a  scheme  which  spells  out  on  what  basis  compensation 
should be calculated. It is a transparent scheme; the law provides the tariff which indicates 
each description of injury, the standard amount of compensation to be paid in respect of each 
specific  injury.  This  Authority  has  a  Chief  Executive  who  has  to  account  for  all  the 
disbursements for the sake of transparency, of course. It is a well-regulated scheme and it is 
even  approved  by  each  House  of  Parliament  in  the  UK.  Therefore,  the  persons  who  are 
eligible  for this  award, the conditions are that he must have been the victim of a criminal 
injury or a direct victim of a crime of violence committed in a relevant place. 

 So, this is the point of my intervention today, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, to appeal to 
the hon. Ag. Prime Minister to see to it that Regulations or a proper Bill come before this 
House in order to restore justice to the victims of hit and run accidents and also a Bill along 
the lines of the Criminal Injuries Compensation Act in the UK in order also to restore justice 
to those who have been victims of a violent crime, who are blameless and who are innocent.  

Thank you. 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I wish to thank the hon. Member 
for his intervention. As I mentioned this morning, since the beginning of the year, there have 
been 111 cases of hit and run, causing injury or death. There have been eight deaths of hit and 
run since the beginning of the year. I am informed as follows and I will read a statement that 
has been prepared, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  

The issue of compensation for criminal injuries is a complex matter which cannot be 
treated with levity. This policy has been adopted and implemented in several jurisdictions, 
including the United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand, and Trinidad and Tobago, as well in 
several  States  of  the  United  States.  However,  each  country  has  its  own  scheme  of 
compensating victims of criminal injuries under specific statutory provisions.  

Regarding the setting-up of such an authority or scheme in Mauritius, the House will 
appreciate that we are referring to a very complex issue and given its wide ramification and 
financial implications, it is proposed that the hon. Attorney General refers the matter to the 
Law Reform Commission under Section 5(2), of the Law Reform Commission Act. The Law 
Reform Commission may thereafter study all the implications thereof and, in the light of this 
report, Government would be in a better position to take a decision as to the most appropriate 
policy for Mauritius. I wish nevertheless to draw the attention of the House to the fact that 
Section 88, of the Insurance Act, provides that  -  

114 

 
“Subject  to  regulation  being  made  by  the  Minister  for  the  establishment  of  an 
insurance  industry  compensation  fund  for  the  payment  of  any  claims  in  respect  of 
risks situated in Mauritius as may be prescribed against an insurer licensed under this 
Act  remaining  unpaid  by  reason  of  insolvency  of  such  insurer,  subjects  to  such 
limitation,  restriction,  (...)  and  conditions  as  may  be  prescribed  and  payment  of 
compensation  to  persons  suffering  personal  injury  in  traffic  accidents  where  the 
tortfeasor  or  the  vehicle  which  caused  the  injury  is  untraceable  subject  to  such 
limitations and restrictions as may be prescribed”.  

As I have mentioned this morning, Mr Deputy Speaker, I had myself announced in 
my 2014 Budget that this Insurance Fund would be set up. And I am pleased to note that the 
regulations  have  been  prepared  and  have  been  forwarded  to  the  Ministry  of  Financial 
Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms and, hopefully, within the forthcoming 
weeks,  we  will  have  the  Insurance  Compensation  Fund  set  up,  as  I  mentioned,  with  a 
schedule of compensation depending on the type of injury or death, and, of course, also with 
a Seed Fund from Government and a levy on its insurance policy.  

So, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I hope that it should go some way towards alleviating the 
hardship  of  the  victims  and,  at  the  same  time,  as  I  mentioned,  the  Attorney  General  will 
forward  the  whole  issue  of  Criminal  Injuries  Compensation  Authority  to  the  Law  Reform 
Commission. 

Thank you. 

At 7.01 p.m. the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Tuesday 13 October 2015 

at 11.30 a.m. 

WRITTEN ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

 

BOIS MARCHAND CEMETERY – LARCENY 

(No.  B/621)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Bois 
Marchand Cemetery, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of 
Police, information as to the number of reported cases of profanation of tombs in the Chinese 
section thereof over the past two years, indicating the measures that will be taken to prevent 
the recurrence thereof. 

 
Reply: I presume the hon. Member is referring to the offence of “violating tomb”, as 

115 

provided for by Section 275 of the Criminal Code. 

I am informed by the Commissioner of Police that, over the last two years, no case of 
“violating tomb” at the Chinese section of the Bois Marchand Cemetery has been reported to 
the Police. 

However,  one  case  of  “damaging  property”  and  seven  cases  of  “larceny”  at  the 

Chinese section of the Bois Marchand Cemetery, have been reported to the Police. 

I  am  further  informed  by  the  Commissioner  of  Police  that,  policing  of  the  Bois 
Marchand  Cemetery  has  been  enhanced  through  sustained  mobile  patrols,  by  day  and  by 
night,  by  personnel  of  the  Terre  Rouge  Police  Station,  the  Divisional  Support  Unit,  the 
Emergency Response Service and the local CID, as well as through sensitisation campaigns. 

 

US DEPARTMENT OF STATE – TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT 
(No. B/622) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether he will state if he has taken cognizance of 
the Report on Trafficking in Persons 2015 of the US Department of State, and if so, indicate 
the measures that Government proposes to take to crack down the network of trafficking in 
persons, if any, in Mauritius. 

Reply:  On  28  July  2015,  the  Secretary  for  Foreign  Affairs  submitted  to  the  Prime 
Minister’s Office a copy of the extract of the Report on Trafficking in Persons 2015 relevant 
to Mauritius as released by the US Department of State. 

In the 2015 Report on Trafficking in Persons, the US Department of State has placed 
Mauritius under Tier 2 Watch List, which indicates that Mauritius does not fully comply with 
the minimum standards  for the  elimination of human trafficking, but is  making significant 
efforts to bring itself into compliance, and the report has made several recommendations in 
that respect. 

Since issues related to Trafficking in Persons such as child prostitution, child labour 
and brothel keeping are dealt with by different Ministries and Departments, the 2015 Report 
on Trafficking in Persons was circulated to them for their views and comments, which are 
now being examined to decide on the way forward.  It is proposed to contest certain aspects 
and findings of the Report which have not been substantiated.  Furthermore, the US Embassy 
will be consulted on the manner in which information is gathered for the preparation of the 
Report by the American authorities. 

116 

 
Some of the recommendations in the report are already being implemented.  In regard 
to  the  use  of  anti-trafficking  legislation  to  investigate  and  prosecute  trafficking  offences, 
concerned  officers  of  the  Police,  State  Law  Office  and  Office  of  the  Director  of  Public 
Prosecutions  are  being  trained  on  Trafficking  in  Persons  so  that  investigations  and 
prosecutions are made under the Combating of Trafficking in Persons Act of 2009.  Prior to 
2009, the law enforcement officers were investigating and prosecuting cases related to human 
trafficking  under  other  laws  such  as  the  Criminal  Code  Act  or  the  Child  Protection  Act.  
These  officers,  therefore,  require  relevant  training  to  be  able  to  interpret  and  enforce  the 
Combating of Trafficking in Persons Act. 

I am also informed that the Ministry of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and 

Training has reinforced its Special Migrant Workers Unit by two additional staff. 

I  am  further  informed  that  the  Ministry  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  & 
Family Welfare is working on a comprehensive policy and strategic plan for children.  The 
Police is also working in collaboration with international organisations such as INTERPOL to 
gather information and intelligence for offences, including those related to human trafficking, 
having an international dimension. 

To ensure proper  coordination, an inter-Ministerial Committee will be set up under 
the  chairmanship  of  the  Attorney-General  and  comprising  the  hon.  Minister  of  Social 
Integration  and  Economic  Empowerment,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child 
Development  and  Family  Welfare,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations, 
Employment and Training, the Secretary for Home Affairs, the Commissioner of Police and 
the  Director  of  the  Public  Prosecutions  for  a  concerted  response  to  issues  related  to 
Trafficking in Persons including child trafficking and forced labour. 

 
 

SUBOXONE – DRUG SUBSTITUTION THERAPY 

(No.  B/623)  Dr  Z.  Joomaye  (Second  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the proposed introduction of 
Suboxone  as  a  new  substitution  therapy  in  replacement  of  Methadone,  he  will  state  if 
amendments will be introduced to the Schedule of the Dangerous Drugs Act to cater therefor. 

 

(Withdrawn) 

 

 

117 

NINE YEAR SCHOOLING PROJECT - IMPLEMENTATION 

(No.  B/644)  Mr  D.  Ramful  (Third  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 
Research  whether,  in  regard  to  the  proposed  implementation  of  the  Nine  Year  Continuous 
Basic Education Project, she will state the policy being envisaged by her Ministry concerning 
private tuition at primary school level. 

Reply:    I  wish  to  draw  attention  of  the  House  that  the  Nine  Year  Schooling  (NYS) 
project being introduced in the context of educational reforms will bring in a transformation 
of our current educational structure and the accompanying measures are likely to bring about 
a systemic change which would lay emphasis not only on the cognitive development, but also 
on the integral development of the Mauritian student.  

This  is  a  holistic  and  integrated  approach,  Madam  Speaker,  which  will  involve  a 
paradigm shift, a change in the mindset of people. The focus will be on the pupil’s attainment 
and achievement. 

The pupils would be provided with the opportunity to develop their talents, multi-skills 
and  their  personality  in  a  holistic  manner.    The  whole  evaluation  process  itself  will  be 
revisited.  The  new  mode  of  assessment  will  allow  a  better  evaluation  of  their  cognitive 
development and recognition of their talents and skills as well.   

Another  important  pillar  of  the  reform  is  the  introduction  of  the  remediation.  The 
implementation  of  the  remediation  system  right  from  Grade  1  will  allow  the  early 
identification  of  any  pupil  showing  learning  difficulties  and  the  provision  of  pedagogical 
support  in  a  timely  manner  helping  the  latter  to  overcome  his/her  difficulties.  “Cela  nous 
permettra de mieux encadrer les élèves et faciliter l’apprentissage”. Putting the pupil back 
on the right track in a timely manner through remediation during his or her schooling will in 
the long run reduce the dependence on private tuition. 

Moreover, this new system would entail an elimination of the A+ grade. 
The National schools will no longer admit students to Grade 7. 
The admissions to secondary schools will be done on a Regional basis. All students will 
get the opportunity to progress to Grade 7 after the Grade 6 exams which will culminate into 
an achievement certificate, known as the Primary School Achievement Certificate (PSAC).  

Pupils  will  thus  be  learning  in  a  more  conducive,  competition  -free  environment 
without the intense pressure or stress that currently exists. Parents would themselves realise 
that, with this new learning set up where the child’s  cognitive and meta cognitive faculties 
will be enhanced, private tuition will find less and less space.  

 

118 

We are confident that private tuition will by itself lose its 'raison d’être’ in the near 
future. The Ministry, therefore, does not intend to come forward with a new policy in regard 
to  private  tuition  in  the  Primary  sub-sector  as  we  firmly  believe  that  in  the  long  run  this 
demand for private tuition will subside on its own. 

We are coming up with a system which will relieve the undue stress that the Mauritian 
students have been subject to for decades now, it is the duty of one and all, all stakeholders, 
decision makers, heads of schools, parents and educators to cooperate and make this happen. 

 

CIRCULAR MIGRATION PROGRAMMES - BENEFICIARIES 

(No.  B/645)  Mr  D.  Ramful  (Third  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and  Training  whether,  in 
regard to the Circular Migration Programmes to which Mauritius is a party, he will in each 
case, state the – 

countries concerned therewith;  

(a) 
(b)  duration thereof, and  
(c)  number of Mauritian nationals who have benefitted thereunder. 
Reply:  Mauritius  became  a  member  of  the  International  Organisation  for  Migration 
(IOM) in 2006.  In collaboration with the IOM, the Government is implementing the Circular 
Migration  Programmes  which  aim  at  identifying  employment  and  training  opportunities 
abroad for Mauritian nationals.  

In regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed that Mauritius has circular migration 

programmes with Canada, France and Italy.   

In  regard  to  the  circular  migration  programme  with  Canada,  I  am  informed  that  the 
programme  started  in  2007  with  the  assistance  of  the  IOM  (Mauritius)  which  sought 
employment opportunities for Mauritian nationals for placement in Canadian enterprises in 
the following sectors: food processing, cleaning, maintenance and repairs of heavy vehicles, 
hairdressing, and welding.   

As  regards  the  circular  migration  programme  with  France,  I  am  informed  that  the 
bilateral  agreement  was  signed  in  September  2008  and  the  agreement  came  into  effect  in 
September 2010 following the completion of the ratification procedures on both sides.  This 
agreement  contains  a  list  of  occupations/sectors  in  which  Mauritian  nationals  may  be 
employed in France and this includes construction, catering, agriculture and fisheries sectors. 

 

119 

Regarding  the  circular  migration  programme  with  Italy,  I  am  informed  that  the 
agreement  was  signed  in  September  2012.    The  programme  aims  at  providing  training  to 
Mauritian nationals in the skills required to facilitate their placement after training. 

In  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  the  circular  migration 
programme with the IOM in respect of Canada is ongoing. The bilateral agreements between 
Mauritius and France and Italy are for an indeterminate period.  

In regard to part (c) of the question, I am informed that so far a total of 489 Mauritian 
nationals have been sent to Canada and six to France.  100 Mauritian nationals, including 21 
from Rodrigues have benefitted from the training programme in Italy for the period 2013 to 
2015.  Under the circular migration programme with Italy, a first group of 31 Mauritian agro-
processors benefitted from a two-week training and placement programme at the Institute of 
Mediterranean Agronomy in Bari, Italy, in October 2013.  A second batch of 69 Mauritians 
benefitted from a two-week training programme in the Fisheries and Tourism sectors in June 
this year. 

We continue to work closely with IOM to explore employment opportunities for our 

Mauritian nationals abroad. 

 

ROAD ACCIDENTS (FATAL) 

(No. B/646) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to 
fatal road accidents, he will state the number thereof which have occurred between the period 
– 

(a) 

(b) 

January 2015 up to the  time when the speed  cameras have become operational 
again and the number thereof which have occurred since then up to 30 September 
2015, and  
January 2014 to 30 September 2014. 

(Withdrawn) 

 
 
 
 

 

120 

VEHICLES - SMOKE EMISSION 

(No. B/647) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and 
Beach Management whether, in regard to the Survey on Vehicular Emissions and Capacity 
Building on Emission Testing Project of his Ministry for which smoke meters, sound level 
meters and axle weighbridge were procured under the Maurice Ile Durable Fund in 2013, he 
will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Police de l’Environnement, information as 
to the number of interventions it has conducted in relation thereto, since January 2015 to date, 
indicating the outcome thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

IMPASSE RAOUL RIVET STREET, PORT LOUIS – RESURFACING 

(No. B/648) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the Impasse Raoul 
Rivet Street in Constituency No. 2, Port Louis South and Port Louis Central, he will, for the 
benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Municipal  Council  of  Port  Louis,  information  as  to 
when the “2014 approved in principle” works to be undertaken thereat in 2015 to the tune of 
Rs192,000 and Rs150,000 respectively will be carried out.  

Reply: I am informed by the Municipal City Council of Port Louis that a decision was 
taken in 2014 to include the project for the resurfacing of Impasse Raoul Rivet and Raoul 
Rivet Street estimated to cost Rs192,000 and Rs150,000 respectively in Local Development 
Fund 2015. 

I am further informed that since the Local Development Fund 2015 does not cater for 
road  projects,  the  resurfacing  of  these  roads  has  been  kept  in  abeyance  and  will  be 
implemented by the Municipal City Council of Port Louis subject to availability of funds.  

MRA - CUSTOMS DEPARTMENT – VACANCIES 

(No. B/649) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the Customs 
Department,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Mauritius  Revenue 
Authority,  information  as  to  the  reasons  why  there  has  been  a  reduction  of  the  personnel 
thereof. 

121 

 
Reply: I am informed by the Mauritius Revenue Authority (MRA) that there has not 
been  any  reduction  in  the  personnel  of  the  Customs  Department  since  December  2014  to 
date.  

However, there are currently 612 officers in post at the Customs Department on an 

establishment of 701, resulting in 89 vacancies. 

Action has already been initiated to fill those vacancies. The posts of Trainee Custom 
Officers  were  advertised  in  April  2015.  Written  examinations  were  held  on  19  September 
2015 and the selection process is expected to be completed shortly. The successful candidates 
are expected to be in post at MRA in January 2016. 

 

ALLIED HEALTH PROFESSIONS BILL - INTRODUCTION 

(No.  B/650)  Dr.  Z.  Joomaye  (Second  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the proposed 
introduction of the Allied Health Professions Bill to regulate the activities of chiropractors, 
physiotherapists, psychologists, speech therapists, nutritionists, dietitians, phytotherapists and 
homeopathy practitioners, he will state where matters stand. 

 

(Withdrawn) 

 

BLUE ECONOMY - JOB CREATION 

(No.  B/651)  Mr  G.  Lesjongard  (Second  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and  Outer 
Islands whether, in regard to the blue economy, he will state if a Blue Growth Study has been 
conducted to - 

(a) assess the impact thereof on growth and job creation potential and the dynamics 
improvements  and 

technology 

for  research  and  development 
innovations, and  

to  deliver 

(b) identify marine and maritime resources and the potential of each activity thereof. 

 

(Withdrawn) 

 
 

 

122 

 

ECONOMY - ENTITIES - COLLAPSE 

(No.  B/652)  Mr  G.  Lesjongard  (Second  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River) 
asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, following the collapse of 
the  former  British  American  Insurance  Co.  (Mtius)  Ltd.  which  has  warranted  the 
disbursement of substantial funds by Government, he will state the measures taken to identify 
any other “too-big-to fail” entity in Mauritius which would, in case of collapse, be disastrous 
to  the  Mauritian  economy,  indicating  the  remedial  measures  envisaged,  if  any,  in  relation 
thereto. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY - GOODS & SERVICES - PAYMENT 

(No.  B/653)  Mr  G.  Lesjongard  (Second  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
construction industry, he will state if Government will consider the introduction of a Building 
and  Construction  Industry  Security  of  Payment  Bill  with  the  objective  to  safeguard  the 
interests of the contractors, of the subcontractors and of the consultants thereof for the timely 
payment in respect of the goods and services provided. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

RIVIÈRE DES ANGUILLES & SOUILLAC – WATER SUPPLY 

(No.  B/654)  Mr  B.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in 
regard  to  water,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Central  Water 
Authority, information as to –  

(a) where matters stand as to the Rivière des Anguilles Dam Project, and  
(b)  if  an  upgrading  of  the  Bois  Cheri  Water  Filtration  Plant  is  being  considered, 
having regard to the irregular supply thereof in Constituency No. 13, Rivière des 
Anguilles and Souillac.  

Reply:  With  regard  to  part  (a),  the  hon.  Member  may  refer  to  my  reply  to 
Parliamentary Question No. B/31 of 10 February 2015 on Rivière des Anguilles Dam Project.  
Following  the  Expression  of  Interest  launched  in  November  2014,  the  Central 
Procurement  Board has  shortlisted nine firms for the provision of consultancy services for 
design review, preparation of bid documents and supervision of works. 

 
My Ministry is currently finalising the Request for Proposal document which should 

123 

be issued by the end of 2015, after seeking all necessary clearances. 

As regards part (b) of the question, the Central Water Authority informs me that the 
Bois Cheri Water Treatment Plant, which was upgraded in November 2011, supplies water to 
the regions of Bois Cheri, Grand Bois and part of La Flora where water supply is satisfactory.  
As regards, Rivière des Anguilles and Souillac, they are supplied by Rivière du Poste 
treatment plant which receives water from direct abstractions from Rivière des Anguilles.  As 
water supply is disrupted during heavy rain, the CWA will upgrade the Treatment Plant to 
treat muddy water.  Works are expected to start in 2016. 

With the construction of the Rivière des Anguilles dam, scheduled to be completed by 

January 2021, water supply will be improved in the South. 

 

CEB – DIESEL POWER PLANTS - CONTRACTS 

(No.  B/655)  Mr  B.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in 
regard to the diesel power plants in mainland Mauritius and in Rodrigues, he will, for the 
benefit of the House, obtain from the Central Electricity Board, information as to the number 
of contracts awarded in relation thereto over the period 2004 to 2014, indicating in each case 
the –  

(a) name of the contractor therefor, and  
(b) contract value thereof.  
 
Reply: I am tabling the information. 

 

BIO-FARMING DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY -  IMPLEMENTATION  

(No. B/656) Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security whether, in regard to the implementation of a 
proposed Bio-Farming Development Strategy, as highlighted in the Budget Speech 2015, he 
will state where matters stand. 

Reply:   The need to boost Bio-Farming and other forms of natural farming has been 
strongly  canvassed  in  the  Government  Programme  2015-2019  as  well  as  in  the  Budget 
Speech 2015-2016. 

Technically,  Bio-Farming  encompasses  Natural  Farming,  Zero-Budget  Natural 
Farming,  Permaculture,  Organic  Farming  and  even  Smart  Agriculture.  By  promoting  the 

 

124 

concept of Bio-Farming, Government is in fact encouraging farmers to gradually shift from 
conventional agriculture which relies heavily on chemical inputs such as mineral fertilisers 
and  synthetic  pesticides  with  a  view  to  producing  high  quality  and  nutritious  food  free  of 
harmful  chemicals  and  reducing  risks  of  environmental  damage  associated  with  heavy 
reliance on the use of such products. 

The  House  will  appreciate  that  it  will  be  very  difficult  for  planters  to  shift  from 
traditional agriculture to bio-farming overnight. My Ministry is finalising a Strategy Paper for 
the  Agriculture  Sector  for  period  2015-2019,  whereby  a  Strategy  for  Bio-Farming 
Development  is  being  proposed.  This  Strategy  comprises  three  levels  of  intervention  to 
encourage the shift from conventional agricultural production to bio-farming systems. These 
are - 

(a)  Upgrading  of  conventional  production  practices  through  the  adoption  of  Good 
Agricultural Practices and compliance initially with MAURIGAP standards for the 
local market and eventually Global Gap standards for the export market; 

(b)  Smart  Agriculture  Initiatives,  that  is  promotion  of  judicious  and  rational  use  of 

agricultural inputs; 

(c) Bio/Natural Farming which is the systematic use of natural inputs such as ruminant 

waste for the production of bio-fertilisers; and 

(d) Organic Farming which is the ultimate production system targeted through a proper 
system  of  certification  that  would  meet  international  norms  and  standards  in 
compliance  with  International  Federation  for  Organic  Agriculture  Movement 
(IFOAM)  

In  line  with  these  interventions,  a  number  of  actions  have  been  initiated  by  my 

Ministry, namely - 

(i) A Technical Committee has been set up at the level of my Ministry in May 2015 to 
work  out  the  modus  operandi  for  the  implementation  of  bio-production  projects, 
norms and standards for bio-production, certification of projects and Bio-Farming 
Development Certificate.  

(ii) To encourage farmers to adopt bio-farming practices and to encourage consumers to 
use bio-products, these have to comply with international bio-norms and standards. 
My Ministry is working in close collaboration with the Mauritius Standards Bureau 
for the preparation of appropriate standards including bio-fertilisers standards. 

 (iii)In addition, my Ministry has launched an Expression of Interest for the setting up 
of a Certification Body for Green Agriculture Certification of agricultural produce. 

 

125 

This Certification Body will ensure, in the first instance, that planters follow good 
agricultural  practices.  At  a  later  stage,  this  will  be  extended  to  bio/organic 
certification  

(iv)  An awareness programme has been developed whereby the farming community is 
being  sensitised  on  benefits  of  bio-farming.  A  National  Workshop  on  Zero 
Budget  Natural  Farming  was  launched  by  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  on  05 
September 2015. This workshop was followed by a training programme in both 
Mauritius and Rodrigues.  As at date, 915 farmers have already been trained on 
this new natural farming system. I am informed that this natural farming concept 
is an intermediary step to proper organic farming system. 

(v). My Ministry has already released nine Arpents of State Land at Bois Marchand and 
Arsenal for the setting up of demonstration plots to kick start bio-farming projects. 
These nine Arpents of land will shortly be allocated to Cooperative Societies who 
are willing to embark in such projects, following an Expression of Interest. 

(vi)  My  Ministry  in  collaboration  with  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development  is  currently  working  on  a  bio-farming  development  certificate  as 
well  as  on  a  number  of  other  incentives  to  encourage  farmers  to  shift  from 
conventional  agricultural  practices 
to  bio-farming.  In  parallel,  Research 
Programmes are being elaborated to develop best agricultural practices as well as 
alternatives  to  synthetic  agro-chemicals  to  ensure  the  implementation  of  bio-
farming projects.  

through  a  Technical  Cooperation  Project  for 

.(vii)  Technical  assistance  has  also  been  obtained  from  the  Food  and  Agriculture 
Organisation  (FAO) 
the 
implementation of the project “Support for the development of organic farming 
and institutional capacity  building in Mauritius” As per this project, technical 
assistance  to  the  tune  of  USD  352,000  has  been  obtained  inter  alia  for  the 
conduct of an assessment on the current status of organic agriculture and value 
chain  constraints  of  organic  products,  identification  of  priority  organic  crops 
and pilot zones and preparation of an Organic Agriculture Bill. This project will 
be  implemented  shortly  once  experts  have  been  identified  by  the  FAO.  The 
recruitment of a National Project Coordinator is currently under way to facilitate 
the project implementation and ensure effective liaison and cooperation between 
the different stakeholders and the international consultants. . 

 

126 

(viii) The Chemical Fertilisers Control Act 1980 is being reviewed by my Ministry and 

will be replaced by a New Fertilisers Act so as to also cater for bio-fertilisers  

The  implementation  of  this  project  involves  a  number  of  stakeholders  and  to  ensure 
proper and effective coordination, two Committees have been set up, one at the level of my 
Ministry  and  a  second  one  at  the  level  of  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development.  

With the strategy that has been developed, I am confident that we are on the right track 

and the first results will be visible in the near future.  

 

 

 

 

 

PORT LOUIS SOUTH & PORT LOUIS CENTRAL – NDU PROJECTS 

(No.  A/5)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  Constituency  No.  2,  Port 
Louis  South  and  Port  Louis  Central,  he  will  state  the  projects  undertaken  thereat  by  the 
National Development Unit over the period January 2015 to date, indicating in each case the 
– 

(a) 
(b) 

nature thereof, and 
cost thereof. 

Reply: No projects were undertaken by the National Development Unit (NDU) for 
period January to June 2015.  The reason for same was that the new Government decided to 
effect a "constat des lieux" in the first instance, given that the NDU had previously awarded 
contracts well beyond its budget and executing capacity. 

For this Financial Year, to circumvent problems encountered previously, the NDU, in 
consultation with the relevant Parliamentary Private Secretary has prepared a list of projects 
to be implemented in Constituency No. 2 and same has been approved by Cabinet. 

The list of projects is placed in the Library. 

PORT LOUIS SOUTH & PORT LOUIS CENTRAL – LARCENY 

(No.  A/6)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the offence of larceny, he 
will , for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to 

 

127 

the  number  of  reported  cases  thereof  having  been  committed  in  Constituency  No.  2,  Port 
Louis South and Port Louis Central over the period January 2015 to date, indicating – 

(a) 
(b) 

(c) 

arrests effected in connection therewith, and 
cases thereof which have been prosecuted and – 

the aggregate estimated value of the stolen items; 
the number of – 
(i) 
(ii) 
if consideration will be given for – 
(i) 
(ii) 

the installation of additional Closed Circuit Television cameras, and 
an increase in Police patrols thereat. 

Reply: In regard to parts (a) and (b) of the question, the Commissioner of Police has 

informed that, over the period January 2015 to date – 

(i) 

(ii) 

323 cases of larceny committed in Constituency No. 2, Port Louis South and 
Port Louis Central have been reported to Police; 
the aggregate value of the stolen items have been estimated at Rs9,041,663; 
and 
(iii) 
68 persons have been arrested, out of whom, 21 persons have been prosecuted. 
Regarding  part  (c)  of  the  question,  the  Commissioner  of  Police  has  informed  that 
installation of additional CCTV cameras in the region concerned is not presently envisaged, 
in view of the fact that all the identified crime prone areas and red spots are equipped with 
164 CCTV cameras. Such zones are determined according to the population density of the 
area,  the  prevailing  crime  rate  thereat  and  the  intensity  of  commercial  activities,  amongst 
others. 

Furthermore, on a daily basis, Police carry out regular foot and mobile patrols in the 
region.    Regular  Police  are  also  assisted  by  the  Emergency  Response  Service,  Divisional 
Support  Unit,  CID,  Divisional  Traffic  Police  and  Field  Information  Officers.    Besides, 
whenever the need arises, the Special Support Unit and Special Mobile Force are deployed to 
ensure public safety and public order. 

 

TRANQUEBAR – FOOTBALL GROUND 

(No.  A/7)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Youth  and  Sports  whether,  in  regard  to  the  football 
playground at Tranquebar, in Port Louis, he will state –  

(a) the construction costs thereof;  

128 

 
(b) the scheduled opening date thereof, and  
(c)  if  consideration  will  be  given  for  the  construction  of  changing  rooms,  shower 

rooms and toilets thereat.  

Reply: The project for the construction of a football ground at Tranquebar is being 

undertaken by the National Development Unit (NDU) of the Prime Minister’s Office. 

From  information  submitted  by  the  NDU  of  PMO,  the  project  consists  of  the 

following three phases – 

(i) 

(ii) 
(iii) 

earth  works,  masonry  walls,  construction  of  French  drains,  levelling  sand 
turfing; 
fencing and fixing of gates, and 
lighting of football ground. 

NDU has informed this Ministry that the contract for Phase I was awarded to Modern 
Jurassic Building and Construction Ltd on 07 November 2012 for the sum of Rs3,957,328.00 
(VAT inclusive). The starting date was scheduled for 10 January 2013 with a completion date 
of 10 June 2013. However, the contract was terminated on 30 July 2014 due to delays and 
non-performance on the part of the contractor. As a result, the levelling and turfing of the 
football ground remained outstanding. 

The scope of work for outstanding works, that is levelling and turfing of the football 
ground  is  being  finalised.  It  is  envisaged  that  work  order  would  be  allocated  to  existing 
contractor before end of October and the works completed before end of December 2015. 

As regards Phase II of the project, NDU awarded the contract to Safety Construction 
Co. Ltd on 01 August 2014 and the works were completed on 27 February 2015 for the sum 
of Rs7,095,636.60 (VAT inclusive). 

Phase  III  of  the  project,  that  is,  lighting  of  the  football  ground  will  be  considered 

during the next Financial Year. 

As regards part (b) of the question, NDU has informed that on completion of the three 
phases  of  the  project,  the  site  would  be  handed  over  to  the  Ministry  of  Youth  and  Sports 
which will decide on the opening date. 

Regarding  part  (c)  of  the  question,  NDU  has  informed  that  no  provision  has  been 
made for the construction of changing rooms, shower rooms and toilets in the project. Once 
this Ministry would take over the site, consideration would be given for the provision of these 
facilities thereat. 

 

 

129 

WORKFARE PROGRAMME - JOB PLACEMENT 

(No.  A/8)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and  Training 
whether, in regard to the Workfare Programme, he will state the –  

(a) admission criteria for registration thereunder and;  
(b)  number  of  workers  who  have  registered  thereunder  since  January  2015  to  date, 

indicating the;  
(i) aggregate amount of Transition Unemployment Benefits paid out thereto;  
(ii) training or re-skilling provided thereto, and  
(iii) number thereof who have obtained a job placement thereafter. 

 
 
Reply: The Workfare Programme was established in February 2009. As regards part 
(a) of the question, according to the provisions of Part IX of the Employment Rights Act, a 
worker, other than a migrant worker, may join the Workfare Programme where - 

(a) 

(b) 
(c) 
(d) 

(e) 

(f) 

he reckons  continuous employment on  a  full-time basis on a determinate or 
indeterminate contract of employment with the same employer for a period of 
at least 180 days;  
he has contributed/ought to have contributed to the National Pension Scheme; 
the determinate contract has come to an end; 
his employment has been terminated on one of the following grounds - 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii)  economic,  technological,  structural  or  similar  nature  affecting  the 

ill-treatment by the employer; 
failure on the part of the employer to pay wages due; 

enterprise; 

poor performance and; 

(iv)  misconduct; 
(v) 
(vi)  without any justification; 
he has not been paid any compensation/severance allowance by his employer, 
and 
he has not reached the retirement age. 

As regards part (b) of the question, the requested information for period January to 30 

September 2015 is at table below.  

 

 

130 

Statistics for Workfare Programme 

  

(b)  No.  of  workers  registered  for  the  Workfare 
Programme 

(i)    Amount  paid  as  Transition  Unemployment 
Benefit for period January 2015 to August 2015 

(ii) No. of worker who opted for Training and re-
skilling  
No. of workers provided with training 

(iii)    No.  of  workers  who  have  opted  for  Job 
Placement 
No.  of  workers  who  have  obtained  a 
placement 

job 

 

2015 (January-September) 

Male 

2602 

Female 

Total 

1223 

3825 

Rs 194,427,467 (inclusive of 

applications prior to January 2015 and still 

under payment) 

69 

151 

82 
 

 
 

Nil 

(Training not yet 
started) 

2249 
 

392 

1056 

140 

 

3305 
 
532 

