 

 

 

No. 35 of 2015 

1 

 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

 

TUESDAY 20 OCTOBER 2015 

 

 

 

 

 
 

2 

CONTENTS 

 

PAPERS LAID 

QUESTIONS (Oral) 

MOTION 

STATEMENTS BY MINISTER 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

BILLS (Public) 

ADJOURNMENT 

QUESTIONS (Written) 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 
KCMG, QC  
Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 
GCSK  
Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 
Communications 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo, GCSK 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 
Utilities 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 
Sinatambou 
Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 
Perraud 
Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 

Integration 

and  Economic 

of 
Minister 
Empowerment 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 
International Trade 
Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 
Family Welfare 
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance, 
Institutional  Reforms,  Minister 
Technology, 
Communication and Innovation 
Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 

of 

 

Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, 
QPM 
Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 
Cheong, MSK 
Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 

4 

Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 
Institutions 
Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands 
Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 
Disaster and Beach Management  
Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms 

Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and 
Training 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Gopall, Mr Navin (Temporary Transfer to 
RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 35 of 2015 

 

Sitting of 20 October 2015 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 

7 

PAPERS LAID 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table - 
 
A.   

Prime Minister’s Office – 

Certificate of Urgency in respect of the following Bills (In Original) - 

(a)  
(b)  

(c)  

 

(d)  
(e)  
(f)   

(g)  
(h)  
(i)   
(j)   
(k)  
(l)   

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

The Supplementary Appropriation (2014) Bill (No. XVII of 2015). 
The  Arabic-Speaking  Union  (Amendment)  Bill  (No.  XVIII  of 
2015). 
The  Bhojpuri-Speaking  Union  (Amendment)  Bill  (No.  XIX  of 
2015). 
The Chinese-Speaking Union (Amendment) Bill (No. XX of 2015). 
The Creole-Speaking Union (Amendment) Bill (No. XXI of 2015). 
The  Sanskrit-Speaking  Union  (Amendment)  Bill  (No.  XXII  of 
2015). 
The English-Speaking Union Bill (No. XXIII of 2015). 
The Hindi-Speaking Union Bill (No. XXIV of 2015). 
The Marathi-Speaking Union Bill (No. XXV of 2015).  
The Tamil-Speaking Union Bill (No. XXVI of 2015). 
The Telugu-Speaking Union Bill (No. XXVII of 2015). 
The Urdu-Speaking Union Bill (No. XXVIII of 2015). 

 
B.    Ministry of Finance and Economic Development - 

(a)  

(b)  

 

The  Annual  Report  of  the  Permanent  Resident  Investment 
Fund for the year ended 31 December 2014. 

The  Public  Procurement  (Amendment)  Regulations  2015. 
(Government Notice No. 198 of 2015).  

(c)  

 

Estimates of Supplementary Expenditure (2014) of 2015. 

 
C.    Ministry of Health and Quality of Life 

The  Report  of  the  Director  of  Audit  on  the  Financial  Statements  of  the 
Mauritius Institute of Health for the year ended 31 December 2014. 

8 

 
 
D.    Ministry of  Local Government  – 

(a)    Mauritius  Fire  and  Rescue  Service  (Special  Assistance)  Regulations 

2015. (Government Notice No. 197 of 2015).  

(b)    Municipal  Town  Council  of  Beau  Bassin-Rose  Hill  (Street  Naming) 

Regulations 2015. (Government Notice No. 200 of 2015) 

(c)   District Council of Moka (Fees, Dues and other Charges for Classified 
 
Trades)  (Amendment  No.  5)  Regulations  2015.  (Government  Notice 
No. 201     of 2015). 

(d)   District Council of Moka (Fees, Dues and other Charges for Classified 
 
Trades)  (Amendment  No.  6)  Regulations  2015.  (Government  Notice 
No. 202     of 2015). 

 
E.    Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection  – 

The  Rodrigues  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Price  of  Taxable  and  
Non-Taxable Goods) (Amendment No. 27) Regulations 2015. (Government 
Notice No. 199 of 2015) 

 
F.    Ministry  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 

Reform, Ministry of Technology, Communication and Innovation – 

(a)  The  Securities 

Issuers) 

 
(Amendment) Rules 2015. (Government Notice No. 203 of 2015).  

(Disclosure  Obligations  of  Reporting 

(b)  The Securities (Public Offers) (Amendment) Rules 2015. (Government 

 
Notice No. 204 of 2015). 

 
G.    Ministry of  Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions 

– 

The Annual Reports 2012 and 2013 of the Sugar Industry Labour Welfare 
Fund. 

 
 

 
 

9 

ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

ELECTORAL REFORM 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P.  Bérenger)  (by Private Notice)  asked the Rt. 
hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Ruling of the United Nations Human 
Rights Committee in 2012 following the complaint by ‘Rézistans ek Alternativ’ regarding the 
non-compliance by Mauritius with the International Covenant on Political and Civil Rights, 
he will state –  

(a)  where matters stand at the level of the Committee, as at to date, and  

(b)  how  Government  proposes  to  follow  up  on  the  said  Ruling,  indicating  if  an 
electoral reform Bill with ‘une dose de proportionnelle’ and to do away with the 
obligation  imposed  on  every  candidate  at  general  elections  to  declare  the 
community  to  which  he  or  she  claims  to  belong  will  be  introduced  and,  if  so, 
when. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, as the House is aware, prior to the last General 
Elections,  every  candidate  at  any  general  election  was  required  to  declare  his  community, 
pursuant to section 3(1) of the First Schedule to the Constitution. 

In  2007,  the  political  party  “Rezistans  Ek  Alternativ”  challenged  the  above 

requirement before the United Nations Human Rights Committee (UNHRC). 

The  United  Nations  Human  Rights  Committee  (UNHRC)  concluded  that  the 
requirement of mandatory  classification of a  candidate for a  general election constituted a 
violation  of  Article  25  of  the  International  Covenant  on  Civil  and  Political  Rights.    The 
United Nations Human Rights Committee (UNHRC) also reminded that Mauritius was under 
an  obligation  to  provide  the  complainants  with  an  effective  and  enforceable  remedy  and 
avoid similar violations in the future. 

 

This is precisely what Government is in the process of doing. 

10 

 
 
In  December  2011,  following  a  Judgment  of  the  Judicial  Committee  of  the  Privy 
Council,  the  political  party  “Rezistans  Ek  Alternativ”  entered  two  constitutional  plaints 
which are still pending before the Supreme Court. 

 
Consequently,  in  July  2014,  Parliament  passed  the  Constitution  (Declaration  of 
Community) (Temporary Provisions) Bill which removed the mandatory requirement for a 
candidate to declare his community. 

However,  the  above  Act  applied  only  to  the  first  general  election  held  after  the 
 
commencement of the Act.  For subsequent general elections, candidates will still have to 
declare their community, if no change is brought to the law.  For this reason, “Rezistans Ek 
Alternativ” has maintained its constitutional plaints which have been fixed to 03 November 
2015 for merits.   

The House will appreciate that we can only report new developments to the Human 

Rights Committee once the matter has been resolved at the level of the Supreme Court. 

Madam Speaker, in regard to part (b) of the question, as the House is aware, with 

respect to electoral reform, the Government Programme 2015–2019 provides as follows - 

Paragraph 264 - 

 

“Our  electoral  system  will  be  reformed  to  introduce  a  dose  of  proportional 
representation 
the  National  Assembly  and  guarantee  better  women 
representation.” 

in 

The  Government  Programme  also  provides  that  Government  will  eradicate  fraud, 
corruption, malpractices and irregularities in all aspects of public life and restore our national 
values  based  on  discipline,  work  ethics  and  good  governance.  To  this  end,  a  Financing  of 
Political Parties Act will be enacted. 

Madam  Speaker,  since  the  year  2000,  there  have  been  several  Reports  and 

Commissions that have looked into the electoral system of Mauritius, namely - 

(i) 
(ii) 

the Sachs Commission (2001); 
the  Report  of  the  Select  Committee  on  the  “introduction  of  a  measure  of 
Proportional Representation in our Electoral System (2002); 

(iii)  the  Report  of  the  Select  Committee  on  the  “Funding  of  Political  parties” 

(2002); 

11 

 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi)  Modernising the Electoral System (March 2014). 

the Carcassonne Report (Dec 2011); 
the Sithanen Report (January 2012); 

This  Government  has  pledged  to  adopt  a  genuinely  decentralised  and  participative 
approach in decision making and a consultative approach in matters directly relating to the 
Constitution of the country in all cases where the interest of the public at large is at stake. 

On  the  other  hand,  in  line  with  its  reporting  obligations  under  the  International 
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, Mauritius should have submitted its fifth National 
Periodic Report to the Human Rights Committee in 2010.  This was however not done.  I am 
proposing to submit the Report early next year. 

Madam  Speaker,  upon  the  advice  of  the  Solicitor  General  tendered  on  16  October 
2015, Government proposes to inform the Human Rights Committee that Government stands 
committed  to  reform  our  electoral  system  so  as  to  introduce  a  dose  of  proportional 
representation  in  the  National  Assembly  and  guarantee  better  women’s  representation.  
Furthermore, the Electoral Supervisory Commission will be given wider powers to control 
and  sanction  fraud,  corruption  and  conflict  of  interests  during  election  time  and  also  to 
monitor  political  funding  and  abuse  of  position  of  power.    The  issue  of  mandatory 
declaration  of  community  will  be  addressed  in  the  wider  context  of  the  electoral  reform 
proposed by the Government. 

Madam Speaker, the last General Elections in December 2014 has in effect acted as 
referendum and thus people of Mauritius have made an unequivocal choice.  I wish to draw 
the  attention  of  the  House,  that  the  proposals  of  the  previous  regime,  were  more  in  the 
personal interests of two party leaders rather than in the national interest.  The population 
rather opted for the programme proposed by L’Alliance Lepep which was for the clean-up of 
the  country  to  create  a  conducive  environment  for  sustainable  development  and  economic 
growth. 

Madam Speaker, this Government has pledged to conduct business on the principles 
of discipline, transparency and accountability.  Good governance is the order of the day and 
we will restore trust and confidence in all aspects of public and institutional life. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to state that I am not prepared to accept a PR model 
that will disturb the verdict of the Mauritian electorate and frustrate the will of our people.  
In  this  respect,  I  propose  to  set  up  a  Ministerial  Committee  to  examine  and  make 

 

12 

recommendations  on  electoral  reforms  as  proposed  in  our  Government  Programme  2015-
2019.  Appropriate consultations will thereafter be held with all stakeholders. 

Mr Bérenger: I understand that Government has decided to wait for the case that is 
coming before the Supreme Court. Do I take it, therefore, that since the last general elections, 
the Human Rights Committee in Geneva has not been informed of the pending case and of 
the stand of Government and that it is now, from what I heard, that Government is going to 
inform the UN Human Rights Committee what is the situation? 

The Prime Minister: That is so, Madam Speaker. 

Mr  Bérenger:  Can  I,  again,  ask  there  has  been  no  correspondence  from  their  end, 

from the side of UN Human Rights Committee on that case? 

The Prime Minister: I am not aware of. 

Mr Bérenger: Can I know whether there has been locally any representation as far as 

Rezistans Ek Alternativ is concerned - representations to the Government? 

The Prime Minister: Not that I am aware of, but we are waiting for the verdict of the 

Supreme Court. 

Mr Bérenger: The Rt. hon. Prime Minister has reminded us of what was provided for 
une  dose  de  proportionnelle,  in  both  the  present  Government’s  Electoral  Programme  and 
later  on  the  2015-2019  Government  Programme.  Does  that  include  bringing  down  the 
threshold for parties to be qualified to 5%? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I can’t answer to that. When we will be taking decision, 

we will consider that. 

Mr Bérenger: I am sure the Rt. hon. Prime Minister must be fully aware that, as far 
as  I  can  see,  no  one  has  ever  proposed  a  proportional  representation,  une  dose  de 
proportionnelle - rather to use the very words which were used in their programme - no one 
has proposed a dose de proportionnelle that would overturn the result of the electorate. Does 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree that, in fact, no one has ever proposed that? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I don’t think I’ll agree to that. We all know that the kind 
of  amendment  that  was  being  proposed  by  the  MMM  in  the  past  would  certainly  have 
disturbed the verdict of the electorate. 

13 

 
Mr Bérenger: I hope the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is not referring to the time when he 
was in the MMM and proposed what we proposed then. Can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister give 
me any reference, on what occasion, what proposal did the MMM make at any time down 
history lane which would have disturbed the result of the elections, that is, the result at the 
level of constituencies? Can I be reminded? Will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister be kind enough 
to remind me on what occasion was that proposed, in what form? 

The Prime Minister: In fact, the MMM has all the time in mind, the same type of 

amendment based on what had been done in Rodrigues. 

Mr Bérenger: Reference has been made to Rodrigues. I need not quote from what the 
Rt. hon. Prime Minister said in the case of Rodrigues on 20 November 2001, where he said -  
I’ll quote - when he was presenting the Bill for autonomie - 

“Fear has been expressed that a party which obtains a clear-cut majority at the 
local regional level – that is, constituencies – may find itself without a majority after 
the allocation of seats on an island region basis – that is, à la proportionnelle. With 
the system proposed, this is unlikely to happen. However, to allay such fear, provision 
has  been  made  in  clause  11(10)  for  additional  seats  to  be  allocated  to  the  winning 
party so as to preserve its majority.” 

And the hon. Prime Minister then continued - 

“This is, of course, an exception. The proposed system may not be perfect - in fact 
there is no perfect system anywhere in the world - but it is the best for Rodrigues.” 

As  described  by  the  then  Prime  Minister  and  now  Prime  Minister.  Will  the  hon.  Prime 
Minister  agree  with  me  that  what  went  wrong  in  Rodrigues  is  not  the  electoral  system 
proposed, it is the fact that the then Chief Commissioner quarrelled with some of his people 
who  left  him  and  he  found  himself  in  a  minority.  It  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  electoral 
system! 

(Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister: Well, the result of the electorate had naturally been disturbed. 
The majority was diminished. I must tell the hon. Leader of the Opposition that he should 
know that I have always stood by the principle that the verdict of the electorate should not be 
disturbed. But since my Government at that time, all of them decided that we should go with 

 

14 

that  law  insofar  as  Rodrigues  is  concerned,  I  brought  the  Bill  in  the  House  and  as  Prime 
Minister, was it not my duty to defend it? Could I have done otherwise? 

Mr Bérenger: Yes, but would the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree with me that there is 
no comparison possible between Rodrigues and Mauritius in terms of the number of elected 
people,  Members  of  the  elected  Assembly,  the  size  of  the  electorate  and  there  is  no 
requirement  there  to  declare  your  community  when  you  have  elections  for  the  Regional 
autonomy Assembly? Will he agree with me that the comparison does not apply at all and 
that  therefore  we  should  work  out  something  for  the  whole  of  Mauritius,  including 
Rodrigues, for this National Assembly and not go on this wrong track which he is adopting as 
if what has happened in Rodrigues - for the wrong reasons, in fact - can be duplicated here in 
Mauritius? 

The Prime Minister: Well, in fact, this is what we are doing. I have said it in my 

answer. 

Mr Bérenger: Can I be provided with any detail of the Ministerial Committee that is 
going to be set up? Is it going to be set up even before the case in the Supreme Court takes 
place? Are we going to inform the UN Human Rights Committee in Geneva that a Ministerial 
Committee is going to be set up? 

The Prime Minister: The case is coming very soon. I hope the judgment will not be 
delayed. It will depend when the judgment is going to be delivered. If there is a long delay, 
then we will have to act. 

Mr Bérenger: Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he will agree with me 
that there are two completely different things: electoral reform has been with us for a long 
time and it had nothing and has nothing to do with individuals; la deuxième république, le 
partage des pouvoirs is another matter, but now we are talking about electoral reform and this 
has absolutely nothing to do… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

Mr  Bérenger:  This  has  absolutely  nothing  to  do  with  individuals.  What  is  being 
discussed  has  been  discussed  for  the  last  30  years  and  that,  therefore,  we  should  not  mix 
issues; mix the issue of electoral reform with the issue of the rééquilibrage des pouvoirs entre 

 

15 

le Président et le Premier ministre. Will he agree with me that we will not move forward if 
we keep on mixing those two issues? 

The Prime Minister: Well, we don’t agree with that. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr  Mohamed:  I  would  like  to  ask  the  hon.  Prime  Minister  the  following:  in  the 
decision  of  the  Committee  Experts  delivered  on  15  January  2015,  following  the 
communication of Rézistans ek Alternativ, I read, at paragraph 15.5, a very important element 
which is reference to the 1972 Census. Here, the Committee Experts - if I may be allowed to 
quote - states that it has looked into it and it says –  

“The  Committee  therefore  finds,  taking  into  account  the  State  party’s  failure  to 
provide an adequate justification in this regard (…)” 

Here, it was in regard to the Census of 1972 that had not been updated -  

“(…) and without expressing a view as to the appropriate form of the State party’s or 
any  other  electoral  system,  that  the  continued  maintenance  of  the  requirement  of 
mandatory  classification  of  a  candidate  for  general  elections  without 
the 
corresponding  updated  figures  of  the  community  affiliation  of  the  population  in 
general would appear to be arbitrary (…)” 

The fact that it has not been updated – 

 “(…) and therefore violates Article 25 (b) of the Covenant.” 

Having noted what was said at paragraph 15.5 of the experts’ opinion delivered, as I 
stated,  on  15  January  2015,  could  the  hon.  Prime  Minister  tell  us  what  exactly  does  his 
Government propose to do in order to address this particular remark of the experts that says 
that the stand of Mauritius not to update this Census of 1972 is itself a violation of Article 26 
of the Convention because I am also aware, as everyone else, the hon. Prime Minister would 
recall… 

Madam Speaker: Ask your question, hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed: That’s the last part. 

 
Madam Speaker: You should give the opportunity as others also want to have the 

16 

floor! Please, be accurate and short! 

Mr Mohamed: That’s the last part. The hon. Prime Minister would recall that this is 
also a view and whether he would consider re-actualising this Census as also agreed because 
I have seen also his partner, the actual Deputy Prime Minister, stating in public that he would 
be agreeable to that. 

Madam Speaker: We have understood your question, hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, when we will come with the reform, there will 

be no reason to deal with any census. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Lesjongard! 

Mr Lesjongard: Madam Speaker, may I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he 
is aware of the several representations made by the Rodrigues Regional Assembly or political 
parties in Rodrigues with regard to the issue of proportional representation in the sense that it 
does not represent les vœux de l’électorat à Rodrigues and that they have requested in the 
past - and this has never been entertained - that this be amended? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  it  is  a  fact  that  representations  have  been 
made on several occasions. Recently, I was in Rodrigues, request has been made officially, I 
had been around, the feeling of the people in general is that they are fed up with the present 
system and that there should be remedial action. There should be a new electoral system for 
Rodrigues and I agree with them. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leopold! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Leopold: Indeed, this proportional system in Rodrigues causes instability because 
out  of  six  regions  in  Rodrigues  we  won  four  and  we  are  ruling  with  only  one  majority  in 
Parliament. So, it causes instability. I would like to ask the hon. Prime Minister - because that 
system of allocation of proportional seats for the Rodrigues Regional Assembly has caused 
instability  to  the  First-Past-The-Post  system  -  whether  he  will  consider  amending  the  law 
shortly. 

The Prime Minister: I have just said it. 

 
Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Uteem! 

17 

Mr Uteem: I heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister mention that there is going to be a 
Ministerial Committee which will look into this whole electoral reform. May I know from the 
Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether this Committee will have full powers or will it be bound by 
the commitment already taken during the elections and set out in the manifeste électoral of 
l’Alliance Lepep, namely, that –  

« Une dose de proportionnelle sera introduite ; le seuil d’éligibilité pour les sièges 
proportionnels sera 5% des votes nationaux recueillis ; une représentativité d’un tiers 
des femmes sera assurée ; le système de Best Loser sera maintenu. » 

Will this Ministerial Committee be bound by what has been in the manifeste électoral? 

The Prime Minister: We will try to stick to our principles and our promises as far as 

possible. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Ganoo:  May  I  ask  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  in  view  of  the  urgency  of  the 
matter and in view of the fact that the Bill, which is passed by the previous Government in 
2014 was a sunset Bill, we have to find another formula for the next election, and also, in 
view of the fact that the Privy Council said in its judgement in 2011, I quote -  

“That if the issues cannot be resolved politically, they may be raised before the 
Judicial Committee in the future.” 

And another sentence was – 

“It remains open to the applicant to advance a constitutional challenge in the future.” 

So, this is the invitation of the Privy Council for the complainant to come before the 
Privy Council to find a solution.  The Privy Council ruled on the matter. Can I ask the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister to take up the previous question that has been put?  Political reform is a 
matter of compromise. Wouldn’t the Rt. hon. Prime Minister think that it will be better to set 
up a Committee of the House so that all political parties as well as those outside the House - 
because we are all for political reforms in this House - can be heard? 

18 

 
The Prime Minister: When there have been Select Committees in the past and my 
personal  feeling  is  that  we  will  never  come  to  a  conclusion,  we  will  never  come  to  an 
agreement.  We  have  taken  the  responsibility.  We  want  to  take  the  whole  responsibility  to 
discharge that burden which is on us and finally re-consult the population.  I hope that the 
population will agree with us.  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr Bérenger: A lot of detailed work has been done in the past; going back to the 
days when the Rt. hon. Prime Minister was Prime Minister and all the way back to 1982 and 
later on. A lot of work has been done, both at the Prime Minister’s Office level, but also at 
the Solicitor General, the State Law Office and the Attorney General’s Office. A lot of work 
was done at the Attorney General’s Office until the eve of the last elections. I am not saying 
that the work was completed, but a lot of progress was made. Has the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
been able to get help from the Attorney General to trace the latest drafts that had been ready 
at the level of the Attorney General’s, Solicitor General’s Office? 

The Prime Minister: We will certainly consult all these. We will do that. 

Mr Bérenger: Will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister circulate whatever the latest version 

prepared at the Attorney General’s and Solicitor General’s Office is available? 

The Prime Minister: I do not see any need for me to circulate. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, any questions? 

Mr Bérenger: No. 

Madam Speaker: That’s all. Questions! Hon. Bhagwan! 

METHADONE SUBSTITUTION THERAPY PROGRAMME – MINISTER OF 

HEALTH - STATEMENT 

(No. B/706)  Mr R. Bhagwan (First Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether he will state if he has taken cognizance 
of a letter addressed to him by the President of the association “Prevention, Information et 
Lutte contre le SIDA” requesting the revocation of the hon. Minister of Health and Quality of 
Life, following a recent statement made by the hon. Minister in Rose Hill with regard to the 

 

19 

drug addicts  who  are being treated under the Methadone Substitution Therapy Programme 
and, if so, indicate if he proposes to take any action in relation thereto. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, the President of the association “Prevention, 
Information  et  Lutte  contre  le  SIDA,”  commonly  known  as  PILS,  has  indeed  addressed  a 
letter to me on 07 October 2015 following a statement made by the hon. Minister of Health 
and Quality of Life. 

Madam Speaker,  as the  House is  aware, the statement in question  was  made by the 
hon.  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  within  the  context  of  a  political  meeting  of 
“Mouvement  Libérateur”  on  Thursday  01  October  2015,  but  this  has  been  blown  out  of 
proportion. 

Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister has explained to me that it was just a ‘boutade’ and 
he had no thought of offending anybody or any group through his comments.  I do not think, 
therefore, that it is reasonable to ask a Minister to step down following such a remark made in 
jest  during  a  political  meeting,  within  a  particular  context,  and  which,  I  must  say,  did  not 
warrant all the hue and cry, let alone a revocation.  I am satisfied that there was no ill-will on 
the part of the Minister.  Besides, the Minister is not guilty of any act of fraud or dishonesty, 
nor has he committed any breach of the oath of allegiance or the oath for the due execution of 
his office of Minister. 

Madam Speaker, I am informed that since the hon. Minister of Health and Quality of 
Life  had  announced  that  alternative  treatment  strategies  would  be  introduced  for  new 
patients,  there  has  been  an  uproar  from  some  NGOs.    The  new  treatment  proposed  using 
Suboxone followed by Naltrexone, aims at working towards detoxification, rehabilitation and 
ultimately giving a chance to those persons to reintegrate the mainstream society. 

Madam Speaker, my Government aims to rehabilitate drug dependent patients so that 
they come out of the vicious circle of addiction with the ultimate goal for their economic, 
social and welfare integration in the mainstream of our society. 

Besides, in a spirit of collaboration with the NGOs, on 25 September 2015, the hon. 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life had a formal working session at the PILS office in 
Port Louis with Mr Neelen Vencadasamy, President of PILS, Mr N. Ritter, Director and other 
staff as well as the senior staff of the Ministry to discuss the collaboration between the NGO 
and the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life. 

 

20 

Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister of Health and Quality of Life has made a statement 
in this august Assembly on 13 October 2015 that experts from UNAIDS will carry out a full 
and  comprehensive  evaluation  to  assess  the  relevance,  effectiveness,  efficiency  and 
sustainability of the Needle Exchange Programme and the Methadone Maintenance Therapy 
programmes since their inception in 2006 and to come up with appropriate recommendations. 

Mr Bhagwan: In the reply made by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, it is clear that the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister will not revoke his Minister. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister has informed 
the  House  that  he  has  been  informed  by  the  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life,  but 
following his visit to Cape Town, he met the Executive Director of UNAIDS and requested 
for  a  full  comprehensive  evaluation  of  the  two  programmes,  namely  the  Methadone 
Substitution Therapy and the Needle Exchange Programme and to come up with appropriate 
recommendations as stated by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister. Will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
request  his  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  to  go  back  to  what  prevailed  until  the 
recent decision from the two programmes namely the Methadone Substitution Therapy and 
the Needle Exchange Programme? 

The  Prime  Minister:  I  don’t  see  the  importance  of  this  question.  All  this  is  being 

taken care of. 

Mr Bérenger: If I can say something on that. What the hon. Minister of Health and 
Quality of Life proposed at one side disturbed completely both the Methadone System and 
the  Seringue  Distribution  System  and  also  the  confidentiality  clauses  under  which  these 
programmes were being performed. Well, this happened at a given point in time.  Can I be 
allowed  to  congratulate  the  hon.  Minister  that  he  has  gone  to  Mr  Michel  Sidibé,  Chief 
Executive Director of USAIDS and UNAIDS - UNAIDS which have been full of praise for 
precisely those two programmes. I congratulate him that he has requested that very UNAIDS 
to come with a full and comprehensive evaluation of the two programmes. Can I ask the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister would it not be in order to go back to what prevailed until that evaluation 
is fully carried out and then, à tête reposée, whatever changes need to be made will be made? 
Madam Speaker: I just wish to draw the attention of hon. Members that the question 
is on the request for the revocation of the hon. Minister of Health and Quality of Life and that 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister will not be able to reply to questions which concern the Ministry 
of Health and Quality of Life. Yes, hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem:  The Rt. hon. Prime Minister just mentioned that what was said by the 
hon. Minister of Health and Quality of Life was a ‘boutade’. In order to avoid this type of 

 

21 

dérapage,  would  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  consider  coming  forward  with  a  code  of 
conduct for Ministers? 

The Prime Minister:  Well, the amount of dérapage that we see everyday from the 

other side, I am surprised. 

(Interruptions) 

 

Madam Speaker:   Next question, hon. Sesungkur! 

POLICE - ARBITRARY ARREST  

(No. B/707) Mr D. Sesungkur (First Member for Montagne Blanche and GRSE) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to alleged arbitrary arrests, he 
will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to 
the – 

(a) number of complaints filed over the period 2009 to 2014, indicating if an estimate 
of the contingent liabilities pending on Government as a result thereof has been 
made, and  

(b) steps being taken for the prevention of the occurrence thereof. 
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that  5  civil  cases  related  to  alleged  arbitrary/unlawful  arrest  had  been  lodged  against  the 
Police from 2009 to 2014 and damages amounting to Rs13.5 m. were claimed. 

In 2 cases, settlement has been reached between the two parties for a total amount of 
Rs625,000  without  admission  of  any  additional  liability,  and  in  the  remaining  3  cases  the 
Court  decided  in  favour  of  the  plaintiffs  and  awarded  damages  amounting  to  a  total  of 
Rs174,180. 

Madam Speaker, as regards part (b) of the question, mention has been made in the 
Government  Programme  2015-2019  for  the  proposed  introduction  of  a  modern  legal 
framework modelled on the UK Police and Criminal Evidence Act to address the abusiveness 
and arbitrariness of the present system of “Provisional Charges”. 

In view of the sensitive and complex nature of the issue, it is imperative to have wide 
consultations with all stakeholders before introducing a new Bill in the National Assembly.  
This consultation process, which will take some time, will start as soon as the fresh draft Bill 
is finalised by the Attorney General’s Office. 

22 

 
I also wish to inform the House that, as announced in the Government Programme, an 
Independent Police Complaints Commission will be set up and it is expected, among others, 
to act as a deterrent to any abuse from the Police, including arbitrary arrests.  The relevant 
legislation is presently being drafted by the Attorney General’s Office. 

Mr Sesungkur: Will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree that the past few years have 
been  the  darkest  period  of  our  democracy  in  regard  to  the  number  of  arrests  of  innocent 
people, I am thinking of Pascale Bodet, Suda Singh and also of political opponents like hon. 
Sawmynaden, yourself, Madam Speaker, and the hon... 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Sesungkur, please don’t mention names! 

Mr Sesungkur: So, will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree that nobody is above the 
law,  but,  at  the  same  time,  there  should  not  be  blatant  abuse  as  it  was  the  case  under  the 
previous regime? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I have just said that we are looking into the whole matter; 

we will come with legislation so that what happened will be things of the past. 

Mr  Uteem:  Madam  Speaker,  may  I  know  from  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  being 
given that we are talking about liberty, a constitutional right, whether we have a time frame 
as to when this Government will come forward with that much awaited piece of legislation? 

The Prime Minister: As I have said, the Bill is being worked out by the Attorney 

General’s office. I can’t give the exact time frame. 

Mr Ganoo: The Rt. hon. Prime Minister has given us the number of arbitrary arrests 
that have taken place and millions of rupees that are being paid by the State as a result of 
these arbitrary arrests. Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether the Attorney General’s 
Office shouldn’t review the limitation period that is given for a citizen of this country to sue 
the State, especially in case of arbitrary arrest? Today, the period is two years; whether in 
case  of  Police  brutally  only,  perhaps,  we  should  not  review  this  limitation  period  and 
eliminate it completely? 

The Prime Minister: These abuses have been tolerated by their past ally; we have 
said that we are going to do everything so that these things do not happen again, of course, as 
far  as  possible.  In  many  countries,  more  advanced,  more  democratic,  there  are  always 
sometimes these unhappy things happening. 

 

23 

PROSTITUTION RELATED OFFENCES - ARREST 

(No. B/708) Mr D. Sesungkur (First Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to prostitution related offences, 
he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as 
to  the  number  of  raids  carried  out  in  brothels  in  2011,  2012,  2013  and  2014  respectively, 
indicating the - 

(a) number of arrests effected in connection therewith; 
(b) amount of money seized as proceeds thereof, and  
(c) measures being taken to deal therewith. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that  the  number  of  raids  carried  out  in  dwelling  houses  used  as  brothels  in  regard  to 
prostitution of related offences are as follows - 

Year 

2011 

2012 

2013 

2014 

Total 

Number of Raids 

9 

5 

4 

2 

20 

 

In regard to parts (a) and (b) of the question, I am further informed that 49 persons, 
including three minors, were arrested during these raids and a total sum of Rs58,700 were 
seized as exhibits for the purpose of enquiry. 

In regard to part (c) of the question, the following measures are ongoing to deal with 

prostitution related offences - 

(i)  maintain Police presence and mobile patrols in risk prone areas; 

(ii)  stop and search on suspected persons and vehicles; 

 
(iii) undertake  crack  down  and  joint  operations  with  the  support  of  different  units 

24 

such as Special Support Unit and Special Mobile Force; 

(iv)  pre-position Police Response Team at identified locations; 

(v)  deploy  Community  Policing  Officers  and  Neighbourhood  Officers  for  door  to 

door sensitisation of the community in general, and 

(vi)  deploy  Field  Intelligence  Officers  from  the  Divisional  Crime  Intelligence  Unit 
for information gathering for proactive and targeted actions. I am also informed 
by the Ministry of Gender, Child Development and Family Welfare that a series 
of measures is taken by the Child Development Unit to deal with offences related 
to prostitution and involving children.  Some of these measures are as follows - 

(i)  since  all  cases  of  alleged  child  prostitution  are  referred  to  the  Child 
Development Unit, the latter carries out a social enquiry and where required, 
immediate and long-term protective and support services are provided at the 
six  Family  Support  Bureaux  across  the  island  in  terms  of  psychological 
counselling and legal advice.  Sometimes, the child victims are removed from 
dangerous  environment  and  are  placed  in  safe  places  where  they  are  taken 
care of by qualified professionals; 

(ii)  a hotline/help number 113 is available for reporting prostitutions involving 

children; 

(iii) assistance such as medical examination is provided; 

(iv)  through  its  Community  Childwatch  Committees,  the  Child  Development 
Unit provides proximity service and surveillance of children exposed to any 
form of violence, and 

(v)  protocols of collaboration between the Child Development Unit, the Police 
and Ministry of Health and Quality of Life have been established to ensure 
continuous care to child victims. 

Mr  Sesungkur:  Madam  Speaker,  will  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  agree  that  our 
society  took  a  dangerous  slope  of  the  past  few  years  when  we  look  at  the  degree  of 
immorality about the nation zougader and the mentality to make easy money … 

 
Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Sesungkur,  your  question  relates  to  prostitution  related 

25 

offences, now you are talking of nation zougader! 

Mr Sesungkur: I was elaborating on the state of affairs of our society and how the 

Government is taking measures to remedy the situation. 

The Prime Minister: Well, it is said ‘l’exemple vient d’en haut’!  

(Interruptions) 

So, I am not surprised of what took place, but I have already answered: all the steps that are 
being taken. 

Mr Ramful: Madam Speaker, I think our law on prostitution, as it stands, provides 
for the offence of importuning, that is, those who solicit for immoral purposes and also for 
keeping brothel. However, the law is silent as regards those who incite others to prostitute for 
financial gains. Would the Rt. hon. Prime Minister consider the possibility of coming with 
amendments to provide for those offences? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I will have to look up whether the law is silent. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Bhagwan! 

HORSE RACING - COMMISSION OF INQUIRY - RECOMMENDATIONS 

(No.  B/709)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether he will state if he has inquired from the 
Secretary for Home Affairs if he has officially  received copy  of the  Interim Report of the 
Commission  of  Inquiry  on  Horse  Racing  submitted  to  him  by  the  former  President  of  the 
Republic  and,  if  so,  indicate  the  reasons  why  no  action  has  been  taken  in  regard  to  the 
recommendations made by the Commissioner and, if not, will he consider ordering an inquiry 
to be carried out to trace out the report at the Prime Minister’s Office. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, in view of the fact that we already have the 
final Report of the Commission of Inquiry on Horse Racing and that my Ministry has already 
initiated actions to implement the recommendations, therefore the question of an inquiry to 
trace out the preliminary report does not arise. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

 

26 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Prime  Minister  whether  as  recommended  in  the 
report,  urgent  criminal  investigation  has  been  set  up  to  investigate  concerns  that  criminal 
offences of cheating were occurring at the MTC? 

The Prime Minister: We are acting on the recommendations of the final report. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Can  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  inform  the  House  whether  in  the 
course of the inquiry he has inquired within the activities of the PMO where senior officers of 
his Ministry are very close to the MTC or even owners of horses, if not their relatives, like 
Polar Royale? 

The Prime Minister: I never felt any necessity for such an inquiry. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Can  I  ask  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  whether  he  will  review  the 
system  of  having  clearances  from  senior  officers  of  the  PMO,  giving  clearance  for  the  -  I 
would say - hiring of jockeys from South Africa and other countries where themselves are 
owners  of  horses,  their  relatives  are  owners  of  horses  and  they  are  giving  the  clearances 
themselves at the PMO? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I don’t know since when this has existed, it has been in 

practice and they were cohabiting with those… 

…who had been promoting this, but I have said… 

(Interruptions) 

I have said… 

 (Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! Order, please! Order I said! Allow the hon. Prime Minister 

to reply! 

The Prime Minister: I have said… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: I have said order! 

 

27 

The Prime Minister: … that we are implementing. We can’t do everything in one go, 

in one day. Step-by-step we are putting order insofar as racing is concerned. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Bhagwan, please! 

Mr  Bhagwan:  I  do  respect  the  hon.  Prime  Minister.  So,  I  will  ask  the  hon.  Prime 

Minister - li dire moi bous mo lagel, I will never bous mo lagel! 

You have said so! You have said so! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! Hon. Bhagwan, please sit down! Please sit down! Are you 

raising… 

Hon. Bhagwan, please!  

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Order, I said! I am on my feet!  Hon. Bhagwan, are you raising a point of order? Yes! What is 
your point of order? 

Mr Bhagwan: I have heard the hon. Prime Minister, of whom I have a lot of respect 
personally, stating ‘bous to lagel’ when I asked a supplementary question. I am asking the 
hon. Prime Minister on a point of honour for the respect I have for him and for the respect he 
has for the House, to withdraw what he has said. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please, sit down! Hon. Prime Minister, did you utter these words? 

The Prime Minister: I asked him to shut up. 

(Interruptions) 

 

28 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan, please sit down! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Bhagwan, please, I am on my feet! I am on my feet! You have to be silent! Hon. Prime 
Minister, if you did say this, will you kindly withdraw, but if you say you did not, then I will 
have again to have recourse to the recordings. 

(Interruptions) 

Is there any comment again on the ruling I have given? Next question, hon. Ramful! 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, didn’t  you just give a ruling? Didn’t you just ask the 
hon. Prime Minister to withdraw? I think the hon. Prime Minister did not hear what you just 
said. 

Madam Speaker: No. He said. What I said is that if he feels he has said it, that he 
withdraws. If he said he hasn’t said it, then I will have to have recourse to the recordings. 
This is what I have said and this is my ruling. No debate on my ruling, please! 

Next question, hon. Ramful! 

VILLE NOIRE - CAVENDISH BRIDGE - RENOVATION 

(No. B/710) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Cavendish  Bridge  of 
Ville Noire, in Mahebourg, he will state if the National Development Unit will implement the 
project for the renovation thereof during the current financial year. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the RDA that the Cavendish 
Bridge is situated along Plaine Magnien-Mahebourg Road (A12).  The bridge is a potential 
Heritage Site but not yet listed as one of our National Heritage Monuments. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, you are disturbing the hon. Prime Minister! 

The Prime Minister: In the year 2000, the RDA constructed footpath on both sides of 
the bridge to allow safe movement of pedestrian from one side to the other.  The footpath is a 

 

29 

metal structure with wooden planks.  Furthermore, in July 2011, the bridge was repainted by 
the RDA in the context of its centenary celebration. 

 However, it should be highlighted that the wooden planks are subject to theft, decay, 

wear and tear.  Regular maintenance is, therefore, carried out by the RDA. 

Madam Speaker, I am also informed that RDA has made a provision of Rs500,000 for 
better  environmental  resistant  material  to  replace  the  wooden  planks.    However,  the 
implementation will be carried out upon receipt of the decision of the National Heritage Trust 
Fund as to the type of material that can be used. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Being  given  that  a  question  was  being  raised  in  the  past  during  the 
previous  Government  and  nothing  had  been  done  by  the  previous  Minister,  will  the  hon. 
Prime Minister consider asking engineers of the NDU to go and carry out a full survey with 
regard to l’état of this bridge at Ville Noire? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Let’s  wait!  Let’s  have  the  advice  of  what  we  must  use  as 

materials and then we will send engineers, if need be. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ganoo! 

CHILDREN - SEXUALLY ABUSED 

(No. B/711) Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National Development Unit whether, in regard to the children, he will, for the benefit of the 
House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, for each of the years 2013, 2014 and since 
January 2015 to date, information as to the number of reported cases thereof having allegedly 
been victims of the offence of - 

(a) sexual intercourse with a minor under the age of 16;  
(b) attempt upon chastity, and 
(c) causing a child to be sexually abused. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, sexual intercourse with a minor under the age 
of 16 and attempt upon chastity are criminal offences under section 249 of the Criminal Code 

 

30 

Act.    Any  person  found  guilty  under  such  charges  is  liable  to  penal  servitude  for  a  term 
between 10 to 20 years depending on the case. 

 Regarding the offence of causing a child to be sexually abused, sections 14 and 18 of 
the  Child  Protection  Act  provide  that  any  person  found  guilty  may  be  convicted  and 
sentenced for a period not exceeding 20 years. 

 I  am  tabling  the  number  of  such  reported  cases  for  the  years  2013  to  date,  as 

submitted by the Commissioner of Police. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  am  also  informed  by  the  Ministry  of  Gender  Equality,  Child 
Development and Family Welfare that the following measures are taken in reported cases of 
sexual offences - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

(v) 

(vi) 

the Child Development Unit records the case for social enquiry whilst Police 
performs the criminal enquiry; 
children victims of sexual offences are also provided with immediate and long 
term  protective  and  support  services  at  the  level  of  six  Child  Development 
Unit  outstations  across  the  island,  namely  at  Goodlands,  Flacq,  Rose  Belle, 
Port  Louis,  Bambous  and  Vacoas  as  well  as  at  the  Drop-in-Centre  in  Port 
Louis; 
there is close networking and  collaborative  efforts with the Brigade pour la 
Protection des Mineurs and other stakeholders to assist in the identification of 
victims through crackdown operations; 
the hotlines 113, 148 and 999 are also available to provide emergency support 
services to any reported cases of sexual offences on children; 
joint interviews by the Police and Child Development Unit officers to avoid 
repeated narrations of incident and secondary victimisation; 
immediate assistance to victims of sexual offences for medical examinations 
as well as HIV testings and pregnancy tests; 
psycho-social counselling to victims and their families; 

(vii) 
(viii)  children  victims  of  sexual  offences  who  are  assessed  to  be  in  immediate 
danger  in  their  family  environment  are  removed  therefrom  and  placed  in  a 
place of safety as per the Child Protection Act for alternative prise en charge 
by qualified professionals; 

 
(ix) 

(x) 

(xi) 

31 

as regards victims who live together with their families, ongoing home visits 
are  effected  by  the  Child  Development  Unit  officers  on  a  regular  basis  to 
ensure that children  are  being rehabilitated and  geared  for normal schooling 
and/or alternative skilling; 
in some cases, therapeutic activities are carried out at ‘Jardin de la Paix’ at 
Calodyne  managed  by  CEDEM  for  children  victims  of  abuse  inclusive  of 
sexual offences and child prostitution, and 
sensitisation campaigns are carried out by the Child Development Unit and the 
National Children’s Council. 

Mr  Ganoo:    I  thank  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  for  his  elaborate  answer,  Madam 
Speaker.  May I ask him whether it is not time for the authorities in Mauritius also to compile 
a list of all persons who have been convicted for sexual assault and for whatever offence they 
have been prosecuted, and it should be available at the Attorney General’s Office or at the 
Ministry  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and  Family  Welfare  and  this  list  to  be 
readily  available  and  distributed  to  other  law  agencies  and  to  places  especially  which  are 
frequented by children, for example, private primary schools, private pre-primary schools as 
it is the case in other jurisdictions? 

The Prime Minister:  Well, we will consider this. 
Mr Jhuboo: Madam Speaker, I am happy to hear what is being done by the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister, but, obviously, there is an issue. According to l’Organisation Mondiale de la 
Santé, 20% to 25% of children have had serious child abuse in Europe.  In India, it is 50%.  
According to the figures from the Ministry, in Mauritius, it is 0.3%.  Obviously, there is an 
issue.  Can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister inform the Ministry in charge to come with a serious 
study on child abuse in order to protect the children of our Republic? 

The Prime Minister:  Well, we will try to better the situation.  I will pass on this to the 

Ministry concerned. 

Madam  Speaker:  Time  is  over!    Hon.  Members,  the  Table  has  been  advised  that 
Parliamentary  Question  Nos.  B/748  in  regard  to  the  proposed  renovation  of  the  Plaine 
Magnien  football  ground  and  A/16  in  regard  to  the  provision  of  lighting  facilities  at  Cité 
Bassin  football  ground,  addressed  to  the  hon.  Minister  of  Youth  and  Sports,  will  now  be 
replied by the hon. Minister of Local Government. 

The Table has also been advised that PQ Nos. B/731 addressed to the hon. Minister of 
Finance and Economic  Development  and  B/734 addressed to the hon.  Minister of  Labour, 
Industrial Relations, Employment and Training have been withdrawn.  

 

32 

Hon. Members, the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development has made a 
request to the Chair that PQs addressed to him be taken out of turn as he is proceeding on 
official  mission  later  during  the  day.    I  am,  therefore,  calling  PQ  Nos.  B/714  and  B/718 
immediately after PQ No. B/712.  PQ No. B/712, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

BOI - TRADE AND INVESTMENT MANAGERS- APPOINTMENT 

(No. B/712) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked the 
Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  whether,  in  regard  to  the  proposed 
appointment of eight Trade and Investment Managers in strategic cities, as mentioned in the 
Budget Speech, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Board of Investment, 
information  as  to  the  number  of  such  managers  having  been  appointed  as  at  to  date, 
indicating their respective – 

date of appointment, and  
posting. 

(a) 
(b) 
Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Board of Investment 
(BOI)  that  following  the  announcement  in  the  Budget  Speech  2015-2016,  a  recruitment 
exercise is underway at the BOI for the selection of eight Trade and Investment Managers.  

I  am  also  informed  by  the  BOI  that  so  far  suitable  candidates  for  the  Paris  and 
Johannesburg offices have been identified and appointments will be made shortly by the BOI 
Board. 

Dr.  Sorefan:    Will  the  hon.  Minister  consider,  when  recruiting  or  appointing  those 
Managers,  to  go  in  the  same  line  as  the  British  High  Commission  has  done  in  Mauritius 
recently, I think, in January?  

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  I will look into it, Madam Speaker. 
Mr Jhuboo: I would like to know from the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic 

Development whether these Managers will have objectives to attract FDI? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Well, they will have to perform. 
Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

BOI – PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT SCHEME 

(No. B/714) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked the 
Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Property 
Development  Scheme,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Board  of 
Investment, information as to if – 

(a) an in-depth study has been carried out prior to the implementation thereof and, 

if so, table copy of the report thereof; 

 

33 

 

(b)  any regulation has been finalised in relation thereto, and  

(c) the residents thereof will be charged local rates/residential tax. 

 

 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Madam Speaker, one of the measures announced in the 2015-
2016 Budget Speech was the restructuring of the IRS and RES schemes as these two schemes 
have also brought undesirable consequences, the most serious one being that those projects 
are gated communities which constitute a serious risk to the very fabric of our society.   

With regard to part (a) of the question, a Budget Implementation Committee was set up 
to carry out a comprehensive exercise including a survey with IRS/RES buyers and inputs 
from members of civil society, professionals of the construction industry and the public at 
large. I am tabling a copy of the report prepared by the Committee. 

Regarding  part  (b)  of  the  question,  on  18  June  2015,  a  single  scheme,  namely  the 
Property Development Scheme was laid down in regulations to the Investment Promotion Act 
based on the recommendations of the committee.  The IRS and RES Schemes were revoked. 
The  new  scheme  is  centered  on  inclusive  development,  doing  away  with  gated 
communities and providing for a wide range of living, employment and leisure opportunities 
to both locals and foreigners. 

The key change that has been incorporated in the regulations is the condition that 25 per 
cent of the residential properties in a project under the scheme must be reserved for citizens 
of Mauritius or members of the Mauritian diaspora registered under the Mauritian Diaspora 
Scheme. 

As  regards  part  (c)  of  the  question,  any  immovable  property  situated  within  the 
jurisdiction  of  a  Municipal  City  Council  or  Municipal  Town  Council  is  subject  to  the 
prevailing local rates, including a residence under the Property Development Scheme.  

Dr.  Sorefan:    Madam  Speaker,  regarding  the  rate,  will  the  hon.  Minister  strongly 
consider those living outside the Municipal Council, that is, the District Council - mainly we 
have a lot in the Black River District where we have a state within a state with all apartheid 
going there - pay the rate to the District Council? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Yes, in fact the BOI is working on this. 
Mr Uteem:  Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development 
just mentioned that the IRS and RES Schemes certificates have been revoked.  May I know 
from the hon. Minister of Finance what would happen to those promoters who have received 

 

34 

IRS and RES certificates, but have not yet implemented their projects, whether they will have 
to make a new application or would their IRS/RES licence be converted into a new scheme? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Well,  as  far  as  I  know,  those  projects  which  have  been 

approved can go ahead, unless the Board of Investment decides otherwise. 

Mr Ganoo: Can I ask the hon. Minister when the 25% of the residences would have 

been sold to Mauritians, will these complexes be still catered? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: In principle, it will not be, because the idea behind it is that 
we  try  to  build  up  those  projects  and  integrate  as  far  as  possible  the  local  population  and 
diaspora. So, the word ‘catered’ is used to mean building walls around, I don’t know, but it is 
clear that this new project aims at unifying those development projects within the whole of 
our society. 

Mr Jhuboo: I would like to know from the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development whether since the Property Development Scheme (PDS) has replaced the RES, 
is he satisfied with the number of projects approved by the PDS? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Well, the project is quite new. In fact, I have a list of those 
who have applied for invesment under the scheme. There are eight and two have already been 
issued an approval. 

Dr. Sorefan: May we know from the hon. Minister how many IRS/RES have been 

approved, but started and abandoned in the country? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: I need to check the information. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

BANK OF MAURITIUS - CMA SMALL SYSTEMS  

(No. B/718) Dr. R.  Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the CMA Small 
Systems, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Bank of Mauritius, information 
as to when bids were launched in respect of each procurement exercise carried out therefor in 
2009, indicating in each case – 

(a) 

the names of the – 

(i) 

bidders therefor; 

(ii)  members of the Bid Evaluation Committee 

35 

the purpose thereof, and 

if they are operational and, if not, why not. 

 
(b) 

(c) 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Bank of Mauritius 
that  no  bids  were  launched  in  respect  of  the  procurement  of  software  from  CMA  Small 
Systems AB. 

As the Bank of Mauritius was selected by the Committee of Central Banks of COMESA 
to  be  the  settlement  agent  for  REPSS,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  had  to  adopt  a  compatible 
settlement software.  Accordingly, the Bank of Mauritius chose the CMA Small Systems AB 
which was the software service provider of Regional Payment and Settlement System (REPSS) 
for the COMESA Clearing House. 

I  am  also  informed  that  three  other  systems  were  acquired  directly  by  the  Bank  of 

Mauritius from CMA Systems AB as they are all inter-linked directly with REPSS, namely - 

(i)  The Mauritius Automated Clearing and Settlement System (MACSS); 
(ii) The Cheque Truncation System, and 
(iii) Depository System for Treasury Bills 

All the four systems are fully operational. 

Dr. Sorefan: Madam Speaker, the CMA has implemented RTSX using a dedicated 
network in some countries, whereby customers do not have to pay swift charges or all local 
real  time  settlement.  Will  the  hon.  Minister  inform  the  House  whether  this  option  was 
proposed in the technical document of CMA for the RTSX system?  If yes, did BOM pay for 
implementing  the  dedicated  network  and  yet  those  to  use  swift  and  on  what  terms  and 
conditions, BOM re-negotiated with CMA? What I am trying to say is that we have a system 
and BOM has paid a lot of money to the bank, has paid a lot of money to CMA and this is not 
being functional and, we, Mauritians, when we exchange money bank to bank, we are made 
to pay swift charges. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo Madam Speaker, the question might be most pertinent, but I 

need notice of it. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

 

 

36 

UNIVERSITY OF MAURITIUS & CANBERRA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY - 

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING 

(No. B/713) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the Minister of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific Research 
whether, in regard to the Memorandum of Understanding signed between the University of 
Mauritius and the Canberra Institute of Technology, on 20 February 2013, she will state if 
there has been, as a result thereof, any – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

exchange of students and of academic staff members; 

joint research project, and 

capacity building for public officer.   

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  University  of 
Mauritius  that  a  Memorandum  of  Understanding  between  the  University  and  Canberra 
Institute of Technology was signed on 20 February 2013. The duration of the MoU is of five 
years as from the date of signature and is renewable by mutual consent of both parties. 

With regard to parts (a), (b) and (c) of the question, I am informed that as at date, 
there has been no exchange of students, of academic staff members, no joint research project 
and no capacity building of public officers. 

The Faculty of Science of the University of Mauritius did express an initial interest to 

invite the visiting academic staff in Forensic Science in January 2014. 

However, the phasing out of the course after having run for three years and due to this 
phasing out, this need for the visiting academy staff was no longer felt and, consequently, the 
Faculty  of  Science  did  not  receive  the  proposal  and  the  matter  has,  therefore,  not  been 
pursued further. 

Dr. Sorefan: Will the hon. Minister consider strongly this MoU, because it will be to 
the advantage of our staff and students and research fellow that we do implement seriously, 
very soon? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: In fact, the Canberra Institute of Technology is a leading 
institution and can do a lot in the training of a skilled labour force.  I, indeed, will ask the 
University of Mauritius to consider taking full advantage of this MoU. 

 

 

37 

ASSOCIATION MAURICIENNE DE BOXE - MANAGING COMMITTEE 

(No.  B/715)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Youth  and  Sports  whether,  in  regard  to  boxing,  he  will  state  if  his 
Ministry  recognises  the  present  Managing  Committee  of  the  Association  Mauricienne  de 
Boxe and, if not, why not. 

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, I have to inform the House that the procedures 
laid down at section 5(4)(c) of the Fourth Schedule of  the Sports Act 2013, regarding the 
removal  of  the  president  of  the  National  Sports  Federation  have  not  been  followed  while 
effecting  changes  in  the  composition  of  the  Managing  Committee  of  the  Association 
Mauricienne de Boxe. 

This  matter  has  become  a  dispute  between  the  two  persons  claiming  to  be  the 

president of the Federation. 

In such circumstances, I have referred the matter to the Ombudsperson for Sports who 

has initiated an enquiry with a view to finding out an amicable settlement in the matter.  

Mr  Quirin:  Madame  la  présidente,  peut-on  savoir  du  ministre  qui  son  ministère, 

actuellement, considère comme le vrai président de la fédération de boxe? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Madam  Speaker,  as  I  have  just  mentioned,  the  procedures  laid 
down have not been followed. Now, the case is in front of the Ombudsperson for Sports and 
we hope that we will reach an amicable settlement. 

Mr  Quirin:  Madame  la  présidente,  l’honorable  ministre,  dans  sa  réponse,  vient  de 
nous informer que les procédures n’ont pas été respectées par rapport à la révocation illégale 
du président Telvar. J’ai en ma possession copie d’une lettre, provenant du ministère de la 
Jeunesse  et  des  Sports,  adressée  à  la  fédération  de  boxe,  où  le  ministère  affirme  que  la 
révocation  de  M.  Telvar,  le  président  sortant  ou  le  vrai  président,  s’est  faite  d’une  façon 
illégale. La lettre du ministère le confirme. De ce fait, peut-on savoir - comme il l’affirme lui-
même, et qu’il existe des instances de conciliation – pourquoi le ministère, avant d’affirmer 
que la révocation de M. Telvar a été faite de façon illégale, n’a-t-il pas référé ce cas devant 
ces instances de conciliation, tel que l’Ombudsperson for Sports, avant de venir affirmer que 
cette révocation a été faite de façon illégale ? 

38 

 
Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, this is an administrative procedure and when I 
took notice of that, then, I have asked them to put the matter in front of the Ombudsperson 
because we are talking about sports, so we should reach an amicable settlement. 

Mr Quirin: Ce qui veut dire, Madame la présidente, que le ministère n’a pas respecté 
sa propre loi, il a été à l’encontre de ce qui est spécifié dans le Sports Act. Peut-on savoir, 
effectivement, par rapport à cette lettre adressée par le ministère à la Fédération de boxe, qui 
a signé cette lettre, Madame la présidente? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Madam  Speaker,  as  I  have  stated,  the  matter  is  in  front  of  the 
Ombudsperson, it is not a question of who signed or did not sign. We are talking about sports, 
we need to reach a settlement, we will reach a settlement. Both parties are agreeable to that. 

Mr  Quirin:  Madame  la  présidente,  le  ministre  est  en  train  de  fuir  devant  cette 

question. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Quand même! Next question, hon. Quirin! 

HIGH LEVEL SPORTS UNIT – ATHLETES - ALLOCATION CRITERIA  

(No.  B/716)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the high level sports, he will, for 
the benefit of the House, obtain from the High Level Sports Unit, information as to if any 
change has been made in the allocation criteria for Olympic and non-Olympic athletes and, if 
so, indicate the reasons therefor. 

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, verbal representations have been received from 
several quarters during cash prize ceremonies organised by my Ministry to reward athletes 
and  coaches  who  have  won  medals  in  major  international  competitions,  to  the  effect  that, 
over the years, the philosophy behind the scheme pertaining to classifications of sports into 
Olympic and non-Olympic ones has not been adhered to. 

The House may wish to know that initially there was a clear demarcation of sports 
into  these  two  categories.  All  national  sports  federations  are  affiliated  to  their  respective 
international sports federations. The international sports federations for Olympic Sports are in 
turn recognised by the International Olympic Committee and they have to strictly adhere to 
this charter. This is not the case for non-Olympic federations which have their own respective 

 

39 

rules. Besides, National Sports Federations are listed separately as Olympic Sports and non-
Olympic Sports in the Fifth Schedule of the Sports Act 2013. 

Furthermore,  the  number  of  countries  affiliated  and  the  number  of  licensees  for 
international  sports  federations  in  respect  of  Olympic  Sports  are  significantly  higher  than 
those  of  international  federations  for  non-Olympic  Sports.  Consequently,  in  any  major 
competition, the number of participating countries and athletes are also very much higher in 
Olympic Sports. In the light of the reasons I have just given, the High-Level Sports Unit of 
my Ministry has deemed it appropriate to revert to the policy adopted initially. 

Madam Speaker, as from 01 October 2015, the monthly allowances payable to high-
level athletes have been categorised into Olympic and non-Olympic rates. The quantum of 
monthly allowances being paid to high-level athletes as from 01 October 2015 is as follows –  

LEVEL 

Range: Quantum of financial package (Rs) 

Olympic Sports 

Non-Olympic Sports 

26,000 – 32,000 

13,000 – 16,000 

13,000 – 20,000 

   7,500  – 10,000 

World 

Inter 

Continental 

Continental 

6,500 – 11,000 

Regional 

3,500 – 5,500 

4,000 – 6,000 

             3,500 

 
Mr  Quirin:  Madame  la  présidente,  vu  que  la  nouvelle  formule  proposée  fait  une 
séparation entre les disciplines Olympiques et non-Olympiques, le ministre peut-il nous dire 
comment son ministère a évalué l’effort des athlètes de ces deux catégories avant de prendre 
une telle décision?  

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, the answer is in the question itself, Olympic and 

non-Olympic! We don’t need to quantify what effort has been made or not. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Quirin:  Madame  la  présidente,  à  mon  avis,  cette  décision  est  non  seulement 
injuste mais elle divise aussi le sport mauricien. De ce fait, je demanderai au ministre de bien 

 

40 

vouloir revoir cette formule pour une autre qui ne pénalise pas principalement les disciplines 
non-Olympiques.  

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Madam  Speaker,  Olympic  is  Olympic!  It  is  governed  by  the 
Olympic Body and non-Olympic is non-Olympic. It is just like you have on this side of the 
House the Government and on the other side the Opposition! 

The same thing! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Quirin: Une dernière question, Madame la présidente.  
Madam Speaker: I will allow you a last question! 
Mr Quirin: Oui, une dernière question. La nouvelle formule, en fait, fait provision 
d’une  récompense  pro  rata  en  fonction  du  nombre  de  participants  dans  une  compétition. 
N’est-ce  pas  une  décision  injuste  vis-à-vis  des  sportifs,  que  ce  soit  des  disciplines 
Olympiques  ou  non-Olympiques ?  En  fonction  du  nombre  de  participants  dans  une 
compétition et la récompense est offerte par la suite en fonction de ça… 

Madam Speaker: What is your question, hon. Quirin? 
Mr Quirin: Je demande au ministre s’il ne considère pas cela comme étant injuste de 
déterminer  l’effort  par  rapport  aux  nombres  de  compétiteurs  dans  une  compétition, que  ce 
soit Olympique ou non-Olympique ? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Madam  Speaker,  I  think  c’est  plus  injuste  envers  l’athlète  qui 
pratique un sport Olympique que de voir tout le monde sur la même longueur d’onde. Il faut 
avoir  une  sorte  de  démarcation  and  this  has  always  been  the  case  even  in  Mauritius  and 
worldwide.  

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Leopold! 

OCTOPUS FISHING SEASON - YIELDING 

(No. B/717) Mr J. Leopold (Second Member for Rodrigues) asked the Minister of 
Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and  Outer  Islands  whether, 
following the closure of the Octopus Fishing Season 2015 in part of mainland Mauritius, he 
will state the outcome thereof in terms of the yielding of octopus. 

41 

 
Mr Koonjoo: Madam Speaker, I am informed that a two-month voluntary closure of 
the octopus fishery on a pilot basis was launched on 10 August 2015. The closure applied 
only to Le Morne and Souillac regions.  

The pilot project was initiated by the Indian Ocean Commission through its SmartFish 
and Biodiversity Projects with the assistance of the European Union and in collaboration with 
the Mauritius Marine Conservation Society and officers of my Ministry. 

The  closure  of  the  octopus  fishery  was  implemented  after  the  carrying  out  of  an 
awareness campaign by  the Mauritius Marine Conservation Society with the fishers of the 
abovementioned regions.  

The closure was lifted on 10 October 2015. According to records, the five-day period 
from 10 to 14 October 2015, a total of about 400 Kg of octopus was captured in Le Morne, 
Baie du Cap and Riambel, compared to about 60 Kg for the month of June 2015 and about 90 
Kg for the month of July 2015 in these same regions. 

In view of the very encouraging results obtained during the pilot project, my Ministry 
has decided to introduce legislation to provide for a close season for octopus fishery from 
August to October as from next year. In this connection, I have given instructions to officers 
of  the  Fisheries  Protection  Services  of  my  Ministry  to  carry  out  an  awareness  campaign 
among fishers islandwide.  

This is being done in the interest of both the fisher community and the population at 

large.  

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Leopold! 

Mr Leopold: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the hon. Minister for coming up 
with a legislation. In Rodrigues, we have been doing the closing season for four years now 
and it is ruled by a regulation so, if the hon. Minister comes with a regulation and we have a 
regulation in Rodrigues, will they not conflict with each other? Is the hon. Minister going to 
consult the Local Authorities of Rodrigues so that there is no conflict between the two laws 
as we are in the same Republic? 

Mr Koonjoo: Obviously yes, Madam. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

42 

 
Mr Jhugroo: Madam Speaker, being given that this has been a success for the past 
four years in Rodrigues and the same has been tried here on a pilot basis, and the Minister is 
coming with a legislation, can I ask the hon. Minister whether the same will be applied for 
Agalega and the outer islands? 

Mr Koonjoo: Naturally yes, Madam. 

Mr Ganoo: The hon. Minister mentioned only two localities and he just praised the 
results that have been obtained. Does he intend to extend that ban on octopus to other areas in 
Mauritius also or will he restrict himself to the two localities? 

Mr Koonjoo: I just said, Madam, that it will be taken everywhere in Mauritius. 

Mr Leopold: So, during the closing season in Mauritius, were there any fraudulent 
operations that were done and, if yes, is the hon. Minister thinking of involving the National 
Coast Guard in the surveillance of this fishing activity? 

Mr Koonjoo: Madam Speaker, as far as I know, I don’t think that there has been any 
fraudulent exercise in Mauritius. I don’t know much about Rodrigues, but if there is anything 
like that, naturally it will concern both places to take care of. 

Mr  Jhuboo:  Since  the  hon.  Minister  will  come  with  a  piece  of  legislation,  has  he 

thought of a compensation for the local fishermen during the closure period? 

Mr Koonjoo:  I don’t think this has been done in Rodrigues; fishers in Rodrigues are 

picker ourites and they are done… 

(Interruptions) 

They are done there by the ladies, fisherwomen in Rodrigues. Unfortunately, we don’t have 
picker ourites in Mauritius, but I presume that … 

(Interruptions) 

I presume that we will take everything into consideration before putting forward a legislation.  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo! 

Mr Ganoo: From a report of the COI, I can see that “la lutte contre le braconnage a 
été  un  défi  majeur  des  éditions  précédentes »  and  the  authorities  in  Rodrigues  decided 

 

43 

« d’impliquer 200 pêcheurs pour rejoindre l’équipe de surveillance locale. » So, can I ask the 
hon.  Minister  also  –  I  do  not  blame  him  for  that,  he  cannot  say  whether  there  has  been 
braconnage in Mauritius –  to see to it that we can involve the local fishermen as part of the 
surveillance when the ban will be operational? 

Mr Koonjoo: Yes, Madam, I will see to it. 

Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for one and a half hours. 

 

At 12.58 p.m. the sitting was suspended.  
On resuming at 2.38 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

CASINOS DE MAURICE – WORKERS  

(No.  B/719)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training whether he will 
state if he has received a letter from the State Investment Corporation Management Services 
Co. Ltd. for a reduction of the workers of the Casinos de Maurice, dated 02 October 2015 
and, if so, indicate the number of workers proposed for laying off and the actions taken in 
relation thereto, if any. 

Mr Callichurn: Madam Speaker, in fact, my Ministry has received a letter dated 02 
October  2015  on  the  State  Investment  Corporation  Management  Services  Co.  Ltd,  giving 
notice,  under  section  39B  of  the  Employment  Rights  Act,  of  its  intention  to  reduce  the 
number of workers at the following Casinos managed by the Company – 

•  Le Grand Casino du Domaine Ltd; 
•  Le Caudan Waterfront Casino Ltd.; 
•  Sun Casinos Ltd.; 
•  Beach Casinos Ltd., and 
•  Casino de Maurice Ltd. 

In its notification, the State  Investment Corporation Management Services Co.  Ltd. 
has not indicated the number of workers proposed to be laid off. It has however, indicated 
that – 

(i) 

it proposes to initiate the process of reduction of the workforce, in view of the 
fact that – 

•  out  of  the  five  Casinos,  two  have  ceased  operation,  namely,  Beach 

Casino Ltd in 2009 and Sun Casino Ltd. in 2015; 

 

(ii) 

44 

• 

the  financial  position  of  the  companies  managing  the  casinos  have 
been  in  the  red  for  quite  a  number  of  years  and  to  date  the 
accumulated losses stood at Rs581 m., and  

the  management  had  no  other  alternative  but  to  initiate  discussions  on  the 
process  for  reduction  of  employees  under  section  39B  of  the  Employment 
Rights  Act,  as  all  other  options,  including  the  offer  of  a  Mutual  Agreed 
Scheme to 317 Casino employees aged 50 and above to take early retirement 
have not materialised. The option for a Mutually Agreed Scheme had not been 
accepted by the majority of the employees concerned and only 34 employees 
accepted the offer. 

In line with the provisions of section 39B of the Employment Rights Act, my Ministry 
has started an inquiry into the matter with a view to determining whether the reason for the 
intended reduction of workforce is justified or not.  

The inquiry has revealed that the number of employees to be laid off has not yet been 
determined  and  that  the  Management  has  initiated  discussions  with  the  Casino  Employees 
Union on the proposed reduction of workforce. Both parties have had two meetings on 12 and 
19  October  2015.  Another  meeting  between  the  parties  has  been  fixed  for  Monday  26 
October 2015.   

My Ministry is closely monitoring the situation. 
Mr Bhagwan:  Can the hon. Minister inquire as to whether he has been informed on 
which ground the SIC is imposing that the employees that would be transferred to the casino 
of  Grand’  Baie  should  leave  the  union  and  that  they  should  not  join  any  union?    Has  the 
attention of the Minister of Labour been drawn to that particular condition imposed by the 
SIC Ltd.? 

Mr  Callichurn:  Well,  I  have  not  been  informed  of  the  situation,  but  I  have  been 
informed that the employees currently working at different casinos will be transferred to the 
casino of Grand’ Baie, the newly opened casino. 

Mr  Bhagwan:    Can  the  hon.  Minister  of  Labour  explain  to  the  House  if  the 
redundancy  under the economic grounds applies  to the casinos of Mauritius, knowing that 
overstaffing is the result of the management strategy and Government policy of liberalising 
the gaming sector and also whether the figures given for the losses have been double-checked 
by any other third party, by the Ministry of Labour? 

45 

 
Mr  Callichurn:  My  Ministry  has  initiated  an  inquiry  and  we  are  looking  into  this 
aspect, but I am given to understand that the economic reason is that the casino is facing a 
financial difficulty for quite some time now. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Concerning  the  casino  of  Grand’  Baie,  could  the  hon.  Minister  of 
Labour  inform  the  House  what  are  the  grounds  on  which  the  SIC  intends  to  transfer 
employees from the SICMS services? Could he also inform the House whether there are new 
terms of contract and whether the Ministry of Labour has been made aware of these terms 
and conditions for the new contract which are offered to the workers who are going to be 
transferred to Grand’ Baie? 

Mr Callichurn: I am given to understand that the new terms and conditions will be 

applicable to those who will be transferred to Casino of Grand’ Baie. 

Mr Mohamed:  Could I ask the hon. Minister whether he could confirm that at some 
stage  during  the  negotiations  between  the  employees  represented  by  the  unions  or  by 
themselves  and  management  in  presence  of  the  Ministry  of  Labour  that  the  employer  had 
unilaterally decided to amend one of the conditions of employment that had initially formed 
part of the Award, namely to ensure that the transport allowance that they were entitled to, be 
purely and simply cancelled as well as the 14th month which they were entitled to as part of 
their package, forming part of an  Award and that also had, unilaterally,  on the part of the 
employer  been  cancelled  without  consultations?  And,  lastly,  that  the  Ministry  of  Labour 
rightly, I am informed, indicated to the employer that they were in the wrong. 

Mr Callichurn: I will certainly look into the matter and I take good note of whatever 
the hon. Member has stated. But I must say that the negotiation is still ongoing and that no 
final decision has yet been taken. 

Mr Bhagwan:  Madam Speaker, I will go on the same line as my Colleague. There 
are several sums which are due to the workers and which are their normal entitlements. So, 
can  the  hon.  Minister,  at  least,  have  a  follow-up  with  his  officers  along  with  the  SIC 
Management Services - we are reaching December and they are all human beings - that they 
be paid whatever sums which are due to them, especially to the lower grades and other grades 
and not the fat cows which have been appointed on political reasons and doing nothing there? 

Mr Callichurn: Is the hon. Member referring to the 14th month bonus? 
Mr Bhagwan:  Including that and other allowances, sums which are due to them in 

the course of their normal duties, which have not been paid since months. 

Mr Callichurn: I will certainly look into the matter. 

 

46 

MINISTRY OF HEALTH & QUALITY OF LIFE - INFRASTRUCTURAL 

PROJECTS   

(No. B/720) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
Ministry  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life,  he  will  give  details  of  the  infrastructural  projects 
undertaken therefor, since January to June 2015, indicating the projects in respect of which 
the study and design phases thereof have been completed, indicating in each case – 

(a) when the bids therefor will be launched; 
(b) total estimated value thereof, and  
(c) amount of fees paid out to the consultants therefor in each case, if any, as at to 

date. 

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, I am informed that since the proclamation of the Public 
Procurement Act 2006, each Ministry and Department is responsible for the implementation 
of  its  own  infrastructural  projects.    My  Ministry  provides  technical  assistance  for  the 
preparation  of  specifications,  designs,  cost  estimates,  bidding  documents  for  floating  of 
tenders  and  eventually  for  supervision  during  implementation  and  certification  of  payment 
claims. 

With regard to projects on behalf of the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life, I am 
informed that since January to June 2015, actions have been initiated for the implementation 
of six projects as follows - 

•  New  Long  Mountain  Hospital  Phase  II  comprising  conversion  of  the  first 
floor to accommodate offices, conference room, mess and dormitories.  The 
contract  has  been  awarded  for  the  sum  of  Rs2,906,000  out  of  which  an 
amount of Rs1,633,306.60 has already been paid; 

•  Extension  to  Pharmacy  at  Jawaharlal  Nehru  Hospital  for  which  the 
preliminary  stages  have  been  completed.    The  working  drawings  are  being 
finalised  and  necessary  clearances  being  sought  from  relevant  authorities 
before  seeking  the  approval  of  the  Buildings  Plan  Committee.    Bids  are 
expected to be launched within the current financial year; 

•  Floreal Mediclinic project comprising construction of a two storeyed building 
at the location of an ex-Community Health Centre.  Preliminary designs have 
been  completed  and  bidding  documents  and  final  drawings  are  under 

 

47 

preparation and are expected to be ready by end of November this year for 
launching of tenders; 

•  Construction of New Phoenix Community Health Care Centre to replace the 
old  building  and  provide  additional  space.    The  preliminary  designs  have 
been  completed.    The  working  drawings  are  being  finalised  and  necessary 
clearances being sought from relevant authorities before seeking the approval 
of the Buildings Plan Committee.  Bids are expected to be launched by March 
2016; 

•  Extension of the Dialysis Unit at Dr. A. G. Jeetoo Hospital to accommodate 
additional dialysis machines to cater for more patients.  The project is still at 
a design stage, and 

•  Rehabilitation of an existing building at Solferino, Vacoas to accommodate a 
Cancer Centre for which the preliminary designs are being worked out by a 
Consultant appointed on 14 September 2015.    

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (b) of the question, the total estimated value of 

the abovementioned projects, excluding the Cancer Centre, amounts to some Rs135 m.     

As regards part (c), I am informed that no consultancy fees have yet been paid to any 

of these projects. 

Mr Rughoobur: Madam Speaker, the information given  relates to the  current  year 
January to June 2015. I don’t know if the hon. Minister has the information - because it was 
since January 2014 to June 2015 - on the list of projects that has been designed and paid to 
Consultants. The question was based on the amount of money paid to Consultants, designs 
ready but tenders that have not been launched. 

Mr Bodha: I have answered the question with regard to the dates. What I can say to 
the hon. Member is that we have 33 projects which are at the design stage and 15 projects 
which  are  at  the  construction  and  supervision  stage  and  they  are  being  monitored  by  my 
Ministry. Now, if a specific question is put, I will be able to put a list of all the projects and 
consultancy fees which have been paid in relation thereto. 

Mr Mohamed: Madam Speaker, we talked about a list of 30 or so projects. Can the 
hon. Minister confirm to this House if the Area Health Centre in the area of St. Francois in 
Plaine Verte, Constituency No. 3, happens to be - if at all, not details required for that - on 

 

48 

that list? Madam Speaker would understand why I am putting that question which is a very 
old story, indeed. 

Mr Bodha: I don’t have a list, but I can provide the information to the hon. Member. 

Mr Rughoobur: May I suggest to the hon. Minister like you have in the Ministry of 
Education,  for  those  big  Ministries  where  you  have  got  huge  capital  projects,  if  he  would 
consider proposing to those Ministries, I think, a Project Implementation Unit, like you have 
in the Ministry of Education, the appropriate resources for the follow-up to ensure whatever 
project  is  to  be  implemented.  One  is  the  question  of  project  implementation  for  the  big 
Ministries but also for the maintenance of those once the projects are completed, like for the 
Ministry of Health, for example, having a series of buildings to maintain once the projects are 
completed. 

Mr Bodha: I think, Madam Speaker, that there have been cases where officers from 
my Ministry, engineers or others are attached to another Ministry to, in fact, do the design 
and supervision later. Well, I think if that can help, we will, but what we are doing is we have 
a meeting with the Ministry and we go project by project to see how to make them happen as 
soon as we can. 

Mr Jhugroo: I just heard the hon. Minister, in his reply, saying that there are above 
30 big projects in the pipeline. So, can I ask him whether he has got enough professionals in 
his Ministry to look after the design and monitoring of these projects? 

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, we never have enough professionals. What we do, in 
fact, we have a list of priorities. But I think the most important priority is the funding of those 
projects and as soon as there is a funding process, then we can have a hierarchy of priorities 
and make things happen. 

DR. BEERGOONATH GHURBURRUN HOME - GRANT 

(No. B/721) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked the Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions whether, in 
regard to the Dr. Beergoonath Ghurburrun Home, she will – 

(a) state - 

(i) the quantum of funds granted thereto since January 2014 to date, and  

 

49 

(ii)  if  she  is  aware  that  the  employees  thereof  whose  employment  has  been 
terminated over the past 24 months have reported to the Ministry of  Labour, 
Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and  Training  that  they  have  been  unfairly 
dismissed, and  

(b) for the benefit of the House, obtain information as to -  

(i)  if it is being run in strict compliance with the legislation regarding residential 

care homes, and  

(ii) the  procedures  followed  for  the  appointment  of  the  Managing  Committee 

thereof. 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: I wish to inform the House that my Ministry has, in a letter 
from Dr. Beergoonath Ghurburrun Home dated 05 October 2015, been informed that since 08 
September 2015, the name of the Gandhi Breedh Ashram has been changed into that of Dr. 
Beergoonath Ghurburrun Home.  

The quantum of funds granted to the Ashram from January 2014 to August 2015 was 
Rs12,086,705  for  both  male  and  female  units.  The  amount  of  funds  for  the  month  of 
September has not yet been included as it is the practice that payment for a particular month 
is effected in the next month. Therefore, payment of funds for the month of September 2015 
will be effected in October.  

With  regard  to  part  (a)  (ii),  I  am  informed  by  the  Ministry  of  Labour,  Industrial 
Relations,  Employment  and  Training  that  two  complaints  of  alleged  termination  of 
employment of two employees during the past 24 months have been received. One of them 
has been reinstated and for the other one, his claim has been settled by way of compensation.  
As regards part (b) (i), I wish to inform the House that the Home was founded in 1965 
and has since then been running in accordance with the rules of the Residential Care Homes 
Act  2003  and  the  Residential  Care  Homes  Regulations  2005.    However,  on  17  November 
2013, Dr. Beergoonath Ghurburrun to whom the Residential Care Home licence was issued 
passed away and a relative took charge of the administration of the Home.  

I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  the  licence  of  the  Home  expired  on  07  September 
2014.  Payment of the licence fees by the Home for the period ending 07 September 2015 has 
been  duly  accepted  and  the  licence  will  be  issued  as  soon  as  proper  documentation 
evidencing that the applicant is a fit and proper person is submitted to the Residential Care 
Home’s Board and the appropriate procedure is followed.  

Moreover,  inspectors  from  my  Ministry  conduct  site  visits  nearly  every  week  to 
ascertain  and  ensure  that  the  rules  of  the  Residential  Care  Homes  Act  2003  and  the 

 

50 

Residential Care Homes Regulations 2005 are complied with. I wish to point out that during 
these  weekly  visits  some  complaints  have  been  received.  One  of  the  alleged  complaints 
concerned non-compliance of choice of food of an inmate. Management was informed of the 
rights  of  inmates  and  proper  action  was  taken.  The  second  complaint  concerned  the 
installation of camera in the consultation room of the doctor posted at the Home. The needful 
has been done and the camera removed. Both complaints have already been dealt with.  

Madam  Speaker,  with  an  ageing  population  in  Mauritius,  there  is  bound  to  be  an 
increasing  number  of  homes  to  cater  for  the  needs  of  the  elderly.  I  wish  to  reiterate  the 
commitment of our Government to ensure the protection of the elderly people in our society. 
This has always been one of our top priorities. We shall leave no stone unturned to ensure 
that residents of homes are protected from ill-treatment, abuse, violence and non-respect of 
their rights. In case there is evidence of occurrence of such circumstances, we will see to it 
that  immediate  remedial  actions  are  taken  and  severe  sanctions  are  meted  out  against  the 
perpetrators or any other person responsible.  

It  is  important  to  note  that  an  amount  of  Rs1.4  m.  has  been  budgeted  for  the 
installation of CCTV cameras in charitable homes with a view to detecting and preventing 
abuse, violence and ill-treatment of our elderly people. A survey has already been carried out 
on the number of cameras required which receive capitation grant. On 06 October 2015, my 
Ministry  has  written  to  the  Commissioner  of  Police  to  work  out  the  specifications  for  the 
supply and installation of CCTV cameras for the purpose of … 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Minister, I am sorry to interrupt you, but you may come with 
a  statement  later  on,  on  questions  of  homes  in  general.  I  think  you  have  answered  your 
question and if…  

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Madam  Speaker,  if  you  have  a  look  at  the  length  of  the 

question, I am bound to give a lengthy answer. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, but you have to reply to the question. If you want to come on 

the question of homes generally, then you can come with a statement. 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Sometimes  we  have  to  give  some  explanations  for  hon. 

Members to understand. 

Madam Speaker: I am sorry, hon. Minister, this is my ruling. You have to go by my 

ruling. 

 

51 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: As far as the procedures followed for the appointment of 

the Managing Committee at Part (b) (ii)… 

(Interruptions) 

…I am informed by the Ministry of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training 
that according to Rules 11 and 12 of the said association, the management of the association 
is vested in a committee of four persons to be elected every three years at its Annual General 
Meeting  and  the  four  elected  members  choose  amongst  themselves,  a  President,  a  Vice-
President, a Secretary and a Treasurer. That’s all. 

 (Interruptions) 

Mr Rughoobur: This is a serious issue.  Can I ask the hon. Minister if she is aware of 
complaints from former employees who have been forced to resign - I find this is a serious 
matter - from the home there?  Is the hon. Minister aware of this? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Well, as from information received from the  Ministry of 
Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and  Training,  the  two  cases  referred  to  alleged 
termination  of  employment,  that’s  all.  The  nature  of  complaint  is  alleged  termination  of 
employment. 

Mr Rughoobur: Well, in view of the list of complaints that we receive, may I ask the 
hon. Minister if she could look into the possibility - as per the registration of Care Homes Act 
under clause 24 empowers her - of setting up an Advisory Committee, on this specific issue, 
but, at the same time, look at the overall functioning of those care homes in Mauritius? 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Well,  you  will  agree  with  me  that  it  all  depends  on  the 
seriousness of the complaint. If it is a minor complaint which can be dealt with, let’s say, by 
mediation,  for  example,  choice  of  food  of  inmates,  well  and  good.  But  if  there  is  serious 
offence, serious complaint, proper actions will have to be taken, rest assured. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Fowdar! 

Mr Fowdar: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Can I ask the hon. Minister whether her 
Ministry  receives  annual  financial  statements  from  nursing  care  homes  for  scrutiny  and  to 
ensure that the grants or subsidies given to them are spent judiciously? 

 

52 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Well, I have been made aware that the financial statements 
are forwarded to the Registrar of Associations and as far as my Ministry is concerned, regular 
visits are made by our officers to inspect the record and if there is any discrepancy identified, 
my Ministry will take immediate and necessary actions for the security and protection of our 
elderly. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed: Thank you, Madam Speaker. May I ask the hon. Minister how many 
inmates are there currently at the Dr. Beergoonath Ghurburrun Home and what is the number 
of staff currently serving them? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Well, there are presently 72 bed capacity: 48 male and 24 

female, and about 32 employees. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo! 

Mr Ganoo: May I ask the hon. Minister in this precise case of the Dr. Beergoonath 
Ghurburrun Home, there has been so far no financial discrepancy registered or noted by her 
Ministry and that, on the contrary, in the case of this Home, over and above the grants that 
are granted to the Home, the family has to top up for the proper running of this Home? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: I am not aware of that. 

Madam Speaker: Last question, hon. Fowdar! 

Mr Fowdar: Thank you, Madam Speaker. With regard to the accounts submitted to 
the Registrar of Companies, this is normal practice, but the fact that the Ministry is giving 
money to the nursing home, I think the hon. Minister should see to it that they have a say on 
the  expenses,  so  they  need  to  scrutinise  the  accounts  and  to  see  that  the  money  is  spent 
judiciously.  Madam  Speaker,  I  also  wanted  to  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  whether 
donations - what hon. Ganoo has just mentioned - given to the inmates directly by the parents 
or well-wishers, whether there are guidelines on how their money is spent or whether they 
have control on the money, whether the Ministry has control. 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Well, I don’t have the answer now. If my friend can come 

with a substantive question, I will look into the matter and answer properly. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Rughoobur! 

 

53 

TOURISM AUTHORITY - RECRUITMENT 

(No. B/722) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications 
whether,  in  regard  to  the  Tourism  Authority,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain 
therefrom, information as to the - 

(a)  number  of  new  recruits  thereat,  since  January  2015  to  date,  category-wise, 

indicating in each case, the qualifications held; 

(b) composition of the Enforcement Division thereof, indicating the total amount of 

contraventions booked over the past six months, and  

(c) total amount of money earmarked for the training of the staff thereof, indicating 
the amount thereof spent, since January 2015 to date and the categories of staff 
concerned therewith. 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  Tourism 

Authority as follows - 

With regard to part (a) of the question, a Director has been recruited in September, on 
a two-year contract. He holds a Master in Business Administration and reckons more than 30 
years’  experience  at  senior  management  level  in  the  field  of  tourism  development  and 
hospitality management.  

As regards part (b) of the question, the Monitoring and Compliance Unit is currently 
manned  by  an  Acting  Manager  and  four  Tourism  Enforcement  Officers.  Over  the  past  six 
months,  it  has  established  166  contraventions  as  compared  to  101  contraventions  for  the 
corresponding period of 2014.  

I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that,  in  the  performance  of  its  enforcement  duties,  the 
Monitoring and Compliance Unit is also assisted by Police Officers, Officers of the National 
Coast Guard and Inspectors of the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life. Moreover, actions 
have  been  initiated  for  the  reinforcement  of  the  monitoring  capacity  of  the  Unit,  with  a 
recruitment of ten additional Tourism Enforcement Officers, which is currently in process.  

With regard to part (c) of the question, for the Financial Year 2015-2016, an amount 
of  Rs3  m.  has  been  earmarked  for  training  purposes  for  the  benefit  of  front  liners  of  the 
Tourism Industry, including the staff. So far, officers of the grade of Tourism Enforcement 
and IT have followed a training course on ‘Tourism in the Digital Age’.  

 

54 

I further understand that the current training plan is being revisited for implementation 

during this financial year.  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rughoobur! 

Mr  Rughoobur:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  May  I  know  from  the  hon.  Deputy 
Prime Minister in my reply to PQ No. B/322, it is a couple of months earlier, the Tourism 
Authority was to embark on a human resources audit and the need was felt for the recruitment 
of additional Enforcement Officers.  The hon. Deputy Prime Minister mentioned about the 
recruitment of officers, was he speaking about the recruitment of those Enforcement Officers 
itself? 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  I  read  this  again,  Madam  Speaker.  I  said  ‘the 
recruitment of ten additional Tourism Enforcement Officers’. So, we are recruiting Tourism 
Enforcement Officers.  

As regards the HR audit, I think I will leave it to the new Director who just joined to 

decide as to whether this is required. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The hon. Minister has talked about the 
number of people who have been recruited as goes the question. Would he be able to answer 
my question as regards the number of people in the same corresponding period who have lost 
their jobs?  If he cannot, I can come with a substantive question. 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Come with a substantive question! 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: Can I know from the hon. Deputy Prime Minister whether apart from 
the one he has informed us who has been recruited, there have been people of minor grades 
who have been recruited and whether those who were on contract, we still remember those 
who were having problems, contract workers, whether these have been solved? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: There are still a number of people on contract, Madam 
Speaker and I agree that we need to find a solution for these people. There has been no other 
recruitment  except  a  few  people  who  have  been  transferred,  I  think,  from  SPDC  to  the 
Tourism Authority. 

 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rughoobur! 

55 

Mr Rughoobur: I would request the hon. Deputy Prime Minister if he could consider 
probably  amending  the  Tourism  Authority  Act  to  ensure  that  the  taxis  based  at  hotels  are 
issued with a tourist enterprise licence as well. I know it is not directly related to the question, 
but if he could? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, they have a taxi licence. I think it is 
probably  enough,  too  many  licences  will  not  help,  too  many  cooks  will  spoil  the  broth, 
Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Rughoobur!  

AFRICAN CHARTER ON DEMOCRACY, ELECTIONS AND GOVERNANCE 

- SCHOOL CURRICULA 

(No. B/723) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 
Research  whether,  in  regard  to  the  African  Charter  on  Democracy,  Elections  and 
Governance, she will state the specific and concrete proposals that will be made to lead our 
students to be fully aware of the substance thereof and of their role in the building process of 
a  democratic  society,  following  the  Joint  Experts  Consultative  Meeting  held  in  Abuja,  in 
Nigeria, between 28 and 30 September 2015, to engage the African Ministers of Education in 
the mainstreaming thereof in the school curricula. 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Madam Speaker, I wish to highlight at the outset that the 
specific  objectives  of  the  Joint  Experts  Consultative  Meeting  which  was  held  in  Abuja 
(Nigeria) from 28 to 30 September 2015 in order to engage African Union Member States 
Ministries  of  Education  in  the  inclusion  and  mainstreaming  of  the  African  Charter  on 
Democracy, Elections and Governance (ACDEG) in the school curricula, are to - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

popularise the African Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance among 
young citizens so that shared values reach the grass root level; 

design activities in the school curriculum to promote the values of this Charter, 
and 

to enable students to have an active voice in the promotion of democracy in their 
country. 

 

56 

This  would  imply  the  inclusion  of  these  shared  values  enshrined  in  the  Charter,  into  the 
existing modules or curricular activities at the school level.  It would also mean engagement 
of Ministries of Education in the development of comprehensive training kits and programme 
on the African Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance or teachers and students.  

Madam  Speaker,  a  New  Curriculum  Framework  is  being  elaborated  which  makes 
provision  for  the  inclusion  of  cross  curricular  themes  and  the  development  of  21st  century 
skills and competencies, which embraces core principles of a democratic society such as - 

•  Citizenship Education; 
Intercultural Education; 
• 
•  Values; 
•  Human Rights Education (which is being integrated in the Form I Social 

Studies syllabus as from January 2016, on a pilot basis), and  

•  Sustainable Development. 

Work is in progress at the level of the Ministry and at the MIE on the above issues. 

However,  I  wish  to  point  out  that  according  to  information  obtained,  the  outcome 
document of the Joint Expert Consultative Meeting has yet to be tabled and for any decisions 
to  be  taken  thereon  to  be  binding,  the  recommendations  as  may  be  endorsed  by  the 
Specialised Technical Committee (STC) on Education, Science and Technology, need to be 
adopted at the AU Summit in January 2016. 

Therefore, as explained above, the report of the STC has to go through the decision-

making process of the AU and adopted by an AU Summit before its adoption. 

Nonetheless, Madam Speaker, in spite of the above, I wish to reassure the House that 
we are leaving no stone unturned in our endeavour through the National Curriculum to instill 
in  the  youth  those  values  that  would  contribute  in  the  building  of  a  more  democratic, 
peaceful, unified and prosperous society. 

Mr Rughoobur:  May I ask the hon. Minister to please ensure, because we are talking 
a  lot  about  the  reforms,  whether  it  is  the  nine-year  schooling  or  any  reform  that  will  be 
coming - we are looking forward to - that it should be aligned with the recommendations of 
the African Union? And will the hon. Minister, please, look into this issue and ensure that in 
her Ministry, the recommendations are taken on board while the hon. Minister is speaking of 
reform in her Ministry? 

 

57 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun:  As mentioned earlier, Madam Speaker, this is being taken 

care of, in spite of the fact that the Charter has still not been ratified.   

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Jhugroo! 

LE BOUCHON PUBLIC BEACH – ACCESS ROAD 

(No. B/724) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  Le 
Bouchon public beach, he will state if consideration will be given for the construction of a 
secondary access road thereto, as the only one road leading to the beach is narrow and traffic 
congestion occurs thereat and, if so, when and, if not, why not. 

Mr Bodha:  Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Road Development Authority that 
the existing access road leading to the public beach is not classified under the Roads Act and 
as such, is under the jurisdiction of the Local Authority, that is, the District Council of Grand 
Port.  

The upgrading of the existing access road/or the construction of a new secondary access 
will, therefore, have to be considered by the concerned Local Authority, that is, the District 
Council of Grand Port. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Uteem! 

CENTRAL WATER AUTHORITY – NON-REVENUE WATER  

(No.  B/725)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in 
regard to water supply, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Central Water 
Authority, for the period January 2015 to date, information as to the - 

(a)  percentage of non-revenue water and  
(b) pipe replacement project works carried out, indicating the costs thereof. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 

Collendavelloo):  Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Central Water Authority that - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

the average level of Non-Revenue Water is 58%, that is, for the period 
January 2015 to date; 
there are presently 30 ongoing projects to replace 130 kms of pipelines 
throughout the Island of Mauritius for a total cost of Rs976.9 m. These 
projects are scheduled to be completed by March 2016, and 
200 kms of pipeline will be replaced over the next 8 years for a total 
cost of about Rs2.3 billion.  

 

58 

I  am  also  informed  that  under  the  sewerage  projects  being  implemented  by  the 
Wastewater Management Authority, 103 kms of pipes have been replaced as at September 
2015. 

Mr  Uteem:  Madam  Speaker,  may  I  know  from  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister,  what 

action, if any, is the CWA taking to reduce the non-revenue water? 

Mr Collendavelloo:  Well, first of all, we have got to divide it into two.  First of all, 
there is the physical loss, which is about 45% and the rest is commercial loss.  Commercial 
loss is pilfering, wrong metering, errors, etc.; that is easy to cure.  It requires manpower and 
some brainpower as well. 

The  second  one  is  physical  water  losses.    Well,  we  have  got  4,000  kms  of  pipes  in 
Mauritius. 1,570 kms, that is, some 40% require replacement. So, these projects are part of 
the action plan to diminish the non-revenue water loss. This is part of the development plan 
of the CWA. 

Mr Uteem:  In 2013, the Government recruited the services of Singapore Corporation 
Enterprise to prepare a Memorandum for the CWA, precisely to reduce non-revenue water. 
May  I know from the hon. Vice-Prime Minister whether Singapore Corporation Enterprise 
has completed and submitted its report and what action has been taken since then?  

Mr Collendavelloo:  I understand they are still working, but I am sure this could be the 

subject of a substantive question and I shall gladly give all the information. 

Mr Ganoo:  Can the hon. Vice-Prime Minister indicate to the House what will be the 
percentage of the non-revenue water after the works, which he just mentioned, will have been 
completed? Does he have an idea? 

Mr Collendavelloo:  I wouldn’t be able to hazard a guess.  So, we are now at 58%.  All 
the plans are intended to reduce it, but I am not aware off-hand as to what is the percentage 
that we would reach. 

Mr Uteem: I have not heard the hon. Vice-Prime Minister properly.  Can he repeat it - 
if  he  has  done  so  -  what  is  the  amount  that  has  been  spent  for  this  year  by  the  CWA  in 
replacing defective pipelines? 

Mr Collendavelloo:  Well, I don’t have the answer year by year.  What I know is that 
we  have  30  ongoing  projects  to  replace  130  kms  of  pipeline  for  Rs976.9  m.  If  the  hon. 
Member wants the breakdown year by year, I will have to come back. 

Mr Lesjongard: Madam Speaker, the hon. Vice-Prime Minister stated that he doesn’t 
have  an  indication  with  regard  to  what  would  eventually  be  the  percentage  loss  in  non-

 

59 

revenue  water  when  works  are  completed.  Can  we  have  an  indication  of  what  are  the 
international norms with regard to non-revenue water? 

Mr Collendavelloo:  No, I am sorry.  This is not a quiz.  This is Question Time.   I 

don’t have it. 

Dr. Sorefan: Madam Speaker, may we know from the hon. Vice-Prime Minister if he 
is aware that in Quatre Bornes, in conjunction with Wastewater Management Authority, they 
replace the old pipe with the new pipe, but we are still getting water from the old pipe? The 
new pipe has not been connected to the residents for nearly one year. 

Mr Collendavelloo:  I am sure they will do something about it.  This is a matter of so 

little detail that I am not aware of this for the moment. 
 

Madam Speaker:  Last question on this, hon. Uteem! 
Mr Uteem:  Thank  you, Madam Speaker.  Earlier this year, to justify increasing the 
contribution to Mauritius Growth Fund, the levy that has been put on petroleum products and 
where around Rs1.3 billion additional revenue would be raised, the Minister of Finance and 
Economic Development stated that the rationale for it is to give money to the CWA to replace 
pipelines. So, may I know from the hon. Vice-Prime Minister how much money has CWA 
obtained from the STC  coming directly from the Rs1.3 billion that have been imposed on 
petroleum products? 

Mr Collendavelloo: I will need notice of that. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Uteem! 

BAI (FORMER) - BRITISH-AMERICAN INVESTMENTS COMPANY (KENYA) 

LTD - SHARES 

(No.  B/726)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 
Reforms, Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the 
shares in the British-American Investments Company (Kenya) Ltd. held by the former British 
American Insurance Co. (Mtius) Ltd. and its related companies, he will, for the benefit of the 
House, obtain from the Financial Services Commission, information as to the – 

(a) 

(b) 

offers received as at to date for the purchase thereof, indicating in each case, 
the price and terms and conditions thereof; 

value thereof at the time of the appointment of the conservators of the British 
American Insurance Co. (Mtius) Ltd., and 

 
(c) 

current value thereof. 

60 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed 
by  the  Financial  Services  Commission  that  an  acceptable  offer  has  been  received  for  the 
purchase of 23.3% shares held by the Former British American Insurance Co. (Mtius) Ltd. in 
British American Investments Company (Kenya) Ltd. 

Madam  Speaker,  British  American  Investments  Company  (Kenya)  Ltd.  is  listed  on 
the Nairobi Stock Exchange. At this stage, it would be inappropriate to disclose information 
of a sensitive nature. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, the Conservators were appointed on 03 April 
2015 and the quoted share price of British American Investments Company (Kenya) Ltd. was 
26 Kenyan shilling per share. 

With  regard  to  part  (c)  of  the  question,  Madam  Speaker,  the  shares  of  British 
American Investments Company (Kenya) Ltd. were being traded at 15 Kenyan shilling on 15 
October 2015. 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, is the hon. Minister aware that the Administrators – at 
that time they were Conservators – had actually informed the FSC that they had received two 
offers, one for Rs4.1 billion and one for Rs4.7 billion for the sale of the shares in Britam?  If 
this is the case, can I know from the hon. Minister why the FSC did not go ahead for the sale 
of those shares? 

Mr Bhadain: This is not the case, Madam Speaker. There was a verbal conversation 
between the Special Administrator and the Chairperson of the FSC informing that there was 
an offer, but there was no mention about the figure that the hon. Member has mentioned and 
also there has been no expression of interest or any documented offers received at that time, 
when the previous Special Administrators were there. However, as I have just stated, there is 
an offer which has been received and accepted by the FSC which is, shall I say, more than the 
loan which has been taken from the Central Bank of Mauritius of Rs3.5 billion at a rate of 
3.6% interest payable within one year; it is much more than that, but, of course, I can’t give 
precise details because it is of a confidential nature. 

Mr Uteem: Can the hon. Minister confirm whether he is aware or not that at the point 
when the Conservators were going to sell the shares in Britam back in June 2015 to pay the 
Super Cash Back Gold, the FSC or someone else had requested that the transaction be carried 
out through a designated broker from South Africa? 

61 

 
Mr  Bhadain:  Again,  that’s  not  correct,  Madam  Speaker.  Firstly,  the  Special 
Administrators  at  that  time  were  never  going  to  sell  the  shares  in  Britam,  Kenya  because 
there is a process to follow. The Central Bank of Kenya has to be informed in such a case. 
They were looking into the possibilities of getting people to express their interests on those 
shares.  

Now, true it is that there was a  company in South Africa whose services had been 
retained to look into the possibilities of attracting investors to express an interest as well; that 
was Barclays Investment in South Africa. I must say, Madam Speaker, that to go back on the 
share price, there is always a premium which is attributable to a shareholding of 23.3%. What 
you  are  talking  about,  it  is  taken  in  a  big  insurance  company  like  that  and  that  premium, 
today, has been materialised and, hence, the value which has been obtained by the FSC on 
shares  which  is  well  above  what  has  been  borrowed  from  a  central  bank  for  repaying  the 
people of Super Cash Back Gold on 30 June 2015. 

Mr Bérenger: Will the hon. Minister agree with me that the comparison should not 
be with the money that has been borrowed, but the comparison should be the value of the 
shares at a given point in time and now? Will he agree with me? 

Mr Bhadain: Yes, I certainly agree, but the reason as to why I mentioned the loan is 
to give the assurance that public funds are not being taken to repay the loan which was taken 
from  the  Central  Bank.  With  regard  to  the  share  price  which  was  quoted,  the  price  of  26 
shillings at the time when the Conservators had looked into the matter, the offer now is better 
than that. 

Mr Bérenger: I think I heard the hon. Minister say that there is at present a firm offer 
being considered by FSC, but I think I did not hear him make any reference to what the hon. 
Minister of Finance has said, that is, that a sovereign  fund to be created will be used to buy 
those shares. Is there any reason why no reference has been made to that statement from the 
hon. Minister of Finance who had this idea of a wealth fund, sovereign fund to be set up for 
purchasing those shares, has this been abandoned? 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, firstly, let me say that the FSC has already approved 
the offer. So, we are at an advanced stage and the buyer has also committed to pay 10% into 
an escrow account which is in the process of being done.  

With  regard  to  the  sovereign  fund,  I  must  say,  Madam  Speaker,  that  the  Financial 
Services Commission falls well into my portfolio and this is what has been decided by the 

 

62 

FSC  and  as  Minister  for  that  particular  sector,  Financial  Services,  I  think  it  is  a  big 
achievement. 

Mr Mohamed: Is the hon. Minister telling us that the hon. Minister of Finance is not 
really aware of what has just happened or that they are not on the same wavelength? Is that 
what he just said to us? 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, the hon. Member has the habit of misunderstanding 

things. I never said that. 

(Interruptions) 

Certainly not! And I can reassure him that the Minister of Finance is well aware of what is 
happening. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Uteem! 

COURTS ASIA & HILLBROW (MAURITIUS) LTD. - CLAIMS 

(No.  B/727)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 
Reforms, Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the 
claims made by Courts Asia and Hillbrow (Mauritius) Ltd. against the Special Administrator 
of  the  British  American  Insurance  Co.  (Mtius)  Ltd,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House, 
obtain from the Financial Services Commission, information as to – 

(a) 

(b) 

if it agrees with the content thereof, and 

the actions it has taken in relation thereto. 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, I am again informed by the FSC that Courts Asia Ltd 
has written a letter dated 27 August 2015 to the Special Administrator to signify its intention 
to claim damages for breach of obligations by Iframac Ltd (Special Administrator appointed). 

Inasmuch as this is a matter between two private parties, Madam Speaker, it would be 

inappropriate for me to make any comments thereof. 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, I heard what the hon. Minister has said, but has he taken 
cognizance of the letter written by Courts Asia Ltd and the serious allegations made in that 
letter and does he agree with those allegations bearing in mind the statement made in this 
very  august  Assembly  by  the  hon.  Minister  on  the  sale  of  Courts  to  Mammoth  instead  of 
Courts Asia Ltd? 

63 

 
Mr Bhadain: I am not aware of any serious allegations, Madam Speaker, but to be 
honest,  Courts  Asia  Ltd  was  one  of  the  parties  who  had  engaged  with  the  Special 
Administrator at that time. They were probably misled by the Special Administrator at that 
time. They chose to write a letter to the FSC to say that we intend to claim against the Special 
Administrator. As far as I am aware, there is no case which has been entered to date and these 
are issues between two private parties. I don’t see why we should get into it. 

Mr Uteem: The reason why we should get into it, Madam Speaker, is because in this 
august Assembly, the hon. Minister told this House that the offer from Mammoth was better 
than the offer from Courts Asia Ltd and it is clear from the letter that has been sent to the 
Administrator  that  Courts  Asia’s  offer  was  better  and  was  not  even  given  the  chance  to 
improve on their bid or so unlike Mammoth. 

Mr Bhadain: Well, Madam Speaker, this is certainly not the case and I think that the 
hon.  Member  is  again  misinformed.  The  offer  of  the  other  company,  Mammoth  Ltd.  was 
better in the assessment which has been conducted by the FSC and the FSC has decided to go 
ahead with that at a specific period.  

With regard to Courts Asia  Ltd  and Mammoth, they  were both informed that the 
consideration for the FSC and also for this Government was the social aspect. That was the 
prime consideration.  People’s jobs had to be safeguarded in the light of the massive fraud 
which has been conducted with BAI and the people who were running it at the time. These 
people were in no way party to that fraud, the employees who were working in Courts. 900 
employees, Madam Speaker! 720 jobs have been safeguarded out of 900 in Courts. 180 have 
been compensated well above what the law provides, that is, the Employment Rights Act and 
also they have integrated the Workfare Programme. I think again, this Government has done 
the maximum it could and the FSC has rightly taken the decision to go for Mammoth and I 
have  no  qualms  whatsoever  as  Minister  for  this  sector  about  the  decision  which  has  been 
taken by the FSC.  

Mr Uteem: Ex facie the claim, it is clear that what is in the claim is different from 
what the hon. Minister is saying because in the claim, Courts Asia is stating that they were 
willing to retain 85% of the employees unlike Mammoth who retained only 80%. They were 
willing to pay Rs26 m. compensation for people who are going to lose their jobs, whereas 
Mammoth gave only Rs6 m. and requested the Government to pay Rs6 m. So, in the light of 
these facts, would the hon. Minister still maintain that the offer of Mammoth was better than 
Courts Asia Ltd? 

 
Mr Bhadain: Absolutely, Madam Speaker. And the reason for that is because those 

64 

figures which have been quoted by the hon. Member came after the decision of the FSC. 
When The Board had already decided and evaluated the bids which were in its presence, then 
the gentleman from Courts Asia Ltd went to the press - we know how the press functions in 
those issues - to come and say: “I would have done this, I would have done that. I would have 
employed more people. I would have paid more!”  If we are to run a Government like that, 
then we will run into a brick wall! 

Madam Speaker: Next Question, Hon. Uteem! 

VEDIC SOCIAL ORGANISATION – SHELTERS - COMPLAINTS 

(No.  B/728)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  For  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and  Family  Welfare 
whether,  in  regard  to  the  shelters  administered  by  the  Vedic  Social  Organisation,  she  will 
state if she has received complaints in relation thereto and, if so, indicate the actions taken in 
relation thereto, if any. 

Mrs Perraud: Madam Speaker, I am informed that the Vedic Social Organisation is 
presently managing three shelters for children under Court Orders. Two of the shelters are 
owned  by  my  Ministry.  Management  services  contract  have  been  signed  with  the  Vedic 
Social Organisation for the management of the shelters. As regards the third one, a capitation 
grant per child accommodated is given to that organisation. Various complaints have been 
received  on  the  functioning  of  the  shelters  through  letters  received  at  the  level  of  my 
Ministry.  Furthermore,  both  the  internal  control  of  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development,  as  well  as  the  Director  of  Audit,  have  highlighted  shortcomings  on  various 
issues in the management of those shelters. 

Madam Speaker, as Minister responsible for the development of children, I have been 
very attentive to what stakeholders in the sector had to say. And the conditions prevailing in 
shelters  were  common  in  our  discussions.  I  have  made  it  a  point  to  visit  several  shelters 
personally, in the company of officers of my Ministry, and make an assessment. 

In the light of my observations, the hon. Prime Minister and Cabinet agreed upon my 
recommendation,  to  the  setting  up  of  a  Fact-Finding  Committee  on  Residential  Care 
Institutions/Shelters  for  Children  on  17  April  2015.  The  setting  up  of  a  Fact-Finding 
Committee  on  shelters  only  four  months  after  my  appointment  as  Minister  of  Child 

 

65 

Development is a clear signal that we mean business and will do all that is necessary for the 
optimal development of children. The report is awaited and its recommendations would be 
considered for implementations for an enhanced ‘prise-en-charge’ of the children placed in 
Residential Care Institutions/Shelters for children in line with the Convention on the Rights 
of the Child.  Madam Speaker, we have not waited for the conclusion of the Fact-Finding 
Committee to act or else it would have been very damaging. We have been proactive in our 
approach and the following measures have been taken –  

(i) 

meetings  were  held  at  the  level  of  my  Ministry  with  the  service  provider, 
drawing her attention on all shortcomings and representations made and this 
was followed through official letters addressed to the latter.  
Madam Speaker,  I would like, however, to underline that in the light of the 
shortcomings  in  respect  of  this  particular  shelter,  the  Management  Services 
Contract has not been renewed and is presently on a month-to-month basis; 

(iii) 

(ii)  my  Ministry  has  already  called  for  expression  of  interest  to  identify  NGOs, 
and individuals who are willing and who have the capacity to manage shelters 
for children according to set norms. But, unfortunately, the response was very 
low.  We  want  and  we  need  to  appoint  a  new  service  provider  following 
procedures,  but  we  must  have  people  who  have  the  knowledge,  the 
competence but above all a heart to care for children; 
close monitoring visits are presently being effected by the officers of the Child 
Development  Unit  (CDU)  to  ensure  that  the  best  interests  of  the  children 
accommodated therein are safeguarded at all times.  
And  as  monitoring  of  work  at  shelters  is  important,  my  Ministry  has  lately 
recruited  Family  Welfare  and  Protection  Officers  (FWPOs)  to  strengthen 
monitoring and service delivery to the family as a whole. The CDU needs a 
critical  mass  of  social  workers/FWPOs  with  the  right  knowledge,  skills  and 
attitudes  to  attend  to  the  needs  of  complex  and  difficult  cases.  There  was  a 
need  to  reinforce  and  strengthen  monitoring  and  supervision  of  shelters. 
FWPOs  presently  working  at  monitoring  of  shelters  are  doing  a  good  job, 
bringing  into  light  all  potential  threats  to  the  physical  and  emotional  well-
being of the children in shelters. 

We have also recruited, Madam Speaker, new Psychologists because we had only six 
Psychologists  posted  at  the  CDU  to  cater  for  six  outstations,  21  Residential  Institutions, 

 

66 

Foster  Care  Department,  Child  Mentoring  Programme  and  cases  referred  by  Family  Court 
and the DPP. 

Mr Bérenger:  I did not hear the hon. Minister give us the composition of that Fact-
Finding  Committee.  Can  I  know  who  chaired  it  and  who  were  the  other  members  of  that 
Fact-Finding Committee? 

Mrs Perraud: The composition of the Fact-Finding Committee: we have Mr Henry 
Vellien, Mrs Karuna Rajiah and Mr Cliff Grenade and as Secretary, the Deputy Permanent 
Secretary of my Ministry, Mrs Jaunbocus.  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Can the hon. Minister give us an indication of the Chair also? Who 

is chairing this committee? 

Mrs Perraud: Yes, excuse me, it is Mr Vellien. 

Mr  Uteem:  Madam  Speaker,  may  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  when  were  the 

complaints received and when were the meetings held by her Ministry? 

Mrs  Perraud:  I  must  inform  the  House  that  we  got  several  complaints.    I  can’t 
actually give a date.  Immediately after receiving the complaint letters, anonymous letters or 
telephone calls, I visited the shelter and after my visit I asked for the setting up of the Fact-
Finding Committee and then meet the service provider/Manager. 

Mr Uteem: Is the hon. Minister aware that the person in charge of this organisation is 
currently  on  bail  for  an  offence  relating  to  assault  on  children  and  his  son-in-law  is  also 
interdicted on the ground of sexual intercourse with minor in that shelter? 

Mrs Perraud: As I have already said, we had many serious allegations. This is one 
of the reasons why I asked for a Fact-Finding Committee. So, we have to let the Fact-Finding 
Committee work. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Jhugroo! 

PARIS & LONDON EMBASSIES – MAURITIAN DELEGATION - RENTED CARS  
(No. B/729) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade whether, 
in regard to the Embassies of Mauritius in Paris and in London respectively, he will state the 

 

67 

number of times they had rented cars to be put at the disposal of the former Prime Minister, 
of the members of his delegation and of other persons at his request, over the period July 
2005 to December 2014, indicating the – 

(a) make and model of the cars rented, and  
(b) total cost incurred therefor. 
Mr Sinatambou: Madam Speaker, I have been able to obtain only bits and pieces of 
information, since the question covers a period of nine years. The information sought is still 
being compiled and will be placed in the Library of the National Assembly in due course. 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Can  the  hon.  Minister  inform  the  House  what  amount  of  money  has 

been paid in London with regard to the rental of cars stating their make and model? 

Mr  Sinatambou:  The  total  amount  of  money  paid  for  cars  rented  for  the  former 

Prime Minister over the period is £257,130.96. That is an average amount of Rs13.2 m. 

Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Minister inform the House how many times cars had been 
rented for the former Prime Minister in London when our Mauritian Embassy has in its fleet 
two BMW series 5 and one series 7? 

Mr Sinatambou: In fact, our mission in London has one Mercedes 250, one BMW 
X5 make and one BMW serie 7 30. And the number of times for which cars have been rented 
over that period in London is 36. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Lesjongard!  

(Interruptions) 

Hon.  Jhugroo,  I  have  already  asked  for  the  next  question,  you  should  have  asked  your 
question quickly.  Yes, hon. Lesjongard! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Jhugroo, just tell me, are you challenging the ruling I just gave.  When I have asked for 
the next question, you can’t come back on this question. 

(Interruptions) 

CEB - ST LOUIS POWER STATION - BIDS 

(No.  B/730)  Mr  G.  Lesjongard  (Second  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to 
the Tender CPB-20-2015 for the development of the St Louis Power Station, he will, for the 
benefit of the House, obtain from the Central Electricity Board, information as to the –  

68 

 
(a) number of bids received;  
(b) names of the bidders therefor, indicating in each case the - 

(i) bid value thereof, and 
(ii) name and make of the engine manufacturer associated therewith, and  

(c) price quoted in respect of each engine therefor. 
The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo): Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Central Electricity Board that at the 
closing  date  of  01  October  2015,  the  Central  Procurement  Board  received  five  bids.  The 
names of the bidders and the price quoted are posted for public information on the website of 
the Central Procurement Board. I am tabling a copy as posted on the website.  

With regard to part (b)(ii) and (c) of the question, I am informed by the CEB that it 
has no information at this stage as the Central Procurement Board is currently carrying out 
the evaluation of bids. 

Mr Lesjongard: Madam Speaker, in a reply on 01 September, the hon. Vice-Prime 
Minister  himself  stated  with  regard  to  engine  manufacturers  that  we  do  not  have  many  of 
them running around the world.  Does he confirm that this is the case with this tender? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  Well,  there  are  not  many  people  who  manufacture  these 

machines. The matter has not changed in the last three months. 

Mr Lesjongard: May I  ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister whether he is aware that 
one of the engine manufacturers in the present tender has been imposed fines of the order of 
USD150 m. by a court of justice for paying bribes to secure contracts? 

Mr Collendavelloo: I am not even aware of what are the engine manufacturers who 

are in the bid. I am not aware of the engine makes. Only the CPB has got that information. 

Mr Bérenger: It is a bit surprising, I am sure the hon. Vice-Prime Minister must be 
aware of the Volkswagen issue, which MAN is a subsidiary of Volkswagen  and it is now 
across the world that MAN was fined by courts of law for bribes for falsifying figures. Can I 
know whether those assessing those offers will take into consideration such matters or will 
they stick to purely technical issues? 

Mr Collendavelloo: I am not aware whether MAN is one of the engines quoted. The 

CEB … 

Mr Bérenger:  You should know. 
Mr Collendavelloo: I am sorry. 
Mr Bérenger:  Everybody knows this. 
Mr Collendavelloo: Well, everybody may know, but I do not know. 

69 

 
Mr Bérenger:  You should know. 
Mr  Jahangeer:  In  view  of  a  strain  situation  we  have  actually,  one  of  the  bidders 
according to the website which the hon. Vice-Prime Minister mentioned, namely VWSCs, are 
suing the Government and, at the same time, they are bidding for the same project. Will the 
hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  inquire  about  the  eligibility  of  the  VWSCs  in  accordance  with 
section 3 of evaluation and qualification criteria, taking into consideration the corruption case 
of the VWSCs in Malta? 

Mr Collendavelloo: This is a matter which will be taken up by the CPB and I do not 

interfere in procurement matters. 

JIN FEI PROJECT – RELOCATION - PLANTERS 

(No.  B/731)  Mr  G.  Lesjongard  (Second  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River) 
asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the planters 
of the Riche Terre region who had been relocated in the wake of the implementation of the 
Jin Fei Project, he will state where matters stand as at to date. 

(Withdrawn) 

SUBOXONE - DRUG SUBSTITUTION THERAPY   

(No.  B/732)  Dr.  Z.  Joomaye  (Second  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the proposed 
introduction of Suboxone as a new substitution therapy for the treatment of the drug addicts 
in replacement of Methadone, he will state if amendments will be introduced to the Schedule 
of the Dangerous Drugs Act to cater therefor. 

Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, let me first of all say that the proposed introduction of 
Suboxone only applies to those who wish to join the programme for drug therapy. Suboxone, 
Madam  Speaker,  is  a  branded  product  containing  two  components:  Buprenorphine  and 
Naloxone.  

Buprenorphine  which  is  a  dangerous  drug  is  already  listed  in  Schedule  II  of  the 
Dangerous Drugs Act 2000, whereas Naloxone is an opiate antagonist and is not considered 
as a dangerous drug. There is, therefore, no need to amend the Dangerous Drugs Act for the 
listing of Suboxone. 

Dr. Joomaye:  I would like to ask the hon. Minister if he is aware that introducing 
Suboxone will automatically facilitate the import and the traffic of Subutex which contains 
Buprenorphine on the local market. 

Mr  Gayan:  Well,  whatever  will  be  done,  Madam  Speaker,  will  be  done  by 

Government under strict control. 

70 

 
Mr Leopold: Would the hon. Minister agree that Suboxone and Methadone are just 
substitutes  for  risk  management  and  also  to  prevent  the  propagation  of  HIV/AIDS  among 
drug  users,  especially  IV  drug  users?  I  would  like  to  ask  the  hon.  Minister  whether  he  is 
coming with a comprehensive treatment so that drug users get off of Suboxone, Methadone 
or other dangerous drugs. 

Mr Gayan: Well, that is the ultimate objective of Government not to have anybody 
on any of these therapies, but we have to start somewhere and this is why we consider that 
Suboxone is more likely to wean off people from drugs than Methadone. 

Dr.  Joomaye:    Is  the  hon.  Minister  aware  that  the  implementation  of  any  new 
substitution  programme  needs  a  pilot  project,  studies  and  all  these  will  take  time.  In  the 
meantime, will the hon. Minister consider bringing back the Methadone programme as it was 
because it would take months and the patient won’t have medication in the meantime? 

Mr  Gayan:  Madam  Speaker,  let  me  once  again  say  that  all  those  who  are  on 
Methadone therapy are continuing to get the Methadone therapy. What is being considered is 
an  alternative  for  the  new  ones  who  wish  to  join  the  programme.  We  have  started  a 
programme  where  we  consider  that  a  screening  has  to  be  done  so  that  these  people  are 
motivated  to  get  off  the  drugs;  this  is  the  whole  purpose.    And  let  me  also  say,  Madam 
Speaker, that we have heard a lot about Suboxone and all this. In 2005, Mr Nicolas Ritter 
declared – 

« (…)  ne  pas  comprendre  pourquoi  les  autorités  mauriciennes  n’ont  toujours  pas 
realisé que le Subutex a davantage de côté positif et qu’il peut nous aider dans ce 
travail. » 

Mme Nathalie Rose, Coordinator of CUT said –  

« Nous  ne  pouvons  pas  être  plus  royalistes  que  le  roi !  Dans  le  monde  entier,  les 
avantages du Subutex ont été reconnus. Alors, à quand le tour de Maurice? » 

So,  we have not invented anything, Madam Speaker, it is already there. 

Mr Mahomed: Madam Speaker, when the subject of Suboxone was first evoked in 
Parliament, the hon. Minister had suggested that we do some search on Google and I have 
done some googling, and my question is as follows. 

(Interruptions) 

71 

 
Is the hon. Minister aware that the subject of Suboxone does not have a clean sheet at 
all?    And  I  am  to  refer  here  to  a  report  that  I  found  upon  googling,  “30  Years  of  Harm 
Minimisation – How Far Have We Come?”  An Australian perspective! And, in there, it is 
said  that  the  record  of  Suboxone  is  even  worst  than  Methadone  as  Suboxone  is  poorly 
accepted by drug addicts. Is the hon. Minister aware of such a report? 

Mr Gayan: Well, my information, Madam Speaker, is that Suboxone is an approved 
treatment for opioid dependence that had a significant role in expanding access to effective 
opioid  dependence  treatment.  Suboxone  is  a  fixed  dose  combination  tablet  containing 
Buprenorphine and Naloxone in a 4:1 ratio. The tablet which is administered sublingually - 
that is, you place a tablet under the tongue - is an established substitution treatment for opioid 
dependence.  It  is  currently  available  in  Europe,  the  United  States  and  in  more  than  30 
countries worldwide. 

Mr  Bérenger:  In  a  PQ  that  I  asked  earlier  on,  I  congratulated  the  hon.  Minister 
because when in Cape  Town he met Mr Michel Sidibé, the Executive Director of UNAIDS, 
and they are very serious people. I am sure they will come here, they will look at all these 
Methadone, Suboxone - Saxophone … 

(Interruptions) 

All these different drugs and so on! They are very, very serious people and they are going to 
make recommendations. So, can I appeal to the hon. Minister, we should not be discussing 
the details and quoting Mr Ritter and so on. Let us give the UNAIDS the chance to do a good 
job  and  make  recommendations,  but,  in  the  meantime,  why  not  go  back  to  what  prevails. 
Because  what  has  happened  now  is  that  the  way  Methadone  is  distributed  has  changed, 
people are not turning up. The way seringues are in front of the Police Station, people are not 
coming along and the confidentiality that used to prevail is being challenged and you know 
once this is damaged, it becomes very difficult to repair. So, I appeal to the hon. Minister 
why  not  go  back  gently  to  what  prevails,  give  UNAIDS  the  chance  to  make  firm 
recommendations. 

Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, let me say once again that it was not de gaieté de coeur 
that we had to decentralise the distribution of Methadone. There were serious security issues - 
I can see hon. Bhagwan shaking his head in agreement. He knows the problems that I also 
know in Beau Bassin. 

 

72 

(Interruptions) 

What the hon. Leader of the Opposition has said, that people are being discouraged 
from attending the compounds of the Police Station where this is being done is not true. The 
number  that  we  had  at  the  beginning  of  decentralisation  -  people  who  are  taking  the 
Methadone - is still the same today. What has happened is that the NGOs have informed the 
Ministry that there are about 200 people who would like to join the programme. For these 
people we have said, let us see if they can be motivated to get out of it so that they do not 
become  dependent  for  life  on  Methadone.  Let  me  also  say  that  out  of  the  200  whom  we 
started to screen - when I say ‘we’, it’s the Ministry - only 100 turned up, the others have 
remained untraced; the NGOs have not been able to help us to find them out. There is no 
contact address. So, there is a problem and this is what we are trying to address.  When I met 
Mr Michel Sidibé in Cape Town, I explained to him all these difficulties. I explained to him 
how the Needle Exchange Programme, for example, which was being distributed at 10,000 
per month last year has shot up 60,000 this year. There is a problem … 

(Interruptions) 

People  must  listen  to  what  I  am  saying!  What  has  happened  is  that  needles  are  being 
distributed both by the NGOs and by the Ministry. Where the Ministry is distributing needles 
there has been no increase.  The increase has only happened where the NGOs are distributing. 
So, there is an imbalance and I need to understand why this is so. I explained all this to Mr 
Michel Sidibé and he has agreed to assist. In fact, I will be sending him the letter today to 
invite him to come to carry out this evaluation. Let us see what comes out of that evaluation. 

Mr  Mohamed:  In  2013,  I  myself  visited  the  World  Health  Organisation  on  this 
particular issue of Methadone distribution and  I also met Professor Zullino of the CHU in 
Geneva where this particular issue of Methadone distribution was discussed. In 2013 itself, 
Professor Zullino and a team from the World Health Organisation were sent to Mauritius with 
the idea of analysing our Methadone distribution methodology, whether we could improve it, 
identify  the  lacuna,  see  whether  the  dosage  was  right  and  to  ensure  that  not  only  it  was 
provided but it could be properly monitored and that it brought positive result. That report 
was  given  to  the  Ministry  of  Health  sometime  in  2014.  Could  the  hon.  Minister  consider 
tabling this report and telling us why does he not consider implementing that report first that 
the  World  Health  Organisation  themselves  standby  since  they  sent  their  own  people  and 
experts to Mauritius to study it, prepare it and give it to us? 

73 

 
Mr  Gayan:  Well,  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  a  bit  confused.  I  heard  the  hon.  Member 
speak of a report carried out by HUG, the hospital in Geneva, or WHO. Well, I am not aware 
of such a report, but if there is one we will certainly look for it. But let me also say that we 
had  lots  of  reports  on  this,  but  since  the  programme  started  in  2006  until  today,  Madam 
Speaker,  out  of  about  6,000  people  who  have  been  on  this  programme  only  40  have  been 
rehabilitated. Only 40 over 9 years! We are saying, we need to look at it and look at it very 
seriously. 

ALLIED HEALTH PROFESSIONS BILL - INTRODUCTION   

(No.  B/733)  Dr.  Z.  Joomaye  (Second  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the proposed 
introduction of the Allied Health Professions Bill to regulate the activities of chiropractors, 
physiotherapists, psychologists, speech therapists, nutritionists, dietitians, phytotherapists and 
homeopathy practitioners, he will state where matters stand.    

Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, with the assistance of the Commonwealth Secretariat, 
my  Ministry  has  prepared  a  draft  Health  Professions  Bill  which  is  going  to  cater  for  20 
professions which had not yet regulated. The Bill was posted on the Website of my Ministry 
from 10 February to 30 April 2015 to seek views and suggestions from members of the public 
in general and stakeholders in particular.  

The draft Bill is now at the Attorney General’s Office for finalisation. 
Dr. Joomaye: I would like to ask the hon. Minister if he is aware that any complaint 
has been received by the Medical Council of Mauritius or his Ministry regarding any of these 
professionals who might be doing illegal practice of medicine. 

Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, I receive these kinds of representations on a daily basis. 

This is why we need to regulate all these professions. 

Dr.  Joomaye:  I  would  like  to  know  whether  there  will  be  necessary  amendments 
brought to the Medical Council Act to give it enough powers to refer cases of illegal practice 
of medicine to the Police directly. 

Mr  Gayan:  Well,  let  the  Bill  come  to  the  House.  If  there  are  amendments  to  be 

made, I am sure the hon. Member will make them and we will consider. 

 
 
 

 

74 

YOUTH EMPOWERMENT PROGRAMME - UNEMPLOYED GRADUATES - 

PLACEMENT 

(No. B/734) Mr D. Sesungkur (First  Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and  Training  whether,  in 
regard to the unemployed graduates, he will state the - 

(a)  number  thereof  aged  between  18  and  30  registered  with  his  Ministry,  as  at  31 
December 2014, indicating the number thereof having obtained placements under 
the Youth Empowerment Programme, and  

(b) steps taken by Government to assist them secure employment. 

(Withdrawn) 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Sesungkur! 

SOCIAL AID & PENSIONS - BENEFICIARIES 

(No. B/735) Mr D. Sesungkur (First  Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) 
asked the Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions whether, in 
regard to social aid and pensions, she will state the - 

(a)  number  of  people  with  disabilities  or  unhealthy  conditions  who  are  benefitting 
therefrom,  since  31  December  2014  to  date,  indicating  the  main  causes  of  the 
disabilities and unhealthy conditions;  

(b) amount of funds disbursed therefor in 2012, 2013 and 2014 respectively, and  
(c) steps being taken to improve the living conditions of the beneficiaries thereof.  
Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Madam  Speaker,  I  would,  first  of  all,  thank  the  hon. 
Member for this particular question as I consider this to be indeed an opportunity to speak on 
a subject which concerns the population at large and is therefore of significant importance.  

I am informed that about 51,200 persons with disabilities have been benefiting from 

social aid and pensions since December 2014 to date.  

The main causes of the disabilities as reported by the Medical Unit of my Ministry are 
diabetes with its complications such as blindness, renal failure, amputations and non-healing 
wounds,  cerebral-vascular  accidents,  cardiovascular  diseases,  cancer,  old  age  debility, 
epilepsy, hearing impairment, Alzheimer, dementia, congenital disorders and injury.  

As regards part (b) of the question, the amount of funds disbursed thereof in 2012, 

2013 and 2014 are as follows – 

 

Year 

2012 
2013 

2014 

 

75 

Amount (Rs) 

Billion 

Rs1,992,945,285 
Rs2,067,418,202 

Rs2,275,546,042 

As regards part (c) of the question, there are indeed a series of measures taken by my 
Ministry to improve the living conditions of persons with disabilities benefiting from social 
aid and pensions. There are around 20 measures, but, Madam Speaker, due to time constraints 
I will enumerate only a few of them. 

1.  Persons with disabilities who are beneficiaries of Basic Invalidity Pension benefit 
from  free  travel  bus  pass.    Students  with  disabilities  too  benefit  from  the  same 
facility. 

2.  To  enable  easy  access  to  public  places,  free  parking  coupons  are  provided  to 

eligible disabled persons.  

3.  Training of informal carers is given to relatives of family members who take care 

of people with severe disabilities.  

4.  Financial  assistance  provided  by  Government  for  treatment  abroad  has  been 
increased from Rs500,000 to Rs800,000. On top of that, the National Solidarity 
Fund provides an additional assistance of Rs200,000 and meets the return airfare 
of two persons.  

5.  Assistance is  also provided by the National Solidarity  Fund  for the purchase of 

assistive devices such as – 

 spectacles; 

•  nappies to persons suffering from incontinence and bedridden; 
• 
•  dentures, and 
 medical bed. 
• 

Madam  Speaker,  it  is  also  to  be  noted  that  apart  from  the  provision  of  the  above-
mentioned facilities, my Ministry has also increased significantly the pension rates and social 

 

76 

aids provided to persons with disabilities causing an increase in expenditure of around Rs60 
m. monthly.  

We have also noted with serious concern that, children who are below the age of 15 
and who  are  either bedridden or who suffer from disabilities of not less than 60%  are not 
entitled to the Basic  Invalidity Pension. They qualify only for Social Aid which is means-
tested. This means that these children are entitled to Social Aid only where their parents earn 
less than Rs350,000 yearly. My Ministry is in the process of bringing a positive change in 
this area whereby it is proposed that children who are below the age of 15 and who are either 
bedridden or who suffer from disabilities of not less than 60% will benefit from Invalidity 
Pension irrespective of the annual earning capacity of their parents.  

Moreover,  with  a  view  to  revamping  the  Medical  Unit,  we  are  in  the  process  of 

recruiting more medical practitioners to – 

(i) 

enable more domiciliary medical visits to be effected with a view to providing 
even more efficient medical care to patients, and 

(ii) 

facilitate the timely determination of applications.  

I also wish to highlight that currently the extent of disability suffered by a person is 
determined in accordance with the Sixth Schedule of the National Pensions Act as well as 
with  the  help  of  comprehensive  medical  guidelines  prepared  by  medical  specialists.  We 
intend to include these guidelines in the National Pensions Act to give it “force de loi” in the 
near  future.  This  will  not  only  ensure  transparency,  but  will  also  make  it  mandatory  for 
medical practitioners to comply with these guidelines in practice.  

Beneficiaries of pension or social aid will henceforth be notified by way of letter two 
months preceding the date on which their pension or social aid is due to be discontinued. This 
procedure  will  allow  beneficiaries  to  undergo  their  medical  re-boarding  with  a  view  to 
determining whether they are eligible for the pension or not.  

With regard to persons who are assessed by the Medical Board as being permanently 
disabled, these persons will be entitled to Basic Invalidity Pension for life without the need 
for them to constantly attend the Medical Board to undergo medical re-boarding to determine 
their eligibility. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Sesungkur! 

 

77 

Mr Sesungkur: Is the hon. Minister aware that the current practice at her Ministry 
level is that the only means of livelihood of these persons are being suppressed abruptly and 
then procedures restarted? So, can the hon. Minister consider to give a humane approach to 
the whole system and show some flexibility in the approach and to ensure that the only means 
of livelihood of these people are not suppressed and that they benefit from the pension and 
social aid for a period of transition? Thank you. 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Yes.  Madam  Speaker,  this  is  what  I  have  said  in  my 
answer. That’s why I am revisiting the Medical Board and see to it that we can facilitate the 
timely determination of applications. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mahomed! 

Mr  Mahomed:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  With  regard  to  disability  pension  to 
people who have lost either arms or legs, many at times - and which we know they are not 
going to be in good condition again, their arms and legs are not going to grow again - they 
have to be revisited by doctors apparently for obvious reasons because doctors are paid an 
allowance  for that. So, may  I  ask the hon. Minister what is being done  at the level of her 
Ministry to address this problem? 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Well,  if  you  had  listened  carefully  to  my  reply,  I  have 
already mentioned that this is being taken care of and they will no more have to attend the 
Medical Board. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, we listened carefully.  

(Interruptions) 

Can we know from the hon. Minister the number - if she has the figures - of people who were 
in receipt of these disability aid and pensions in 2014, but who no longer receive those social 
aid and pensions in 2015? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Unfortunately,  I don’t have the figure.  If  you can come 

with a substantive question. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ramano! 

 

78 

QUATRE BORNES - DECONGESTION PROGRAMME 

(No.  B/736)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 
asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to Quatre 
Bornes  and  the  vicinity  thereof,  he  will  state  if  consideration  is  being  given  for  the 
elaboration of a Decongestion Programme therefor, respectively for the - 

(a) short term, and  
(b) long term. 

Mr  Bodha:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  fully  aware  of  the  acute  congestion  problem  at 
Quatre  Bornes  the  moreso  during  peak  hours  in  the  morning  and  in  the  afternoon.    The 
Traffic Management and Road Safety  Unit has worked out a Traffic Management Scheme 
with a view to making the most effective use of the existing road system and this scheme will 
basically involve the following - 

•  Restrictions on turning movements along roads where traffic flows will be 

reversed [d’Epinay Avenue and Osman Avenue]; 

•  Conversion of roads into one-way [Buswell Avenue, d’Epinay Avenue, and 

Avenue des Rosiers and Avenue Ylang Ylang]; 

•  Re-routing of buses along Odette Ernest Avenue and Murphy Avenue; 
•  Provision  of  traffic  lights  at  major  road  junctions  [junction  at  Osman 

Avenue and St. Jean Road and Murphy Avenue and St. Jean Road]; 

• 

•  Provision  of  pelican  crossings  on  roads  which  have  high  traffic  volumes 
and high pedestrian flows [St. Jean Road near Post Office, Candos-Vacoas 
Road near Kalimaye, and Palma Road near Taxi Stand); 
 Provision  of  additional  lanes  on  roads  which  have  high  traffic  volumes 
[extension of the left merging lane along St. Jean Road up to the left turning 
lane going towards Tulipes Road and extension of the left filter lane along 
St.  Jean  Road  at  the  junction  at  La  Louise  for  traffic  heading  towards 
Candos];  

•  Relocation  of  bus  stops  at  Palma  Road  near  taxi  stand,  Candos-Vacoas 

Road near kalimaye and Victoria Hospital. 
 

We have also tried to reduce the number of parking on the main roads. 

 

79 

Madam Speaker, I am informed that the traffic scheme will be implemented in phases.  
In the short term, that is, Phase 1 has already started with traffic signs and road markings 
being provided on site for one additional lane along St Jean Road for traffic heading towards 
La Louise.  This additional lane will be operational in two weeks’ time during the afternoon 
peak from 15.00 hrs to 19.00 hrs.  

In the longer term, it is proposed to implement the following measures - 

•  Extension of the left merging lane along St. Jean Road up to the left turning lane 

going towards Tulipes Road with the provision of raised footpath, and 

•  Extension  of  the  left  filter  lane  along  St.  Jean  Road  at  the  traffic  lights  at  La 

Louise. 

Mr Ramano: Le nombre de problèmes est vraiment énorme.  Une des solutions peut-
être c’est que si on pourrait envisager de déplacer le taxi stand de La Louise dans un autre 
endroit pour mieux règlementer le trafic dans la région de La Louise. 

Mr  Bodha:  Madame  la  présidente,  toutes  les  propositions  sont  les  bienvenues.    Je 

propose, au fait, d’en parler avec l’honorable Ramano. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan:  Is the hon. Minister aware that recently from La Louise to the St Jean 
round-about, we have seven traffic lights in a way to decongest, but is he aware that this is 
causing a lot of problems?  Every 500 metres, we are having traffic lights and since they are 
not synchronised, we have to stop and that is creating a lot of problems at St Jean Road.  

Mr Bodha:  I will definitely look into the matter, Madam Speaker. 

Madam  Speaker:    The  Table  has  been  advised  that  the  following  PQs  have  been 

withdrawn: PQ B/737, B/744 and B/745.  Next question, hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

SUBOXONE - IMPORTERS 

(No. B/737) Mr S. Mohamed (First Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port Louis 
East) asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to Suboxone, he 
will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Pharmacy Board – 

(a)  a list of the importers thereof, and  
(b) information as to the cost thereof as opposed to Methadone. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

 

80 

HALAAL FOOD - REGULATIONS 

(No. B/738) Mr S. Mohamed (First Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port Louis 
East) asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to halaal food, he 
will state where matters stand as to the proposed amendments to be brought to the Food Act 
and the regulations made in relation thereto, indicating when the regulations that had been 
finalised last year would come into operation. 

Mr  Gayan:    Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  the  matter  regarding  the  proposed 
amendments to be brought to the Food Act and regulations is still being looked into. Contact 
has been established with the Halaal Research Committee which is headed by a Mufti. 

However, the issues that remain to be determined are as to whether the regulations for 
halaal  foods  have  to  be  made  under  the  Public  Health  Act  or  under  the  Trade  Laws, 
inasmuch  as  no  definitive  conclusion  has  been  reached,  whether  it  is  a  health  issue  or  a 
certification issue, marking or labelling issue. 

Mr Mohamed: I thank the hon. Minister for his answer.  The same question was put 
some few months back when the hon. Minister was being replaced by another Minister here 
and the same answer was given actually:  “it was being worked on.”   Is the hon. Minister 
aware  that  ever  since  2011,  the  then  Minister  of  Health  had  already  chaired  several 
committees,  had  already  had  meetings  with  representatives  of  various  mosques  and 
organisations concerning halaal certification, representative from the State Law Office and 
had even prepared draft regulations that were already approved as far back as 2011.  Is the 
hon. Minister aware of that? 

Mr Gayan:  Well, I am aware, Madam Speaker, that this issue has been studied for a 
number of years, but the problem is that I put the question to my officers and the answer that 
I  was  given  was  that  it  is  impossible  for  a  doctor  or  for  any  inspector  to  know  whether 
something is halaal or is not halaal.  It is impossible medically or from a public health point 
of view to know that.  So, this is why I said that it looks more like a trade issue where the 
customer has to be sure that the person or the supplier is a reputable and reliable supplier that 
is supplying halaal food, but it is not a health issue.  This is why it has taken so long and it is 
likely  to  take  a  bit  longer.    This  is  why  I  have,  myself,  given  instructions  to  my  staff  to 
contact the Jummah Mosque.  The people there informed my Ministry that there is a mufti 
who is the expert on halaal issues and I have asked my officers to get in touch and to work 
out something.  It is not that we are unwilling to do something, but we need to do something 
that  is  implementable,  enforceable  and  that  is  workable.    As  it  is,  it  is  impossible  for  my 

 

81 

inspectors to go and say whether this is halaal or this is not halaal. It is a question of, as they 
say in latin, ‘caveat emptor’, the buyer must beware.  

Madam Speaker:  Yes, hon. Mohamed! 
Mr Mohamed:  Is the hon. Minister aware - I mean, since he has just said that it is 
impossible as such for inspectors to look at things and to decide what is halaal and what is 
not – that not only in various other jurisdictions, as the hon. Prime Minister put it: “more 
democratic than us”, such laws already exist and are being enforced by Central Government? 
Is he also aware that the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations, together 
with  the  World  Health  Organisation,  have  a  book,  a  standard  which  they  go  by,  which  is 
called  Codex  Alimentarius  Commission  and  in  the  Codex  Alimentarius,  this  is  where  the 
definition of what ‘halaal’ is, as a guidance to other jurisdictions to implement it in our local 
laws?  Therefore, if this has already been worked upon at the time when the former Minister 
of Health in 2011, was then Minister of Health, it had already been looked into and  all the 
legal issues have been worked out, why is it that today it seems as though - I am not accusing 
the hon. Minister of anything, Government may change, people may go, new ones can come 
in - officers of the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life have a serious issue with trying to 
find hurdles, not to stop the implementation of a project that has already started long time 
back and to which there is no problem, but they keep on inventing new ones?  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Jhugroo, please! 
Mr  Gayan:    Madam  Speaker,  my  information  is  that  there  is  a  Halaal  Industry 
Development Corporation and the Trade Description Act, in the countries that we have talked 
about,  that  regulates  the  issue  of  halaal.  And  ‘halaal’  from  what  I  understand  is  an 
expression that means that –  

“The food or goods neither is nor consist of or contains any part or matter of an animal 
that is prohibited by Hukum Syarak (…)”.   

It is not that we are not looking into the matter, but the issue is: is it a health issue or is it a 
trade issue?  That is the main concern that we have because it is impossible - from what I am 
told by my officers - for enforcement purposes for them to go and say this is halaal if the 
label says something else. 

Madam Speaker:  One last question because time is over already! 
Mr Mohamed:  Is the hon. Minister aware - with regard to solutions to the problems 
that may exist, but in my humble view do not exist – that what was proposed in 2011 was 
precisely  that  there  would  be  a  National  Halaal  Certification  Committee  set  up  under  the 

 

82 

aegis of the Ministry of Health and Quality of  Life and on that committee there would be 
muftis of various schools of thought who are qualified to work together with officers of the 
Ministry, thereby circumventing the alleged problems of enforcement that they may have?  
So, the solution was worked out by the then Minister who is now the Speaker. 

Madam Speaker:  You have made your point; allow the hon. Minister to reply! 
Mr Gayan:  Madam Speaker, I also explored this avenue and then I was told that my 
predecessor in the Ministry was looking at the halaal issue.  And then, there is the issue of 
who is going to certify whether vegetarian food is really vegetarian.  So, there are all sorts of 
issues that come into play. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, this House is aware of the problems that India is facing today with 
beef that is being exported and sold in India.  So, we have a serious problem.  I say again, we 
have contacted the mufti.  Let us see what the mufti says and we will be guided by what the 
mufti says. 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

PQ NO. B/709 – PRIME MINISTER - WORDS WITHDRAWN 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Members,  I  have  a  short  announcement  to  make.    In  the 
course of the Prime Minister’s Question Time today, hon. Bhagwan raised a Point of Order to 
the effect that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister uttered the words “bous to lagel” to his address.   

Since the Rt. hon. Prime Minister was in a sitting position at the time when the above 
words were supposed to have been uttered, I asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister as to whether 
he had uttered such words to the address of hon. Bhagwan and the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
replied, I quote  –  

“I asked him to shut up”. 

Hon. Members, the words “shut up” are not in order and I, therefore, invite the Rt. 

hon. Prime Minister to kindly withdraw the above words. 

(Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, my apologies and I withdraw. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

 

Order! 

83 

(Interruptions) 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10 (2) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that all the business on today’s 

Order Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER 

IOIG 2019 – MAURITIUS - HOST COUNTRY 

The Minister of Youth and Sports (Mr Y. Sawmynaden): Madame la présidente, je 
dois informer cette auguste Assemblée que, suite à la tenue, aujourd’hui même, de la réunion 
du  Comité  International  des  Jeux  (CIJ)  à  l’île  de  la  Réunion,  on  vient  de  m’informer  que 
l’organisation des jeux des îles de 2019 a été retirée aux Comores. Le CIJ a pris cette décision 
après avoir étudié le dernier dossier et la présentation faite par la délégation comorienne. 

Selon les membres du CIJ, les Comores n’ont pas respecté les conditions imposées 
lors de la dernière réunion, en conséquence le CIJ a demandé à la délégation mauricienne si 
l’île  Maurice  pouvait  considérer  la  possibilité  d’organiser  les  dixièmes  jeux  des  îles  de 
l’Océan Indien. 

Madame  la  présidente,  suite  à  leur  demande  et  dans  l’intérêt  des  jeux,  nous  avons 
favorablement répondu à cette requête, dont j’ai le plaisir d’annoncer que les prochains jeux 
des îles de l’Océan Indien seront organisés à l’île Maurice en 2019. 

PUBLIC BILLS 

First Reading 

On motion made and seconded the following Bills were read a first time - 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

The Supplementary Appropriation (2014) Bill (No. XVII of 2015) 

The Arabic-Speaking Union (Amendment) Bill (No. XVIII of 2015) 

The Bhojpuri-Speaking Union (Amendment) Bill (No. XIX of 2015) 

84 

The Chinese-Speaking Union (Amendment) Bill (No. XX of 2015) 

The Creole-Speaking Union (Amendment) Bill (No. XXI of 2015) 

The Sanskrit-Speaking Union (Amendment) Bill (No. XXII of 2015) 

The English-Speaking Union Bill (No. XXIII of 2015) 

The Hindi-Speaking Union Bill (No. XXIV of 2015) 

The Marathi-Speaking Union Bill (No. XXV of 2015) 

The Tamil-Speaking Union Bill (No. XXVI of 2015) 

The Telugu-Speaking Union Bill (No. XXVII of 2015) 

The Urdu-Speaking Union Bill (No. XXVIII of 2015) 

 
(d) 

(e) 

(f) 

(g) 

(h) 

(i) 

(j) 

(k) 

(l) 

Madam Speaker:  I suspend the sitting for half an hour. 

At 4.23 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 5.07 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

Second Reading 

THE NATIVE TERRESTRIAL BIODIVERSITY AND 

NATIONAL PARKS BILL 

(NO. XVI OF 2015) 

Order for Second Reading read. 

The  Minister  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security  (Mr  M.  Seeruttun):  Madam 
Speaker, I beg to move that the Native Terrestrial Biodiversity and National Parks Bill (No. 
XVI of 2015) be read a second time. 

As set out in the Explanatory Memorandum, the main object of this Bill is to make 
further  and  better  provision  for  the  protection,  conservation  and  management  of  native 
terrestrial  biodiversity,  and  giving  effect  to  the  Convention  on  International  Trade  in 
Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (the CITES) and any other biodiversity related 
Convention  to  which  Mauritius  is  or  may  become  a  party.  The  Bill  also  provides  for  the 
identification, control and management of reserved lands and private reserves. 

In fact, Madam Speaker, the Native Terrestrial Biodiversity and National Parks Bill 
will replace the existing Wildlife and National Parks Act which was enacted in the year 1993. 

 

85 

After  more  than  20  years  now  and  with  major  developments  in  the  areas  of  biodiversity 
conservation  and  management,  there  is  need  to  further  strengthen  the  protection  of  our 
endemic fauna and flora and genetic resources. 

Madam Speaker, I must state that this Bill is long overdue and I am advised that the 
Ministry has been working on it for the last ten  years. Wide consultations have been held 
with  relevant  stakeholders  along  with  inputs  from  specialised  international  agencies.  It 
appears that the issue of biodiversity was not a priority for the previous Government. 

Madam  Speaker,  Mauritius  is  a  signatory  party  and  member  of  a  number  of 

biodiversity related international instruments. These are namely – 

(a) The United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD); 
(b) The Convention on International Trade of Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and 

Flora (CITES): 

(c)  The Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable 

Sharing of Benefits Arising from their Utilisation; 

(d) The Convention on Migration of Wild Species (CMS); 
(e) The Ramsar Convention on Wetlands; 
(f)  The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), and  
(g) The African Eurasian Waterbird Agreement (AEWA). 
Madam Speaker, at the 70th UN General Assembly held in September this year, world 
leaders embraced the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development with new goals and targets 
set to transforming the world. And Goal 15 specifically refers to biodiversity protection and 
reads  as  follows:    protect,  restore,  and  promote  sustainable  use  of  terrestrial  ecosystems, 
sustainably manage forests, combat desertification, halt and reverse land degradation and halt 
biodiversity loss. 

A set of targets clearly  spells out the need to take urgent and significant actions to 
reduce  the  degradation  of  natural  habitats,  halt  the  loss  of  biodiversity  and  protect  and 
prevent the extinction of threatened species. There is also the need to introduce new measures 
to  prevent  the  introduction  of  invasive  alien  species  and  reduce  their  impact  on  land  and 
water ecosystems and control or eradicate the priority species. 

Madam Speaker, the Bill is therefore being introduced at a very opportune time as it 
will  address  the  new  agenda  for  sustainable  development  through  protection  of  our 
biodiversity. 

86 

 
Biological diversity – or biodiversity – the term given to the variety of life on earth 
and  the  natural  patterns  it  forms  and  as  we  see  it  today  is  the  fruit  of  billions  of  years  of 
evolution, shaped by natural processes and, increasingly, by the influence of humans. It forms 
the web of life of which we are an integral part and upon which we so fully depend. This 
diversity  is  often  understood  in  terms  of  the  wide  variety  of  plants,  animals  and 
microorganisms. Scientists reckon that there are actually about 13 million species on earth. 

Biodiversity  also  includes  genetic  differences  within  each  species  –  for  example, 
between  varieties  of  crops  and  breeds  of  livestock.  Chromosomes,  genes  and  DNA  –  the 
building blocks of life – determine the uniqueness of each individual and each species. Yet, 
another aspect of biodiversity is the variety of ecosystems such as those that occur in deserts, 
forests, wetlands, mountains, lakes, rivers and agricultural landscapes. 

In each ecosystem, living creatures, including humans, form a community, interacting 
with one another and with the air, water, and soil around them. It is the combination of life 
forms  and  their  interactions  with  each  other  and  with  the  rest  of  the  environment  that  has 
made Earth a uniquely habitable place for humans. Biodiversity provides a large number of 
goods and services that sustain our lives. 

We, therefore, have a duty, an obligation towards our people today and tomorrow to 
protect this biodiversity and to ensure that it is used for the benefit of one and all. Protecting 
biodiversity is in our self-interest. Biological resources are the pillars upon which we build 
civilisations. 

I  must  here  add  that  my  Ministry,  with  the  technical  and  financial  support  of  the 
United Nations Development Programme/Global Environment Facility is presently preparing 
a National Biodiversity  Strategy and Action Plan (NBSAP) as well as the Protected Areas 
National Expansion Strategy. A Strategic Plan to enhance forest and tree cover has also been 
prepared  and  will  target  the  planting  of  500,000  trees  over  the  next  five  years.  This  will 
improve  the  habitats  for  our  fauna  and  flora  and  will  also  help  to  mitigate  the  effects  of 
climate change. 

Madam Speaker, it is important to mention that today we have only 2% of pristine 

native forests left though our forest cover represents 25% of total land area. 

This Bill, together with the strategies and action plans will address the critical issues 
and  threats  to  our  biodiversity  and  native  forests.  Economic  development  is  essential  to 
meeting  human  needs  and  to  eliminate  poverty.  However,  the  sustainable  use  of  nature  is 
essential for the long-term success of development strategies. 

87 

 
A  major  challenge  for  the  21st  century  will  be  making  the  conservation  and 
sustainable  use  of  biodiversity  a  compelling  basis  for  development  policies,  business 
decisions and customer desires. 

Madam Speaker, our country is still recognised today as a biodiversity hotspot with 
some unique endemic flora and fauna still well preserved. Our Pink Pigeon, Kestrel, Echo 
Parakeet  and  passerine  birds  are  well-known  conservation  success  stories.  Similarly,  our 
Mauritian  endemic  bat  species,  the  Pteropus  niger  is  unique  and  is  the  subject  of  many 
studies.  Our  national  parks,  the  Black  River  Gorges  National  Park  and  the  Bras  D’Eau 
National  Park  which  are  proclaimed  national  parks  under  the  law  and  which  harbour  rich 
native forests, are popular tourist attractions which are visited by a large number of visitors 
every day. Restoration programmes are ongoing in these forests to remove invasive species 
such as Chinese guava plants and other invasive plants. Conservation management areas have 
been created and these areas will be given special protection under the new law. 

The Vallée de Ferney and the Vallée d’Osterlog Endemic Garden are endemic forests 
which  harbour  a  rich  biodiversity  with  rare  native  plant  species.  Many  privately  owned 
forests, including large areas of mountain and river reserves also harbour rich native flora and 
fauna which are well preserved, but no legal protection is given to these endemic areas and 
this Bill will help to address such issues. More parks will be created to provide the people 
with more green spaces for leisure and recreation. 

Our islet nature reserves, such as Round Island, Ile Aux Aigrettes, Ile D’Ambre are 
examples of protected nature reserves, Islets nature parks, where restoration and conservation 
programmes are ongoing by the NPCS with the collaboration of NGOs. The Rivulet Terre 
Rouge Estuary Bird Sanctuary is another protected area and is a migratory bird site for a large 
number of winter birds from the northern hemisphere. This site is under legal protection and 
is a designated Ramsar site. 

I will be shortly coming with a new legislation for the protection of all Ramsar sites 
and  the  control  of  developments  on  and  around  wetlands  which  are  habitats  for  a  large 
number of species. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  enactment  of  the  Native  Terrestrial  Biodiversity  and  National 
Parks Bill will be a major or rather critical step to strengthen the protection of our natural 
resources and halt biodiversity loss. 

Part I of the Bill covers preliminary matters, including interpretation of the various 

terms used in the Bill and also its application. 

88 

 
Part II of the Bill provides for the setting up of the Native Terrestrial Biodiversity and 
National Parks Advisory Council which shall advise the Minister on matters relating to native 
terrestrial  biodiversity,  reserved  land  and  conservation  generally.  The  Council  will  also 
advise  on  the  assessment  of  the  state  of  wildlife  resources  and  the  effect  of  land  use  and 
environment activities on wildlife and wildlife habitat and will make recommendations with 
regard to the conservation of wildlife.  The Council will appoint subcommittees and co-opt 
such other members as it considers appropriate to assist it. 

Part III of the Bill provides for the setting up of the National Parks and Conservation 
Service  which  shall  consist  of  such  scientific,  technical,  administrative  and  other  public 
officers. There shall be a Director of the Service who shall be a public officer and who shall 
have administrative control of the Service. I wish here to point out that the National Parks 
and  Conservation  Service  already  exists  and  there  is  a  Director  presently  whose  functions 
have been generally reviewed in the new Bill. 

Part  IV of the  Bill deals with national parks and other reserves.  It provides for the 
declaration  by  proclamation  by  the  President  of  any  State  land  to  be  a  National  Park  or 
special  reserve  where  the  land  is  of  natural,  scenic,  scientific,  educational,  recreational 
importance  or  value  and  preservation  is  necessary.  It  also  provides  for  the  designation  of 
private land as may be prescribed to be a private reserve for its protection and restoration. 

Though  the  ownership  such  designated  private  reserve  will  remain  vested  in  its 
owner, the latter will have to seek the approval of the Minister for the alteration or sale of the 
designated private reserve. Section 13(3) provides for the compulsory acquisition of a private 
reserve  for  the  public  benefit.  Section  14  provides  for  the  owner  of  a  private  reserve  to 
maintain  the  reserve  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  Director  who  will  have  the  responsibility  to 
assist the owner to maintain the reserve. 

Furthermore, there is provision to declare any land adjoining a private  reserve or a 
reserved land to be a buffer zone for that land. The purpose of declaring a buffer zone is to 
ensure that the activities in such buffer zones are monitored and impacts of such activities are 
not detrimental to the protected reserves. Here, I am bringing an amendment to section 15(1) 
to  provide  for  the  delimitation  of  the  buffer  zone  to  be  within  an  area  not  exceeding  200 
metres  of  the  reserved  land  instead  of  one  kilometre.  The  one  kilometre  buffer  zone  is  an 
internationally accepted standard for protected areas. However, given the small size of our 

 

89 

island and limited land resources, I am, therefore, proposing a buffer zone of not exceeding 
200 metres. 

Madam Speaker, these provisions have been made in order to ensure the protection of 

lands of high and unique biodiversity value. 

Part  V  relates  to  the  setting  up  of  CITES  Authorities.  As  I  mentioned  earlier, 
Mauritius is party to the Convention International Trade on Endangered Species of Flora and 
Fauna, or the CITES as commonly referred to. This convention is an international agreement 
between Governments which aim to ensure that international trade in wild animals and plants 
does not threaten their survival. International wildlife trade is estimated to be worth billions 
of dollars annually and includes hundreds of millions of plant and animal species. The trade 
is diverse, ranging from live animals and plants to a vast array of wildlife products derived 
from  them,  including  food  products,  exotic  leather  goods,  wooden  musical  instruments, 
timber and medicines. Levels of exploitation of some animal and plant species are high and 
the  trade  in  them,  together  with  other  factors,  such  as  habitat  loss,  is  capable  of  heavily 
depleting their populations and even bringing some species close to extinction. Though many 
wildlife  species  in  trade  are  not  endangered,  the  existence  of  the  CITES  agreement  is 
important to safeguard these resources for the future. 

Because the trade in wild animals and plants crosses borders between countries, the 
effort to regulate it requires international cooperation to safeguard certain species from over 
exploitation. The CITES works in this spirit of cooperation and accords varying degrees of 
protection to more than 35,000 species of animals and plants listed in the three appendices of 
the  CITES.  Hence,  each  Government  is  required  to  set  up  its  Management  Authority  to 
implement and enforce the legislation relating to species conservation and issue permits in 
accordance with the CITES. Accordingly, a Scientific Authority will also be established to 
advise the Management Authority on all CITES related matters. 

Part  VI  provides  for  a  better  protection  of  our  endemic  flora  and  will  regulate  the 
propagation and sale of  native plants. The section also makes provision for the hunting of 
wildlife  and  game.  Here,  I  wish  to  bring  an  amendment  to  add  a  new  subsection  26(4)  to 
provide  for  the  Minister  to  authorise  the  hunting  of  wildlife  at  night  on  the  advice  of  the 
Director.  We  are  all  presently  aware  of  this  serious  problem  as  regards  the  endemic  bat 
population  which  has  reached  a  large  number  and  is  causing  significant  damages  to  fruit 
plantations.  However,  because  of  its  protected  status  and  the  existing  legal  provision 

 

90 

prohibiting  hunting  at  night,  we  are  bound  by  the  existing  legal  provision  and  cannot 
authorise its culling at night. Hence, this section will allow for a derogation to be made for 
hunting of wildlife at night in exceptional circumstances and where human life or national 
interests prevail. 

I wish here to point out that human and wildlife conflict is an international issue and 
many countries do resort to culling as and when such conflicts represent a threat to human 
life  and  agriculture  where  livelihoods  of  people  are  directly  at  stake.  At  times,  bold  and 
unpopular  decisions  have  to  be  taken  by  Government  in  national  interest.  However,  all 
necessary measures will be taken to ensure the survival and sustainability of the population of 
the species. 

Furthermore,  as  regards  hunting  of  game,  sections  27(b)  (iii)  of  this  Bill,  forbids 
hunting  of  deer  with  bows  and  arrows  in  view  of  the  humane  aspects.  However,  I  have 
received  representations  that  this  new  provision  will  negatively  impact  on  tourism-related 
activities.  I  am  here  bringing  an  amendment  to  section  27(2)  to  empower  the  Director  to 
authorise  a  person  to  hunt  game  for  any  purpose  and  by  any  method  on  such  terms  and 
conditions as maybe prescribed. Appropriate regulations will be made to regulate this activity 
to  ensure  that  all  security  measures  are  adhered  to  and  those  practising  such  sports  are  in 
possession of valid licences and authorisation. 

Part VII provides for the control of wildlife and will specifically address the major 
threat  posed  by  invasive  species  to  biodiversity.  It  will  provide  for  the  setting  up  of  the 
Invasive Alien  Species Committee for the purpose of controlling the introduction of exotic 
wildlife  in  Mauritius  and  preparing  a  prohibited  list  of  wildlife  species which  shall  not  be 
allowed to enter Mauritius. The importation of exotic wildlife including pet animals will be 
regulated through a system of permits and licences and payment of the prescribed fee. 

This part also provides for the setting up of a Special Technical Committee for the 
purpose  of  controlling  wildlife  in  Mauritius.  In  cases  where  any  species  of  wildlife  has 
attained  pest  level,  the  Special  Technical  Committee  will  advise  on  the  control  of  such 
species in the national interest for such period and in such manner as it may determine. Here 
again the problem we are presently facing with the bats will be addressed in a legal manner 
and  in  the  national  interest.  This  part  will  also  provide  for  the  control  of  species  which, 
though  small  in  numbers,  but  may  constitute  a  threat  at  strategic  locations  such  as  for 
example, the airport. 

91 

 
Part  VIII  provides  for  the  issue  of  CITES  Export  and  Import  permits  by  the 
Management Authority for species or derivatives thereof which are listed on the CITES lists 
of species or as may be prescribed.  

Part  IX  provides  for  the  registration  of  persons  who  intend  to  trade  in  prescribed 

species and keep records of such trade.  

Part  X  deals  with  the  powers  of  the  officers  and  incorporates  the  provisions  of  the 

existing Wildlife and National Parks Act together with some changes.  

Part X1 deals with the financial provisions and other changes in the National Parks 
and  Conservation  Fund  to  consist  henceforth  of  the  levies  payable  by  monkey  export 
companies  for  the  export  of  live  monkeys  and  derivatives  thereof.  So  far  these  companies 
have been paying the levy under protest as there was no legal requirement for such payment.  

Part XII deals with offences and penalties and also for regulations to be made for the 
purpose  of  this  Act,  coordination  with  other  laws  and  for  the  repeal  of  the  Wildlife  and 
National Parks Act and its regulations. It also provides for the consequential amendments and 
transitional arrangements.  

Madam  Speaker,  nature  supports  such  diverse  industries  as  agriculture,  cosmetics, 
pharmaceuticals, pulp and paper, horticulture, construction and waste treatment. The loss of 
biodiversity threatens our food supplies, opportunities for recreation and tourism, and sources 
of wood, pharmaceuticals and energy. It also interferes with essential ecological functions. 
Our need for products of nature we once ignored is often important and unpredictable. Time 
after time we have rushed back to nature’s cupboard for cures to illnesses or for infusions of 
tough genes from wild plants to save our crops from pest outbreaks. Many breeds of the main 
farm  animal  species  are  currently  at  high  risk  of  extinction.    While  the  loss  of  individual 
species catches our attention, it is the fragmentation, degradation, and outright loss of forests, 
wetlands,  coral  reefs,  and  other  ecosystems  that  poses  the  gravest  threat  to  biological 
diversity.  

We all know that ecosystems provide a range of goods  and services which include 
provision of food, fuel and fibre, provision of shelter and building materials, purification of 
air and water, detoxification and decomposition of wastes, stabilisation and moderation of the 
Earth’s climate, moderation of floods, droughts, temperature extremes and the forces of wind, 
generation  and  renewal  of  soil  fertility,  including  nutrient  cycling,  pollination  of  plants, 

 

92 

including many crops, control of pests and diseases, maintenance of genetic resources as key 
inputs  to  crop  varieties  and  livestock  breeds,  medicines  and  other  products,  cultural  and 
aesthetic benefits.  

The  long-term  viability  of  species  and  ecosystems  depends  on  their  being  free  to 
evolve  in  natural  conditions.  This  means  that  we  have  to  learn  how  to  use  biological 
resources in a way that minimises their depletion. We have to make development sustainable, 
to ensure that it meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future 
generations to meet their own needs. This new Act will usher in a new era of environmentally 
sound  economic  development.  As  a  Government,  we  need  to  provide  the  critical  role  of 
leadership, particularly  by setting the appropriate rules  and regulations to guide the use of 
natural resources and to protect, conserve and sustainably use our biodiversity. 

The amendments which I am proposing to bring at Committee Stage to section 15 (1), 
section 26 and section 27 (2), as I have said earlier have been circulated and I will be moving 
accordingly at Committee Stage. 

Madam Speaker, I am confident that this Bill will have the support of everyone as it 

will give better protection to our parks, native forests and our native fauna and flora.  

So, I now commend the Bill to the House. 

Mr Sawmynaden rose and seconded. 

(5.34 p.m.) 

Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  and  Petite  Rivière):  Madam 
Speaker, the Native Terrestrial Biodiversity and National Parks Bill is quite comprehensive 
and  its  presentation  to  this  National  Assembly  was  long  overdue  as  stated  by  the  hon. 
Minister.  It  replaces  the  Wildlife  &  National  Parks  Act  (1993)  which  had  replaced  the 
Wildlife  Act  1983.  We  welcome  its  presentation  and  I  congratulate  the  hon.  Minister  for 
bringing this comprehensive Bill to the National Assembly for approval.  

Madam  Speaker,  this  Bill  has  improved  conservation  matters  on  several  fronts, 
namely alignment with the CITES, conservation of biodiversity on private lands, protection 
of freshwater biodiversity, invasive alien species, management and auditing of the national 
parks and conservation fund amongst others.  

93 

 
Madam  Speaker,  at  the  time  the  hon.  Minister  is  presenting  this  Bill,  it  is  of 
paramount importance that we analyse what is the state of our biodiversity in Mauritius. I was 
having a look the other day at the very interesting interview of our President of the Republic 
on TV 5 and she had to say - 

“La survie de la race humaine dépend de la survie de la biodiversité. Nous sommes 
imbriqués dans cette nature que, malheureusement, nous ne respectons pas ! ». 

It is a fact that we have a population that does not care. The majority of us do not care 
for the protection of our environment despite all efforts which have been made and which are 
still being made and also our children at school.  Biodiversity needs urgent attention. If you 
ask me, I will say that biodiversity is at ICU level. 

Madam  Speaker,  Mauritius,  Rodrigues  and  also  our  outer  islands  still  hold 
exceptional biodiversity of global significance.  Despite massive habitat destruction which is 
occurring  every  day,  invasion  by  alien  species  and  other  threats  that  have  led  to  many 
extinctions and to a biodata that is today amongst the most threatened in the world. Decisive 
conservation  actions  have  saved  some  species  from  virtually  certain  extinctions  and 
conservation and restoration management actions which are still being done and which need 
to be innovated, tested or improved. Often, we have had encouraging results and sometimes 
not. However, apart from the classic threats of habitat destruction and fragmentation invasive 
species  and  diseases,  extinction  depths  are  broken  down  mutualisms  that  are  besetting  the 
islands, and not only here, Rodrigues, our outer islands, Agaléga, St. Brandon, and others. I 
was  just  talking  to  the  hon.  Minister  about St.  Brandon,  the  urgent  need  to  look  about  St. 
Brandon and also our islets.  

Certainly, the threats we are facing are being worsened day by day or at least hindered 
by progress. We progress, but we have problems of environment. We also have the low and 
declining  commitments  to  biodiversity  conservation  which  needs  to  be  addressed  and 
remedied  and  which  I  am  sure  this  piece  of  legislation  will  consolidate  and  with  the  hon. 
Minister at the head of the Ministry, I am sure we will see positive results in the months or 
days  to  come.  The  country  should  seek  to  implement  its  law  to  protect biodiversity  rather 
than to seeing to relax or even to ignore them. There is also much room for improvement in 
terms  of  capacity  building  and  evidence-based  approach  to  conservation  and  restoration 
action. As well as in prioritisation of tasks particularly concerning restoration of habitats and 
finally,  it  appears  essential  to  encourage  NGOs  actions  to  move  towards  more  or 

 

94 

encompassing and sustainable efforts like embracing an ecosystem approach and community 
involvement  in  conservation  in  a  more  meaningful  manner  keeping  species  centred  action 
only when it is absolutely necessary. This is a global situation, Madam Speaker, and you have 
been involved in that sector for many, many years and you have your contribution as well.  

Madam  Speaker,  we  must  not  only  be  concerned  with  our  national  environmental 
issues, but also with the global issues and we feel that it is in this kind of legislation that we 
shall determine the future of biodiversity on Planet Earth and what will our grandchildren see 
tomorrow  on  this  planet.  We  are  in  fact  shaping  today  the  biodiversity  spectrum  of  future 
Mauritius.  

Madam Speaker, concerning global issues, as we all know, France will be hosting and 
presiding the 21st Session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework 
Convention  on  Climate  Change,  COP21,  known  as  ‘Paris  2015’  from  30  November  to  11 
December. COP21 will  be a  crucial  conference, as it needs to  achieve a new international 
agreement on the climate, applicable to all countries, with the aim of keeping global warming 
below 2°C. France as well as the international community will therefore need to play hard to 
ensure  convergence  and  to  facilitate  the  search  for  consensus  by  the  United  Nations. 
Mauritius as a SIDS needs to ensure that the interests of the Island States are safeguarded, as 
we are quite vulnerable to the impacts of climate change which has also a direct impact on 
the degradation of the biodiversity, and I am sure Mauritius will be present in that conference 
and will be submitting our Mauritius Report. 

Madam  Speaker,  in  fact,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  Mauritius  is  a  tiny  nation,  the 
Republic of Mauritius has played over the years an active role in world environment fora as 
we  are  fully  aware  that  sustainable  development  of  the  Blue  Planet  can  only  be  achieved 
through  coordinated  international  plan  of  implementation.  We  are  party  to  almost  all  the 
important environment related conventions and we are duty bound to ensure compliance. It is 
precisely, what I guess, that we are doing today by replacing the Wildlife and National Parks 
Act of 1993 by this new legislation, the Native Terrestrial Biodiversity and National Parks 
Bill. 

Avant d’entrer dans le vif du sujet des différentes sections du projet de loi, I wish to 
make a general remark concerning enforcement of environmental legislations in Mauritius. 
We  all  agree  that  it  is  almost  useless  to  make  legislations  if  we  do  not  give  ourselves  the 
means to effectively enforce same. And it is most crucial that not only stakeholders, but the 

 

95 

public at large should be fully briefed on the rationale as well as the final outcome of these 
legislations. Environment Education is a never-ending process as we need to change some 
bad  habits  -  and  we  are  a  nation  of  bad  habits  -  that  sometimes  have  been  around  for 
centuries; especially on environmental matters, we are still lagging behind despite the efforts 
made over the years by the Governments of the day. 

Madam Speaker, decision-makers need enfin to fully grasp that “Sunlight is said to be 
the best of disinfectants”. It is therefore essential that decisions are clear, transparent, fully 
explained and reports readily accessible. This is why when I was Minister of Environment, 
the then Government when we were amending the Environment Protection Act, there was no 
clarity on the preparation of the EIAs and we made amendments in the legislation to bring 
more  transparency  to  the  preparation  of  the  EIAs  and  the  public  at  large.  These  decisions 
should not only be transparent but fully explained and reports accessible and we made the 
reports accessible in the local authorities. Where there is a lack of transparency, people are 
ready  to  believe  that  there  is  anguille  sous  roche  and  that  the  promoter  or  developer  is 
actually  benefiting  from  more  favourable  conditions  or  from  derogations  as  compared  to 
others. And then la polémique s’enflamme et personne ne se soucie vraiment de la vérité en 
tant que telle. 

I personally think that with the passing of the Freedom of Information Act, once in 
force,  will  provide  an  additional  leverage  to  environmental  activists  in  the  preparation  of 
statutory hearings and hence give more weight to their arguments. 

Madam Speaker, environment protection and conservation cannot be achieved solely 
through the introduction of legislations. We need to get our people, especially the younger 
generation on board so that we can develop a new environment culture amongst our people. 
The fact that there is so much heated debates every time an environment issue crops, be it on 
stray dogs, be it on culling of bats, export of primates, construction of a hotel at Le Chaland 
as  it  is  these  days,  clearly  indicate  there  is  a  lack  of  transparency  in  the  process.  To 
effectively  promote  environment  stewardship,  first  of  all,  we  need  to  create  a  conducive 
environment  and  it  starts  with  freedom  of  access  to  information.  No  way  out,  Madam 
Speaker. 

Let  me  now  come  to  the  Bill  proper.    As  I  said  earlier,  it  seems  that  the  primary 
objective  is  to  make  the  protection  and  the  preservation  of  a  terrestrial  biodiversity  in  our 
Republic CITES-compliant, but it is also clear that it is the Ministry’s wish to be entrusted 

 

96 

with new powers in regard to the management of terrestrial biodiversity in the country, and 
we have no problem to give, as far as we are concerned, more powers so that it should be 
effective powers in the public interest. 

The Wildlife and National Parks Act of 1993, which had replaced the Wildlife Act of 
1983, is actually the main piece of legislation providing for the protection of flora and fauna. 
Though it is quite a comprehensive piece of legislation, there are some weaknesses.  

First,  it  is  still  not  fully  compliant  to  CITES,  as  it  appears  that  to  some  extent  the 
Convention is still unimplemented - I would like the hon. Minister, at least, to have a look at 
that. The Wildlife Regulations of 1998 did cater for some of these weaknesses.  

In a sense, Madam Speaker, this piece of legislation is, as I said, long overdue and we 
have to support it. But we need to have a closer look at the new provisions of this Bill, which 
shall, undoubtedly, be a powerful instrument for ensuring management of conservation issues 
in  Mauritius  and  Rodrigues.  The  Bill  also  caters  for  the  conservation  of  biodiversity  on 
private  lands  and  the  protection  of  freshwater  biodiversity.  The  sensitive  issue  concerning 
management of invasive alien species has also been addressed. 

However, Madam Speaker, a few of the issues need some clarifications.  Section 2 of 

page 7 - 

“‘protected life’ means such species of wildlife as may be prescribed.” 

This  list  should  appear  as  an  appendix  to  the  Bill,  and  its  composition  agreed  with 
conservation agencies.  All native and endemic species of Mauritius and Rodrigues should be 
listed, or at least construed to be on the ‘protected wildlife’ list. 

On section 26, ‘Hunting of Wildlife’ – 

“Notwithstanding subsections (1) and (2), the Director may in writing, subject to 
such terms and conditions as he considers appropriate, authorise the hunting of 
wildlife”.  

It should be ‘wildlife only’.  I shall come later on to the issue of bats.  

Section  36,  ‘Special  Technical  Committee’,  we  propose  that  it  should  apply  to 

introduced species only.   

 

97 

There  is  need  to  define  the  ‘Strategic  Location’  on  section  37.    This  control  should 
apply to introduced species only.  If a native species become a threat to a ‘strategic location’, 
its control can be decided by the Native Terrestrial Biodiversity and National Parks Advisory 
Council.  

Madam Speaker, despite some shortcomings, this Bill is a step in the right direction.  
Mieux vaut tard que jamais! However, all our efforts to ensure that this piece of legislation is 
CITES-compliant may tombe à l’eau because of the timing.  I would have wished that the 
hon. Minister could have come earlier before with the issue… 

What? 

 (Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  No comments, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhagwan:  To rêve Ramgoolam même matelot!   

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  No comments from a sitting position! 

Mr Bhagwan:  Linn fini allé li mo kamarad! 

(Interruptions) 

I am saying the timing.  I think the issue of bats should have been addressed earlier.  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, with regard to some clarifications and suggestions, I have asked… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please! 

Mr Bhagwan: I will come to one of the sections, Madam Speaker, again, to raise the 

issue of two specific matters. 

(Interruptions) 

 

98 

I  wish to raise the issue of management of National Parks.   Criticisms have been levelled 
concerning the day-to-day management of the parks and the behaviour of visiting public.  We 
all agree that a National Park is not a beach  -  we have to go on Sundays  and see what is 
happening at the Plaine Champagne area.  A National Park is not a beach where you have 
your picnic, nor is it a fair.  It is a fair pendant les congés publics and every Sunday.   

There is urgent need for the hon. Minister to have a fresh look at the whole issues, now 
that there would be a new legislation. Madam Speaker, for so many  years - without being 
personal - before, all the then Ministers of Agriculture were busy with the question of sugar 
and  very  little  time  was  addressed  to  the  questions  of  conservation,  of  wetlands  or  of  our 
mountains.  I am not saying it unfairly.  We were all busy… 

(Interruptions) 

I was busy with the sugar sector.  I think there is urgent need to look at these issues now that 
we are having an eco-tourism in the region of Plaine Champagne, Eau Bleue and even in the 
north.  So,  there  is  an  urgent  need  for  the  Minister  to  have  a  fresh  look  and  have  a  re-
engineering of that section.  At Pétrin, there is a small office which is not well-equipped.  I 
have asked some questions and they have told me that ‘ena voleurs’.  I think this is not an 
excuse.  We are living in a modern world.  We are on full swing on the tourism sector, on the 
eco-tourism.  As  I  said,  at  Pétrin  there  is  a  small  and  nice  office,  but  there  is  lack  of 
equipment.  So,  we  should  have  modern  IT  equipment  as  well  as  literatures.    It  is  not  a 
negative criticism, but a positive observation which I am making to the hon. Minister. 

Madam Speaker, Le Dauguet in Port Louis is a sort of reserve land.  We did create, I 
would  say,  a  Parcours  de  Santé  in  Le  Dauguet.    The  best  local  fruits  we  can  have  in  Le 
Dauguet; it is some ten minutes from here, near the Champ de Mars.  You can go and see 
now that Le Dauguet has been transformed. You have no squatters; you have temples.  But 
there is a complete destruction of, I would say, the specificity of Le Dauguet.  This is under 
the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Agro-Industry and Food Security.  Formerly, you even had 
an office with gardes forêt in the region.  I won’t mention the Midlands region.  So, there are 
conservation zones, there are specific zones.  Formerly, when we were at the primary schools, 
it was a great day for us to go there for a picnic or go in all these conservation zones and then 
come back and write an essay. But, today, there is a real problem of degradation.  There is a 
problem of law and order, of public danger. And we are talking about these invasive species! 
You just have to go in the Plaine Champagne region and see how these invasive species sont 

 

99 

en  train  d’envahir  this  beautiful  treasure  of  ours.  So,  I  am  making  an  appeal  to  the  hon. 
Minister to have a fresh look at all these issues, and of our mountains which should also be 
included.   

Madam Speaker, I was very happy to see that the hon. Minister went to Ilot Gabriel. So, 
in  this  piece  of  legislation,  there  are  some  islets  which  have  been  earmarked  as  closed 
reserves: Ile aux Fous, Ile aux Vacoas and Rocher des Oiseaux. Also we have open reserves: 
Ile d’Ambre, Ile aux Flamants, Ile aux Fouquets and others.  There is an Islets National Park 
which  falls  under  the  Ministry  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security,  following  the 
presentation of a report made then by the Director of Audit.  Then, the Government of the 
day, from 2000 to 2005, created a sort of, Islets National Park under the jurisdiction of the 
Ministry of Agro-Industry and Food Security.  We have to go and see the state of our islets 
today.  I think the hon. Minister… 

(Interruptions) 

No, I have said that you have been to Ilot Gabriel. I have not been unfair to you. I know… 

Madam Speaker: Please, address the Chair! 

Mr Bhagwan: I have congratulated you for that. So, there is need to have – I won’t 
say  holistic  –  a  sort  of  management  plan,  well-prepared,  taking  into  consideration  the 
different sections of this legislation and the powers of the Minister, at least, to put some order 
in  all  these  islets.  We  all  know.    I  won’t  go  into  the  saga  of  giving  islets  to  individuals, 
private  operators  and  so  on.  Mauritians  must,  I  would  say,  make  the  maximum  of  these 
treasures and put it also in our tourist map in terms of trajet touristique. So, this is what I had 
to say on the islets. 

Madam Speaker, before concluding, I will come to this issue of culling of bats. I have 
been the one who has raised this issue in Parliament for so many times in the past. Today, I 
can say it is a hell. We all know what is happening. For the past  years, we have seen the 
population of bats increasing and the only action which was initiated ‘zot ine fini’ and we all 
know what has been the traffic in that, same as the Trust Fund giving tôle.  It was a lucrative 
business for certain individuals. 

Madam Speaker, the Ministry has issued a communiqué recently, going on the same 
line as the issuing of nets. It is good! But we have to encadrer the population, not only those 
who  have  private  orchards,  big  orchards,  but  all  those  even  in  the  urban  areas,  private 

 

100 

individuals who go to the Ministry and have nets, give them a sort of training, even help them 
with specialised personnel to use these nets. We all know that the nets have not given results. 
Today, having myself been a supporter of drastic action by the Ministry and I did draw the 
attention  of  the  Minister  that  we  need  some  PR,  there  is  need  to  do  PR,  explain  to  the 
population  and  I  know  that  the  population  at  large  wants  to  have  their  letchis  and  their 
mangues. We all know, whatever the ONG will say, but this is the real problem. There is a 
litige  on  the  numbers;  the  ONG  is  saying  they  see  so  many  and  the  Ministry,  through  its 
technicians, is saying that there is so many.  Entretemps, Madam Speaker, je suis en train de 
prendre  connaissance,  la  question  s'internationalise.  We  have  our  reputation  on  the 
international fora. Là, je vois – 

« Dans  une  “position  statement”  rendue  publique  jeudi,  l’IUCN  prévient  que 
l’abattage  de 
l’espèce  de  chauve-souris  unique  à  Maurice  est  susceptible 
d’occasionner  un  rehaussement  de  sa  classification  sur  la  liste  rouge  des  espèces 
menacées (…).» 

So, I won’t go into all the press articles which have been published on this issue. 

I think the Minister doit embricader the Mauritius Wildlife Foundation. We have a 
Wildlife  Foundation.  They  have  prepared  reports  by  experts  showing  the  attitude  of 
Mauritians towards the Mauritian fruit bats. So, 560 mauriciens! We all know the problem. 
They  have  even  prepared  other  reports  by  somebody  from  the  Bristol  University.  This 
question of shooting of bats also, a case where in Australia – New South Wales (NSW), I 
think, they started into culling of bats and then they had to backpedal. So, what I am asking 
the Minister, this issue will become a very hot issue on the international front. We have to 
take a decision. Where I stay, Madam Speaker, the name itself is Clos Verger, it is a verger, 
we have all the trees. 

(Interruptions) 

I am not talking for me. From what I have gathered from the South, from the North, from the 
East,  there  is  a  real  problem.  I  am  not  putting  myself  against  the  NGOs;  there  is  a  real 
problem,  there  is  a  litige  on  the  quantity.  The  Minister  must  now  inform,  there  should  be 
more information going on TV, using radio, having programmes and also we are coming with 
amendments  to  give  powers  to  the  culling  at  night.  That  also  is  very  important  for  the 
Minister to have a mapping and also informer. The Minister has a great task, his officers also 
d’informer la population et de convaincre aussi l’IUCN. 

101 

 
I appeal to the Minister, at least, to communicate with the IUCN, give the figures and 
also appeal to the officers of the Ministry. Today, we are having legislation; we are having 
problems,  environment  cut  across  party  politics,  Madam  Speaker.  I  can  congratulate  the 
Minister; he is somebody who will listen when we give suggestions. So, it is Mauritius with 
more  reputation.  Whenever  we  will  criticise,  the  Minister  will  go  in  an  international  fora; 
when the IUCN will be criticising Mauritius, cela fait mal. Alors, what I am appealing to the 
Minister, on this very delicate issue, is to bring everybody on board. Let’s have a trial and see 
the results. We will see next year, instead of regressing, it is becoming more and more.  We 
all know, however, if we have cyclones, then there would be no need to have this SMF. This 
is what I had to say on the issue of bats. 

Madam Speaker, this Bill is a very important Bill. I am sure, with amendments, the 
Minister  will  have  unanimity  in  the  House  -  whatever  amendments  we  can  have  -  and 
everything  will  depend  on  its  implementation.  Formerly,  we  had  garde  forêt;  people  were 
afraid of garde fôret; now it is foreign ranger, I think. We have a Director of National Parks 
and  Gardens;  we  have  a  Director  and  Directors.  So,  the  implementation  of  these  different 
sections of this legislation will be here to evaluate its implementation. 

I appeal to the civil servants, all the responsible persons in the different sections of the 
Ministry, to see to it that there is progress, physical progress, we can see the difference in 
Pétrin, in Le Dauguet, at, I would say, Les Gorges where we go every Sunday, it is more like 
a fair, we see takeaway everywhere. So, this is where it should be result-oriented and what 
we are doing this afternoon, we  are preparing  for the future  and biodiversity is something 
very important, it is the treasure of our republic. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

(6.06 p.m.) 

Mr  P.  Jhugroo  (Second  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien):  Madam 
Speaker, let me, first of all, congratulate my very good friend, hon. Minister Seeruttun, for 
bringing this very precious piece of legislation which was long overdue. 

Madam Speaker, the native biodiversity protection has always been a high priority for 
this Government. Indeed, Mauritius was among the first countries in the world to have signed 
the  Convention  on  Biological  Diversity.  Over  the  years,  Mauritius  has  joined  most  of  the 
major Conventions dealing with biodiversity, namely, the Convention on International Trade 

 

102 

in Endangered Species of wild Fauna and Flora, Convention on Migratory Species of wild 
Animals, Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit Sharing. 

Madam Speaker, Mauritius is regarded internationally as a biodiversity hotspot with 

a high level of endemism of its flora and fauna. 
Under the current legislation, very little protection is provided to the native plants.  

It is worth noting that Mauritius has some 691 native species of flowering plants out 
of  which  273  are  endemic  to  Mauritius.  However,  not  less  than  80%  of  these  species  are 
considered as threatened. This new Bill will bring a better protection to the native flora and 
fauna  and  will  set  up  the  necessary  framework  and  provide  adequate  tools  for  the 
conservation and management of our native terrestrial biodiversity.  Not only does this Bill 
provide for Government to identify and proclaim any State land as national park or special 
reserve but goes to the length of designating private owned land as private reserve, if such 
land is of natural importance or value to the State. Even any adjoining land with all its bio 
diverse fauna and flora, within a perimeter of up to 200 metres, may be protected by being 
declared as a buffer zone as just mentioned by the hon. Minister in his Second Reading.  

This  measure,  Madam  Speaker,  proves  the  equity  and  sense  of  justice  of  this 
Government by striking the right balance between respect for private property and the vital 
need for protection and conservation of our biodiversity. 

Madam Speaker, it is commendable to point out that this Bill will also provide for the 
protection  of  freshwater  biodiversity.  This  biodiversity  was  previously  not  taken  care  of. 
Freshwater  biodiversity  includes  all  native  species  of  flora  and  fauna  occurring  in  rivers, 
lakes and dams. This rich diversity of species previously benefited from little protection and 
attention.  You  may  wish  to  note,  Madam  Speaker,  that  past  surveys  have  revealed  the 
presence  of  18  species  of  fish  and  10  species  of  crustaceans  out  of  which  3  species  of 
crustaceans  have  been  described  to  be  unique  to  Mauritius.  This  new  Bill  will  enable  the 
National Parks and Conservation Service to protect and conserve this important area of our 
biodiversity  which  has,  unfortunately,  not  been  duly  considered  so  far.  The  sustainable 
utilisation of this resource will be regulated under this Bill. 

Madam Speaker, the Black River Gorges National Park was established in 1994 as the 
first  national  park  for  Mauritius  and  covers  an  area  of  6574  hectares.  This  park  is  a  very 
popular  ecotourism  site  among  both  locals  and  foreigners.  Several  amenities  have  been 

 

103 

provided to visitors’ satisfaction. This Bill will make better provision to enhance the national 
park to become an important world-class ecotourism site. A Management Plan for the next 
five years will be further produced to cater for this. 

The Mauritian fruit bat population, as just mentioned by the former orator, Madam 
Speaker, has increased quite significantly for the past 10 years. It is true that the former orator 
brought  to  this  House  several  Parliamentary  Questions  with  regard  to  bats.  I  have  also 
addressed the same issue in the past. Thanks to the hon. Minister of Agro-Industry and Food 
Security who is doing his best to get rid of the nuisance caused by the bats for the past 10 
years.  

In 2006, the population was estimated to be around 26,000 bats to reach an estimated 
90,000 bats in 2013. During the past few years no major cyclones were recorded in Mauritius. 
Cyclones naturally regulate the bat population, Madam Speaker. Nowadays, bats are causing 
considerable  damage  to  our  highly  prized  seasonal  fruits  such  as  letchis,  mangoes  and 
longanes.  The  production  of  these  fruits  has  decreased  considerably.  There  is  a  noticeable 
shortage of these fruits on the local market and this contributes to the soaring prices. There is 
an urgency, Madam Speaker, to address the situation. This new Bill will allow the control of 
wildlife which otherwise can reach pest status just like the Mauritian fruit bat. For those who 
fear for the survival of our endemic fruit bat, let them be reassured that this Bill provides for 
safe control measures that can, in the long run, only be for the benefit of the species. 

Madam Speaker, in recent  years, there has been an increase in importation of pets, 
namely birds, by individuals, pet shops and breeders. However, there has been uncontrolled 
release  of  these  species  in  nature.  Some  of  these  species  have  become  invasive  and  are 
affecting our native biodiversity. Examples are the catfish, crayfish and apple snail. The latter 
caused  serious  damage  to  the  water  lilies;  this  is  what  we  have  witnessed  in  the  SSR 
Botanical Garden. The new Bill, Madam Speaker, will allow the control of importation of 
exotic wildlife and regulate their trade and breeding. An Invasive Alien Species Committee 
will also be given legal recognition under this new Bill. 

Before concluding, Madam Speaker, allow me to address the issue of the composition 
of the Advisory Council. It is my humble opinion that appointing one person from either the 
private sector or an NGO involved in tourism or outdoor recreation would be depriving the 
Council  from  the  expert  advice  of  the  drop-down  sector.  Furthermore,  the  NGO 
representative  would  more 
dealing  with 

appropriately 

an  NGO 

be 

from 

 

104 

conservation/environmental  issues  rather  than  one  NGO  involved  in  recreation/tourism.  I, 
therefore, propose an amendment to Part II section 5 (1) (j) of the Bill to read as follows –  

“a person from the private sector (…).” 

Additionally to include a subsection (1) (k) which would read as follows –  

“a person from a Non-Government Organisation involved in conservation of natural 
resources or environment related issues.” 

To conclude, Madam Speaker, I would like to congratulate once more the Minister of 
Agro-Industry and Food Security for introducing this piece of legislation as it will provide 
enhanced protection to the biodiversity resources of the Republic of Mauritius and allow the 
Government to meet its obligation at international level. 

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhuboo! 

(6.17 p.m.) 

Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River): Thank you, Madam 
Speaker. I would like to thank you for giving me the opportunity to comment on the Native 
Terrestrial Biodiversity and National Parks Bill. The necessity to come with such a piece of 
legislation was already mentioned in the National Parks Bill of 1993 and was long overdue. 
However, I would like to highlight some issues which, in my humble opinion, would deserve 
further consideration.  

The  hon.  Member  and  the  hon.  Minister  have  proposed  some  major  amendments, 

which I welcome. But, to start with, at paragraph 5, and I quote – 

“The  Board  of  the  Council  shall  consist  of  a  Chairperson,  an  officer  from  the 
Ministry, the Director, the Conservator of forests, a representative from the Ministry 
of  Education,  Environment,  Tourism,  University  of  Mauritius, 
two  persons 
specialised in conservation, a person from the private sector, a person from an NGO 
involved in tourism and outdoor recreation.” 

But,  Madam  Speaker,  no  mention  is  made  for  a  person  from  a  Non-Governmental 
Organisation  involved  specifically  in  the  conservation  field.    I  would  like  here,  Madam 
Speaker,  to  draw  the  attention  of  the  House  and  make  a  special  plea  for  the  Mauritius 

 

105 

Wildlife  Foundation.  The  Mauritius  Wildlife  Foundation  is  not  an  ordinary  NGO.  It  has 
intensively contributed to the preservation of special and several species, which was almost 
instinct.  A  savoir  le  Cateau  Vert,  Pigeon  des  Mares,  Kestrel,  the  Mauritian  foodie,  le 
Cardinal Rouge, Olive White Eyes, the Seabirds, le lézard de l’île Ronde, la restauration de 
l’île aux Aigrettes et j’en passe. 

A ce titre, Madame la présidente, le rôle de la Wildlife a été crucial, déterminant et je 
pense  que  l’écarter  de  ce  conseil  serait  se  priver  d’un  savoir-faire,  de  l’expérience,  d’une 
connaissance de notre flore et de notre faune, acquise au fil des années. Ne pas profiter de 
cette expertise sera, à mon avis, une profonde erreur, et je pense que la Wildlife, à ce titre,  
devrait être sur ce conseil. 

Par ailleurs, Madame la présidente, la partie IV du Bill concerne The National Park 

and other Reserves et l’alinéa 15 fait référence au Buffer zones et je cite –  

“The Minister may, by notice published in the Gazette, declare any land adjoining a 
private reserve or a reserved land within an area of one kilometre to be a buffer zone 
(…).” 

And the Minister proposed to bring an amendment, reducing the distance from “1 kilometre” 
to “200 metres”. 

Je  pense  que  cette  mesure  va  dans  le  bon  sens.  Elle  a  inquiété  beaucoup  de 
propriétaires  de  domaines  terriens  notamment  dans  la  région  de  l’Ouest,  dans  ma 
circonscription, la région de Bel Ombre et de ses alentours est proche du National Park. Et à 
ce  titre,  avoir  un  Buffer  zone  d’un  kilomètre  aurait  aligné  tous  les  projets  qui  sont  autour 
notamment  un  projet  de  golf,  un  projet  de  villa  qui  aurait  amené  de  l’emploi  dans  la 
circonscription. Donc, c’est un amendement que je soutiens. 

 

Un autre point, Madame la présidente, est l’alinéa 17, et je cite – 

“(…) the Director may (…) issue a licence authorising any person to – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

sell goods; 

provide services to visitors, or 

carry out any other activities of a commercial nature.” 

 

106 

I think it is a valid proposition, especially in line with the vision of transforming Mauritius 
into an eco-tourism destination.  

Mais force est de constater que la réalité est tout autre. Aujourd’hui ceux qui ont réussi 
le  pari  l’écotourisme  ne  sont  que  des  domaines  privés  à  l’instar  de  Médine,  Bel  Ombre, 
Ferney,  St  Felix,  Domaine  D’Andrea,  Lakaz  Chamarel  et  bien  d’autres.  Les  quelques 
incursions de projets écotouristiques sur les terres de l’État se sont toujours soldés par des 
échecs.  Ces  domaines  mentionnés  ont  réussi  tout  simplement  car  ils  ont  la  visibilité  sur 
l’investissement. Tous ces développements se font sur des terres privées alors que dans le cas 
de ce projet de loi, l’État louerait à des opérateurs privés des terres afin de les permettre de 
réaliser des projets d’écotourisme sur celles-ci avec un droit de regard et un management plan 
bien établi, bien régulier, et qui est une bonne chose. Mais cependant le problème reste entier 
car  il  demeure  dans  la  durée  du  bail  qui  est  de  sept  ans.  Aucune  personne  qui  est  saine 
d’esprit  et  avisée  ne  prendra  le  risque  d’investir  des  sommes  importantes  dans  les  lodges, 
dans des infrastructures, dans la restauration avec pour horizon un bail de sept ans. Ce qu’il 
faudrait proposer, c’est d’exciser la parcelle nécessitant des gros investissements, l’assujettir 
d’un bail industriel donc plus long et réserver la durée de sept ans pour l’autre partie de la 
réserve.  

Si l’État souhaite que les terres qui lui appartiennent soient bien gérées, administrées, 

protégées, il faut qu’elles soient capables de donner la visibilité à ses locataires. 

Par ailleurs, Madame la présidente, une proposition qui est importante et qui ne figure 
pas dans ce projet de loi, ces terres de l’État appartiennent aux mauriciens, appartiennent à 
notre nation et pourtant ils ne connaissent même pas l’existence. Il faudrait que les portes de 
ces  domaines  soient  accessibles  à  des  périodes  bien  spécifiques  et  ouvertes  à  nos 
compatriotes afin qu’ils puissent les visiter.  

Concernant la clause 27, et je cite – 

“(…) No person shall hunt – 

(a) 

any game – 

(ii) from a vehicle; 

(b) 

any deer – 

 

107 

(i) 

with a firearm of 0.22 (…)” 

Je tiens à attirer l’attention de la Chambre sur ces points qui sont inclus dans ce Bill et qui ont 
pour  but  de  contrôler  le  braconnage  mais  qui  viennent  interférer  directement  dans  le 
management  des  domaines  privés.  En  effet,  le  culling,  ce  qu’on  appelle  couramment 
l’abattage  des  cerfs  sélectifs  pour  approvisionner  les  supermarchés,  les  bazars,  la  grande 
distribution se fait généralement en voiture le soir à l’aide d’un 0.22 car c’est un petit calibre 
qui  permet  de  ne  pas  déranger  la  faune  et  la  flore.  Pour  ne  pas  pénaliser  l’activité  de  ces 
domaines, cette clause devrait s’appliquer au reserve land seulement et non pas aux domaines 
privés car les uns étant de l’élevage extensif et les autres de l’élevage intensif. 

Quant au point 27, l’alinéa 3 du Bill, Madame la présidente, il était impérieux que le 
ministre ne prenne pas de décisions sur ce sujet, surtout des décisions hâtives. Et je le félicite 
pour  l’amendement  qu’il  a  proposé,  qui  est  celui  concernant  la  pratique  du  tir  à  l’arc.  En 
effet, la chasse à l’arc est un sport qui prend de plus en plus d’ampleur, certains pays utilisent 
même ce mode de chasse comme outil moderne de game management. De nombreux archers 
viennent à Maurice pratiquer ce sport car ils découvrent de nouveaux territoires. Il y a une 
gestion des cheptels qui est bien faite. Les chasseurs apprécient de plus en plus la chasse qui 
est difficile, qui est sportive et qui donne plus de chance au gibier. De par la proximité des 
terrains de chasse et les hôtels de la côte Ouest et du Sud, les chasseurs amènent leur famille 
qui séjournent et de ce fait une double économie se met en place: l’hébergement et la chasse. 

Ce qu’il faudrait, Madame la présidente, c’est que la chasse à l’arc soit régulée par les 
autorités compétentes, sous les mêmes conditions que le game licence, que l’enregistrement 
du chasseur à l’arc soit rendu obligatoire, qu’un stage d’apprentissage avec la fédération de 
tir à l’arc à Maurice soit rendu obligatoire parce qu’il existe une fédération de tir à l’arc et 
qu’un temporary game licence soit issu pour les chasseurs étrangers. 

Madame la présidente, je crois que ce projet de loi va dans le bon sens à part des vives 
inquiétudes  que  j’ai  énumérées  et  auxquelles  le  ministre  a  répondu,  je  le  remercie  et  je  le 
félicite pour ce  Bill.  Il est primordial de transmettre aux générations futures ce patrimoine 
écologique dans un meilleur état qui nous a été transmis. 

Merci de votre attention. 

 

 
(6.26 p.m.) 

108 

Mr M. Gobin (First Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac): Thank you, 
Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity of speaking on this Bill this evening.  I will 
join in all the congratulations that have been said tonight.  I think it is unanimous.  We are all 
congratulating the hon. Minister for introducing this Bill to the House.   

I do not want to say more than what has already been said on the policy.  I do not 
want to say anything more because all has already been said, there is unanimity.  We need to 
protect our biodiversity, our wildlife.  What I want to mention are just a few issues on which I 
am appealing to the hon. Minister to ensure that we have results.  I am appealing, first of all, 
to the hon. Minister to ensure full coordination between the Director of the National Parks, 
the Customs and the Police.  I mention particularly the Customs because at the point of entry, 
whether be it at airport or at the harbour, we have seen over a number of years in the past, 
introduction of – I think the definition is “exotic wildlife” from other countries particularly 
Madagascar, recently, where the species are beautiful to the eye, but very dangerous to our 
local wildlife.   

Such has been through two points of entry: the harbour and the airport. If this Bill is 
to  be  properly  enforced,  we  need  rigorous  training  of  Customs  Officers/Police  Officers, 
including the Anti-Drugs Smuggling Unit - why not, they are vigilant for drugs.  We need 
officers to be vigilant for importation of ‘dangerous’, if I may say, wildlife which can cause 
untold damage to our local wildlife. It is high time that constant training be put in place and, I 
presume, the Director of the Natural Parks and Conservation Service will bear responsibility 
for that and ensure that there are tangible results. 

I note that in this Bill, Madam Speaker, wider powers are being given to the Director 
of National Parks and Conservation Service. He already has wide powers; I think there are 
wider  powers  being  granted;  with  wider  powers  comes  wider  responsibility,  heavy 
responsibility. There have been echoes in this House this evening: have we taken stock of 
whether  the  existing  national  parks  are  properly  being  managed?  Are  the  existing  traders 
operating in the current national parks helping to maintain biodiversity or the contrary? The 
Director is being empowered under clause 17 now, which will eventually be section 17, ‘to 
grant licences to sell goods, provide services to visitors.’  

109 

 
I am appealing to the hon. Minister to ensure that such licences are given with very 
strict  conditions  pertaining  to  maintenance  of  the  biodiversity.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  this 
licence  under  clause  17  would  be  granted  with  the  approval  of  the  hon.  Minister.    Hon. 
Minister,  you  will  bear  the  responsibility  ultimately!  I  am  appealing  to  you  to  ensure  that 
such licences are given with strict conditions, not only on paper bien plastifié dans la main du 
trader; we need enforcement. We all go to our national parks, the first one being Les Gorges. 

We see street racing now with motor bikes in the area on certain days. Just to name 
that!  I  am  appealing  to  you,  hon.  Minister,  to  make  sure  that  the  National  Parks  and 
Conservation  Service  is  not  only  a  scientific  service,  it  is  a  service  which  needs  to  be 
managed properly and that includes enforcement. 

On the second point I wish to highlight tonight, I have some reservations with respect 
to Part VI of the Bill, more particularly concerning the question of ‘Hunting of game’. If we 
look at clause 27, Hunting of game, subparagraphs 3 (a) and 3 (b), it says -  

“(3) (a) Subject to paragraph (b), a person or anyone authorised by him may 
hunt any game found straying on any cultivated portion of that 
person’s land or damaging that person’s crop”. 

Justifiably so, if game is damaging a person’s crop, it is legitimate that that person would be 
hunting, but it is provided right after that –  

“(b) (i) Where a person, acting under paragraph (a), kills any game, that 
person  shall  forthwith  send  the  carcass  to  the  nearest  police 
station”. 

What is more interesting is that the Police Officer in charge of the station shall forward the 
carcass  to  a  Social  Security  Officer!  Unfortunately,  my  good  friend,  the  hon.  Minister  of 
Social  Security  is  not  here.  The  Police  Officer  in  charge  of  the  station  shall  forward  the 
carcass to a Social Security Officer for disposal! I have serious reservations, Madam Speaker.  
First of all, whether the Police Officers now will have to handle the carcass, at what time of 
the day or night, on Sunday?  

Now, there is a Police Station at Grand Bassin.  What if game is shot, brought down 
in the cultivated land around that protected area? It is a protected area; there are parts being 
cultivated upon.  Would that carcass be taken to Grand Bassin Police Station? I am putting 

 

110 

the question, I don’t have the answer. Now, once the carcass is taken to the Police Station, it 
will require the Police Station to find a vehicle to put that carcass.  Will it be in the Police car 
or the Police van?  

(Interruptions) 

We have seen that for a number of years, il n’y a pas de solution magique. There is a problem 
of Police attending to cases right now. The law practitioners in the House know the situation 
well. I won’t say it is an excuse, but very often we hear that le véhicule de la Police est sorti, 
nous n’avons pas attend to that case or patrol in the area or go there and attending to Police 
duties. Now, the Police Officer in charge of the Station shall forward the carcass but how will 
that  happen?  Next  point,  where  does  the  carcass  go  to?  A  Social  Security  officer,  for 
disposal! How will the poor Social Security Officer - I assume that it is on a weekday, if it is 
on a Sunday  I don’t know how that  will take place  - dispose of the  carcass? Why are  we 
bringing  the  Police  into  this  and  why  are  we  bringing  the  Social  Security  Officer  in  this 
disposal of the carcass? I am suggesting that if a person hunts game on his land, on which he 
cultivates,  the  onus  should  be  on  him  to  dispose  of  the  carcass.  Of  course,  I  perfectly 
understand the fear that we will see the carcass being dumped in river or being dumped in 
other  private  land,  but  I  don’t  think  that  the  solution  is  to  give  this  responsibility  to  the 
nearest  Police  station,  followed  by  the  Social  Security  Officer  for  disposal.  I  am  sure  my 
good friend, the hon. Attorney General will come up with an acceptable solution. 

Next point, Madam Speaker, concerns the very important question of firearms. As it 
is, in the regulatory set up, game licence is issued by the Commissioner of Police. This Bill is 
bringing  one  further  layer  of  licensing.  The  first  layer  is  the  licence  issued  by  the 
Commissioner of Police that is issued under the Firearms Act. This Bill brings a second layer, 
and that is in clause 28 - 

(1) 

“Where a person has been issued by the Commissioner of Police with a 
game licence (...).” 

Then comes step 2 - 

“(...),  he shall apply to the Director (...).” 

Mighty powers of the Director, here, once again! 

“(...),  he  shall  apply  to  the  Director  of  the  National  Parks  for  an 
authorisation to hunt such game as may be prescribed”.  

111 

 
The Bill is utterly silent - deafening silence - as to what happens if the Director of 
the  Natural  Parks  refuses  the  licence  to  hunt  games.  That  person  therefore  holds  a  game 
licence issued by the Commissioner of Police.  He is probably the holder of a firearm but has 
no  licence  from  the  Director  of  National  Parks  to  hunt  game;  what  will  he  do  with  the 
firearm? Keep it for himself; display it in his living room? I think the Bill should provide that 
- if the Director of National Parks refuses, he shall immediately notify the CP who then will 
require  the  immediate  surrender  of  the  licence.  Otherwise,  we  will  be  having  cases  where 
firearms  are  being  bought  with  a  game  licence  without  the  corresponding,  the  corollary 
approval of the Director of National Parks to hunt game and we don’t want to take risks when 
it comes to firearm be it for game or otherwise. 

In the interest of time conservation, Madam Speaker, I will stop here. 

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dayal! 

(6.39 p.m.) 

The Minister of Environment, Sustainable Development and Disaster and Beach 
Management (Mr R. Dayal): Madam Speaker, the essence and importance of biodiversity in 
the proper management of the ecosystem cannot be overemphasised. It is the be all and end 
all of everything. The word ‘bios’ - life from the Greeks encompasses the whole realm of 
nature. Nature is life and nature is God and man has to harmonise all his acts and doings de 
vivre en symbiose avec la nature. This Bill is, therefore, timely and of prime importance as 
this Government is embarking in a holistic approach of healing Mother Nature starting from 
our  motherland.  Biodiversity  is  also  the  natural  capital  of  humanity  and  causes  the  proper 
functioning  of  our  living  environment.  However,  this  very  important  feature  of  the 
environment is under threat from human activities and the adverse impacts of climate change 
amongst the others.  

On the global front, the United Nations Environment Programme reports that pressure 
on  biodiversity  continues  to  increase;  habitat  loss  and  degradation  from  agriculture  and 
infrastructure  development,  overexploitation  of  resources,  pollution  and  invasive  alien 
species remain the predominant threats. Climate change is increasing in importance and will 
have  profound  impacts  on  biodiversity.  The  state  of  global  biodiversity  is  continuing  to 
decline with substantial and ongoing losses of populations, species and habitats.  

 

112 

The benefits human obtains from biodiversity are at risk. Hence, our obligation as a 
living entity in the cradle of nature to ensure the harmonisation of our needs and the needs of 
other species that make the richness of our ecosystem by striking the right balance which we 
are doing through this Bill. Our native terrestrial biodiversity and National Parks should be at 
the  forefront  of  our  mind  while  engineering  our  development  plans  for  sustainable 
development.  

In Mauritius, our flora and fauna have relatively high level of diversity and endemism 
as  a  result  of  the  island’s  location,  age,  isolation  and  varied  topography.  As  per  a  recent 
survey, Mauritius has 691 species of which 273 are single island endemics and another 150 
are mascarene endemics. The total extent of green forests cover in Mauritius is about 25% of 
the total land area. The forest cover is composed of planted forest, native forest 2% and shrub 
land 14%. 1% of the native forest is considered to be of good quality while 9% of this area is 
highly degraded because of unwarranted human interference within the concept of nurturing 
nature.  

The urgency of climate change calls for the greening of our planet and our land mass. 
We must plant more trees in an aggressive manner. It is good to know that forests are the 
lungs  of  our  planet  and  cover  one  third  of  all  land  and  are  home  to  80%  of  terrestrial 
biodiversity. It is also vastly used as a source of medicine and a single mature tree produces 
approximately  118kg  of  oxygen  per  year  and  two  mature  trees  can  supply  enough  oxygen 
annually to a small family. One tree can absorb as much carbon in a year as a car produces 
while driving 50,000 km and one tree can absorb one tonne of carbon dioxide in its life.  

Hence, our project of planting of trees along our main roads in collaboration with my 
colleagues,  the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport,  hon.  Nandcoomar 
Bodha, and the Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security, hon. Seeruttun, and all other 
relevant  stakeholders.  I  am  coining  this  exercise  with  the  ‘Embellir  Maurice’  campaign 
where stakeholders will join the process. This reminds me of a young boy of 15 years from 
Germany by the name of Felix Finkbeiner who has made a plea through the United Nations 
Environment Programme for planting 1 trillion trees across the globe by 2020.  

The forests of the Republic of Mauritius are small in area, no doubt, but perform vital 
functions; the most important of them being soil and water conservation. The roles of forests 
in  reducing  soil  erosion,  carbon  sequestration,  conservation  of  biodiversity  and  genetic 
resources,  pollination  and  providing  recreation  and  ecotourism  activities  are  now  widely 

 

113 

recognised  and valued.  However, pressures from human activities and natural factors have 
highly modified Mauritius’ ecosystems. The major threats to terrestrial biodiversity are the 
loss  and  the  degradation  of  habitats,  posing  the  risk  of  loss  of  species,  development  in 
general, combined with the introduction of invasive species of plants and animals has had a 
disastrous effect on the native flora and fauna and their habitat. Pollution, pests and diseases 
and  natural  disasters  have  further  exacerbated  the  problems.  As  a  result,  the  Republic  of 
Mauritius is one of the world’s biodiversity hotspots. Indeed, according to the International 
Union  for  the  Conservation  of  Nature,  Mauritius  has  the  third  most  endangered  terrestrial 
flora in the world.  

Therefore,  Madam  Speaker,  I  would  like  to  congratulate  my  colleague,  the  hon. 
Minister  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security  for  coming  up  with  the  Native  Terrestrial 
Biodiversity  and  National  Parks  Bill  whose  main  purpose  is  to  make  further  and  better 
provision for - 

(a) the protection, conservation and management of native terrestrial biodiversity and 
giving effect to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of 
Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) and any other biodiversity-related convention to 
which Mauritius is or may become a party to, and  

(b) the identification, control and management of reserve lands and private reserves 

and for related matters.  

The  new  Bill  also  provides  for  the  broadening  of  the  functions  of  the  Advisory 
Council in that the latter will also assess the state of wildlife resources and the effects of land 
and environmental activities on wildlife and wildlife habitats. Both the forestry services and 
the National Parks and Conservation Service, are presently not empowered to assess private 
land for the purpose of preventing felling of trees and bad filling of wetlands on private lands.  

In this regard, I note with much satisfaction that the new Bill makes provision for - 

(a) designation  of  private  reserves  for  the  purpose  of  protecting,  enhancing  or 
restoring  natural  ecosystems,  wildlife  habitat  or  habitat  of  rare,  threatened  or 
endangered plants or animal species and for the retention of significant botanical, 
zoological, geological or morphological features of land.  
We have seen the case of Grand’ Baie and we are aggrieved by it.  

 

114 

(b) the  ownership  to  be  retained  by  the  private  landowner  and  for  compulsory 

acquisition for the benefit of the public.  

(c) assistance from the Director to give assistance to maintain the private reserves. 
(d) the  establishment  and  function  of  a  management  authority  and  a  scientific 
authority to regulate the export and import of Convention on International Trade 
in Endangered Species, listed species would enable better control and protection 
of our biodiversity.  

Climate  change  could  cause  the  proliferation  of  invasive  plants  since  they  are 
generally more tolerant to a wider range of environmental conditions in comparison to native 
plants.  Invasive  plants  species  can  also  displace  important  native  vegetation  because  the 
invasive species often lack natural predators. This leads to a competition for space and food 
and  as  a  result  of  which  the  growing  population  of  bats  may  become  a  threat  to  human 
activities.  

In fact, today, we are all aware that fruit growers and the public are facing a serious 
problem  in  that  their  yield  is  largely  affected  by  the  growing  population  of  bats.  It  is, 
therefore,  critical  that  the  population  of  bats  be  kept  under  control  in  a  scientific  manner, 
without endangering the species. This new Bill, which comes at an opportune time, provides 
for the control of wildlife upon authorisation whenever it attains pest status and for the setting 
up of a special Technical Committee to advise on this issue.  

Reducing  the  rate  of  biodiversity  loss  requires  the  implementation  of  multiple  and 
mutually supporting policies which involve conservation, sustainable use and recognition of 
biodiversity values.  It is indeed imperative that  we recognise the value  of our biodiversity 
which is the very basis for life on earth. Controlling loss of biodiversity is one side of the 
coin. Reversing the situation and enhancing biodiversity are the most appropriate action that 
is  warranted  and  this  is  exactly  what  this  Bill  provides  for.  It  requires  as  they  always 
advocate, the cleaner, greener and safer Mauritius and is based on human factor engineering 
all throughout.  

Biodiversity is God gift to us and what we do of it is our gift to God. Therefore, priority 
should be to protect the gift of Mother Nature in terms of local fruits and endemic species by 
striking  the  right  balance  which  this  Government  is  trying  hard  to  achieve.  Australia  has 
already adopted a legal framework for the culling of bats where orchids are more affected and 
where  native  food  resources  are  extremely  scarce  and  cultivated  fruits  provide  the  only 
alternative to starvation.  

 

115 

Moreover, where serious economic loss is proven and other methods have failed, we 
should not forget that economic progress, human well-being and social prosperity can only 
emerge  from  a  healthy  and  vibrant  environment.  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  sure  that  the  new 
regulatory  framework  will  allow  better  protection  of  our  native  terrestrial  biodiversity  and 
ensure that the children of tomorrow will have a better legacy. The flourishing and genetical 
resilience will depend on the quality of protection provided today.   

Before ending, I would like to comment on two aspects raised by hon. Bhagwan.  First, 
we are reviewing the Environment Protection Act. Second, le Dauguet was left abandoned.  
There were no toilets.  We are providing two toilets and we are reopening it on the 30th of this 
month for public access. 

(Interruptions) 

Third, we are providing security as well.  We also heard that there are certain aspects which 
we are not looking at in terms of mapping. Let me tell you that when I was replacing my 
good friend, hon. Seeruttun, I held a meeting in the presence of the Commissioner of Police 
and the Commanding Officer with all the top guns of the Ministry of Agro-Industry and Food 
Security.      I  must  tell  you  that  we  planned  systematically  to  do  the  culling  exercise  in  a 
manner where no prejudice would be caused to nature and we wanted to do it in a manner 
whereby we achieve the target for the mission that we set out.  

Thank you very much. 

(6.52 p.m.) 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to thank all hon. Members on 
both  sides  of  the  House  for  their  intervention  and  keen  interest  in  the  Native  Terrestrial 
Biodiversity and National Parks Bill.  I have taken good note of the valid suggestions made 
by each one of them and also the views expressed on the different aspects covered by the Bill. 
The  House  will  appreciate  that  any  Bill  is  not  a  finality  in  itself  and  is  to  be  reviewed, 
updated in the light of ground experiences gathered, progress made in other jurisdictions and 
new elements emerging out of revisited Conventions and agreements. 

Mauritius has made significant progress in the area of biodiversity. However, there is 
room for further improvement. I have taken note of the points raised from a few of my friends 

 

116 

who spoke before me.  I will start with my good friend, hon. Gobin, when he talked about the 
carcasses.  

(Interruptions) 

I  have  been  told  that  the  reason  why  we  have  to  go  to  the  Police  is  a  question  of 
accountability,  usually  to  record  a  theft.  Whenever  an  animal  is  found  dead,  it  has  to  be 
reported  to  the  Police.  So,  that  is  a  reason  why  it  has  been  taken  to  Police.  It  is  for 
determining  the  ownership  of  that  particular  animal  that  was  killed.  Why  it  is  sent  to  the 
Social Security Office? The reason being to forward it to an orphanage. That is a reason. We 
felt that that particular carcass could be used for consumption.   

As regards firearms, I am sure the hon. Member will agree with me that we do need 
some kind of coordination between the Commissioner of Police and the Director of National 
Parks so that whenever permits and licences are awarded to those who applied for firearms, 
the Director of National Parks also be made aware of who are the detainees of those firearms 
so that there could be a better control of who are those who are allowed to carry out hunting. 

There  was  one  question  raised  by  hon.  Jhuboo  with  regard  to  the  use  of  bows  and 
arrows.  We have mentioned that we are going to come with regulations to make sure that all 
the necessary precautions are being taken to ensure that those who are going to practice that 
kind of sport are first trained to use that kind of weapon and also they are given a kind of 
licence that prove that they have the necessary training. If we have people from abroad who 
come here, they have to come up with some kind of licences that are awarded in their country 
of origin. So, we are working on that kind of regulations to ensure that things are being done 
in a proper manner. 

Hon. Bhagwan mentioned about the problem of cleanliness in the park’s area. That’s 
the question we are trying to address and I am sure we will see some differences in the near 
future because we also feel that things have to be improved in that area as well.   

The question about training those people who are given nets to protect their trees from 
bats being infesting their fruits, there again the officers of FAREI are giving technical advices 
on how to do it.  As you also know, we are encouraging people to prune their trees and go 
towards, what we call, dwarf plants so that trees are not grown too high and  this would avoid 
bats being attracted to those trees.   

 

117 

With regard to PR, we have to communicate with the international organisation.  We 
have established contacts with them.  We have been trying to tell them how it is affecting our 
fruit production here, but probably we need to do more. So, we are looking into that as well.  
I think I have covered most of the points raised by those who intervened before me.   

Madam  Speaker,  so,  to  end,  I  will  say  this  Bill  is  a  step  in  the  right  direction,  an 
attempt to provide and improve a legal and institutional framework to tackle emerging issues 
in the local widelife landcape. The instiutional arrangement proposed in the Bill attempts to 
build  consensus  with  all  parties  concerned  and  also  set  up  mechanism  for  indepth  and 
continuous consultations, not only to protect our biodiversity, but to use it judiciously and 
sustainably. 

So, to conclude, I thank all Members again and commend the Bill to the House. 

Thank you. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Bill read a second time and committed 

COMMITTEE STAGE 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

THE NATIVE TERRESTRIAL BIODIVERSITY AND 

NATIONAL PARKS BILL 

(NO. XVI OF 2015) 

Clauses 1 to 14 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 15 (Buffer Zones) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

Mr Seeruttun:  I move for the following amendments in clause 15 – 

“(a) 

in clause 15, in subclause (1), by deleting the words “of one kilometre” and 
replacing them by the words “not exceeding 200 metres”. 

Amendments agreed to. 

Clause 15, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clauses 16 to 25 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

 
Clause 26 (Hunting of wildlife) 

118 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

Mr Seeruttun:  I move for the following amendments in clause 26 – 

“(b) 

in clause 26, by adding the following new subclause – 

 

(4) 

 
Notwithstanding  subsection  (1),  the  Minister  may,  on  the 
advice of the Director, authorise, in writing and on such terms and conditions 
as he may determine, the hunting of wildlife by night.” 

Amendments agreed to. 

Clause 26, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 27 (Hunting of game) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

Mr Seeruttun: I move for the following amendments in clause 27 – 

“(c) 

in clause 27, in subclause (2), by deleting the words “he considers appropriate, 
authorise a person to hunt game for scientific or game management purposes 
by any method which he may approve” and replacing them by the words “may 
be  prescribed,  authorise  a  person  to  hunt  game  for  any  purpose  and  by  any 
method which he may approve.” 

Amendments agreed to. 

Clause 27, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clauses 28 to 54 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

First Schedule and Second Schedule ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

The title and the enacting clause were agreed to. 

The Bill, as amended, was agreed to. 

On the Assembly resuming with Madam Speaker in the Chair, Madam Speaker 

reported accordingly. 

Third Reading 

On  motion  made  and  seconded,  the  Native  Terrestrial  Biodiversity  and  National 

Parks Bill (No. XVI of 2015) was read the third time and passed. 

 

119 

ADJOURNMENT 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  that  this  Assembly  do  now 

adjourn to Friday 23 October 2015 at 3.00 p.m. 

Question put and agreed to. 

The  Vice-Prime  Mnister,  Minister  of  Housing  &  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun)  rose 

and seconded. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned. 

(7.05 p.m.) 

MATTER RAISED 

HAJJ PILGRIMAGE 2015 – ORGANISATION  

Mr R. Uteem (First Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis Central): Thank 
you Madam Speaker, I would like to raise a specific matter on the problems relating to the 
organisation of Hajj pilgrimage of 2015. 

Madam  Speaker,  Hajj  is  one  of  the  five  pillars  of  Islam  and  every  Muslim  must 
perform pilgrimage to Makkah in Saudi Arabia at least once in his lifetime subject to having 
the means and to be physically fit to perform also. 

This  year, around 1,150 Mauritians went for  Hajj pilgrimage, but this time around, 
unfortunately, five of our compatriots were killed during the stampede which occurred on 24 
September 2015, in Mina near Makkah. I extend our heartfelt condolences to all the families 
of the victims. 

Madam Speaker, the Islamic Cultural Centre Trust Fund Act sets up the ICC Trust 
which  has  as  one  of  its  object  to  deal  with  matters  relating  to  the  organising,  facilitating, 
monitoring and supervision of Islamic pilgrimage to holy places and that is why I am raising 
this issue before this august Assembly, because the Minister concerned namely the Minister 
of  Arts  and  Culture,  under  the  Act,  is  given  powers  to  supervise  and  give  directions  of  a 
general nature to the ICC. 

Every year, Madam Speaker, there are issues whenever there is organisation of Hajj. 
There are issues with who gets the licence to organise Hajj. There are issues as to how the 
Hajj organisers behave or carry out their duties and functions in Saudi. There are issues as to 
how  visas  are  allocated.  At  some  point,  it  was  on  a  list,  but  this  list  seems  to  have  been 

 

120 

outdated because people who are not on the list have been going for Hajj and also this list 
does  not  take  into  consideration  the  age  and  health  conditions  of  people  to  whom  priority 
should be given. There are issues with the Hajj Mission itself, the composition, whether we 
need more people who are fluent in Arabic language, because that is the language spoken in 
Saudi Arabia, whether the Hajj mission should have doctors and we have seen it this time 
around where there were lots of Mauritians injured, we did not have sufficient doctors to give 
first-hand aid, we did not have sufficient medicines like even painkillers to meet these. 

So, every  year there is a lot of these problems which are recurring.  I will make an 
appeal to the Minister concerned, if he can have a relook at the organisation of Hadj. There 
was a report made by hon. Reza Issack, but it was never signed by the then Director of the 
ICC,  so,  it  was  never  implemented.  Maybe,  it  is  time  to  have  a  fresh  look  at  the  whole 
organisation and get people from the public, people who have experience and who can come 
and contribute and give ideas as to how to improve the organisation of Hajj. 

But, of course, Madam Speaker, today what I really want to raise is the specific issues 
of  what  happened  in  Makkah  on  24  September.  I  have  taken  the  time  to  go  and  meet  the 
families of the victims. I have taken the time to go and meet Hajj organisers, eyewitnesses 
and even the members of the Hajj Mission so as to get a complete picture. And it would seem 
that everyone that I have met, confirmed that, at one point in time, there was a road that was 
blocked.  We don’t know for what reason, but there was a road that was blocked and that 
forced a number of pilgrims to go back and meet pilgrims coming from the other direction. 
So, it was extremely hot and this clash resulted in the death of what the Saudi authorities have 
stated to be 769.  But what generally from information we gathered from different countries 
is that it exceeds 2,000 people. 

All these families now want to know exactly what has happened so that such incident 
does not happen again. We are not the only ones in Mauritius who are asking questions. In 
Algeria,  for  example,  the  Government  stated  that  they  will  demand  compensation  for  the 
families of the deceased and for the injured. In Bangladesh, they condemned the disrespectful 
handling of the bodies after the 24-September incident in Makkah, the way the Saudi security 
officers removed bodies from the site, seemed as if they were dumping garbage. We all saw 
pictures on the Internet of lorries taking bodies and pilling them up bulldozers.  

Nigeria also went further as to raise the issue in the House of Parliament in Nigeria, 
and the House there demanded for the immediate takeover of the investigation of the incident 

 

121 

by international investigators since there were still conflicting reports as to the cause of the 
incident. It stated that this became necessary in order to prevent further occurrences. 

In  Mauritius,  unfortunately,  the  first  reaction  from  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister 
Soodhun was to blame one particular Hajj organiser, and then it was reported in the press that 
after the meeting with the Saudi authorities - it was reported in the press, I am not saying that 
that is correct  – that apparently the  Vice-Prime Minister congratulated  the Saudi Arabia.  I 
have no doubt that it is probably Saudi propaganda about what actually happened. But may I 
make  a  humble  request  in  the  name  of  all  the  victims  of  the  deceased  in  Mauritius  that 
officially the Government of Mauritius asks for an independent inquiry into what happened 
exactly so that people in Mauritius can complete their grief. 

Thank you. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun): 
Madam Speaker, as it is a very sensitive issue, with your permission, I would like to reply to 
certain points raised by hon. Reza Uteem.  

Hajj organisation is an extremely challenging exercise for years. The Government, the 
Islamic Cultural Centre, the Hajj Committee and the Hajj Mission have spared no efforts to 
ensure  that  the  best  possible  conditions  are  created  for  our  Hajjis.  For  the  benefit  of  the 
House, I deem it necessary to elaborate on the different steps of the Hajj organisation 2015. 

There  is  a  transparent  selection  exercise  of  Hajjis  as  well  as  the  designation  of  11 
operators.  In  the  past,  it  was  about  34  operators.  Initially,  our  quota  of  1,040  Hajjis  was 
maintained  and  it  was  only  on  10  September  that  Saudi  authorities  informed  us  that  our 
request for 500 additional visas was approved. Only Mauritius in the whole world obtained 
500 more visas. It was on my request, when I met the Minister of Hajj in March this year. 
Due to short notice, only 115 persons responded positively. We had contacted 3,350 people 
who were on the list of future Hajjis.  

To make the necessary arrangement, it is to be recalled that the officer who went to 
take the visas in South Africa was caught up in administrative procedures at the airport of 
Johannesburg and he missed his flight. However, all the additional 115 Hajjis were able to 
reach Saudi Arabia before the closing of the Hajj terminal on 17 September.  

122 

 
As part of the pre-Hajj mission, I had the privilege of going to the Kingdom of Saudi 
Arabia  in  March  2015  to  start  preparations  for  our  Hajjis  and  I  signed  a  different  Hajj 
protocol agreement with the Saudi Minister of Hajj.  

The Government also negotiated the best deal in terms of airfare, fixed at Rs35,000 
with Emirates Airline, whereas last year it was Rs46,000 in spite of the dollar being Rs30 and 
today it is Rs36.  

Training  sessions  were  provided  to  Hajjis  at  the  seat  of  ICC,  except  for  the  last 
additional batch of 115 as time did not permit. With regard to the accommodation of Hajjis, 
the  officer-in-charge  of  the  ICC  was  sent  to  Saudi  Arabia  to  inspect  the  three  buildings 
booked in Makkah and four in Madina and rated as three-star plus, prior to finalisation of 
contracts of operators. Operators were asked to sign two contracts for the first time: one with 
the Hajjis and a second one with the ICC.  

Vaccination was provided to all Hajjis in five  regional hospitals prior to departure. 

Saudi officers were in Mauritius for the allocation of visa in August.  

Moreover, I personally chaired meetings with the relevant authorities such as Atom, 
IML, the Customer Department, the Police Force and the Ministry of Health and Quality of 
Life in the presence of the Board Members of the ICC to make sure that the departure and the 
arrival of the Hajjis would take place in the best possible condition. I do not think that we 
have any complaint from any Hajji for the arrival and the departure in Mauritius. This year, 
just to correct my good friend, it was 1,179 Mauritians who accomplished the Hajj. 

As regards the Hajj Mission, I must specify that the team was made of six competent 
and apolitical persons and one among the six was a well-known interpreter in Arabic. The 
team which proceeded to Saudi Arabia was led by Mr Samioullah Lauthan, Chairman of ICC; 
everybody unanimously accepted.  

Madam Speaker, it would be important for me to clarify certain issues. Every Hajji 
will definitely tell you about the heat which rose to around 45o in Saudi Arabia. This caused 
quite some health hazards to many Hajjis, but they were all attended to by the medical teams 
of Saudi Arabia. I personally intervened with the Government of India so that we could get 
the services of Indian doctors in all the regions of Makkah, Mina, Arafat and Madina from 
the dispensary of the Indian Government.  

123 

 
One  of  the  complaints  made  by  the  Hajjis  was  that  air  conditioners  were  not 
functioning  in  Mina.    I  must  state  that  this  was  not  a  problem  affecting  particularly 
Mauritians, but many Hajjis from other countries also had to bear such a situation.  The Hajjis 
also  complained  of  long  delays  before  buses  were  released  for  the  trip  to  Madina.    Hon. 
Members would surely appreciate that this occurrence was due to the fact that management of 
the transport facilities was done by the Saudi authorities and not by the Mauritian authorities. 

We  are  all  aware  that  a  tragic  event  occurred  in  Mina  as  mentioned  by  the  hon. 
Member  during  Hajj  this  year.    It  would  appear  that  because  of  the  non-respect  of  the 
predetermined timetable, it happened that Mauritian Hajjis were present on site at the time of 
the incident.  The aspect is being investigated into.  Initially, we had a group of 11 persons 
missing.  Gradually, the Hajj Mission was able to trace 6 of them. At this point, I must place 
on record that the Hajj Mission has to be commended for all the efforts that are deployed to 
undertake the search.  Even certain operators and all the other Hajjis as well as some of our 
compatriots residing in Jeddah worked as a team to organise a search campaign.  I was in 
permanent  contact  with  the  Hajj  Mission  to  gather  any  update  about  how  the  situation 
evolved night and day.   

I can assure the House - my hon. friend and the Janoo family know - that I was in 
contact whole night and day, giving them all the information.  This was also supported by the 
Janoo family in Mauritius.  I had given clear instructions to the Hajj Mission to stay till they 
got  the  final  information.    I  can  say  that  we  are  the  only  organisation  that  stayed  and  we 
attended the funerals of all the five Mauritians.  I was there, not at the funeral, but in Makkah 
and this had been done in Mina.  We are the only country that stayed there till the end of the 
funeral. Unfortunately, we got information about the death of five missing Hajjis.   

While I was on official mission in Saudi Arabia, this démarche was much facilitated 
by the fact that I brought the DNA samples.  I can tell you that I was the only Minister who 
brought  along  with  me  to  Saudi  Arabia  the  DNA  samples  -  this  has  been  proved  by  the 
Minister of Health of Saudi Arabia - to help in the identification of corpses.  My good friend 
knows the situation in which the dead bodies were.  I am not going to say what I have seen 
and witnessed personally. I am not going to reveal it. 

The funeral, as I mentioned, of the deceased Mauritian Hajjis, took place in Mina. I 
would like to mention that we have informed and I have insisted that the names should be put 
at the entrance of the cemetery so that at any time their family want to pay a visit, they can do 

 

124 

so. We will get the permission, there is no problem.  I would like to present once more my 
sincere condolences to the Janoo and Nazurally families. 

I have to inform hon. Members that during my recent visit to Saudi Arabia, we were 
the only country who has been able to meet Prince Mohamed Bin Salman Bin Abdulaziz, the 
Saudi Minister of Health, the Minister of Foreign Affairs and the Minister of Hajj.  We have 
had long discussions about the Hajj organisation.  They have reassured me that next  year, 
they will come up with more advanced security measures for Hajjis. 

A dedicated committee  has been set up by the  Crown Prince immediately  after the 
incident to reflect on how best the organisation of Hajj 2016 could be planned.  I have been 
invited by the Prince to come up with proposals, if any.  I shall consult all the stakeholders 
and submit appropriate proposals for consideration by the committee. 

At our level, the ICC is undertaking a survey whereby Hajjis have been called upon to 
talk about their experience, advice, suggestions and improvements that may be brought in the 
organisation of Hajj in future.  I avail myself of this opportunity to invite suggestions from all 
hon. Members in case these could contribute towards improving Hajj organisation for next 
year. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

At 7.25 p.m. the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Friday 23 October 2015 at 

 
3.00 p.m. 
 

WRITTEN ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 
CHILDREN’S BILL - INTRODUCTION   

(No. B/739) Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister of Gender Equality, Child Development and Family Welfare whether, in regard to 
the proposed introduction of a Children’s Bill which would harmonise the different pieces of 
legislation dealing with the children, she will state where matters stand. 

Reply: I am informed that a Draft Children’s Bill was submitted to my Ministry by 
the  Attorney  General’s  Office  in  October  2012  and  discussions  had  taken  place  on  the 
provisions of the Bill in 2013 and 2014.   

125 

 
Upon my assumption of office, I personally chaired various meetings where the Bill 
was re-examined in the light of a list of policy issues brought up by the Attorney General’s 
Office in June 2015.  In that respect, consultations are still ongoing with other Ministries.  

The Children’s Bill is a complex and elaborate piece of legislation and will have far 
reaching  implications  on  the  development  and  well-being  of  the  Mauritian  child.    My 
Ministry will soon engage  with the Attorney General’s Office on the legal implications of 
policy issues agreed upon by my Ministry and other concerned Ministries and the Bill will 
then be finalised.   It is expected that the Bill will be introduced in the National Assembly 
before the end of the present session. 

 

METHADONE SUBSTITUTION THERAPY PROGRAMME 

(No. B/740) Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Methadone  Substitution 
Therapy Programme, he will state if he has been apprised of the comments made by Dr. D. 
M. of Reunion Island in relation to - 

(a) his Ministry’s decision not to administer Methadone as a treatment against drug 

addiction to new patients, and 

(b)  connections  of  Professor  H.  with  the  Go  Medical  Company,  a  supplier  of 

Naltrexone. 

 
Reply:  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  I  have  indeed  taken  note  of  the  comments 
made by Dr. D. M. of Reunion Island.  The comments are of general nature and reflect the 
personal opinion of Dr. D. M. in relation to the policy of the Government regarding the Harm 
Reduction Programmes. 

The House may be interested to note that following interactions with officers of my 
Ministry who attended the ‘14ème  Colloque VIH et Hépatites’ organised by the Indian Ocean 
Commission in Seychelles last week, Dr. D. M. addressed an email dated 15 October 2015 to 
me stating the following – 

 
“Je  suis  le  Dr.  David  Mété,  médecin  au  CHU  de  la  Réunion  et  responsable  de  la 
Fédération Régionale d’Addictologie de la Réunion (FRAR).  J’ai le plaisir de vous adresser 
en attaché mon curriculum vitae. 

126 

 
Je vous adresse cet email dans les suites de mon intervention lors du Colloque VIH 
Océan  Indien  aux  Seychelles.    Les  représentants  de  votre  ministère  m’ont  informé  que  la 
nature de mes propos avait heurté. 

Je souhaite vous assurer par ce message que telle n’était pas mon intention et sachez 
que j’en suis désolé.  Je vous exprime l’expression de mon sincère respect ainsi que de ma 
plus  haute  considération.    Les  propos  que  j’ai  tenus  sont  ceux  du  médecin  spécialisé  en 
Addictologie que je suis, ils ont été tenus en mon nom personnel et n’engagent en rien les 
autorités des Seychelles, de la Réunion ou du CHU de la Réunion. 

Les échanges que j’ai eus avec vos représentants ont été très riches et m’ont permis 

d’élargir ma vision de la problématique des drogues à l’île Maurice. 

En tant que médecin addictologue, je ne peux que saluer l’introduction de nouvelles 

options dans le programme mauricien (Suboxone, soutien psychosocial).” 

 
With regard to part (b) of the question, I am afraid I am not aware of any connections 

between Professor H. and the Go Medical Company.  

 

FLIC EN FLAC - ACCESS ROAD 

(No. B/741) Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the project for the 
urgent provision of a new access road to Flic en Flac, he will state where matters stand. 

Reply: I am informed by the RDA that an alignment for a proposed “New Link Road 
to Flic en Flac has been identified.  The project is approximately 7.0 km long and starts near 
Junction  Palma  Road  (B2)  &  Geoffroy  Road  (B91)  at  Beaux  Songes.    The  proposed  road 
crosses the Rivière Noire Road (A3) at Cascavelle and ends at the Flic en Flac Road (B34) in 
the region of Flic en Flac/Wolmar. 

 In  November  2014,  following  a  tender  exercise,  Scene-Ries  Consult  Ltd  was 
appointed as Consultant for the Environmental, Social and Traffic Impact Assessment for the 
proposed alignment.  The consultancy fees were to the tune of Rs2.2 m.   

In  May  2015,  the  Consultant  submitted  a  preliminary  report  and  proposed  the 

following, amongst others - 

•  Construction of approximately 7.0 km of single carriageway road; 
•  Construction of two grade separated junctions on Palma Road (B2) at Beaux 

Songes and on Riviere Noire Road (A3) at Cascavelle; 

 

127 

•  Construction of a bridge over an approximate length of 40 m, and 
•  Laying of about 10.0 km of roadside drains; 

 The  estimated  cost  of  the  project,  as  submitted  by  the  Consultant  is  Rs1.5  billion 

which is, according to the RDA, on the high side.    

I am informed that the RDA is now reconsidering the whole project proposal of the 
Consultant  in  view  of  the  high  cost  involved  and  given  the  fact  that  the  alignment  passes 
through environmental sensitive areas such as marshy lands, hunting ground and flood-prone 
areas as well as residential areas.  

LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACT - AMENDMENT 

(No.  B/742)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 
asked the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the Local Government Act, he 
will state when proposed amendments will be introduced thereto, indicating the main avenues 
of the reform that will be proposed. 

Reply: In the Government Programme 2015-2019, it was announced that Government 
will amend the Local Government Act to consolidate democracy at local level and promote 
better participation of Local Councillors in the management of community affairs. 

As the House is aware, in April this year, the first phase of amendments to the Local 
Government  Act  were  undertaken  as  there  was  an  urgent  need  to  make  Local  Councils, 
especially the Municipal Councils, fully functional. 

The House will recall that during the debates pertaining to the amendments brought to 
the Local Government Act in April 2015, I stated that a second phase of amendments to the 
Local Government Act will be undertaken. In this context, my Ministry has carried out a first 
round  of  consultation  with  major  stakeholders,  including  the  Electoral  Commissioner,  the 
Ministry of Housing and Lands and the 12 Local Authorities. 

The feedback and suggestions obtained have been examined and it has been noted that 
these  pertain  mainly  to  a  few  sections  of  the  existing  legislation  which  would  need  to  be 
amended with a view to addressing some loopholes in the existing legislation, so as to bring 
more  clarity  in  certain  procedures  and  interpretation.  Unfortunately,  no  proposal  has  been 
received for the formulation of any major policy orientation. 

As  the  way  forward,  therefore,  further  consultations  with  major  stakeholders  are 
ongoing, besides exploring the legislative experience on local government matters of other 
Commonwealth countries such as the UK, Australia and New Zealand with a view to picking 
up therefrom what could be of relevance for our local context. 

128 

 
Although  the  main  avenue  of  reform  has  not  yet  been  fine-tuned,  the  fundamental 
issues of local democracy such as the sharing of responsibilities between central government 
and Local Authorities, the duties and functions of Local Councillors, the equilibrium that has 
to  be  struck  between  local  autonomy  and  accountability,  local  government  financing  and 
decision-making  processes  involving  the  local  government  officers  and  elected  councillors 
are being studied for review. 

As  soon  as  we  complete  the  consultation  process  and  firm  up  the  proposals  to 
consolidate democracy at local level, we shall introduce a Bill to the National Assembly to 
that effect. 

 

STREET VENDORS & HAWKERS - FESTIVE SEASON 

 
(No.  B/743)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Local  Government  whether,  in  regard  to  the  street  vendors  and 
hawkers, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the – 

(a)  local  authorities,  information  as  to  the  measures  that  will  be  taken  in  relation 

thereto during the forthcoming festive season of December, and  

(b) Municipal Council of Port Louis, information as to where matters stand as to the 
construction of the appropriate structure for the accommodation thereof, in Port 
Louis. 

Reply: I wish to refer the hon. Member to the reply I made on 01 September 2015 to 

Parliamentary Question B/374 on the issue of relocation of hawkers operating in Port Louis. 

I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  with  a  view  to  setting  in  place  an  appropriate 
mechanism  to  control  hawkers  during  the  end  of  year  festivities,  I  have  had  consultative 
meetings with the Mayors of all the Municipal Councils. It was noted from the discussions 
that the situation was under control and manageable in all towns except in the City of Port 
Louis. 

I shall arrange to place in the Library of the National Assembly, the list of measures 

which each Local Authority is taking during the forthcoming festive season. 

As regards the Municipal City Council of Port Louis where the problem seems to be 
more complex, the House may wish to note that the following measures have been taken to 
ensure a better control of hawking activities during the end of year period – 

•  a  press  notice  has  been  published  highlighting  the  consequences  of  street 

vendors and hawkers operating along the roads, drains and pavements; 

 

129 

•  “No Hawkers” sign plate will be fixed in strategic places; 
• 

the  “No  Entry”  sign  at  Farquhar  Street  has  been  removed  to  enable  smooth 
vehicle flow; 
illegal structures fixed by the Street Vendors and hawkers are being removed. 
• 
•  handrails will be placed at strategic places to prevent hawkers from exposing 

• 

their wares along pavements, and 
identification  badges  will  be  issued  to  those  hawkers  paying  a  trade  fee  for 
“seller of foodstuff and none foodstuff (mobile) (except on public beaches and 
500 metres from any markets). 

I propose to meet the Lord Mayor in the coming days to find out how the situation is 
evolving  on  site  and  to  consider  whether  other  measures  should  be  envisaged  during  that 
period. 

With  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  mentioned  in  my  reply  to  Parliamentary 
Question B/374, the construction of the appropriate structure to accommodate the hawkers is 
an integral part of the Port  Louis redevelopment and the decongestion programme and the 
Port  Louis vision 2013  project, initiated by the  Ministry of Public infrastructure  and  Land 
Transport. 

The  conceptual  proposal  to  accommodate  some  1000  hawkers  at  both  the  Victoria 
Station and Immigration Square has been presented to all concerned stakeholders and their 
feedbacks are awaited to finalise the project. 

 

SUGAR - EXPORT 

(No.  B/744)  Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security  whether,  in  regard  to 
sugar,  he  will  state  if  the  bigger  US  sugar  allocation  to  Australia  in  the  Trans  Pacific 
Partnership will have any impact on our export thereof under the tariff rate quota. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

DEUX FRÈRES – INHABITANTS - RELOCATION 

(No.  B/745)  Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis East) asked the Minister of Environment, Sustainable Development and Disaster and 
Beach Management whether, in regard to the proposed relocation of the inhabitants of Deux 

 

130 

Frères who are facing potential danger due to the prevailing risks of landslide, he will state 
where matters stand. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND QUALITY OF LIFE – MEDICAL 

PRACTITIONERS - RECRUITMENT 

(No. B/746) Dr. Z. Joomaye (Second Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  whether,  in  regard  to  the  medical 
practitioners  who  were  recently  recruited  to  serve  as  Medical  and  Health  Officers  in  his 
Ministry, he will state the – 

(a) criteria used for the selection thereof, and  
(b) probation  period  of  satisfactory  performance  after  which  they  will  be  eligible 
for  confirmation  on  the  permanent  and  pensionable  establishment  of  his 
Ministry. 

Reply: Since 15 October 1997, the Public Service Commission has delegated powers to 
my Ministry to employ Medical and Health Officers/Senior Medical and Health Officers on a 
purely temporary month-to-month basis to palliate for shortage of doctors. 

Several  conditionalities  are  attached  to  such  delegation  of  powers,  namely  that  the 
employment is made against vacancies and candidates should have the required qualifications 
as  laid  down  in  the  Scheme  of  Service,  they  should  not  have  retired  in  the  interest  of  the 
Public Service or on medical grounds. 

I am informed that a first selection exercise was carried out as far back as 1998 under 
such delegation.  Thereafter, several selection exercises have been made as follow: 2004 (7 
candidates), 2005 (63), 2006 (30), 2007 (133), 2008 (12), 2009 (173), 2010 (84) and 2011 
(69). 

With regard to part (a) of the question, my Ministry carried out a similar exercise in 
August 2015 to cater for those doctors who are presently on study leave without pay.  The 
same criteria were used in addition to experience, clinical knowledge, management of cases 
and personality. 

You may wish to note that my Ministry reported 119 vacancies to the Public Service 
Commission on 05 March 2015.  The post was advertised on 07 April 2015 and we are still 
awaiting for the outcome.  The House is aware that it is imperative for my Ministry to have 
adequate  manpower  to  run  existing  and  new  services  as  we  are  dealing  with  the  lives  of 

 

131 

people.  Hence, my Ministry had to employ 60 doctors on a temporary basis under delegated 
power to palliate for such shortage. 

Part  (b)  of  the  question  does  not  arise  inasmuch  as  the  Medical  and  Health 
Officers/Senior  Medical  and  Health  Officers  selected  have  been  employed  on  a  purely 
temporary  month-to-month  basis.    Such  employment  does  not  give  them  any  claim  for 
permanent  appointment.    Should  vacancies  occur  in  the  grade  of  Medical  and  Health 
Officers/Senior  Medical  and  Health  Officers,  they  will  have  to  apply  and  will  have  to 
compete along with other applicants. 

The House may wish to note that the selection exercise carried out by my Ministry is 

independent of the one to be made by the Public Service Commission.  

The House is aware that families have made a lot of sacrifices to send their children to 
study medicine. However, it is impossible for the Ministry to recruit all unemployed doctors 
in the public service. 

My Ministry is doing a manpower planning exercise to define our needs for the medical 
profession and eventually, we may adopt the French system of ‘Numerus Clausus’ to define 
our future manpower requirements.  My Ministry is also negotiating with friendly countries 
to  export  our  doctors  to  take  up  employment  in  the  region  and  in  other  African  countries 
within an agreed framework.  

 

AIRMATE LTD – EMPLOYEES – TERMINATION OF CONTRACT 

(No.  B/747)  Mr  D.  Ramful  (Third  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and  Training  whether,  in 
regard  to  Airmate  Ltd.,  he  will  state  the  number  of  employees  thereof  whose  contract  of 
employment  has  been  terminated  since  December  2014  to  date,  indicating  the  reasons 
therefor in each case. 

Reply: I am informed that for the period December 2014 to 16 October 2015, Airmate 
Ltd has terminated the contract of employment of 11 workers – 6 for misconduct, 4 for poor 
performance and 1 whose services as ‘Manager Legal’ were no longer required. 

Additionally,  5  workers  ceased  to  be  in  employment  with  the  company  for  having 
committed a breach of contract and the company has not renewed the contract of employment 
of 62 workers whose determinate contracts of employment had come to an end during the 
same period, as their services were no longer required. 

 

 

132 

PLAINE MAGNIEN - FOOTBALL GROUND - RENOVATION 

(No. B/748) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the proposed renovation of the 
Plaine Magnien football ground, he will state where matters stand. 

 
Reply (Minister of Local Government): I am informed by the District Council of 
Grand Port that the upgrading of the Plaine Magnien football ground was undertaken by the 
National  Development  Unit  and  works  started  in  June  2013.  The  practical  handing  over 
exercise was effected on 19 December 2014 with a maintenance period of one year. 

I  had  representations  from  Members  for  Mahebourg  and  Plaine  Magnien,  i.e.  hon. 

Jhugroo, hon. Hurreeram and hon. Thierry Henry. 

A visit was held on 02 September 2015 to assess the situation regarding the football 

ground. It revealed the following shortcomings –  

•  proper  leveling  of  the  football  ground  has  not  been  carried  out  at  several 

places; 

•  chipping  has  been  used  instead  of  top  soil  or  rocksand  for  leveling  of  the 

ground; 

•  watering of the grass was not being done, and 
•  8 manhole covers were missing. 

These shortcomings have been communicated to the National Development Unit for 
necessary action at its end and the final handing over is expected to be held on 19 December 
2015. 

I am further informed that a revised estimate is awaited from the Central Electricity 
Board to supply electricity and spotlight at the football ground and for which an amount of 
Rs800,000 is available. Given that the football ground was closed during construction works, 
the  existing  cloakroom  was  damaged  by  vandals.  The  required  reinstatement  works  have 
been estimated at Rs400,000 and will be undertaken by the Council jointly with the National 
Development Unit. 

 

HARRY LA TOUR STADIUM - RENOVATION 

(No. B/749) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the proposed renovation of the 
Harry La Tour stadium, in Mahebourg, he will state where matters stand. 

133 

 
Reply:  Necessary  actions  have  already  been  initiated  by  my  Ministry  for  the 
renovation of the Harry  La Tour stadium following request made by the  Chief Whip, hon. 
Jhugroo, the PPS hon. Henry and hon. Hurreeram.  The renovation works will comprise the 
demolition and reconstruction of the boundary wall along the La Chaux Street over a length 
120 metres, construction of a spectators’ stand to accommodate approximately 700 persons 
and replacement of 100 metres of damaged chain link fencing near the proposed spectators 
stand.    The  project  also  includes  upgrading  works  to  the  cloakrooms  and  other  related 
amenities. 

Preliminary drawings have already been completed and very soon a tender exercise 

will be carried out for the implementation of the project. 

 

PARASTATAL BODIES/STATE-OWNED COMPANIES – 

CHAIRPERSONS, CEOs & MANAGERS – APPOINTMENT 

(No. A/9) Mr A. Ameer Meea (Second Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port 
Louis East) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister 
for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Chairpersons, Chief 
Executive Officers, General Managers and Managing Directors of the parastatal bodies/State- 
owned companies falling under the aegis of his Ministry, he will give a list thereof, indicating 
in each case, the terms and conditions of appointment thereof, including the salary and other 
benefits drawn. 

Reply: There are at present five parastatal bodies/State-owned companies operating 

under the aegis of the Prime Minister’s Office, namely -  

(i) 

(ii) 

Gambling Regulatory Authority; 

SBM Holdings Ltd; 

(iii)  Air Mauritius Ltd; 

(iv)  Mauritius Duty-Free Paradise, and 

(v)  Media Trust. 

The  information  requested  by  the  hon.  Member  has  been  placed  in  the  Library.  
However,  in  regard  to  SBM  Holdings  Ltd  and  Air  Mauritius  Ltd,  as  already  indicated  in 
replies  to  previous  Parliamentary  Questions,  these  companies  are  listed  on  the  Stock 
Exchange of Mauritius and are governed by their Memorandum and Articles of Association 

 

134 

and the Companies  Act.  It would, therefore, not be appropriate to provide the information 
asked for by the hon. Member for these two companies. 

 

ROCHE BOIS POLICE STATION – STAFF & VEHICLES 

(No. A/10) Mr A. Ameer Meea (Second Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port 
Louis East) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister 
for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Roche Bois Police 
Station,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Commissioner  of  Police, 
information as to the number of – 

(a) 
(b) 
(c) 

staff posted thereat, grade-wise; 
vacancies existing thereat, and 
vehicles attached thereto. 

Reply:  In  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  there  are  forty-three  Police  Officers 

posted at Roche Bois Station in the following grades – 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

Inspector: 

 

Police Sergeant: 

Police Corporal: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Police Constable/Woman Police Constable:   

 

 

 

 

 1 

 4 

 4 

34 

With respect to part (b) of the question, there are twelve vacancies as follows – 

(i) 

(ii) 

Police Sergeant: 

Police Corporal: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(iii) 

Police Constable/Woman Police Constable:   

 

 

 

2 

2 

8 

As regards part (c) of the question, two vehicles are presently operational at Roche 

Bois Police Station, namely one 4 x 4 van and one motorcycle. 

644 Police Constables passed out on Saturday 17 October 2015.  All Police Divisions 

will be reinforced accordingly. 

SAVANNE & BLACK RIVER – NDU PROJECTS 

(No. A/11) Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National Development Unit whether, in regard to Constituency No. 14, Savanne and Black 

 

135 

River,  he  will  give  a  list  of  the  projects  being  implemented  thereat  by  the  National 
Development Unit in the current year, indicating in each case the – 

(a) 
(b) 

nature thereof, and 
cost thereof. 

Reply: The list of projects to be implemented in Constituency No. 14 by the National 
Development  Unit  during  this  financial  year  has  been  placed  in  the  Library.    The  cost  of 
projects cannot be assessed at this stage. 

 

POLICE STATIONS, DIVISIONAL HEADQUARTERS & DETENTION 

CENTRES – CONSTRUCTION 

(No. A/12) Mr A. Ameer Meea (Second Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port 
Louis East) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister 
for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  proposed 
construction of Police Stations, Divisional Headquarters and Detention Centres, he will, for 
the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, a list thereof, indicating 
where matters stand in each case, including the – 

(a) 
(b) 

(c) 

cost thereof; 
amount of funds earmarked therefor, indicating the amount of money already 
spent in relation thereto, and 
expected start and completion dates thereof. 

Reply: The information has been placed in the Library of the National Assembly. 
 

MISSIONS OVERSEAS - AMBASSADORS/HIGH COMMISSIONERS - 

APPOINTMENT 

(No. A/13) Mr A. Ameer Meea (Second Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port 
Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and  International 
Trade  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Ambassadors/High  Commissioners  posted  in  our 
Embassies/High Commissions, he will give a list 

thereof, indicating in each case the –  

(a) posting, and  

(b) terms and  conditions of appointment thereof, including the salary, allowances and 

other benefits drawn. 

 
Reply:  The information requested for has been placed in the Library of the National 

136 

Assembly. 

 

BLACK RIVER GORGES NATIONAL PARK - PATROLS 

(No. A/14) Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management 
whether, in regard to the Black River Gorges National Park, he will state if he is aware of the 
chaotic environmental situation prevailing thereat and, if so, indicate - 

(a) the measures he proposes to take in relation thereto, and  
(b) if consideration will be given for the setting up of enforcement teams to deal with 

the offenders thereat. 

Reply: I am informed that there is no “chaotic environmental situation” prevailing at 
the Black River Gorges National Park. This has been confirmed by the National Parks and 
Conservation Service which is responsible for the management of the National Park.  

A site visit was also conducted at the Black River Gorges National Park by officers of 
my Ministry in the presence of officers of the Forestry Department. In the course of this visit, 
no environmental problem/nuisance was noted. 

I am further informed that several measures are taken to ensure the safety and security 
of the endemic fauna and flora as well as visitors. Regular monitoring and patrols are effected 
by the Police du Tourisme as well as Enforcement Officers of the Ministry of Agro-Industry 
and Food Security throughout the National Park. 

I  have  also  been  informed  that  as  at  today,  no  case  of  environmental  pollution  has 
been reported at my Ministry nor at the Police de L’Environnement in the region of the Black 
River Gorges National Park. 

CHEMIN GRENIER - MARKET FAIR - CONSTRUCTION 

(No. A/15) Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the proposed construction of the Chemin 
Grenier new market fair, he will state where matters stand as to the implementation thereof, 
indicating the expected start and completion dates thereof. 

Reply: I am informed by the District Council of Savanne that - 

(i)  a  project  proposal  for  the  construction  of  a  new  market  fair  at  Chemin 
Grenier has been submitted to the Project Plan Committee for examination 
and recommendation to the Government; 

 

 

137 

(ii)  land has been identified for the project and procedures have been initiated 
by  the  Ministry  of  Housing  and  Lands  for  its  acquisition  and  eventual 
vesting in the Council; 

(iii) adequate parking space would be made available; 
(iv) roads, electricity and water facilities would be made available, and 
(v)  the estimated cost of the project is Rs75 m. 

I have further been informed that once the project is approved, financial clearance 
would be sought for the implementation of the project and same would be included in the 
budget  proposal  for  2016/17.  The  project  duration  would  be  approximately  one  year  if  all 
utilities are brought to the site and clearances are obtained from other stakeholders such as 
Road Development Authority, Traffic Management and Road Safety Unit, Ministry of Health 
and Quality of Life and the Mauritius Fire and Rescue Service. 

 

CITÉ BASSIN - FOOTBALL GROUND - LIGHTING 

(No. A/16) Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the Cité Bassin Football Ground, he will 
state if consideration will be given for the provision of lighting thereat and, if so, indicate the 
proposed time frame set for the implementation thereof. 

Reply (Minister of Local Government): I am informed by the Municipal Council of 
Quatre Bornes that the Cité Bassin Football Playground is the property of the Sugar Industry 
Labour Welfare Fund. However, being given that the football ground is being used by the 
football  team  of  the  region,  it  is  presently  being  maintained  by  the  Municipal  Council  in 
terms of mowing of grass and marking thereat. 

I am informed that the provision of lighting at the football ground may be considered 
by  the  Municipal  Council  subject  to  its  vesting  in  the  Council  and  availability  of  required 
funds. 

