 

1 

 

 

No. 15 of 2015 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

WEDNESDAY 01 APRIL 2015 

 

 

 

2 

 
 

                              CONTENTS 

 

 

QUESTION (Oral) 

MOTION 

            BILL (Public)   

 

 

 

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 

KCMG, QC  

Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 

GCSK  

Communications 

Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo, GCSK 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 

Utilities 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Minister 

of 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Integration 

and  Economic 

Empowerment 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 

Sinatambou 

International Trade 

Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 

Perraud 

Family Welfare 

Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain 

Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 

Institutional Reforms 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 

 

4 

Institutions 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 

Shipping and Outer Islands 

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, 

Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 

QPM 

Disaster and Beach Management  

Hon. Marie Roland Alain Wong Yen             Minister of Civil Service and Administrative  

Cheong, MSK 

 

 

 

       Reforms 

    Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn            

Minister  of  Labour, 
Employment and Training 

Industrial  Relations, 

 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Madam Speaker 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, 

      GCSK 

Deputy Speaker 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Hurreeram,  Hon.  Mahendranuth 
Sharma 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

(Temporary  

Gopall,  Mr  Navin 
Transfer to RRA) 

 Jankee,  Mrs Chitra  

Badal, Mr Ramesh 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

 

          Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 15 of 2015 

 

Sitting of 01 April 2015 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

 

7 

ORAL ANSWER TO QUESTION 

CEB - GENERATORS - TENDER 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Vice-
Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to electricity, he 
will, for the benefit of the House, obtain information - 

 (a) in respect of the procurement of four 15 MW generators, from the -  
(i) Central Procurement Board, why it cancelled the tender therefor;  
(ii) Independent Review Panel, where matters stand regarding the appeal lodged 

in relation thereto;  

(b) from the Central Electricity Board -  

(i) where matters stand  regarding the  case lodged before the Supreme Court in 

relation to the tender for the procurement of 15 MW generators;  

(ii) if fresh tenders will be launched for the procurement of 15 MW generators;  
(iii) if the World Bank report on the capacity expansion plan based on updated 

economic conditions will be made public, and  

(iv) the measures being taken to prevent rolling black-outs as from end 2015. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):  Madam  Speaker,  in  August  2011,  the  CEB  started  the  process  for  the 
redevelopment of the St. Louis power station. In August 2012, CEB made an application for 
an  EIA  licence  which  was  granted  in  August  2013.  In  September  2013,  CEB  decided  to 
procure 4 diesel generators of 15 MW each. Mott Mac Donald was reappointed in connection 
with the preparation of the tender documents. I use the term ‘reappointment’ because Mott 
Mac Donald had been the original Consultant on that matter. The document was floated in 
February 2014. By 27 March 2014, ten expressions of interest were received. On 15 April 
2014,  the  Central  Procurement  Board  informed  CEB  that  five  potential  bidders  had  been 
selected. This was approved by the African Development Bank which had agreed to finance 
the  project.  On  24  June  2014,  the  Central  Electricity  Board  (CEB)  invited  bids  from  five 
prequalified  bidders  approved  by  the  Central  Procurement  Board  (CPB)  and  the  African 
Development Bank, with expected commissioning of the engines by early 2016. 

•  By the closing date of 25 September 2014, only one bidder, Burmeister and 
Wain  Scandinavian  Contractor  (BWSC),  submitted  its  bid.  On  14  October 
2014, the loan agreement was signed for an amount of Rs3.5 billion. 

 

8 

•  With regard to part (a)(i) of the question, on 20 November 2014, the Central 
Procurement  Board  informed  CEB  that  the  only  bid  received,  that  is,  from 
BWSC, was substantially non responsive and that it was not in a position to 
approve any award of the contract. 

•  On  25  November  2014,  in  line  with  section  39  (1)(a)  of  the  Public 
Procurement  Act,  the  CEB  informed  BWSC  of  the  cancellation  of  the 
procurement exercise. 

•  On 01 December 2014, BWSC challenged the decision of the CEB and on 04 
December 2014, the CEB informed the bidder that the challenge could not be 
entertained as the exercise had already been cancelled. 

As  regards  part  (a)(ii)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  on  15  December  2014, 
BWSC filed a review with the Independent Review Panel (IRP). The IRP held five hearings 
on this case and the parties filed their submissions on 13 March 2015. The determination of 
the IRP has not yet been received. 

With  regard  to  part  (b)(i)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  by  the  CEB  that  it  is  not 
aware of any matter before the Supreme Court regarding that project, neither is my Ministry 
aware of any case before the Supreme Court. 

With reference to part (b)(ii), the CEB has updated its supply-demand balance taking 
into account the short term expected demand of electricity. The CEB has already approved 
the  extension  of  the  Power  Purchase  Agreement  for  the  22MW  plant  with  Consolidated 
Energy Ltd (Beau Champ) from July 2015 up to 2018 at the purchase price of Rs2.95 per 
Kwh for 160 Gwh annually. 

The African Development Bank also reviewed the bid received from BWSC as well 
as the Bid Evaluation Report from CPB and has recommended that fresh bids be invited with 
revised specifications. 

According to the CEB - 
(i) 

with this extension, the electricity demand can be met until mid 2017 with the 
existing plants of the CEB and the Independent Power Producers and a well 
planned maintenance programme. 
accordingly  CEB  is  renewing  the  bid  document  for  a  60  MW  at  St  Louis 
Power Station as recommended by African Development Bank.   I must add 
that I had considered acting under Section 21 of the Public Procurement Act, 

(ii) 

 

9 

i.e Emergency Procurement but, on further consideration, and for the sake of 
transparency, I have now discarded this possibility. 

With  the  revised  bid  technical  specifications,  it  is  expected  that  more  competitive 
bidding will take place.  This meets the concurrence of the African Development Bank.  It is 
expected that the bids will be floated by June 2015 with the approval of CPB and African 
Development Bank.  The plant is expected to be operational in the second quarter of 2017. 

As regard part (b) (iii), in January 2015, the World Bank submitted a draft report on 
“assessment of electricity demand and generation expansion plan over the period 2015 - I am 
sorry, it must be a mistake.  I will correct that later. I will supplement it.  

The draft report confirms that to meet the short-term generation gap, an extension of the 
CEL  contract  -  yes,  I  am  sorry;  it  is  2015  to  2022  -  is  required  together  with  the 
commissioning of St Louis Power Station in 2017. The report also highlighted that the CEB 
should optimise on maintenance schedules of its existing power plants. 

In my reply to the last PNQ on this matter, I informed the House that the final report of 
the World Bank Consultant was expected by end of March.  However, the Consultant has had 
to take into consideration the Government decision regarding the CT Power project and had 
to review its recommendation for the period 2018-2022. 

We are pressing the World Bank to submit the final report within the shortest delay. 
On  receipt  of  the  report,  I  will  consult  Government  as  to  whether  the  report  can  be 

made public. 

With  regard  to  part  (b)  (iv),  the  CEB  has  updated  its  supply-demand  balance  and 
confirms to me that it will manage the supply without deficit and optimise on its maintenance 
schedules, voltage management of existing power plants. 

As regards part (b)(iv), CEB is of the view that all measures are being taken to avoid 

any black out. 

Mr  Bérenger:  I  had  asked  whether  we  can  have  the  reasons  why  the  Central 
Procurement Board threw out the tender and all I have heard is that the Central Procurement 
Board has said that the only bid received was substantially non-responsive. Now there is a 
Government that wants to have good governance all over the place; my information was that 
there  was  a  change  in  the  specifications  after  the  tender  had  come  out,  tailor-made  -  not 
everybody, but some people in the Central Electricity Board - to suit the purposes of those 
people and favoriser a given contractor.  Has there been a Police enquiry on this matter? 

 

10 

Mr Collendavelloo:  No, there has been no police enquiry on this matter.  There has 
been no complaint of any fraud on this matter. My utmost preoccupation is to get on with the 
job,  that  is,  to  try  and  ensure  the  procurement  of  these  generators  as  quickly  as  possible.  
Now,  with  regard  to  the  decision  of  the  CPB,  they  found  that  it  was  substantially  non-
responsive.  CEB was not necessarily of this view. The matter appears to be a little bit more 
complex  than  this.  There  seems  that,  at  the  level  of  the  CPB,  there  were,  in  fact,  two 
conflicting reports with regard to what should be done.  But whatever it is, the best course of 
action is to ask for fresh tender including the reason which the hon. Leader of Opposition has 
mentioned, that is, it could have been tailor-made to suit a particular tenderer; we don’t want 
to get bogged down in that sort of situation. 

Mr Bérenger:  But still, CEB has led us to trouble in the past and now I hear the new 
Minister being very optimistic on the basis of what the CEB says.  Can I ask, therefore, in a 
tight situation like that, where we are given all sorts of guarantees by the CEB, what changes 
are going to take place at the CEB?  Who is chairing the Board of the CEB now?  Who is the 
General Manager and will he be replaced? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:    As  at  to  date,  the  Senior  Chief  Executive  of  the  Ministry  is 
chairing the Board and the General Manager of the CEB has been asked to step down and to 
be the officer-in-charge.  I intend to make recommendations for a new Chairman and a new 
General Manager.  A communiqué will be issued as soon as this is finalised which could be 
done in the next two or three days. 

Mr Bérenger: As far as the Independent Review Panel is concerned, I heard the hon. 
Vice-Prime  Minister  say:  “the  determination  of  the  Independent  Review  Panel  has  not  yet 
been  received”.  Well,  am  I  right  in  saying  that,  in  the  meantime,  the  Independent  Review 
Panel has been replaced by a new lot and that, therefore, they will have to start all over again 
and can we have an indication how long this will take? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  What  I  have  said  in  my  reply  is  the  official  stand,  that  is,  the 
findings have not been received and that is strictly speaking accurate.  However, what I am 
informed  is  that  the  IRP  had  almost  finished  the  recommendations,  but  a  new  panel  was 
brought in and technically they should, I suppose, start again. But we don’t need to do this 
because we are cancelling the whole process, calling for new tenders.  The exercise has been 
started.  Let us be optimistic about it! 

Mr Bérenger:  Although we have got an official reply first corrected by the hon. Vice-
Minister  straightaway  five  minutes  later!    So,  in  fact,  as  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  is 
saying, the Independent Review Panel is off the mark, out of the picture for the moment.  If I 

 

11 

can  move  on,  I  am  sure  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  will  agree  with  me,  we  have  two 
problems; one, urgent four times 15MW power plants that must come into operation as soon 
as possible and then in longer term as from 2017-18, we have the need for a 100/200 MW 
based load supply.  I have heard that, unfortunately, the report that was supposed to be ready 
by  the  end  of  March  is  being  finalised  by  the  World  Bank.    But,  in  the  meantime,  in  the 
Public Sector Investment Programme, amongst the projects in the pipeline is listed, I quote – 
“Power generation projects including fossil-based power plants of total capacity over 
100 MW”. 
Can  I know which is  which pending the World Bank report because the hon. Vice 
Prime Minister has been very optimistic concerning renewal energy. Very optimistic! Now, 
after  we  have  done  away  with  the  CT  power,  there  is  reference  in  the  public  sector 
investment programme of, as I said, the 100 MW fossil based power plants. So, can we know 
which is which? 

Mr Collendavelloo: There are two issues. First of all, there is CT Power. CT Power is 
one thing. We took the decision that we took on the basis of the financial capabilities of CT 
Power. The second issue is coal. We never said that we are going to dump all the coal power 
plants in Mauritius and just use wind and sun. We will need to use coal for some time and 
there are clean coal power plants which are possible. The World Bank is going to assist us 
and  we  are  going  to  expect  the  report  any  time.  I  speak  in  presence  of  an  ex-Minister  of 
Energy who knows the situation with regard to these fossil plants. We are not going to do 
away with coal. Of course, we are going to put added emphasis on renewable energies and we 
are trying to start the projects as soon as possible. 

Mr Bérenger: Coming to the last part of my question which is the disturbing part of 
my  Private  Notice  Question,  I  believe  the  risk  is  very  real  that  we  have  not  a  general 
blackout, but rolling blackouts, cuts here and there all over the place. As from the end of this 
year,  the  CEB  is  being,  according  to  me,  over  optimistic.  I  know  that  the  hon.  Minister 
himself - the new Minister - in ‘Le Mauricien’ of 22 December, said – 

“Le risque de blackout existe’. 

And now that this 4 x 15, the former Government was relying all out on this 4 x 15, 
therefore,  60  MW.  Two  of  those  four  engines  were  supposed  to  come  into  operation  in 
November 2015.  2017 is mentioned now and we say that it will be probably later on.  Can I 
ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister whether they have the figures for the peak demands in the 

 

12 

country since the beginning of the year – he is the Minister since the last general elections - 
and at that point in time what was the effective capacity of the CEB, that is, keeping out the 
possible breakdown, the classical way of working effective capacity, that is, taking out the 
biggest  plan,  taking  out  what  is  required  to  be  taken  out  for  maintenance  purposes  and 
providing for a 10% spin-off safety margin? Does he have the figure, therefore, for the peak 
since the beginning of the year and what was the CEB effective capacity at that point in time? 

Mr Collendavelloo: First of all, I have the figures planned for the year 2015 and then 
I shall come to what has happened during the year. Globally, CEB has a capacity of 395 MW.  
Then, the IPPs have 197 MW which makes us a total of 592 MW. We have got to discount 
breakdowns  that  gave  us  37,  the  schedule  maintenance  which  is  30  so  that  the  effective 
capacity is 525 with a peak power forecast February 2015 - that is what we are dealing now - 
463.  Now, when we add the 10% spinning reserve that brings us to 509 with an excessive 
capacity margin in terms of percentage of 3% - those are the figures given to me by CEB - it 
would  appear  that  the  technical  units  of  my  Ministry  are  not  in  strong  disagreement  with 
these figures which have to be worked out. I am given a note to say that we have, in fact, 
witnessed a slight reduction in demand and that CEB intends to optimise maintenance. Of 
course, with the new team that comes in, we shall try and review that situation. 

Mr Bérenger: Good luck! Can I point out to the hon. Vice-Prime Minister that even 
on  figures  which  have  just  been  quoted  CEB  is  fiddling?  We  used  to  provide  60  MW  for 
maintenance, now they have grignoté, in your figures it is 40 MW. 

(Interruptions) 

30! Even less!  It used to be 60 MW. They have grignoté! So, can  I ask the hon. 
Vice-Prime  Minister  to  be  very  careful?  In  fact,  according  to  my  figures,  peak  demand, 
effective capacity, when you deduct all that, we were 10 MW close to danger point. Will he 
agree with me and that, therefore, there is no room to be over optimistic and as the CEB has 
said: there is no problem?  Will he agree with me that le risque est très réel ? 

Mr Collendavelloo: I understand that the 30 MW issue is World Bank forecast. 

(Interruptions) 

I agree that we should not be overtly optimistic, but there is no room for doomsday 
catastrophic images in our mind. I am extremely concerned about this situation and although 
I am not overtly optimistic, this is a file that has been on my mind ever since I took office, 
and we hope that with the new tender process, we will be able to look at it optimistically. 

13 

 
Mr Bérenger: All for optimism was the fact that the previous Government expected 
Médine to keep on providing 11 MW during crop time for the most difficult period of the 
year. In the reply to my former PNQ and today I have heard no reference to that, although the 
60 MW has been postponed, is that now no longer on? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Not at all! You will recall that I did give the figure to the House. 
I did give for 2015 the figure of 197 subtotal IPP.  Of course, I can give the precise figures. 
That includes Médine: 11 MW, consolidated that is Beau Champ for 22 MW, then we have 
FUEL: 20, Belle Vue: 46, CTDS: 30, the other one 65 and we go on like that. 

(Interruptions) 

But Médine is mentioned in my paper, 11 MW as from July 2015. I skipped that in 

order not to swamp the House with figures. 

Mr Bérenger: Can I ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister whether he is aware that, in 
fact, we are sur la corde raide already?  Already 35 years old engines that are a danger to the 
employees,  to  the  workers,  that  are  a  nuisance  to  the  people  around  the  power  stations 
concerned, to the point that environment has asked that these engines be not operated after a 
given hour at night, it is going beyond that. So, now we are postponing, decommissioning of 
these 35 years old engines, because we are sur la corde raide, and at the same time, we are 
putting people’s lives and health in danger and, at the same time, we are using gas turbines in 
an exaggerated manner, because they are very, very expensive. So, when a statement comes 
can we have some clarification on that aspect of the problem also? 

Mr Collendavelloo: I think I better say that I will come back with a statement on that 
issue.  I  am  given  a  paper  which  states  that  the  old  engines  are  being  operated  at  reduced 
capacity, but I would like to have the opportunity of well looking into it and come with a 
statement on that matter. 

Mr  Mahomed:  Madam  Speaker,  is  the  rope  going  to  be  even  tighter  with  the 
forthcoming  announced  smart cities, some of which appeared to be shovel ready  going by 
press reviews? This is on the one hand.  The more specific question will be: does the latest 
supply and demand analysis of the balance of the CEB cater for these smart cities?  What are 
the energy efficiency measures for the country being envisaged at the level of the Ministry 
also? 

Mr Collendavelloo: We have three questions.  Let me see if I have got them right.  
First of all, tight rope.  I am not going to put the country on a tight rope.  I hate tight rope 

 

14 

walking.  I walk neither in the dark nor on a tight rope, and the House can be assured that this 
is my immediate preoccupation. We have the situation that we have, and this is a matter of 
fact of which there is nothing much we can do except to take remedial measures. 

With regard to the smart cities, we hope - and that is my programme - that emphasis 
will be put on sun top photovoltaic.   If these are off-grid photovoltaic units, it means that 
these cells will not be a burden on the grid of the CEB.  Of course, that is more complex than 
this, because we have to upgrade the grid as the grid is a dumb grid and is not a smart grid.  
All this has got to be done.  We will be embarking on this matter.  Can I say that - I think I 
have already said that in the House - I benefit from the very valuable assistance of Prof. de 
Rosnay who has agreed to come back to help us.  He is an extremely good intellectual.  We 
also benefit from the assistance of certain international experts, and we hope to be able to put 
something together.  I hope I have not missed any part of the hon. Member’s question. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 
Mr Bhagwan: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The Minister has just stated the situation 
at Saint Louis Power Station, as also pointed out by the hon. Leader of the Opposition.  We 
all know that the 20 MW engines at Saint Louis, Pielstick engines, are running illegally in 
terms of age. This is a fact.  But can the Minister enquire about the situation at Fort George?  
In the recent past, there have been cracks on the engines at Fort George; the Sulzer engines. 
Can  the  hon.  Minister  at  least  inform  the  country  and  the  population,  while  preparing  the 
overall situation of these engines, the situation concerning the power plants at Fort George in 
order to reassure the population? 

Mr Collendavelloo: I am sure that the hon. Member will have no objection to coming 
with a substantive question on the Fort George issue.  I shall then dig in my files to come 
forward with a good answer; certainly a better answer that I could give now. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Ganoo! 
Mr Ganoo: Has the hon. Minister given thought to the possibility that the bidder, that 
is, BWSC, might have recourse to the Supreme Court to seek redress if they consider that 
injustice  has  been  meted  out  to  them,  especially  as  there  is  information  going  around  that 
there is a Bid Re-evaluation Committee which was set up and which recommended that the 
bidder be convened for clarification and negotiation, if need, be and so on? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Let me start with the last part.  There was a second report at the 
level  of  the  Central  Procurement  Board  of  which  we  were  not  aware,  which  apparently 
surfaced  during  the  proceedings  before  the  IRP.  That  second  report  recommended  that 
discussions be held to discuss the shortcomings of the bid more or less.  This clearly did not 

 

15 

find favour with the CPB - neither the old CPB nor the new CPB - for some reason better 
known to them.  If BWSC is to go to the Supreme Court, that is not going to stop us, unless 
we get an injunction, from opening new bids.  If we get an injunction, I always can fall back 
on emergency procedures, which I don’t want to use if at all possible. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, your last question. 
Mr  Bérenger:  Yes,  my  last  question.    I  think  we  can  agree  to  disagree  on  our 
assessment of how serious, how big the risk of rolling blackouts; not all blackouts are.  I have 
my  own  assessment,  the  CEB,  overoptimistic  as  usual,  and  clearly  the  new  Minister  is 
making his own assessment.  But is he aware that, unfortunately, for South Africa, for our 
brothers and sisters, it is already a fact that rolling black-outs have been on for months now 
because of lack of long-term and medium-term planning? Et ça nous pend au bout du nez.  
Therefore, will the hon. Minister agree with me that there is no room to panic, but no room 
for complacency as well? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  As  has  happened  on  several  occasions,  in  fact,  we  are  in 
agreement. This is not time for complacency.  I agree with this.  There is no disagreement at 
all as to the attitude which we should take.  We must be vigilant, we must be careful, and we 
must do the utmost that we can to avoid even rolling blackouts. But, what can I do? What can 
we do with the existing situation? We have got to try and work as fast as possible, which is 
what I am trying to do. 

Madam Speaker: Time is over! 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10 (2) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move that all the business on today’s Order 

Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

(12.10 p.m.) 

PUBLIC BILLS 

Second Reading 

THE APPROPRIATION (2015) BILL 

(NO. III of 2015) 

 

16 

& 

THE APPROPRIATION (2015-2016) BILL 

(NO. IV of 2015) 

Order  read  for  resuming  adjourned  debate  on  the  Second  Reading  of  the 
Appropriation (2015) Bill (No. III of 2015) and the Appropriation (2015-2016) Bill (No. IV of 
2015). 

Question again proposed. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Aliphon! 
Mr  A.  Aliphon  (Third  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière):  Thank  you, 
Madam  Speaker.    Madam  Speaker,  c’est  avec  une  grande  fierté  que  je  m’adresse  à  cette 
Chambre  aujourd’hui.  Avant  tout,  je  tiens,  au  nom  de  ma  famille,  de  mes  mandants  de  la 
circonscription  numéro  20  et  en  mon  nom,  féliciter  le  Premier  ministre,  le  ministre  des 
Finances, de même que mes collègues de la majorité d’avoir pourvu à l’île Maurice un budget 
qui nous met sur les rails du deuxième miracle économique. Ce budget que chaque Mauricien 
déjà qualifie de budget populaire, novateur et incitatif cadre avec l’île Maurice en devenir et 
qui souhaite rattraper le temps perdu. 

Madam Speaker, quand nous passons en revue les différentes mesures prises par le 
ministre des Finances, nous pouvons constater qu’aucun secteur n’a été oublié, passant par la 
nation d’entrepreneurs, par la diaspora mauricienne, par le développement du port, les PME, 
les TIC, l’environnement, de même que la belle Ile Rodrigues, sans oublier le dossier du 9-
year Schooling pour l’éducation. Finalement, avec ce budget, le gouvernement nous permet 
de grandir. Nous arrêterons d’être des job seekers et deviendrons des job providers. 

Quelles sont ces mesures phares pour venir mettre l’économie sur les rails ? Elles sont 
nombreuses.  Ne  pas  reconnaître  ce  budget  comme  un  bon  budget,  comme  le  prétend 
l’opposition, tient d’une dose de mauvaise foi, quand nous savons que pratiquement depuis 
deux  ans  notre  économie  était  au  point  mort  avec  un  Parlement  fermé  pour  cause  de 
négociation. L’île Maurice marchait à tâtons entre les épisodes des ‘on and off’. Nous avons 
connu un budget poussant les Mauriciens à vouloir partir sous d’autres cieux, et combien de 
nos jeunes sont partis soi-disant temporairement, mais ne sont jamais revenus. La cause reste 
la déception devant un ancien gouvernement qui a toujours pensé avant tout à leurs proches et 
aux petits copains, aidé en cela par cette opposition présente aujourd’hui dans l’hémicycle. 
Aster zot pe rod casse paker ! 

17 

 
Ceci m’amène à exprimer ma déception face à cette opposition qui voulait, il n’y a 
même  pas  quatre  mois,  convaincre  la  population  mauricienne  de  voter  pour  leur  team ; 
encore plus montait ma préoccupation au changement de ton juste après, pour entendre dire 
maintenant par l’opposition que l’ancien gouvernement ne valait pas la peine. Mais, hélas, 
hier on a vu le contraire, ils ont fait un walk-over ensemble, main dans la main… 

(Interruptions) 

Pire  encore !  Pire  encore,  entendre  l’Opposition  critiquer  ce  budget  me  gêne 
énormément et quand quelquefois l’Opposition vient dire ‘ça ti dan nou plan avant’, je leur 
dis simplement la bonne parole à la mauricienne : ‘Ki alle la chasse perdi so place!’.  Mais 
aussi  je  veux  leur  demander  une  chose,  ont-ils  réfléchi  à  ce  qu’ils  disent,  car  si  c’est  vrai 
qu’ils retrouvent ce qu’ils ont déjà pensé dans ce budget, donc, ce budget devrait être très bon 
et non critiquable. Un point c’est tout. 

C’est  preuve  que  cette  Opposition  n’a  jamais  eu  une  vision  pour  une  île  Maurice 
moderne, et fort heureusement que la population ne leur a pas fait confiance et le lepep Moris 
mérite ce budget, ce no-tax Budget. Ce qui me pousse à demander à l’Opposition de ‘asizer 
vinn apran leçon are nou’. 

Tous  les  économistes  sont  unanimes  à  reconnaître  que  c’est  un  budget  de  relance, 
laissant  la  place  à  des  méga  projets  pour  remettre  l’économie  sur  les  rails :  les  13  Smart 
Villes, un nouveau port, sans compter avec les hôtels et les PMEs ;  le recrutement de 100 
médecins et 1,400 membres du personnel pour la santé.  Nous avançons à coup sûr vers le 
2eme miracle économique. 

Pour atteindre ce but, bien sûr que le gouvernement compte sur tous les mauriciens, car 

ce n’est qu’ensemble ki nou pou capav guet divan ek avancer. 

Madame la présidente, qu’avons-nous de bon dans ce budget? Ce budget nous montre 
que  nous  avons  affaire  à  un  caring  Government  qui  pense  avant  tout  à  sa  population. 
Comment,  vous  me  demanderez?  Après  avoir  en  moins  de  100  jours  rejeter  le  projet  CT 
Power,  mis  de  l’ordre  dans  les  terres  de  l’État,  dans  des  routes,  ce  gouvernement  nous 
propose déjà des solutions durables, et là, je fais un pressant appel aux ménages d’investir 
dans la production d’énergie renouvelable pour leur propre consommation, d’utiliser les kits 
photovoltaïques et batteries pour stocker du courant car tout est déductible de leurs revenus 
imposables. 

Madame la présidente, imaginez-vous, par famille, avoir 6 mètres cubes d’eau gratos,  
ça représente  - viser un peu! - une semaine d’eau pour une famille de quatre personnes. Nous 
savons  qu’une  famille  de  quatre  personnes  par  mois  utiliserait  environ  30  fûts  bleus 

 

18 

ordinaires, que nous connaissons tous.  Chaque famille mauricienne aura plus ou moins 7 fûts 
d’eau gratuits.  Ek budget là pas bon! Baisse sur les fers de construction; achat d’un terrain 
pour une première fois qui est exempté de droit d’enregistrement ; seuil d’impôt sur le lump 
sum à la hausse et baisse des intérêts sur les hire purchase.  Li pas bon même budget là! 

Quid des mesures concernant le logement ! 1,000 logements sociaux pour les familles à 
moins de R 10,000 par mois ; les maisons seront revues, agrandies, passant de 39 mètres à 50 
mètres carrés. Construction de 700 maisons en plus par NEF. Pour une dalle, le coût du don 
revu à la hausse, Madame la présidente! Pour couler une dalle - sans jeu de mots - ça coûtera 
moins cher ce don-là. Là  aussi c’est revu à la hausse par ce gouvernement. La liste restante 
est encore longue, mais je ne peux que dire ceci: qui dit mieux! Comment pouvez-vous, après 
tout cela, Messieurs de l’opposition, dire que nous, Membres de la majorité, nou tape la table 
juste pou faire plaisir ? Pour une fois, acceptez que vous êtes dépassés en idées novatrices. 
Soyez donc beaux joueurs. 

Madame  la  présidente,  un  mot  sur  la  notion  des  interdits;  les  zougader,  les  sacs  en 
plastique, les courses. Il était temps que quelqu’un vienne mettre de l’ordre dans ce secteur et 
c’est  certainement  avec  un  ouf  de  soulagement  que  beaucoup  de  familles  accueillent  cette 
décision de bannir les cartes à gratter.  Certaines familles, j’ose espérer, auront à la place des 
cartes à gratter, du pain à se mettre sous la dent. Et là, je dis au ministre des Finances, malgré 
les pressions de tenir bon car il pourra compter sur moi pour le soutenir. Cependant, M. le 
ministre,  permettez-moi  de  faire  un  appel.    Je  voudrais  être  le  porte-parole  de  ma 
circonscription, le No. 20, et étendre cela aux autres circonscriptions de l’île, qu’il demande à 
la Banque de Maurice to look into the matter et d’intervenir auprès de toutes les banques de 
l’île, pour assurer un meilleur service, surtout rapide, concernant lepep en général. Ceux-là 
même qui font tourner les commerces en faisant des retraits ou versements chaque jour aux 
guichets des banques. C’est une honte de voir notre île Maurice, que nous voulons moderne, 
de longues files d’attente de 30 à 40 minutes par personne avant de pouvoir disposer de leur 
argent ! Et quid du temps perdu par ces ‘ti-dimounes’, et surtout pour moi! La solution est 
simple : une augmentation de guichets et j’en serais heureux.  Et cela soulagera les clients 
tout en offrant de nouveaux jobs aux Mauriciens. Nous serons tous heureux. 

Madame  la  présidente,  je  me  réjouis  davantage  qu’à  partir  de  janvier  2016,  nous 
accueillerons pour une île Maurice que nous voulons écolo, le Green-In Attitude et que le 
terme ‘sacked plastic’ deviendra une réalité, et que pour le bonheur de tout un chacun, nous 
userons d’une alternative bio avec brio. 

 

19 

Madame la présidente, pour terminer, je voudrais féliciter l’équipe mise en place pour 
donner à l’île Maurice ce budget que tout un chacun qualifie de grandiose, sauf l’opposition. 
Et comme tout un chacun qui veut d’une belle île Maurice, je dis ceci aux Mauriciens: avec 
ce gouvernement nous sommes en route pour un deuxième miracle économique.  

Merci, Madame la présidente. 

(12.19 p.m.) 

Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière):  Madame  la 
présidente, je ne perdrais pas mon temps ni celui de la Chambre pour répondre à l’honorable 
Aliphon car d’ailleurs il n’en vaut pas la peine. 

Madame  la  présidente,  la  montagne  a  finalement  accouché  d’une  souris.  Cette 
expression résume, à mon avis, dans une très large mesure le budget que vient de présenter le 
ministre  des  Finances  de  l’Alliance  Lepep.  En  fait,  le  mot  ‘lepep’  n’est  qu’un  leurre.  La 
population qui s’attendait à un budget qui allait soulager ses souffrances tout en bénéficiant 
d’un pouvoir d’achat plus conséquent, mais il n’en fut rien. Et l’espoir de tout un peuple s’est 
vite transformé en désillusion. 

Madame la présidente, après l’euphorie des effets d’annonce lors de la présentation du 
budget,  nous  constatons  jour  après  jour  à  quel  point  ce  présent  budget  ne  répond  pas  aux 
attentes  des  ‘ti-dimounes’  en  particulier.  Le  ministre  des  Finances,  Madame  la  présidente, 
s’est félicité d’avoir fait un no-tax Budget, mais nous savons tous que tel n’est pas le cas. 
D’ailleurs, l’économiste Pierre Dinan a même qualifié cette démarche de l’honorable ministre 
des Finances de petite ruse, comme une manière de dire qu’il n’y a pas de taxe additionnelle. 
Pour  soutenir  mes  propos  je  citerai,  par  exemple,  la  surtaxe  de  R  4  sur  les  carburants.  La 
décision du ministre des Finances de conserver cette taxe est inappropriée dans un contexte 
économique difficile, où le pouvoir d’achat des Mauriciens s’amenuise. Encore une fois, ce 
sont les consommateurs qui en font les frais. 

Madame la présidente, ce qui était annoncé comme un budget qui devait jeter les bases 
d’un second miracle économique, s’est révélé en fin de compte un mirage économique. La 
dépréciation  de  la  roupie,  dont  n’a  pipé  mot  le  ministre  des  Finances  dans  son  discours, 
entraînera,  à  coup  sûr,  une  augmentation  des  prix  des  denrées  alimentaires  importées,  de 
même que ceux des médicaments. Cela a tout l’effet d’une bombe à retardement car j’ai bien 
peur  qu’une  grande  partie  des  R  5,000,  accordées  à  nos  aînés,  finisse  dans  les  caisses  des 
pharmacies.  

Madame  la  présidente,  le  feel  good  factor  est  déjà  chose  du  passé.  Désormais,  le 
citoyen Mauricien  est back to reality car le budget 2015-2016 ne traite  pas des problèmes 

 

20 

fondamentaux de la société qui touchent particulièrement les jeunes et les démunis. Rien sur 
la question du VIH/Sida, de même que sur le combat contre la prolifération de la drogue et 
ses  conséquences  sur  notre  société !  Ce  gouvernement  démontre  que  c’est  le  cadet  de  ses 
soucis.  

Tous les travailleurs sociaux à Maurice vous diront leur grande déception devant le peu 
de détermination affichée par ce gouvernement sur ces deux dossiers. Rien n’a été annoncé 
dans le budget pour combattre d’une manière plus efficace et efficiente ces deux fléaux qui, 
comme  nous  le  savons  tous,  font  beaucoup  de  ravages  dans  notre  société.  Le  souhait  des 
travailleurs sociaux est la construction d’un hôpital spécialisé pour le VIH, cela afin d’offrir 
un  meilleur  traitement  aux  patients  atteints  par  ce  virus  mais  aussi  pour  un  traitement 
psychosocial.  

Madame la présidente, le Premier ministre a affirmé, à maintes reprises, qu’il fera du 
combat contre la drogue son cheval de bataille.  Or, pas un mot à ce sujet dans le budget, 
excepté une annonce sur l’augmentation de l’enveloppe accordée à la force policière.  Et là 
aussi on aurait aimé savoir quel montant du budget de la police sera consacré à un combat 
plus  rigoureux  et  efficace  contre  le  trafic  de  la  drogue  et  aussi  quels  seront  les  outils  qui 
seront utilisés. 

Madame la présidente, ceux qui sont sur le terrain savent à quel point le fléau de la 
drogue gagne en ampleur de jour en jour à Maurice. Les jeunes d’ailleurs sont nombreux à 
tomber dans les filets des trafiquants de la mort. Si nous ne menons pas un combat acharné et 
sans  relâche  au  quotidien  contre  ce  fléau,  on  risque  de  voir  notre  société  sombrer  dans 
l’abîme.  

Madame  la  présidente,  si  d’un  côté  ce  gouvernement  veut  combattre  la  ‘nation 
zougadère’ - avec raison d’ailleurs - d’un autre côté, il laisse l’impression de ne pas avoir les 
solutions pour empêcher que notre paradis ne devienne un enfer.  

Madame  la  présidente,  au  sujet  du  law  and  order,  je  note  avec  satisfaction  que 
l’honorable ministre des Finances ait fait mention de la création d’une Police Academy. De 
même, l’annonce du recrutement de 600 policiers est un point positif également. Toutefois, le 
gouvernement  doit  veiller  à  ce  que  le  recrutement  se  fasse  dans  la  transparence  et  la  
méritocratie.  

L’académie  de  police,  une  fois  mise  en  place,  devra  assurer  une  formation  tous 
azimuts de nos futurs policiers. Il est souhaitable que la force policière dans son ensemble 
reçoive  un  entrainement  physique  continu.  Notre  police  ne  doit  pas  être  la  risée  de  la 
population.  Au contraire, la population devrait être fière de sa force policière.  Et pour cela, 

 

21 

il faut que le gouvernement accorde toute son attention à ce secteur afin que nous ayons une 
police formée à la meilleure école, efficace et surtout en bonne santé et ce n’est qu’à cette 
condition que l’uniforme forcera à nouveau le respect. 

Madame la présidente, je voudrais, à nouveau, attiré l’attention du gouvernement sur 
le problème des enfants de rue. C’est, à mon avis, une autre bombe à retardement qu’il faut 
désamorcer au plus vite.  Je crains fort que les chiffres ne soient bien plus importants que 
ceux qui nous sont fournis officiellement.  

Nous  constatons  que  dans  de  nombreux  quartiers,  dans  les  villes  comme  dans  les 
villages, il y a une recrudescence de ce problème.  J’espère que la ministre responsable de ce 
secteur accorde une attention particulière à cette question et que les fonds nécessaires soient 
attribués, malgré le fait que rien n’est mentionné dans les dotations budgétaires.  

Aujourd’hui,  Madame  la  présidente,  nombre  de  nos  jeunes  sont  en  perdition,  sans 
repère, sans guide et surtout sans avenir. Face à une société qui évolue de plus en plus vers le 
matérialisme, on laisse, trop souvent, les oubliés du développement et ceux qui ne peuvent 
suivre  le  rythme  infernal,  au  bord  de  la  route.  Demain,  ces  oubliés  peuvent  devenir  des 
problèmes réels pour notre société qui seront difficiles à tacler. Déjà que nous faisons face 
actuellement  à  une  recrudescence  de  toutes  sortes  de  violence  dans  le  pays.  Si  nous 
n’attaquons pas ce problème à la racine, l’arbre qui poussera de travers viendra nous rappeler 
combien nous avons échoué dans notre tâche à offrir une société plus juste et équitable à nos 
enfants.  

Madame la présidente, la république de Maurice compte 229 poches de pauvreté selon 
les chiffres officiels. Le budget ne fait mention que de 38 qui ont été identifiées et auxquelles 
une  attention  spéciale  sera  accordée.    Et  quid  des  quelques  200  restantes?  Seront-elles 
laissées à leur propre sort? Ne court-on pas le risque de voir ces poches délaissées dans ce 
présent budget s’appauvrir davantage? L’idéal est que le gouvernement considère ces poches 
de  pauvreté  d’un  même  œil  et  les  aident  tous  à  sortir  du  gouffre  de  la  misère,  slowly  but 
surely ! À ce sujet également le gouvernement démontre qu’il est en manque d’inspiration et 
n’a pas de solution pour s’attaquer aux problèmes de notre société. Le ministre des Finances a 
semble-t-il trouvé une formule magique: celle de laisser le secteur privé faire le travail à la 
place  du  gouvernement.  N’est-ce  pas,  Madame  la  présidente,  une  façon  pour  ce 
gouvernement d’abdiquer devant ses responsabilités? 

L’autre formule magique du ministre des Finances est les Smart Cities qui paraissent 
innovants  sur  papier,  et  même  exaltants  pour  le  secteur  de  la  construction.  Mais  à  qui 

 

22 

profitera  vraiment  ce  supposé  boom?  Aux  travailleurs  ou  à  ceux  qui  vont  faire  de  la 
spéculation foncière? Aux pauvres ou aux riches?  

Madame la présidente, permettez-moi de dire un mot sur la taxe de 10 sous qui a été 
enlevée sur le coût d’un SMS. C’est ce qu’on appelle un coup d’épée dans l’eau. Faites un 
tour sur les réseaux sociaux et vous verrez à quel point les jeunes se moquent de cette mesure. 
D’autant que cette baisse est insignifiante. Aujourd’hui, les jeunes communiquent par textes 
gratuitement à travers des applications comme Viber, Tango et Whatsapp.  

Avec le développement annoncé dans le domaine de la technologie informatique, avec 
les 350 Wi-Fi spots que le gouvernement compte introduire à travers le pays, le traditionnel 
SMS  deviendra  obsolète.  Il  est  souhaitable  que  le  ministre  des  Finances  fasse  un  effort 
supplémentaire pour revoir à la baisse le coût des SMS. Tout comme il est souhaitable de 
baisser le coût de la connexion à l’Internet. D’autant plus que le gouvernement a évoqué son 
intention de former des jeunes pour un deuxième cyber village et faire de Maurice une Cyber 
île. 

Madame la présidente, il est regrettable que le Budget 2015/2016 n’ait fait mention 
que  brièvement  des  administrations  régionales.  Le  MMM  prône  depuis  des  lustres  une 
meilleure démocratisation et un empowerment des conseils de districts et des municipalités. 
La municipalisation des villages est un sujet qui n’a pas été évoqué, alors que le pays doit 
prendre cette voie, pour que villes et villages soient sur le même pied d’égalité.  

Nous  ne  pouvons  souhaiter  que  les  amendements  qui  seront  apportés  au  Local 
Government  Act  fassent  place  à  une  plus  grande  démocratie  régionale  et  non  pas  des 
amendements cosmétiques taillés sur mesure pour le gouvernement en place.  

Madame la présidente, je vais à présent évoquer les mesures ayant trait à la jeunesse 
et au sport. Mais que suis-je en train de dire, Madame la présidente? Elles sont quasiment 
absentes dans ce présent budget. Ces mesures sont tellement infimes que la section Youth and 
Sports  a  dû  être  rattachée  à  Leisure,  Arts  and  Culture.  Du  jamais  vu!  La  communauté 
sportive est restée sur sa faim comme d’habitude. Le football est la seule discipline qui a été 
prise en considération.  

On se vantera certainement de l’autre côté de la Chambre que 60 millions de roupies 
sont consacrées aux Jeux des Iles. C’est, certes, le cas, mais nous savons tous qu’une grande 
partie de cet argent sera consacrée aux frais de participation du Club Maurice aux Jeux des 
Iles.  Quand  le  ministre  des  Sports  aura  déduit  les  frais  des  billets  d’avion,  les  frais  de 
participation,  les  frais  d’hébergement  et  les  per  diem  aux  quelque  300  personnes  du  Club 
Maurice, il ne restera pas grand-chose pour peaufiner la préparation de nos athlètes. 

23 

 
Madame la présidente, là où le bât blesse, est que les mesures annoncées n’accordent 
aucune importance aux disciplines sportives. La seule mesure avec laquelle le ministre des 
Finances est venu de l’avant est les 26 millions de roupies pour soutenir le projet de football 
professionnel.  

D’abord,  je  voudrais  attirer  l’attention  de  la  Chambre  que  le  football  professionnel 

n’est plus au stade de projet à Maurice.  

Le football professionnel est aujourd’hui une réalité et cela depuis six mois à travers 
une compagnie privée qui organise  et finance les équipes de cette ligue.  Le  gouvernement 
vient annoncer qu’il mettra de l’argent dans ce qu’il appelle ce «projet» sans donner aucune 
indication comment cette somme sera distribuée. Est-ce que ces R 26 millions iront aux dix 
clubs de la ligue professionnelle ou dans les caisses de cette compagnie privée? Ne serait-il 
pas plus judicieux, Madame la présidente, que le gouvernement investisse une partie de cette 
somme  dans  la  formation  des  jeunes  footballeurs  par  le  biais  des  écoles  de  foot?  Je  ne 
cesserai de dire à quel point c’est regrettable que ce gouvernement n’ait pensé qu’au football 
et le ministre des Sports malheureusement donne nettement cette impression depuis qu’il a 
pris  ses  fonctions.  Priorité  au  football,  mais  les  autres  doivent  patienter.  Quel  signal  le 
gouvernement envoie-t-il à ces sportifs qui ne pratiquent pas le football?  

Il  est  clair  que  ce  gouvernement  n’a  pas  de  politique  définie  en  matière  de  sport 
encore moins de plan d’action pour relancer le sport, qui se trouve au plus bas niveau.  Le 
football est certes le sport roi, je le concède, Madame la présidente, mais ces dernières années 
Maurice  a  brillé  sur  la  scène  internationale  dans  d’autres  sports,  dans  d’autres  disciplines 
comme la boxe, le kick-boxing, le judo pour ne citer qu’eux.  

Il suffit de lire d’ailleurs la réaction des dirigeants des fédérations dans les journaux 
pour  comprendre  à  quel  point  la  communauté  sportive  se  sente  lésée,  mise  à  l’écart.  Je 
regrette l’absence d’une politique  gouvernementale pour encourager les nouvelles disciplines 
mais cela ne m’étonne pas, car le gouvernement mise tout ou presque sur le football. Rien 
non  plus,  sur  une  politique  de  formation  à  tous  les  niveaux.  Une  formation  structurée  et 
professionnelle, nous le savons tous, est le seul moyen qui nous permettra de sortir la tête de 
l’eau et nous positionner dans le futur sur la scène internationale.  

Nos  héros  d’hier  et  nos  champions  de  demain  sont  aussi  oubliés,  Madame  la 
présidente.  Pas  un  mot  sur  les  bourses  de  haut  niveau,  les  bourses  d’études  et,  surtout, 
l’après-carrière des sportifs de haut niveau.  L’État est en train de créer  deux catégories de 

 

24 

sportifs. Mais je dois préciser, je ne suis pas contre le fait de donner les moyens adéquats au 
football pour réussir. J’aimerais bien que la professionnalisation réussisse et que notre sport 
roi redevienne une fierté locale comme jadis, mais je plaide pour ces milliers de licenciés qui 
ont choisi de pratiquer un autre sport et que le gouvernement choisit de laisser sur la touche. 
Pratiquement aucun projet infrastructurel pour la jeunesse n’a été annoncé et nous constatons 
que ce sont les mêmes projets qui reviennent sur le tapis. Il suffit d’ailleurs de consulter les 
Estimates pour s’en rendre compte.  

Je souhaite vivement, Madame la présidente, que le gouvernement rectifie le tir. Le 
plus tôt sera le mieux, afin de donner  confiance à ces nombreux jeunes qui ne demandent 
qu’une chose: qu’on leur donne les moyens de pratiquer le sport qu’ils aiment et pour qu’ils 
puissent  en  retour  donner  le  meilleur  d’eux-mêmes  et  faire  honneur  à  la  nation.  De  grâce 
donc, cessez cette politique de deux poids, deux mesures!  

J’espère que l’abolition des guidelines par rapport aux CSR va bénéficier aux clubs 
ainsi qu’aux fédérations sportives car la communauté sportive a constamment tiré la sonnette 
d’alarme  ces  derniers  temps  concernant  le  manque  de  moyens  financiers,  indispensable  au 
bon fonctionnement des différentes structures.  

Madame  la  présidente,  lors  de  mon  intervention  récemment  sur  le  Programme 
Gouvernemental  2015-2019,  j’avais  énuméré  toute  une  série  de  mesures  susceptibles  de 
redorer le blason de notre sport. Je ne vais certainement pas me répéter mais je compte sur le 
gouvernement,  en  particulier  l’honorable  ministre  des  sports  pour  y  porter  une  attention 
particulière.  

Madame  la  présidente,  en  ce  qui  concerne  ma  circonscription,  nombreux  sont  les 
projets qui sont restés au stade de projet comme celui de décongestionner le centre-ville de 
Beau  Bassin  à  partir  de  la  rue  Vandermeersch  jusqu’à  Coromandel.  Il  y  a  aussi 
l’aménagement d’un terrain de football à Canot, la construction d’un nouveau marché à Beau 
Bassin,  la  construction  d’une  médi-clinique  à  Petite  Rivière,  l’aménagement  d’une  gare 
routière à Mont Roches ainsi que la construction de drains dans différentes régions telles que 
Coromandel, Belle Etoile, Vuillemin, Mare Gravier, Albion entre autres.  

Je fais donc un pressant appel au ministre des infrastructures publiques et au PPS de 
la  région  de  bien  vouloir  considérer  mes  requêtes  pour  le  bien-être  des  habitants  de  ces 
localités.  

Madame la présidente, je souhaite vivement que ce gouvernement rectifie le tir vis-
à-vis du social, de la jeunesse et des démunis. Le pays n’a pas besoin d’être réinventé. Il a 

 

25 

besoin d’hommes de vision pour dessiner l’île Maurice de demain et sans que qui que ce soit 
ne  soit  laissé  aux  bords  de  la  route  lorsque  passe  le  train  du  développement,  social  et 
économique. Je vous remercie. 

(12.39 p.m.) 

The Minister of Health and Quality of Life (Mr A. Gayan): Thank you, Madam 
Speaker.  Madam Speaker, it is with a deep sense of pride and satisfaction that I rise to speak 
on  the  Budget  which  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development,  my  good 
friend, hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo has presented to the House and to the nation on 23 
March 2015.  I say a deep sense of satisfaction because it reminds me of the days of 1983 
when Sir Anerood Jugnauth, after the famous first 60-0 of 1982, went to the elections in 1983 
and became Prime Minister again; hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo became the Minister of 
Finance, and I was the Minister of Foreign Affairs and Tourism. In 1983 - the hon. Leader of 
the Opposition is not here - he was beaten by me in Constituency No. 18 and he came in as a 
best loser in 1983. Since then he changed Constituency to move to another one. In 2014 at the 
last  elections  the  ML,  the  Muvman  Liberater,  had  just  been  formed.  My  friend,  hon. 
Collendavelloo,  and  I  decided  that  we  had  to  show  the  courage  that  we  had  to  stand  in 
Constituencies numbers 19 and 20. These were the citadels of the MMM. 

Imprenable!  When I went the first time and there was no… 

(Interruptions) 

What I am going to say is going to hurt… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

What I am going to say is going to hurt and it will hurt. 

Madam Speaker: Silence! Order! 

 (Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Gayan: It will hurt. We upset… 

(Interruptions) 

26 

 
Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Members  would  you  allow  the  hon.  Minister  to  continue 
with his speech, please! He listened carefully when others were intervening so it is his turn 
now to intervene. Thank you. 

Mr Gayan: And, if we had another week, Madam Speaker, hon. Bhagwan would 
not be here. The hon. Leader of the Opposition would not be here. One more week, because 
the 60-0…  

Let me not speak about Farida.  We will come to Farida later on… 

(Interruptions) 

Ale guete Farida! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! Order! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Gayan:  I  will  come  to  that,  but  let  me  say  that  this  is  a  great  Budget  and  I 
congratulate the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development for having presented 
this Budget. 

Madam Speaker, let me address the issue that had just been raised by hon. Bhagwan. 
In  PQs,  in  the  media,  at  ICAC,  at  the  Equal  Opportunities  Commission,  the  issue  of  the 
appointment of the Executive Director of the Trust Fund for Specialised Care has been given 
a treatment as though it is the number one issue in this country. Let me say that it is not the 
first time that Statutory Bodies have people appointed by the Minister and by Cabinet.  In 
fact, the hon. Leader of the Opposition will have to bear political responsibility for his words 
when he spoke: “Ar sa madame là” as though she was a marchand cotomili. He forgot to 
mention  that  she  is  a  qualified  Barrister,  somebody  who  has  been  the  legal  adviser  to  a 
Commercial Bank. 

Madam Speaker:  Order, I said!  

Order!  I am on my feet!   

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

27 

Hon.  Members,  order,  please!  Hon.  Members,  you  are  here  as  hon.  Members!    Hon. 
Members, I am on my feet! 

Hon. Rutnah, please!  I am on my feet! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Members, I appeal to you all, when you were intervening, the hon. Minister listened in 
silence.  Would you, please, allow him to continue in silence! 

(Interruptions) 

I have to draw your attention that you are here as hon. Members, so please behave as such.  
Thank you.  

Mr  Gayan:    Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.    Madam  Speaker,  I  was  saying  that  the 
Executive  Director  of  the  Trust  Fund  is  a  qualified  Barrister.    She  has  experience  as  a 
Manager. 

She has been… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Would you continue!  Hon. Members, would you continue!  Hon. 

Uteem, please!  When I am on my feet, I wish to have some silence in the House. 

(Interruptions) 

The  hon.  Minister  listened  when  you  were  intervening.    Would  you,  please,  allow  him  to 
intervene without interruptions! Thank you. 

Mr  Gayan:    Madam  Speaker,  when  questions  were  asked  in  this  House  about  that 
appointment, hon. Shakeel Mohamed - it must be mentioned that it is for the first time in the 
history of Independent Mauritius, a non- Hindu is sitting as Leader of the Labour Party in this 
House - attacked Vijaya Sumputh.  The hon. Member attacked her and this is going to be 
something that not only in this House, but out there in the public, we are going to make use of 
to show how much… 

Not only do they hate… 

Madam Speaker:  Order!   

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Order again, please! If you continue, I will have to interrupt the sitting! 

(Interruptions) 

 

28 

Hon. Members, are you going to continue to interrupt!   

(Interruptions) 

If you continue to interrupt, I will have to suspend the sitting!   

Mr Gayan:  Madam Speaker, I was saying that there were not only PQs, but for the last 
four weeks, in ‘Week-End’ newspaper - the Director of ‘Week-End’ is Mr Jacques Rivet and 
it is published by ‘Le Mauricien’ also -  week after week, there has been constant harassment 
on this appointment.  Photographs of that lady have been published and all sorts of comments 
have been made. I am referring to ‘Week-End’ of Sunday, 22 March -   

“Des nominations de plus en plus scandaleuses”.   

What is scandalous about that appointment?  What is so scandalous?  Hon. Uteem, 
we all know what he said about our colleague, hon. Ms Jadoo-Jaunbocus, in the last elections.  
We know what the hon. Leader of the Opposition said about women, about hon. Mrs Boygah. 

 (Interruptions) 
Madam Speaker:  Order!  Silence and order, please! 
Mr Gayan:  Shame on you!  Shame on you!  What they said about women and it is no 

surprise, Madam Speaker, there is no woman elected on that side. 

No woman!  Not a single one!  

Because you have been ill-treating women! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order! 
Mr Gayan:  Madam Speaker, let me also say that this attack on Vijaya Sumputh has 
been orchestrated.  Hon. Bhagwan was  filling his car  at a petrol station  in Reduit, he was 
talking to people and said that he was going to bring down that woman.  He went to Grand 
Bassin and when one goes to Grand Bassin for Mahashivratri… 

When one goes to Ganga Talao, one goes with a pure heart… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Bhagwan, please! 
Mr Gayan:  And he said there, at Grand Bassin, that he was going to destroy Vijaya 

Sumputh. 

Madam Speaker:  You will have the opportunity to reply!   

 (Interruptions) 

 

Mr Gayan:  Shame! What you said! 

And all those… 

29 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Members, are you going to continue to interrupt!   

Hon. Members, I will have to suspend the sitting!  

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Bhagwan, please!  I appeal to all of you.  Have some order in the House!  

Mr  Gayan:    I  was  saying,  Madam  Speaker,  when  we  go  to  Ganga  Talao,  to  Grand 
Bassin, we go with a pure heart.  You will recall, Madam Speaker, and everybody on this side 
of the House will recall that when we go to Pari Talao, we do not go there to pray and not for 
the destruction of people.  Hon. Bhagwan - I have witnesses - said at Grand Bassin that he 
was going to ask questions to destroy Vijaya Sumputh.   

I have witnesses and we all saw viré mam. 

In the clip ‘viré mam’…  

 (Interruptions) 

 (Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Members, once more I would like to ask you to allow the hon. 
Minister  to  continue.    If  there  are  things  which  are  not  in  order,  I  will  intervene  for  sure.  
Hon. Bhagwan, you will have the opportunity, when you intervene, to reply back to him. 

Mr Bhagwan:  On a point, I don’t mind when the hon. Minister is stating my name.  I 

go to Pari Talao every day, every week.  I don’t have any lesson to take from him. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Okay, hon. Bhagwan!   

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Bhagwan, please! You will intervene when you have got a point of order!  

Mr  Gayan:    Madam  Speaker,  what  the  hon.  member  said  about  Mangal  Mahadev; 

Mangal Mahadev is going to attack him.  He is going to attack him! 

But anyway, I was saying, Madam Speaker… 

(Interruptions) 

 (Interruptions) 

 

30 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Jhugroo!  Hon Jhugroo, can you, please, remain silent! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Gayan, I think you dwelt plentily on this issue; can we, now, pass on to another issue. 

Mr Gayan:  Madam Speaker, I am afraid that I will have to dwell slightly more on this 

because not only has it been in the press and I mentioned about this Week-End edition –  

“des nominations de plus en plus scandaleuses”.   

But I leave it to the appreciation of the House, the manner in which the press has 
been hammering and battering someone for four weeks.  What is the newsworthiness of this? 
I can understand one week, I can understand two weeks, four weeks.  I hope ‘Week-End’ will 
publish  whatever  I  am  saying  in  this  House,  and  I  hope  they  do  it  faithfully  because  we 
believe in freedom of the press.  I for one, as barrister, have defended anybody, and  I  will 
continue  to  defend  anybody  who  is  unjustly  attacked.    But  never  has  there  been  such 
persecution of one person by the media for such a long period of time.  Never!  And I think it 
is important that we mention it in this House.  I will say it for anybody; not only because she 
happens to be the Executive Director of the Trust Fund. 

(Interruptions) 

Let me say, Madam Speaker, that in ‘L’Express’ of yesterday there was an article 

on the front page - 

« (…) l’EOC - Equal Opportunities Commission - ouvre trois enquêtes sur Gayan » 

And then they go on to speak about – 

« Y  a-t-il  eu  discrimination  politique  dans  le  recrutement,  le  13  février,  de  Vijaya 
Sumputh comme directrice exécutive du  Trust Fund (…)  D’où sa décision d’ouvrir 
trois enquêtes sur le ministre de la Santé Anil Gayan. » 

Madam Speaker, I am going to table in the House the letter I received from the Equal 
Opportunities Commission.  I am going to read it so that everybody knows.  It is dated 30 
March, and I checked with my secretary before coming to the House at 11.25 a.m. whether 
there had been another communication from the Equal Opportunities Commission.  This is 
what the letter says, and I quote – 

 “Honourable Minister, 

1. 

Following  an  article  written  by  you  under  the  title  ‘Down  and  Up’  and 
published  in  ‘L’Express’  newspaper  of  10  March  2014,  this  Commission 

 

2. 

3. 

31 

opened  an  investigation  into  the  allegations  made  therein  purporting  to  say 
that  Senior  Citizens  Associations  from  Constituency  No.  16  are  granted  a 
more favourable treatment than other Senior Citizens Associations from other 
constituencies. 
Prior to completing the aforesaid investigation, this Commission would like to 
hear you in connection with the above subject matter. 
You are therefore kindly requested to be and appear before this Commission 
on  Friday  03  April  2015  – 
at 
2 p.m.” 

is  on  Friday  next  – 

that 

There is no mention at all of anything regarding Vijaya Sumputh or anything about 

the Trust Fund.   I table this, Madam Speaker. 

This shows the persecution that is going on against somebody.  This is an institution.  
And what does the article also say?  I wrote immediately  yesterday to ‘L’Express’.  I was 
hoping that ‘L’Express’ was going to give me the same spot in the newspaper today. They put 
it  in  page  3,  and  I  did  say  that  there  had  been  nothing  about  an  investigation  concerning 
matters other than an article which I had published in March 2014.  And it is only now that 
Mr Brian Glover, the Chairperson of the Commission, decides to start an investigation.  Not 
only that, Madam Speaker.  Just to show the kind of persecution that is going on, the kind of 
injustice that is going on! Mr Brian Glover, yesterday, on Radio One, said that not only did 
he have evidence, but he said that if that article which I had written is not evidence of false 
and  malicious  denunciation  in  writing,  what  is  it?    He  is  not  only  the  investigator;  he  has 
become the prosecutor… 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Gayan! 

Mr Gayan: Yes. 

Madam  Speaker:  According  to  the  Standing  Orders,  you  cannot  attack  somebody 

who is not present in this House.  I am just drawing your attention to this. 

Mr Gayan: I am just saying because I have been the subject of comments in the press 
without  any  justification.    The  press  has  been  hammering,  and  there  is  systematically  in 
‘Week-End,’ under the signature of Josie Lebrasse, who writes les “Faits et Effets”.  It seems 
that  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  fait  quelque  chose  samedi  et  elle  sent  les  effets 
dimanche. 

(Interruptions) 

32 

 
Kot sa fer sa ?  Well !  But, anyway, Madam Speaker, I think I have made my point.  
I have made my point that both the Labour Party and the porte-parole of the Labour Party - I 
do  not  know  what  parole  il  porte,  but  anyway  these  are  matters  that  will  be  part  of  the 
campaign in No. 11, in No. 12 and all over the country.  This kind of injustice should not be 
tolerated.  This is assassination by the media; this is something that we have to stop. 

Madam Speaker, the only problem that is scandalous is that there was no advertising 

of that particular post. 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! Order! Hon. Bhagwan, please no cross- talking! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Bhagwan, no cross-talking please! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, the press… 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Gayan: Alan Ganoo knows Gooljaury and Soornack!  Madam Speaker, if I may; 

I am on my feet, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker, the other point that the Equal Opportunities Commission mentioned 

about starting an enquiry was… 

I had said, in reply to a question on this issue… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Gayan,  I  am  sorry!    I  have  to  refer  you  to  the  Standing 
Orders, section 40(5), wherein you cannot attack anybody who is not present in the House, 
and secondly, you cannot talk about somebody who is the president of a Commission. 

Mr Gayan: I bow to your ruling, Madam Speaker. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  was  saying  that,  in  one  of  the  replies  that  I  gave,  I  said 
‘Government  is  Government  and  Government  decides’,  just  like  you  said  that  the  Chair 
decides  when  it  comes  to  maintaining  order  in  the  House.    When  I  said  this, that  was  the 
eureka moment of the whole world, of the media, as though it was the first time that they 

 

33 

were  hearing  that  Government  is  here  to  govern!    As  you  always  ask  the  question,  the 
question is: whether the ayes have it or the noes have it.  But that is democracy!  We have 
been  elected  to  be  the  Government  and  to  govern!    The  whole  media,  ‘Week-End’, 
‘L’Express, Weekly’!   It’s the first time they hear that Government is here to govern.  The 
first  time!    It  is  amazing!    Sometimes  I  wonder  about  the  level  of  intelligence  of  the 
journalists who write these things. What is so objectionable about this?  But they made it an 
issue! Everything becomes an issue!  I think we need to call the bluff of all those people who 
write anything or say anything.   The time will come when we will deal with these issues on 
occasion arising. 

But,  let  me  say  also,  Madam  Speaker,  that  we  have  in  our  country  a  system  of 
statutory corporations. The statutory corporations exist and have existed for many years.  In 
England,  therefore,  the  QuANGOs,  the  quasi-autonomous  non-governmental  organisations, 
are set up to do what was being done in the public sector by the public service. They are there 
to make governance more efficient and this is why they exist and this is why accountability 
remains with the Minister, but the execution is given to a statutory corporation. Yesterday, 
the hon. Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms spoke 
about this; I don’t need to go about the governance. We are here for five years; people will 
judge us in five years.  

(Interruptions) 
The people will judge and the people will judge them also! 
(Interruptions) 

And this is why… 

This is why, Madam Speaker… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Minister Gayan, can I ask you for how long you have to go? 
Mr Gayan: I have quite a bit to go. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Then, it’s better for us to break for lunch. We will break for one 

and a half hours for lunch. 

At 1.01 p.m. the sitting was suspended.  
On resuming at 2.36 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 
Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Gayan! 

34 

 
Mr  Gayan:  Madam  Speaker,  I  was  saying  before  we  broke  up  for  lunch  that  the 
nature of democracy in this country is that the Opposition has its say and the Government has 
its way. That has always been the case and that is going to continue to be the case.  

Let me say a word on meritocracy. It is being assumed that unless you advertise, you 
cannot  have  meritocracy.  Let  me  take  an  example,  we  advertise  for  the  post  of  Director-
General of the MBC. All the applicants apply and among them there is Mr Dan Callikan who, 
because he was there, happens to be more qualified and is more knowledgeable and the panel 
selects him as the number one recruit. Do we, as a Government, take him? Do we? Do we 
take  Mr  Dan  Callikan?  So,  when  we  talk  of  advertising  and  meritocracy,  everything  is 
relative. We have to see the people who are best suited to implement the programme of the 
Government and to implement whatever Government decides. So, I am saying this because 
some people are trying to act like virgin prostitutes. I am sorry to use that expression, but we 
are not… 

Madam Speaker: Excuse me, hon. Minister! What you have just said, you have to 

(Interruptions) 

withdraw because this is unparliamentary! 

Mr Gayan: I withdraw! I withdraw! 

I withdraw! 

I withdraw! 

 (Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 (Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, let me say what  I have said, that the Budget is a great Budget.  It 
addresses all the issues that are going to enable Mauritius to make that qualitative jump to get 
to the second economic miracle. I think this is what the Budget is all about and it is our duty, 
as elected Members in this House, to say loudly and clearly that we are all behind this Budget 
and we should congratulate not only the Minister, but also the Prime Minister for his vision 
and for his leadership. 

Madam Speaker,  I must say that there is one word that sums up and permeates the 
Budget and that is the word of fairness, and sharing. If you go to page 1 of the Budget, I think 
the word sharing appears five times on one page. I think this is the very essence of the Budget 
that has been presented. 

With regard to my Ministry, the Health Sector, the hon. Minister of Finance has stated 

as follows at page 26 of the Budget–  

35 

 
“Madam Speaker, on healthcare our policy is to improve quality and delivery, reduce 
waiting time, and keep up with latest medical technologies while promoting greater 
efficiency.” 

I  think  we  are  already  in  the  process  of  implementing  these  policies  in  order  to 

reduce waiting time. At paragraph 160, and I quote – 

“To reduce long queues and backlog for surgery in hospitals, we are recruiting one 
hundred doctors on a full time basis and other specialists on a sessional basis.” 
Since I am taking the floor on this issue, Madam Speaker, let me say that the Ministry 
is prepared to put at the disposal of the public all the facilities and all the staff required to 
ensure that they get the best available treatment for their health, and also that they get the 
quality of life that they need within the earliest possible time frame.  

 It is forgotten at times that if somebody has to wait a long time to have an operation it 
is  the  quality  of  life  of  that  person  that  is  undermined.    It  is  for  that  reason  that  I  have 
impressed upon all my staff that there should be as little time as possible before somebody 
gets an appointment for an operation.  That is as far as the Ministry is concerned.  But as far 
as the public is concerned, they also have an obligation to ensure that whatever facilities and 
appointments are given, they do respect those appointments.  Unfortunately, I have tried to 
obtain  from  my  officers  information  about  the  number  of  planned  surgeries  which  were 
cancelled  in  the  months  of  January  and  February  2015.    You  will  be  surprised  to  hear, 
Madam Speaker, that the total of cancelled operations is 548 for the months of January and 
February.    The  main  reasons  for  cancellation  are:  the  patients  are  unfit;  patients  did  not 
attend; patients are not  keen and, repeatedly, this is the reason that is being  given: patient 
uncooperative.  So, my appeal to the public is that when an operation is cancelled, it means 
that others, who could have been operated, have to wait even longer.  These people have their 
quality of life which is damaged. 

So,  it  is  important  that  when  we  speak  about  health  -  I  am  sure  that  lots  of  our 
colleagues  in  this  House  get  representations  from  their  mandants  that  they  are  waiting  for 
operations.  But, very often, there are valid reasons for the wait.  So, what instruction I have 
given is that, if there is a waiting list, the waiting list has to be complied with. No one should 
jump the list unless it is an  emergency.    If it is  an emergency, of course, the doctors will 
ensure  that  everybody  who  is  in  that  situation  gets  the  treatment  at  that  point  in  time.  
Otherwise,  the  whole  process  will  become  unmanageable.    So,  this  is  why  I  appeal  to  the 
public as well that if there is an operation planned, they need to ensure that they are in the 
condition to be operated.  I hope that this message goes out and that we do not, not only have 

 

36 

longer waiting lists, but also we have resources that are not being optimised. This is why I 
thought  that  I  must  bring  this  to  the  attention  of  the  House  so  that  we  all  know  what 
difficulties are faced in this Ministry. 

I am also grateful to the hon. Minister of Finance for having provided Rs9.7 billion in 
this Budget for the health sector.  We are also in the process of implementing new projects 
like the new Cancer Centre, the e-Health Project and the construction of a new state-of-the-
art ENT Hospital. 

I wish to say a few words about the ENT Hospital.  There was at a time the possibility 
of shifting the ENT Hospital to some other spot, but it appears that this is going to be very 
difficult. So, the decision has been taken to construct the ENT Hospital in the same place, but 
making  sure  that  there  is  no  damage  to  the  environment  and,  as  far  as  possible,  and  the 
necessity of preserving the original structure of the place because it is part of the patrimoine 
and  we  are  not  going  to  destroy  le  patrimoine.    As  far  as  possible,  le  patrimoine  will  be 
preserved. The ENT Hospital will be constructed on that very site. We are proposing to do 
that  as  fast  as  possible.    I  am  sure  that  the  MPI  and  the  other  Ministries  involved  will  be 
doing whatever they need to do in order to see that the project is fully implemented. 

There are some other things that I would like to say about the budget and the projects 
with regard to the health sector.  When I joined the Ministry of Health, I must confess I did 
not know much about it. But I have been trying to learn very fast. Somebody even told me: 
“You are going to the Ministry of Hell”.  I must say that it is a difficult Ministry; it is a large 
Ministry, but we are trying to ensure that whatever we do is in the best interest of the people.   
You are aware, Madam Speaker, that there was a long list for cataract operations.  So, 
we have opened, in Souillac, a new unit that is looking after the people, not only in the South, 
but it seems that they can cater also for more people from Moka Eye Hospital.  They are also 
thinking  of  increasing  the  workload  at  Souillac  so  that,  eventually,  we  will  come  to  a  no 
waiting list at all for eye operations. 

The  other  thing  that  I  would  like  to  say  is  that  we  have  a  big  issue  on  overseas 
treatment.    I  am  sure  there  are  lots  of  Members  in  this  House  who  have  this  problem  of 
people coming to them to see whether they can get funds to be operated overseas.  Now, there 
are certain areas where inevitably some patients will have to go overseas.  There are protocols 
in place which ensure that those who are in need of treatment overseas will go to have their 
operation overseas.  But we have also noticed that very often, we could arrange for specialists 
to come, let’s say, from Reunion, from India to operate on more people here and to optimise 
the resources that we have.  For the Government, it might be easier to get a specialist to come 

 

37 

and operate on ten people in Mauritius rather than sending one person overseas.  The patients 
would  be  in  surroundings  that  they  are  used  to  and  it  is  only  going  to  be  better  for  their 
recovery.  So, we are also looking into this aspect of ensuring that whatever services can be 
provided  locally,  we  are  going  to  see  what  can  be  done  in  this  regard.  The  House  is  also 
aware that on Medi-clinics, we are operating a 24-hour service.  Of course, there are some 
teething problems, but, eventually, I think the people are very happy with the service.  It cuts 
down on lots of unnecessary expenses and with regard to transport, especially at night.  

There  is  one  very  big  problem  with  regard  to  the  health  sector;  it  is  the  disposal  of 
hazardous medical waste.  This is something that we need, as a Government, to look into very 
carefully with my colleague, the hon. Minister of Environment because medical hazardous 
waste  is  a  source  of  great  nuisance.    Everybody  knows  that  in  Port  Louis  itself,  at  Jeetoo 
Hospital, there is an incinerator which is a source of nuisance.  So, we are looking into that 
aspect as well to see how the problem can be alleviated by a new technology that can look 
into the disposal of medical waste.  Because medical waste cannot be disposed of like any 
other  domestic  waste,  it  has  to  be  disposed  of  in  a  very  scientific  way  so  that  it  does  not 
create any other problems. 

Madam  Speaker,  we  are  also  reorganising  SAMU  and  the  Accident  and  Emergency 
Department.    Since  SAMU  was  created  in  1997,  they  have  been  intervening  in  lots  of 
emergency situations. There is also the possibility of getting the SAMU to work together with 
the A and E in a regional hospital so that when SAMU is not being called on, it can also be of 
help and assistance in the A and E Department of each hospital.  

Unfortunately,  in  Mauritius,  diabetes  still  continues  to  be  a  major  problem.    The 
prevalence of diabetes and pre-diabetes is very high. I do not want to get into the technical 
issues of this, but, once again, I have to appeal to the population that they have to be looking 
after their health.  There should be no excess in anything that they consume and they should 
ensure that they have a healthy way of living.   

At times people are not very conscious of their risk factors, so this is why we have 
the NCD department in the Ministry for the National Prevention Programme and attempts are 
being made and, in fact, programmes are in place to sensitise people for diabetes as well as 
counselling  and  education  on  risk  factors.  There  is  also  screening  for  cervical  cancer,  for 
sexually active women aged between 30 to 60 years but I hope that, by the time we come to 
the end of the five years, this screening of cervical cancer should be extended to teenagers as 
well because this is, at least, one cancer that is preventable. If it is tackled at a good moment, 
it is likely to be a source of great progress for the country in the health sector. Breast cancer 

 

38 

unfortunately is increasing and there is screening that is being done but here again there is a 
programme ongoing which helps women to go for their screening so that if it is detected in 
time, something can be done about it. 

Madam Speaker, we all know recently the co-pilot of the Germanwings plane who, 
because of psychological problems, crashed the aircraft killing in the process 150 people on 
board. I recently attended a conference in Geneva on the global action against dementia. With 
an ageing population, this is going to be a time bomb for us and, according to the estimates, 
dementia  is  going  to  triple  within  the  next  20  to  30  years  and  dementia  is  for  life  long 
treatment. So, we have really to do something about this dementia issue unless … 

(Interruptions) 

So we need to have a national strategy to deal with the early screening of mental 

disease and mental health. We have to do this in order not to stigmatise people.  

Unfortunately, one of the issues with mental health is that if somebody is suffering 
from  a  mental  health  problem  and  you  ask  the  person  to  go  and  see  a  psychologist  or  a 
psychiatrist; it is a problem. Everybody around him will say: No. That is not a case of mental 
illness.  But  we  must  educate  people  to  tell  them  -  yes  you  must  go.  Maybe  you  have  no 
problem but, at least, you have an assessment of the psychological level of the person so that 
we don’t get into the kind of this co-pilot crashing the plane. I am not saying that our pilots… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo please!  
Mr  Gayan:  We  are  working,  Madam  Speaker,  on  a  national  strategic  plan  on 
awareness, prevention, risk reduction, diagnosis and rapid response, but for this we also need 
to build capacity. We want to project Mauritius as a centre of excellence for medical care but 
for  this  to  happen  we  need  to  build  the  capacity  required  so  that  we  really  offer  the  best 
medical services available anywhere in the world. We have young doctors and in the Budget 
we will be recruiting one hundred medical officers and I’m going to impress upon them that 
they  need  to  be  trained  and  to  specialise  in  those  scarcity  areas  where  we  do  lack  the 
expertise. We have general practitioners but we need to have specialists in the high-tech areas 
where  medicine  is  going  to  move  in  the  future.  We  cannot  lag  behind  because,  if  we  lag 
behind, we will never be able to realise the vision that we have of Mauritius, of making it a 
centre of excellence for tertiary education and also for specialised medical care. 

So, all these things are ongoing Madam Speaker. There are lots of other things but I 
don’t  want  to  take  too  much  time  of  the  House.  When  I  met  the  Director  General  of  the 

 

39 

World Health Organisation Madam Speaker, there was one question that she asked me which 
really floored me and the question was –  

“Do you have universal free medical services in Mauritius?” 

I said yes. 

“Is that service available to all foreigners?  

I had no immediate answer but when I came back I started to enquire about all those foreign 
workers whether they are given free medical service in a system which is designed to cater 
for our people. I have spoken to my colleague the hon. Minister of Labour to see whether 
those people, who are recruiting workers from overseas, include the medical condition of all 
workers, first of all and secondly, whether they have an insurance policy to provide for any 
medical treatment they may require when they come. Otherwise, our resources will be used to 
service foreigners. I am not speaking of an emergency situation. Of course, any foreigner, in 
an emergency, will be entitled to medical treatment, but in normal circumstances we should 
have  a  system.  If  I  were  to  travel  to  Reunion  tomorrow  I  will  need  a  medical  insurance, 
otherwise, I don’t get access to that country. So, we also need to be careful. That is why I was 
saying that she seems to know more about what is happening in this country. Of course, she 
is  in  that  position  but  it  is  important  that  we  also  remember  that  nothing  is  free  in  life.  
Everything is paid for and our vision is to have the best medical treatment that we can have 
for  our  people.  For  that  to  happen  there  should  be  cooperation  from  everybody  and  in 
particular, as I mentioned before, those people who are programmed for operations they must 
ensure that they are fit for operations and not have operations postponed. 

Madam Speaker, let me conclude by saying that this Budget is a budget that is going 
to ensure the second economic miracle. We are going to fight poverty and this Budget bears 
the imprint of not only  the hon. Minister of  Finance but  also the Rt. hon. Prime Minister. 
Since everybody has been quoting from learned authors: Shakespeare and Rousseau, let me 
also say something about this for both the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and the hon. Minister of 
Finance – 

“Some are born great, some achieve greatness, and some have greatness thrust 
upon them”. 

In our case greatness has been achieved by the hon. Minister of Finance and the Rt. 

hon. Prime Minister. 
I thank you. 

(3.01 p.m.) 

40 

 
Mr A. Wong Yen Cheong (Fourth Member for GRNW and Port Louis West): 
Madam Speaker, it is indeed a great privilege for me to add my voice to those who preceded 
me in supporting the National Budget of the Alliance Lepep Government led by the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister - Sir Anerood Jugnauth.  

I  am  proud  today  to  share  my  appreciation  on  the  Budget  2015/2016.  Madam 
Speaker, I promised to be short, concise and have all my Parliamentary friends present to be 
here to listen to me. 

I strongly congratulate my colleague, hon. Lutchmeenaraidoo Minister of Finance and 
Economic  Development  for  presenting  to  the  Mauritian  population  a  Budget  which  is 
undoubtedly  the  most  suited  in  the  present  context.  It  is  the  outcome  of  a  shared  vision, 
mission and direction as well as compassion for our people. The deep and sincere concern of 
this Government for the population at large is very much reflected in these various economic 
and social measures which have been announced. The hon. Minister of Finance, through his 
budget, has on one hand laid the foundation for a near doubling of the GDP growth to 5.7% 
for 2016/2017. On the other hand, the Budget has been acclaimed by the people as one that 
meets the needs and aspiration. Therefore, the presentation of the no-tax Budget is no less 
than a major feed in the actual global context characterised by a general slowdown by the 
world economy.  

Madam Speaker, I must say that I am sad to note that, although this budget is well set 
to achieve the deuxième miracle économique, but some – I would say some - on the other side 
of  the  House  no  less  than  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  and  some  other  Opposition 
Members have chosen to make comments that are mere rhetoric. What are Members of the 
Opposition  saying,  I  prefer  not  to  come  back  on  this  because  we  all  heard.  No,  Madam 
Speaker,  each  and  every  measure  of  this  Budget  has  been  thoroughly  worked  out  by  the 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development who has set a realistic and achievable smart 
goals. This Government has not and will not engage in demagogical promises which cannot 
be honoured because this Government a été largement plébiscité par le peuple pour travailler 
pour le peuple et avec le peuple.  

C’est vrai nous avons tous ici, ou presque tous, fait partie à un moment ou une autre 
d’une alliance avec les différents partenaires dans ce Parlement. Aussi vrai que le PMSD a 
fait partie du précédent  gouvernement  et dans les différentes  alliances dans le passé. Mais 
nous  estimons  qu’un  parti  qui  se  retrouve  en  alliance  ce  n’est  pas  de  son  devoir  d’aller 
surveiller son partenaire. Il faut qu’il y ait une confiance mutuelle. C’est pour cela je pense 

 

41 

que  c’était  le  travail  de  l’opposition  quand  le  précédent  gouvernement  arrivait  à  faire  du 
travail qui n’était pas correct.  

Aujourd’hui,  nous  sommes  fiers  de  faire  partie  de  cette  alliance  avec  un  respect 
mutuel sous le leadership de Sir Anerood Jugnauth. Tout aussi vrai que nous pensons que 
c’est  le  rôle  de  l’opposition  de  faire  un  travail    constructif  et  de  veiller  à  ce  que  le 
gouvernement travail en toute honnêteté pour le progrès du pays. Nous savons très bien que 
face  au  précédent  gouvernement  il  n’y  avait  pas  d’opposition.  Je  préfère  m’abstenir  de 
commentaires.  Cependant,  l’opposition  ne  veut  pas  dire  s’opposer  absolument    à  tout. 
L’opposition a le devoir de faire  des propositions constructives pour aider le pays à avancer. 
C’est d’ailleurs ce que préconise le modèle westminsterien dont nous nous inspirons. De plus, 
ne  dit-on  pas  que  pour  une  bonne  démocratie,  il  faut  une  bonne  opposition?  Je  souhaite 
vraiment voir cette coopération de l’opposition. Donnons l’exemple à ces jeunes qui étaient là 
aujourd’hui - ils sont partis - du Lycée La Bourdonnais. 

(Interruptions) 

Bien sûr, nous donnerons l’exemple.  

Madam Speaker: Order, please!  
Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Donnons l’exemple à ces jeunes qui sont là aujourd’hui et 

qui éprouvent l’envie de nous remplacer dans cette auguste Assemblée à l’avenir.  

Tout  comme  l’exemple  dont  ma  colistière  a  mentionné  dans  son  discours,  une 
campagne exemplaire que  nous avons fait avec les adversaires. Nous avons aujourd’hui un 
gouvernement  qui  a  le  courage,  à  travers  le  budget  ambitieux  présenté  par  mon  collègue, 
l’honorable Lutchmeenaraidoo, de construire pour l’avenir.  Prenons l’exemple des temples 
d’Angkor, des pyramides d’Égypte, de Machu Picchu, de Rome,  les œuvres de ceux qui ont 
gravé l’histoire, qui ont posé les premières pierres sans pour autant en voir la concrétisation. 
Ce sont des peuples qui ont osé œuvrer pour le futur. C’est aussi ce que j’avais dit lors de 
mon  intervention  sur  le  discours  programme  du  gouvernement  de  l’Alliance  Lepep.    Les 
semences que nous mettrons en terre aujourd’hui ne seront pas pour nos assiettes, mais celle 
des futures générations. Il revient donc à chacun d’apprécier les projets pharaoniques dont les 
bases sont jetées par ce présent budget. 

Madam Speaker, I fully agree with my colleague to make Mauritius un vaste chantier 
de développement with measures regarding investment and economic development.  This will 
create space for a higher growth path by unlocking major infrastructure projects as it would 
make  optimum  use  of  resources,  create  employment  and  give  a  boost  to  our  construction 
sector. 

 

42 

Je  voudrais,  par  ailleurs,  Madame  la  présidente,  souligner  mon  appréciation 
concernant les améliorations dans ma circonscription, Grand Rivière Nord-Ouest/Port Louis 
Ouest qui sera témoin.  Et pour cela, je tiens à remercier le ministre des Finances qui a su 
écouter avec attention mes propositions. Il les a prises en considération et dans peu de temps 
la Circonscription No. 1, comme les autres régions du pays, aura un nouveau visage.  

Le Budget 2015-2016 est intitulé ‘At The Crossroad’ et  cela me ramène à un endroit 
particulier; notamment la jonction de Grande Rivière Nord-Ouest en direction de Pointe aux 
Sables et La Tour Koenig.  Tous les jours, ceux qui passent par cet endroit éprouvent toutes 
les peines du monde pour rallier la capitale le matin et vice versa l’après-midi. C’est donc 
avec  un  immense  plaisir  et  un  soulagement  que  nous  accueillons  l’ambitieux  projet  de 
développement maritime permettant de faire le trajet entre Pointe aux Sables et Port Louis  en 
bateau. Le projet d’extension de la zone portuaire de Pointe aux Sables à Baie du Tombeau 
va aussi transformer toute cette région. Les habitants de la Circonscription No. 1 seront aussi 
comblés en termes de projets routiers, de fourniture d’eau, de gestion d’eaux usées, du projet 
de  Marina,  entre  autres.  Ces  projets  et  ce  vaste  chantier  bénéficieront  aux  habitants  de  la 
circonscription, à tout le pays en entier et au secteur touristique.  

Madam  Speaker,  I  will  now  comment  on  a  few  bold  measures  announced  in  the 
Budget;  the  boosting  of  growth  in  the  SME  sector  will  help  transform  the  economy.  The 
sector has, in fact, been given a new position by providing a quantum leap for this sector in 
terms  of  tax  incentives,  funding  through  a  dedicated  SME  bank  and  operating  space,  thus 
paving the way forward from red tape to red carpets. 

Madam  Speaker, 

the  Budget  also  consolidates 

the  social  package  with  a 

comprehensive set of measures such as – 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 

(vi) 
(vii) 

(viii) 

job creation to tackle unemployment;  
a Marshall Plan to combat poverty;  
a substantial increase in social benefits; 
several incentives in respect of housing for low and middle income groups; 
a review of CSR Scheme to render it more effective with a special focus on an 
indicative list of 38 pockets of poverty; 
a higher access to water and affordability thereof; 
a significant review from 19% to 12% of the interest rate in connection with 
hire purchase;  
recruitment of 100 medical doctors and other specialists;  

 
(ix) 

(x) 

43 

setting  up  of  an  Independent  Police  Complaints  Commission  to  be  presided 
over by a former judge of the Supreme Court to ensure that the fundamental 
human rights are respected;  
increase in the budgetary allocation to Rs7.9 billion for the Police department 
to restore law and order situation.  

As  I  said  during  my  speech  on  the  Government  Programme,  the  future  generation 
should be proud of us and the legacy that we will leave for them. Thus, as announced by the 
hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development, we are unlocking 13 employment-rich 
megaprojects, 8 of which will be designed on the Smart Cities concept and also five techno 
poles. 

Madam Speaker, I will now move to the proposed measures for my Ministry that will 
enable the Civil Service to at least meet, not to say exceed, the expectation of the population. 
As  executive  arm  of  Government,  the  Civil  Service  has  proved  to  be  effective  in 
implementing Government policies with even limited resources.  It is an undeniable fact that 
the  Civil  Service  will  continue  to  remain  Government’s  most  trusted  partner  in  the  socio-
economic transformation of the country. 

Madam Speaker, this is why reforms in the Civil Service are inescapable, to be able to 

face the challenges and turbulences in the global competitive environment.  

I  am  glad  to  see,  in  line  with  this  Government’s  2015-2019,  Civil  Service 
modernisation  through  the  use  of  Information  and  Communication  Technology,  (ICT)  has 
been  given  high  importance.  We  have  to  take  maximum  advantage  of  the  power  of 
technology  and  embrace  e-Government.  There  is  no  other  choice  if  we  want  to  keep  pace 
with the global trend.  

Adoption  of  e-Government  initiatives  across  the  Civil  Service  is  important  in 
promoting inclusion and participatory development and resonates with citizen demands for 
increased transparency and accountability in public service delivery. It is also instrumental in 
streamlining  operation  through  better  communication  and  coordination  within  and  across 
Ministries and Departments, private sector and the public. In short, e-Government is the most 
effective tool to promote sustainable growth and good governance.  

Madam Speaker, as part of this reforms initiative, my Ministry in collaboration with 
the  Ministry  of  Technology,  Communication  and  Innovation,  has  a  very  important  role  to 
play to encourage all public sector organisations to harness ICT in their operation. To set the 
right example, my Ministry is driving a major e-Government initiative, namely, the Human 

 

44 

Resource Management Information System, known as the HRMIS Project which will, indeed, 
bring  a  revolution  in  the  management  of  human  resource  across  the  Civil  Service.  The 
HRMIS, Madam Speaker, is a priority project of my Ministry which involves a lot of process 
re-engineering  in  the  management  of  human  resources,  ranging  from  recruitment  to 
retirement.  It  will  be  a  valuable  tool  to  assist  in  strategic  human  resource  planning  and 
management. The direct benefits of HRMIS will – 

• 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

• 

provide accurate, timely, relevant, user-friendly and complete information will 
definitely address administrative delays and inefficiency. 
it will reduce paper work to a large extent. 
relieve senior officials from routine tasks and avoid duplication of works; 
enable a judicious use of human and financial resources; 
improve the communication line both intra and inter- Ministries/Departments; 
create  a  synergy  between  the  Human  Resource  and  Finance  Division  of 
Ministries/Departments resulting in timely payments of allowances to public 
officers, thus reducing considerably the processing time from several days to a 
few minutes; 
side  by  side,  employees  will  be  empowered  to  access  the  basic  details  and 
communicate  online  with 
through  a  “self-service” 
application, reducing considerably the need for them to call personally on the 
HR or Finance Divisions for trivial matters. 

the  HR  Division 

Madam Speaker, in addition, my Ministry is coming up with series of bold measures 
to enable the Civil Service to leap forward and enhance its capacity to better respond to the 
needs and aspirations of stakeholders and the citizens.  Here I would like to mention two such 
measures. 

First, my Ministry is coming up with the much-awaited Public Sector Re-engineering 
Bureau, as an executive arm of the Reform Steering Council, to effectively drive reforms and 
ensure the full implementation of reform initiatives across the Civil Service.  This Unit will 
indeed be “la cheville ouvrière” to carve out the sectorial reforms required and work together 
with the line Ministries to attain the desired objectives. 

Second, as already announced, the Public Service Bill will also become a reality in the 
coming months.  This legislation will be a major breakthrough for the Public Service and will 
enable amongst others to – 

 

• 

• 
• 

45 

establish  an  apolitical  and  performance-oriented  Public  Service  that  is 
efficient, effective and economical in serving the Government of the day and 
the citizens; 
uphold the essential qualities and values of the Public Service; 
define the roles, powers and responsibilities of Ministers, Supervising Officers 
and Advisers for more accountability. 

Quality Management Initiatives 
In  addition  to  the  above,  my  Ministry  will  continue  to  sustain  its  efforts  towards 
instilling a quality culture across the Civil Service through the continued implementation of 
the following initiatives – 

(a) 
(b) 
(c) 

ISO Certification 
Counter Service and Customer Care 
Public Service Excellence Award to recognise and reward excellence 

Madam Speaker, all these reform strategies will be void if people do not reform their 
own  attitude  and  mind-set.  However,  we  should  every  that  the  most  difficult  reform  and 
change to bring is attitude, as it is often said “old habits die hard”. I personally believe that 
we  can  capitalise  on  incremental  positive  behavioural  change  by  moving  out  from  the 
comfort zone, “thinking out of the box”, and shifting from business as usual to business as 
unusual. 

Madam Speaker, we have to reckon the fact that there is a problem of attitude and 
mind-set in certain areas which need to be addressed as a matter of priority.  I am very much 
pleased to note that no less than the Rt. hon. Prime Minister himself has said in very clear 
terms the need for a change in the mind-set at the level of the population.  This will, no doubt, 
take some time, but I am confident that this change of mind-set will take place and contribute 
to the success of the reforms that we have already announced. 

Madam Speaker, Human Resource Development Strategy.   Let me now elaborate on 
our HRD Strategy.  With the advent of major government projects such as Human Resource 
Management  Information  System  and  Performance  Management  System,  a  broader 
dimension and orientation will be given to the training functions to render it more demand-
driven, performance-based and reform-oriented in the Civil Service. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  Civil  Service  College,  the  long-awaited  project,  will  set  the 
foundation  and  framework  for  the  institutional  support  towards  capacity  building  through 

 

46 

lifelong learning, training in ICT, e-learning and also multi-skilling.  The College will also 
help to systematically expand training and development efforts across all levels of the Civil 
Service and also for the various sectors, including State-owned enterprises and parastatals. 

Madam Speaker, Ministries and Departments must make a maximum use of online 
courses through the LMS.  The development of e-learning courses in the public sector will 
complement  traditional  face-to-face  training,  with  a  number  of  outstanding  advantages  for 
public institutions and public officers, including reduced costs, paperless training, increased 
retention and application to the job and self-responsibility. 

Madam Speaker, Training Needs Assessment will be a critical activity and will serve 
as  a  diagnostic  tool  to  determining  what  training  needs  to  take  place.    Therefore,  it  is 
important to train and to develop public officers who will be called upon to carry out Training 
Needs  Assessment  at  their  respective  Ministries/Departments.    TNA  will  provide  training 
management with basic skills and tools to identify performance gaps and plug them with the 
knowledge, skills and abilities needed by the organisations, improve productivity and provide 
quality services. 

Madam Speaker, I will personally ensure that our public officers are provided with the 
“state-of-the-art” environment conducive to their safety, health, welfare and well-being.  In 
this context, the Occupational Safety and Health Management System will be implemented in 
a phased manner to create safer, healthier workplace for public officers.  In parallel, to strike 
the  right  work  balance,  my  Ministry,  through  the  Public  Officers  Welfare  Council,  will 
introduce new leisure activities for the welfare of public officers and their families.  If it is 
often  said  that  happy  bees  make  more  honey,  I  will  go  a  bit  further  to  make  the  honey 
sweeter. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  greatest  difficulty  that  we  are  all  facing  is  that,  although  the 
Public  Service  is  doing  a  good  job,  the  results  are  not  always  tangible  and,  therefore,  go 
unnoticed.  I will propose a Monitoring and Evaluation Framework customised to fit in the 
needs  of  the  Public  Service  in  order  to  assess  the  social  impact  and  effectiveness  of  our 
reform strategies.  Monitoring and evaluation will also help to bring about a positive attitude 
and mind-set, improving performance at our officers and enhance the perception of the Public 
Service in the eyes of both citizens and non-citizens of the country.  Let me here quote Peter 
Drucker, the Management icon, who said – 

“What cannot be measured cannot be managed and what cannot be managed cannot 
be measured”. 

47 

 
Madam  Speaker,  this  Budget  lays  the  foundation  for  a  more  equitable  and  better 
Mauritius.    Everything  will  come  at  the  appropriate  time.    Let’s  not  forget  that  this 
Government has obtained a clear mandate of five years.  The people of this country will see 
the change. 

Before concluding, I would like to seize this opportunity to pay tribute to the good 
work being done by the vast majority of the public officers all across the Civil Service who 
are working diligently and honestly. 

Madam  Speaker,  once  again, 

I  congratulate  my  colleague,  hon.  Vishnu 
Lutchmeenaraidoo,  Minister  Finance  and  Economic  Development,  as  well  as  his  whole 
Budget team, and  I wish to put on record their support to help me to build a better nation 
through the Civil Service. 

With these words, I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

(3.22 p.m) 

Mr  T.  Benydin  (First  Member  for  La  Caverne  &  Phoenix):  Madam  Speaker, 
permettez-moi  tout  d’abord  de  remercier  et  de  féliciter  l’honorable  ministre  des  Finances 
pour  les  mesures  magistrales  énoncées  dans  son  discours  du  budget  pour  l’exercice  2015-
2016.  Nous sommes pour autant heureux de constater et de témoigner que 25 ans après, notre 
ministre des Finances, l’honorable Vishnu Lutchmeenaraidoo, n’a pas changé d’un iota. S’il 
était là, j’allais lui dire “You are constant as the northern star, and you are also a man of all 
seasons”, et que sa volonté et son optimisme béat sont parmi les caractéristiques qui l’ont 
inspiré et encouragé à présenter, au nom du gouvernement, un budget de relance qui inspire 
confiance, et qui s’inscrit dans les orientations du discours-programme et les promesses faites 
à la population par le biais du manifeste électoral de L’Alliance LEPEP. 

Madam Speaker, avec les consultations qui ont précédé la présentation de ce budget, 
le ministre des Finances a aussi, avec la bénédiction de notre Premier ministre et les Leaders 
de l’Alliance LEPEP, fait triompher la démocracie participative et surtout le dialogue social, 
tant souhaité et voulu par les partenaires sociaux, les syndicats et les organisations de notre 
société civile. Ainsi, le ‘feel good factor’ de notre gouvernement se consolide de jour en jour 
et est devenu maintenant le ‘feel better factor’ avec les mesures sociales et surtout avec les 13 
méga projets et le démarrage d’un vaste chantier ; la création des 8 smart cities. La promotion 
des petites et moyennes entreprises et la nouvelle structure du développement économique et 
social qui permettront, dans une grande mesure, à propulser et générer des nouveaux emplois 
pour les jeunes et ceux et celles en quête d’un travail durable, décent et digne. 

48 

 
Madam  Speaker,  si  avant  la  présentation  du  budget,  un  sondage  de  85%  de  la 
population  était  favorable  de  l’action  du  gouvernement,  il  est  un  fait  indéniable  que 
maintenant  avec  la  présentation  du  budget,  le  nombre  de  satisfaits  a  davantage  augmenté. 
Bravo au Premier Ministre, au ministre des Finances et à notre équipe gouvernementale ! 

La décision courageuse de gouvernement d’initier un Plan Marshall contre la pauvreté 
est  très  salutaire.  Cela  permettra  au  gouvernement  d’adopter  une  nouvelle  approche  pour 
l’accroissement  de  l’aide  et  soutien  aux  plus  démunis  et  aux  familles  les  plus  pauvres  et 
vulnérables  de  notre  société  et  ceux  qui  vivent  dans  les  cités  et  dans  des  conditions 
déplorables. A cet effet, il faut souligner les mesures courageuses pour la provision des fonds 
au ministère du Logement pour la construction de 1,000 logements sociaux aux familles dont 
les  revenus  mensuels  sont  moins  de  R  10,000  ainsi  bien  que  les  fonds  relatifs  à  la 
construction  de  700  housing  units  pour  les  familles  les  plus  vulnérables  sous  l’égide  du 
National Empowerment Foundation. 

Madam  Speaker,  housing  is  one  of  the  basic  and  fundamental  human  rights  and  a 
socio-economic  right  offering  protection  and  providing  security  to  the  citizens.  It  is, 
therefore, imperative that while taking care of social housing for the have-nots, provision of 
housing  should  be  accompanied  by  basic  living  needs  such  as  safe  drinking  water,  good 
sanitation, accessible roads and drainage facilities. 

Une  autre  décision  révolutionnaire  pour  venir  en  aide  aux  groupes  vulnérables 
concerne ce droit fondamental de la distribution d’eau gratuite à chaque famille de l’ordre de 
six mètres cubes par mois. 

Water is the lifeblood of every human being. This provision, therefore, constitutes a 
major  breakthrough  in  the  promotion  of  the Welfare  State  and  an  equitable  society  and  in 
essence, a pro-poor and inclusive development strategy for the Republic of Mauritius. 

Madam Speaker, les entreprises du secteur privé ont aussi un rôle important à jouer 
dans le combat contre la pauvreté. Elles ne peuvent se contenter de leurs profits et miroiter 
leurs chiffres d’affaires et d’offrir des salaires faramineux aux chefs et patrons seulement. Le 
secteur privé a donc une responsabilité d’aider le gouvernement à améliorer le quotidien et la 
qualité  de  vie  des  groupes  défavorisés  et  vulnérables,  d’où  la  nécessité  de  revoir  le 
fonctionnement  du  CSR  (Responsabilité  Sociale  des  Entreprises).  Cependant,  laisser  seule 
aux entreprises la responsabilité de gérer et d’octroyer l’assistance financière aux ONG, selon 
leurs propres critères, pourrait entrainer des difficultés et contraintes à long terme. Donc, il 

 

49 

nous faut avoir un système efficace de ‘monitoring’ afin d’éviter des exclusions et de veiller à 
ce que le parrainage par le privé se passe dans les meilleures conditions et selon la politique 
du gouvernement pour éradiquer la pauvreté et l’exclusion sociale. 

Bravo  aussi  au  ministre  des  Finances  pour  cette  courageuse  décision  d’exercer  un 
contrôle strict sur les jeux du hasard et de faire disparaître les cartes à gratter, qui, au lieu 
d’enrichir,  entraine  beaucoup  de  nos  citoyens  vers  un  endettement  conséquent  car  il  est 
évident qu’il y a toujours plus de perdants que de gagnants. 

Madam Speaker, under the previous Government, growth and development have been 
impeded by a number of factors, namely,  inappropriate policies and strategies leading to no 
significant  and  sustainable  improvement  in  living  standards  of  people.  In  this  context, 
Government’s strategy to facilitate business and boost up investment with the expectation of 
a growth rate exceeding 5% is most welcome and a laudable effort to meet the challenging 
objectives of full employment. Even Statistics Mauritius – today I have read in the newspaper 
– forecasts already a growth rate of 4.1% for this year and to this end we cannot understand 
the pessimistic position of the Opposition regarding improvement in our growth rate. 

We have reasons to be more confident now that high investments, in particular the 13 
Mega projects with the eight smart cities will boost up public infrastructure development and 
will generate thousands of jobs in the country. 

Madam  Speaker,  it  goes  without  saying  that  “an  appropriate  Wage  Policy”  is  an 
essential  component  of  a  favourable  investment  climate  and  that  an  active  labour  market 
policy  will  help  to  curb  down  unemployment  and  all  forms  of  disguised  employment, 
including casualisation and precarious forms of labour. 

Our National Employment Policy should, therefore, focus essentially on reviewing at 
regular intervals remuneration and conditions of service together with a better scheme for the 
allocation of pension benefits to workers, especially those working in the private sector. 

Madam  Speaker,  “Labour  is  not  a  commodity”.  This  is  spelt  out  clearly  in 
unequivocal terms by the International Labour Office (ILO). In this context, Government’s 
decision to amend and revisit the two labour laws is commendable and will, no doubt, instill a 
new era of industrial relations, both in the private and public sectors, with decent working 
conditions and salaries, which will contribute to make work and labour sustainable. We also 
acclaim  Government’s  policy  to  reject  in  all  its  forms  job  discrimination,  and  to  promote 

 

50 

transparency  in  job  recruitment  with  the  sacrosanct  principles  of  meritocracy  and  good 
governance. 

In the context of the proposed Wage Policy, appropriate measures should therefore be 
undertaken  to  sustain  and  support  le  pouvoir  d’achat  des  bas  salaires,  d’où  la  nécessité 
grandissante d’introduire le salaire minimum dans le pays. 

Nous sommes confiants que dans le contexte des mesures du budget, le gouvernement 
réalisera une gouvernance économique efficace et responsable et qui place l’emploi au cœur 
du  développement  économique  et  social.  Egalement,  les  entreprises  doivent  éviter  d’avoir 
recours  aux  licenciements  abusifs  et  d’éliminer  les  écarts  des  salaires  entre  hommes  et 
femmes. 

Madam  Speaker,  it  is  very  reassuring  that  the  budget  focusses  on  essential  factors, 

namely – 

• 

• 

Reinforcement of social security and social protection measures to eliminate 
poverty and focusing on targeted vulnerable groups - with a lion’s share of a 
total provision of Rs 27.5 billion for social security expenditure 
Strengthening  the  regulatory  environment  of  the  financial  sector  to  attract 
international  asset  and  activate  promotion  campaigns,  especially  Global 
Business  activities  in  Africa  with  the  creation  of  the  Financial  Services 
Promotion Agency; 
the setting up of a National Ocean Council to implement the Ocean Economy 
Project; 
improvement of the quality of education from pre-primary to tertiary levels, 
revamping of the vocational training with the provision of Rs14.7 billion to 
the Ministry of Education; 
reinforcement of law and order with the recruitment of 600 additional Police 
Officers and the setting up of a Police Academy to promote efficient training 
capacity; 

• 

• 

• 

•  as pointed out by the Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms, 
hon.  Wong  Yen  Cheong,  reforms  of  the  public  sector,  in  particular,  the 
launching  of  the  Civil  Service  College  which  will  inevitably  contribute 
towards providing a world-class service to the nation, and 

 

• 

51 

the  setting  up  of  a  Legacy  Sovereign  Fund  to  ensure  accountability  and 
transparency in public sector bodies like the SIC, Casino de Maurice, etc. is 
indeed  a  step  forward  to  ensure  and  guarantee  good  governance  and  best 
practices. 

Madam  Speaker,  such  measures  contained  in  the  Budget,  will  serve  as  a  more 
effective instrument of resource allocation to ensure not just a progression of GDP growth, 
but  also  to  meet  the  achievement  of  important  social  objectives,  such  as  employment 
creation,  poverty  elimination,  promotion  of  quality  education,  training  and  skills,  housing 
facilities,  food  security,  especially  bio  farming,  green  energy  and  environment  protection, 
amongst others. 

Madam Speaker, as concluding remarks, I make bold to say that in essence, this is a 
mega - what we call in the Creole language - this is a mari Budget, a smart Budget worked 
out  by  a  smart  Government  for  the  economic  and  social  well-being  and  interests  of  the 
citizens of Mauritius. It is also said, and I quote –  

“No man is an island.” 

And that -  

“No island is a world in itself.” 

But with the serious commitment of our Government, under the able leadership of 

Sir Anerood Jugnauth, Mauritius can be qualified as being “a world in itself.” 

At the crossroad, in this context, we have to look forward in the right direction and, in 
this  regard,  I  can  only  wish  Godspeed  for  the  successful  implementation  of  the  budgetary 
measures  for  2015-2016  and,  above  all,  I  am  sure  we  are  going  to  realise  the  second 
economic miracle. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Lesjongard! 

(3.36 p.m.) 

Mr G. Lesjongard (Second Member for Savanne & Black River): Merci, Madame 
la  présidente.  Madame  la  présidente,  merci  de  me  donner  l’occasion  d’intervenir  sur  le 
premier budget de l’Alliance Lepep, budget présenté par l’honorable ministre des Finances le 
23 mars et budget qui a pour titre « At the Crossroad ».  Etre à la croisée des chemins, en 
d’autres mots, nous sommes arrivés à un carrefour et la question qui est posée est : quelle 
direction  prendre,  aller  tout  droit,  revenir  sur  ses  pas  ou  changer  de  direction ?  De  toute 
façon, Madame la présidente, dans n’importe quelle direction que nous allons, le temps nous 

 

52 

dira si cela a été une bonne ou une mauvaise direction. La question que je me suis posée et en 
préparant  mon  discours  c’était  de  savoir  quel  langage  adopter  et  le  choix  a  été  comme 
toujours  très  clair ;  un  langage  de  vérité.  Langage  que  j’ai  toujours  pratiqué  durant  ces  15 
dernières années dans cette auguste Assemblée. Depuis 2005, j’ai été très critique à l’égard 
des budgets présentés par le régime du docteur Navin Ramgoolam. Que ces budgets furent 
présentés  par  l’honorable  docteur  Sithanen,  l’honorable  Xavier-Luc  Duval  ou  l’honorable 
Pravind Jugnauth, j’ai émis des critiques. Tout le temps c’était des critiques bien fondées et 
constructives, et je ne vais pas déroger de ce principe aujourd’hui. Je qualifierais ce budget 
comme un budget qui a du bon mais aussi du moins bon. 

Commençons par le moins bon! 

(Interruptions) 

Ce  budget,  Madame  la  présidente,  ne  rassure  pas  totalement  la  population  sur 
certains sujets préoccupants tels que le pouvoir d’achat ou la création d’emplois. Mais, par 
contre - et là c’est du bon - il allège la souffrance des familles en interdisant certains jeux du 
hasard et il en était temps, Madame la présidente. Par contre, dans la lutte contre la pauvreté, 
le ministre joue le rôle de Ponce Pilate. Il donne l’impression que l’État se décharge dans la 
lutte contre la pauvreté et ce n’est pas une bonne chose, Madame la présidente. 

At  paragraph  7,  under  the  title  ‘Economic  Review’,  the  Minister  of  Finance  shares 

with us some of the key figures in his Budget, and I quote –  

“In 2014, the unemployment rate stood at 7.8 per cent, with a high concentration of 
jobless among our youths and women.” 

He also states that –  

 “And the current account showed a deficit of Rs39.6 billion, representing 10.3 per 
cent of GDP.” 

And a budget deficit of 3.2 per cent and he expects that growth for 2015-2016 will 
be of the order of 5.3 per cent! And for 2016 and 2017, it will be of the order of 5.7 per cent. 
But he is very silent on the inflation rate and on the unemployment rate. Having shared these 
figures with us, he then states that we are at the crossroad and warns the population that if 
Government  adopts  a  no  policy  change  or  a  business  as  usual  approach,  we  face  a  bleak 
future.  

With regard to social justice, he confirms what everybody has been saying under the 
Labour Party regime, that is, the rich are becoming richer and the poor are becoming poorer 
and it is high time that we redress this situation. He, therefore, Madam Speaker, sets the four 
major  objectives  of  the  actual  Government,  that  is,  high  investment  leading  to  high 

 

53 

employment; long term sustainable development; greater social justice, and transparency and 
good governance.  

I shall dwell now with the issues of high investment leading to high employment, long 
term sustainable development and greater social justice. He states that in order to achieve the 
above, he is proposing the implementation of 13 mega projects, projects which are qualified 
as  employment-rich  and  will  lead  to  the  creation  of  ‘Smart  Cities’.    To  implement  the  13 
projects, he says that we will require Rs120 billions of investment and some 7,000 arpents of 
land. I believe some of which is going to be prime agricultural land. 

If  you would allow me, Madam Speaker,  I would again repeat what I said under the 
Labour Party regime when I intervened on the Budget that was presented by Rama Sithanen 
in 2007.  I am repeating myself because I do not want the same mistakes to happen again.  
Although I support this type of development, I feel that we should be very cautious. 

J’avais interrogé le ministre à l’époque sur la qualité d’investissement qu’il comptait 
attirer. Et, par la suite, nous avons eu les fameux projets Jin Fei, Neo Town et d’autres. Si on 
parle de la qualité d’investissement que le pays a besoin, il ne faut pas non plus négliger la 
qualité de cet investissement. L’exemple est très simple et je prendrais l’être humain comme 
l’exemple.  Ce  n’est  non  seulement  la  quantité  qu’une  personne  consomme,  mais  aussi  la 
qualité qu’il consomme qui a une incidence directe sur sa santé et son espérance de vie. On a 
fait cette bêtise dans le passé et nous payons le prix aujourd’hui. Nous avons souillé la beauté 
de notre pays dans plusieurs endroits avec des développements sauvages, ne respectant pas 
les normes de construction. Ce qu’il faudrait aujourd’hui dans cette croissance basée sur le 
développement des 13 Smart Cities, c’est d’éviter de faire les mêmes bêtises. Il faut donner 
plus  d’attention  à  la  durabilité  de  notre  environnement  et  c’est  cela  qui  va  renforcer  cette 
croissance. Je pense qu’une croissance trop rapide ne peut qu’être provisoire et elle est basée 
que  sur  des  expédients  condamnables.  Ces  expédients  sont  principalement:  trop  de 
subventions de l’État, une indifférence à l’égard de la protection de notre environnement et 
une répartition injuste des dépenses publiques. Nous avons connu cela sous l’ère Ramgoolam.  
Il y a ceux qui croient qu’un pays peut réussir avec une croissance qui n’est pas soutenue. 
Moi je suis de ceux qui croient qu’une croissance doit être soutenue. 

Le  précédent  régime  nous  a  montré  à  quel  point  un  gouvernement  pouvait  gaspiller 
l’argent  public.  Hier,  on  a  entendu  le  ministre  Collendavelloo  répondre  à  des  questions 
concernant des projets du wastewater. Il faut qu’on arrête cela car c’est l’argent du peuple et 
dire que nous avons voulu cautionner cela. Madame la présidente, … 

(Interruptions) 

 

Je plaide coupable. 

54 

(Interruptions) 

Nous devons tous, de ce côté de la Chambre mais aussi certains de l’autre côté de la 
Chambre, plaider coupables. Ni le MSM, ni le PMSD ne peuvent se dédouaner de la notion 
de responsabilité collégiale. Nous avons aussi vu, Madame la présidente, à quel degré on a pu 
faire  du  tort  à  notre  environnement  en  construisant  sur  des  cours  d’eau,  en  déviant  nos 
rivières,  en  faisant  certaines  de  nos  régions  un  amas  de  béton  et  en  donnant  à  des  petits 
copains  la  gestion  des  îlots  à  des  fins  commerciales.  Aujourd’hui  plus  que  jamais  nous 
sommes conscients à quel point il faut protéger notre environnement. Je souhaiterais moi que 
le développement de ces Smart Cities se fasse à travers un vrai cahier de charges et pas au 
détriment de notre environnement.  

Nous sommes tous conscients du changement climatique. Les inondations qui frappent 
souvent  notre  île  nous  interpellent.  Nous  avons  récemment  été  témoins  de  ces  inondations 
dans le sud de l’île. Le ministre Dayal était venu. Le développement dans cette région a eu 
une  incidence  directe  sur  les  habitants.  Alors,  je  souhaiterais,  encore  une  fois,  que  tout 
développement qui va se faire dans ce pays prenne en considération la protection de notre 
environnement. Il faudrait aussi que les jobs qui vont être créés pour la construction de ces 
Smart Cities ne soient pas réservés qu’aux étrangers. Il faudrait mettre un peu d’ordre dans 
ces compagnies de construction qui ne recrutent que des travailleurs étrangers. Un des actifs 
les plus importants en matière de développement est le capital humain. Et le Premier ministre 
actuel le sait très bien car il a toujours mis le mauricien au centre de tout développement. Le 
principal  actif  de  la  plupart  des  pauvres,  c’est  le  capital  humain.  C’est  pourquoi  je  crois 
fermement en cette nation mauricienne. C’est une nation de bâtisseurs. Nos ancêtres dans le 
passé nos enfants aujourd’hui! Faisons leur confiance et donnant leur les outils nécessaires 
afin  qu’ils  puissent  bâtir  l’île  Maurice  de  demain.  Cette  jeunesse  vous  a  fait  confiance  en 
décembre  et  il  ne  faut  pas  la  laisser  tomber.  En  investissant  dans  le  capital  humain  on 
redresse l’inégalité et ce faisant on réduit la pauvreté. Alors il est temps de prouver que tous 
nos  enfants  auront  une  éducation  de  qualité,  qu’ils  soient  scolarisés  à  Quatre  Bornes,  à 
Briqueterie, à Rose Hill, à Baie du Cap. Disons non à toute forme de favoritisme, de copinage 
ou de népotisme. 

The Minister should be very careful when he defines those 13 projects. Especially when 
he states that the Smart Cities will be designed to be environment friendly, will generate its 
own resources in terms of energy and water; will provide for state of the art connectivity; will 
provide smart transportation and reduce traffic congestion. 

 

55 

I  would  wish  to  comment  on  one  of  these  projects  which  is  found  in  Constituency 
No.14. This project has been there for quite some time. One can go and check the website:  
www.montroze.com. It has nothing to do with a smart city in its initial concept. It is defined 
as an IRS project with 34 villages, 48 apartments, tourist residence of 60 units and a shopping 
area. They are still looking for investors for the project although they have all the required 
permits. 

Il serait méchant de ma part de dire qu’ils sont en train de chercher des investisseurs 
avec une torche. Et comme je ne suis pas méchant, je dirais que de nos jours, il n’est pas 
facile de trouver des investisseurs. 

It is for this reason, Madam Speaker, that I would like the Minister, when he sums up, 

to let us have more information on the six projects, which are ready for implementation. 

Let me say a few words on the SME sector. I welcome the creation of an SME bank, 
but I would wish to know what will happen to the DBM. Concerning the measures for the 
SME  sector,  I  would  wait  for  the  implementation  of  those  measures  and  then  make 
comments. The reason is that year in and year out, we hear of measures for the SME sector, 
but when it comes to implementation, our entrepreneurs face a lot of difficulties. I would also 
want to see the one-stop-shop in action. I think it is a big mistake to let SMEDA manage the 
one-stop shop. They  do  not have the capacity to do so and on top of that, asking them to 
collect trade fees on behalf of local authorities will be another burden for them. I wonder who 
made that proposal.  

As far as transforming Port Louis harbour from a port destination to a regional hub, I 
sincerely believe that this is achievable. But here again, we should be careful. I wish that the 
Master Plan which is under preparation by the Mauritius Ports Authority be made public, so 
that,  all  stakeholders,  including  the  civil  society,  be  allowed  to  have  a  look  and  make 
comments.   

Concerning the restructuring of IRS and RES, I do not know what Government has in 
mind,  but  let  me  draw  the  attention  of  the  Government  to  a  situation  which  I  believe  is 
unacceptable. Government, in this Budget, has taken the decision to ban publicity on gaming. 
I  am  not  saying  that  Government  should  ban  publicity  related  to  IRS  and  RES,  but 
Government should exercise control on the contents of publicity related to IRS or RES. For 
example, again in Constituency No. 14, next to Ruisseau Créole, a promoter is advertising for 
the sale of Villas under an RES project to foreigners and he has put, in big letters or figures, 
the price of those Villas, 483,000 euros. And next to that billboard, there is a place called 
Camp Lacolle.  

 

56 

(Interruptions) 

This is serious! The place is called Camp Lacolle. Those families do not have water. 
We should not allow such things to happen; that is, having on a billboard the sale of a villa at 
483,000 Euros and next to that billboard, families without water supply. 

This does not send that image of Mauritius ‘c’est un plaisir’ to tourists visiting our 
country. Concerning the Agro-Industry and Fishing, I would just comment and say that I was 
surprised yesterday to hear from the hon. Minister responsible for Agro-Industry that almost 
10,000  hectares  of  land  have  been  abandoned  by  our  small  planters.  I  think  one  of  the 
solutions is, in the present Budget, that is, bio-farming. It can be a solution, but, I think, it 
will  require  a  lot  of  subsidies  at  the  beginning.  I  have  also  been  hearing  about  agri-solar 
farms for quite some years now. This is another solution, that is, in addition to bio-farming, 
the farmer is producing electricity, but there are no incentives in that direction in the Budget.  
The Minister responsible for energy is present.  Let me make a few comments with 

regard to the energy, water and wastewater sector.  

I will comment, first, on the electricity sector. This budget has not addressed such a 
vital sector of the economy and any developing nation builds its economy on a sound energy 
policy. Energy is vital and cannot be dissociated with GDP growth. If, as the hon. Minister of 
Finance says, we are at the crossroad, then the energy sector is also at the crossroad. There 
are  two  important  issues,  one  related  to  our  electricity  production  and  the  other  to  our 
environment. By putting aside the LRT project, we will definitely maintain our reliance on 
petroleum products for quite some time. Hence, it is more than required to abate our carbon 
dioxide emissions.  

We are today at one kilogram of carbon dioxide per kilowatt hour generated with a 
mix of energy comprising of 40% coal, 40% fuel oil, 15% bagasse, 4% hydro and 1% solar or 
renewable  energy.  The  long-term  energy  strategy  that  was  laid  down  by  the  previous 
Government  targeted  renewable  energy  to  35%  in  2025.  Today,  we  are  at  20%  renewable 
energy out of which 19 is hydro and bagasse. In other words, renewable energy, that is solar 
and  wind  energy  is  only  1%,  that  is,  from  2007  to  2015,  we  have  achieved  only  1%  of 
renewable energy related to solar or wind energy. At this pace, we will require 150 years to 
reach 35% of renewable energy related to solar and wind. How are we going to realise the 
ambition of a Smart Mauritius with such figures? This shows a clear failure of our energy 
strategy. This budget must make allowance for a clear energy strategy. Intentions and goals in 
the mind should be translated into clear mission and vision, then, proper strategy worked out 
to elaborate solid plans with realistic implemented schedules. It seems that Government has 

 

57 

once  again  obliterated  the  opportunity  to  redress  the  situation  in  the  energy  sector.  The 
situation of ‘laisser- faire’ is continuing without a driver in the seat. I think the hon. Minister 
replied to a question by the hon. Leader of the Opposition today morning and I have put in 
my speech that there is no Chairperson, no General Manager at the Central Electricity Board 
for the time being. But I need to congratulate the hon. Minister for the bold decision to abort 
the CT Power Project.  

(Interruptions) 

I said the CT Power Project. From the very beginning, I had said that I am against 
the  project  because  it  was  an  unsolicited  project.  We  have  wasted  nine  years  for  a  single 
project and during those nine years, we have been unable to tackle the energy problems in our 
country correctly. This should never happen again. Therefore, time has come to ask the CEB 
to update its integrated plan 2013 to 2022.  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Henry, please! 
Mr Lesjongard: We have to define our target for the future generation mix in light of 
current world trends and best practices. We heard about LNG and the pre-feasibility study 
was tabled by the former Minister. The question today is: what next? We also heard about 
studies  on  geothermal  energy.  Again,  no  outcome!  The  National  Energy  Commission 
produced the report. The Collectif l’énergie submitted a report to the Minister.  Again, what 
next?  There is also the project of 4x15 MW at St. Louis Power Station.  We have also heard 
recently of a project at Fort George. If I may say, in that sector, we are in total darkness. 

With regard to renewable energy, apart from investment in renewable energy system 

to be deductible… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jahangeer! Please, don’t interrupt! 
Mr  Lesjongard:  …from  chargeable  income.  What  incentives  are  there  in  this 

Budget?  Small planters and SIPPs have remained aux oubliettes. 

Do  we  think  that  CEB  alone  can  achieve  35%  renewable  energy?  No,  Madam 
Speaker.    We  have  to  move  fast.  The  Utility  Regulatory  Authority  is  still  not  operational.  
This Budget fails to redress some of the pertinent issues I have raised in the energy sector. 

The MID Unit has been dissolved. What about the MID vision today? Where is the 
MID Fund?  Where is the CEB contributing annually Rs300 m.? Renewable energy has been 
shifted  from  the  Ministry  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  to  the  Ministry  of  Environment, 

 

58 

Sustainable Development and Disaster and Beach Management. What is the rationale behind 
that? 

I  wish  to  refer  here  to  the  speech  I  made  in  2008  when  the  then  Government 
introduced  the  MID  concept;  et  c’est  toujours  d’actualité.  J’avais  dit  à  l’époque:  c’est  un 
vaste chantier.  The concept should not be linked only to energy problems.  C’est un modèle 
de vie. C’est de faire les Mauriciens vivre et mettre en pratique ce modèle de vie. It is also 
about  creating  jobs  for  the  people  of  our  country;  new  types  of  jobs.  We  have  known  the 
blue-collar jobs, then the white-collar jobs.  Now, it is time for the green-collar jobs, for the 
people of all walks of life. 

I said that seven years ago, and I am saying it again. Notre vision de ce concept de 
l’île Maurice Durable est limité, et c’est ça le problème. When I say it is about creating jobs, 
it  is  about  creating  jobs  such  as  Environmental  Consultants,  Biological  System  Engineer, 
Environmental Engineer, Green Building Architects, Solar Energy Engineers, Wind Energy 
Engineers, and Ecology Educators.  Not only for professionals, but also for manual jobs such 
as  Organic  Farmers,  Eco-Technology  Workers,  Eco-Electricians,  Eco-Plumbers,  Eco-
Construction Workers.  We are far away from that.  We have wasted a lot of time, Madam 
Speaker.  We should not… 

(Interruptions) 

 
That’s  why  I  am  saying  time  has  proved  me  right,  Madam  Speaker.    On  est  passé 
complètement à côté de la plaque. Maintenant, Monsieur le Premier ministre, la balle est dans 
votre camp. Allons voir ce que ce nouveau gouvernement va réaliser dans quelque temps. 

(Interruptions) 

Grid  for  smart  cities  has  been  announced  in  the  Budget.    One  of  the  mandatory 
conditions  is  that  they  will  produce  their  own  electricity.    Then,  if  this  is  the  case, 
Government  should  come  forward  with  a  new  strategy  for  the  energy  sector.  Wastewater 
projects!  Year in, year out, I have raised the issue of cost overrun on wastewater projects.  
Yesterday, we heard the hon. Minister.  I think it is high time.  There is a report, I brought the 
report, and I am going to give it to the hon. Minister.  That report dates back to 2011.  It is a 
very  clear  report.    It  states  that  from  2008  until  today  all  of  the  projects  that  have  been 
executed  by  the  Wastewater  Management  Authority  have  had  cost  overrun;  all  of  the 
projects, Madam Speaker. 

With regard to the water sector, one cannot talk of the water sector without talking of 
the Bagatelle Dam and the implementation of that dam which is costing the Mauritian people 
a lot of money. 

 

59 

Let  me  come  to  ‘Nation  Zougadère’.  I  definitely  welcome  these  measures.    It  was 
high time that we do away with those gambling activities, and I believe that the lobby must 
have been very strong.  I do understand that, as it involves a lot of money.  But I need to 
congratulate Government for those decisions.  Now, I wish to see the implementation of those 
decisions. 

Concerning horseracing, I put a question yesterday but, unfortunately, the hon. Prime 
Minister  could  not  reply  to  that  question.    I  believe  that  we  should  implement  the 
recommendations of that Commission of Enquiry before the start de la saison hippique in our 
country.  Players are waiting… 

(Interruptions) 

It  is  difficult,  but  it  is  not  impossible.    If  we  really  want,  like  we  say,  mettre  de 

l’ordre dans cette mafia, we should start now and not wait. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to allocation of State land, I am happy that decisions are 
now being taken.  Greater transparency should be there in the allocation of State land.  But, 
like we say, the proof of the pudding is in the eating.  We need to see, because we heard of 
people leaving this country with suitcases full of money after having sold land that belong to 
the people of this country. 

I  will  end  up,  Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  the  housing  sector  and  the  Marshall 
Plan  against  poverty.  There  are  some  measures  with  regard  to  the  housing  sector  which  I 
think  everybody  welcomes,  that  is,  the  increase  with  regard  to  the  casting  of  slabs, 
construction materials.  But, with regard to the construction of houses in the various regions 
of this country, I think we should be able to build more houses for those families who are in 
urgent need of a house. 

Concerning  the  Marshall  Plan  against  poverty,  I  do  not  think  Government  should 
remove all the guidelines - I think the previous orator said that - with regard to the CSR.  As a 
Government, you cannot put everything on the shoulders of the private sector.  This decision 
was not there in the Government Programme 2015-2019.  I am, therefore, urging Government 
to review that decision.  True it is that we need the private sector, but Government should 
keep control on what the private sector does.It has been proven that, with regard to poverty 
alleviation,  we  require  not  only  the  private  sector,  but  the  private  sector,  Government  and 
other stakeholders like NGOs in those various regions. 

Madam Speaker, I will end up here.  I have made my comments the way I usually do.  
Donnons le temps au temps.  Donnons la chance à ce nouveau gouvernement. Il y a beaucoup 
de bonnes intentions dans le discours, mais le temps nous dira si on a pu implémenter ce qui a 

 

60 

été prévu dans le budget.  C’est toujours comme ça.  La population attend toujours ceux qui 
gouvernent au tournant et le tournant viendra.  A ce moment-là on saura si au carrefour ou si 
à la croisée des routes, vous avez pris le bon chemin. 

Merci, Madame la présidente.  

(4.14 p.m) 

Mr  S.  Bholah  (Second  Member  for  Montagne  Blanche  &  GRSE):    Madam 
Speaker,  our  visionary  Budget  is  meant  to  bring  us  through  the  21st  century  with  a  bang.  
Each  and  every  citizen  of  this  nation  is  now  committed  to  an  economy  that  rewards  hard 
work, generates rising income and allows everyone to share in the prosperity of a growing 
Mauritius. 

As a great patriot, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, irrespective of his age, has stood up to save 
our  country.  We  are  shocked  by  every  day’s  saga  of  corruptions  that  are  being  revealed. 
During  the  last  decade,  when  people  had  no  food  at  home,  their  dues  were  being  shared 
through some golden handshakes, among a few friends. 

Madam Speaker, the people are the Government and the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has 
said  it  so  well  on  the  occasion  of  his  85th  birthday,  and  I  quote:  “The  people  are  the 
Government, they have sovereign power”. And they made the right choice some three months 
ago  and  we  shall  live  up  to  the  expectations.  I  can  say  with  confidence,  that  we  have  at 
present the best Government.  

Thanks  to  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth  and  his  team,  ‘a  feel  good  factor  ’reigns  in  the 
country right now.  Les Mauriciens ont retrouvé le sourire.  The frustrations that Mauritians 
were living in during the last decade have dissipated.  

This Budget is all set to help working families feeling more secure. Those who want 
to upgrade their skills can follow necessary courses, and hence, compete for higher-paid jobs. 
Bold actions and strategies will be taken to give a serious boost to the SME sector. Our local 
entrepreneur is embarking on a revolutionary journey. Entrepreneurship has now to evolve 
from a niche mind-set into a powerful, mainstream movement. We invite our people to share 
their business innovation because we are ready to talk business 

Madam Speaker, let me now come to the SME sector and the measures which have 
been announced in the Budget Speech. In the course of the electoral campaign, we had made 
it clear that our intention was to make the SME sector the backbone of the economy and to 
use it as an engine of growth. 

61 

 
In  the  Government  Programme  this  pledge  was  renewed  and  we  even  committed 
ourselves to allocate Rs10 billion to the sector over the next five years. The Budget Speech 
now is testimony that it was not mere rhetoric but sincere commitment. 

Let me make it clear to the House. Seeking to improve the competitiveness of SMEs 
is not only about understanding problems confronting businesses in the sector, it is also about 
a better understanding of how to overcome these barriers. This is why we maintain that we 
have made the correct diagnosis and applied the appropriate remedies. 

Madam  Speaker,  it  is  in  the  face  of  this  ordeal  that  many  potential  and  budding 
entrepreneurs give up after having tried hard to set up their own enterprise.  I have heard and 
read  multiple  comments  following  the  Budget  Speech,  that:  “We  do  not  have  an 
entrepreneurial culture”.  Therefore, this being the case, we are bound to fail and it implies 
that one of the pillars of the Budget was frail and fragile and would never yield the expected 
results. 

Academics, consultants and other self-appointed gurus are very fond of this kind of 
argumentation. It makes the headlines and gives them some unexpected visibility. However, 
let me take a trip down memory lane, and if we can scan the literature available we would 
find  the  same  rhetoric  popping  up  time  and  again.  When  we  moved  from  an  agricultural 
economy into an industrial one, did we have an industrial culture? 

When we created the free zone, was our labour prepared for this adventure? Were our 
investors  geared  towards  becoming  industrialists  and,  today,  we  pride  in  calling  them 
‘captains of the industry’. The same story goes for the move from an industrial economy to a 
service economy and eventually to a knowledge economy. 

However, despite all odds we have navigated the rough seas and today we are cited as 
an example around the world. This momentous change was brought about by the duo of Sir 
Anerood Jugnauth and Vishnu Lutchmeenaraidoo.  Today we have the same team, but with a 
more sophisticated vision, a committed Government and a ‘lepep admirab’. Together, I am 
convinced that we will succeed.  

Madam Speaker,  we know that there is a lot of compliance burden  confronting the 
SMEs. Hence, we are simplifying the business information process by lessening the current 
onerous regulations, reducing the plethora of licences and by providing mentorship. 

It is common knowledge that our local entrepreneurs face all sorts of problems in their 
daily activities and these include, amongst others, a poor understanding of tax, VAT, national 
insurance and bookkeeping, as well as difficulties in obtaining capital and the absence of a 
guaranteed income. They constantly have to battle against unfair bureaucratic, financial and 

 

62 

administrative  burdens.  It  very  often  looks  like  an  obstacle  course,  and  coming  out  of  it 
successfully is not given to anybody and if ever he comes out then he must be congratulated 
as a ‘commando entrepreneur’. Very often, they also point to the shortage of working capital 
as the prime cause of business failure. Lack of adequate start-up funds has a knock on effect 
restricting  development  and  growth  by  reducing  funds  available  for  activities  such  as 
advertising, publicity and acquisition of suitable premises. They also face issues such as the 
low  level  of  demand  for  their  products  and  services  as  well  as  the  nature  of  marketplace 
competition.  Many  nascent  entrepreneurs  also  express  concern  about  difficulties  in 
identifying and contacting potential customers. 

Madam  Speaker,  a  major  boost  that  we  are  giving  to  young  entrepreneurs  is  the 
possibility for them to obtain a loan from the SME bank without personal guarantee. In the 
past, entrepreneurs have repeatedly drawn attention that their projects are stalled or squarely 
failed just because commercial banks or other financing institutions did not trust them. We, as 
a Government, would like to demonstrate our act of faith towards young entrepreneurs. We 
are aware that some might fail but they will learn from their mistakes, while others have been 
hesitant. We have taken the bold leap ahead. The Budget 2015 is restoring the link between 
hard work and opportunity. 

Madam Speaker, we have adopted a bottom-up approach and listen to their sad plight 
and predicament.  What have we done?  We are creating an SME bank.  We acknowledged 
that this is not the easiest route, but we are confident that the creation of such an institution 
would be beneficial not only to the SME community but to the economy as a whole. An SME 
bank  would  specialise  in  creating  the  right  financial  instruments  and  schemes  to  meet  the 
demands of the SME community. It will give us the possibility for adopting novel approaches 
to meet unexpected challenges. In addition, the SMEs will not have to compete with larger 
corporation  to  ensure  funding.    The  larger  corporations  have  better  credit  rating  vis-à-vis 
commercial banks and they have preferential treatment. In the case of an SME bank that form 
of discrimination would not arise. I would say that it is a manna falling from heaven for the 
SMEs. 

As regards the working capital requirements, we have teamed up with the State Bank 

of Mauritius and they will assist young entrepreneurs with some special packages. 

Creation of one Stop Shop 
Madam Speaker, one of the most acute problems faced by entrepreneurs in general, 
and  SMEs  in  particular,  is  in  respect  of  licences  and  clearances.  A  number  of  permits, 

 

63 

licences or clearances required to set up a business or even to run and then later expand, is 
mind blowing.  It is a big deterrent. 

If we really want to create that “nation d’entrepreneurs”, we have no other solutions 
to take the bull by the horn and address this thorny issue. This problem is not new and may 
attempts have been made in the past to solve it or at least to minimise its effect. However, we 
have met with luke warm success not to say total failure in certain situations. I must point out 
that no one considers that he is to be blamed because where an institution regulates, it does so 
in the interest of the public. But over the years, the pile of regulations compounded from all 
institutions, have made it impossible to do business. 

Madam  Speaker,  we  believe  in  the  SME-friendliness.  The  SMEDA  is  expected  to 
play a major role in technical assistance and mentorship. SMEDA will have to work more 
efficiently in order to reduce the failure rate of business in Mauritius and equip businesses 
with the correct tools to grow. We have decided to use a big bang approach and extend the 
mandate of SMEDA so that it will henceforth operate as a One Stop Shop. It will act as a 
single window for all licences, permits and other clearances for entrepreneurs. 

SMEDA  will  assist  as  a  single  window  and  use  a  fast  track  mechanism  to  obtain 
approval for all licences. I am also pleased to inform the House that consultations are being 
held with the Mauritius Post Ltd. so that their network of 113 Post Offices could be used for 
the collection of dues to be paid by any entrepreneur to SMEDA which will then transmit to 
the regulatory authorities. 

In addition to the issue of licences and other clearances, SMEs have to travel through 
a  labyrinth  of  institutions  to  obtain  Business  Development  Services.  This  is  a  huge  hurdle 
which they have to overcome. 

The  One  Stop  Shop  will  house  under  one  single  roof  all  Business  Development 

Services which an entrepreneur requires. 

We are adopting a model which does not exist anywhere else and we are confident it 
will be a huge success. The challenge is huge. The task is gigantic. I am fully aware of the 
implications because work has already started and progress is underway. However, we are 
bound to succeed for one single reason. There is total commitment in all respect to adhere to 
the decision of Government and to make it happen. 

Cancellation of 32 licences and simplification of 38 others 
Madam Speaker, in addition to the One Stop Shop, we have also decided to relieve 
the  burden  of  the  business  community  by  removing  or  simplifying  around  70  permits  or 

 

64 

clearances. In this context, 32 permits will be cancelled and 38 others will be simplified. This 
adds to our efforts and commitment to ease the task of the business community. 

Increasing the VAT Threshold 
Madam  Speaker,  as  I  pointed  our  earlier,  the  SME  community  has  a  poor 
understanding  of  the  tax  administration  and  the  VAT.  Very  often,  they  find  themselves 
entangled in the process of registration and failure on their part result in payment of penalties. 
Many efforts have been done to ease their burden and we have now gone one step further. We 
have raised the threshold for VAT registration from a turnover of Rs4 m. annually to Rs6 m. 
annually. This measure will remove most SMEs outside the bracket of those compelled to be 
VAT registered. 

In addition to the increase of the VAT Registration Threshold, a major policy decision 
is  the  8-year  tax  holiday  for  enterprises  that  register  with  the  One  Stop  Shop.  A  similar 
measure was introduced in the 1980’s and the results were beyond expectation in terms of 
investment. Today, this measure is being tailor-made for SMEs and we expect that they will 
realise how far Government is willing to go to facilitate their activities. 

Industrial Parks 
Madam  Speaker,  acquisition  or  accessing  suitable  premises  for  SMEs  to  carry  out 
their activities is not within the reach of most micro and small enterprises. Many micro and 
small enterprises attempt to conduct businesses on their own premises at home. This results 
in  multiple  problems  for  themselves  and  their  neighbours.  At  times,  it  ends  in  tense 
relationship with their environment. In addition, they have to go through a lengthy process of 
obtaining permits from the local authorities and other licensing institutions. Government is 
fully  aware  of  these  issues  and  we  have  taken  the  bold  decision  of  providing  for  seven 
additional industrial parks adding up to the three already constructed. 

However, we are not going around in a haphazard way. Once we assumed office, we 
decided to have a Master Plan for the development of industrial parks around the country. 
The Master Plan is almost ready and once it is approved, industrial parks will be constructed 
in  accordance  with  the  demand  for  space  by  the  SMEs.  We  are  also  considering  the 
possibility of using part of the land available for the creation of site and services units. 

Madam Speaker, insofar as the handicraft sector is concerned, one important measure 
has been proposed. In fact, one of the major problems faced by our local artisans is the lack 
of  visibility  and  access  to  market  to  showcase  their  products.  In  this  budget,  provision  is 
being made for the Tourism Act to be amended so that all the tourist shops where destination 
products are sold, 20% of the space is reserved for products manufactured locally. There are 

 

65 

many such boutiques around the country. We have already inventoried the places where these 
boutiques are situated and amendments to the law will be proposed in the Finance Bill. We 
hope this will provide sufficient space for the local artisans to prosper. 

In  addition,  we  are  looking  into  all  MoUs  we  have  with  friendly  countries  such  as 
India, Pakistan and others and we want to use the facilities provided to us to bring master 
craftsmen who may improve the skills of our local artisans to open new avenues for them in 
terms of quality and new lines of products. 

Madam  Speaker,  my  Ministry  is  not  only  about  enterprise,  but  its  mandate,  as  its 
name  indicates,  is  about  business  as  well.  In  this  context,  we  are  thinking  seriously  about 
measures to boost businesses in general in Mauritius. 

Last year, we organised, for the first time, the National Inclusive Business Award. It 
was  a  success,  but  we  could  not  canvass  as  much  participation  as  a  Ministry  would  have 
wished. I have this year requested that we start the process earlier and work hard to secure the 
participation of as many businesses and enterprises as possible. However, I propose to set up 
at the level of my Ministry an Inclusive Business Unit. I am pleased to inform the House that 
an amount of Rs5 m. has been included in the budget for the organisation of the award and 
the setting up of this unit. We have also been promised the required human resources to man 
the unit. In fact, inclusiveness is the participation of one and all in the development of the 
country.  Government  is  making  considerable  efforts  in  transforming  the  mindset  of 
entrepreneurs  by  encouraging  enterprises  in  adopting  the  inclusive  business  model  so  that 
they can diversify, transform and grow their businesses in a sustainable manner. 

Participation in International Fairs SME Refund Scheme 
From 2012 to 2014, 318 enterprises have benefitted from the SMEs Refund Scheme for 
participation in International Export Promotion Events. As from this year, the scheme will be 
manned by SMEDA and an amount of Rs40 m. has been included in the budget. 

Madam Speaker, I have elaborated on the various measures we have proposed in the 
budget. These measures are there for the taking. It is now up to the entrepreneurs to use them. 
Some  of  the  sceptics  will  argue  that  there  have  always  been  an  array  of  measures  for 
enterprises and what is new. 

I  must  concede  that  what  they  say  is  somewhat  true.  But  the  difference  is  in  the 
approach.  We  have  held  various  sessions  with  the  entrepreneurs  and  the  most  critical 
assessment of Government policy comes from SMEs themselves. 

Over the last 20 years, it is estimate that there have been approximately 100 initiatives 
to support the improved competitiveness of SMEs, yet the take up rate has been low. Even 

 

66 

support programmes such as training and business health checks have rarely achieved more 
than a ten per cent take-up and often it is much less. According to the entrepreneurs, the main 
reasons for low take-up rates include: 

1. 

2. 

3. 

support providers do not understand the needs of owner managers’ businesses 
and therefore offer standardised support measures; 

SMEs  are  sceptical  of  solutions  based  on  large  firm  practices  which  are 
delivered through top-down support programmes, and 

the largely standardised top-down support may be administratively convenient 
but fail to recognise the heterogeneity of small firms. 

The limitations of policy provision and delivery are not necessarily an indication of 
a lack of demand for assistance. We have used a bottom-up approach and concentrated our 
efforts  on  providing  measures  that  target  SMEs,  recognise  their  needs  and  limitations  that 
they  face.  The  measures  we  have  proposed  are  not  magic  formulae  that  will  solve  all 
problems. We will have teething problems on our journey to success but we are willing to 
take up the challenge and solve the problems as they arise. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to clarify an issue regarding the 
coexistence of the SME bank and the DBM. My friends on the other side of the House, hon. 
Uteem and also hon. Lesjongard have today requested that I clarify the matter because of the 
confusion.  

Madam Speaker, there is nothing in the Government Programme nor in the Budget 
Speech which indicates that the DBM is going to close. The DBM, like every organisation, 
will have to reinvent itself in the new economic landscape that we are creating. Whether the 
DBM  will  continue  to  exist  or  not  is  a  major  policy  decision  but,  as  previously  stated,  I 
personally believe that the existence of one does not exclude the existence of the other. I also 
understand that the DBM has some Rs20 billion of assets of which Rs4 billion are account 
receivable. Besides that they have four subsidiaries and I will not step into the shoes of the 
Board or the chairman but they have to find ways and means in this competitive financial 
world to keep this organisation on a going concern basis. 

The Cooperative Sector 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, I shall now come to the cooperative sector. The cooperative sector is 
playing  an  important  role  in  the  economy  to  sustain  employment,  food  production  and 

 

67 

democratisation  of  the  economy.  The  movement  is  more  than  hundred  years  old  and  has 
admirably  shown  its  resilience  over  time.  Moreover,  cooperatives  build  triple  bottom-line 
sustainability as they enhance social, economic and environmental development. 

Sectors Serviced by Cooperatives 

Today, more than 30 different socio-economic activities are serviced by cooperatives. 
Cooperatives in Mauritius and Rodrigues consist of some 95,000 members grouped in some 
1,050  cooperative  societies  with  a  turnover  of  around  Rs5.5  billion.  The  main  economic 
activities  undertaken  by  cooperative  societies  are  production  and  marketing  of  sugarcane, 
potatoes cultivation, onions, fresh vegetables, livestock, fish, bus owners, consumer stores, 
handicraft, credit and savings. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  Cooperative  Business  Model  has  been  found  to  provide  a 
supportive  environment  for  women  and  youngsters  new  to  business  as  it  gives  them 
confidence and is capable of harnessing the skills and resources. It is also important to note 
that the movement has an important role in ensuring food security at the national level. Our 
Minister of Finance has both and it is a blessing for our small country. 

With  rapid  globalisation  and  the  changes  in  the  socio-economic  environment, 
cooperatives  have  to  operate  in  a  very  competitive  context  and  have  to  face  various 
challenges. The cooperative movement has stood up to this challenge and embarked on the 
path of economic transition towards becoming ‘cooperative entrepreneurs’. 

Madam Speaker, easy access to finance has for long been a major problem faced by 
the  cooperative  sector  as  well.  Cooperatives  being  a  component  of  SME  will  now  benefit 
from  the  wide  array  of  measures  recently  announced.  The  SME  bank  will  indeed  act  as  a 
catalyst for the development of the cooperative entrepreneurs. 

The Sugarcane Cooperatives 

Madam Speaker, the small planters’ community has suffered real hardship in the past 
10 years. It is only through their hard labour and painful efforts, grim energy, but resolute 
courage that some have been able to survive. The cooperative sector is regrouping some 155 
cooperative  credit societies who are cultivating  some 5600 hectares of land and producing 
some 350,000 tonnes of sugarcane. It is worth mentioning that over 50% of the sugar planters 
are from cooperatives. The reform in the sugar sector characterised by the drastic fall in the 
price of sugar has affected our sugar planters. The fall in the price of sugar from Rs17,500 to 
Rs12,400  has  a  major  impact  on  the  small  planters  who  are  struggling  with  the  ups  and 
downs of erratic economic situations. 

68 

 
Under the budgetary measures 2015-2016, Government has shown its great care and 
concern for the sugar cane planters’ community. Thus, necessary provision has been made so 
that  small  sugar  planters  producing  up  to  60  tonnes  of  sugar  will  be  given  a  one-off 
compensation  of  Rs3400  per  tonne  of  sugar  for  crop  year  2014  while  the  remaining 
categories will receive Rs2000 per tonne from the Sugar Insurance Fund Board (SIFB). 

Madam  Speaker,  all  the  necessary  support  will  be  provided  for  the  cooperative 
societies to grow their business and increase their revenue. The extent of market avenues will 
be expanded to provide a platform for the cooperative societies to sell their products. Under 
the  Cooperative  Improvement  Programme,  the  information,  education  and  communication 
campaign will be further strengthened to encourage newcomers in the cooperative societies 
and to consolidate the existing ones. Tailor-made courses will be dispensed to cooperative 
members in order to upgrade and add value to their products so as to fetch a higher price on 
the  market.  Specific  training  on  good  governance,  packaging,  computing  and  online 
submission  of  accounts  would  be  encouraged  to  keep  abreast  with  current  and  recent 
development.  

Madam  Speaker,  animal  breeders  grouped  in  cooperatives  are  breeding  cows,  pigs, 
poultry etc. They have been facing soaring cost of production as the percentage of the total 
cost for animal feed had greatly increased, particularly following the closure of the Richelieu 
Livestock  Feed  Factory.  Madam  Speaker,  this  Government  has  taken  two  bold  steps  to 
alleviate the burden of all breeders –  

(i) 

the DBM will waive all interests and penalties on loans of up to Rs100,000 to 
planters,  fishermen  and  breeders.  However,  this  will  be  subject  to  the 
condition of paying back their outstanding capital amount within a period of 
90 days. 

Madam Speaker, with my coming into office and following meetings and site visits I 
had with the federations in the cooperative sector, I had the opportunity to listen to the plight 
of many farmers. Moreover, cooperative federations also met the hon. Minister of Finance 
who has addressed several issues. The big farmers regrouped in the cooperative societies and 
federations had made several representations in the past to successive Ministers, but all the 
time, I must say that their grievances fell into deaf ears.  

Madam Speaker, it is this Government that finally took the bold decision, which was 
not  easy,  but  still  we  did  it,  to  waive  arrears  of  interests  and  penalties  on  loans  advanced 
under  the  Pig  Sector  Restructuring  Programme  to  the  pig  farmers.  Madam  Speaker,  this 

 

69 

Government  has  at  heart  the  fate  of  the  farmers  and  we  want  to  improve  the  farmers’ 
livelihood in a changing world. The subsidy provided for animal feed is doubled from Rs2 to 
Rs4 per kilo. Madam Speaker, if everyone is moving forward together then success takes care 
of itself. 

According  to  the  Food  and  Agricultural  Organisation  of  the  United  Nations, 
aquaculture  is  probably  the  fastest  growing  food  producing  sector  and  now  accounts  for 
nearly 50 per cent of the world food fish. Mauritius therefore cannot stay behind. Fishermen 
grouped  in  cooperative  societies  will  be  encouraged  to  embark  on  aquaculture  projects  to 
sustain a living through partnership with large operators. 

Bio Farming 

Madam  Speaker,  for  many  years  we  have  heard  that  pesticides,  insecticides, 
fungicides and other chemicals are adversely impacting on our health, but so far, we have not 
witnessed any bold measures. The cry of today is that our mother Earth is being exploited and 
polluted with agro chemicals and pesticides. It is high time for us to revisit the agricultural 
practices which ensure sustainability. Moreover, it is known that the food we consume has an 
impact on our health. Indeed the bio cultivation facility will encourage cooperative planters to 
rethink their way of cultivation and adapt practices which are bio friendly. 

The cooperatives have been avant-gardistes and we are proud to say that concerning 
this  problem,  cooperatives  have  already  embarked  into  bio  fertiliser  project  joint  ventures. 
The project, put up in collaboration with India, was launched in early February, 2015 by the 
Rt. hon. Prime Minister and is expected to grow with the announcement of the focus on bio-
production. 

Madam Speaker, where there is no vision, there is no hope. But this Government has 
both vision and hope.  Like a soldier, we fight long and hard for a cause. We want to have a 
healthier  population.    Thus,  this  Government  took  the  initiative  of  providing  assistance 
towards  the  promotion  of  organic  agriculture  with  the  introduction  of  a  “Bio  Farming 
Development Certificate”. 

It  is  known  to  everybody  that  the  cooperative  sector  is  traditionally  enshrined  in 
primary sectors. This new certificate which includes a package of incentives amongst which 
an 8-year tax holiday and exemption from various taxes and duties on importation of bio food 
inputs acts like a light in the tunnel. This will be a priority sector under the SME Scheme. 
The facilities provided under bio production will also encourage cooperative planters to align 
their cultivation towards sustainable agricultural practices. 

 

70 

Madam  Speaker,  the  journey  of  a  thousand  miles  begins  with  one  step.  Economic 
transition,  renovation  and  revamping  is  a  long  journey  for  cooperatives.  The  cooperative 
sector  regroups  some  2,500  vegetable  planters,  grouped  in  64  Agricultural  Marketing 
Cooperative Societies, catering for 70% of our local fresh vegetables. These cooperatives are 
willing  to  adopt  sustainable  agricultural  practices,  new  production  techniques  and  adopt 
hygienic sale of market produce. 

Madam Speaker, the Fair Trade certified label requires the use of practices that promote 
soil  conservation,  water  conservation,  reforestation,  species  diversity  and  environmental 
education. The standards also promote organic practices by prohibiting genetically modified 
organisms and certain agrochemicals. Fair trade offers small producers and workers a better 
deal and improves the terms of trade. It guarantees a minimum price which covers the cost of 
sustainable production and a fair trade premium to be used for economic, environmental and 
social development. 

Today,  the  sugar  sector  is  facing  major  problems  especially  with  the  reform  in  the 
sector and the decrease in the price of sugar. It is, therefore, imperative that we exploit the 
opportunities provided under fair trade so that we can ensure the sustainability of the sector. 
More cooperative societies will be fair trade certified and the products will be diversified. 

Madam  Speaker,  we  are  largely  dependent  on  imported  goods  and  this  trend  should 
stop  to  protect  our  local  jobs  and  to  keep  our  foreign  currency  in  the  country.  We  are 
convinced  that  the  initiatives  in  the  Budget  may  help  entrepreneurs  to  foray  into  new 
segments. 

Madam  Speaker,  because  of  time  constraint  again,  I  will  have  to  curtail  my 
intervention. I will just end up by talking on technology. Not all new businesses innovate and 
invest in high-tech though it is of vital importance in a company. It plays an outsized role in 
job creation. High-tech  and  ICT firm formations are becoming increasingly  geographically 
dispersed.  It’s  a  secret  to  none  that  technological  advancement  enables  the  production  of 
high-tech  goods  and  services  on  a  wider  basis.  High-tech  companies  around  the  world, 
innovate, improve operations and deliver value. Remember when you invest in technology, 
you keep up with industry changes; make full use of technology transfer opportunities and 
also explore various funding options. 
With this, I end up my address. 
Thank you. 
Madam Speaker:  I suspend the sitting for half an hour. 

 
At 4.44 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

71 

On resuming at 5.19 p.m with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 
Mr G. Oree (Second Member for Port Louis North & Montagne Longue): Madam 
Speaker, I feel honoured to address this House for the first time in the presence of so many 
hon. Members and particularly the super calibre politician, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Sir 
Anerood Jugnauth. 

Frankly speaking, I wanted to start my speech with a song because hon. Roopun told 
me  that  the  former  Minister  of  Arts  and  Culture  did  that.  But,  I  am  not  doing  it  simply 
because the song would be Soldat Lalit Militant and the hon. Leader of the Opposition is not 
here.  I  would  also  like  to  speak  in  front  of  hon.  Uteem  who  did  some  comments  about 
Bollywood  films.  I  would  advise  him  to  watch  a  Hollywood  film  ‘Doomsday  2012’  - 
Apocalypse now. 

(Interruptions) 

So,  I  will  take  it  again,  I  would  advise  hon.  Uteem  to  watch  this  film  ‘Doomsday 
2012’,  Apocalypse  now.  On  that  particular  film  we  learn  who  is  the  real  leader.    In  fact, 
everybody was rushing towards the giant, but the president died with his people in this planet. 
A real leader is the first one to come and the last one to go. A real leader sacrifices himself 
for others and does not sacrifice others for himself alone. The real leader is not on the other 
side, but sitting on this side. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, I am sure that we all agree that our country has been blessed by the 
visit of his Excellency ‘Narendra Modi Ji’ on the occasion of our national day. During his 
short visit he displaced and taught us so many lessons of friendship, love, respect, simplicity 
and  how  politicians  should  be  down-to-earth  despite  being  in  power.  For  me  the  lesson  is 
clear, before being a good politician or even a Prime Minister, one should become a good 
human being. The priority should always be to uplift the lower class. Power without grace is 
a  curse  and  this  budget  does  exactly  this.  People  should  always  be  at  the  centre  of  any 
Government action. Madam Speaker, we all know how water is vital for performing rituals in 
all communities, religions, places of worship and above all for each and every household and 
an individual in our society. I must salute the initiative which this Government has taken for 
offering a certain level of water free of charge to household. Monetarily this is insignificant, 
but it is a great step toward eradicating absolute poverty especially for those who don’t have 
the means. One can live without food, but not without water, water is life.  

72 

 
Madam Speaker, now allow me to speak about the adverse consequences of betting 
and  gaming in our society. All religions condemn gambling, but  I  would like to depict an 
example from ‘Mahabarata’. We all know that dice playing was the root cause of the battle. It 
lasted for 18 days in which 1.5 million warriors lost lives and only 12 survived. Lord Krishna 
who is in fact the reincarnation of Lord Vishnu guided Arjuna how to win the battle and to 
overcome all obstacles. Today the hon. Minister of Finance - allow me to say hon. Vishnu - is 
guiding us to clean up this social ill from our country. 

(Interruptions) 

Our forefathers came as slaves and indentured labourers and transformed this barren 
land  into  a  paradise  with  their  blood  and  sweat  and  they  have  always  taught  us  only  hard 
work will bring progress. Madam Speaker, we are here to be called a ‘nation travayer’ and 
not a ‘nation zougader’. The probability of winning in betting and gaming is very minimum 
compared to losing. Logically the winners are always the organisers; unfortunately the most 
deprived ones are most tempted for making easy money and eventually end up with losing 
everything. This causes frustration and leads them to get involved in illegal activities. The 
increase  in  gambling  activities  over  the  past  years  was,  in  my  opinion,  intentional.  The 
population  was  encouraged  to  live  in  dreams  and  illusions  rather  than  struggling  hard  to 
progress in life. It was a deliberate move to opiate the mass so that they may replete their 
coffers secretly. Madam Speaker, though the hon. Finance Minister has taken the step to go 
forward  with  a  high  investment  budget  to  steer  the  economy  which  will  generate 
employment,  still  the  deprived  ones  are  not  left  neglected.  He  has  set  up  a  Marshall  plan 
against poverty, this indicates a firm intention and dedication of this Government to uplift the 
poor and vulnerable ones. The most encouraging factor is that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
himself is involved and giving his full support and collaboration. 

With  a  population  of  only  1.2  million  and  being  the  most  economically  developed 
country in Africa; this island can surely erase poverty. With this Government gearing towards 
the concept of fairness, equity and social justice, I firmly believe that poverty will no longer 
exist in the immediate future.  

Madam Speaker, since years many businesses have been making supernormal profits 
through credit transactions. According to surveys and reports, the majority of household are 
indebted in this country. By reducing the rate of interest, this Government is providing relief 
to middle and lower classes and thus this budget reinforces consumer protection.  

73 

 
Madam Speaker, poor people do not pay much direct tax like income tax, but they 
greatly suffer from indirect taxes like VAT. By reducing VAT on certain services the burden 
of low income earners will surely be reduced - example on ‘SMS’.  

Madam Speaker, the introduction of the SME bank will act like a breath of oxygen for 
people  who  are  willing  to  start  their  own  businesses.  Very  often  we  find  people  who  are 
unemployed or want to start a business, but have insufficient fund or no capital at all. The 
setting  up  of  this  bank  will  certainly  fill  up  the  gap,  thus  giving  equal  opportunities  to 
everyone  who  wants  to  become  an  entrepreneur.  This  will  certainly  empower  people  to 
promote  self-employability.  Thousands  of  people  with  low  academic  qualifications,  who 
cannot obtain a job in the public sector or elsewhere would, without any doubt, benefit from 
this  situation  which  is  going  to  be  a  one-stop  shop.  Fishermen  and  small  planters  would 
equally  benefit  from  the  above  measures.  Madam  Speaker,  this  budget  is  further 
strengthening our Welfare State. As from now there are several Medi-Clinics and area health 
centres which are operational on a non-stop basis, people whether they are poor or rich would 
be benefiting from high quality health services free. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to stress on the social security facilities being extended 
by this Government. In my constituency the region like Roche Bois, Ste Croix, Cité La Cure 
which are termed as ‘régions défavorisées’ these people genuinely need social aid and decent 
accommodation. I am delighted by the measures taken in this budget, particularly, to make 
Social  Security  the  prime  concern.  The  cases  of  squatting  and  flood  victims  in  my 
Constituency would certainly be reduced. Generally this Government has kept up the promise 
of  relieving  poor  people,  reducing  costs  of  living  as  far  as  possible  and  increasing  the 
standard of living for the low income earners. The budget devoted to social security is the 
largest one. By spending so much we are translating into reality our commitment to cater for 
the poorest and the most vulnerable groups of our society. 

Madam Speaker, this is my maiden speech. I wish to share my personal experiences 
and opinion on current events and issues. I must say that I am deeply impressed and totally 
convinced  that  our  country’s  destiny  is  in  good  hands.  Allow  me  to  express  my  heartfelt 
congratulations  to  all  the  members  of  this  august  Assembly  and  specially  to  the  Rt.  hon. 
Prime Minister under whose inspiration and guidance, the hon. Minister of Finance has done 
a remarkable job by putting people at the very centre of development and, frankly speaking, I 
also appreciate the Members of the other side who have the courage to stay here and to listen 
to us even though they are not speaking today. I hope the sun will shine afterwards. 

 
Madam  Speaker,  let  me  tell  you  sincerely  what  my  son  told  me  during  the  last 

74 

election campaign when I had to prepare a budget to finance expenses. He told me –  

« Papa prend ène loan ta, après to pa pu coquin même ! » 

This is the common perception of our youth on politicians, in general, as they believe 
that politicians join politics mainly to fill up their safe. How can I deny him after what has 
been found and portrayed widely at Riverwalk recently? Madam Speaker allow me to refer to 
the Veda which states that – 

“One cannot become happy if one intends to become rich overnight by adopting any 
means,  one  obtains  happiness  only  through  hard  labour  and  just  means.  Money 
obtained  through  immoral  and  improper  means  will  destroy  the  entire  family  with 
one’s health and wealth. Wealth obtained through improper means will stay for ten 
years and as from the eleventh year onwards, the entire family is set on the path of 
ruins and destruction.’’ 
Madam Speaker, are we not witnessing this above quote from the Veda right now in 

this country?  

Now,  Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  seize  this  opportunity  to  speak  about  the 
Constituency  No.  4,  where  we  have  witnessed  so  many  dramas  and  swapping  of  elected 
candidates, Executive Members and political nominees from one Party to another. I am proud 
to tell you that despite all these swapping, it is only in Constituency No. 4 that all the three 
candidates of L’Alliance Lepep got elected with flying colours in Port Louis and set the trend 
of victory for other constituencies in rural areas. 

Madam Speaker, I was shocked to witness how in this 21st century, people are still in 
extreme poverty, deprived from the basic needs of life. For example, the condition of living 
of squatters at Cité la Cure is beyond imagination and, if this condition persists, it can give 
rise to social explosion.  Part of this Constituency consists of several mountain ranges and is 
thus prone to natural calamities such as landslide and flooding.  

I must tell you, Madam Speaker, my heartbeat increases whenever it rains these days. 
The situation becomes chaotic the next day at the Police Station and Social Security Office 
namely at Astor Court, because of the uncontrollable so-called sinistrés. These sinistrés are 
deliberately  women  and  children,  for  reasons  we  all  know  very  well.  Can  we  continue 
tolerating  this  situation,  Madam  Speaker?  Can  we  accept  our  Police  Officers  and  Civil 
Servants to be aggressed verbally and physically when they are on duty? Many of them are 
traumatised  and  want  to  be  transferred.  There  is  an  atmosphere  of  insecurity  that  always 
prevails  at  the  Social  Security  Office.  Gatherings  are  even  being  held  in  front  of  the 

 

75 

Government House nowadays. I must admit that there are also genuine cases which deserve 
the support of our Government.  

Why victims should further be victimised with unnecessary bureaucratic procedures if 
lepep is at the centre of every Government action? Why officers cannot go directly to victim, 
not  with  vouchers,  but  with  basic  needs  which  can  help  solving  the  problem  of  abuses. 
Madam Speaker, I must admit that in most cases vouchers are being given without any visit 
or  crosschecking  by  any  Police  Officers.  Most  of  our  Police  Stations  are  understaffed  and 
there is a lack of logistic and other facilities to react promptly. How can only eight officers 
conduct surveys for 500 victims at a time? I strongly believe that we must be proactive and 
need to have a special squad to tackle such cases.  

Madam Speaker, are our Police Officers fully trained for flood management? Why our 
Special Mobile Force Officers are often immobile at Vacoas Headquarters? I think an urgent 
restructuration programme should be implemented and the Disaster Management Team must 
be empowered, accordingly. We cannot allow a new case of death due to floods. Here, I must 
say  I  welcome  the  decision  taken  by  the  hon.  Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable 
Development and Disaster and Beach Management to effectively manage flood in Port Louis 
recently. We cannot wait for things to happen, but we must make things happen at the right 
time. According to me, in-depth surveys must be carried out by competent bodies in flood 
prone areas. Actually, there is no proper maintenance of drains and dredging of rivers. Very 
often, the Local Government is incapable to do the job as it should be. Most of the so-called 
drains are only one or two feet deep whereas floodwater rises to metres.  

Madam Speaker, cases of thefts are so common that they are not considered to be a 
serious  offence  any  more  in  Mauritius,  particularly  in  my  Constituency,  namely  at  Terre 
Rouge,  Ste  Croix  and  Roche  Bois.    Distribution  of  methadone  has  not  been  properly 
regulated and drug addicts openly move in the vicinity of Abercrombie Police Station and 
often  assault  passers-by.  Many  cases  of  robbery  are  purposely  not  reported  because  the 
victims often do not recover what they have lost and, on the other hand, reported cases take 
too long to reach a verdict. Moreover, the culprit very often receive VIP treatment in prison 
and often in certain Police Stations, habitual criminals are friendlier with Police Officers than 
with common people.  

Police  Officers  who  are  supposed  to  be  responsible  to  maintain  law  and  order  are 
themselves insecure. Most Police Officers hide their outfits after their working hours so as to 
be safer at bus stations and crowded area. I think our Police Officers must be treated with due 
respect and dignity, but, at the same time, I condemn without reserve any form of brutality by 

 

76 

them.  I  strongly  believe  it  is  time  to  bring  a  meaningful  change  in  our  entire  Police 
Department and I must say that the Abercrombie Police Force is at times unable to cope with 
the ever increasing number of cases. A new Police Force should be constructed in either Cité 
La Cure or Vallée des Prêtres.  

The Immigration Square is a very common place where we witness all sorts of illegal 
activities and sometimes violence. The bus shelters and main roads have been transformed as 
a marketplace, thus leaving the Central market deserted. Hawkers and ‘taxi marrons’ have 
their own codes of conduct who are, in fact, more powerful than patent holders.  

Madam  Speaker,  please  allow  me  to  speak  a  little  about  the  actual  situation  in  our 
schools. After working as an educator for 23 years in Private Secondary School, I must say 
that  there  are  serious  issues  in  regard  to  degradation  of  moral  values  and  increasing 
indiscipline at bus stops, inside the bus and in the school also. So much so that, last year, the 
Ministry  of  Education  and  Human  Resources  conducted  a  survey  on  colleges  and  schools 
willing to get Police assistance, but there was no follow-up.  

Our country is heading towards an ageing population and with only 13,000 children 
being  admitted  in  Standard  I  this  year,  as  opposed  to  a  normal  intake  of  25,000  over  the 
previous years, it is clear that many Private Secondary Schools may cease operation in the 
coming  years.  I  strongly  request  the  hon.  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources  to 
compensate stakeholders fairly and to redeploy redundant staff accordingly.  

Finally,  I  would  like  to  draw  your  attention  that  there  are  around  20,000  voters  in 
Constituency    Nos.  1,  2  and  3,  but  my  Constituency  which  is  geographically  larger  has 
49,000  voters.  Therefore,  I  think  the  electoral  boundaries  need  to  be  reviewed  for  a  fairer 
representation. 

To conclude, Madam Speaker,  I must say that this Budget is a historic one since it 
lays the foundation to transform our country and to stimulate the economy as a whole. At the 
same time, it contains measures to alleviate the poor and to bring sunshine and comfort in the 
life  of  the  underprivileged.  Being  a  teacher  in  economics,  I  must  say  that  this  is  a  rather 
difficult task, but I must salute the courage of the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development  for  having  taken  the  risk.  He  has  been  able  to  strike  the  balance  between 
economic development and social justice. I should also express my sincere apology to anyone 
who may have felt offended and hurt by my comments as this has never been my intention.  

Madam Speaker, I wanted to be sincere to myself and spilt out whatever I had in my 
heart.    Before  shifting  to  my  last  words,  sincerely,  I  want  to  say  that  the  situation  in  our 
universities is very bad. So much so that parents with daughters don’t want to send them to 

 

77 

universities. Nobody cares! If you want to experience it, just go at University of Mauritius. 
On the left-hand side you have the Open University which has a main gate but, on the right-
hand side, the University of Mauritius is gateless. You can come from any side or you can 
come at any time. So, why every time it is ‘après la mort la tisane’? 

Allow me to quote this saying of Mahatma Gandhi, because each time having seen 
them on the other side either looking down or laughing, but let me tell them, when we close 
our eyes, we better concentrate.  

“First they ignore you, then they laugh at you and then, you succeed.” 
Madam Speaker, one day I hope to hear this from my son - 
« Papa, pas tous politiciens qui travay pou rempli zot poches, encore ena politiciens 
honnête dans sa pays la couma Sir Anerood Jugnauth. Suive so pas. » 
Thank you. 

 (5.42 p.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Social  Integration  and  Economic  Empowerment  (Mr  P. 
Roopun): Madam Speaker, allow me, at the very outset, to congratulate hon. Oree for his 
maiden speech. I am told that he is an accomplished Ramayan chanter and I am sure that one 
of these days we will be able to discover his singing talent in some other quarters. 

Let me join in with the other orators to applaud and congratulate the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister  and  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  for  this  very  first 
Budget of l’Alliance Lepep. 

I shall not delve lengthily on each and every aspect of this Budget nor unnecessarily 

repeat what the previous orators have already highlighted. 

In  a  nutshell,  I  wish  to  emphasise,  however,  that  in  this  budget  there  has  been,  as 
promised,  no  additional  burden  on  the  country  in  terms  of  taxes.  We  have  also  not  only 
maintained  all  support  which  were  already  being  provided  to  the  common  people,  but  we 
have  supplemented  these  by  yet  a  few  others.  Just  to  take  a  few  examples,  the  six  cubic 
meters of free water every month, decrease in interest rates for purchases under hire-purchase 
schemes, the setting up of SMEs parks, SMEs banks.   

We  all  know  that  a  budget  is  much  more  than  an  accounting  exercise  and,  here,  we 
have  got  a  budget  the  main  philosophy  of  which  is  to  forge  a  large  consensus  around  the 
Government programme.  I have no doubt that this has now been achieved as we have now 
the support of all economic and social actors and we are now on the right track in developing 
a new economic order that will set the pace for a more compassionate, inclusive and fairer 
society which will ultimately culminate into a second economic miracle. 

 

78 

I  must  say  that  since  we  assumed  office  some  100  days  ago,  we  have  been  able  to 
create new hope and renewed confidence amongst the population generally. It was, however, 
vital  that  this  wave  of  confidence  and  this  feel  good  factor  transcend  all  sectors  of  the 
Mauritian  society.  There  is  now  a  general  adherence  by  Mauritians  from  all  social  and 
economic  backgrounds,  there  is  a  general  feeling  that  the  interests  and  aspirations  of 
everyone have been taken care of and nobody has been side-lined.  

Madam Speaker, it was crucial to create this climate that everyone is being taken on 
board. As we know, in certain quarters, more especially within the business community and 
the private sector, after the surprise of the result of the December election, there were some 
apprehensions. It was feared that in the quest to counterbalance for the additional pressure on 
the Exchequer caused by the increase in social allocations and the salary compensation some 
major fiscal adjustments were inevitable.  

This  fear  about  the  state  of  our  public  finance  was  further  exacerbated  by  the  sheer 
number of skeletons which were found in the cupboards of the various Ministries in this short 
span of time.  

Just to take the case, Madam Speaker, of the outgoing Minister of Public infrastructure 
will be quite revealing.  Minister Bachoo was not only one of the Vice-Prime Ministers, but 
he was also the most experienced Member of  the then Cabinet, considered to be the most 
performing  and  whom  the  previous  Prime  Minister  has  more  than  one  occasion  publicly 
congratulated.  You  have  just  to  take,  for  example,  the  Audit  Report  of  2013  to  know  the 
frasques of hon. Bachoo.  I quote - 

“Over the past years, NDU has undertaken more projects than were initially planned in 
the budget, but the financing requirements were not duly assessed. In many occasions, 
the NDU did not comply  with the provisions of the Public Procurement Act and the 
Public Procurement Regulations.” 

Out of 49 projects, Madam Speaker, 17 contracts amounting to not less than     Rs 
284.8  m.  were  allocated  without  any  tendering  exercise.    The  NDU  has  incurred  total 
expenditure of some Rs1.71 billion. 

A  budget  of  Rs225  m.  approved  for  the  Land  Drainage  Watershed  Management 
Programme ended with an amount of Rs1.16 billion being spent which represents an overrun 
exceeding 400% and we all realise in what state the NDU was left after the passage of the 
previous Government.  

 

79 

This gives us an idea of how money has been squandered if we add up this with the 
Bagatelle  Dam  saga  where  there  has  been  an  increase  in  the  initial  cost  by  Rs1.71  billion 
representing 58% of variation. 

The Ring Road saga where a road which leads to nowhere and never used has collapsed 

while the amount spent thereon initially estimated at Rs950 m. reached  Rs1.4 billion. 

(Interruptions) 

Last but not least, we have inherited the Verdun-Terre Rouge project. Not only did the 
project  show  a  cost  overrun  of  some  43%  jumping  from  Rs2.3  billion  to  reach  about  Rs4 
billion, it has yet to be determined whether remedial works can be undertaken to render it 
safe and what will be the cost implication and whether this project is altogether affordable.  

This  is  only  one  Ministry,  but  we  know  the  situation  elsewhere;  at  the  MBC,  for 
example,  with  accumulated  debts  reaching  Rs1  billion,  the  scandalous  payment  of  Rs5  m. 
only to the former Director General on his leaving on a ground of conscience, as he put it.  
The Betamax jackpot was, for the last years, a sum of Rs1 m. every day being encashed. 

In this context, we cannot make abstraction to the 76 overseas trips of the former Prime 
Minister which has cost Rs200 m. of public funds. On some occasions, for one single day 
spent abroad over Rs1 m. have been spent.  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Jhugroo, please! 
Mr Roopun: This gives us an insight of public money which has been squandered or 
lavishly spent without any benefit for the country. In the same vein, while referring to the 
millions found in the coffers of the previous Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth talked 
about “100 jours pour le voleur et un jour pour le maître.” We all know what we found in 
one day, but it is most unfortunate that even the best inquiring team in the world will not be 
able to give us a fair estimate of the frasques of this voleur for all those days that run from 
2005 to 2014. 

Madam Speaker, we don’t know yet what other scandals will be unearthed in days to 
come.  Only  yesterday,  we  heard  hon.  Collendavelloo  talking  about  the  case  of  the 
Wastewater  Management  Authority.    We  also  heard  about  this  ‘ghost  committee’,  ‘la 
démocratisation de l’économie’ where we had Rs2.2 m. spent.  

(Interruptions) 

All these which I have just stated are in the public domain, but it was important for us 
 
to  highlight  these  because  there  were  certain  Members  in  this  House  who  were  utterly 
surprised that we are spending less on a few items, but we could not do otherwise.  We are 

 

80 

bound to come with a responsible and balanced budget.  I must say that we have a mandate to 
clear up wherever there were abuses. We have faith that the population knows that whatever 
we have done in this budget is yet the beginning of a long period which will eventually lead 
us to a renewed economic miracle. 

Allow me, Madam Speaker, to now come on certain issues pertaining to my Ministry, 
especially on two aspects which have lately been subject to much debate. As we all know, 
Mauritius is among the few countries where we have a dedicated Ministry working towards 
the upliftment of the poor and the vulnerable.  

The  role  of  my  Ministry  is  to  coordinate  Government  policies  and  activities  of  all 
national agencies engaged in poverty alleviation and designed to ensure implementation of all 
such Government policies. 

I wish to point out that the fight against poverty is not the sole responsibility of this 
Ministry. This scourge is multidimensional and involves different Ministries. I am happy that 
all relevant ministries are fully aware of this and give their support in that sense. 

This  Ministry,  as  we  all  know,  was  created  in  2010  and  was  headed  by  the  actual 
Deputy Prime Minister, hon. Xavier-Luc Duval. I must say that, at that time, it was a driving 
force towards the fight against poverty. In fact, all programmes presently in place had been 
designed  during  that  initial  period.  It  is  unfortunate,  however,  that,  in  2011,  when  my 
predecessor took office, he took a backseat and there was no more coordination among the 
various ministries and no follow up regarding implementation of the previous Government 
programmes and the Ministry ultimately fell into oblivion. 

I  wish  to  emphasise  that  my  intention  is  again  to  make  the  Ministry  of  Social 
Integration and Economic Empowerment the  focal point of all activities related to poverty 
alleviation. Since I assumed office, I have enlisted the support not only of NGOs and partners 
of  the  private  sector,  but  also  had  intensive  consultation  with  several  of  my  colleagues, 
including the Minister of Education, insofar as students who failed CPE but are not following 
pre-vocational courses designed for them. I also had brainstorming sessions with the Minister 
of Social Security in regard to the harmonisation of the Social Register of Mauritius and also 
regarding best ways to come in support of victims of flooding. I had consultations with all 
Private  Parliamentary  Secretaries  with  a  view  to  enlist  their  support  for  a  more  concerted 
action on the ground.  

81 

 
Similarly, I visited various pockets of poverty. Only, last week-end, I was in the south 
along with MPs of the region to take stock of the situation on ground and to consider the best 
ways to proceed further. 

Insofar as CSR guidelines are concerned, Madam Speaker, I must highlight that the 
CSR  Committee,  falls  under  the  aegis  of  the  Ministry  of  Finance.    It  has  been  decided  to 
remove guidelines, but the reason behind it is not to give freehand to all CSR Companies, but 
designed to remove various administrative hurdles which were causing lot of difficulties for  
effective intervention on the ground. 

I must say that I have myself received representations from various quarters regarding 
the  need  to  review  CSR  guidelines  and  we  wish  that  the  elimination  of  all  red  tapes  and 
administrative hurdles will enable CSR companies to operate in a more serene atmosphere. 
The fact that we are eliminating guidelines should not be read in isolation. We have under 
paragraph 175 of the Budget the philosophy under which the CSR Fund has been created and 
it is under this philosophy that we should now view the elimination of the CSR guidelines as 
mentioned under paragraph 180. Needless to say that philosophy is deeper and stronger than 
guidelines and we have trust that the CSR companies will have a meaningful partnership with 
the  Ministry  in  the  fight  against  poverty.  I,  personally,  have  no  doubt  that  they  will  act 
responsibly and within the parameters of paragraph 175. It goes without saying, however, that 
we will have a close follow-up of the situation as they unfold and adjustment, if any, will be 
done if the need is felt. 

Another issue which has raised lots of controversies is the concept of “parrainage” 
which the Government wants to promote. Up till now, funding of actions on the ground has 
been on a project based basis and each year both CSR Companies and NGOs had invariably 
to  apply  to  the  CSR  Committee  for  their  projects  to  be  approved.  There  has  been  no 
integrated approach regarding the fight against poverty. Upon assuming office, I discussed 
lengthily with various stakeholders and advocated a more integrated approach whereby my 
Ministry  together  with  CSR  companies,  NGOs  and  the  beneficiaries  themselves  work 
together and conduct a socio-economic survey to determine in each pocket of poverty what 
are the different fields of interventions. We will endeavour to develop a medium and long-
term partnership so that our interventions are result-oriented instead of being project-oriented. 

Government’s approach to the adoption of pockets of poverty by private companies 
under CSR is, in fact, a very daring and courageous initiative.   Demagogy apart, Government 

 

82 

is more concerned in creating the right synergy and appropriate landscape for a better future 
and lead the country on the high-income path by mainstreaming the vulnerable citizens. In 
this  respect,  the  House  may  take  cognizance  of  the  budget  outlays  of  various  Ministries 
namely Social  Integration, Social Security, Gender Equality, Housing and Lands. We have 
got  also  a  long  list  of  various  programmes  under  those  various  Ministries  which, 
unfortunately,  I  won’t  be  able  to  highlight  here.  I  am  sure  that  hon.  Members  during  the 
Committee of Supply will be able to seek clarification on them and find out what is being 
spent  on  poverty  alleviation  by  different  Ministries.  I  must  add  it  is  utter  bad  faith  to  just 
come  with  a  particular  programme  and  say  that  we  are  just  privatising  the  combat  against 
poverty. We know that. Every Government, even before 2010, has through various Ministries 
been  doing  a  lot  for  the  poor.    On  one  particular  programme  which  we  want  to  conduct 
differently, there is a fuss, but we are fully aware that poverty alleviation is and has always 
been  dealt  with  by  various  Ministries,  even  more  specifically  in  terms  of  amount  by  the 
Ministry of Social Security. 

I would therefore wish to reassure that it is fallacious to interpret that Government has 
the intention to outsource its commitments on the fight against poverty or to privatise poverty 
eradication. I consider that selective amnesia has gained ground since the introduction of the 
concept of “parrainage”.  Hon. Uteem was talking about the 38 pockets of poverty. I think 
that hon. Manish Gobin explained it in a few words. It has never been the contention of this 
Ministry or this Government that we have got only 38 pockets of poverty. In fact, these 38 
pockets of poverty come out of a long list which my Ministry forwarded to the Ministry of 
Finance in the context of the Budget. And out of this list, the Minister of Finance took an 
indicative  list  of  38  pockets  of  poverty  where  there  will  be  a  new  approach  which  is  the 
approach of the ‘parrainage’. All other programmes which have existed, be it in my Ministry 
or in other Ministries, are being implemented. Funds are available and there is no reason to 
doubt one second that we are just outsourcing our fight against poverty.  

I wish to repeat, for the information of hon. Uteem, that we should have a long-term 
vision about poverty alleviation. Poverty alleviation is not a combat which we can win in a 
span of one or two years. It is a long process. It needs a continued approach. What we want is 
to give a certain appartenance of these programmes. This concept of ‘parrainage’ will help 
us to be more effective on the ground. We are going to have a company with the support of a 
few  NGOs  doing  the  work  on  the  ground,  knowing  exactly  what  should  be  done  and 
accompanying the work over the period of a few years and we will be able to know whether it 

 

83 

is effective, what remedial and corrective action should be undertaken so that we can deliver. 
We are trying it on 38 pockets and I am sure that if this gives results, in years to come, we 
will try to adopt this same policy for other regions. 

I must say that this is not something new. This integrated approach existed before 
when we had the programme for the eradication of absolute poverty. A committee comprising 
of NGOs and social workers meeting regularly and monitoring the situation on the ground 
and taking corrective measures. This is what we want to bring again. 

Madam Speaker, poverty being complex and multi-facetted, its eradication cannot be 
done overnight.  We are, therefore, bound to bring meaningful changes in the mindset and our 
poor people who, I am sure, realise that they will also be engaged in this fight and this will 
eventually lead to their empowerment and ultimate integration in the mainstream strategy.  

Insofar as the NEF is concerned, Madam Speaker, as stated in my intervention during 
the  vote  of  thanks  on  the  Presidential  Address,  I  highlighted  that  the  restructure  of  the 
National Empowerment Foundation is one of the top priorities of my Ministry. I must add 
that I was personally appalled by the situation I saw at the NEF and there was total lack of 
leadership.  We  are  taking  measures  to  redress  the  situation  as  early  as  possible.  Several 
misgivings have been noted when I took over and various authorities have been requested to 
carry out inquiries. I must say that since public funds are involved, those who have faulted 
should  be  held  to  account.  The  Public  Sector  Efficiency  Bureau  has  already  started  a  pre-
audit exercise and we hope to have recommendations which will help us to reorganise more 
effectively the NEF. Just to cite an example of the state of affairs at the NEF, the House may 
wish  to  note  that  the  NEF,  which  is  a  registered  company,  has  not  published  its  Annual 
Report since 2010.  I  consider it to be a very serious matter and we are taking  appropriate 
actions against all those who are responsible for such misgivings.  

As my Ministry will be in the forefront of the fight against poverty, I am setting up a 
Poverty  Observatory  at  the  level  of  my  Ministry  to  create  a  permanent  and  independent 
platform  for  all  relevant  stakeholders  to  sustainably  address  the  issue  of  poverty  in  all  its 
forms. It will also act as an advocacy group in the fight against poverty and create linkages 
with the SADC Regional Poverty Observatory for sharing of information and best practices. 
The Poverty Observatory will also conduct regular surveys and publish relevant reports on 
poverty. I am expecting that the Observatory will be operational by July 2015. 

With  a  view  to  ensuring  maximum  outreach  for  deserving  vulnerable  families,  my 
Ministry has, in consultation with the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development and 
the Ministry of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions, decided that only 

 

84 

eligible beneficiaries registered under the SRM will henceforth benefit from NEF Schemes 
and also under the ‘parrainage’ concept. This will also enable my Ministry to have a national 
database of vulnerable households living below the poverty threshold.  This measure will also 
instill a fair and transparent process and at the same time ensure judicious use of public funds 
as well as an effective tool to measure poverty cycle. 

A Monitoring and Evaluation Unit will also be set up at my Ministry. Only yesterday, 
hon.  Jhugroo,  during  a  parliamentary  question,  raised  this  issue  and  I  must  say  that 
henceforth,  whatever  programme  is  being  done  at  the  level  of  the  NEF  will  be  monitored 
closely by my Ministry. I must say that insofar as the Training and Placement Programme run 
by the NEF is concerned, I noted with dismay that previously, training and placement was not 
specifically meant for our poor clientèle below the poverty threshold. There was no follow-up 
undertaken to ascertain that the most deserving vulnerable are really empowered for a better 
economic livelihood. This status quo has been challenged and henceforth, the Training and 
Placement Programme will focus on NEF beneficiaries as elaborated at paragraph 60 of the 
Budget Speech for those academic qualifications which are meaningful in terms of training 
and  placement  and  also  for  those  who  have  failed  the  CPE  and  have  got  some  problems 
insofar as their academic performance is concerned. 

I wish to conclude, Madam, by stating that vulnerable families may rest assured of the 
unflinching support of Government to respond to their plight. I wish to announce that very 
shortly  a  helpdesk  will  become  operational  at  the  level  of  my  Ministry  for  registration  of 
complaints and prompt intervention and equally help CSR companies willing to intervene and 
join hands in our fight against poverty. 

With these few words, Madam, I wish to thank each and every one for their attention. 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Baboo! 

(6.12 p.m.) 

The Minister of Arts and Culture (Mr S. Baboo): Madam Speaker,  allow me to 
congratulate the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development firstly for the brilliant 
presentation of the first Budget of the new Government covering two different financial years 
and secondly, for shifting the complex Programme-Based Budgeting to a simpler approach 
which is the Performance-Based Budgeting; a budget that also bears of the imprints of our Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth. He has made sure that the voice of all colleagues 
Ministers and all those who massively rallied to his call for a modern and clean Mauritius are 
echoed  in  this  Government  Budget  for  achieving  meaningful  change.  It  is  indeed  the  first 
time in the history of Mauritius that a ‘feel good factor’ started right from the first day of the 

 

85 

new Government. We are also proud that the concerns of the Deputy Prime Minister, hon. 
Xavier-Luc Duval, regarding social inclusion have been taken on Board. 

Donc,  Madame  la  présidente,  les  années  changent,  mais  fort  heureusement,  ne  se 
ressemblent pas car nous avons proposé à la population un budget qui fait la part belle à la 
justice sociale et le développement dans l’égalité, tout en consolidant les fondamentaux de 
notre économie. D’ailleurs, l’accueil chaleureux fait à ce budget par toute la population, dans 
son ensemble, en dit long sur sa portée. 

This Budget is not just another lacklustre and monotonous accounting exercise focusing 
on deficits and ways to  plug them; rather this is a  Budget that speaks the language of the 
common man and addresses his concerns. It is a Budget for the people. This is why we did 
not introduce any tax for the common man. We have made sure that they are better off at the 
end of the day. As we want to ensure that they have more disposable income, we have taxed 
those  businesses  that  defeated  this  very  purpose  and  ultimately  plagued  our  society:  the 
‘nation zougadère’. 

This  budget  reflects  our  sincere  sense  of  commitment  and  patriotism  as  well  as  our 
determination  to  translate  the  Government  Programme  into  concrete  actions.  The  strategic 
objectives of this Government are to provide a quality service to the population, development 
of  infrastructure,  good  governance,  promotion  of  the  creative  industries,  reform  in  the 
education sector, housing, ICT development, cultural tourism, agricultural reforms and nation 
building. 

We are in the 15th year of this century. We have to face a lot of new challenges. The 
world  economy  is  not  growing  as  predicted  and  developing  countries  are  in  the  grip  of 
uncertainties.  There  is,  therefore,  a  pressing  need  for  a  radical  change  in  attitudes  and 
mindsets. We need innovative ideas and a willingness to shake up bad habits of the past in 
order to live up to the challenges of the third millennium. 

Madam Speaker, this Government has the mettle to change the situation. We have  a 
new breed of politicians leading the country, ready to quench the thirst of the population. And 
this is reflected in the Budget which highlights the importance of making strategic choices on 
revenue mobilisation and spending while maintaining the macroeconomic balance to enable 
sustainable  growth,  job  creation  and  the  alleviation  of  poverty.  It  is  a  fact  that 
macroeconomic  stability  will  enable  the  Government  to  strike  a  proper  balance  between 
development initiatives and a social cohesion.  

This  Budget  recognises  the  dignity  of  the  people  and  its  philosophy  is  to  place  the 
individual  at  the  forefront  of  the  development.  Therefore,  a  people-centric  approach  to 

 

86 

development has been adopted to stimulate sustainable change: we have listened to people, 
considered  their  needs  and  aspirations,  chalked  out  a  work  plan  together  and  we  are 
constructing their future. 

Madam Speaker,  as promised in our electoral  manifesto, we are tackling the setback 
faced by unemployed graduates as a result of the mismatch between their training and job 
market  requirements.    The  only  realistic  way  to  bridge  this  gap  is  through  further  skill 
development in line with market realities.  Government has thus made a budgetary provision 
of Rs80,000 per graduate in order to enable them to enhance their skills and become ready for 
employment possibilities.  

Madam  Speaker,  the  Budget  provides  for  another  essential  dimension  of  human 

development, the preservation and promotion of arts and culture.  

Today, it is acknowledged that the creative industries represent an important economic 

pillar with the potential for creating jobs and giving a boost to artistic creativity.  

Our pluricultural environment and heritage are the keys to unleashing our imagination 
and creative abilities. It is essential today to encourage creativity and innovation in pursuit of 
equitable, sustainable growth and development. 

Culture is a driver and  enabler of sustainable human development as it is led by the 
growth  of  the  creative  economy  supported  by  the  creative  industries.  Madam  Speaker, 
according to the United  Nations Conference on  Trade and  Development Report of 2013,  I 
quote – 

“The creative economy is not only one of the most rapidly growing sectors of the 
world  economy,  but  also  a  highly  transformative  one  in  terms  of  income 
generation, job creation and export earnings”.  

Madam Speaker, hence investing in culture and the creative sector as a locomotive of 
social development can lead to the overall well-being of the population. Human creativity and 
innovation  are  the  true  wealth  of  a  nation  today.  This  Government  is  committed  to 
strengthening  the  business  and  managerial  skills  of  cultural  actors  for  inclusive  social 
development.  The  participatory  approaches  and  active  involvement  of  artists,  creators  and 
performers in policy making process will definitely enhance the quality of life of all partners. 
Madam Speaker, our heritage industry will be given a new dimension in symbiosis with 
the growing tourism industry. Monuments and museums are being increasingly recognised in 
the world as important sources of income. They have an active role to play in the economic 
development of a country. The Budget has provided adequate funds for the restoration and 
maintenance of our national heritage sites. Our museums will be given a new orientation and 

 

87 

will be made more attractive. The potentials of our two world heritage sites will be optimised. 
The Boards of both institutions will be called upon to come up with a realistic plan of action 
on how to bring tourists and Mauritians to the sites. While it is essential that our people must 
know their history, it is equally important to showcase this to our foreign visitors.  

The  diversity,  plurality  and  vitality  of  cultural  expressions  in  Mauritius  are  a  direct 
blessing from the Almighty. The pride of our nation lies in artistic and cultural development 
and the ability to harness our heritage for the welfare of the people. 

I would like to extend once more, my heartfelt thanks to the Deputy Prime Minister, 
hon.  X.  L.  Duval,  for  his  commitment  to  ensuring  that  the  Ministry  of  Tourism  works  in 
tandem with my Ministry to kick-start cultural tourism. To that end, he has agreed, amongst 
others, to the creation of an espace artistique at La Citadelle. The project will contribute to 
the conservation, promotion and protection of this National Heritage while, at the same time, 
creating avenues for employment of artists and opportunities for cultural entrepreneur. The 
potentialities  flowing  from  the  convertion  of  La  Citadelle  into  an  espace  artistique  are 
enormous. Our artists and performers will be given the opportunity to display their talents 
daily adding to their sources of income. Tourists and Mauritians will be given the opportunity 
to appreciate the Mauritian genius. Organised tours and visits will be arranged every day. We 
have  to  cultivate  a  longer  term  interest  in  arts  and  make  maximum  use  of  existing 
infrastructures while bringing the arts to the people.  

Madam Speaker, entrepreneurial skills development is essential in the promotion of 

the creative industry. It will be based on the following -  

•  Strengthening  the  role  of  artists,  creators  and  performers  through  awareness 

raising, training and specialisation.  

•  Developing entrepreneurial capabilities by imparting a better  understanding 

of the creative industries.  

•  Sharing of experiences and knowledge networks and partnership.  
•  Providing technical tools to function in the industry. 
•  Elaborating of business plans.  
•  Negotiating skills with banks and sponsors.  
•  Developing of a market strategy.  

Our  artists,  performers  and  creators  will,  therefore,  be  empowered  to  lead  their 
enterprise to a successful destination - the consumers of Cultural Goods and Services. In this 
respect the Budget provides for the setting up of a special desk by the SME bank to assist 

 

88 

local artists, sculptors, musicians and creators to modernise and expand their business. My 
Ministry  will  work  in  close  collaboration  with  the  Ministry  of  Business  Enterprise  and 
Cooperatives and SMEDA to fast-track the processing of application from artists and cultural 
entrepreneurs.  

Madam  Speaker,  both  our  tangible  and  intangible  heritage  can  become  income 
generating  elements.  Having  at  heart  the  preservation  of  cultural  memories,  we  have 
submitted the nomination dossier of Bhojpuri Folk Songs of Mauritius to UNESCO for its 
inscription on the UNESCO Representative List of Intangible cultural heritage of humanity. 
This  follows  the  inscription  of  the  Mauritian  Sega  typik  of  the  UNESCO  list  recently. 
Preparatory works will now start for the Nomination Dossier of Sega Tambour of Rodrigues 
and  Sega  Chagos.  The  National  Archives  will  continue  with  the  digitalisation  process  of 
records to make it accessible to national as well as international users. This budget has made 
provisions for the next phase of the project, that is, the digitalisation of all the archives related 
to indentured labourers.  

My Ministry, in collaboration with the Nelson Mandela Centre for African Culture, is 
providing services so that Mauritians of African origins can trace back their genealogy. These 
services are already  available on the website of the Centre. Research is ongoing to further 
enhance these services.  

Let me also announce that this year we are celebrating the 200th anniversary of this 
official  setting  up  of  the  National  Archives.  A  set  of  activities  will  be  organised  at  both 
national and international level to celebrate the bicentenary. I propose to lead a delegation to 
UNESCO in Paris in May to mark the event. In this context, UNESCO has agreed to host at 
its seat an exhibition on our Archives.  

Madam Speaker, it is said that culture is the soft power of a nation. It is indeed an 
important element in building relations between countries. My Ministry will further enrich 
the practice of cultural diplomacy. In this vein, we will shortly sign an agreement with the 
Government of Turkey for the promotion of cultural ties that dates as far back as the 18th 
century.  The  Turkish  National  Television  will  be  shortly  in  Mauritius,  to  shoot  a 
documentary film on the cultural and historical  links between our two countries. This will 
serve as a tool to promote Mauritius as a tourist destination which is perfectly in line with the 
concept of cultural tourism. Let me also point out that Turkey has more than 1,000 heritage 
sites.  My  Ministry  will  also  seize  this  opportunity  to  seek  the  assistance  of  the  Turkish 
Government  in  the  area  of  heritage  protection  and  promotion.  In  the  same  line,  the 
programme for cultural corporation signed between Mauritius and  India during the visit of 

 

89 

Prime Minister Narendra Modi in Mauritius, will further enhance the cultural ties between 
our two countries. The same principles are applicable between Mauritius and other friendly 
countries  such  as  China,  Senegal,  Mozambique,  Madagascar,  Seychelles,  Egypt  amongst 
others.  

The  programme  for  cultural  cooperation  includes  exchanges  of  Cultural  troupes  of 
performing arts, training facilities in fields such as: Archives preservation and management, 
museography,  drama  and  theatre,  sharing  of  knowledge  so  the  exchange  of  experts  and 
technicians in various artistic and cultural fields.  

Madam Speaker, the renovated Serge Constantin Theatre was reopened on Friday 27 
March to mark the World Theatre Day.  It will be the only operational theatre pending the 
renovation of the Plaza Theatre and Port Louis Theatre. It is worth mentioning that the Serge 
Constantin Theatre, is the first theatre in Mauritius to be equipped with a KNX Modular bus 
control  system.  That  is,  a  remote  control  system  for  motorised  barrel  structures.  It  is  also 
equipped with a totally modern system energy efficient which is both ozone and eco-friendly. 
This  theatre  has  also  been  provided  with  modern  state-of-the-art  equipment,  such  as 
motorised curtains, new light design to meet the needs and requirement of our performers. All 
this has been done with a view to managing the theatre in a more professional way and to 
improving the quality of shows and events that will be organised both by my Ministry and 
users of this facility.  

My  Ministry  will  set  up  a  monthly  programme  free  of  charge  for  the  public  in  the 
various arts and culture sector over and above programmes by private institutions and artists. 
Our objectives are to bring people back to the theatre and to provide a platform to artists to 
display their talents. The Copyright Act makes provision for the setting up of the Mauritius 
Right  Management  Society.  I  have  already  set  up  the  Board  of  the  Right  Management 
Society  which  will  ensure  that  the  rights  of  our  artists  are  properly  managed.  Madam 
Speaker,  accessibility  to  cultural  infrastructures  has  to  be  fluid.  The  cost  of  using  these 
facilities is sometimes prohibitive. To address this issue the stade musical is making its way. 
I have no doubt about it. The population will have the opportunity to attend concerts by local 
and international artists at reduced cost. 

Madam Speaker, the setting up of a National Centre for Performing Arts will provide 
capacity  building  to  our  artists  and  creators,  hence,  enabling  them  to  obtain  a  livelihood 
through their arts. They will obtain – 

(i) 

adequate  training  and  capacity  in  business  networking,  arts  and  financial 
management and contract negotiation; 

 
(ii) 

90 

training  on  marketing  strategies  and  the  cultural  value  chain  in  the  music 
industry to ensure that they are not exploited by producers and middlemen.  

This measure will give hopes to our creators and performers. We will leave no stone 

unturned to make things happen for the benefit of our artists.  

In this respect, a one day workshop is being scheduled with stakeholders in the artistic 
and cultural fields in the coming days. Thereafter, a strategic plan on the creative industries 
including new measures announced in the Budget will be prepared. We have to cultivate a 
longer term interest in arts and make maximum use of existing infrastructures while bringing 
the arts to the people.  

Madam Speaker, the artistic development of a nation brings in its wake refinement in 
the appreciation of arts in general. Creativity and innovation are nurtured. The National Art 
Gallery  will  position  itself  to  enlist  the  full  participation  of  the  community  of  artists  and 
sensitise the population on the balming effect of a work of art.  

Madam  Speaker,  a  thing  of  beauty  is  a  joy  forever.  Madam  Speaker,  we  need  to 
acknowledge that this Budget has made provisions to cater for measures as announced in the 
President’s Speech and the Budget Speech. No section of the population has been left out and 
due consideration has been given to our artists and creators.  

I wish to highlight that arts and culture are integral parts of our life and they cannot be 
dissociated.  Having  understood  the  centrality  of  arts  in  our  daily  life,  our  commitment  to 
human dignity will definitely pave the way for a colourful life. This can only be achieved by 
placing arts and culture at the mainstream of the society. This is not only the guarantee of our 
future; in fact, this is the only future. 

Madame  la  présidente,  je  souscris  entièrement  à  l’observation  pertinente  de  mon 

collègue, le ministre des finances, qui disait, je cite –  
« Un pays sans culture est un pays sans âme. » 

Et  pour  conclure  dans  cette  même  logique,  je  me  permets  de  postuler  que  les 

générations futures vont regarder l’heure sur la pendule des arts et de la culture.  

Merci, Madame la présidente. 

(Interruptions) 

Mrs Monty:  Madam Speaker, I move that the debate be now adjourned. 

Mr Lepoigneur rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

 

Debate adjourned accordingly. 

91 

ADJOURNMENT 

The Prime  Minister:    Madam Speaker,  I beg to move that this Assembly do now 

adjourn to Thursday 02 April 2015 at 11.30 a.m.  

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned. 

MATTERS RAISED 

(6.34 p.m.) 

PETITE RIVIÈRE GOVT SCHOOL  – 10-YEAR STUDENT – ALLEGED 

SEXUAL ABUSE 

Mr  A.  Aliphon  (Third  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière):  Madame  la 
présidente, si vous me permettez, j’aurais souhaité que Madame la ministre de l’Education 
éclaire la Chambre si elle en a la possibilité, bien sûr, sur le cas de viol d’une élève de dix ans 
à Petite Rivière dans la circonscription No. 20, avec toutes sortes de nouvelles : parents en 
colère, mouvements de révolte, cover-up, etc. Depuis hier, la presse en parle. Nous savons 
que la fille de dix ans aurait été violée par le jardinier de l’école contre paiement. 

Merci, Madame la présidente. 
The  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 
Scientific  Research  (Mrs  L.  D.  Dookun-Luchoomun):  Madam  Speaker,  with  your 
permission, I would like to address the House and inform the House on the issues related to 
this particular case. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to this case of alleged sexual abuse on a Standard VI 
pupil aged 10, at Petite Rivière Government School by a person reported to be a close relative 
to the child. This person had been enlisted by the PTA of the school as gardener on a part-
time basis during the third term in 2014.  

My  Ministry  had  taken  cognizance  of  a  school  report  on  Monday  30  March  2015 
relating to this case of sexual abuse which was reported to have taken place on Tuesday 24 
March outside the school premises. According to the same report, the accused person had, on 
24 March, sought permission from the school to collect the child on the ground that there 
would  be  a  religious  ceremony  at  the  pupil’s  place.  The  Headmaster  allowed  the  child  to 

 

92 

leave the school after having registered the pupil’s name in the movement book as the person 
had, according to the school, previously picked up the pupil from the school on behalf of her 
parents on 15 October 2013, on 02 June 2014 and on 20 August 2014.  

With  regard  to  the  release  of  the  pupil  on  24  March  2015,  the  parents  were  not 

consulted as opposed to the previous three cases.  

On Thursday 26 March 2015, the class teacher noticed the sum of Rs200 with the 
pupil and informed the parent and it was only then that the parents came to know that the 
relative who picked the child had given her the sum of money and the parents informed the 
school that, in fact, there was no religious ceremony held at their place on 24 March.  

On  Friday  27  March,  Police  had  called  at  the  school  to  inquire  into  the  matter. 
According to the Police report dated 01 April 2015, the accused had apparently picked up the 
child from school at about 11.15 on 24 March and allegedly abused her sexually in a nearby 
sugarcane  field.  The  accused  was  arrested  on  26  March  and  remanded  to  Police  cell.  The 
child was also examined by the Police Medical Unit on 27 March in presence of her mother 
and officer of the CDU and Police inquiry is still on.  

Madam Speaker, on Monday 30 March, the Headmaster of the school informed the 
Zone Directorate of the incident. The incident had been reported to the CDU of Bambous as 
well. It has been reported that on the same day, a group of parents who expressed their strong 
concern about the incident, had gathered at the school for a meeting with the Headmaster. 
Hon. Guy Lepoigneur, MP, also called at the school to meet the Headmaster and addressed 
the group of parents.  

The  Zonal  Directorate  had  delegated  officers  of  the  school  inspectorate:  a  School 
Inspector, a Senior Inspector and the Principal School Inspector on 30 March to inquire into 
the matter. The school has also sought the consent of the parents for the child to be seen by an 
Educational Psychologist of the Ministry.  

Madam  Speaker,  I  am  advised  that  the  Headmaster  of  the  school  met  the  group  of 
parents on 30 March and a special meeting of the PTA was convened by the Headmaster for 
Tuesday 31 March at 13.00 hours on that matter. In his report to the Zone dated 30 March 
2015, the Headmaster had informed the Zonal Directorate of that Special PTA Meeting.  

However, it is viewed with concern that the Zone did not delegate any representative 
to the PTA Meeting and the Zone had issued instructions to the Headmaster to the effect that 
this case should not be raised at any PTA Meeting for the sake of confidentiality and welfare 
of the child.  

93 

 
Madam  Speaker,  in  view  of  the  seriousness  of  the  case,  I  have  ordered  that 
explanations  be  sought  from  the  Zone  Director  and  the  Inspectorate  as  to  why  no 
representative  of  the  zonal  directorate  was  delegated  to  the  special  PTA  meeting  and 
secondly, why instructions were issued to the Head Master  for the matter not to be raised 
although  taking  into  consideration  that  confidentiality  should  have  been  taken  into 
consideration.    Explanations  will  also  be  sought  from  the  school  as  to  why  no  parental 
consent  was  sought  prior  to  release  of  the  child  on  that  day  unlike  the  previous  occasions 
when  the  parents  were  contacted  and  why  a  substantial  delay  was  noted  in  reporting  the 
matter to the zone and to the Ministry. 

Madam Speaker, as stated earlier, enquiry is on at the level of the Police and CDU.  
Moreover, I have ordered a full-fledged enquiry on the matter and also on the circumstances 
that led to the release from school of the child on that day. The enquiry team will also be 
called upon to situate responsibilities and recommend disciplinary actions to be taken against 
officers in case they have failed in their duties. In the meantime, instructions are being issued 
to schools for a more rigorous control on release of pupils and to ensure that parental consent 
is sought and obtained in each case prior to release.  I wish to reassure the House that the 
matter is being followed up very closely at the level of my Ministry and actions will be taken 
very promptly. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Rughoobur! 

FOND DU SAC – MARKET - CONSTRUCTION 

Mr  S.  Rughoobur  (Second  Member  for  Grand’  Baie  &  Poudre  d’Or):    Thank 
you,  Madam  Speaker,  for  taking  briefly  the  time  of  the  House.    I  have  a  request  for  my 
Constituency.  Actually,  since  several  years,  there  has  been  a  request  -  and  this  request  is 
being addressed to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister as Minister for the National Development Unit 
- for the construction of a covered market at Fond du Sac and I would request the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister to, please, look into the issue because – you know -  c’est comme un bazar 
flottant when you have got heavy rainfall there.  This new market fair would, I am sure, help 
those inhabitants, in surroundings areas as well whether it is Vale, Petit Raffray and other.  
So, I make a humble request to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to, please, look into this issue.   

Thank you.  
The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, I must inform the House that NDU right now 
is heavily indebted.  I don’t know after payment of debt what amount will remain for other 
projects in the different Constituencies.  In any case, if it is possible, we will look into this 
and if the means are there, we will do the needful. 

 
Madam Speaker:  Hon. Ameer Meea! 

94 

 

CANAL ANGLAIS - REPAIRS 

Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port  Louis 
East): Yes, Madam Speaker, thank you. My subject matter relates to the NDU which falls 
under the purview of the Prime Minister’s Office and it relates to the Canal Anglais.   

I recently put a question to this House relating to the Canal Anglais, but due to time 
constraint, we could not debate the question in the House, but I have got the written answer 
whereby  the  NDU  was  instructed  to  carry  out  a  survey  to  the  state  of  the  Canal  Anglais.  
With recent heavy rainfall, what has happened; there have been so many cracks in the walls 
of  the  Canal  Anglais  which  has  been  built  since  very  long  ago  and  which  was  last  time 
rehabilitated  in  the  years  2000  and  2005.    And  these  cracks  have  resulted  in  leakage  and, 
therefore, overflowing into the houses of inhabitants on the uphill of Military Road in my 
Constituency.  Also, the Municipality of Port Louis currently looked into the maintenance, 
into the cleaning of the canal, but they don’t have the budget to carry out extensive work to 
the canal.  Therefore, I request the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to urgently look into the matter 
and request NDU to take immediate action.   

Thank you. 
The Prime Minister: Well, the answer will be the same.  If the budget permits, then 

we will do the needful.  We will make Canal Anglais become Canal Français. 

At 6.45 p.m. the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Thursday 02 April 2015 at 

11.30 a.m.  

 

