 

 

No. 13 of 2015 

1 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

 

 

FIRST SESSION 

MONDAY 23 MARCH 2015 

 

 

2 

CONTENTS 

 

 

PAPERS LAID 

 

 

MOTION 

 
BILLS (Public)   
(i) 
(ii) 
 

The Appropriation (2015) Bill (No. III of 2015) 
The Appropriation (2015-2016) Bill (No. IV of 2015) 

BUDGET SPEECH 

 

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 

KCMG, QC  

Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 

GCSK  

Communications 

Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo, GCSK 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 

Utilities 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Minister 

of 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Integration 

and  Economic 

Empowerment 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 

Sinatambou 

International Trade 

Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 

Perraud 

Family Welfare 

Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain 

Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 

Institutional Reforms 

 

4 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 

Institutions 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 

Shipping and Outer Islands 

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, 

Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 

QPM 

Disaster and Beach Management  

Hon. Marie Roland Alain Wong Yen             Minister of Civil Service and Administrative  

Cheong, MSK 

 

 

 

       Reforms 

    Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn            

Minister 
of  Labour, 
Employment and Training 

Industrial  Relations, 

 

5 

 

 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Madam Speaker 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, 
      GCSK 

Deputy Speaker 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram,  Hon.  Mahendranuth 
Sharma 

 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

 

          Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

(Temporary  

Gopall,  Mr  Navin 
Transfer to RRA) 

 
Jankee,  Mrs Chitra  

Badal, Mr Ramesh 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 13 of 2015 

 

Sitting of 23 March 2015 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 5.00 p.m. 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

 

 

7 

                                                        

 
 

PAPERS LAID 

 

 
      The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table - 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
A. 
 
 
 
 
B. 
 
 

 
 
 
 

The Appropriation (2015) Bill (No. III of 2015); and 
The Appropriation (2015 – 2016) Bill (No. IV of 2015) 
 

Prime Minister’s Office – 
Certificate of Urgency in respect of the following Bills (In Original) - 
(i) 
(ii) 
 
Ministry of Finance and Economic Development 
(a) 
(b) 

Estimates for the period 6 months ending 30 June 2015 
Estimates 2015 – 2016 

 
 

 

8 

 

  
 
 

 
 

 
 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10(2) 

The Prime  Minister:  Madam Speaker,  I beg to move that  all the business on today’s 

Order Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

 

PUBLIC BILLS 

First Reading 

On motion made and seconded the following Bills were read a first time – 

(a) 
(b) 

The Appropriation (2015) Bill (No. III of 2015) 
The Appropriation (2015-2016) Bill (No. IV of 2015) 

 

Second Reading 

THE APPROPRIATION (2015) BILL 

(NO. III OF 2015) 

& 

THE APPROPRIATION (2015-2016) BILL 

(NO. IV OF 2015) 

Order for Second Reading read. 

 

 

9 

BUDGET SPEECH 

Mauritius at the Crossroad  

The  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  (Mr  S.  Lutchmeenaraidoo): 
Madam  Speaker,  I  move  that  The  Appropriation  (2015)  Bill  (No.  III  of  2015)  and  the 
Appropriation (2015-2016) Bill (No. IV of 2015) be read a second time. 

 

 

INTRODUCTION 
Madam  Speaker,  at  the  outset  I  wish  to  place  on  record  that  I  have  had  very  fruitful 
meetings  with  various  stakeholders  during  the  recent  Budget  consultation  exercise.    I 
extend  my  thanks  to  all  those  who  have  participated,  for  their  views  and  suggestions. 
Indeed, their contribution has been most helpful in today’s Budget presentation.  

 

The  priorities  and  concerns  voiced  out  by  the  stakeholders  reflect  very  much  the 
sentiments that have led to our crushing victory in the last election. The electorate gave 
us a clear mandate to clean up the mess and give our country a fresh start.  Vox Populi 
Vox Dei. 

In setting things right, it is essential that we have a clear vision of the future we want for 
our nation. It will not be enough to plan for the creation of greater national wealth. We 
also need to be concerned with better sharing. If we believe, as we should, that as a nation 
we are one, then we should put the principle of sharing at the very heart of our policies. A 
proper policy of national sharing is also crucial for maintaining social peace, a sine qua 
non condition for sustained economic growth. Therefore, greater sharing will underscore 
all the main policy decisions in this Budget.  

Madam Speaker, before coming to the objectives of the Budget and to our policies for 
attaining those objectives, I wish first to explain the rationale behind the change in the 
budgeting  approach  -  from  a  Programme  Based  Budgeting  to  Performance  Based 
Budgeting.  There was a consensus that the Programme Based Budgeting was bulky and 

2. 

 
3. 

 
4. 

10 

too  complicated  for  legislative  purposes  and  for  the  public.  It  made  the  appropriation 
process  tedious  and  very  often  opaque.    We  are  shifting  to  a  more  transparent,  and 
simpler to understand Budgeting process. 
Second, following the amendment to the Finance and Audit Act, I am presenting to the 
House two Budget estimates. The first one covers the six months from January to June 
2015 and the second one covers the 12 months period from July to June 2016.  

In line with our commitment to a policy of transparency, we are circulating a Supplement 
entitled “The Economic and Social Backdrop to Budget 2015/16 along with the Budget 
Speech.   I am also circulating, with the Budget Speech, an Annex that gives more details 
on the measures of this Budget and outlines the main legislative changes being proposed.   

ECONOMIC REVIEW 
In regard to the domestic economy, we note that growth has continued to oscillate around 
an  anaemic  3  per  cent  per  annum  for  the  last  decade.  Such  a  low  growth  rate  cannot 
generate enough employment and improvement in living standards. At this sub-par rate 
we will soon be overtaken by other countries.  In 2014, the unemployment rate stood at 
7.8 per cent, with a high concentration of jobless among the youths and women. Here it is 
worth noting that in the latter part of the 1980s, it took a growth rate of around 6.5 per 
cent to achieve full employment.  

The recent declining trend in the petroleum prices has helped to keep inflation subdued.   
But  our  external  trade  and  current  account  deficits  remain  in  a  precarious  state.    We 
ended the year 2014 with a huge trade deficit of Rs76.8 billion, representing 19.9 per cent 
of GDP.  And the current account showed a deficit of Rs39.6 billion, representing 10.3 
per cent of GDP. Deficits of such magnitude, Madam Speaker, on our external accounts 
cannot be sustained and they will undermine macroeconomic fundamentals.   

As regards the budget deficit for 2014, it came to 3.2 per cent of GDP, with total revenue 
and grants amounting to Rs79.7 billion and total expenditure of Rs92.2 billion.  

 

5. 

 
6. 

 
II.  
7. 

 
8. 

 
9. 

 

 

10. 

 
11. 

11 

Public sector debt for the purpose of the statutory debt ceiling, increased to 54.2 per cent 
of GDP by end 2014.  When measured using IMF definition, it has reached an alarming 
level of 61 per cent. 

For 2015/2016, we expect GDP growth to go up to 5.3 per cent and for 2016/2017 we are 
targeting a growth rate of 5.7 per cent.  As I announce the policies and measures in this 
Budget, this House and the nation will better understand my optimism.  

 
12.  We also expect inflation to remain subdued and the unemployment rate to decline.  
 
13. 

However,  there  are  risks  and  uncertainties  at  the  global  level.    Deflation  is  looming. 
Growth is fading.  The outlook for the global economy is rather grim.  Any major black 
swan event can and will play havoc in the world economy, and affect us negatively. 

 
III.  MAURITIUS AT THE CROSSROAD 
14.  Madam Speaker, I will now speak about the objectives of this Budget. Let me first of all 
draw the attention of the nation on some fundamental realities and questions that have 
cropped up in my mind.  

 
15.  Madam Speaker, I have not an iota of doubt that Mauritius is at a major crossroad. We 
are indeed at the crossroad.  A no-policy-change and a business-as-usual approach will 
condemn the country to low anaemic growth, high unemployment and a bleak future.  

 
16. 

 
17. 

 

Almost  all  the  areas  of  our  economy  are  at  the  crossroad.  Decisions  we  take  now, 
decisions we take in this Budget, will have a profound impact on the country’s future, 
and will determine whether we will make it to the next level.  

Similarly for social justice. We are at the crossroad. If we do not choose an alternative 
path, more and more families will be left outside the mainstream, poverty will keep on 
rising and income inequality will widen further.  

 

18. 

 
19. 

 

12 

Our environment and ecosystems are also at the crossroad. If we continue with business 
as usual, we will be perpetuating the decay of our environment and quality of life.    

To make the hard choices and put our country on the right path ahead, we need to ask 
fundamental questions.   

• 

 
• 

 
• 

 
• 

 
• 

Knowing that our society is at the crossroad, do we continue to be inward-looking 
in  our  action  and  insular  in  our  mind-set,  or  do  we  go  all  out  for  a  policy  of 
opening our economy and country to the global system and foreign know-how? 

Do we continue to witness the social ills that are wearing down the fabric of our 
society, or do we go all out for effectively dealing with them?  

Our system for transparency and good governance is also at the crossroad.  Do we 
stay with the present system characterised by opacity that breeds corruption or do 
we go all out for a cleansing that will inject more meritocracy, transparency, good 
governance in the management of public affairs?  

Do we continue to accept the prevalence of so many pockets of poverty  in our 
country  or  do  we  go,  in  a  determined  way,  to  resolve  them  and  restore  our 
credibility as a caring nation?  

We are also at the crossroad in our economic and social policies.  Do we limit our 
sight to the current generation or do we work and invest for future generations as 
well?  
 

20.  Madam Speaker, this Budget has been crafted on the basis of these questions, and also on 
the basis of other considerations that I will explain as we go along. That is why the four  
main objectives of this Budget are to -  
 
First, steer the economy towards a path of high investment, and high employment. 

13 

 
Second, secure long term sustainable development for all. 
 
Third, achieve greater equity and social justice for one and all.  
 
And  fourth,  promote  transparency  and  good  governance  in  the  management  of  public 
affairs.   

 

 

IV.     HIGH INVESTMENT AND HIGH EMPLOYMENT 
21.  Madam  Speaker,  let  me  now  address  the  first  objective  of  high  investment  and  high 

employment.  

  

22. 

 

23. 

‘Maurice: Un Vaste Chantier de Développement’ 

 

No economy can generate high growth without high investment levels. ‘Notre économie 
est  dans  une  phase  d’éssoufflement.’    Our  traditional  sectors  are  experiencing  low 
growth, low investment and therefore low employment creation - even shedding jobs. We 
need to go out of the box if we want to create jobs at a rapid pace.  And this is what this 
Budget does, Madam Speaker. 

The 13 Mega Projects  
Our  very  first  action  is  to  unlock  employment-rich  mega-projects  that  will  be  spread 
across the country. Eight of these projects will be designed on the ‘Smart City’ concept 
that will bring about a total revolution in the way we live, work and play. The smart cities 
will be designed to - 
 
• 

Be environment friendly 

• 

• 

• 

Generate its own resources in terms of energy and water  

Provide for state-of-the-art connectivity  

Provide smart modern transportation 

 

14 

• 

And reduce traffic congestion across the island.  

. 

24.  Madam  Speaker,  this  is  a  legacy  we  will  want  to  leave  for  our  children  and  for  their 

children.   

 
25. 

These ‘ Smart City’  projects include  
 

i. 

ii. 

The Omnicane airport city in the south-east. 

St Félix Village projects in the south. 

iii. 

The Médine Integrated Park in the west.  

iv.  Roches Noires project in the north-east.  

v. 

vi. 

The Azuri Phase 2 project in the north. 

The Terra project in the north. 

vii. 

The Highlands City project in the centre. 

viii. 

The Richeterre Project in the vicinity of Port Louis.  

ix.  And  5  ‘Technopoles’  at  Highlands,  Rose  Belle,  Flacq,  Rivière  du  Rempart  and 

Bambous.   

 

26.  Madam Speaker, six of these projects are ready for implementation.  
  
27. 

Altogether,  the  13  megaprojects  will  drastically  optimise  the  utilisation  of  some  7,000 
arpents of land, mobilise some Rs120 billion rupees of much needed private and foreign 
direct  investments,  create  thousands  of  jobs,  and  give  a  tremendous  boost  to  the 
construction industry which has been contracting since 2011.  In fact, Madam Speaker, 
our country will soon be ‘ un vaste chantier de développement’.    

 

 
 

 

15 

SMEs  - ‘Île Maurice Nation D’entrepreneurs’ : The SME Bank 

28.  Madam Speaker, I now come to the most ambitious goal of this Government - making the 

SME sector the backbone of our economy.   

 
29. 

Let me ask this question. Should we continue with business as usual and perpetuate an 
economic system that favours concentration of the public assets of our economy in the 
hands  of  only  a  few?  Or  do  we  empower  more  and  more  of  our  citizens  to  become 
entrepreneurs to have a wider participation and better sharing of the wealth we create as a 
nation?   

 
30.  Madam Speaker, here also we have come to the crossroad and we must choose the right 

course.   

   
31. 

So far, we have only seen a piecemeal and fragmented approach to providing support to 
the SME sector. The outcomes have been far below expectations.  

 
32.  We  need  a  more  coherent  strategy  and  scheme  that  provide  meaningful  support  at  all 
levels to young entrepreneurs; from conceptualisation of a project, to its realisation.  It 
will  cover  support  on  financing,  choice  of  production  methods  and  technology,  and 
marketing. To achieve this, I am proposing a comprehensive “One Stop Shop” approach 
to the SME sector.  

 
33. 

 

First, I am launching the Small and Medium Enterprises Bank -that would be known very 
soon as the SME Bank - to provide seed capital to entrepreneurs without any need for 
personal guarantee.  As I have said on several occasions, an amount of Rs10 billion will 
be made available to the Bank over the next five years, starting with a share capital of 
Rs200 million and a line of credit of Rs2 billion from Government for its first year of 
operation.    The  SME  Bank  will  be  located  on  the  ground  floor  of  SICOM  Tower  at 
Ebene.   

16 

Second, we are setting up a One-Stop-Shop which will provide under one roof, all the 
support, financing and information, as well as the delivery of all the permits and licenses 
that SMEs require to start and grow their businesses.  This One Stop Shop, managed by 
SMEDA, will be located on the first three floors of the SICOM Tower at Ebene. 

Third, to further facilitate the young entrepreneurs in their business ventures, access to 
working  capital  will  be  ensured  by  the  State  Bank  of  Mauritius  which  will  have  a 
dedicated desk in the SICOM Tower. 

Fourth,  SMEDA  will  operate  on  a  fast  track  mechanism  to  ensure  that  all  necessary 
permits  and  approvals  needed  to  carry  out  business  are  delivered  within  the  minimum 
time.  In this context, the number of permits and licenses will be streamlined and reduced 
to the strict minimum. 

Fifth, in line with the spirit of One Stop Shop, the New SMEDA will be empowered to 
collect Trade Fees on behalf of local authorities.  

Sixth, - and this is a major fiscal incentive - SMEs registered under the Scheme will be 
exempted from the payment of corporate tax for a period of 8 years.  

Seventh,  Government  is  significantly  increasing  the  industrial  space  for  SMEs  by 
creating  7  more  SME  Parks  in  addition  to  the  3  recent  ones  at  Roche  Bois,  La  Tour 
Koenig and Bambous.   

Eighth, VAT registration threshold is being increased from Rs4 million to Rs6 million. 
This measure concerns all SMEs. 

Ninth,  the  turnover  threshold  for  submission  of  quarterly  return  under  the  Advance 
Payment System is being raised from Rs4 million to Rs10 million.  

 

34. 

 
35. 

 
36. 

 
37. 

 
38. 

 
39. 

 
40. 

 
41. 

 

 

42. 

17 

Tenth, the annual fee payable to the Registrar of Companies by a small private company 
with turnover not exceeding Rs10 million is being reduced from Rs2,500 to Rs500. 

 
43.  Madam Speaker, we are confident that our youth will boldly move in this sector of great 
future.  In  fact,  Madam  Speaker,  this  generous  package  of  incentives  will  be  further 
improved.  I am inviting the youth of our country to motivate us to bring about further 
improvements.  
 
Transforming the Port-Louis Harbour: From a Destination Port to a Regional Hub 
44.  Madam Speaker, after dealing with the forthcoming mega projects to put our country on 
the  path  of  a  modern  smart  Mauritius,  -  after  introducing  the  ambitious  SME  “Ile 
Maurice Nation d’Entrepreneurs” project - our next endeavour for high investment-high 
employment is the transformation of the Port-Louis Harbour from a destination port to a 
regional hub.  

 
45. 

 
46. 

 
47. 

  

I have indicated to the nation on several occasions, that there will be unprecedented high 
investments over the next five years in the port infrastructure.  This project will connect 
Port-Louis to almost all the ports in the region and many more beyond our region. It will 
enable thousands of vessels to drop anchor in our harbour while supplying a wider variety 
of  port  and  maritime  services.    Thus,  the  port  will  become  a  key  contributor  to  the 
development  of  the  ocean  economy,  creating  vast  opportunities  for  our  SMEs,  and 
thousands of new jobs for our labour force.  

This  ambitious  project  will  entail  developing  the  port  on  an  area  extending  from 
l’embouchure of Grand River North West to Baie du Tombeau.   

This single project has the potential of a double-digit contribution to GDP in the long-
term. The sheer scale of that development warrants a well-thought-out strategy. 

 

48. 

 
49. 
 
50. 

 
51. 

18 

The Mauritius Ports Authority is therefore coming up with a new Masterplan focused on 
making  the  Port-Louis  harbour  a  hub  for  bunkering,  seafood,  transhipment,  cruise  and 
petroleum.   

The Masterplan will also include the development of a full-fledged marina.   

Huge investments are already being made to expand the activities of the port, including 
extension  of  the  berths  at  the  Mauritius  Container  Terminal,  refurbishment  of  three 
existing quays cranes, and development of the Island Container Terminal.  

Offshore  bunkering  activities  will  start  before  the  end  of  this  year,  while  the  storage 
facilities for onshore bunkering are being expanded significantly with the participation of 
international petroleum companies.  

Restructuring the IRS/RES 

 
 
52.  Madam Speaker, let me come to the issue of IRS/RES as another contributor to our high 
investment- high employment objective. We believe that the IRS and RES schemes need 
to be reviewed in depth. We are deeply concerned with the adverse impact of IRS and 
RES projects on our society.  While the two schemes have brought benefits we have also 
seen undesirable consequences. The most serious is that many of these projects, if not all, 
have become enclaves which constitute a serious risk to the very fabric of our society.  

 
53. 

 
V.  

Government  is  therefore  carrying  out  an  in-depth  analysis  of  the  weaknesses  and 
shortcomings of the IRS and RES. Our aim is to design a single scheme that would be 
centred on inclusive development, doing away with gated communities and providing for 
a  wide  range  of  living,  employment  and  leisure  opportunities  to  both  locals  and 
foreigners.  New  regulations  under  the  Investment  Promotion  Act  will  then  set  out  the 
parameters of the new scheme.  New Planning Policy Guidelines will also come in force.  
The new package will be announced next month. 

TRAINING AND HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 

 

19 

54.  Madam Speaker, the mega projects as well as the development of the SME sector will 
require  substantial  appropriately  trained  labour  force,  especially  at  the  technical  and 
middle management level.  

 
55.  We have an education and training system that is not capable of producing such skills at 

the pace and quantum that the economy needs.   

   
56.  We are certainly at the crossroad for our education system also. Do we need to continue 
producing hundreds of ‘Gradués Chômeurs’ every  year, who have received training in 
fields where there is no outlet? Or do we want an education system that caters for the 
need of the new economy? We are in dire shortage of middle management and qualified 
skills.  

 
57. 

 
58. 

So, we are engaging today in a new direction on this question of manpower training and 
development. 

First,  Government  will  use  the  three  campuses  presently  under  construction  at  Réduit, 
Montagne Blanche and Pamplemousses as follows - 
 
• 

The Réduit campus will be used to house a Polytechnic which will offer courses 
in Middle Management, ICT and other ICT-related fields.    

 
• 

 
• 

The  Montagne  Blanche  campus  will  be  reserved  for  a  Polytechnic  offering 
courses, mainly in Tourism, and Hotel Management, including cruise tourism.  

The Pamplemousses campus will offer courses mainly in health care for nurses, 
technicians  and  trained  personnel  in  the  medical  field,  especially  in  the 
maintenance of sophisticated medical equipment. 

59. 

 
Second,  there  are  presently  some  3000  ‘gradués  chômeurs’,  whose  training  does  not 
match market requirements. To improve their chances of getting a job, the University of 

 

 
60. 

 
61. 

20 

Mauritius and other qualified institutions will develop tailor-made crash courses in fields 
with high job prospects. Government will cover the fees of all those students, amounting 
to around Rs80,000 per student per year.  

Third,  the  role  and  functions  of  the  Mauritius  Institute  of  Training  and  Development 
(MITD)  will  be  reviewed  to  put  a  much  greater  emphasis  on  training  plumbers, 
electricians, welders, masons, carpenters, and other technicians for which there will be 
increasing demand as the ‘vaste chantier de développement’ unfolds.  

Fourth, a ‘Chambre des Métiers’ is being set up with a view to giving greater recognition 
to  the  skills  and  competencies  of  trade  persons  and  other  technicians.    It  will  deliver 
‘cartes de compétences’ to its registered members.  

 

 
  
VI.     BUSINESS FACILITATION AND INVESTMENT CLIMATE 
62.  Madam  Speaker,  after  dealing  with  investment,  employment  and  training,  let  me  now 
come to the issue of business facilitation. To generate the kind of investment that will 
generate  a  growth  rate  exceeding  5  per  cent  will  require  a  conducive  business 
environment,  one  that  is  free  of  cumbersome  procedures,  and  that  will  allow  the  fast 
decision making process.  

 
63. 

   
64. 

 
65. 

 

To this end, greater powers will be given to the Fast Track Committees at the Ministry of 
Finance  to  expedite  the  approval  process  and  facilitate  the  implementation  of  major 
investment projects.  

Second, we plan to abolish a total of 70 - yes 70 permits and licences that have become 
obsolete, and irrelevant.  

Third, the renewal of some types of licences and permits annually will become automatic 
simply upon payment of fees, including through e-payment.    

 

66. 

  
67. 

 
68. 

21 

Fourth, operators will also be given the possibility for renewing their licences for a period 
of up to 3 years. 

Fifth, operators in the tourism sector will be given the possibility of an omnibus permit 
for their various activities.  

Sixth,  Madam  Speaker,  an  appropriate  wage  policy  is  an  essential  component  of  a 
favourable investment climate for attracting FDI. So, Government is carrying out a study 
of  the  labour  market  and  the  wage  policy  to  bring  it  in  line  with  the  need  to  boost 
investment.  Every  worker  and  employee  in  our  society  must  get  his  fair  due  in  the 
development process. 

 
 VII.    SECTORAL REVIEW 
69.  Madam Speaker, I will now announce our strategies to boost investment and employment 

in key traditional sectors of our economy.  
 
Agro industry and fishing   
First, small planters. As we know, small sugarcane planters, defined as those producing 
up to 60 tons of sugar, have been facing difficulties due to adverse market conditions for 
sugar. Indeed, the price per ton has dropped from Rs17,500 for crop 2012 to Rs12,400 for 
crop 2014.  I am pleased to announce that the SIFB will give to those small planters a 
one-off  compensation  of  Rs3,400  per  ton  of  sugar  for  crop  2014,  while  the  remaining 
categories will receive Rs2,000 per ton.  

Second,  DBM  will  waive  all  interests  and  penalties  on  loans  of  up  to  Rs100,000,  to 
planters, fishermen and breeders, provided they pay back the outstanding capital amount 
within a period of 90 days.  

Third, for pig breeders the arrears of interest and penalties will be waived on the loans 
advanced under the Pig Sector Restructuring Programme.  

 
70. 

 
71. 

 
72. 

 

 

73. 

 
74. 

 
75. 

 
76. 

22 

Fourth, the subsidy provided to animal feed, including for cows, will be doubled to Rs4 
per kilo.    

Fifth, concerning the fisheries sector, Government is creating vast new opportunities for 
fishermen  to  engage  more  and  more  in  aquaculture  through  partnership  with  large 
operators.   

I would like to come to bio-food. The quality of food we consume has a direct correlation 
with the health of the population.   Yet, we have noticed a disturbing trend during the last 
decades.  The  food  we  consume  is  more  and  more  contaminated  with  pesticides, 
insecticides,  fungicides  and  other  chemicals.  Studies  are  confirming  that  a  number  of 
diseases  are  linked  to  this  new  consumption  pattern.  To  deal  with  this  issue  we  are 
launching an intensive campaign to sensitise the population on these risks and to shift to 
the consumption of bio-food.    

To  encourage  the  production  of  bio-food,  we  are  introducing  a  “Bio  Farming 
Development Certificate”.  This will include a package of incentives among which will 
be, an 8-year tax holiday, and exemption from various taxes and duties on importation of 
bio-food inputs.  Bio-farming will be one of the priority sectors under the SME scheme I 
have just announced. We have the ambition of producing no less than 50 per cent of our 
total local food production according to bio norms.   

 
77.  We must also ensure that food is distributed under right hygienic conditions. To this end, 
Government is investing some Rs370 million in a national wholesale vegetable market 
and Rs223 million in a modern slaughterhouse.   

 
 
78. 

Manufacturing  
I will now come, Madam Speaker, to manufacturing. Madam Speaker, the manufacturing 
sector is not being left to itself.  An inter-ministerial committee has been set up to look 
into the issue of tariff protection for sensitive local industries especially against dumping 
practices.  

 

 
79. 

 
80. 

23 

To  facilitate  the  modernisation  programme,  particularly  in  the  textiles  sector,  the 
Accelerated Annual Allowances provisions in the Income Tax Act will be improved.  

Furthermore, the Freight Rebate Scheme will be extended to other ports in Africa  and 
open to all shipping lines. 

 
81.  We are providing Rs442 million in this Budget to the Ministry of Industry, Commerce 
and Consumer Protection to support the manufacturing sector as it gears up to meet the 
challenges of stiffer global competition. 

 
 
82. 

 
83. 

 
84. 
 
85. 

 
86. 
 
87. 

 
88. 

Tourism  
I will now come to the tourism sector. As regards the tourism sector, we are increasing in 
a big way the Budget for MTPA from Rs390 million to Rs560 million, an increase of 
Rs170 million.  

Second, the MTPA will be restructured for greater flexibility and effectiveness to meet 
the objectives set for the tourism industry.  

Third, Government is taking a more liberal approach to open air access.   

Thus,  starting  October  2015  Austrian  Airlines  will  operate  one  weekly  flight 
to Mauritius. 

And, as from December 2015, Lufthansa will operate two weekly flights to Mauritius. 

Government will negotiate with airline companies for stopovers in Mauritius on the UK-
Australia route.   

Negotiations are also being engaged with other airlines to expand the air connectivity to 
Eastern Europe and Central Asia.  

 

 
89. 

 
 
90. 

  
91. 

92. 

 
93. 

 
94. 

 
95. 
 
96. 

 
97. 

24 

Fourth, the Budget also provides for a tourism sites embellishment programme and for 
raising the standards of operators in the industry.  

Developing the ICT sector as a Key Driver of Development 
I  will 
boost 
and employment in the ICT/BPO sector. 

announce 

now 

our 

policies 

to 

investment, 

growth 

First,  as  our  ICT  sector  moves  up  the  value  chain,  Mauritius  will  have  a  third 
international  gateway  through  the  installation  of  a  new  submarine  cable.    This  will 
connect both Mauritius and Rodrigues to the rest of world. 
 
Second, the whole island will have full broadband fibre connectivity within the next 3 
years.  

Third,  to  ensure  an  adequate  pool  of  appropriately  qualified  personnel,  the  ICT  Skills 
Development Programme will be extended to cover training for unemployed youths even 
if they do not have a job placement.   

Fourth, we are introducing a Scheme whereby ICT companies that recruit a minimum of 
100 employees will be allowed to bring in a quota of foreign qualified employees.  This 
will encourage the big global ICT players to set up business in Mauritius.  

Fifth, the number of free WIFI hotspots will be increased from 15 to 350. 

Sixth, and not the least, Madam, I am pleased to announce the abolition of the 10 cents 
levy on SMS. 

Seventh, I am providing Rs125 million to fund a National Innovation Programme. The 
main aims of the Programme are to foster a new culture of research and development and 
give a spur to the creation of new innovative products and services.  

 

 

 
 
98. 

 
99. 

25 

 

A Sound, Stable and Inclusive Financial Services Sector 
Coming  to  the  financial  services  sector,  our  measures  and  policies  are  aimed  at 
consolidating and diversifying both our product base and markets.   

First, Government will introduce a special Financial Sector Incentive Scheme to attract 
international  Asset  and  Fund  Managers  to  relocate  their  front-office  operations  in 
Mauritius.  

 
100.  Second, the Financial Services Promotion Agency will be reactivated for more effective 

promotion campaigns, especially to diversify our Global Business activities in Africa.  

 
101.  Third,  a  Financial  Services  Institute  is  being  set  up  at  Réduit  to  provide  specialised 

training courses that are focused on the actual needs of the industry.   

     
102.  Fourth,  to  revitalise  the  secondary  market  for  Government  Securities,  the  Bank  of 

Mauritius will provide market makers with an exit mechanism.  

 
103.  Fifth,  the  Income  Tax  Act  is  being  amended  to  exempt  non-resident  corporate  bond 

holders from withholding tax. 

 
104.  Sixth,  the  Insurance  Act  will  be  amended  to  enable  the  issue  of  insurance  policy 

documents in digital format.   

 
105.  And seventh, the clear statement made by Prime Minister Modi during his last visit in 
Mauritius has reassured all stakeholders in the global business sector that India will do 
nothing to harm this sector. We will cooperate fully with the Indian authorities to bring to 
a  fruitful  conclusion  our  discussions  on  outstanding  issues  relating  to  the  Double 
Taxation Avoidance Agreement.   

 

26 

 
106.  Madam Speaker, concerning the ocean economy, a new Petroleum Bill will be introduced 
shortly  to  provide  the  legal  and  fiscal  framework  for  exploration  and  exploitation  of 
hydro-carbon resources in our Exclusive Economic Zone.  

 
107.  Government  is  also  setting  up  a  National  Ocean  Council  to  ensure  better  coordination 
among all stakeholders both public and private to implement the Ocean Economy project. 

 
108. 

I must also add that the new Faculty of Ocean Studies at the University of Mauritius is 
offering courses in Oil and Gas Enterprise Management in collaboration with Aberdeen 
University.   

 

VIII.  ENVIRONMENT, ENERGY, WATER AND WASTE MANAGEMENT 

Environment 

109.  Let me now come, Madam Speaker, to the issue of environment. I will now speak about 

the policies and measures to better protect and enhance our environment.  

 
110.  We  have  seen  how  global  overexploitation  of  natural  resources  and  carelessly  planned 
development  can  cause  irreversible  damage  to  our  planet  and  its  ecosystem.    Madam 
Speaker, “notre planète est en détresse” and we should not underestimate the urgency for 
exceptional measures worldwide to save our planet.  

 
111.  The need to take urgent and immediate measures for the protection of the environment is 

compelling.  It is now or never. 

 
112.  Let us not forget that our planet can well exist without us but we cannot live without this 

planet.  

 
113.  Our future is in our own hands. 
 

 

27 

114.  That is why this Government has formulated a comprehensive set of measures to protect 

the environment. 

 
115.  First,  the  National  Environment  Commission,  chaired  by  the  Prime  Minister,  will  be 
revived  to  create  better  synergy  among  the  various  stakeholders  to  address  important 
environment concerns and issues.  

 
116.  Second,  as  natural  calamities  can  seriously  damage  the  environment,  we  need  to  be 
constantly in a state of preparedness. In this context, Government has set up the National 
Disaster Management Centre under the aegis of the Ministry of Environment to ensure 
quick response to any major unforeseen event.  

 
117.  Third, to address the recurring and often tragic problem of flooding, I am providing total 

resources of Rs1.3 billion in this Budget for priority drain works across the island.  

 
118.  Fourth,  on  our  last  mission  to  Rodrigues,  I  was  impressed  by  the  decision  of  the 
Rodrigues Regional Assembly to ban plastic bags. We realised that this ban has enabled 
the  flourishing  of  small  scale  initiatives  to  replace  plastic  bags.  After  careful 
consideration  and  consultation  we  have  decided  to  ban  the  use  of  plastic  bags  in 
Mauritius effective on 1st January 2016. 

 
119.  Fifth, a Mauritius Renewable Energy Agency is being set up to promote the development 
of renewable energies. In this context, it will work out a package of incentives for small 
energy producers.  Government is aiming to raise the share of local renewable energy in 
the electricity generation mix to 35% or even higher by 2025.    

 
120.  Sixth, to encourage households to have their own solar energy unit,  I  am allowing the 

total investment in such equipment to be deductible from chargeable income.   

 
121.  Seventh, investment in solar and other renewable energy will be eligible for financing as 

well as other incentives under the SME Scheme I announced earlier.  

 

 

28 

 
Wastewater and Solid Waste Management  

 
122.  Madam Speaker, wastewater and solid waste management are also crucial to our policies 

to protect and enhance the environment.   
 

123.  Regarding  wastewater  services,  priority  will  be  given  to  regions  that  are  highly 
vulnerable to environmental and health hazards. Accordingly, a total of Rs3 billion will 
be invested by June 2018 in this sector. 

 
124.  An  amount  of  Rs229  million  will  be  invested  in  an  interim  facility  for  the  storage  of 
hazardous wastes at La Chaumière for subsequent exportation to treatment and disposal 
facilities abroad. 

 
125.  A new waste recycling facility will be implemented at La Brasserie. 
 
126.  Government  is  conscious  of  the  injurious  effects  of  asbestos  on  the  health  of  the 
population. We are therefore, earmarking an amount of Rs100 million for dealing with 
the asbestos issue in public buildings.   

 

Water: A Basic Human Right  
I now come to the utility sector.  I will first announce measures for the water sector.  

127. 
 
128.  Madam Speaker, water is a basic human right. Some countries such as South Africa have 
even enshrined it in their constitution and offering a certain level of water supply free of 
charge.   

 
129.  This Government fully subscribes to this philosophy.  Therefore,   every household in our 
country will be entitled to at least 6 cubic metres of water per month free of charge.  The 
new Utility Regulatory Authority will be responsible to implement this decision.   

  

 

29 

130.  Madam Speaker, we have decided to change all the defective water pipes in the network 
to reduce the huge losses in transmission. To this end, I am introducing an item in the 
Public Sector Investment Programme (PSIP) with a project value of Rs20 billion to be 
implemented during the next 8 years for replacing defective water pipes in the network. 

 
131. 

In this Budget, I am providing a total of Rs3.5 billion for the water sector.   

 

IX.   MODERNISING LAND TRANSPORT 
132.  Madam  Speaker,  I  now  come  to  land  transport.  As  promised  during  the  electoral 
campaign we have, as a matter of top priority, modified the penalty point system to the 
satisfaction  of  all  drivers.    Road  safety  remains,  however,  a  concern  which  this 
Government will address in a meaningful way.  

 
133.  The  whole  population  was  shocked  to  learn  about  the  extensive  damages  to  the  Terre 

Rouge – Verdun motorway, in such a short period of time after its inauguration.  

 
134.  Government is urgently tackling this problem.  
 
135.  Furthermore, Government is investing in:  

First, a fly-over at Decaen street to reduce traffic congestion in and out of Port-Louis.   
 
Second, the implementation of the fly-over over the Phoenix and Jumbo roundabouts is 
being accelerated. 
 
Third, a new bridge to link Coromandel with the motor way, and  
 
Fourth,  we  are  examining  the  feasibility  of  operating  a  ferry  boat  between  Pointe  aux 
Sables, Port-Louis, and Baie du Tombeau.   
 
 As  regards  public  transport,  the  National  Transport  Corporation  will  proceed  with  the 
acquisition of 100 semi low floor buses to modernise its fleet.  

136. 

 

30 

 
 
X.    OPENING MAURITIUS TO THE WORLD 
137. 

I  now  turn  to  our  economic  partnership  with  Africa  and  the  crucial  role  which  this 
partnership will play in future. 

 
138.  Our  first  role  will  be  to  redefine  the  role  of  the  Mauritius  Africa  Fund  which  will 
concentrate  on  the  development  of  Special  Economic  Zones  (SEZ)  in  Africa.    Three 
countries namely Madagascar, Ghana and Senegal have already expressed their intention 
to work with Mauritius on the above projects.  

 
139.  Second, we are setting up a regional shipping line to expand regional trade and the role of 

our port in the region.  

 
140.  Third,  the  Board  of  Investment  will  be  posting  8  Trade  and  Investment  Managers  in 
strategic  cities  around  the  world,  that  include  Beijing,  Geneva,  Pretoria,  London, 
Moscow, Mumbai, New York, and Paris. They will be based in our embassies. 

  

XI.    RODRIGUES AND OUTER ISLANDS    
141.  Madam Speaker, I now come to Rodrigues.  I would like to speak about important actions 
we  are  taking  to  ensure  that  the  development  of  Rodrigues  keeps  pace  with  that  of 
Mauritius.   

 
142.  We owe this to the Rodriguan people - the more so because, as in Mauritius, there is great 

scope in Rodrigues for rapid progress in diverse economic sectors.  

 
143.  During my pre-Budget visit to Rodrigues, I saw for myself various areas of development 
where action can be taken in the immediate. Indeed, I announced a series of measures to 
help  their  implementation.  Among  the  measures  taken,  was  the  reduction  in  the  return 
airfare  from  Rodrigues  to  Mauritius  which  has  been  effective  since  15th  February;  the 

 

 
144. 

31 

guaranteed  price  scheme  for  certain  basic  products  and  the  extension  of  the  Youth 
Employment Programme to Rodriguans. 

In  this  Budget,  we  are  doing  more.  We  are  providing  funds  for  starting  the 
implementation of three major projects that will improve significantly connectivity with 
Rodrigues.  

 
145.  These include -   

First, the acquisition of an appropriate new vessel for both merchandise and passenger 
transport in replacement of the Mauritius Pride.  
 
Second, the extension of the Sir Gaëtan Duval airport with a project value of Rs2 billion 
to accommodate larger aircraft.  In this connection, Air Austral will operate twice weekly 
flights on the Reunion-Rodrigues route as from May this year.  
  
Thirdly,  a  consortium  is  being  set  up  by  Mauritius  Telecom  to  install  and  operate  the 
undersea fibre optic cable linking Rodrigues to Mauritius and to the rest of the world.   

 

146.  Moreover, we are providing for – 

• 
• 

• 

• 

An SME ICT park for the ICT/BPO activities; 
The conversion of the unutilized slaughter house into an SMEs Agro-Industrial 
Park;  
Further developing the fishing industry and providing for new training facilities 
for fishermen;  
And, a special training and placement scheme for Rodriguan graduates. 

 

147.  To enhance the income of planters in Rodrigues, the Agricultural Marketing Board will 
purchase the whole surplus production of onion, garlic, saffron, ginger and red beans at 
guaranteed prices.  
 

 

148. 

32 

In  view  of  the  acute  shortage  of  fresh  water  in  Rodrigues  there  is  an  urgent  need  for 
desalination  of  sea  water.  To  this  end,  Rs120 million  has  been  provided  in  the  two 
Budgets.  

 
149.  This  Budget  also  makes  a  provision  of  Rs2.4  billion  to  meet  the  recurrent  and  capital 

Budget of Rodrigues Regional Assembly for calendar year 2015.   

 
150.  We are confident that our visit to Rodrigues has laid the foundation for a new paradigm 
based on mutual respect and acknowledgement of the specificities of Rodrigues within 
the Republic.  

 
151.  Regarding Agalega, with the assistance of the Indian Government, Rs750 million will be 

invested in the construction of a new airport and new jetty facilities.  

 
152.  Madam  Speaker,  I  now  come  to  LOCAL  AUTHORITIES.  A  glaring  issue  that  local 
authorities will be dealing with in this financial year is the relocation of street hawkers. A 
Hawkers  Centre  at  the  Northern  Bus  Terminal  in  Port-Louis  has  been  approved.  
Implementation of this project will start this year.   

 
153.  Grant in aid to Local Authorities has been increased to Rs2.8 billion.  
 
XII.    SOCIAL REVIEW 
154.  Madam Speaker, let me now elaborate on our policies for the social sector. 
 
155. 

I shall touch successively on health care, education, Marshall Plan against Poverty, law 
and order, ‘nation zougadère’, child protection and family welfare, youth, sports, arts and 
culture. 

 

 
 
 

 

Health Care    

33 

156.  Madam  Speaker,  on  health  care  our  policy  is  to  improve  quality  and  delivery,  reduce 
waiting  time,  and  keep  up  with  latest  medical  technologies  while  promoting  greater 
efficiency.  

      
157.  To  this  end,  Government  has  increased  the  budget  of  the  Ministry  of  Health  to 

Rs9.7 billion.   

 
158.  A  number  of  new  projects  will  be  implemented  ranging  from  the  setting  up  of  a  New 
Cancer Centre, to the   implementation of the e-health project, and to the construction of a 
new state-of-the-art ENT hospital. 

 
159.  Furthermore, the primary health care services will be improved by implementing round 

the clock services in several Mediclinics and Area Health Centres.    

 
160.  To  reduce  long  queues  and  backlog  for  surgery  in  hospitals,  we  are  recruiting  one 

hundred doctors on a full time basis and other specialists on a sessional basis. 
 

161.  Furthermore,  we  are  recruiting  another  1,400  supporting  medical  staff  ranging  from 

162. 

nurses to pharmacy technicians, and health care assistants. 
 
Education: Building the Knowledge hub of the future 
I will now come to the issue of education.  Madam Speaker,  I am providing an amount of 
Rs14.7 billion to the Ministry of Education to improve the quality of education from pre-
primary to tertiary level, implement the nine year schooling, reform the tertiary sector as 
well as revamp and adapt vocational training to the new needs of our society. 
 

163.  This  Government  will  also  do  away  with  the  malpractices  which  have  damaged  the 

reputation of our tertiary education sector.   

 

 

34 

164.  To  rebuild  the  reputation  of  that  sector,  raise  quality  and  meet  international  standards, 

Government is coming up with a new Higher Education Bill.  

 
165.  Government is also introducing a more transparent and efficient Financing Model based 

on performance for Public Funded Tertiary Education Institutions.   

 

Social Security 

166.  Madam  Speaker,  earlier  in  the  speech  I  spoke  on  the  necessity  to  place  sharing  at  the 
centre of our development agenda. We cannot maintain social peace without a policy of 
sharing and caring, and without social peace, no sustainable development progress can be 
achieved.  
 

167.  We all know the tremendous and exceptional effort that this Government has made in the 
first week of its mandate to improve the income of our elderly, handicapped, widows, 
orphans  and  other  recipients  of  social  benefits.    The  population  is  aware  that  by  this 
single measure we improved the daily life of more than 240,000 of our citizens who were 
amongst those who suffered the most from the increased gap between the rich and the 
poor.    

    
168.  For the period January 2015 to 2016, we have made a total provision of Rs27.5 billion for 

social security expenditure. This Budget tops the list of all Ministries. 

 
169.  We  are  a  nation  that  has  always  shown  generosity  and  compassion  when  it  comes  to 
national solidarity. This is borne out by the spontaneous act of generosity and solidarity 
that  we  all  witnessed  following  the  flash  flood  in  Port  Louis  in  March  2013.    We  are 
aware that quite a number of our senior citizens wish to donate their old age pension to 
charitable institutions. I am pleased to announce that all those who donate their pension 
towards  the  Marshall  Plan  against  Poverty  managed  by  the  CSR  committee,  will  be 
exempted from payment of income tax on this amount. 
 
Housing 

 

 

35 

170.  Madam Speaker, I now come to housing. To meet the challenges of housing for the low 

and middle income groups, we are taking the following bold measures - 
 
First, we are providing funds to the Ministry of Housing and Lands for the construction 
of 1,000 low cost housing units for families whose monthly income is below Rs10,000.  
 
Second, the size of these housing units will now be increased from 39 square meters to 50 
square meters.  
 
Third, we are providing funds for the construction of 700 housing units in the next two 
years for vulnerable families under the National Empowerment Foundation.   
 
Fourth, we are increasing the grant for casting of roof slab from Rs65,000 to Rs75,000 
for  families  earning  a  monthly  income  of  up  to  Rs10,000.  This  income  limit  was  
previously Rs8,500.  
 
Fifth, we are broadening the categories of households eligible for the grant for casting of 
slabs.    Thus,  families  earning  between  Rs10,000  -  Rs15,000  monthly  will  henceforth 
benefit from a grant of up to Rs40,000.  
 
Sixth, we are increasing the grant for purchase of building materials from Rs55,000 to 
Rs65,000 for families earning up to Rs10,000 monthly.  
 
Seventh,  Government  is  providing  436  serviced  plots  for  families  earning  a  monthly 
income in the range of Rs10,000 - Rs25,000. 
 
Eighth, the exemption from payment of registration duty for a first time buyer of land is 
being increased from Rs1 million to Rs1.5 million 

 

Marshall Plan against Poverty 

 

36 

171.  Madam  Speaker,  I  now  come  to  the  Marshall  Plan  against  Poverty.    The  plight  of 
vulnerable families has been getting worse in recent years. The challenge in front of us is 
formidable. We need to face it with maximum compassion, and we also need to be bold. 
That is why the Prime Minister personally announced an Anti-Poverty Marshall Plan so 
as to get rid of the problem altogether. Today we are creating a solid foundation for that 
Marshall Plan. 
 
I  am  pleased  to  announce,  under  the  first  leg  of  the  Marshall  Plan  a  major  innovative 
approach  in  dealing  with  the  problem  of  poverty.    The  general  and  indirect  approach 
adopted so far in the relief of poverty has proven to be most ineffective. The lot of those 
families has hardly improved. Instead, there has been a deterioration in their quality of 
life.  This is why we have decided to go for a more  direct approach in extending support 
to the very poor families living in identified ‘cités’ and other ‘poches de pauvreté’. The 
support will be comprehensive, designed to lift in a meaningful way, living conditions 
and quality of life of these unfortunate families.  

172. 

 
173.  Madam Speaker, I would like to develop a new concept to allow for institutions that are 
contributing to CSR to take under their wings those unsustainable pockets of poverty in 
our country.  I am speaking here of the concept of ‘parrainage’.  An indicative list of 38 
pockets of poverty is at Annex, which is being circulated.  

 
174.  This concept of ‘parrainage’ is one which extends in the medium and long-term in the 
sense that when a company takes under its wings a ‘poche de pauvreté’, it will take under 
its responsibility the short, medium and long-term development of this area.  

 
175.  The ‘parrainage’  will include the following:  
Improving living conditions generally  
Raising  the level of employment  
Curbing social ills   
Ensuring that all children attend school and develop further their talents  
Creating sports and leisure facilities 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

 

176. 

37 

• 

And improving quality of life generally. 

 

Immediately after the Budget, I will start meeting with  major companies to participate in 
this national initiative to resolve once for all the problem of poverty in those ‘poches de 
grande pauvreté’. 

 
177.  The  second  leg  of  the  Marshall  Plan  is  to  revisit  the  structure  of  the  Corporate  Social 
  During  pre-Budget 
Responsibility  (CSR)  system 
consultations,  several  NGOs  have  raised  their  concerns  on  the  constraints  in  accessing 
support under the CSR system as it is now structured.  

it  more  effective. 

to  make 

 
178. 

I have given deep thoughts to the matter, and I have decided to review the CSR system in 
depth.  I  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  preferred  alternative  is  to  let  companies 
decide on how best to fulfil their social responsibility and obligation in a most effective 
manner.  Companies, thereon, will be free to allocate the 2 per cent of CSR according to 
their own set of priorities. 

 
179.  As for NGOs who are looking for support, it will be incumbent on them to convince the 

companies that their action and programmes deserve support. 

  
180. 

I am therefore removing all existing CSR guidelines. All companies will however have to 
submit their annual return on this question to the MRA.   
 
Law and Order 

181.  Madam Speaker, we are all concerned about the law and order situation in the country.  It 

has been deteriorating rapidly in recent years and we need to redress the situation. 
 

182.  First, in this Budget I am making a provision of Rs7.9 billion for the Police Force. 

 

183.  Second,  600  additional  police  officers  will  be  recruited  during  the  coming  year.    A 
modern  full-fledged  Police  Academy  is  being  set  up  to  boost  training  capacity.    I  am 

 

38 

pleased to announce also that the new recruits - the 600 which will be recruited - will 
undergo an intensive training at the Academy before being deployed to police stations.  
This will go a long way towards a more professional Police Force. 
 

184.  Third,  we  are  also  providing  for  the  recruitment  of  specialist  forensic  accountants  and 

analysts as well as computer and mobile phone experts to improve police investigations. 
 

185.  Fourth,  an  independent  Police  Complaints  Commission  will  be  set  up,  which  will  be 
presided  by  a  former  Judge  of  the  Supreme  Court  to  ensure  that  fundamental  human 
rights of citizens are respected. 
 
The Judiciary 

186.  To combat crime we need an effective justice system, one that can deliver justice more 
speedily.    We  are  therefore  increasing  the  budget  of  the Judiciary  to  Rs600  million  to 
improve  Court  infrastructure  and  allow  for  the  recruitment  of  one  hundred  additional 
court personnel. 
 
Nation Zougadère 

187.  Madam Speaker, I now come to the thorny issue of ‘Nation Zougadère’. 

 

188.  Madam  Speaker,  during  the  electoral  campaign  we  took  a  strong  commitment  to  put 

order in this mess.  
 

189.  Let me now announce those measures: 

 

190.  First,  a  total  ban  on  betting  and  gambling  advertisement.  This  decision  takes  effect 

immediately. 
 

191.  Second, a total ban on issue of new gaming and betting licenses except for casinos, for a 

period of five years.  
 

 

39 

192.  Third, Madam Speaker, a total ban on scratch cards also known as ‘cartes à gratter’. 

 

193.  Fourth,  we  are  increasing  substantially  gaming  licence  fees  and  betting  taxes.  The  full 

details thereof are given in the Annex to this Budget. 
 

194.  Fifth,  municipalities  and  district  councils  will,  within  a  period  of  3  years,  relocate  all 
gaming  houses  from  city  centres  to  approved  designated  areas.  Government  will 
participate in the cost of relocation.  
 

195.  As the House is already aware the number of race meetings has been reduced from 43 to 

35. 
 

196.  The  Gambling  Regulatory  Authority  (GRA),  under  the  aegis  of  the  Prime  Minister’s 
Office,  will also come up shortly with more details on operational measures to further 
curb gambling. 
 

197.  Madam Speaker, ‘nation zougadère’ is based on the illusion that life is a jackpot – if you 
play  it  right  you  become  a  millionaire.    Our  forefathers  taught  us  the  contrary  -  that 
prosperity comes with hard work, discipline and dedication. 
 
Consumer Protection 

198.  Let me now come to the issue of consumer protection. 

 

199.  Madam  Speaker,  we  have  become  a  nation  of  consumers  and  much  less  a  nation  of 
producers  of  goods  and  services.  In  fact,  we  are  becoming  too  much  of  a  consumer 
society as borne out by the proliferation of hypermarkets and shopping malls.  

  
200.  The trend towards consumerism has had 3 major effects on our country.  

 

201.  First,  official  statistics  are  confirming  that  household  debt  has  attained  unsustainable 

levels.  No responsible Government can ignore this trend.  

 

 

40 

202.  Second,  the  surge  in  consumption  has  put  unbearable  pressure  on  our  imports  and  the 
balance  of  trade  has  reached  alarming  levels  never  seen  before.    Madam  Speaker,  our 
imports  have  exceeded  our  exports  by  a  massive  Rs76.8  billion  in  2014.  This  trend 
cannot be sustained. 
 

203.  Third,  consumers,  very  often  unknowingly,  are  being  fleeced  by  stores  and  financing 
institutions  that  sell  goods  on  hire  purchase.    Consumers  should  know  that  they  are 
paying 19 per cent interest on hire purchase and a further penalty rate of 5 per cent is 
charged for any late payment, which brings the total amount to 24 per cent. 
 

204.  This scandalous state of affairs cannot continue.  I am, therefore, proposing a series of 

measures to further protect consumers.  

 

First,  concerning  hire  purchase,  I  am  reducing  the  maximum  interest  rate  from  19  per 
cent to 12 per cent, and the penalty rate from 5 per cent to 2 per cent.   
 
Second, all suppliers of goods and services must display prices inclusive of VAT here 
now  on.    This  measure  concerns  all  hotels,  restaurants,  shopping  malls,  hypermarkets, 
supermarkets,  and  all  other  distribution  networks.  In  the  case  of  shops,  the  price  tags 
should display only one price, the price inclusive of VAT.   The Finance Bill will provide 
for appropriate sanctions in case of non-compliance.  
 
Third,  coming  to  banks,  numerous  consumers  have  complained  about  excessive  fees 
charged by banks, including on credit card transactions.  As a first step I am setting up an 
Office  of  Ombudsperson  on  Financial  Institutions  which  will  deal  with  complaints 
received  and  recommend  appropriate  remedial  action.    Furthermore,  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius is planning to implement the report on abuses of commercial banks released 
recently. 
 

 

205. 

41 

Fourth, a special committee is being set up to examine the Report of the Commission of 
Enquiry on Sale by Levy for expediting the implementation of its recommendations. 

 

I  am  confident,  Madam  Speaker,  that  these  measures  will  go  a  long  way  to  protect 
consumers. 
 
Child Protection, Family welfare, and Development Gender Equality  

206.  Madam Speaker, I now come to our measures to ensure greater child protection, family 

207. 

welfare and gender equality.  
 
I must  emphasise that  child protection remains  a primary  concern to this Government.  
This is because children very often bear the brunt of poverty and violence in our society.  
 

208.  First,  I  am  doubling  the  provision  for  joint  government  and  civil  society  initiatives  to 

support children and women in distress. 

 
209.  Second, I am increasing the number of technical staff at the Child Development Unit by 

over 50 per cent for the protection of children and families.  

 
210.  Third, I am making provision for the Ministry to recruit six more child psychologists.  
 
211.  Fourth, the financial assistance scheme for upgrading of the level of services of crèches 
in  deprived  areas  is  being  extended  pending  the  implementation  of  the  Marshall  Plan 
against Poverty. 

 
212.  Fifth, I am also increasing the capitation grant to NGOs working with children who are 

victims of abuse by 50 per cent.  
 
 
 
 

 

42 

Youth, Sports, Leisure, Arts and Culture  

213.  Madam  Speaker,  our  policies  to  promote  the  well-being  of  our  population  cannot  be 
comprehensive if we do not give due consideration to the development of sports, leisure 
facilities, and arts and culture.  
 
In  spite  of  Mauritians  being  great  football  fans,  local  football  has  been  practically 
inexistent for a long period of time. 

214. 

 
215. 

 
216. 

It is only recently that we have seen a pickup in attendance at football matches between 
professional  teams  in  our  Premier  League.    This  positive  development  must  be 
encouraged.  

I am, therefore, making a provision of Rs26 million as Government contribution to the 
project of professional football.   
 

217.  We are also providing for the upgrading of the ‘Centre Technique Francois Blaquart’ at 

Réduit to provide facilities to our young footballers.   

 
218.  To encourage our athletes who are putting in tremendous efforts to represent our country 
internationally,  I  am  making  a  provision  of  Rs60  million  for  the  Indian  Ocean  Islands 
Games.  

 
219.  Madam Speaker, ‘Un pays sans culture est un pays sans âme’.  We have witnessed over 
the  years  a  serious  decay  of  our  ‘patrimoine  national’  and  a  deep  feeling  of 
‘découragement’ among our local artists.   

 
220.  To  remedy  this  chaotic  situation,  we  are  setting  up  a  Task  Force  that  will  comprise 
experienced  people  who  are  dedicated  to  the  cause  of  arts  and  culture,  to  assess  the 
situation and come with recommendations.  

 

 

221. 

43 

In the meantime, our efforts will be focused on mobilising the required resources under a 
Public,  Private  Partnership  (PPP)  initiative  to  renovate  the  Plaza  theatre  and  the  Port-
Louis theatre, upgrade our museums and other heritage sites, and transform La Citadelle 
into an ‘espace artistique’.  
 

222.  All Smart Cities will be required to invest in dedicated space for the development of arts 

and culture. 
  

223.  Moreover, the SME Bank will have a special desk to assist local artists, sculptors, and 

musicians to modernise and expand their business.   
 

224.  We  are  also  providing  for  a  study  on  the  ‘Stade  Musical’  for  concerts  by  local  and 

international artists and the setting up of a National Centre for Performing Arts. 
 

XIII.   ENSURING TRANSPARENCY AND GOOD  GOVERNANCE 
225.  Madam Speaker, I will now speak about our action to achieve the fourth main objective 

of the Budget which is to ensure transparency, accountability and good governance. 
 

226.  Madam  Speaker,  we  cannot  overemphasise  the  importance  of  transparency  and  good 
governance  in  the  management  of  public  affairs.    This  is  an  area  where  Government 
needs to be constantly vigilant and also ready to effect changes wherever necessary. In 
this Budget, we are introducing changes which have been long overdue, especially in the 
crucial areas of meritocracy, procurement, and management of State lands.  
 
I will start with meritocracy.  We stand firm in our deep faith that every individual should 
be  able  to  progress  in  our  society,  based  on  his  ability  and  talent  rather  than  on  class 
privilege, political and religious affiliations or wealth.   
 

227. 

228.  Madam Speaker, job discrimination is unacceptable in the new paradigm of Nation for all 
–  which  explains  why  transparency  in  job  recruitment  is  quickly  gaining  ground  at  all 
levels. 

 

44 

 
229.  The principle of meritocracy will also be extended to procurement procedures.  In view 
of the opacity surrounding allocation of contracts in the past which has led to shady deals 
and widespread corruption, we have decided, as a matter of transparency that all contracts 
will  henceforth  be  allocated  after  full  and  transparent  tender  procedures.    The  Public 
Procurement Act will be amended accordingly.  

 
230.  The Central Procurement Board itself will be restructured and it will have more staff in 

order to expedite the allocation of contracts in a more transparent manner.     
 
Greater transparency in the allocation of state lands 

231.  Madam Speaker, I now come to State lands, where the need for transparency is greater 
than ever.  We have seen how State lands have been dished out to political ‘protégés’ 
who sold their rights for hundreds of millions of rupees. 
 

232.  Madam Speaker, we will start in a determined way to have greater transparency in the 

process for allocation and management of State lands.   
 

233.  First,  a  Digital  State  Land  Register  will  be  compiled  and  made  public.  It  will  provide 
comprehensive data on State lands already leased as well as unallocated State lands that 
may be developed for commercial, industrial and other uses.   
 

234.  Second, allocation of State lands will be made on a transparent basis like in Singapore. 

 

235.  Third, Government is making it mandatory for the names of beneficiaries of new leases 
of  State  lands  to  be  published  in  the  Government  Gazette  giving  details  of  the  lands 
leased and proposed usage. 
 

236.  Madam  Speaker,  for  better  governance,  we  are  also  reviewing  the  functioning  of  the 
Board of Directors of public sector bodies. The chairpersons will not get involved in the 
day to day operations of the organisation anymore and will not be entitled to a permanent 

 

237. 

238. 

45 

office. As far as possible CEOs who are directly accountable to the Board of Directors 
will be recruited on a transparent basis.  

 

Public Sector Reforms  
I now refer to public sector reforms. 
 
I am pleased to announce that at long last the Civil Service College will become a reality. 
This will be crucial to continuously upgrading the skills and knowledge of public officers 
through refresher courses and e-learning platform. 
 

239.  Government  is  also  investing  to  make  digital  technology  more  pervasive  in  the  Civil 

Service.  

 
240.  Madam Speaker, on a different note, we are increasing the provisions for the Trade Union 

Trust Fund and the Media Trust by 33 per cent. 
 
Legacy Sovereign Fund:  Our legacy to future generations. 

241.  Madam Speaker, I’ll now come to a major project.  We have a long culture of work and 
saving for the future. In fact our country would never have achieved so much without this 
culture of hard work and savings passed on by our forefathers. It is our responsibility to 
hand over this culture to our children. 
 

242.  We  are  therefore  setting  up  a  Legacy  Sovereign  Fund  that  will  invest  for  future 

generations. 
 

243.  First, one per cent of total Government revenue collection will be credited to the Fund 

each year. 
 

244.  Second, the population will remember that we sold 40 per cent of our shareholding in 
Mauritius Telecom for around Rs7 billion rupees and squandered the money. In the same 
vein, we bypassed international tenders for the SSR airport and paid Rs14 billion for a 

 

46 

contract that was not worth more than Rs8 billion. This gross mismanagement of public 
funds has unfairly indebted future generations. Madam Speaker, we want to move away 
from  this  way  of  doing  things.    As  from  today  all  the  proceeds  from  the  sales  of 
Government  properties  will  be  credited  to  the  Legacy  Sovereign  Fund  for  long  term 
investment. 
   

245.  Third, Madam Speaker, I would like to recall that I set up in the eighties institutions like 
the  State  Investment  Corporation,  the  Mauritius  Duty  Free  Paradise,  the  Casino  de 
Maurice just to name a few,  to inculcate world class management  practices in the public 
sector. I never thought that all those institutions would end up in the shameful situation 
they are in today. The population will understand our concern not to allow such state of 
affairs to recur in the future.  Therefore, the Legacy Sovereign Fund will be answerable 
to  Parliament  to  ensure  total  accountability  and  transparency  as  well  as  robust 
management. 

 

Diaspora  

246.  Madam Speaker, many families in Mauritius have sons and daughters who have chosen 
to  stay  abroad  after  their  studies.  Many  of  them  are  highly  qualified  and  experienced 
professionals.  The State has invested in them and their departure constitutes a brain drain 
and a loss for their country and their family. 
 

247.  We are therefore proposing an exceptionally bold package of incentives to attract them 
back to our country.  I am pleased to announce the following measures to encourage the 
Mauritian diaspora abroad to return and serve our country.  
 
First, an exemption from income tax for a  full period of ten  years on  all their income 
including worldwide income.  
 
Second,  an  exemption  from  payment  of  customs  duties  of  up  to  a  maximum  of  Rs2 
million on a car that can be purchased in Mauritius or abroad.   
 

 

47 

Third, they will be entitled to bring back their personal belongings without payment of 
customs duties and VAT. All Mauritians holding  a Mauritian passport  as well as their 
children, whether they have a Mauritian passport or not, are eligible to apply.  Those who 
do not have a Mauritian passport will be granted a permanent residence permit.  
 
All professionals who have worked a minimum of ten years abroad are eligible. 

 

The Board of Investment will manage the whole scheme.  
 
So,  Madam  Speaker,  if  I  have  to  sum  up  our  appeal  to  the  Mauritian  diaspora  in  four 
words, I would say: Our country needs you. 

 

XIV.   MACROECONOMIC POLICIES AND TAXATION  
248.  Madam Speaker, I will now move to the issue of economic policies and taxation in the 
Budget  and  talk  about  macroeconomic  policies.  The  Bank  of  Mauritius  will  have  full 
independence  in  formulating  and  implementing  both  exchange  rate  and  monetary 
policies.    We  are  strengthening  coordination  between  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  and  my 
Ministry so as to ensure that at all times we have a consistent macroeconomic policy mix.   
 
Prospects for 2015/16 

249.  Madam  Speaker,  as  regards  budgetary  prospects  for  the  financial  year  2015/2016, 
recurrent expenditure will require a provision of Rs93.6 billion, and capital expenditure 
of Rs12.6 billion.  

 
250.  Total revenue is expected to be Rs90.8 billion, of which tax receipts of Rs77.8 billion. 
  
251.  The budget deficit therefore for 2015/2016 will be 3.5 per cent of GDP.  
 
252.  Public sector debt will be 54.2 per cent of GDP whereas, if measured by IMF standards, 

it will be 58.6 per cent. 

 

 

253. 

48 

I would like to mention that, in line with our objective to bring greater transparency in the 
management of public finances, all Special Funds will be closed by end June except the 
National  Resilience  Fund  and  the  Build  Mauritius  Fund  which  will  be  phased  out 
gradually. 

 
254.  Concerning budgetary figures for the first six months period January to June 2015, they 
are  available  in  the  Estimates  2015  (January  to  June)  which  are  being  circulated.  
However,  the  statistical  ratios  have  not  been  compiled  because  they  are  not  very 
meaningful as they should normally be computed on a twelve months basis.  

 

Taxation 

255.  Madam Speaker, I will now announce measures on tax administration. 

 
First, I am reducing – I mean tax administration rather than taxation - from 30 per cent to 
10 per cent the deposit required from a taxpayer for lodging an objection against a tax 
assessment made by the MRA or by the Registrar-General’s Department.  
 
Second,  the  statutory  time  limit  for  an  assessment  is  being  reduced  from  4  years  to  3 
years. 
 
Third, the MRA will have to obtain the approval of the Assessment Review Committee 
before raising an additional assessment after that period of 3 years. 

 

256. 

I  wish  to  add  that  the  Finance  Bill  I  will  bring  to  the  House  soon  will  contain 
amendments  to  various  enactments  relating  to  tax  administration,  public  finance  and 
other areas, in line with the objectives of this Budget.  These amendments are explained 
in the Annex to the Budget Speech.  
 
Tax Measures 

257.  Madam Speaker,  let  me  now  announce  the  revision  of  allowances  on  personal  income 

tax. 

 

 

49 

258.  First,  I  am  raising  all  the  Income  Exemption  Thresholds  by  Rs10,000.    Thus,  any 
individual  deriving  an  income  of  Rs285,000  will  not  have  to  pay  any  income  tax.  
Likewise, a couple with two young children and a total income of up to Rs495,000 will 
have no income tax to pay. 
 

259.  Second, I am also raising the additional deduction in respect of children who are pursuing 
tertiary  studies,  whether  in  Mauritius  or  abroad,  to  Rs135,000  per  child  and  I  am  also 
increasing the allowable number of years for studies from 3 years to 6 years.  
 

260.  My third measure is meant to assist those families who are striving to become the owner 
of  a  first  home.    I  have  indeed  received  several  representations  about  the  present 
restrictions in the Interest Relief provisions which limit the deduction to the first 5 years 
and to a maximum amount of Rs120,000. I find those requests sensible and accordingly I 
am taking the following decisions - 
• 
• 
 
As a result, a first-time home-owner will be able to claim tax relief for the full amount of 
interest he paid on his mortgage loan and for the full duration of that loan. 

I am eliminating the 5 years restriction, and   
I am also abolishing the cap of Rs120,000. 

 

261.  Fourth, the exemption threshold on the lump sum received as pension, retiring allowance 

or severance allowance is being raised from Rs1.5 million to Rs2 million. 
 

262.  Madam Speaker, after announcing those significant tax measures, after providing for the 
various  Budget  measures  I  have  enumerated  and  after  Budgeting  for  a  major 
strengthening in the social protection system, let me now turn to other fiscal measures. 
 

263.  There are a number of options open to me.  One option is to increase the rate of excise 
duties on the usual victims: consumers of cigarettes and alcohol.  Another option I have is 
to  reinstate  tax  on  dividends  for  companies.  I  have  given  careful  thoughts  to  those 

 

264. 

50 

possibilities and I have considered that none of them would be in consonance with the 
spirit of this Budget.  
 
 I  am  therefore  pleased  to  announce,  Madam  Speaker,  that  the  first  Budget  of  this 
Government is a no tax Budget. 
 

(Applause) 

 

XV.   CONCLUSION 
265.  Madam Speaker, I would like to dedicate this Budget to Sir Anerood Jugnauth, our Prime 

266. 

 
267. 

Minister, who is here. He has always been a constant source of inspiration to me. 
 
I  have  consulted  with  all  my  colleagues  Ministers  and  I  thank  them  for  all  for  their 
support and collaboration. 

I wish to extend my deep thanks also to the Financial Secretary, Dev Manraj and all the 
staff  of  my  Ministry  for  their  total  dedication  and  unflinching  support  to  prepare  the 
budget. 

 I shall now conclude Madam Speaker. 

 
268. 
 
269.  This Budget goes far beyond a classical Budget and presents to the nation a ‘véritable 

projet de société’.  

 
270.  As I said at the beginning, we are at the crossroad.   
 
271.  This Budget is a wake-up call to the nation.  
 
272. 
 

 The choice is ours. 

 

51 

273.  We can choose to adopt a business as usual approach and allow our society, our economy 

to decay further. 

 
274.  Or we can choose to take the tough decisions needed for a better future for ourselves and 

our children.  

 
275.  The question is: can we take this leap of faith? 
 
276.  Madam Speaker, I am confident that we, as a nation, can and will do it. 
 
277.  Madam Speaker, I now commend the two Bills to the House. 
 

(Applause) 

 
The Prime Minister rose and seconded. 
 

 

ADJOURNMENT 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that this Assembly do now adjourn 

to Tuesday 31 March 2015 at 11.30 a.m.  

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned.  

At 6.32 p.m. the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Tuesday 31 March 2015 at 

11.30 a.m. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

52 

 
 
ANNEX 

TO  

 

 

(APPENDIX) 

THE BUDGET SPEECH 2015-2016 

BUDGET MEASURES 

 

EXPLANATORY NOTES AND MAIN PROVISIONS 

TO BE INCLUDED IN THE FINANCE BILL 

 
 

PART A: TAXATION AND PUBLIC FINANCE 

 

Personal Income Tax 

 

Income Exemption Thresholds 
Increase in the income exemption thresholds by Rs10,000 for income year 1st July 2015 
to 30th June 2016 as follows: 

 

Individual with no dependent 

Individual with one dependent 

Individual with two dependents 

Individual with three or more dependents 

Retired/disabled person with no dependent 

Retired/disabled person with dependents 

From 

To 

Rs275,000 

Rs285,000 

Rs385,000 

Rs395,000 

Rs445,000 

Rs455,000 

Rs485,000 

Rs495,000 

Rs325,000 

Rs335,000 

Rs435,000 

Rs445,000 

 

 
Additional Deduction for Tertiary Education  
The additional deduction in respect of a dependent child who is pursuing tertiary studies 
is being raised as follows: 

 

 

 

 

53 

from Rs125,000 to Rs135,000, if abroad; and  
from Rs80,000 to Rs135,000, if in Mauritius. 

The  deduction  which  can  be  claimed  for  up  to  three  consecutive  years  of  an 
undergraduate course will now be available for the first 6 years of study. 
 
Interest Relief 

Interest paid in a year on a secured housing loan contracted by a first-time home-owner is 
allowed as a deduction from taxable income, up to an amount of Rs120,000 (both for a 
single person or a  couple) and for 5 consecutive  years only.  Two measures are being 
taken: 

o 
o 

The 5-year time limit is being removed; and 
The ceiling of Rs120,000 is also being removed. 
 

As a result, as from 1st July 2015, a first-time home-owner will be able to deduct from his 
taxable income the full amount of interest paid on such loans over the years. 

 

Lump Sum Income 
Currently, the first Rs1.5 million of the lump sum received as commutation of pension, 
retiring  allowance  or  severance  allowance  is  exempt  from  income  tax.    The  exempt 
income threshold will be raised from Rs1.5 million to Rs2 million, with effect as from 1st 
July 2015. 
 
Donation of Basic Retirement Pension (BRP) 
Any  person  who  elects  to  donate  his  Basic  Retirement  Pension  (BRP)  in  full  to  an 
approved charitable institution or an approved Foundation will be exempt from income 
tax thereon.  The National Pensions Act will also be amended. 
 

Taxes and Levies under Income Tax Act 

 

Solidarity Levy on Telephony Service Providers 

 

 

 

54 

The  Solidarity  levy  on  telephony  service  providers  [5%  of  book  profit  +  1.5%  of 
turnover]  which  was  introduced  in  2009  and  subsequently  extended  will  be  further 
extended up to June 2018. 
 

  Special Levy on Banks 

The  Special  Levy  on  Banks  is  currently  10%  of  chargeable  income  for  segment  A 
banking business and 3.4% on book profit and 1% on operating income for segment B 
banking business.  This current formula which is scheduled to last until this year will be 
maintained up to June 2018.  
   
Alternative Minimum Tax 
An Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT) of the lesser of 7.5% of adjusted book profit or 
10% of any dividend declared is payable by a company if the computed tax liability is 
below that minimum amount.   
The AMT was suspended for manufacturing and hotel companies for fiscal years 2013 
and  2014,  mainly  to  allow  those  companies  to  benefit  fully  from  accelerated  annual 
allowances.  
The AMT will now be removed for all sectors. 
 

Alignment of Tax Year with Government New Financial Year 
Submission of Personal Income Tax Returns 
With the alignment of the tax year (which is currently on a calendar year basis) with the 
new  financial  year  of  Government,  i.e.  from  1st  July  to  30th  June,  there  will  be 
exceptionally  during  the  year  2015  two  income  tax  returns  to  be  submitted  by 
individuals: 
o 

the  first  one  will  be  the  normal  income  tax  return  to  be  submitted  by  31st 
March/15th April 2015; and  
the second one to be submitted by 30th September/15th October 2015 covering the 
6 months period from January to June 2015. 

o 

Thereafter,  submission  of 
September/15th October. 

income 

tax  returns  will  be  done  annually  by  30th 

 

 

55 

 
Income Tax Thresholds and Deductions/Reliefs 
The adjusted exemption thresholds and other deductions/reliefs allowable in respect of 
income  derived  during  the  6  months  period  (1st  January  to  30th  June  2015)  will  be  as 
follows: 
 

Deductions 

Adjustment 

  Income exemption thresholds 

Amount of thresholds will be halved. 

  Additional exemption in respect 

of dependent child pursuing 
undergraduate course 

  Relief for medical or health 

insurance premium 

  Interest relief on secured housing 

loan 

 

 

Amount of deduction will be halved. 
The 6 months period will not be 
taken into account when applying the 
time limit of 6 years. 
The monetary ceilings will be 
halved. 

Relief will be granted in respect of 
the actual amount of premium or 
interest paid for the 6 months period, 
subject to the above ceiling. 

Employers will be required to issue the Statement of Emoluments and Tax Deduction for 
the 6 months period not later than 15th August 2015. 

 

 

Corporate Income Tax Returns 

Corporates will continue to submit their tax returns 6 months following the end of their 
accounting period. 

However, representations have been received to give additional time to companies having 
accounting  year  ending  30th  June  and  submitting  their  returns  by  end  of  December.  
Accordingly, those companies will be allowed, at their option, to pay the tax due in the 

 

56 

last quarter based on an additional APS return.  Any adjustment based on their audited 
financial statements will be effected before 31st January. 

 

 

Date Limit for Submission of Tax Returns 

The latest date for submission of tax returns will be 2 working days before the end of the 
financial year (30th June), as is presently the case. 

 

Small Enterprises (turnover of not more than Rs10 million) 

 

SMEs Registered with the New SMEDA 

Any  small  company  registered  with  the  new  SMEDA  after  1st  June  2015  will  benefit 
from the following fiscal incentives: 

o 
o 

o 

exemption from payment of corporate income tax for the first 8 years; 
exemption from the requirement to operate tax withholding under Tax Deduction 
at  Source  (TDS)  for  the  first  8  years  (Withholding  under  PAYE  will  still  be 
required, if applicable); and 
exemption  from  submission  of  financial  statements  and  annual  returns  to  the 
Registrar of Companies for the first 8 years. 
 

VAT Registration 
The compulsory VAT registration threshold is being raised from a turnover amount of 
Rs4 million to Rs6 million.  
 
Advance Payment System (APS) Returns 
Companies having turnover not exceeding Rs4 million are currently exempted from the 
requirement to submit quarterly corporate tax returns under the Advance Payment System 
(APS).   
This turnover threshold is being raised from Rs4 million to Rs10 million. As a result, all 
small enterprises will no longer be subject to the APS. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

57 

Company Annual Fees 
The annual fee payable to the Registrar of Companies by a small private company will be 
reduced from Rs2,500 to Rs500. 
 
Annual Return to Registrar of Companies 
There will be no obligation on a small private company to file an annual return to the 
Registrar  of  Companies  except  if  there  has  been  a  change  in  shareholding  or  in  the 
composition of the board of directors or other particulars. 
 
Simplified Financial Statements  
The Companies Act will be amended to allow filing of financial statements prepared on a 
cash  basis  by  small  private  companies.    No  balance  sheet  will  be  required  to  be 
submitted. 
 
Simplified Income Tax System  
A Simplified Tax System will be introduced to facilitate small enterprises to comply with 
their legal requirements as regards keeping of records and filing of income tax and VAT 
returns.  Its main features will be as follows: 
o 
o 

It will be on a “cash” basis instead of “accrual” basis.  
No balance sheet will be required and instead only 6 items of information would 
be required. 
A simplified system for computing CSR and annual allowances will be applied. 
The cash-based system will considerably reduce record keeping requirements and 
simplify accounting by small businesses.  
Practice  notes  will  be  issued  by  the  MRA  on  the  records  to  be  kept  and  the 
standard formats. 

o 
o 

o 

Small  enterprises  (i.e.,  enterprises  with  turnover  not  exceeding  Rs10  million)  will  be 
given the option to join the Simplified Income Tax system. 

 

 

VAT Cash Accounting Scheme 

 

 

 

 

58 

Similarly, a simplified VAT system for small enterprises will be introduced.  
  

Promotion of Green and Sustainable Development 

Accelerated  Income  Tax  Depreciation  Provision  for  Green  Investment:    Exceptional 
accelerated annual allowances were introduced in 2013 in respect of: 
o 

landscaping  and  other  earth  works  for  embellishment  purposes  (50%  straight 
line); and 
Green technology equipment (50% straight line). 

o 

 

green technology equipment is defined as capital expenditure (excluding passenger car) 
on  renewable  energy,  desalination  plant,  composting  equipment,  pollution  control 
equipment, water efficient plant, energy efficient equipment, etc. 

These  exceptional  provisions  which  have  lapsed  on  31st  December  2014  are  being 
reintroduced and made permanent.  

 

Solar Energy Investment Allowance:  A household investing in his own solar energy unit 
will be allowed to deduct from his taxable income the total amount invested in such a 
unit, including photovoltaic kits and battery for storage of electricity.  
 
Exemption from Land Conversion Tax: Renewable energy projects such as solar farms, 
agri-solar  farms  and  biomass  projects  require  large  extents  of  land  and  that  is  why 
agricultural lands put to that use are exempted from Land Conversion Tax.  However, if 
the  project  promoter  and  investor  is  not  the  owner  of  the  land  he  is  not  being  able  to 
benefit from that tax incentive even if he holds a long-term lease over the land. 

The Sugar Industry Efficiency Act will accordingly be amended to allow a lessee to apply 
for a land conversion permit and benefit from any tax exemption applicable to his project. 

 

 

P.E.T. Bottles 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

59 

In the 2014 Budget, a graduated Refund Scheme of the Rs2 duty on each P.E.T bottle 
was  introduced  with  a  view  to  promoting  collection  of  used  plastic  P.E.T  bottles  for 
export, thus removing them from our waste stream.  The scheme is being re-engineered to 
encourage SMEs to engage in such recycling activities.   

Government will now pay a flat rate of Rs5 per kg of used P.E.T bottles whenever the 
enterprise has exported or locally recycled at least 1 ton against the current threshold of 
1,000 tonnes annually and a rate of Rs15 per kg. 

 

Ocean Economy 

Bunkering:  The MID levy of 30 cents per litre is currently levied on petroleum products 
(including  fuel  oil  and  aviation  spirit)  that  are  used  for  local  consumption  and  for  re-
export  as  bunker  fuel.    In  the  context  of  our  bunkering  development  project,  the  MID 
levy will be removed as from 1st July 2015 on all petroleum products that are re-exported. 
 
Petroleum  Exploration:    VAT  exemption  on  machinery  and  equipment  used  in  the 
exploration and production of petroleum products.  
 
 
Deep Ocean Water Applications:  VAT zero-rating of chilled deep sea-water to be used 
for the provision of air conditioning services, as is presently the case of water supplied by 
Central Water Authority and electricity supplied by the Central Electricity Board. 

Consumer Protection 

Consumer Price Inclusive of Tax 
The Consumer Protection Act will be amended to make it mandatory for the full price to 
be charged to a consumer to be displayed or advertised TTC (“Toutes Taxes Comprises”) 
without  ambiguity.    Thus,  where  a  product  or  a  service  is  subject  to  VAT,  the  price 
should  be  VAT-inclusive.    Failure  to  do  so  will  be  an  offence  and  will  attract  high 
penalty. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

60 

Levy on SMS and MMS 

The Value Added Tax Act will be amended to provide for abolition of the 10 cents levy 
per message on SMS and MMS, with effect from 1 July 2015. 

Customs Tariff  

Iron Bars: Lowering of the rate of customs duty as from 1st July 2015 on iron bars from 
15%  to  10%  to  bring  in  greater  competition  and  less  uneven  playing-field  on  this 
sensitive  market  in  view  of  the  preferential  tariffs  enjoyed  by  some  sources  of  import 
under preferential trade agreements. 

Gambling Licences and Taxes 

The  taxation  system  on  gambling,  gaming  and  betting  (covering  licence  fees,  fixed 
betting duties and betting taxes) will be simplified, streamlined and adjusted as per table 
below. 

 

Licence Fees, Fixed Betting Duties, Betting and Gaming Taxes 

61 

 

Activities

CATEGORY 1: CASINO

Casino

CATEGORY 2: GAMING HOUSE "A"

Gaming House "A" in Mauritius

Gaming House "A" in Rodrigues

Annual Licence Fee

From

To

Betting Tax

From

To

Rs 3.5 million
              +
Rs 125,000 per 
gaming machine

Rs 3.5 million
           +
Rs 125,000 per 
gaming machine

Rs 3.5 million
              +
Rs 125,000 per 
gaming machine
Rs 500,000
              +
Rs 20,000 per 
machine

Rs 3.5 million
           +
Rs 125,000 per 
gaming machine
Rs 1 million
           +      
Rs 50,000 per 
machine

15% of gross takings

15% of gross takings

35% of gross takings
(gaming machine)

35% of gross takings
(gaming machine)

15% of gross takings

30% of gross takings

35% of gross takings
(gaming machine)
15% of gross takings

35% of gross takings
(gaming machine)
30% of gross takings

35% of gross takings
(gaming machine)

35% of gross takings
(gaming machine)

CATEGORY 3: HORSE-RACING
Bookmaker conducting fixed odds betting on local race :

10% of gross stakes
                +
Fixed duty of           
Rs 16,000/24,000 
per race meeting
10% of gross stakes
                +
Fixed duty of           
Rs 16,000 per race 
meeting

10% of gross stakes
                +
Fixed duty of           
Rs 24,000 per race 
meeting

10% of gross stakes

(Fixed duty 
abolished)

20% of gross stakes

(Fixed duty 
abolished)

20% of gross stakes

(Fixed duty 
abolished)

Win and place 10%

Other 12%

20% of gross stakes

(a) at the racecourse

Rs 350,000

Rs  1 million

(b) outside the racecourse

Rs 350,000

Rs 3.5 million

(c) through remote communication

Totalisator Operator:

(a) at the racecourse

(b) outside the racecourse

(c) conducting bets through remote 
communication

Rs 350,000 per 
principal place of 
business
               +
Rs 40,000 per 
additional place of 
business/facility

Rs 3. 5 million per 
principal place of 
business
            +
Rs 40,000 per 
additional place of 
business/facility

Rs 100,000 

Rs 1 million

Rs 10,000 at each 
place of business 
Rs 40,000 in respect 
of the principal 
place of business
               +
Rs 10,000 in respect 
of each place at 
which facilities are 
provided

Rs 40,000 at each 
place of business 
Rs 40,000 in respect 
of the principal 
place of business
             +
Rs 40,000 in respect 
of each place at 
which facilities are 
provided

(d) conducting local race inter-
totalisator betting
(e) conducting foreign race inter-
totalisator betting

Rs 350,000

Rs 3.5 million

Rs 350,000

Rs 3.5 million

(f) per terminal

Rs 10,000

Rs 40,000

Horse-racing organiser

Rs 1 million

Rs 1 million

N/A

N/A

 

 

 

 

 

 

62 

Activities

Annual Licence Fee

From

To

Betting Tax

From

To

CATEGORY 4: ON ANY EVENT (INCLUDING FOOTBALL)
Rs 350,000 per 
principal place of 
business
               +
Rs 20,000 in respect 
of additional place 
of business

Bookmaker conducting fixed odds 
betting on any event or contingency

Rs 3.5 million per 
principal place of 
business
               +
Rs 40,000 in respect 
of additional place 
of business

10% of gross stakes
                 +
Fixed duty of           
Rs 24,000 per week 
per place of 
business

20% of gross stakes

(Fixed duty 
abolished)

CATEGORY 5: MAURITIUS NATIONAL LOTTERY
Operator of Mauritius National 
Lottery
CATEGORY 6: MISCELLANEOUS
Sweepstake organiser

Rs 37,500

Rs 500,000



Local pool promoter

Rs 15,000

Agent of a foreign pool promoter

Lottery under Part XVII of the 
Gambling Regulatory Authority Act

Operator of dart games

Ad hoc licence
Gaming House "B"

Limited Payout Machine

Collector

Excise Duty 

Rs 37,500
Higher of Rs 5,000 
or 35% of the total 
market value of 
prizes
Rs 30,000 per dart 
board
Rs 20,000 per day
Rs 50,000
Rs 10,000 for 
operator
                +
Rs 5,000 per 
machine
Rs 190

Rs 5 million

46.16% on Net 
Proceeds

46.16% on Net 
Proceeds

Rs 15,000

Rs 15,000

Rs 15,000

Rs 15,000

Rs 15,000

Rs 15,000 per day
Rs 15,000
Rs 15,000 for 
operator
                 +
Rs 10,000 per 
machine
Rs 190

10% of gross stakes 10% of gross stakes
12% of gross 
proceeds
12% of gross stakes 12% of gross stakes

12% of gross
 proceeds

N/A

N/A

N/A
N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A
N/A

Higher of Rs 500,000 
or 10% of gross 
takings per 
machine payable 
on a monthly basis

Higher of Rs 500,000 
or 10% of gross 
takings per 
machine payable 
on a monthly basis

N/A

N/A

 

Disabled  Persons:  The  concessionary  rate  of  excise  duty  on  purchase  of  a  motor  car, 
which  is  currently  granted  to  a  parent  of  a  disabled  minor,  will  be  extended  so  that  a 
parent of a disabled person (impaired mobility), whether the latter is a minor or not, will 
be eligible for the concession. 

Motor Vehicles 

‘individual 
Unlicensed  Agents:  Representations  have  been 
agents/importers of second hand motor vehicles who are unlicensed and causing unfair 
competition on the market.  The issue of regulation and licensing of such agents will be 
looked into by the Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection. 

regarding 

received 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 

63 

Unfair  VAT  Competition:      The  Tenth  Schedule  to  the  VAT  Act  will  be  amended  to 
provide that any person acting as agent in the importation of second hand motor cars to 
be compulsorily VAT registered. 

Radiation Certificate: The obligation for an importer of a second-hand car from Japan to 
furnish a Radiation Certificate which was introduced in 2011 in the wake of the Fujiyama 
nuclear accident will be abolished. 

CO2 Levy/Rebate Scheme: Presently, the CO2 emission threshold used for determining 
the Levy or Rebate chargeable is computed by the average of the CO2 emission for new 
motor  cars  imported  during  the  previous  year.    This  threshold  is  currently  set  at  150 
g/km.  That provision in the Excise Act will be reviewed to provide for the fixing of the 
threshold by way of Regulations. 

Residential Property 

Registration Duty:  A first-time buyer of residential bare land is currently exempted from 
payment of registration duty only if the value of the land to be acquired does not exceed 
Rs1 million.  The threshold value will be raised to Rs1.5 million.  

Construction of Housing Estate Scheme: The Income Tax Act as well as the Land (Duties 
and Taxes) Act and the Registration Duty Act will be amended to extend to June 2018 the 
Construction of Housing Estate Scheme targeting middle-income households which was 
introduced in 2012 and is lapsing this year.   

Under  that  Scheme,  a  housing  estate  construction  project  with  at  least  5  units  for  which  the 
selling  price  per  unit  does  not  exceed  Rs4  million  is  exempted  from  payment  of  land 
transfer tax.  
VAT Refund Scheme on Residential Building:  Likewise, the VAT Act will be amended 
to  extend  the  duration  of  the  VAT  Refund  Scheme  for  middle  income  households  (in 

 

64 

respect  of  construction  or  acquisition  of  a  new  residential  unit  by  a  household  with 
monthly income not exceeding Rs50,000) to June 2018.  

Miscellaneous Tax Measures 

Interest Income:  Interest received by a non-resident company from debentures quoted on 
the stock exchange will be exempted from income tax. 

Accelerated Depreciation for Manufacturing:  The Income Tax Act will provide for an 
extension of the Accelerated Annual Allowances for 3 more years up to 30th June 2018, 
in respect of the following investment:   
- 
- 
- 

equipment costing Rs50,000 or less (100%, i.e. fully expensed); 
industrial premises dedicated to manufacturing (30% reducing balance); 
electronic  and  high-precision  machinery  including  computer  hardware  and 
software (50% straight line); 
plant  and  machinery  (other  than  passenger  car)  by  a  manufacturing  company 
(50% straight line); and 
scientific research (50% straight line). 

- 

- 

VAT on Health Services 
The VAT Act is being amended to clarify that the exemption from VAT on construction 
of  a  purpose-built  building  for  health  services  also  covers  nursing  homes  under  the 
Private  Health  Institutions  Act  and  residential  care  homes  under  the  Residential  Care 
Homes Act. 

Advertising Structure Fee: With a view to increasing compliance, in case an advertising 
structure  has  not  been  registered  with  MRA,  the  owner  will  be  liable  to  a  penalty 
equivalent to 50% the amount of the fee payable. 

Tax Administration: General 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

65 

30%  Payment  on  Objection:    The  amount  payable  by  a  person  dissatisfied  with  a  tax 
assessment made by the MRA or by the Registrar-General’s Department prior to lodging 
an objection will be reduced from 30% of the amount assessed to 10%. 
 
Expeditious  Dispute  Resolution  of  Tax  Scheme  (EDRTS):    The  EDRTS  operated  by 
MRA will be renewed for another year.  The EDRTS allows MRA to review the assessed 
amount (including penalties) claimed from a taxpayer who could not lodge an objection, 
principally because of his inability or failure to pay the 30% of the amount assessed. 
 
Arrears  Payment  Scheme:    That  Scheme  under  the  Registrar-General’s  Department  is 
also being renewed for another year.  The Arrears Payment Scheme will allow a debtor of 
the Registrar-General’s Department to settle any amount due as at 23 March 2015 free of 
penalty provided payment is made on or before 31 January 2016. 
 
Interest Rate:  Interest rate for late payment of taxes to the MRA which is 1% per month 
over 12 months (i.e. 12%) will be reduced to 0.5% per month (i.e., 6% in a year).  
  
Penalty Clauses for SMEs 
Penalty clauses for a small business will be adjusted to their specific income profile and 
their capacity to pay: 
o 

In case of late submission/non submission of Income Tax return, the maximum 
amount of penalty will be reduced from Rs20,000 to Rs5,000 
For late payment of taxes to MRA, the rate of penalty will be reduced from 5% of 
the amount due to 2% 
 

o 

Confidentiality  Provisions:  In  order  for  Mauritius  to  be  able  to  sign  the  Multilateral 
Convention on Mutual Administrative Assistance in Tax Matters developed jointly by the 
OECD and the Council of Europe, the derogation from the confidentiality provision in 
the Income Tax Act will be amended to cover exchange of information in respect of all 
the taxes falling under the purview of the Convention.   
 

66 

Notice of Decisions of the Assessment Review Committee (ARC):  Where an agreement 
or a decision is reached before the ARC, it will now be compulsory for the MRA and the 
Registrar-General’s  Department  to  issue  to  the  taxpayer,  within  5  working  days  of  the 
decision date, a written notice specifying the amount of duty or tax payable and the date 
limit payable. 
 
Notice of Inscription:  Amendments will be made to provide for MRA and the Registrar-
General’s Department to give written notice to a debtor, within 5 working days,  when a 
privilege  is  being  inscribed  on  his  immovable  property  as  well  as  when  it  is  erased 
subsequently. 
 
MRA Board:  The Mauritius Revenue Authority Act will be amended to enable the Board 
to be involved in the processes and other matters relating to the application or execution 
of revenue laws.  They will however still not have access to information on individual tax 
cases.  The aim is to improve the system of checks and balances on the operation of the 
Authority 

Tax Administration: Income Tax 
Tax Deduction at Source (TDS) 

The requirement to operate Tax Deduction at Source (TDS) will not apply to a company 
whose annual turnover does not exceed Rs6 million. 

Large  Company  Statement:  All  companies  with  an  annual  turnover  exceeding  Rs100 
million will be required to submit every year to the MRA an electronic Statement giving 
the  details  on  payments  made  during  the  year  in  excess  of  Rs100,000  for  purchase  of 
goods and services as well as on their recipients 

Tax Administration: VAT 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

67 

Withholding  of  VAT:    With  a  view  to  increasing  VAT  compliance,  Ministries, 
Government departments, local authorities, statutory bodies and the Rodrigues Regional 
Assembly  will  remit  directly  to  MRA  a  percentage  of  VAT  to  be  paid  on  contracts 
exceeding Rs300,000.  The VAT registered contractor will make necessary adjustments 
regarding input tax and output tax in his VAT return. 
 
Other Amendments to VAT 

The other amendments to the VAT Act will be as follows: 

o 

o 

It will be clarified that the time limit for repayment of VAT by the MRA should 
begin only on submission of the relevant receipts for the claim for repayment. 
It is being clarified that VAT recovery, through instruments such as an attachment 
order and inscribed privilege, will be limited to VAT amount unpaid instead of 
the whole amount payable. 

Tax Administration: Excise Duty 

“Cordial”:  The definition of “cordial” will be amended to specify that one litre of cordial 
should contain at least 90 grams of sugar. 

Aged and Premium Quality Rum: 
o 

The evaporation rate allowable by MRA for the purpose of duty computation will 
be  raised  from  1  per  cent  to  up  to  2  per  cent  to  cater  for  more  sophisticated 
methods of  ageing such as in wooden casks for production of premium quality 
rum.   
In addition, the maximum alcoholic strength of aged rum will be increased from 
50  to  55  degrees  to  be  at  par  with  international  standards  and  also  to  cater  for 
increasing demand from tourists. 
 

o 

 

Bio-Fuel:  Excise Regulations will be amended to enable utilisation of residual of alcohol 
(heads and tails) locally as bio-fuel in adapted boilers and remove a barrier to export. 

68 

 
Bank Guarantee:  Security in the  form of bank  guarantee for the purposes of ensuring 
payment of excise duty  payable on excisable  goods manufactured in Mauritius will be 
replaced by bond, as is the case under customs laws. 

Tax Administration: Customs 
The Customs Act will be amended to - 

 

 

 
 
 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

introduce a 5% penalty on late payment of customs duty and excise duty, as is the 
case in other revenue laws;  
allow an aggrieved person who makes an objection after the prescribed time limit 
the right to appeal to the Assessment Review Committee; 
introduce a de minimis clause whereby no claim for refund or refund of customs 
duty and excise duty will be made if the amount is less that Rs250; 
clarify that abandoned goods that have gone through the process of auction but 
have not fetched a sufficient price to cover duties and taxes may be destroyed or 
donated to a charitable institution approved by MRA or to a government agency;   
empower  the  Director-General  of  MRA  to  suspend,  on  his  own  initiative, 
clearance of goods suspected to be counterfeit for 3 working days and inform the 
owner or authorized user accordingly; 
streamline  and  automate  the  warehousing  process  of  goods  with  a  view  to 
facilitating trade, reducing cost and optimising the use of risk management in line 
with the Revised Kyoto Convention best practices.  Consultations have been held 
with stakeholders and the new procedure will be as follows: 
- 

the  manual  ledger  system  which  records  goods  entering  and  leaving  the 
warehouse will be replaced by a computerised system; 
the  proprietor  or  occupier  of  the  warehouse  will  now  be  responsible  to 
record the itemised transactions in the computerised system; and 
MRA (Customs) will carry out physical inspection on a risk management 
basis; 

- 

- 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

69 

o 

o 

o 

allow  the  Director-General  to  scan  a  passenger  travel  documents  including 
passport or laissez-passer and tickets to enable expeditious completion of customs 
formalities, including  payment of  taxes on dutiable goods; 
introduce a new scheme to allow deferred payment of duties and taxes at import 
by one month, except for the month of June (i.e. end of Financial Year) where 
balance  of  all  taxes  and  duties  has  to  be  settled.    The  scheme  will  be  open  to 
SMEs  registered  with  the  SMEDA  and  other  VAT-registered  persons  who  are 
compliant with revenue laws; and 
provide  for  an  enabling  clause  so  as  to  prescribe  the  functions  and  duties  of  a 
freight forwarder, a customs broker and a customs agent. 

Tax Administration: Registrar-General’s Department  

E-Registration: Amendments will be brought to relevant enactments in order to enable at 
the level of the Registrar-General’s Department: 
o 
o 
o 

online submission of documents; 
e-registration; and 
e-payment.  
 
 

Time Limit and Silent Agreement: Provision will be made for an objection lodged against 
an assessment raised by the Registrar-General to be dealt with by the Objection Unit: 
- 
- 
If an objection is not dealt with within the specified period, the objection will be deemed 
to have been allowed by the Registrar-General. 

within 6 months, if it is made before 30 June 2015; and  
within 4 months, for an objection made after 1st July 2015.  

Removal  of  Anomaly:  Any  reduction  in  value  of  an  immovable  property  agreed  or 
determined at the level of the Assessment Review Committee will apply to both the seller 
and the buyer for tax purposes even if one party has not objected to the assessment.  Any 
tax or duty paid in excess will be refunded. 
 

70 

Advance  Ruling:  A  notary  will  be  allowed  to  request  the  Registrar-General  for  an 
advance  ruling  in  respect  of  the  amount  of  duty  and  taxes  payable  in  respect  of  a 
particular transaction upon furnishing the full details of the transaction and payment of a 
fee of Rs5,000. 
 
“Droit  d’Occupation”:    Amendment  will  be  brought  to  clarify  that  Registration  Duty 
exemption  in  respect  of  transfer  of  immovable  property  from  an  ascendant  to  his 
descendent  also  covers  a  right  of  occupation  (“droit  d’occupation”)  in  respect  of  an 
immovable property. 
 
Recovery  of  Arrears  of  Revenue:    The  Registrar-General  will  be  allowed  to  enforce 
payment  of  any  duty  or  tax  due  by  attachment  in  the  manner  provided  under  the 
Attachment (Rates and Taxes) Act. 

Public Debt Management  

The Public Debt Management Act will be amended to exclude any Government security 
issued  for  mopping  up  excess  liquidity  in  the  banking  sector  and  not  for  meeting  the 
borrowing requirements of Government from the computation of the statutory public debt 
ceiling required under the Act. 
In  addition,  provision  will  be  made  for  the  terms  and  conditions  for  the  issue  of 
Government securities to be specified by the Minister instead of having to be prescribed 
by Regulations.  

Public Procurement Act  

To ensure greater transparency, fairness and effectiveness, the Public Procurement Act 
will  be  amended,  inter-alia,  to  make  the  Independent  Review  Panel  give  its  decision 
within 30 days of a request for review failing which the Public Body will be allowed to 
award the contract. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

71 

Public Private Partnership Act 

The  Public  Private  Partnership  Act  will  be  simplified  to  encourage  greater 
participation of the private sector in infrastructure development projects. 

Miscellaneous  
Some  technical  amendments  will  be  brought  to  clarify,  fine-tune,  plug  loopholes  and 
harmonise various provisions in revenue laws and other enactments. 
 

PART B:  OTHER LEGISLATIVE AMENDMENTS 

 

Bank of Mauritius Act  

The Bank of Mauritius Act will be amended to: 

(a) 

enable the Bank to: 

(i)  participate in the launching of the Gold Fund; 

(ii)  create reserves for monetary purposes or such other specific purposes as 
in  conformity  with  applicable 

may  be  determined  by 
International Accounting Principles and best international practices; 

the  Bank 

(iii)  make use of the Special Reserve Fund for liquidity management purposes; 

(iv)  regulate  and  supervise  the  ultimate  intermediate  financial  holding 
companies that have at least one subsidiary that is a financial institution 
licenced by the Bank of Mauritius;  

(v)  demonetise the one cent coin; and 

(vi)  regulate the payment systems in Mauritius. 

(b) 

(c) 

require  every member of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) other that the 
Governor and the Deputy Governors to take an oath of confidentiality; 

vest the Chairman of the MPC with a casting vote which he may use in the event 
of an equality of votes at any meeting of the MPC; and 

72 

(d) 

replace the Bank Review Panel by an alternative review mechanism.  

Banking Act  

 

 

 

 

The Banking Act will be amended to -   

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

(v) 

exempt  foreign  banks  providing  loans  to  Global  Business  Licenced  companies 
and  specified  entities  such  as  the  new  SME  Bank  from  the  need  of  having  a 
Money Lender licence; 

extend the places at which banks can offer their services; 

extend the provision on annual licence  fee to all holders of a licence under the 
Act; 

enable the Bank of Mauritius, in case of emergency, to declare part of a day as a 
bank holiday; 

require that all displays of information by Bank should have the prior approval of 
the Bank of Mauritius; and  

(vi) 

implement a Bank Resolution Mechanism for banks in crisis situation.  

Insurance Act 

The Insurance Act will be amended to enable the issue of policy documents in digital 
format.   

 

Presently, only commercial marine pleasure craft operators are required to subscribe to a 
third party insurance policy as part of their licensing requirements. Third Party Insurance 
will henceforth be made compulsory for all marine pleasure crafts whether for pleasure or 
commercial use. 

 

 
 

 

 

 

73 

Code Civil Mauricien 

Code  Civil  Mauricien will  be  amended  to  clarify  that  when  the  repayment  of  a  loan, 
made by an authorised institution, exceeds three years, the loan agreement may include a 
provision for the capitalization of accrued interest. 

Borrower Protection Act 

 

 

 

 
 

 

The Borrower Protection Act will be amended to: 

(i) 

(ii) 

empower  the  Minister  of  Industry,  Commerce  and  Consumer  Protection  to  be 
responsible for the subject of borrower protection; and 

ensure that the lender performs its due diligence on debt repayment capacity not 
only of the borrower but also his guarantor. 

 

 

Companies Act and Statutory Bodies (Accounts and Audit) Act 

 

The Companies Act will be amended to allow for –  

(i) 

(ii) 

electronic  filing  of  documents  and  electronic  payment  of  fees  falling  under  the 
administration of the Corporate and Business Registration Department; and 

correction of typographical or clerical errors in documents filed with the Registrar 
of Companies without the need for companies to make multiple filings. 

 

Foundations Act and Limited Partnerships Act 

To facilitate settlement, compounding of offences will also be allowed for Foundations 
and limited partnerships as is the case for companies. The Foundations Act and Limited 
Partnerships  Act  will  be  amended  accordingly  to  allow  for  compounding  as  well  as 
electronic filing of documents and electronic payment of fees.  

 

 

 

 

The Registrar of Limited Partnerships will also be empowered to issue a Certificate of 
Current Standing for limited partnerships.  

74 

Consumer Protection (Price and Supplies Control) Act 

The  number  of  days  from  the  date  of  application  to  the  issuance  of  import  or  export 
permits  will  be  established  under  the  Consumer  Protection  (Price  and  Supplies 
Control) Act. 

 

The number of controlled goods at the level of the Ministry of Industry, Commerce and 
Consumer Protection is being reviewed thereby reducing the number of permits required 
at import.  The renewal process for a number of permits is also being simplified. 

Investment Promotion Act 

 The Investment Promotion Act will be amended to empower the Investment Projects 
Fast  Track  Committee  to  fast  track  morcellement  permits  and  Building  and  Land  Use 
permits in addition to the EIA Licence and authorisation for Land Conversion. Moreover, 
provision  will  be  made  for  public  bodies  to  consult  the  Board  of  Investment  on  the 
review of systems, procedures and guidelines in the context of ease of doing business. 

To facilitate the processing of morcellement permits, EIA Licences and authorisations for 
land conversion, the relevant enactments will be amended to allow applicants to attend 
meetings  for  the  purposes  of  giving  clarifications  and  explanations  relating  to  their 
applications. 

Tourism Authority Act 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The Tourism Authority Act will be amended to - 

(i) 

(ii) 

consolidate and streamline the processes for authorisation to carry out activities in 
the tourism sector; and  

enable  Craft  shops  to  reserve  a  minimum  of  20%  of  shelf  space,  in  their 
showrooms, to display locally manufactured handicraft products. 

75 

Code de Commerce 

The Code de Commerce will be amended  to empower the Registrar of Companies to 
strike off a société which has not been renewed after its expiry and for non-payment of 
fees and charges. 

Morcellement Act 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Morcellement Act will be amended to expedite the processing of morcellement permits.  

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Business Registration Act  

The Business Registration Act will be amended to include a Schedule listing the names 
of  Government  agencies  which  will  make  use  of  a  unique  identification  number  to 
facilitate sharing of information and avoid multiple registrations among those agencies. 
The latter will also have access to online registers kept by the Companies and Business 
Registration Department and Civil Status Division. In this context, relevant Acts will be 
amended.  

Freeport Act 

The  Freeport  Act  will  be  amended  to  clarify  the  meaning  of  “support  services”. 
Moreover, the Schedule to the Freeport Act will be simplified and a new freeport activity, 
namely  global  trading,  will  be  added.  Global  trading  refers  to  the  international  buying 
and selling of tradable commodities without the commodities being physically landed in 
Mauritius.  

Human Resource Development Act 

The Human Resource Development Act will be amended with a view to streamlining 
the institutional provisions with a view to enabling the HRDC to more effectively address 

76 

the skills mismatch issue, promote trainer-employer synergy and ensure prompt decision-
making.  

Pension Act and the Statutory Bodies Pension Fund Act  

Certain amendments will be made to Pension Act consequential to the PRB Report and 
also to review the composition of the Public Pensions Advisory Committee with a view 
to ensuring a better representation of the different interest groups. 

Appropriate  amendments will be made to the Statutory Bodies Pension Fund Act to 
enable to merging of various funds and safeguarding pension benefits of employees of 
statutory bodies. 

State Lands Act 

State Lands Act will be amended to allow the transfer of State land for implementation 
of Government approved projects. 

Sugar Industry Efficiency Act 

The Sugar Industry Efficiency Act will be amended to allow a lessee holding a lease 
agreement for a term exceeding 20 years and a non-citizen having a presale agreement in 
respect of agricultural land for business purpose to apply for a land conversion permit.  

Local Government Act 

Government will work out a plan for the setting up of a centralised system at the level of 
the  Ministry  of  Local  Government  for  the  rapid  determination  of  all  applications  for 
building  and  land  use  permits.  This  will  also  allow  for  a  consistent  approach  in 
processing applications. 

Independent Broadcasting Authority Act 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

77 

The  Independent  Broadcasting  Authority  Act  will  be  amended  to  allow  for  the 
completion of digital migration of broadcasting signals. 

Indicative List of the 38Pockets of Poverty 

 

 

 

 

SN  Region 

1  Les Guibies, Pailles 
2  Camp Manna, Tranquebar 
3  Camp Tory, Port Louis East 
4  Quartier Shell, Port Louis West 
5  Marjolin, Cité La Cure, Port Louis 
6  CHA Terre Rouge 
7  Longère Tole/Longère Blanc, Baie du Tombeau 
8  Cité Mère Theresa, Triolet 
9  Cité St Claire, Goodlands 
10  Débarcadère, Poudre D’Or Village 
11  Ramphul Road, Plaines des Roches 
12  Airport Zone, Roches Noires 
13  Ste Catherine, St Pierre 
14  Bonne Veine, Quartier Militaire 
15  Allée Coco, Poste de Flacq 
16  Débarcadère, Poste de Flacq 
17  Cité CHA Bel Air, Bel Air Rivière Sèche 
18  Le Maho, Trou D’eau Douce 
19  Anse Jonchée, Grand Port 
20  Résidence Bethleem, Rose Belle 
21  Cité Ville Noire, Mahébourg 
22  Le Bouchon, Grand Port 
23  EDC Camp Diable 

Number of 
households 

60 
114 
112 
73 
153 
261 
91 
148 
329 
166 
84 
147 
252 
162 
122 
63 
321 
139 
83 
307 
160 
185 
99 

78 

24  EDC Batimarais, Rivière des Anguilles 
25  Folles Herbes, Bambous 
26  Contour Prune, Baie Du Cap 
27  Résidence Kennedy, Quatre Bornes 
28  Cité Riche lieu  
29  Cité Palmerstone, Phoenix 
30  Cité La Caverne, Vacoas 
31  Cité Mangalkhan, Floréal 
32  Cité L’Oiseau, Floréal 
33  Cité Anoska, Forest Side 
34  Cité Joachim, Curepipe 
35  Cité Beau-Sejour, Bassin 
36  Cité Trèfles, Rose Hill 
37  Résidence Barkly, Beau Bassin 
38  Cité Chebel, Beau Bassin 
        Total 

 

 

173 
180 
66 
172 
179 
93 
113 
123 
90 
85 
131 
74 
124 
194 
50 
5,478 

