No. 34 of 2015 

 

1 

 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

 

TUESDAY 13 OCTOBER 2015 

 

 

 

 

 
 

2 

CONTENTS 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

PAPERS LAID 

QUESTIONS (Oral) 

MOTION 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER 
BILLS (Public) 

ADJOURNMENT 

QUESTIONS (Written) 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 
KCMG, QC  
Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 
GCSK  
Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 
Communications 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo, GCSK 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 
Utilities 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 
Sinatambou 
Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 
Perraud 
Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain 

Integration 

and  Economic 

of 
Minister 
Empowerment 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 
International Trade 
Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 
Family Welfare 
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance, 
Technology, 
Institutional  Reforms,  Minister 

of 

 

4 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, 
QPM 
Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 
Cheong, MSK 
Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 

Communication and Innovation 
Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 
Institutions 
Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands 
Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 
Disaster and Beach Management  
Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms 

Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and 
Training 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Gopall, Mr Navin (Temporary Transfer to 
RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 34 of 2015 

 

Sitting of 13 October 2015 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

7 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

NATIONAL ASSEMBLY - PROCEEDINGS - MEDIA REPORT 

 
Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Members,  I  have  to  make  an  announcement  regarding  the 

reporting by the media of the suspension of the sitting of Tuesday 06 October 2015. 

First of all, I wish to make it clear that it is only hon. Members who can effect a walkout. 
The Speaker presides over the proceedings of the House within the parameters of the Standing 
Orders and Rules of the National Assembly and practices and conventions of the House and is 
empowered to suspend the sitting in instances where the House becomes unruly, thereby making 
it impossible to continue with the business of the House.  

On  Tuesday  06  October  2015,  when  the  House  became  unruly  following  interruptions 
from both sides of the House, I appealed to hon. Members to calm down. I even warned hon. 
Members  that  I  would  suspend  the  sitting  in  case  that  situation  would  continue  to  prevail. 
Unfortunately, hon. Members chose to disregard the authority of the Chair which compelled me 
to suspend the sitting. I did announce that I was suspending the sitting, but it appears that due to 
the disorderly situation prevailing in the House some may not have heard me saying so.  

Members of the media are allowed in the House to give a fair and accurate report of the 
proceedings  of  the  Assembly.  They  are  expected  to  verify  the  authenticity  of  whatever  they 
report and not to misrepresent anything that has been said or that has happened in the Assembly. 
It is, therefore, expected that henceforth everyone assumes the responsibility of the facts being 
reported. Thank you. 

NATIONAL ASSEMBLY - PQ NO. B/640 - RULING 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Members, at the sitting of Tuesday 06 October 2015, at the end 
of Question Time, the hon. Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional 
Reforms, Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation rose on a point of order to the 
effect that hon. Bhagwan had used the word ‘manipulated’ during the course of Question Time 
while he was replying to Parliamentary Question No. B/640 and to the supplementary questions 
thereon put by hon. Bhagwan. He stated that by uttering the word ‘manipulated’, hon. Bhagwan 
had imputed motives and inferences that he had been manipulating the programmes of the MBC 
which is a very serious allegation. I stated… 

 

8 

(Interruptions) 

Can I continue? I stated that I had taken note of the point of order and that I will consult 

the recording and come back with the ruling.  

Hon. Members, I have to inform the House that the transcript of the proceedings of the 
House of the sitting of Tuesday 06 October 2015, in fact, revealed that hon. Bhagwan had stated 
the following, and I quote - 

“(…) let it be known to the public through this National Assembly that we are 
not going to participate in any manipulated programme under the Bhadain Broadcasting 
Corporation.” 
Hon. Members, I am of the view that the above statement does impute improper motives 
and inferences against the hon. Minister and amounts to an allegation that the hon. Minister had 
been manipulating the programmes of the MBC.  I, therefore, request hon. Bhagwan to kindly 
withdraw the word ‘manipulated’. 

Mr Bérenger: Can I take a point of order? 
Madam Speaker: Yes. 
Mr Bérenger: Are you ruling, Madam Speaker, that these words are unparliamentary in 
any way because  I  am saying also, Madam Speaker, that the MBC has become the Mauritius 
Bhadain Corporation and that the MBC has never been manipulated like it is these days. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition the word ‘manipulated’ is defined in 

the Oxford dictionary as follows - 

“Control or influence cleverly or unscrupulously”, which means that the hon. Minister is 
in  total  control  of  the  MBC  which  is  being  managed  at  his  whims  and  caprices.  So,  hon. 
Bhagwan,  I  am  addressing  myself  to  you,  you  are  a  seasoned  politician,  you  know  very  well 
what the Standing Orders say, I have given my ruling. Now, it is up to you to withdraw. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Bérenger:  Madam  Speaker,  I  have  taken  a  point  of  order  to  which  you  have  not 
answered.  I  repeat,  as  Leader  of  the  Opposition,  yes,  the  MBC  has  become  the  Mauritius 
Bhadain Corporation. Yes, it is manipulated as per the Oxford dictionary. 

Madam  Speaker:  Can  I  understand  then  that  hon.  Bhagwan  is  not  withdrawing  this 

word? 

(Interruptions) 

 
 

9 

Mr Bérenger: I am repeating what he said. 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan, I am addressing myself to you! 
Mr  Bhagwan:  Madam  Speaker,  how  can  I  withdraw  something  which  is  happening, 

which is being manipulated. No way! No way am I withdrawing any word! 

Mr Bérenger: And I have repeated twice, I want to hear, am I also making allegations or 

using unparliamentary words? 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Then, let me tell you that if you feel that this is a true statement… 

(Interruptions) 
Allow me to finish, hon. Mohamed! I am on my feet! 
Now, let me tell you that if you feel that this is so, then, please, come with a motion to 

this National Assembly. 

Mr  Bérenger:    Madam,  on  the  same  point  of  order,  do  I  take  it,  therefore,  that  those 
words, in the mouth of the hon. Member are unacceptable, are ruled out and so on, and the same 
words  repeated  twice  in  the  mouth  of  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  is  parliamentary,  is 
totally acceptable? Is that your ruling? 

Madam Speaker: Yes. This is my ruling, hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

(Interruptions) 

This is my ruling.  I am insisting that hon. Bhagwan withdraws his word and whatever 
you have said, hon. Leader of the Opposition, I have taken note and I have told you that if this is 
true, then you may come with a motion. 

 (Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed: I have got a point of order, Madam Speaker. May I? 
Madam Speaker: Yes. 
Mr  Mohamed:  Thank  you.  Having  listened  to  this  exchange  and  having  listened  to 
Madam  Speaker’s  ruling,  I  am  happy,  Madam  Speaker,  that  you  listened  to  what  was  said. 
However, it surprises me that you failed to listen when the hon. Minister of Financial Services, 
Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms,  Minister  of  Technology,  Communication  and 
Innovation  in  this  august  Assembly  when  answering  a  question  with  regard  to  the  Mauritius 
Broadcasting Corporation, in a standing position, said to me - 

 

10 

‘Mo pas pou invite toi!’ 
In other words, that he would not invite at the MBC. If this is not manipulation, what is 

it! 

Madam Speaker: Now, okay. I understand then… 

(Interruptions) 

I understand that hon. Bhagwan is not withdrawing in spite of my ruling.  

(Interruptions) 

Please, sit down! Please, sit down!  

Mr Bhagwan: I am maintaining and repeating … 
Madam  Speaker:  You  are  maintaining.  Then,  hon.  Bhagwan,  I  have  said  and  I  am 
asking the hon. Leader of the Opposition whether he is coming with a motion against the hon. 
Minister. 

Are you coming… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Then, I order you out! Hon. Bhagwan, I order you out for the day, because… 

(Interruptions) 

So, you are challenging my authority! Hon. Leader of the Opposition, you are challenging my 
authority!  Are you challenging my authority? 

(Interruptions) 

Are you challenging my authority?  I have given my ruling and I think it is fair. 

(Interruptions) 

If  you  feel  that  the  hon.  Member  is  manipulating,  please  come  with  a  proper  motion  to  this 
House. 

Come with a proper motion to this House! 

(Interruptions) 

 (Interruptions) 

Are you saying: “Shame on me”, hon. Leader of the Opposition? 

Now, order please!   

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

11 

Order!  Hon. Leader of the Opposition, are you saying: “Shame on me”?  Because you looked at 
me and you said: “Shame on you!” 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger:  Yes! 
Madam Speaker:  Are you saying: “Shame on me”? 
Mr Bérenger:  Yes, Madam Speaker, because you… 
Madam Speaker: Yes!  If the hon. Leader of the Opposition is saying “Shame on me”, 

then I order everybody out! 

(Interruptions) 

Everybody! I mean the hon. Leader of the Opposition and hon. Bhagwan.  I order you out for 
today! 

I order you out! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

I have ordered the hon. Leader of the Opposition and hon. Bhagwan out for the day! 

Mr Mohamed: Could Madam Speaker tell me what about my point of view? I asked you 

to listen to all parts, not only to what you want to, but… 

Madam Speaker: I have taken note.  Please, sit down!  I have taken note of what the hon. 
Member said and I will come with a statement later on what he said. Now, hon. Leader of the 
Opposition and hon. Bhagwan, I order you out!  I am saying this for the third time. 

Mr Baloomoody:  On a point of clarification, Madam Speaker. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, you just mentioned: “Everybody out!” May I be clarified what you mean by 
‘everybody’? 

Madam Speaker: I have just said that I am ordering the hon. Leader of the Opposition and 

hon. Bhagwan out for the day. 

Out, I said! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(At this stage Members of the MMM & the Labour Party Opposition left the Chamber) 

 

 

 

12 

PAPERS LAID 

The Deputy Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table - 

A. 

Speaker’s Office 

 

The  First  Report  of  the  Public  Accounts  Committee  of  the  First  Session  of  the 
Sixth National Assembly. 

Prime Minister’s Office – 

 

Certificate  of  Urgency  in  respect  of  the  Native  Terrestrial  Biodiversity  and 
National Parks Bill (No. XVI of 2015). (In Original) 

B. 

 

C.   Ministry of Finance and Economic Development –   

 

The  Investment  Promotion  (Mauritian  Diaspora  Scheme)  Regulations  2015. 
(Government Notice No. 196 of 2015) 

D.  Ministry of  Local Government  –                                                

 

 

 

The  Municipal  Council  of  Quatre  Bornes  (Markets)  (Amendment) 
Regulations 2015. (Government Notice No. 194 of 2015)  

(a)   The  District  Council  of  Pamplemousses  (fees  for  Classified  Trades 
(Amendment)  Regulations  2015.    (Government  Notice  No.  195  of 
2015) 

E.  Ministry of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, Shipping and 

Outer Islands – 

The  Fisheries  and  Marine  Resources  (Extension  of  Net  Fishing  Season) 
Regulations 2015. (Government Notice No. 193 of 2015) 

 

 

 

 

13 

ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

Madam Speaker: I have to inform the House that PQ No. B/657 will be replied by the 

Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms.  Hon. Jhugroo! 

(P.Q. No. B/657 – See after P.Q. No. B/705) 

AIR MAURITIUS LIMITED – PILOTS - RECRUITMENT 

(No. B/659) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) asked 
the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National Development Unit whether, in regard to Air Mauritius Limited, he will, for the benefit 
of the House, obtain from the company, information as to the number of - 

(a) 

(b) 

aircrafts owned by the Company; 

pilots presently employed thereat, indicating the number thereof who are - 

(i) 

(ii) 

Mauritian nationals, and  

foreign nationals, and  

(c) 

pilots recruited during the last recruitment exercise, indicating the number thereof 
who are - 

(i) 

Mauritian nationals, and  

(ii) 

foreign nationals. 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, as already indicated in replies to previous 
Parliamentary  Questions,  Air  Mauritius  Ltd  is  a  Company  listed  on  the  Stock  Exchange  of 
Mauritius and is governed by the Memorandum and Articles of Association and the Companies 
Act. 

It  would,  therefore,  not  be  appropriate  to  provide  the  information  asked  for  by  the  hon. 

Member. 

 

14 

MR T. F. G – FACILITIES - GRANT 

(No. B/660) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) asked 
the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National Development Unit whether, in regard to Mr T. F. G., he will state the capacity in which 
the services thereof have been retained over the period July 2005 to December 2014, indicating if 
he was appointed – 

(a) adviser to the former Prime Minister, and  

(b) Board Member of - 

(i) 

Airports of Mauritius Ltd.  

(ii)  Mauritius Duty Free Paradise Ltd.  

(iii)  Air Mauritius Ltd. and others, indicating in each case the terms  

and conditions of appointment and facilities extended thereto. 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, in regard to part  (a) of the question, no 
contract of employment has been offered to Mr T. F. G. as Adviser to the former Prime Minister.  
However, according to information retrieved, he had been provided Government hospitality in 
terms of hotel accommodation on three occasions as follows - 

(i) 

from 17 to 19 February 2006; 

(ii) 

15 and 16 June 2006, and 

(iii) 

from 10 to 12 February 2014. 

Additionally, he was provided the following facilities - 

(i) 

(ii) 

chauffeur-driven car for his visit from 17 to 19 February 2006, and 

air tickets for himself and his spouse costing Rs135,426 for their visit from 10 to 
12 February 2014. 

 

15 

In  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  Mr  T.  F.  G.  did  not  serve  as  Board  Member  of 
Airports  of  Mauritius  Ltd,  Mauritius  Duty  Free  Paradise  Ltd  and  Air  Mauritius  Ltd.  
Furthermore, these companies had not retained his services in any other capacity.  However, Air 
Mauritius Ltd had provided him five free Business Class air tickets and hotel accommodation for 
his trips to Mauritius during the following periods - 

(i) 

from 21 to 23 August 2011; 

(ii) 

from 23 to 28 January 2012; 

(iii) 

from 24 to 26 June 2012; 

(iv) 

from 07 to 11 November 2013, and 

(v) 

from 09 to 10 July 2014. 

These facilities were provided and the relevant expenditures for hotel accommodation were 
paid by Air Mauritius Ltd upon the authority of the then Chief Executive Officer of the company 

Mr  Jhugroo:    Can  the  hon.  Ag.  Prime  Minister  confirm  whether  Mr  T.  F.  G.  has 
participated in all Board meetings of Air Mauritius in relation to the purchase of aircrafts at the 
request of the former Prime Minister? 

The Deputy Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, as the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has stated 
some  time  ago,  we  are  not  responding  with  regard  to  the  internal  affairs  of  Air  Mauritius 
Limited, being a listed company.  Therefore, I am not able to respond to the holding of its Board 
meetings. 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Can  the  hon.  Ag.  Prime  Minister  inform  the  House  on  what  ground  free 
accommodation at Trou-aux-Biches Hotel plus free chauffeur-driven car from the Police car pool 
were provided to him? 

The Deputy Prime Minister:  There is no information on file, Madam Speaker. 

Mr Jhugroo: Can the Ag. Prime Minister inform the House whether he is aware that Mr T. 

F. G. has acted as an intermediate for the purchase of aircrafts and also for duty-free products? 

 

16 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, there have been statements made that this 
is  the  case.    Madam  Speaker,  the  House  may  note  that,  as  far  as  the  duty-free  matter  is 
concerned,  this  is  in  the  hands  of  the  Central  CID.    As  far  as  the  purchase  of  airbuses  is 
concerned, the whole file has been sent by me at the beginning of the  year to the Ministry of 
Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms and it is now being reviewed by 
that Ministry.   

Mr Jhugroo:  Is the Ag. Prime Minister aware that, on 12  May  2011, the former Prime 
Minister requested Mr André Viljoen to liaise with Mr Laurent Obadia to arrange a meeting with 
Mr F. G? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Who is Mr F. G? 

Mr Jhugroo: Frank Gleeson. 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I don’t have this information.  This is a 
matter for either the Ministry of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms, 
which is reviewing the file, or the Central CID.  

Mr Jhugroo: Is the hon. Ag. Prime Minister aware that Mr André Viljoen has provided 
free  Business  Class  air  tickets  and  free  hotel  accommodation  to  him  and  his  wife,  amounting 
Rs217,000, on five occasions? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I gave full information in the reply as 
to the hotel accommodation provided at Trou aux Biches, the air tickets paid - for one visit  I 
have here.  I have given that information, Madam Speaker. 

Mr Hurreeram: Are you aware hon. Ag. Prime Minister that the former Prime Minister 
gave  instruction  to  Mr  André  Viljoen  that  Mr  Gleeson  had  to  be  kept  updated  about  all  the 
affairs? 

Madam Speaker: The hon. Ag. Prime Minister cannot reply to a question to which the 

hon. Member is referring to another Minister. 

The Deputy Prime Minister: I cannot be aware of this 

 
Madam Speaker: The Table has been advised that PQ B/661 has been withdrawn. Next 

17 

question, hon. Ramano! 

HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION – LEGISLATION - AMENDMENT 

(No.  B/661)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Human Rights Commission, 
he  will  state  if  consideration  will  be  given  for  the  law  in  relation  thereto  to  be  amended  to 
increase the powers thereof to investigate into alleged cases of miscarriage of justice. 

(Withdrawn) 

HORSE RACING – COMMISSION OF INQUIRY –– REPORT 

(No. B/662) Mr R. Bhagwan (First Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) asked 
the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National Development Unit whether he will state if he has inquired from the Secretary for Home 
Affairs if he has officially received copy of the Interim Report of the Commission of Inquiry on 
Horse Racing submitted to him by the former President of the Republic and, if so, indicate the 
reasons  why  no  action  has  been  taken  in  regard  to  the  recommendations  made  by  the 
Commissioner and, if not, will he consider ordering an inquiry to be carried out to trace out the 
report at the Prime Minister’s Office. 

(Withdrawn) 

QUATRE BORNES – LARCENY CASES  

(No. B/666) Mr K. Ramano (Third Member for Belle Rose & Quatre Bornes) asked 
the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National Development Unit whether, in regard to Quatre Bornes, he will, for the benefit of the 
House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to the number of reported cases 
of – 

(a) 

(b) 

theft, and 

possession of stolen property, having been committed thereat, since January 2015 
to date. 

18 

 
The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of 
Police that from January to 08 October 2015, 569 cases of “larceny” and 5 cases of “possession 
of stolen property” have been reported to the two Police Stations situated in Quatre Bornes, that 
is, Quatre Bornes Police Station and Sodnac Police Station. 

Out of the 574 reported cases, enquiry has been completed in 177 cases and the outcomes 

are as follows - 

•  The accused have been fined in 33 cases; 
•  1 case has been dismissed by Court; 
•  10 cases are awaiting Court action;  
• 
• 
• 

In 3 cases the advice of the DPP is awaited; 
In 5 cases the accused have been conditionally discharged, and 
In 125 cases, these have been filed as the accused are unknown. 

In the remaining 397 cases, enquiry is still ongoing. 

Madam Speaker, I am further informed that the Police are doing its utmost to curb down 
the problem of larceny and possession of stolen property in the region of Quatre Bornes through, 
among others, the following measures - 

•  An Anti-Burglary Squad has been set up in the Western Division.  The main task of the 
Squad, which comprises 8 Police Officers is to track down offenders on a 24/7 basis in 
that region; 

•  Aggressive stop and search operations targeting suspicious vehicles and persons loitering 

in the region; 

•  Directed  preventive  mobile  patrols  by  Police  Stations,  the  Criminal  Investigation 
Division,  the  Emergency  Response  Service,  the  Special  Support  Unit,  Bike  Patrol  and 
other Police Units, and 

•  Setting  up  of  Neighbourhood  Watch  Schemes  and  sensitisation  of  residents  on  home 
securities, target hardening, elimination of opportunity factors and reporting of suspicious 
characters and suspicious activities through Hotline Crime Stoppers. 

I am also informed, Madam Speaker, by the Commissioner of Police that he will beef up 

the human resources in terms of Police Officers at these two Police Stations. 

 
Mr Ramano: Madame la présidente, est-ce que le Premier ministre par intérim est en 

19 

mesure de nous confirmer qu’il existe seulement 12 officiers du CID pour une population de plus 
de 80,000 habitants ? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, the information I have here in terms of 
CID Officers, we have in total 20 CID Officers, but I agree with the hon. Member that we have a 
problem that the number of reported cases has increased recently and this has been brought to the 
attention of the Commissioner of Police, and he has promised to do the necessary in terms of 
what I have stated, in terms of human resources. 

Mr Ramano: Madame la présidente, peut-être que la question se pose quant à l’efficacité 
des CCTV cameras dans la ville de Quatre Bornes, que ce soit pour le centre-ville, et aussi peut-
être, envisager la possibilité d’installer d’autres CCTV cameras dans d’autres régions de la ville 
de Quatre Bornes. 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  had  myself  from  the  Tourism  Fund 
installed the cameras, I think 39 cameras at Quatre Bornes. There are not enough cameras. We 
ought  to  have  more  cameras  and  the  Police  are  aware  of  that  and  so  is  the  Prime  Minister’s 
Office, but there are various procurement issues which have come in the meantime and there is 
delay in the installation of these cameras. 

Mr  Ganoo:  Madam  Speaker,  the  Ag.  Prime  Minister  himself  acknowledged  that  the 
problem might be one of human resources. In view of the vast catchment area that Quatre Bornes 
Police Station has to monitor - Quatre Bornes, Belle Rose, La Source, Bassin, Palma - there have 
been  in  the  past  suggestions  made  by  different  organisations  that  the  region  of  Bassin  itself 
should be serviced with a separate Police Station or Police Post.  Can I, therefore, ask the hon. 
Ag. Prime Minister to liaise with the Commissioner of Police, to consider this proposal to see 
whether it would be advisable to give the region of Bassin, which is huge area, a Police Station? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, the Police are already planning a Police 

Post in Ebene on this site and I will certainly raise that with the Commissioner of Police. 

Mr Jhugroo: Being given that we have started putting CCTV cameras everywhere in the 
country, can we know from the Ag. Prime Minister whether Police Officers have got a proper 

 

20 

training  with  regard  to  the  monitoring  of  these  CCTV  cameras,  and  secondly,  if  we  have  got 
officers on a 24-hour basis monitoring the CCTV cameras everywhere in the country? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I will be happy to reply to a substantive 

question on that issue. 

Dr. Sorefan: Madam Speaker, may we know from the Ag. Prime Minister…. 

(Interruptions) 

Last week, I came with this issue of CCTV camera not functioning on the main road of 
St. Jean. Up to now, it is still the same. Is the hon. Ag. Prime Minister aware that we do not have 
a full technician maintenance for these cameras? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am not aware of the functioning of the 

CCTV cameras. We need substantive questions so that this can be replied to. 

Madam Speaker: Parliamentary Question No. B/667, in regard to the enlargement of the 
coastal  road  at  Pointe  aux  Sables,  will  now  be  replied  by  the  hon.  Minister  of  Public 
Infrastructure and Land Transport. Questions to Ministers! Yes, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

(P.Q. No. B/667 – See after P.Q. No. B/657) 

ROADS – RE-ASPHALTING 

(No. B/668) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked the 
Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the roads, he will, for 
the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Road  Development  Authority,  information  as  to  if 
consideration  will  be  given  for  the  inclusion  of  the  scrapping  of  the  old  asphalt  in  the  bid 
specifications  for  the  re-asphalting  thereof  to  avoid  increasing  the  thickness  of  the  asphalt 
thereof. 

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Road Development Authority that the 
actual practice in the process of re-asphalting of roads is to scrap and remove a layer of around 5 
cm of the old asphalt before the laying of a fresh new layer. This process of removing the old 
asphalt is called milling and is undertaken with the specific objective of avoiding an increase in 
the thickness of the asphalt. 

 
 In some places, Madam Speaker, resurfacing is done without milling depending on the 

21 

height of the footpath and the pavements. 

As  regards  bid  specifications,  I  am  informed  that  the  scrapping  of  the  old  asphalt  is 
already included in the bids specifications for the Framework Agreement for Maintenance and 
Minor Works Contract (2014-2016). 

Dr. Sorefan: Madam Speaker, regarding scrapping - that was a pilot study - they do not 
do it and it is not in the specification and wherever we go all around Mauritius, the asphalts are 
higher than the residence, so when we come and say that we are removing the asphalt, or say 
recycling, this is not true.   

Madam Speaker: Ask your question, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan: Will the hon. Minister see to it that this is adhered to because it is causing a 

lot of problems to the drains and to the inhabitants all around? 

Mr Bodha: I thank the hon. Member for the question. In fact, he has made an interesting 
remark. The milling, in fact, has been imposed as from 2014, and before 2014 all resurfacing 
works were done as an additional layer which creates all the problems that he has mentioned. 
What  we  are  trying  to  do,  Madam  Speaker,  is  to  consider  the  possibility  of  recycling  the  old 
asphalt as it is being done in South Africa and Malaysia.  We will consider the possibility of 
milling and scrapping,  milling and resurfacing  so that we do not have  an additional thickness 
with a new layer. 

Dr. Sorefan: May we know from the hon. Minister what grade of asphalt we are using 
because, very recently, on the main road M1 coming to the North at about Bagatelle, near the 
bridge,  the  asphalt  that  is  being  used  makes  a  lot  of  noise.  I  get  the  impression  -  with  the 
experience that I have on asphalt - that the grade of asphalt is being lowered down with a higher 
percentage of binder in it and I am sure this will cause a lot of problems later on. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan, this is another question that you are asking which is 

not within your original question! You had a question on this, hon. Ramano? 

Mr Ramano: C’est tout simplement pour savoir si une étude a été faite pour connaitre la 
qualité de l’asphalte surtout est-ce que cela permet le recyclage de l’asphalte et aussi de savoir 
est-ce qu’il n’y a pas lieu de préciser la durée de l’asphalte ? 

22 

 
Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, from what I understand, it is that there was a consultancy 
which was launched sometime back, but, in fact, we did not go ahead because of unavailability 
of funds. But I think that it is a very interesting question and whatever we are going to build now 
should be value for money and we should have the best quality and this is what we are going to 
include in all the new tenders. 

Madam  Speaker:  Parliamentary  Question  No.  B/670  in  regard  to  the  inter-ministerial 
committee set up to look into the issue of tariff protection for sensitive local industries addressed 
to the hon. Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection will now be replied by the 
hon.  Minister  of  Business,  Enterprise  and  Cooperatives.  Parliamentary  Question  Nos.  B/674, 
B/675, B/677, B/687 and B/696 have been withdrawn! Yes, hon. Dr. Sorefan, next question! 

EMPLOYMENT RIGHTS ACT - SEVERANCE ALLOWANCE 

(No. B/669) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked the 
Minister  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and  Training  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
Employment Rights Act, he will state if consideration will be given for proposed amendments to 
be introduced thereto to include the payment of severance allowance at normal rate as was the 
case in the repealed Labour Act, thereby catering for two regimes instead of one, as is presently 
the case. 

Mr  Callichurn:  Madam  Speaker,  as  the  House  is  aware,  Government  has,  in  its 
Programme  for  2015-2019,  announced  that  amendments  would  be  brought  to  the  labour 
legislation to better protect workers.  

In this regard, I have set up a Technical Committee at the level of my Ministry under the 
Chairmanship  of  the  Director  of  Labour  and  Industrial  Relations  to  review  the  Employment 
Rights  Act  and  the  Employment  Relations  Act.  All  stakeholders  have  been  invited  to  submit 
their proposals for amendments to the two pieces of legislation and the majority of them have 
already forwarded same. 

The Technical Committee is currently reviewing the legal framework so as to ensure that 
it adapts and responds to the new challenges and is considering the proposals received from the 
stakeholders and would make appropriate recommendations to Government in due course. 

23 

 
Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that the Technical Committee has, so far, not 
received any representations from the trade union movement in regard to the reintroduction of 
the payment of severance allowance at normal rate.  

However, on my own initiative, I have requested the Technical Committee, as part of the 
review  exercise,  to  look  into  the  question  of  the  reintroduction  of  the  payment  of  severance 
allowance at normal rate and its implications. 

Dr. Sorefan: I would like to thank the hon. Minister for considering on his own self for 
this because this is the implication of it. Will the hon. Minister also consider going retroactive for 
those cases which have suffered this new law? 

Mr Callichurn: Unfortunately, it will not be possible. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, next question hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

SMEs - INTER-MINISTERIAL COMMITTEE  

(No. B/670) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked the 
Minister  of  Industry,  Commerce  and  Consumer  Protection  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
manufacturing sector, he will state if the Inter-Ministerial Committee set up to look into the issue 
of  tariff  protection  for  sensitive  local  industries,  especially  against  dumping  practices,  has 
submitted its report and, if so, indicate the findings thereof. 

The  Minister  of  Business,  Enterprise  and  Cooperatives  (Mr  S.  Bholah):  Madam 
Speaker,  an  Inter-Ministerial  Committee,  under  the  chairmanship  of  the  hon.  Vice-Prime 
Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands,  was  set  up  by  Government  to  look  into  barriers 
affecting the small and medium enterprises. The Inter-Ministerial Committee met in April, this 
year,  and  decided  that  a  Technical  Committee  be  set  up,  under  my  chairmanship,  with  the 
objective to examining the impact of the influx of imported products on the local market and to 
making appropriate recommendations for the protection and growth of the local industries. 

The Technical Committee comprises officials from my Ministry, the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and  International  Trade,  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development,  the  Ministry  of  Industry,  Commerce  and  Consumer  Protection,  the  Mauritius 

 

24 

Revenue Authority and representatives from the Mauritius Chamber of Commerce and Industry 
and the Board of Investment.  A number of meetings were held, under my chairmanship, and we 
agreed that such an exercise would require a comprehensive understanding and study of all the 
problems  within  the  local  context.  For  example,  we  conducted  a  thorough  analysis  of  the 
different  trade  agreements  under  the  relevant  framework  of  organisations  such  as  the  WTO, 
SADC and COMESA, amongst others, which are commitments by which we are bound. While 
creating an enabling environment for regional and international cooperation, these agreements, 
nonetheless, hinder the development and growth of our local industry notably due to rapid and 
abrupt increases in imports.  

In parallel, we also collected data about the ecosystem pertaining to the manufacturing 
sector at an international level so as to come up with measures that are in line with the current 
worldwide standard. We came to the conclusion that this is not an easy task and it would require 
ample time for a proper research work, amongst others, that would set the basis for discussion at 
the level of the Committee.  

Madam Speaker, therefore, in view of the complexity of the assignment and the specific 
technical issues particularly relating to SMEs, a dedicated working group, led by my Ministry 
and involving all stakeholders was constituted and entrusted with the responsibility to make a 
full  and  detailed  assessment  of  all  issues  affecting  the  domestic  industries,  and  to  propose 
remedial  actions  for  consideration  by  the  Technical  Committee  and  the  Inter-Ministerial 
Committee.  

The working group has had a number of working sessions and they discussed lengthily on 
the  pertinent  issues  such  as  tariff  protection,  anti-dumping  and  countervailing  measures, 
imposition  of  customs  duty  and  others.  Proposals  made  by  the  Working  Group  have  been 
discussed  at  the  level  of  the  Technical  Committee.  The  Preliminary  Report  of  the  Technical 
Committee  on  Tariff  Protection  for  sensitive  industries  has  now  been  finalised  and  will  be 
submitted to the Inter-Ministerial Committee in due course.  

Madam Speaker, therefore, I am not in a position at this stage, to reveal to the House the 
contents of the Preliminary Report that has not been discussed, finalised and agreed upon at the 
level of the Inter-Ministerial Committee. 

25 

 
Dr. Sorefan: Is the hon. Minister aware that we have some products which are typically 
of Mauritius, say, Dodo, that are done by the Mauritian SMEs, are copied in Asia and reimported 
to Mauritius and this is causing a lot of problems to these people. Will the hon. Minister see to it 
that  those  specific  products  pertaining  to  Mauritius  are  not  allowed  to  be  copied  and  enter 
Mauritius? 

Mr Bholah: This has been taken into account and this is very important and we want to 
protect all those SMEs which are involved in the manufacture of these products. This has been 
addressed as well. 

Mr Barbier: Madam Speaker, may I ask the hon. Minister about the tariff? I heard the 
 
hon.  Minister  say  that  we  are  bound  by  convention  or  whatever  rules  of  the  World  Trade 
Organisation (WTO) to implement the tariff policy which is prevailing since some years back 
and this is causing so much harm to our local industries, especially the  manufacturing sector. 
May I know, as the developing countries did, whether they are actually imposing a percentage of 
importation from some countries? Instead of having tariffs, they are now - I will not name the 
country I have in mind - importing like 7% of these importations from China to protect the local 
manufacturing. So, will Mauritius also go in that direction? 

Mr Bholah: Well, I can’t pre-empt at this moment what the inter-ministerial committee 
will decide, but I am aware that on the international scene the barriers have been phasing out. I 
also understand that countries like Indonesia are re-introducing custom duties just to give a boost 
to their local industries. But we will take into account whatever you have said and we will see at 
the inter-ministerial committee what it comes to. 

MBC - MR A. M - SUSPENSION 

(No.  B/671)  Mr  P.  Jhugroo  (Second  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien) 
asked the Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms, Minister 
of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to Mr A. M., he will –  

(a)   for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Mauritius  Broadcasting  Corporation, 

information as to since when and why he was suspended, indicating; 

(i) where matters stand as to the inquiry carried out thereinto, and  

 

26 

(ii)  if  salaries  and/or  allowances,  if  any,  have  been  paid  out  thereto  and,  if  so, 

indicate the quantum thereof, and  

(b)  state if he has been reemployed in any Government institution and, if so, give details 

thereof. 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation 
that  Mr  A.M.,  Desk  Coordinator  (formerly  Chief  News  Editor)  has  been  interdicted  from  his 
duties with effect from 23 July 2009, in view of the shortcomings and mismanagement in the 
organisation of the 'Pepsi Sega Hungama' programme. 

The MBC Board had, at its meeting of 12 November 2010, referred the case of Mr A.M. 
to the Disciplinary Committee.  I am informed that the meetings of the Disciplinary Committee 
were postponed for various reasons put forward by the Counsel of Mr A. M.  

I am also informed by the MBC that Mr A. M. is still under interdiction and is being paid 
his  monthly  basic  salary  of  Rs50,000  plus  salary  compensation  at  approved  rates.  The  new 
management team of the MBC will certainly look into the matter, once the new Director-General 
is appointed. 

Madam Speaker, as regards part (b) of the question, I am informed that as per available 
records, MBC is not aware whether Mr A.M. has been re-employed in any other Government 
institution.  

Mr Jhugroo: Will the hon. Minister agree with me that dilatory tactics have been used 

by the lawyer to protract matters unnecessarily? 

Mr Bhadain: Well, it certainly appears that it has taken a long time, Madam Speaker, 
and this is certainly not acceptable. The new management of the MBC will certainly look into 
this. 

MBC - SECURITY GUARDS - RECRUITMENT 

(No.  B/672)  Mr  P.  Jhugroo  (Second  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien) 
asked the Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms, Minister 
of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the Mauritius Broadcasting 
Corporation, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, a list of the security guards 
recruited thereat, since July 2005 to December 2014, indicating in each case the –  

(a) residential address thereof;  

27 

 
(b) reasons for recruitment;  
(c) mode of recruitment thereof, and  
(d) salaries and allowances drawn. 
Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation 

that since July 2005 to December 2014, 26 Security Guards were recruited.   

I  am  tabling  the  information  regarding  the  Security  Guards,  including  their  residential 

addresses, salaries drawn, date they joined and other details. 

As  regards  parts  (b)  and  (c)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that,  when  the  former 
management  under  the  directorship  of  Mr  D.  Callikan  took  office  in  2009,  the  contract  for 
security services from Brinks Company was terminated with effect from 24 October 2009.  At its 
meeting  of  09  December  2009,  the  Board  approved  the  recruitment  of  four  ex-employees  of 
Brinks  and  three  additional  persons  from  applications  which  were  received  at  the  MBC,  on  a 
freelance basis, for a proper roster system to be put in place. 

From  December  2009  to  May  2012,  the  Board  approved  the  recruitment  of  19  more 

security officers from applications received at the MBC.    

Following  an  internal  advertisement  in  December  2012,  21  security  officers  who  were 
still in service were offered employment on a permanent and pensionable basis with effect from 
01 March 2013.   

Madam  Speaker,  from  a  recent  needs  assessment  conducted  in  September  2015,  it  has 
come  to  light  that  only  13  security  guards  are,  in  fact,  needed.    The  remaining  have  been 
redeployed in other departments as handyworker/driver.  For this one particular category, the roll 
went up to 26, meaning a 100% rate of overstaffing.  This was all done by the previous regime, 
Madam Speaker.  

Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Minister inform the House for what reason the MBC has to 
recruit security officers when we have the presence of Police Officers, SMF officers and CCTV 
cameras installed in each and every corner of the new building of the MBC as well as the coded 
magnetic door lock placed everywhere? 

Mr Bhadain: Well, Madam Speaker,  I  certainly agree with the hon. Member that this 
was an abusive practice.  I have recently answered to another PQ saying that since January 2015 
until today nobody has been recruited at the MBC except for the former Director-General who 
has had his services terminated as well. 

 
Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Minister confirm whether from the list of security officers just 

28 

tabled, most of them come from Constituency No. 5? 

Mr Bhadain: Well, yes. According to the list - I am not going to count the number of 

people, Madam Speaker - a lot of them do come from Constituency No.5. 

Mr Jhugroo: Is the hon. Minister aware that out of the 20 security officers recruited at 
that particular time, two had been sacked because they were involved in the theft of powdered 
milk and one accused of theft of a mobile phone? 

Mr Bhadain: Well, I am not specifically aware of theft of powdered milk or phones, but 

if that is the case, then that is the case. 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Would  the  hon.  Minister  agree  with  me  that  the  recruitment  of  these 
security officers was motivated by political consideration and is now proving to be a waste of 
public funds, rendering MBC to be in red? 

Mr Bhadain: Well,  I stated, Madam Speaker, that it is an abusive practice and this is 

certainly going to be looked into as well when the new management of MBC takes office. 

PLAINE VERTE - NEW GYMNASIUM & MULTIPURPOSE COMPLEX - 

CONSTRUCTION 

(No. B/673) Mr A. Ameer Meea (Second Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port 
Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Local  Government  whether,  in  regard  to  the  proposed 
construction of infrastructures in Plaine Verte, Port Louis, he will state – 

(a) where matters stand in relation to the proposed construction of a new Gymnasium on 

the premises of the Concorde Garden, Plaine Verte, and  

(b)  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Municipal  Council  of  Port  Louis, 
information  as  to  where  matters  stand  in  relation  to  the  construction  of  a  new 
Multipurpose Complex at Renaissance, Plaine Verte, indicating -  
(i) the amount of money earmarked therefor, and  
(ii) if fresh tenders have been launched therefor and, if not, why not. 

(Withdrawn) 

FLEET MASTER LTD - FINANCE & STAFF 

(No. B/674)  Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms,  Minister  of 
Technology,  Communication  and  Innovation  whether,  in  regard  to  Fleet  Master  Ltd.,  a 

 

29 

subsidiary  of  Iframac  Ltd.,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  information  as  to  the 
financial and staffing situations thereof.  

(Withdrawn) 

LE MORNE VILLAGE & LA PRAIRIE PUBLIC BEACH - EROSION 

(No.  B/675)  Mr  E.  Jhuboo  (Third  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River)  asked  the 
Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management 
whether,  in  regard  to  the  coastal  region  between  Le  Morne  Village  and  the  La  Prairie  public 
beach, he will state the measures, if any, that have been taken to prevent the erosion thereof and 
the risk of the coastal road thereat collapsing. 

(Withdrawn) 

CENTRAL PROCUREMENT BOARD – BIDS EVALUATION  

(No.  B/676)  Mr  S.  Rughoobur  (Second  Member  for  Grand’Baie  &  Poudre  d’Or) 
asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to bids evaluation, 
he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Central Procurement Board, information as 
to –  

(a) the criteria used when selecting the chairperson and the members of the evaluation 

panels thereof;  

(b) the number of training organised by the Board over the past three  years in relation 

thereto, indicating in each case the -  
(i) names of the trainers, and 
(ii) costs thereof and, if not, why not, and  

(c)  if the Board has assessed the reasons why the Independent Review Panel has allowed 
challenges  on  award  of  contracts  during  the  recent  months,  and  if  so,  indicate  the 
remedial measures taken in relation thereto, if any. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, I am 
informed  by  the  Central  Procurement  Board  (CPB)  that  the  criteria  used  for  selecting  the 
chairperson and members of evaluation panels are competency, expertise in public procurement 
and knowledge about the item being procured.  

30 

 
 
All members including Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of the CPB as well as the IRP 
and  PPO  are  appointed  by  the  President  in  accordance  with  advice  tendered  by  the  Prime 
Minister after consultation with the Leader of the Opposition. 

Concerning part (b) of the question, training sessions on bid evaluation are organised by 
the Procurement Policy  Office pursuant to section (7)(f) of the Public Procurement  Act.  I  am 
informed that over the past three  years, 14 training sessions were organised for the benefit of 
evaluators. In this respect, the names of the trainers are being tabled and I am informed that no 
fees were paid to them.  

Madam Speaker, regarding part (c) of the question, I am informed by the CPB that during 
recent  months,  there  was  only  one  case  where  the  determination  of  the  Independent  Review 
Panel (IRP) was not aligned to the recommendation of the Board. The IRP has referred the case 
to the CPB for re-evaluation and same is in progress.  

Mr  Rughoobur:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  With  regard  to  the  issue  of  training,  I 
understand it is the PPO which is in charge.  The fact that the CPB is not only responsible for the 
evaluation of bids, but also responsible for the vetting of those bids prior to floating, will the hon. 
Minister look into the issue of ensuring that the CPB, along with the PPO, conducts appropriate 
training to ensure that we don’t come across issues that we get with bids that require complex 
specification  because  they  have  this  responsibility  to  vet?  So  the  training  issue  becomes 
important, whether at evaluation or at the vetting stage. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, I agree. I think that we need to increase on the 
training  side  for  those  who  are  doing  evaluation  of  tenders.  So,  I’ll  transmit  to  the  CPB  the 
proposal of the hon. Member. 

Mr Rughoobur: Well, I am going to table a very interesting report from the PPO on 
sustainable  public  procurement  which  was  prepared  in  July  2011.  May  I  request  the  hon. 
Minister as well to ensure that the recommendations are implemented because as per what you 
have in the report here,  an evaluation was made recently and it was found that most of those 
recommendations  in  that  very  interesting  document  prepared  by  the  PPO  have  not  been 
implemented? So, will the hon. Minister ensure that this is done? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Yes, Madam Speaker. 

 

31 

Mr Rughoobur: A final supplementary question, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Yes. 

Mr Rughoobur: Thank you. The fact that we are speaking about e-procurement, will the 
hon. Minister ensure that the website of the Central Procurement Board is updated because, if 
you have a look, you will see that the former Chairman and Members are still there. If you could, 
please, look into this issue? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Thank you for the question. I will request the CPB to update its 

website.  

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Rughoobur! 

Mr Rughoobur: PQ No. B/677, Madam Speaker. 

Madam  Speaker:  No.  I  am  sorry,  you  have  withdrawn  PQ  No.  B/677.  It  is  PQ  No. 

B/678. 

Mr Rughoobur: Yes. Sorry, Madam Speaker, PQ No. B/678. 

STATE LAND DEVELOPMENT COMPANY - UNIVERSITIES - CONSTRUCTION 

(No.  B/677)  Mr  S.  Rughoobur  (Second  Member  for  Grand’Baie  &  Poudre  d’Or) 
asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the project for 
the construction of universities, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the State Land 
Development Company Ltd., information as to - 

(a) the amount of funds invested therein as at to date, indicating the - 

(i) names of the consultants and of the selected contractors therefor, and  
(ii) expected completion dates thereof, and  

(b)  if  the  Company  is  exempted  from  the  application  of  the  provisions  of  the  Public 

Procurement Act. 

(Withdrawn) 

HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL - MEMBERSHIP 

(No.  B/678)  Mr  S.  Rughoobur  (Second  Member  for  Grand’Baie  &  Poudre  d’Or) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 

 

32 

Research  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Human  Resources  Development  Council,  she  will,  for  the 
benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to - 

(a) if the Board thereof has been constituted and, if not, why not;  
(b)  the  initiatives  undertaken  to  ensure  that  Mauritius  has  the  required  trained  human 
resources  to  develop  the  Information  Communications  Technology,  financial 
services and tourism sectors;  

(c) if any action plan is/will be implemented therefor and if so, give details thereof, and  
(d)  if  a  strategic  partner  has  been  appointed  therefor  and,  if  so,  give  details  of  the 

partnership and, if not, why not. 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  Madam  Speaker,  at  the  very  outset,  I  wish  to  inform  the 
House  that  in  the  context  of the  Budget  2015-2016,  amendments  were  brought  to  the  Human 
Resource  Development  Act  by  way  of  section  22  of  the  Finance  Act  2015  to  provide  for  the 
Human Resource Development Council’s membership to be reduced from 26 to 11 members and 
for  the  repeal  of  the  provisions  relating  to  its  Executive  Committee  which  comprised  eight 
members. The rationale behind this review is to make provision for an efficient-sized Council 
that will enable better performance and quick decision-making at the HRDC.  

While  keeping  in  view  the  above  objective  and  given  that  the  former  Council  and 
Executive  Committee  have  been  repealed  and  lapsed,  consultations  are  being  held  with 
stakeholders for the constitutions of the new Council which will be set up shortly.  

Madam Speaker, as regards part (b) of the question, the HRDC by virtue of its mandate 
should  provide  the  necessary  human  resource  thrust  for  the  successful  transformation  of 
Mauritian economy and has recently undertaken a number of initiatives to ensure that Mauritius 
has  the  required  trained  human  resources  to  develop  the  Information  Communications 
Technology,  Financial  services  and  Tourism  sectors  which  have  been  mentioned  in  the 
Economic  Mission  Statement  (Vision  2030)  of  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  as  having  the 
potential to generate growth, value and employment.  

As part of such initiatives to determine the skills gap, the HRDC has, amongst others, 
conducted labour shortage surveys in ICT, Finance, Tourism and the skills surveys each involved 
some 100 companies. The outcome of the survey revealed that there was a need to improve skills 
across a number of these occupational groups.  

 

33 

An important initiative which goes in the direction to endow the country with the pool of 
trained  human  resources  relates  to  the  HRDC  being  the  coordinating  agency  for  the 
implementation of the Graduate Training for Employment Scheme and also acting as facilitator 
for the execution of the Youth Employment Programme (YEP), the Dual Training Programme, 
amongst others. The YEP is targeting unemployed youth whereas the Dual Training Programme 
is focusing on Programme for both unemployed and existing youths. 

The HRDC is working closely with the industry associations of the respective sectors and 
has  during  year  2014  financed  a  refund  of  some  Rs75  m.  for  the  training  of  about  15,400 
employees for these three sectors. In addition, the HRDC is also partnering at the level of the 
consultative meetings which the University of Mauritius is having with the private sector for the 
mounting of demand-driven training programmes.  

industry  associations  has  provided 

As  regards  the  ICT/BPO  sector,  the  findings  of  the  labour  shortage  survey  which  was 
complemented  by  response  from 
inputs  regarding 
occupational and skill needs in respect of job creation in the sector. In addition, the HRDC, in 
collaboration  with  major  IT  operators,  also  developed  Nomenclature  des  Métiers  for  the 
ICT/BPO  sector  that  gives  a  description  of  job  profiles  for  the  said  sector  and  a  guide  for  a 
decent career path to future entrants in this industry. Moreover, a Career Development Stairway 
has been developed and published specifically for the ICT/BPO sector to provide information on 
various employment and career opportunities through a web portal.  

As mentioned above, it is also assisting in the implementation of a Graduate Training for 
Employment Scheme to provide sponsorship for training of unemployed graduates. Under this 
initiative,  a  postgraduate  training  in  ICT  is  being  mounted  in  collaboration  with  the  industry 
operators. The YEP database would be used for the scheme. Some 1,900 employees were trained 
in ICT sector and involved some Rs11.3 m. for the ICT/BPO sector. 

As for the financial sector, the HRDC survey identified priority skills in terms of training 
programmes  for  Financial  and  Investment  Analysts,  Tax  Compliance  Specialists,  Anti-money 
Laundering Specialists, Insurance Underwriters, Auditors and Financial Consultants. The HRDC 
sponsored  training  for  up  to  Rs47  m.  for  some  7,275  employees  in  the  financial  sector.  The 
HRDC  is  also  collaborating  with  professional  associations  for  provision  of  a  specific  training 

 

34 

programme  such  as  the  Professional  Banker’s  Certificate  and  the  mounting  of  a  conversion 
courses for unemployed graduates in the field of Finance/Accounting. 

In  the  tourism  sector,  the  HRDC  is  working  in  collaboration  with  l’Association  des 
Hôteliers de l'île Maurice (AHRIM), l’Ecole Hôtelière Sir Gaëtan Duval and participating hotels, 
to  facilitate  training  in  the  field  of  tourism  and  hospitality.  The  HRDC  is  facilitating  the 
implementation of a Skills Development Project for unemployed in the tourism sector. Salient 
examples  include  training  in  Hazards  Analysis  and  Critical  Control  Points,  (HACCP) 
implementation,  luxury  pastry  production,  basic  food  hygiene  training,  handling  customer 
complaints,  service  procedures,  among  others.  The  HRDC  has  refunded  around  Rs17  m.  for 
some 6,200 persons last year.  

In addition, the HRDC is sponsoring the dual mode of Apprenticeship Scheme which is 
being implemented by the MITD, especially for the hospitality sector. Under this Apprenticeship 
Scheme,  some  300  persons  benefited  under  the  HRDC  sponsored  scheme  for  the  hospitality 
sector. 

Madam Speaker, as for part (c) of the question, all the initiatives mentioned earlier will 
be complemented by the formulation of a new National Skills Development Strategic Plan for 
Mauritius. The HRDC Action Plan includes the conduct of national skills studies for 10 sectors 
of the economy, covering some 1,500 enterprises. 

As  for  part  (d)  of  the  question,  Madam  Speaker,  no  strategic  partnership  has  been 
established at the HRDC. The HRDC is not a training organisation per se. However, we have 
received technical assistance from Singapore under the World Bank sponsorship to undertake a 
scoping mission for the HRD sector, this in view of setting up the polytechnics which will be 
covering the ICT, tourism and paramedical fields. Recommendations are being finalised. 

Mr  Rughoobur:  The  hon.  Minister  has  been  speaking  about  the  National  Human 
Resource Development Plan. Actually, the plan was prepared in 2009, I think, and I wanted to 
know from the hon. Minister whether there has been any evaluation of the recommendation to 
date  and  what  has  been  the  outcome  because  we  note  that  there  is  actually  HR  deficit  in  the 
services sector, that’s why I mentioned the three sectors? 

 

35 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: In fact, Madam Speaker, we have heard a lot about mismatch 
between the training people are getting in Mauritius and the world of work and this is why we 
have been reviewing the whole sector and we are coming up with new surveys and new training 
programmes. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Rughoobur! 

Mr Rughoobur: Speaking about the Grant Scheme, it is true that we speak of big sums 
that are being spent, but probably if the hon. Minister can look into the funds that are really being 
used  by  those  employers  in  sectors  where  we  really  need  training,  that  is,  we  encourage 
employers in the services sector, for example, to use those schemes, those grants because even in 
this  Human  Resource  Development  Plan  we  have  issues,  recommendations  where  employers 
have to be encouraged to use the Grant Scheme which is not being used adequately. 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  Madam  Speaker,  employers  are  refunded  up  to  60%  of  this 
amount spent and the projects that are being carried out right now involve consultations between 
the training centres, the university and the private sector. I feel that the private sector has plenty 
of encouragement being given to it through the HRDC, and the other institutions are working in 
collaboration with it, so as to ensure that training provided will suit the world of work. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Fowdar! 

Mr  Fowdar:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.    I  heard  the  hon.  Minister  saying  that  the 
number of Board members was reduced to eight.  Does it mean that some sectors of the economy 
represented in the HRDC are no more there now? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Madam Speaker, the number has been reduced from 26 to 11 

and we feel that this will be more efficient and less cumbersome. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Rughoobur! 

CWA - PAILLES - TREATMENT PLANT PROJECT 

(No. B/679) Mr R. Uteem (First Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis Central) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to the 

 

36 

Treatment Plant Project at Pailles, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Central 
Water Authority, information as to the - 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

costs thereof, indicating the amount of variation costs;  

date on which it will become operational, and  

if  an  inquiry  has  been  carried  out  thereinto  and,  if  so,  indicate  the  outcome 
thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

APOLLO BRAMWELL HOSPITAL - ACQUISITION 

(No. B/680) Mr R. Uteem (First Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis Central) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Apollo 
Bramwell Hospital, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain information as to the - 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

funds that have been used for the acquisition thereof; 

procedures that have been followed for the acquisition thereof ; 

monthly income and expenditure thereof since the acquisition thereof to date, and 

intended use thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

BOARD OF INVESTMENT - RESTRUCTURING EXERCISE 

(No.  B/686)  Mr  S.  Rughoobur  (Second  Member  for  Grand’Baie  &  Poudre  d’Or) 
asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the Board of 
Investment, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to - 

(a) 

if a full restructuring exercise is being or will be undertaken thereat to enable the 
Board  to  respond  to  the  increasing  need  of  the  Mauritian  economy  to  attract 
adequate Foreign Direct Investments;  

(b) 

the amount of Foreign Direct Investments;  

 

37 

(i) 

generated, excluding real properties, through promotional activities during 
the year ending 31 December 2014, and 

(ii) 

expected for the year ending 31 December 2015, and  

(c) 

give details as to the share representing the manufacturing sector and the services 
sector, respectively. 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Madam  Speaker,  since  my  coming  into  office  and  the 
reconstitution of the new Board in March 2015, I requested that the organisation be restructured 
for greater effectiveness and to be fully aligned with the Government vision. 

The restructuring exercise of the Board of Investment was completed in August 2015. The 
BOI is now structured, with a new vision and mission, along both market and sectoral clusters 
with special focus on attracting sustainable and productive investments. It is also making greater 
promotional efforts in emerging markets.  To this end, the Board of Investment has opened an 
office in France and seven more are being set up in South Africa, India, UK, China, Switzerland, 
USA and Russia.  

Madam  Speaker,  we  are  constrained  by  the  high  level  of  public  sector  debt  and  our 
commitment to reduce that debt to 50% of GDP by 2018.  As such, the economy relies strongly 
on private sector investment and FDI. 

The  investment  needs  associated  with  the  development  of  the  port,  the  Highlands 
Administrative City, the Riche Terre logistics zone and other smart cities rely a lot on private 
sector and FDI. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (b) (i) of the question, the total FDI, excluding real 
estate  activities  and  hotel  acquisition,  amounted  to  some  Rs4.5  billion  for  the  year  ended  31 
December  2014.  As  regards  part  (b)  (ii)  of  the  question,  based  on  projects  which  are  in  the 
pipeline at the BOI, Foreign Direct Investment is expected to be between Rs11 to Rs12 billion 
for the year 31 December 2015. 

I wish to highlight that several major projects related to the manufacturing sector that we 
have in the pipeline will trigger, sooner or later, new FDI flows and export earnings. Most of 

 

38 

these  investments  take  the  form  of  green-field  investments,  that  is,  investment  that  directly 
creates or expands production facilities. 

As  far  as  part  (c)  of  the  question  is  concerned,  in  2014  the  share  of  FDI  attributable  to 
manufacturing was around Rs76 m. while that of the services sector, excluding hotel acquisition, 
amounted to some Rs4 billion. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Rughoobur! 

Mr Rughoobur: Referring to the restructuring of the BOI, will the hon. Minister please 
look  into  the  issue  of  the  creation  of  a  separate  unit  for  looking  into  the  whole  issue  of 
investment in Africa?  Will the hon. Minister please look into the creation of an African desk, if I 
may say so? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, in fact, the BOI has set up an African desk to 

ensure the channelling of all the investments that are now going in Africa through Mauritius. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Barbier! 

Mr Barbier: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I learnt that, with respect to the PDS and the 
RES, actually the investors are complaining having some difficulties to comply with the Project 
Development Scheme compared to the RES, which was more flexible.   I would like to know 
whether the hon. Minister did get any complaint or any remark in that respect and whether he 
proposes to remedy the situation. 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Yes,  Madam  Speaker.    In  fact,  we  moved  away  from  the  IRS 
because  of  its  gated  community  concept  where  foreigners  all  live  together.    So,  this  was 
abolished  and  we  moved  towards  the  Property  Development  Scheme  (PDS)  and  one  of  the 
conditions of the scheme is that 25% of apartments or homes should be sold to Mauritians or 
non-resident  Mauritians.    This  is  fundamental  to  ensure  that  those  communities  represent  the 
country and also foreigners.  Now, there have been some suggestions that we should remove it.  I 
must say that I would stand against it because before that the IRS system encouraged a way of 
living in Mauritius where the rich were enclosed in their own programme.  So, I think, we will 
stick to the 25%. Anyway, the point that was put was this.  The Mauritians would not be in a 
position to buy those apartments at the price foreigners are prepared to pay.  But, in that case, 

 

39 

they have to do some cross-subsidisation, that is, they sell higher price for foreigners and then at 
a cheaper price for Mauritians. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Rughoobur! 

Mr  Rughoobur: We  are  putting  a  lot  of  emphasis  on  new  sectors  like ocean  economy.  
Will the hon. Minister please ensure that, while the BOI is putting so much emphasis on the new 
sectors,  that  there  is  also  emphasis  put  on  consolidation  of  existing  sectors  like  ICT/BPO, 
financial services and the manufacturing sector as well? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Well,  the  allocation  of  resources  for  the  new  sectors  does  not 
exclude  allocation  of  resources  for  the  existing  sectors.    So,  I  think  both  are  given  equal 
treatment. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question! 

Mr Ganoo:  Can I ask one question, please? 

Madam Speaker:  Yes. 

Mr  Ganoo:  I  wish  to  come  back  on  the  answer  that  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development just gave concerning the change in the scheme of the PDS, the IRS and 
the RES.  He suggested that the solution would be to cross-subsidise, and if I understand him 
properly, impose on the operators the necessity to sell to Mauritian buyers at a reduced price.  
But, of course, this has  constitutional implications in terms of property  rights.  How will that 
work in practice? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Well, this is a proposal which I am making, Madam Speaker.  It 
is  for  the  promoters  to  ensure  that  their  project  is  viable.    We  insist,  as  a  nation,  that  gated 
communities should disappear in this country. 

Mr Ganoo:  Can the hon. Minister, if you will allow me, Madam Speaker… 

Madam Speaker:  Last question! 

 

40 

Mr Ganoo: Regarding the manufacturing sector, doesn’t the hon. Minister of Finance and 
Economic Development agree that this sector has slowed down considerably during these past 
years, and what are the measures and remedies he intends to come up with? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  We have to, in fact, agree that foreign investment, especially in 
the manufacturing sector, has gone down substantially. I have asked the BOI to ensure, therefore, 
that  while  we  are  promoting  those  new  sub-sectors  of  the  economy,  we  don’t  forget  that 
manufacturing is basically substance in terms of value added. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Ganoo! 

POVERTY - MARSHALL PLAN   

(No. B/687) Mr K. Ramano (Third Member for Belle Rose & Quatre Bornes) asked 
the  Minister  of  Social  Integration  and  Economic  Empowerment  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
Marshall Plan against poverty, he will state the - 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

overall costs and time frame set for the elaboration thereof;  

expected number of families who will be concerned therewith;  

financing aspect thereof, taking into consideration eventual input of funds from 
the Corporate Social Responsibility, and  

(d) 

complementary aspect thereof with the Love Bridge Project. 

(Withdrawn) 

DBM  – EMPLOYEES & RESTRUCTURATION 

(No.  B/688)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis East) asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the 
Development  Bank  of  Mauritius  Ltd.,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  therefrom, 
information as to – 

(a) 

the number of employees thereof  

 

41 

(i) 

whose employment have been terminated over the period January 2015 to 
date, and  

(ii) 

in post as at to date, and 

(b) 

where matters stand in relation to the proposed restructuring thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

CSR - POCHES DE PAUVRETÉ - SPONSORING 

(No.  B/689)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis East) asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the 
Corporate Social Responsibility, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain a list of the thirty-
eight companies which are sponsoring poches de pauvreté, indicating in each case, the poches de 
pauvreté which are being sponsored. 

(Withdrawn) 

CWA - STRATEGIC PARTNER  

(No. B/690) Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the Vice-
Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to the Central Water 
Authority,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  therefrom,  information  as  to  if  any 
decision has been taken to seek a strategic partner therefor and if so, indicate - 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

when the decision therefor was taken;  

the reasons therefor, and 

if  studies  had  ever  been  carried  out  in  relation  thereto  and  if  so,  indicate  the 
findings thereof. 

The  Vice-Prime  Mnister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo): Madam Speaker, with  you permission,  I shall reply to PQ B/690 and  B/700 
together.    As  soon  as  I  took  office,  I  took  stock  of  the  various  attempts  by  successive 
Governments to reform the water sector.  All these attempts have failed. 

I also met with the senior management team as well as the trade union of the CWA. 

42 

 
 
I  was  struck  by  the  quality  and  competence  of  all  those  I  met  in  the  course  of  these 
meetings.    However,  the  CWA  is  besotted  by  a  series  of  financial  and  administrative 
incapacities, and we will not be able to provide to the population good quality water on a 24-hour 
basis, seven days a week, unless we take bold reforms. 

I  have  reached  the  conclusion  that  the  daunting  challenges  of  the  CWA  cannot  be 

addressed within the existing institutional structures. 

However, I will use extreme prudence before presenting a plan for reform. Of course, all 

stakeholders would be informed as and when it is felt appropriate.   

Several options are now being examined and it would be premature to discuss them at 

this point in time. 

Mr Ganoo: I can understand fully well the strategy, but can the hon. Vice-Prime Minister 

tell us whether a committee has already been set up to think about the options to strategise? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Well, we have met - I think I can disclose this - with representatives 
of  the  Banque  Africaine  de  Développement  (BAD).  We  are  working  internally  on  the  options 
which are available to us. Essentially, there are three options: Management contracts, which have 
failed; the concept of Affaire Mage, which is an interesting one; thirdly, outright privatisation, 
which is not being excluded, but which will lead to more ripples than the first two contracts. The 
hon. Member has been Minister of Energy, he knows what it means to be in charge of the CWA. 
He lost his hair when he was Minister of Energy… 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Ganoo:  Fortunately, there are other means to regain hair lost now! The hon. Vice-
Prime  Minister  has  himself  made  reference  to  past  studies.    There  was  one  study  which  was 
made by the IFC when the MMM/MSM Government was in power and the IFC is part of the 
World Bank, as the hon. Minister knows, and this report took around three years. The enquiries 
were made for about three years and, finally, the report was submitted to the Government of this 
time, I remember that even hon. Sithanen, when he was Minister - and the MMM/MSM was in 
the Opposition - he paid tribute to that report. Therefore, may I ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister 
whether his Ministry can revisit this IFC Report before taking any decision? 

43 

 
Mr Collendavelloo: Well, nothing came out of  this Report.  I think times have moved 
now. We just have to scrape the ground and start afresh.  I do not think all these reports have 
failed. I see papers here, listing all that has been attempted since 1999. I mean, this is daunting. 
And, certainly, Mr Sithanen is not a reference to me. 

Mr Ganoo: One last question! 

Madam Speaker: Hon, Jhugroo, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Ganoo: Madam Speaker, the IFC Report did not fail. In fact, when the MMM/MSM 
Government lost power, the Labour Government, which came afterwards, shelved the report. In 
fact,  I  have  a  summary  of  the  recommendations  of  the  report,  Private  sector  participation  in 
Mauritius Water and Sanitation and there are many recommendations which the IFC made … 

Madam Speaker: Ask your question, hon. Ganoo! 

Mr Ganoo: …including the option which the hon. Vice-Prime Minister just mentioned. 
May I, therefore, ask him - not only the IFC Report, but even, I think the Singaporeans came 
afterwards, a team of experts and they also made a study and I think submitted a report to the 
then Labour Government. I am just asking the hon. Vice-Prime Minister whether the committee 
which will look at the right strategy, the right option, and takes on board whatever good there are 
in these reports? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Yes, I will consider this, although, personally, I do not have much 
faith on these fly-by-night experts, whether they come from high-flying institutions or otherwise. 
I will, on occasion arising, be happier to discuss the matter with the hon. Member than with all 
sorts of people who do not know about the Mauritian context. 

Mr  Barbier:  The  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  mentioned  that  there  have  been  many 
attempts to improve the water sector in Mauritius but, unfortunately, at no end. May I know from 
the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister,  being  given  that  we  are  now  on  the  right  path  and  actually 
consumers are in big difficulty to pay the combined bills of water and sewerage together, what 
guarantee  will  he  give  to  the  House  that  there  will  be  no  increase  in  whatever  option  the 
Government choose in the tariff of water to the consumers? 

44 

 
Mr Collendavelloo: I cannot give that guarantee at all. The water tariffs are extremely 
low, that’s all, but if you increase water tariffs now that you have not been able to give some 
relief to the population, people will legitimately be asking questions. But the water tariffs will 
need to be increased privatisation or no privatisation. 

Mr Ganoo: Can the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, at least, give a guarantee as regards the 

workforce at the CWA, whether there will be any… 

Mr  Collendavelloo:    No,  I  cannot  give  any  guarantee,  I  am  sorry.  No  guarantee  is 
possible.  If we start talking of workforce and we will see the scandals of contracts which are 
being awarded, you will understand that I am not going to give any guarantee at all. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ganoo! 

PUBLIC PARKS, GREEN SPACES  & ROADS - TREES – SECURITY HAZARDS 

(No.  B/691)  Mr  A.  Ganoo  (First  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River)  asked  the 
Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management 
whether, in regard to the public parks, green spaces and roads, he will state the measures that his 
Ministry  proposes  to  take  to  avert  the  risk  of  accidents  caused  by  the  potential  danger 
represented by trees, following the fatal accident which was caused by the fall of a tree on a car 
parked near the London Supermarket, in Vacoas, on 21 September 2015.   

Mr  Dayal:  Madam  Speaker,  I  shall,  with  your  permission,  reply  to  the  Parliamentary 

Question in my capacity as Acting Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security. 

First of all, I wish again to express my deepest sympathy to the family of the person who 
passed  away  in  the  tragic  accident  caused  by  the  fall  of  a  tree  in  the  parking  of  the  London 
Supermarket in Vacoas on 21 September last. 

In fact, following the accident, a survey of the area was carried out by the Conservator of 
Forests  at  the  request  of  the  Sub-Division  of  Commander  of  the  Vacoas  Police  Station.  The 
Conservator of Forests has reported that the fallen tree was a mature ‘Araucaria’ tree of 62 cm 
diameter growing along a privately-owned lane. The tree was severely attacked by termites at the 
base on a length of one metre from the ground. There were also some 60 palm trees about 15 to 
20 metres high along the same private lane and four other rotten ‘Araucaria’ trees on the parking 
area of the food court which represented security hazards. The Police was requested to inform 

 

45 

the owners to take immediate actions to remove these trees. I am informed that these trees have 
been removed safely.  

The Police enquiry on the accident case is ongoing. 

Madam  Speaker,  let  me  now  clarify  the  roles  and  responsibilities  of  each  authority 
regarding  the  felling  and  maintenance  of  trees  growing  all  over  the  country.  The  present 
legislation, namely the Forests and Reserves Act 1983 provides for the Forestry Service of the 
Ministry  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security  to  exercise  control  over  these  trees  on  all  State 
lands.  These  include  State  forest  lands,  public  parks,  public  beaches,  offshore  islets, 
Government-owned premises such as educational institutions and hospitals. The Forestry Service 
also  has  jurisdiction  over  road  and  river  reserves  and  mountain  reserves  which  are  owned  by 
both  the  State  and  private  owners.  The  prior  authorisation  of  the  Conservator  of  Forests  is 
required for the felling of trees or the lopping of branches on all these specified lands.  

As per existing policy, all requests for felling of trees or lopping of branches on State 
lands  are  channelled  to  the  Forestry  Service  which  makes  appropriate  recommendation  for 
approval by the Ministry.  

However, the Special Mobile Force has the responsibility to attend to the felling of trees 
in emergency cases constituting danger to life and property and in time of natural and human 
induced disasters. 

The  felling  of  trees  along  classified  roads  is  undertaken  by  the  Road  Development 
Authority  whereas  the  District  and  Municipal  Councils  undertake  felling  of  trees  along  non-
classified  roads.  The  Mauritius  Telecom  and  the  Central  Electricity  Board  attend  to  cases 
affecting telephone and power lines respectively.  

The felling of trees on private premises is undertaken by the private land owners who do 

not require any prior authorisation from the Forestry Service. 

Madam Speaker, as regards the measures proposed to avert the risks of accidents by trees, 
the  Forestry  Service,  in  collaboration  with  the  Road  Development  Authority  and  the  Local 
Authorities has, since the beginning of the year, started a survey on a region wise basis to assess 
the  status  and  general  conditions  of  trees  in  all  public  places  and  to  take  remedial  actions 
accordingly.  The Forestry Service has for this purpose acquired a lorry equipped with a lift and 

 

46 

has undertaken felling and trimming of trees as well as lopping of branches along roads in the 
following  regions:  Plaine  Magnien,  L’Escalier,  Mare  Chicose,  St  Hubert,  Ville  Noire, 
Anse Jonchée, Coromandel, Chebel, Rose Hill, Vallée des Prêtres, Port Louis, Belle Mare, and 
Bel Air.  This exercise is ongoing in other regions and will be intensified in view of the cyclonic 
period. 

As  regards  private  land  owners,  they  will  be  sensitised  on  the  need  to  regularly  make 
assessment on the state of trees found on their premises and to fell decaying trees representing 
security hazards. In the event of the general conditions of the trees representing potential danger 
to life and property, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has agreed that the Special Mobile Force, in 
consultation with the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Centre and the Forestry 
Service, will entertain specific requests on a case to case basis. The collaboration of all relevant 
authorities  will  be  enlisted  for  the  awareness  campaign  and  assistance  will  be  provided 
accordingly. Such requests are to be channelled through my Ministry.  

Mr Ganoo: I thank the hon. Minister for his answer, Madam Speaker. The point of this 
question was precisely to sensitise the authorities and the population. Therefore, may I ask the 
hon. Minister whether as one of the first steps - I think he has answered that in the question, but I 
want to make double sure that this forms part of his answer - that his Ministry should coordinate 
at least with the Local Authorities and give the Local Authorities the necessary tools in order to 
see to it that the fall of trees do not become a hazard or a danger to members of the public as, 
unfortunately, the accident that took place in September of this year? 

Mr Dayal: Madam Speaker,  I thank the hon.  Member for this question. This morning 
itself  -  because  today  is  13  October,  the  United  Nations  has  it  as  the  International  Day  for 
Disaster Reduction - I had a work session with all first responders. I must say, we are seriously 
planning  to  have  next  Monday  a  very  specialised  workshop  as  far  as  all  types  of  risks  and 
vulnerabilities  that  we  have  in  the  country  in  the  wake  of  the  cyclonic  period,  that  they  be 
attended  to  in  a  systematic  manner  with  all  stakeholders  concerned.  My  Ministry  will  be 
supervising the whole operation. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

47 

 
Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Minister inform the House whether his Ministry has set up a 
mechanism to verify that all trees and branches found in public areas like primary and secondary 
schools or the major roads are safe and not a threat? 

Mr Dayal: Thank you for this question, hon. Jhugroo. The Disaster Management Centre 
is  making  a  thorough  survey  regarding  the  trees  that  represent  a  potential  threat  to  life  and 
property  all  throughout  Mauritius.  Directives  will  be  issued  to  all  stakeholders  as  and  when 
required. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ganoo! 

RIVIÈRE DES GALETS – INHABITANTS - RELOCATION 

(No.  B/692)  Mr  A.  Ganoo  (First  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River)  asked  the 
Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management 
whether, in regard to the inhabitants of the EDC at Rivière des Galets who are at risk during bad 
weather  conditions,  he  will  state  if  any  decision  has  been  taken  in  regard  to  the  relocation 
thereof. 

Mr  Dayal:  Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  the  risk  to  which  the 
inhabitants facing the sea frontage at Rivière des Galets are subject to is a long-standing issue as 
their residential zone is exposed to incoming waves and swells due to lack of protective natural 
structures such as coral reefs. 

Measures to address the problem of the vulnerable community may be classified under 
short-term,  medium-term  and  long-term.  Relocation  is  a  long-term  measure.  Short-term 
measures  as  a  first  line  of  defence  were  undertaken  by  my  Ministry  to  protect  the  vulnerable 
community as follows –  

(i) 

in 1995/96, coastal protection works had been carried out at Rivière des Galets, 
using  semi-hard  structures  in  the  form  of  walls  and  groynes  made  of  gabions. 
Gabions were placed over a stretch of 800 m to protect the coast from high waves; 

(ii) 

in 2003, 215 m of gabions were removed and replaced as they were damaged; 

 
(iii) 

48 

following  damage  caused  by  storm  surges  in  2006,  damaged  gabions  were 
replaced in 2007 over 450 m from the river towards the cemetery; 

(iv) 

in 2011, 104 m of the gabions installed in 2003 were removed and replaced, and 

(v) 

during the years 2012-2013, a total length of 130 m of gabions which were partly 
installed in 2003 and partly in 2008 were replaced. 

As  a  medium-term  measure,  a  second  line  of  defence  to  protect  the  inhabitants  was 
provided in 2007 through the construction of a retaining wall over some 450 m in front of the 
residential areas. Furthermore, my Ministry has earmarked funds to the tune of Rs90 m. under 
the “Climate Change Adaptation Programme in the coastal zone of Mauritius” project funded by 
the Adaptation Fund Board to help increase the climate resilience of the exposed community at 
Rivière des Galets.  

An international consultancy firm, Indufor Oy from Finland, was appointed in September 
2014 to undertake the feasibility study and cost benefit analysis for coastal adaptation measures 
at Rivière des Galets. The consultant submitted in its reports in August 2015. According to the 
consultant, the option of relocation is technically unfeasible under the Adaptation Fund Project 
due to the non-availability of budget and the timeline for the project, which should end in 2018.  

On  strength  of  the  technical  assessment  and  feasibility  reports  including  Cost  Benefit 
Analysis, the consultant has recommended the construction of improved sea defence structures 
along the entire sea front of the residential zone.  

The scope of works includes the following –  

(a)  construction of rock revetment of a stretch of 450 m; 

(b) implementation of a curved sea wall to reflect the incoming waves; 

(c)  construction  of  water  drainage  system  for  evacuation  of  flood  water  along  the 

exposed area. 

The proposed structures will be designed to enable to withstand the extremely high waves 
that affect the site as well as reducing the overtopping. The design will also consider the impact 
of climate change including sea level rise.  

 
The  design  report  is  expected  in  November  2015  and  works  are  scheduled  to  start  by 

49 

April 2016.  

However, the managed retreat, that is, relocation of the community was also considered. 
A willingness to relocate survey was conducted among the residents of Rivière des Galets and I 
wish to inform the House that most of the inhabitants were favourable to the option. Following a 
site  visit  and  my  personal  intervention,  all  accepted  the  relocation  option  in  the  area  nearby 
where they reside.  

My Ministry held consultation with the St. Félix Sugar Estate to identify an alternative 
site for the relocation of the vulnerable communities not too far from their present residence. A 
plot of five acres of land was identified in consultation with the St. Félix Sugar Estate and the 
community.  Procedural actions have been initiated through the Ministry of Housing and Lands 
for  the  acquisition  and  vesting  of  the  land.  Other  aspects,  including  financial  costs  are  being 
looked into with a view to implementing this long-term measure because we are attentive to the 
plight of people. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dayal, your answer is long and I think it is better to circulate it. 

You’ve got a supplementary question, hon. Ganoo? 

Mr Ganoo: I have only one question. Does the hon. Minister have an idea how long it 

will take for the relocation of the inhabitants? 

Mr  Dayal:  I  must  say  that  St.  Félix  Sugar  Estate  is  willing  to  give  the  land.  It  is  a 
question of fine-tuning procedures at the level of the Ministry of Housing and Lands and also my 
Ministry. The three parties definitely are willing to find a solution.  Therefore,  I think we are 
going to address the problem in a very systematic manner taking all factors into consideration. 

Mr  Ganoo:  Can  I  take  it  from  the  hon.  Minister,  therefore,  that  Government  is  also 
taking  the  responsibility  of  building  new  houses  for  the  occupants  of  the  Rivière  des  Galets 
estate? 

Mr Dayal: All salient factors will be taken into consideration based on whatever options 

will be decided by all parties concerned. 

 
Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for one and a half hours. 

50 

At 1.07 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 
On resuming at 2.43 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo! 

RIAMBEL - RECREATIONAL CENTRE FOR SENIOR CITIZENS – CONSTRUCTION   

(No.  B/693)  Mr  A.  Ganoo  (First  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River)  asked  the 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions whether, in regard to the 
project for the construction of a recreational centre for senior citizens at Pomponette, in Riambel, 
she will state - 

(a) if bids have been launched therefor, and 
(b) the costs thereof. 
Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Madam  Speaker,  tenders  were  launched  by  the  Central 
Procurement Board for the construction of a new recreation centre for  elderly  and disabled at 
Riambel on a design, build and turnkey basis on 19 June 2014 with closing date of 21 August 
2014.  As  at  closing  date,  nine  bids  were  received  and  the  bidders  were:  Ramloll  Bhooshan 
Renovation & Building Ltd, Tayelamay and Sons Enterprise Ltd., Nundun Gopee Building and 
Civil  Engineering  Contractors,  Rehm  Grinaker  Constructions  Company  Ltd,  General 
Constructions  Company  Ltd,  Beijing  Zhuzong  Group  Company  Ltd  Mauritius  Branch,  Phil 
Alain  Didier  Company  Limited,  Laxmanbhai  and  Company  Ltd  and  Beijing  Construction 
Engineering Group. 

Their  bids  were  evaluated  by  the  Central  Procurement  Board  on  03  March  2015.  The 
Central Procurement Board approved the award of contract to Beijing Zhuzong Group Company 
Ltd Mauritius Branch for the sum of Rs202,352,417.28 inclusive of a contingency sum of Rs7 m. 
and VAT.  

Subsequently,  the  Letter  of  Intent  was  issued  to  the  successful  bidder  and  notification 
letters  were  issued  to  the  unsuccessful  bidders  as  per  the  Public  Procurement  Act.  Two 
successful bidders, namely, Ramloll Bhooshan Renovation & Building Ltd and Rehm Grinaker 
Constructions Company Ltd challenged the decision of the Ministry. Both bidders were informed 

 

51 

of  the  grounds  of  non-selection  by  the  Ministry  based  on  information  made  available  by  the 
Central  Procurement  Board.  Not  being  satisfied  with  the  reasons  given,  Ramloll  Bhooshan 
Renovation & Building Ltd filed an appeal to the Independent Review Panel on 02 June 2015 to 
review  the  Ministry’s  decision  of  intent  to  award  the  contract  to  Beijing  Zhuzong  Group 
Company Ltd Mauritius Branch. The matter is still at the level of the Independent Review Panel. 

As regards part (b) of the question, I am informed that the cost estimate of the project as 
worked  out  by  the  Ministry  of  Public  Infrastructure,  NDU,  Land  Transport  and  Shipping  in 
September 2011 was Rs204 m. 

Mr Ganoo: Can I ask the hon. Minister if the successful bidder was the lowest one? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Yes, lowest responsive bidder. 

Mr Ganoo: I know that now that there is a challenge before the IRP, Madam Speaker, la 
balle n’est plus dans le camp du ministre et du ministère. May I just ask the hon. Minister - as 
soon  as  the  challenge  issue  is  cleared  -  to  see  to  it  that  things  are  expedited  because  the 
predecessor  of  the  hon.  Minister  -  I  am  sure  you  will  know,  Madam  Speaker  -  launched  the 
foundation stone in 2006.  We are now in 2015 and, in the meantime, the previous Government 
had constructed recreational centre for senior citizens in Triolet, in Flacq, and I think in Belle 
Mare, taking precedence over this project. So, may I appeal to the hon. Minister, once this issue 
is cleared, to see to it that this centre is set up once for all. 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Well, this is a vivid example how things were being done by 
the previous Government. We are different. We are doing things differently and one of the top 
priorities  of  this  Government  is  to  promote  the  quality  of  life  of  all  our  elderly  people 
irrespective of which constituencies they come from. So, rest assured we are following the matter 
closely and things will be done as per the law. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Sesungkur! 

SMEs – CREDIT FACILITIES 

(No. B/694) Mr D. Sesungkur (First Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) asked 
the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the Banking Act, he 

 

52 

will  state  if  proposed  amendments  will  be  introduced  thereto  to  correct  the  imbalances  and 
inefficiencies  caused  by  the  banks  distributing  credits  over  the  last  decade  to  finance 
construction, housing, hotels and real estate projects at the expense of such productive sectors as 
manufacturing/production, Information and Communications Technology, leisure, entertainment, 
agriculture,  small  and  medium  enterprises  and  to  ensure  that  financial  resources  are  also 
channelled thereto to support Government’s strategy for a sustainable growth and to favour the 
long-term interests of the country. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, there is no provision in the Banking Act with 

regard to the regulation of sectoral distribution of credit.  

However,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  has  the  power  to  issue  guidelines  and  instructions 
regarding the extension of credit by banks. It may be highlighted that in October 2013, the Bank 
of  Mauritius  had  concerns  about  the  growing  level  of  credit  risk  in  certain  sectors  of  the 
economy,  which  could  potentially  be  a  source  of  vulnerability  for  the  financial  system. 
Accordingly, the Bank issued macro-prudential measures for implementation by all banks and 
these included sectoral limits on the construction, tourism and personal sectors as from 01 July 
2014. The sectoral limits were eventually removed in January 2015 so as to allow banks to lend 
to viable projects in these sectors.   

However,  though  credit  to  the  construction  (including  housing),  hotels  and  real  estate 
sectors,  have  increased  significantly  over  the  past  decade,  it  has  not  been  to  the  detriment  of 
other productive sectors. For several years in the past decade, especially in the past five years, 
there has been considerable excess liquidity in the banking system. In fact, as at October 2015, 
the excess liquidity stood at around Rs6.6 billion.  There is, thus sufficient funds on the market to 
provide adequate credit to all sectors of the economy.  

Mr Sesungkur: Will the hon. Minister agree that the practices of the banking sector have 
caused that many of our productive sectors have gradually been neglected and there has been 
more a tendency of banks to remain in the comfort zone, lending to real estate companies, and he 
will see to it as far as possible from the Bank of Mauritius’ perspective if some guidelines, some 
guidance may be given to the banks to concentrate on productive sectors and on new emerging 
sectors like leisure and entertainment? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Yes, Madam Speaker. It is true that the commercial banks try to 
survive  in  comfort  zones.  So,  massive  investments  have  been  done  in  the  construction  and 

 

53 

tourism  sector  and  also  in  consumption,  consumer  credit.  So,  we  tried  to  convince  them  or 
encourage them to move to other sectors. It does not work all the time. This is one of the reasons 
why we have set up the SME scheme. The Rs10 billion will be used to channel, in fact, funds to 
those sectors which have been délaissés by banks. So, I hope that this will partially correct your 
issue. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 
Mr  Jhugroo:   With  regard  to  the  Banking  Act,  will the  hon.  Minister of  Finance  and 
Economic Development consider whether there is a possibility to ask the Bank of Mauritius to 
review the charges on credit cards, being given that many banks charge above 2.5% to 3% on 
every transaction? So, will the hon. Minister consider asking the Bank of Mauritius to review the 
percentage charged on credit cards so as to make it possible for persons using their credit cards 
to purchase commodities everywhere, even from fuel pump stations? 

Madam Speaker: This question is not within the ambit of the question which has been 
asked, but if the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development wishes to reply, he can do 
so. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Thank you. I will do it. In fact, there are sectors, subsectors or 
subsections in the business of banks which are creating problems since a long time. The one is 
the exchange rate on the cross, when you buy and you sell forex, the margin can be 3% to 5%. 
That can be huge. 

(Interruptions) 

If  you  don’t  mind,  I  have  a  problem.  Madam  Speaker,  excuse  me.  So,  the  cross  rate, 

exchange rate has been an area where banks overcharge.  

In other countries, the difference between buying and selling is normally less than 1%.  
Here, it extends to 5%.  Credit card charges are much higher in all countries because consumers 
just  consume  and  don’t  know  that  they  pay  a  lot  of  interest.    So,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  has 
carried out an extensive review of all those charges and the bank is looking into it for changes.  
This is being done presently. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Sesungkur! 

Mr  Sesungkur:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.    Will  the  hon.  Minister  consider  or  is  he 
contemplating  a  dose  of  reform  after  so  many  criticisms,  like  hon.  Mahen  Jhugroo  just 

 

54 

mentioned, on the fees and charges, but also on the sector-wise distribution of credit, how capital 
is being distributed, and the overall impact and the inefficiencies which the current practices of 
banks are causing to the overall economy of the country? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: We all know about it.  In fact, in the last Budget, we spelt out this 
huge problem, especially those offering credit facilities for purchase.  They have been charging 
19% interest rate - higher purchase.  Therefore, in the Budget it was reduced to a maximum of 
12%.  So, this has been done.  The question is: “can we?” Yes, thank you. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please! 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  The  hon.  Member  is  right.    In  fact,  when  we  reduced  the  rate 
from 19% to 12%, they have found a means of bypassing this criterion.  They still charge about 
16%.  So, it is a difficult sector.  You are intelligent, you try to put order, and they are not that 
bad  also.    So,  the  Central  Bank  is,  I  think,  trying  to  implement  measures  to  correct  those 
anomalies. 

COMMERCIAL BANKS - ACCOUNT OPENING – PROCEDURES 

(No. B/695) Mr D. Sesungkur (First Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) asked 
the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether he will state if he is aware that the 
establishment of lengthy, complex and cumbersome procedures by some commercial banks for 
the opening of bank accounts is proving difficult for corporate entities and individuals and, if so, 
indicate if he will consider requesting the Bank of Mauritius to inquire thereinto and to propose 
appropriate reforms of the banking sector to correct certain imperfections and/or abuses. 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Madam  Speaker,  when  opening  an  account  with  a  commercial 
bank, certain legal procedures have to be followed to identify the customer, known as the ‘Know 
Your Customer’ principle. Yet, the requirements should not be such that it becomes an obstacle 
to open a bank account. 

From the international standard setters, namely the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) 
and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision recognise that Anti-Money  Laundering  and 

 

55 

Combating the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) measures have to be so designed to meet the 
national  goal  of  financial  inclusion,  without  compromising  the  measures  that  exist  for  the 
purpose  of  combating  crime.    Applying  stringent  AML/CFT  requirements  can  have  the 
unintended  consequence  of  excluding  legitimate  businesses  and  consumers  from  the  formal 
financial system, hence causing financial exclusion. This factor is taken into consideration in the 
new FATF Recommendation of 2012 and a Guidance Paper in respect of financial inclusion has 
also been issued by FATF. 

The FinScope Consumer Survey carried out in 2014 showed that 85% of our  adults are 
banked, i.e, uses the financial products and services offered by a bank.  Mauritius tops the list of 
SADC countries and other African countries in terms of financial inclusion. 

Indeed, it is not reasonable for banks to take an unduly long time to process and open a 
bank account. I have raised the matter with the Governor of the Central Bank who will address 
the issue and come up with remedial actions. 

Mr Sesungkur: Madam Speaker, will the hon. Minister agree that, in this modern world, 
access to bank and banking facilities is a fundamental right, and that he will ensure, through the 
Central Bank, that such rights are not denied to our citizens, be it individual or corporate? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  MauBank will be there to do the job. 

Dr. Sorefan: Madam Speaker, may I know from the hon. Minister whether the bank can 

order an individual to deposit his statement of account to the MRA for opening an account? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:    I  don’t  have  the  reply,  but  if  the  hon.  Member  comes  with  a 

substantive question, I will reply to it. 

Mr  Ramano:  Dans  le  dernier  budget,  l’honorable  ministre  a  annoncé  la  création  d’un 
Ombudsperson  for  financial  institutions.    Est-ce  que  je  peux  savoir  le  scheme  of  duty  de  cet 
Ombudsperson, et en quoi sa mission sera différente de celle de la Banque de Maurice ? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Well, again, the question is outside the premise of this question. 

So, if the hon. Member comes with a substantive question, I will reply to it. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Sesungkur! 

 

56 

PROCUREMENT DISPUTES – COST 

(No. B/696) Mr D. Sesungkur (First Member for Montagne Blanche & G.R.S.E) asked 
the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  whether,  in  regard  to  the  procurement 
disputes  and  other  contingent  liabilities,  he  will  state  the  costs  incurred  by  Government  in 
relation thereto and expected costs to be incurred in relation to the pending cases for each of the 
years, 2005 to 2014. 

(Withdrawn) 

PUBLIC SECTOR DEBT  

(No. B/697) Mr D. Sesungkur (First Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) asked 
the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the national debt, he 
will state the – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

mode of calculation thereof; 

magnitude of increase thereof over the period 2005 to December 2014, indicating 
the average amount of funds applied annually towards the servicing thereof, and 

strategy developed by Government to manage the level thereof in future and to 
ensure that we do not live beyond our means. 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  the 
national  debt  is  the  amount  that  the  public  sector,  including  the  Central  Government,  local 
authorities,  Rodrigues  Regional  Assembly  and  the  public  enterprises  have  borrowed  over  the 
years  and is outstanding. This is referred to  as the public sector debt, as defined by the  IMF.  
This is the gross debt of the public sector.  However, the Public Debt Management Act 2008 
defines  the  net  public  sector  debt  for  the  purpose  of  debt  ceiling.    I  will  come  to  that  in  my 
answer to part (c) of the question. 

And,  indeed,  Madam  Speaker,  the  public  sector  debt  according  to  both  definitions  has 
grown into a major issue that this Government is committed to address because if it gets out of 
control it can severely undermine the economic stability of the country. In fact, the public sector 

 

57 

debt has become very high and is, therefore, a serious constraint on the public sector’s borrowing 
capacity. 

At  a  time  when  private  sector  investment  is  falling,  the  public  sector  should  normally 
respond with an increase in its investments so that GDP can grow at a faster pace with rapid job 
creation.  But the public sector debt serious situation does not allow for such a response.  It is in 
this perspective that Government is encouraging a greater participation of the private sector in 
public sector projects. 

Regarding  part  (b)  of  the  question,  the  public  sector  debt  has  increased  from  Rs129.2 
billion in 2005 to Rs237.7 billion by the end of December 2014, that is, an increase of Rs108.5 
billion. This is a huge increase of 84 per cent.  This is equivalent, in fact, to 61.5 of GDP – a 
level which is far too high for comfort and which, unfortunately, this Government has inherited. 

On  average,  every  year,  since  2010,  some  Rs38.4  billion  have  gone  in  the  servicing  of 

public sector debt, of which Rs10.2 billion of interest and Rs28.2 billion of capital repayments. 

As regards part (c) of the question, Government is committed to bring the net public sector 
debt  to  50  per  cent  of  GDP  by  2018,  as  required  by  law.    I  should,  here,  stress  that,  for  the 
purpose of the Public Debt Management Act, the public sector debt excludes - 

(i) 

(ii) 

IMF SDR allocations; 

outstanding  amount  of  Government  securities  issued  for  mopping  up  of  excess 
liquidity, and 

(iii)  Government cash and cash equivalents. 

In addition, the debts of some public enterprises are discounted according to the risk they 
represent  to  public  finance.  The  criteria  for  such  discounting  are  laid  down  in  the  Act.  
According to this definition, the public sector debt amounted to Rs209 billion at end 2014, that is 
54.1% per cent of GDP. 

Our strategy for managing the debt is, first of all, to keep the budget deficit at a low and 
sustainable level, by staying within the 3 per cent benchmark.  Secondly, our policies to spur 
growth and development will expand our GDP at a faster pace than in the past and improve the 

 

58 

sustainability of the debt.  Thirdly, our strategy is focusing on reducing the share of external debt 
in total debt. This is aimed at reducing the external debt service ratio and making public finances 
less vulnerable to foreign currency shocks.  This will also help to ease the problem of excess 
liquidity in our banking system, as we will be borrowing more on the domestic market.  Fourth, 
we are lengthening the maturity of our debt with more long term issues and thus reducing the roll 
over risk. Fifth, to reduce the burden of debt on Government, we are encouraging greater private 
sector participation in public sector infrastructure and other projects. And sixth, Madam Speaker, 
we are addressing inefficiencies and improving governance structures in public enterprises.  This 
should be a significant impact on improving their finances.   

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Sesungkur! 

Mr Sesungkur: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Given that the hon. Minister said that the 
marge de manœuvre for borrowing is very limited and that we need financial resources in future 
to finance our projects, how is he envisaging to look for alternative ways of financing to realise 
those projects? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: I have just replied part of this question. In fact, the debt level is 
such that the public sector cannot generate more debt. In fact, we have to reduce the debt to 50% 
of GDP, we are 54.1% presently. So, the question is very simple: how do we encourage growth 
when  the  public  sector,  which  should  have  investment,  cannot  have  released  funds  for  it  or 
cannot take new debt? This is a fundamental issue we have. This is why the Government, since 
the very beginning, we have been trying to encourage private sector investment more and more 
and also get into more FDI. To go further still, projects infrastructure like those of my colleague, 
the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities and my colleague, the hon. 
Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport, many of these projects now will be carried 
out probably on the basis of G to G or BOT. we are working on this, just to ensure that we can 
release  the  funds  necessary  because  the  project  -  my  friend  is  right  -  is  massive,  for  water 
especially,  and  for  road  it  is  Rs15  billion  on  four  years.  So,  we  have  to  reinvent  financing 
methods to get through. 

Mr Barbier: If I heard the hon. Minister well, it seems that we are not allowed to go over 
a certain percentage of GDP to our consolidation about public debt and it seems we have already 
reached over that percentage, and the Minister  stated that by law we cannot go over that. So, it 

 

59 

means that we have had a situation where  we have people who are outlaws today. So, may  I 
know  from  the  Minister  who  are  those  responsible  or  are  these  people,  who  are  outlaws  who 
have not respected the law concerning public debt? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  We  are  constrained  by  the  law  to  reduce  the  debt  to  50%  of 

GDP in 2018. So, we still have some time. 

Mr Mahomed: May  I then ask the hon. Minister what is the current ceiling not to be 

exceeded at this point in time? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Sorry? 

Mr Mahomed: I understand that in 2018 it is going to be 50% but, as at now, what does 

the law provide for? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  I  think  I  need  to  give  one  precision.  We  use  two  types  of 
figures. One, calculation of public debt as a percentage of GDP as defined by IMF, this is 64% or 
60.1% – I will have to check it.  And the second one is the calculation of the debt in function of 
the commitment we have taken by law and this is at 54.1%, it will have to be brought down to 
50% by 2018. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Barbier! 

CUSTOMS DEPARTMENT – DIRECTOR - POST 

(No. B/703) Mr J. C. Barbier (Fifth Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Customs 
Department, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Mauritius Revenue Authority, 
information as to if the post of the Director thereof is vacant and, if so, since when, indicating 
when it will be filled. 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  Mauritius  Revenue 
Authority (MRA) that, following the expiry of the contract of the former Director of Customs, 
Mr Lenaghan, on 21 May 2015, the post of Director of Customs is vacant. 

As per the MRA HR Management Manual, all vacancies should first be advertised within 
the organisation.  In case there is no suitable candidate, application for the post is then opened to 
candidates outside the Authority. 

 
I  am  informed  that  the  post  of  Director  of  Customs  was  advertised  internally  and  the 

60 

selection exercise is under way. 

Mr Barbier: May I know from the hon. Minister whether there is any reason why the 

post has not been advertised internationally? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: The question was answered. I said here – 

“As  per  the  MRA  HR  Management  Manual,  all  vacancies  should  be  first  advertised 
within the organisation.” 

This is what has been done; there have been applications and the MRA is now processing those 
applications. 

Mr Jhugroo: May I ask the hon. Minister why he should advertise internationally when 
we have got people qualified, unemployed and seeking for jobs elsewhere? Because when we see 
what happens at Air Mauritius… 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, I think we have understood your question. 

Please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  My  colleague  is  right.  As  far  as  possible,  we  have  to  give 
preference to Mauritians, so much so that we have now more and more professionals, Mauritians 
coming and the Diaspora Scheme announced in the Budget is encouraging, in fact, Mauritians to 
return back. 

You are right! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Barbier: May I know from the hon. Minister who is the Acting Director actually? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: I don’t know. 

 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Barbier! 

FISHERS - COMPENSATION 

(No. B/704) Mr J. C. Barbier (Fifth Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the  Minister  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and  Outer  Islands 

 

61 

whether, in regard to the fishers of Baie du Tombeau, Roche Bois, Bain des Dames, Sables Noir, 
Grand River North West and Pointe aux Sables affected by the developments in the Port Louis 
Harbour, he will give a list of those who are eligible for compensation, indicating – 

(a) 
(b) 
(c) 

the sum payable to each one of them; 
those in respect of whom the payment thereof has already been effected, and 
whether, as was the case in the north, those who are regular and active but not 
possessing the fisherman professional card will also be taken into consideration 
for the payment thereof. 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, with your permission, I shall reply to this 

question. 

With regard to parts (a) and (b) of the question, I am tabling the information requested by 

the hon. Member. 

Madam  Speaker,  as  regards  part  (c)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  by  the  Permanent 
Secretary, Ministry of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, Shipping and Outer Islands 
that the case in the north relates to a particular incident whereby vessel MV Angel was grounded 
off at Poudre d’Or on 08 August 2011. The insurance company of the vessel, Skuld Insurance 
Company, paid the relevant compensation.   

I am informed by the Director General, Mauritius Ports Authority that the only fishermen 
have  made  representations  in  connection  with  the  MCT  Extension  Works.  A  Joint  Technical 
Committee  comprising  representatives  of  the  MPA,  the  Ministry  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine 
Resources, Fisheries, Shipping and Outer Islands and the legal representative of the fisher-people 
has had several meetings since October 2013.  The Committee has agreed that only registered 
fishermen shall be considered in the dispute between MPA and the fisher-people.   

Subsequently, the MPA and the fisher-people have agreed that a mediator/ arbitrator be 

appointed to resolve the dispute. 

Accordingly, on 07 July 2014, a mediation/arbitration Agreement was signed between the 

parties and the former Chief Justice.   

62 

 
However, as a mediation/arbitration process was not successful, the MPA and the fisher-
people agreed to holding fresh negotiation. An agreement, in September 2014, was reached on 
the amount of compensation to be paid. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  would  like  to  inform  the  House  that  when  the  MPA  effected  the 
dredging works of the English Channel in 2006, only the fisher-people were compensated.  The 
same principle has again been adopted. 

Mr Barbier: This is why I am making a plea in favour of those fishers who do not have 
their professional cards and they are in waiting for years, but they are doing their job, they are 
having their living out of fishing. Unfortunately, they are not considered for compensation when 
all  these  mediations  and  discussions  have  been  going  on.  So,  may  I  ask  the  hon.  Ag.  Prime 
Minister  -  now  we  have  a  new  Government,  we  have  a  Minister  today  who  understands  the 
problem of the fishers – whether he will consider the possibility of considering the griefs of these 
fishermen not having professional card also for compensation? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, this matter has already been dealt with. 
Some 270 people have been paid about Rs40 m. - quite a high number. I must say that nearly all 
of them obtained a sum of Rs150,000 each, which is much more than the amount that was paid in 
2006, as I am sure the hon. Member knows. Now, this has been finalised; but I know also that 
there  are  80  fishermen  who  are  being  assessed  at  the  moment  with  a  view  to  receiving  their 
professional  fisherman  card.  If  they  do  receive  this  card,  obviously  then,  for  any  other  future 
compensation for further works or whatever else is done with the development in the Port, they 
will be included. 

Mr  Barbier:  The  Ag.  Prime  Minister  is  talking  about  ‘further’  compensation,  not  the 
ongoing one. My plea is for the ongoing one.  So, may I have a clear-cut answer, whether they 
are going to be considered or not? 

 

The Deputy Prime Minister: In fact, there is no ongoing one. The previous fishermen 
have just been paid, it is being finalised. Payments have been made to 270 or so fishermen.  Only 
about 10 or 15 have not accepted the amount of money, but that has been paid and it is quite a 
high sum, Madam Speaker. What I am saying is, this is finished, let us look, now, to the future 
and any further work that will be done and on how all the people can be compensated, if need be. 

 
Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Barbier ! 

63 

POINTE AUX SABLES – SQUATTERS - SOCIAL HOUSES 

(No. B/705) Mr J. C. Barbier (Fifth Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in regard to the social houses 
constructed at Pointe aux Sables for the squatters who actually reside on the alignment of the 
forthcoming  Ring  Road  at  Tranquebar,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the 
National Housing Development Company Ltd., information as to where matters stand. 

The Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport (Mr N. Bodha): Madam 

Speaker, with your permission, I will reply to this question.  

I am informed that 82 housing units have already been put up at Pointe aux Sables by the 
State  Land  Development  Co.  Ltd.  in  favour  of  the  National  Empowerment  Foundation.  This 
housing project did not involve at all the National Housing Development Company Limited.  

In fact, a couple of years ago, at the request of the Ministry of Public Infrastructure and 
Land  Transport  and  Shipping,  the  Ministry  of  Housing  and  Lands  initiated  acquisition 
procedures in connection with the Ring Road Project Phase II and part of the alignment running 
in Tranquebar was squatted upon by some 70 families. Suitable sites which could be used for the 
purpose  of  relocating  the  families,  subject  to  them  satisfying  the  eligibility  criteria  had  to  be 
identified. 

Madam Speaker, as no suitable State land was available, an extent of 20A of private land 
from  State  Land  Development  Co.  Ltd.  at  Pointe  aux  Sables/Petit  Verger  was  acquired  in 
exchange  of  land  obtained  at  Camp  Ithier  by  the  Ministry  under  the  2000A  Mauritius  Sugar 
Producers Association/Government deal.  

An extent of 6A out of the 20A at Pointe aux Sables was vested in the Ministry of Social 
Integration,  which  Ministry  was  entrusted  with  the  responsibility  of  relocating  the  squatters 
concerned. 

In the meantime, the number of squatters increased from 70 to 82. Accordingly, tenders 
for  the  construction  of  82  houses  were  launched  and  the  State  Land  Development  Co.  Ltd. 
proceeded with the award of the contract. 

64 

 
As  the  housing  units  are  State-owned  and  belong  to  the  National  Empowerment 
Foundation, it has been decided that the latter would proceed with the sale of these housing units 
on  the  understanding  that  the  Mauritius  Housing  Company  Ltd.  would  be  responsible  for  the 
management of the sale contract as was the case for the squatters of Dubreuil.  

My  Ministry  will  finalise  in  due  course  the  lease  agreement  in  respect  of  each 

beneficiary. 

Madam Speaker, it has also been decided that the National Empowerment Foundation, 
with the help of its social workers, who are familiar with the region of Tranquebar, would carry 
out  a  Public  Relation  (PR)  exercise  to  ensure  the  successful  implementation  of  the  project 
relocation.  

The  National  Empowerment  Foundation  would  also  initiate  the  drawing  of  lots  for 

allocation of the housing units.  

This exercise has been planned with an indicative time frame and it is expected that the 

formalities would be initiated in the coming weeks. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Barbier! 

Mr Barbier: As regards the last part of the answer, do we have any precision concerning 

the time frame? When does the hon. Minister think the allocation will be completed? 

Mr  Bodha:  Well,  from  the  answer  that  I  have,  Madam  Speaker,  it  is  in  the  coming 

weeks. So, it is a question of weeks. I will see whether I can give a precise date later. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan, next question! 

Dr. Sorefan: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The first question that was on the agenda, No. 

B/657 that is being answered as per the rule of this House, last!  

POLICE OFFICERS – INTERDICTION 

(No. B/657) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked the 
Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Police Officers, he will, for the benefit of 

 

65 

the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to the number thereof who 
have been interdicted, since 2009 to date, indicating the number of cases thereof which - 

(a) have been determined and the outcome thereof, and  

(b) are pending, indicating if any mechanism is being envisaged to speed up the process. 

The  Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms  (Mr  A.  Wong  Yen 
Cheong): Madam Speaker, with  your permission,  I shall reply to Parliamentary Question No. 
B/657.  

I  am  informed  by  the  Commissioner  of  Police  that  since  January  2009  to  09  October 

2015, 280 Police Officers were on interdiction from duty. 

In regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed that 106 cases out of the 280 have 

already been determined. The outcome is as follows –  

•  94 Police Officers have been reinstated; 
•  6 have retired, and 
•  6 have been dismissed. 

Madam Speaker, in regard to part (b) of the question, 170 cases are still pending. I am 
informed  by  the  Commissioner  of  Police  that  all  efforts  are  being  made  to  speed  up  the 
completion of Police enquiries on cases involving interdicted Police Officers.  

On  02  July  2015,  the  Commissioner  of  Police  issued  a  circular  to  all  Divisional 
Commanders reiterating the request for early completion of enquiries involving Police Officers 
and, at the same time, to submit a monthly return of these enquiries to the Police Headquarters 
for close monitoring. 

I am also told that, the Master and Registrar has informed the Commissioner of Police 
that at their level also they are closely monitoring the disposal of such cases lodged before the 
various Courts and that they have issued appropriate instructions to all the Magistrates. Thank 
you. 

66 

 
Dr. Sorefan: Madam Speaker,  I thank the hon. Minister for answering that part of the 
cases  having  been  settled  down.  But  is  the  hon.  Minister  aware  that  salaries  paid  to  those 
interdicted officers as up-to-date amount to around Rs160 m., without forgetting the inclusive 
monthly rent allowance? Will the hon. Minister see to it that the fast track - that seems to be now 
going on from what the Minister has said - mechanism which was set up in 2008, it is only now, 
after seven years, that I think we are adhering to - really be a fast track? 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: I thank the hon. Member for this question. We are definitely 
making  sure  and  that  is  why  my  Ministry  has  already  come  with  some  measures.    We  are 
speeding the matter and we are following the case very closely. 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Madam  Speaker,  regarding  cases  at  the  Supreme  Court,  will  the  hon. 
Minister  see  to  it  that  cases  are  attended  to  as  quickly  as  possible  because  we  have  11  cases 
awaiting judgement for over 10 years. There are interdiction cases that are waiting for 10 years 
to be taken by the Supreme Court and we have 30 cases between 5 and 10 years. Will the hon. 
Minister - I don’t know to what level - intervene so that all the cases are dealt with urgently? 

Mr  Wong  Yen  Cheong:  In  fact,  in  March  2015  my  Ministry  made  proposals  to  an 
alternative to interdictions to the Attorney General’s Office. It was proposed to redeploy officers 
to other Ministries/Departments instead of interdictions and this is one of the measures. Also we 
have gone to the Attorney General to see how we can speed up the matter so that we can come as 
fast as possible. We are indeed very concerned with the amount of money that the Government is 
spending on these issues.  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Fowdar! 

Mr Fowdar: I would like to ask the hon. Minister whether he is aware that some of the 
officers were dismissed using section 37 of the DFSC Regulations, unfair dismissal? Whether he 
will  consider  looking  at  these  cases  and  reintegrating  those  officers  who  have  been  unfairly 
dismissed during the past regime? 

Mr  Wong  Yen  Cheong:  Thank  you.  My  Ministry  has  come  in  March  for  these 
redeployments.  We  are  studying  the  matter  and  I  have  already  proposed  like  in  cases  of 
redeployment when we have people who have embezzlement and they are from Finance, we can 

 

67 

send them to registry which has nothing to do with embezzlement. They don’t have any contact 
with money. We had a case with computer misuse which was in an office and they have been 
sent to outstations where no IT system is available and there are many other issues where we can 
redeploy the officers. We will make sure that they are doing work for the money they are earning 
instead of staying home. Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo! 

Mr Ganoo: May I draw the hon. Minister’s attention to the Director of Audit’s Report, 
year in and year out, the question of interdicted Police Officers or public officers is always high 
on the agenda of the Director of Audit. For example, in last year’s report which was tabled a few 
weeks ago, the Director of Audit says –  

“A sum of Rs211.8 m. was paid to interdicted  officers over the past five  years. These 
officers were paid salary for services not rendered. The cost of interdiction is significant 
and is on the increase.” 

May  I  also  ask  the  hon.  Minister  that  one  of  the  reasons  that  there  are  so  many 
interdicted officers is not only because the Courts have not disposed of the matter. In some cases, 
even if the officers have been found guilty or not guilty, the administration is still hesitating to 
take  whatever  decision  and  the  officers  still  remain  interdicted  although  the  cases  are  being 
disposed  of  by  Courts  of  Law?    Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  to  see  to  it  also  that  the 
administration, concerning the Police  Force or the Public Service sometimes shies away  from 
taking the decision even after the cases are being disposed of by Courts of Law? 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: That is why I already said when I reached my Ministry I have 
taken these issues on board because I find it incredible that we are spending so much money.  
We are coming through it, we are seeing to it.  

Mr Fowdar: Madam Speaker, what I was referring to the hon. Minister was section 37, 
which is dismissing a public officer under the ground of public interest, which is vague. There is 
no embezzlement, there is no solid reason for that. I am asking again whether the hon. Minister 
will consider those who were dismissed using section 37 of the DFSC Regulation and whether 
they would be reconsidered for reintegration based on a sort of fairness to see to it that people are 
given their chance again? 

 
Mr Wong Yen Cheong: I will look into the matter. 

68 

Mr Jhugroo: Madam Speaker, being given that we have got several Police Officers who 
are suspended for so long and we also have many Public officers in the same situation, will the 
hon. Minister consider asking the department concerned if we can have a special Court to look 
after all these issues?  

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: In fact, we can’t make a policy of deux poids deux mesures. If 
we do it, we have to do it all across for the public also. That is why we can’t take on board only 
for the public servants, but we will look how we can make it a fast track for everyone. This is 
why I’ve gone to the Attorney General’s office for.   

POINTE AUX SABLES - COASTAL ROAD - UPGRADING 

(No. B/667) Mr J. C. Barbier (Fifth Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National Development Unit whether, in regard to the project for the enlargement of the coastal 
road at Pointe aux Sables by the National Development Unit, he will state if the implementation 
thereof will be carried out during this financial year and, if not, why not. 

The Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport (Mr N. Bodha): Madam 

Speaker, with your permission I will reply to this PQ.  

I am informed by the RDA as follows – 

(a)  the Pointe aux Sables road is a main road which stretches over a length of 8.5 km and 
starts  at  junction  with  A1  Road,  that  is,  Curepipe  to  Port  Louis  at  Grand  Rivière 
North West and passes over an approximate distance of 4 km along the coast through 
Pointe  aux  Sables  and  Petit  Verger  and  continues  inland  to  end  at  junction  with 
Albion road at Petite Rivière; 

(b) the road under reference forms part of an overall network of roads in Mauritius which 
has been built long time ago and whose construction was not subject to any study nor 
engineering design. Such roads were not designed for today’s heavy traffic; 

 
(c)  a  survey  is  currently  being  carried  out  by  the  RDA  to  consider  the  possibility  of 

69 

upgrading the coastal road, and 

(d) the survey includes evaluation of the structural’s integrity of the existing road and  

identification  of  availability  of  land  for  any  enlargement.  This  project  may  entail 
acquisition of land and availability of funds. Consideration will therefore be given for 
this  particular  project  as  soon  as  land  acquisition  and  financial  issues  have  been 
settled. Other similar projects in other regions will also be given due consideration. 

Mr Barbier: Madam Speaker, I am happy to hear that the project is under consideration. 
I  have  been  putting  the  same  question  since  the  last  20  years  now  and  I  heard  the  project  is 
coming,  will  come,  is  under  consideration  and,  now,  under  study!  May  I  have  a  time  frame? 
Now, it is high time! As the House may be aware, this is a road where we have had so many 
accidents these past years and some fatal ones. So, I think there is urgency. May I have a sort of 
engagement, a promise from this actual Minister who seems to be doing his work very well? 

(Interruptions) 

Will he, now, give me a time frame for the implementation of this project, Madam Speaker? 

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, I had a conversation with the hon. Member.  He said he has 
been asking this question for the last 20 years and when he first asked the question, the cost of it 
was Rs20 m. Today, it is Rs140 m. So, a lot will depend on the hon. Minister of Finance and 
Economic Development, but I can promise that I will put up a strong case for him. 

 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10 (2) 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker,  I beg to move that all the business on 

today’s Order Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 

Collendavelloo) rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

 

 

70 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER 

NEEDLE EXCHANGE PROGRAMME & METHADONE MAINTENANCE 

THERAPY 

The Minister of Health and Quality of Life (Mr A. Gayan):  Madam Speaker, I wish 
to make a statement on the evaluation of the Needle Exchange Programme and the Methadone 
Maintenance  Therapy.  During  my  mission  to  Cape  Town  last  week,  I  had  the  opportunity  to 
discuss with Mr Michel Sidibé, the Executive Director of UNAIDS (ONUSIDA), regarding the 
Harm  Reduction  Programmes  being  implemented  by  my  Ministry  in  collaboration  with  the 
NGOs  with  regard  to  substance  abuse,  namely  the  Needle  Exchange  Programme  and  the 
Methadone Maintenance Therapy. Originally, the latter programme was meant to last for only 
two years.  

Taking  into  consideration  that  the  two  programmes  were  initiated  since  2006,  I  am 
proposing  to  invite  UNAIDS  to  carry  out  a  full  and  comprehensive  evaluation  to  assess  the 
relevance, effectiveness, efficiency and sustainability of the two programmes since the inception 
and to come up with appropriate conclusions and recommendations. 

The purpose of such evaluation would be to assess - 

(i) 

(ii) 

the objectives set initially, the outcome and impact thereof; 

the methodologies of the two programmes; 

(iii) 

the success or otherwise of the programmes; 

(iv) 

(v) 

(vi) 

the institutional collaboration between Government and the NGOs especially with 
regard  to  follow-up  by  the  latter  for  the  rehabilitation  of  beneficiaries  of  the 
programmes, etc; 

the  cost  effectiveness  of  the  programmes  funded  partly  by  Government  and 
international organisations; 

the  role  played  by  the  NGOs  in  the  reintegration  of  beneficiaries  in  the 
mainstream society, and 

(vii) 

the  cost-benefit  analysis  of  all  amounts  spent  so  far  by  Government  and  other 
funding agencies, both local and international. 

 

71 

I  hope  that  this  SWOT  (Strengths,  Weaknesses,  Opportunities  and  Treats) 
assessment  will  be  helpful  in  our  strategy  to  obtain  tangible  results  in  the  national 
interest. 

 

PUBLIC BILLS 

First Reading 

On motion made and seconded, the Native Terrestrial Biodiversity and National Parks 

Bill (No. XVI of 2015) was read a first time. 

Second Reading 

THE ROADS (AMENDMENT) BILL  

(No. XII of 2015) 

Order  read  for  resuming  adjourned  debate  on  the  Second  Reading  of  the  Roads 

(Amendment) Bill (No. XII of 2015). 

Question again proposed. 

(3.32 p.m.) 

 
The  Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and  Beach 
Management  (Mr  R.  Dayal):  Madam  Speaker,  the  Roads  (Amendment)  Bill,  I  must 
straightaway commend my colleague, the hon. Minister Bodha, as it comes in a timely manner 
with the provision of a legal framework to manage the impact of rain and surface water on our 
roads which is a cause of multifarious problems. Mauritian history has it that Mr David Oakley, a 
UNDP expert in 1977, came up with recommendations for sustainable urbanisation which was 
not implemented fully. It is to be noted that the improper management of rain surface water has 
direct impact on our roads in the wake of flash floods and torrential rain. Government took a 
laudable  initiative  to  provide  an  institutional  framework  with  the  creation  of  a  land  drainage 
agency. Also in the same spirit, this Government came up with a concept of smart cities to deal 
with a multitude of problems associated with urbanisation and to make the whole of Mauritius a 
smart city and taking on board proper management of rain and surface water thus ensuring the 
physical development of our land mass and meeting holistically the urgency of climate change to 

 

72 

ensure  sustainable  development.  Moreso,  with  the  advent  of  the  force  El  Nino  and  La  Nina, 
meteorological phenomenon is already forecasting torrential rain in our region for this cyclonic 
period.  

The concept of this Bill is aimed at taking bold and pragmatic measures, amongst others, 
to harness the problem associated with rain and surface water at all levels for preventing negative 
impacts on our roads during adverse meteorological conditions to protect life and property.  

The proactive principle of disaster management mandatorily imposes proper management 
of  rain  and  surface  water  which  has  been  neglected  for  years  and  this  has  exacerbated  the 
condition of excessive water pouring into public and road infrastructure with fatal consequences. 
This was evidenced by flash floods experienced at Mon Gout and Port Louis which took a heavy 
toll of 13 human lives.  

Allow  me  also  to  take  the  hon.  Members  of  the  House,  members  of  the  press  and  the 
public in general to the adverse atmospheric conditions that prevail in Mauritius from the end of 
December 2014 to April 2015 where we witnessed rainwater from sugarcane fields coming on to 
public roads as well as from private property because of mismanagement of drains. This could 
have  been  avoided  to  a  great  extent  through  the  management  of  drains  throughout  the  island 
more precisely where such drains impact on road users. Bold measures had to be taken to avoid 
distress to our inhabitants including tourists. Therefore, I have to congratulate my colleague, the 
hon.  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  for  introducing  the  Roads 
(Amendment)  Bill  that  gives  greater  powers  to  a  highway  authority  to  prevent  the  illegal 
discharge  of  water,  soil  or  refuse  from  any  private  property  on  a  road  or  into  a  road  drain. 
Equally,  the  provision  of  an  amendment  whereby  instead  of  going  to  the  Supreme  Court,  the 
Judge in Chambers, the provision is made for looking into, giving those powers to Courts for 
expedient responses and expediency of the law enforcement. 

I am convinced that this long-awaited amendment to the Roads Act will undoubtedly help 
to  achieve  better  cleanliness  and  prevent  clogging  of  drains  thus  preventing  flooding  and 
enhancing public and road safety.  

Madam  Speaker,  my  Ministry  receives  many  complaints  regarding  discharge  of  storm 
water and wastewater from private, commercial and industrial properties into road drains. There 

 

73 

are also many cases of stockpiling of construction materials or debris on roadsides and drains. 
Moreover,  drains  are  sometimes  filled  in  to  allow  access  of  vehicles  into  private  property 
particularly during construction stage. These drains remain obstructed even after the construction 
is completed. Another common problem is a tendency for mechanics to operate vehicles’ repairs 
on the road, thus, spilling used oil on roads and drains. What is worse still, is that all types of 
vehicles are parked on drains, this is further complicated by the haphazard dumping of wastes 
into the environment including roads and drains.  

One of the main amendments proposed in the present Bill relates to the dumping of refuse 
on the road with severe environmental consequences. Solid waste is one of the greatest problems 
the  world  is  facing  today.  First,  there  are  high  cost  associated  to  solid  waste  disposal  and 
management and also, it causes severe environmental damage if not disposed properly such as 
odour,  nuisance,  risks  of  contamination  of  water  courses  and  blockage  of  drains.  Indeed,  in 
addition to the country’s inherent vulnerability with rapid development taking place over the past 
two  decades,  lifestyles  and  consumption  patterns  have  changed  significantly  leading  to 
irresponsible  throwaway  culture.  We  have  a  responsibility  to  inculcate  a  culture  of 
environmental  behaviours.  Although  Mauritians  are  aware  of  the  benefits  of  environmental 
protection, many of them do not always adopt an environment friendly attitude.  

Madam Speaker, Government is very much concerned with accidents occurring because 
of slippery roads which have resulted in serious injuries and loss of lives following overflow of 
water on roads due to blocked drains.  

Safety of road users is of paramount importance for this Government and the new road 
safety measures being taken by hon. Nandcoomar Bodha is an urgent appeal to all of us to adopt 
a responsible driving culture. Government will play its role fully to curb down risk on the roads 
provided there is a wake-up call on do’s and don’ts. There will be more signage to indicate black 
spots along dangerous roads, strengthening of road safety legislations and enhancing protection 
of the most vulnerable road users, amongst others. On the other hand, drivers will have to strictly 
abide by the laws and regulations in force.  

 

74 

Madam  Speaker,  my  Ministry  is  taking  a  number  of  initiatives  to  complement  this 
laudable  initiative  taken  by  my  colleague  the  hon.  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land 
Transport. Allow me to enumerate a few.  

• 

It  has  been  observed  that  external  factors  like  muddy  roads  impact  on  eco-
driving and is a serious cause for road accidents. Although a lot of emphasis is 
being put on eco-driving, because of irresponsible behaviour of third parties, 
road users have to bear the brunt. My Ministry is embarking on an aggressive 
awareness campaign on eco-driving that incorporates safe driving.  

•  The invasion of beaches by plastics and the sea  is causing serious concerns 
among  scientists.  Recently,  the  Race  for  Water  Odyssey  that  landed  in 
Rodrigues  last  week  to  find  out  the  level  of  pollution  of  oceans  by  plastic 
highlighted that the sea has become a floating garbage of billions of trash that 
get accumulated to the seabed because of ocean currents. The Oceanographer 
came, Kim Van Arkel, one of those responsible for, I quote - 

« sur le macro-fragment les résultats sont même affolants. » 

The beach of Gravier in Rodrigues is particulièrement touché. The île Gombrani which is 

near Pont Sud Est in Rodrigues has a sad record. I quote - 

« C’est le site le plus pollué parmi la trentaine des plages à travers le monde que nous 
avons passés au crible depuis le début de l’expédition.» 

Some 66 kg of plastic wastes were collected only on a small portion of the beach and all 
these came from drains. This emanates from an article published in l’Express dated 12 October 
2015.  

Hence, our initiative to ban plastic bags was laudable because plastic carrier bags have 
been  found  to  cause  obstruction  of  drains  as  well  as  having  detrimental  consequences  on  the 
environment.  

My Ministry has promulgated, on 06 August 2015, the Environment Protection (Banning 

of Plastic Bags) Regulations, 2015 which will become effective as from 01 January 2016.  

 

75 

My  Ministry  has  reinforced  the  law  on  illegal  dumping  by  making  provision  for  more 

severe penalties for defaulters.  

Sensitisation  campaigns  are  continuously  being  carried  out  to  raise  awareness  of  the 
promulgation on the consequences of dumping and littering which irremediably has far-reaching 
implications  of  our  ecosystem.  Therefore,  I  can  only  congratulate  my  colleague,  hon. 
Nandcoomar Bodha, for this amendment. 

Madam Speaker, once again, I would like to thank my colleague for coming up with these 
long-awaited amendments to the Roads Act which will surely enhance cleanliness of our roads 
and safety of road users.  

And  lastly,  I  would  like  to  propose  an  amendment  to  the  Bill  to  consolidate  legal 
measures  after  consultation  with  the  Attorney  General’s  Office  on  amendment  and  that 
amendment  is  basically  for  making  the  law  enforcement  more  expedient  at  the  level  of  our 
Courts which is already taken on board. 

Thank you very much. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr.  R.  Sorefan  (Fourth  Member  for  La  Caverne  &  Phoenix):  Thank  you,  Madam 
Speaker. I would like to thank the hon. Minister for coming with this amendment to this Bill and 
from the outset, let me say that we are not against this amendment. 

Madam Speaker, before I move my exposé on this amendment, I would like to define the 
word ‘authority’ because highway authority is mentioned in this Bill. ‘Authority’ is defined as an 
institutionalised  and  legal  power,  inherent  in  a  particular  function,  that  is  meant  to  enable  its 
holder  to  successfully  carry  out  its  responsibilities.  Now,  we  are  giving  greater  powers  to  a 
highway authority. Why? Because the previous law was weak, not powerful. Now, we are trying 
to make it, as the first sentence reads – 

“(…) greater powers to a highway authority(…).” 

 

76 

Having defined the word ‘authority’, Madam Speaker, rest assured that, after what we witnessed 
this morning, we, from this side of the House, will never challenge your authority, as defined in 
this august Assembly. 

(Interruptions) 

We show due respect to an august Assembly and it is going to be like this from this side of the 
House. 

Madam  Speaker,  this  amendment  has  been  drafted  by  officers  of  the  MPI,  then  sent  to 
SLO, back to MPI, to Cabinet, and then to this august Assembly by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
on a Certificate of Urgency under Standing Order 65. How come that such an amendment carries 
some  unexcusable  errors,  which  hon.  Eddy  Boissézon  qualified  as  ‘probably  a  typing  error’?  
Hon. Shakeel Mohamed also qualified it as a ‘typing error’. Madam Speaker, I honestly disagree.  
Officers from the Ministry and the SLO have failed in their duty.  They took it too lightly. 

Madam Speaker: No, hon. Member, please, you have to withdraw this, because you can’t 

say that officers of the SLO have failed in their duty. Please, withdraw it! 

Dr. Sorefan:  Okay, if I have to withdraw that section, let it be recorded that I withdraw.  
But,  Madam  Speaker,  in  the  amendment  that  has  been  circulated,  as  hon.  Eddy  Boissézon 
mentioned, in the main Act, section 27 reads ‘occupier’ and not ‘non-occupier’.  So, I can’t see 
how such an amendment coming in such an august Assembly has failed - from whoever drafted 
it to come to this august Assembly.  How come they have written to amend something that is not 
there?  They should have said: “amend ‘occupier’ in section 27(1) (a)… 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Member,  please  make  your  suggestions.  But,  please,  avoid 
mentioning officers or those who drafted or whoever.  You have the leisure of proposing your 
own amendments. 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Madam  Speaker,  what  I  was  getting  at  is  that  when  a  Bill  comes  to  the 
House, it should be well drafted because we are talking in an august Assembly. That is my point. 
I did mention that to the hon. Minister when I met him after this Bill was circulated with another 
draft mentioning what will be amended from the original Bill.  I was expecting the hon. Minister, 
in his first reading, to rectify it, but this was not so. Anyway! 

 

77 

Madam  Speaker,  let  me  come  to  the  section  of  the  amendment  where  there  are  -  hon. 
Shakeel Mohamed said it very well - two negatives.  If we read it as it has been amended, it is 
said – 

 “No occupier shall not (…)” 

When amending it, they should have read it. The words ‘shall not’ should read only ‘shall’.  But 
here also, we see such a sentence coming in this august Assembly. 

My second issue, Madam Speaker, is section 27 (2), which reads – 

“Any person aggrieved by a refusal of permission under subsection (1) may appeal to the 
Minister, whose decision shall be final”. 

This has not been taken care of.  This, in my humble opinion, should have been deleted, because 
in the amendment which has been circulated today - to be amended as ‘Courts’ with its definition 
- we see that the powers go to the Court, to the Judge in Chambers,. So, we can’t have two kinds 
of power; one given to the Minister, as per the original Bill, and then, in the amendment, we give 
it to the Judge, the Court to inflict, or to give power to the highway authority to do the needful. 
So,  I  personally  think  that  this  section  should  have  been  taken  care  of  and  moved  for  this 
amendment to be deleted. 

Madam Speaker, regarding the words ‘Judge in Chambers’ which have been amended to 
‘Courts’ - amendment which has been circulated today - this is quite acceptable, because if it was 
to leave the Judge in Chambers to decide, it would have caused a lot of hardship to those who 
live far away, say in Mahebourg, who have to come to Port Louis. But, now, the hon. Minister 
has  proposed  amendments  that  the  ‘Judge  in  Chambers’  should  be  deleted  and  replaced  by 
‘Courts’, which is quite acceptable because people can go to their own Courts in their region and 
have things sorted out. 

Madam  Speaker,  when  the  contravenant  goes  to  Court  and  the  Court  decides  to  let  the 
highway  authority  go  and  intervene  on  private  land  to  put  an  end  to  the  contravention,  I  ask 
myself the question.  I have been a Councillor of the Municipal Council of Quatre Bornes and 
the  Mayor  and,  if  I  am  not  wrong,  it  does  not  form  part  of  the  scheme  of  duties  of  local 
employees to go and do work on private land.  And, if they do so, as per the amendment, the 

 

78 

highway authority can claim money from the occupier or owner.  This, I think, is very subjective.  
How the authority can decide - on what ground - the amount that the occupier should pay for the 
work  done  by  the  highway  authority?  I  find  this  very  subjective,  which  will  cause  a  lot  of 
problems. 

The  hon.  Minister  in  his  speech  said  that  illegal  discharge  of  water  from  private 
developments into the road surface and drains has been identified as one of the main causes of 
floods, but the hon. Minister dares not mention the poor maintenance of drains where they do 
exist. Are the covered drains well designed? We see that in Quatre Bornes, in Candos, where the 
main drain, the covering slab is more or less difficult to uplift to go for cleaning, and if they do 
so, they damage the slab. So, they are not designed for proper maintenance, Madam Speaker. 

How many cases of illegal discharge of water on the roads have been recorded? Do we 
have a figure? Do we have a survey of how many people are contraved  where water goes on the 
road? Hon. Boissezon said that if one walks on a road in any town or village, one will see that a 
large majority of occupiers/premises dispose of their stormwater on the road and drains. Madam 
Speaker,  so  easily  said,  but  the  truth  is  only  a  very  few!  It  is  not  that  dramatic,  as  if  all 
Mauritians do not abide by Mauritian laws, Madam Speaker. There are a few against whom we 
have to take action, Madam Speaker. 

This morning,  I put a question on the asphalting of roads and I said that we have to uplift 
certain layers and then to re-asphalt. The objective of that question was to show that all the roads 
that are being asphalted go to a certain level, that is, going much higher. They are higher than the 
drains, higher than the pavements, higher than occupiers’ land! Are we not responsible? Are the 
highway authorities not responsible? Instead of telling: “Owners don’t let your water come on 
the road!” Can I, as an owner, tell the highway authority: “Please, don’t let your water come in 
my land?” This is what is happening! In most of the places,  when it is raining water goes in the 
residence. We have a law that if you contravene, you go to Court Chambers, to Magistrate or 
Judge, they put what need to be done. Because the water of the highway authority goes in our 
land,  can  we,  as  residents,  go  to  Court?  This  is  a  big  problem.  This  is  why  I  came  with  the 
question of recycling and keeping the level of the road lower. That’s the idea of that question and 
this is causing the highway authority responsible in some cases for flooding of the residence. 

79 

 
Madam  Speaker,  no  matter  how  we  design  the  drains,  the  roads,  flooding  will  always 
happen. This happens in France, in UK   even with a perfect draining system, just because of 
nature. We have flash floods, we cannot do much about it. There were much talk here today of 
flash floods. But, in Mauritius, when we have overflowing of water, we all know when we have 
three days’ continuous raining, the land gets saturated and, on the fourth day, even with a very 
slight  rain,  the  water  starts  to  flow.  Nobody  can  prevent  water  coming  from  the  land  of  an 
occupier from going in the drain or if you do not have a drain it goes on the road. This is natural 
law of saturation of the land by the water. So, we put a law, but can we respect that law? Rain, 
you get saturation and then you get overflow, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker, what we need is a Master Plan for drainage system. A National Water 
Drainage Master Plan, not just local,  because we cannot do drains piecemeal. Like I said in the 
Council - will you believe it? - they approved to have a drain in such a road, without taking into 
consideration  where  to  connect  that  drain.  The  drain  just  ends  up  nowhere,  because  we  don’t 
have a Master Plan. We cannot do piecemeal. You can have a drain on a local road, but at the 
end  of  the  day,  you  are  creating  problem  down  the  stream.  So,  we  have  to  come  with  a  real 
Master Plan if we want to avoid flooding.  But flash flooding is the act of God. 

Madam Speaker, the biggest problem that we have today is we have two authorities - as 
rightly pointed out by my friend, hon Shakeel Mohamed - the highway authority and the local 
authorities. Like hon. Shakeel Mohamed said: sometimes no one wants to take the responsibility. 
No one wants to take the responsibility, it’s true!  We saw it in the municipality. The main road 
is taken care of by the highway authority, the RDA, and the other roads are taken care of by the 
local authorities. But the highway authority, do they do their job of maintaining those drains? 
Hardly! I live in Quatre Bornes and  witness  the kind of maintenance that is being done.  

Let me inform this House that when there are heavy rains in Candos lane, it is as if the 
water is afraid to go down the drains and instead it goes on the road. Why? Because the drain is 
dirty, it is full of dirt! The water says: ‘I don’t want to go there. I want to go on the middle of the 
road.’ And that’s true! If the water could talk, it would have said to this House: “Please, keep 
your drain clean, maintain your drain and then I will follow you.” De l’eau suive canal! In a way 
you have to keep your drain clean, because what happened, the drains were blocked, not because 

 

80 

of  residents  –  it  is  a  main  road  –  it  is  just  because,  in  Mauritius,  we  don’t  have  the  habit  of 
sweeping the road mechanically, as they do abroad. Rightly so,  it is expensive to do so. 

There was an incident in St Jean Road where a lady was sweeping the road with her hat. 
She just looked left, right and centre, and threw whatever it is in the drain. That’s what they do. 
So,  it  is  not  the  resident,  it  is  the  authority.  All  the  dirt  goes  there  and  the  drain  is  poorly 
designed, cannot be maintained and when the rainwater comes, the rainwater is clean and it is as 
it says: “I don’t want to be dirty with your drains.” 

Madam  Speaker,  it  is  a  big  problem  when  you  have  two  authorities.  Who  takes  the 
responsibility? What I propose to the hon. Minister - we do talk in the corridor and we exchange 
ideas – is to think about shifting all the responsibilities of the RDA Highway Authority to the 
Local Authorities. They have the means. Hon. Shakeel Mohamed mentioned to have… 

(Interruptions) 

…one authority to take care, but one authority… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, one authority will be difficult… 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Dr.  Sorefan:  …  to  implement  because  of  increased  manpower  which  is  very  costly, 
whereas  we  already  have  the  Local  Authorities.  Local  Government  covers  the  whole  island. 
They have the manpower; they have the know-how. We just have to shift and give them the legal 
framework and authority for them to do the job and they are the ones who are going to be blamed 
if they don’t do the job. They can’t shift problems from RDA, pas moi ça, li ça!   

Madam Speaker, there is another big problem.  

(Interruptions) 

Why  I  say  it  is  a  big  problem,  it  is  because  we  witness  it  as  councillors.  My  friends,  hon. 
Ramano  and  hon.  Barbier  who  were  Mayor  and  Lord  Mayor  know  it.  I  will  speak  on  Quatre 

 

81 

Bornes as I was the Mayor of Quatre Bornes. You have very poor people with a piece of land 
and a small house. What happens after the parents pass away? There is succession. Brothers and 
sisters  apply  to  the  Council  to  have  a  permit  for  vertical  expansion  of  floors  for  residence 
because they are poor. On a very small piece of land, less than 50 toises, they go vertical which 
means  more  people  living  in  there  with  a  lot  of  grey  water,  a  lot  of  rainwater  but  no  land  to 
absorb and no piece of land to do an absorption pit. So, on political grounds, I accept it because 
they are poor and they can’t buy a piece of land. So, we gave them the permit to elevate for their 
residence. So, this, I don’t know how the Court will tell the high authority: “you go there and do 
the job because there is no place to do the job.” That is a big problem that we face in certain 
regions.  

I  will  give  a  concrete  example  that  we  are  facing,  right  now,  in  Highlands,  in  my 
Constituency near the Mosque where you see a small piece of land, three-storey residence, about 
20 members of the family living there. They have one waste absorption pit. It could cater for one 
family. But as time went along, more families were living upstairs, the pit stayed the same. What 
do we see?  Hon. Boissézon knows it very well; hon. Benydin knows it too; our good friend, hon. 
Minister Soodhun knows it very well. All the 25 people are using the same old pit which is 25 
years old. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No cross talking, please! 

Dr. Sorefan: Overflowing goes on the road. This is a typical case.  When the President 
gives his assent to the amendment, I will invite the high authority to go and claim the job. It is 
impossible because they don’t have the land to increase. So, those are individual cases which are 
impossible to implement as per this amendment. 

Madam Speaker, I won’t be long.  To conclude, I would like to say… 

(Interruptions) 

…that I am not happy as to how this amendment came with so many errors. I would rather, like I 
said, come with a Master Plan, come with only one authority and this authority should be the 
Local  Authority  and,  amongst  other  things  that  I  have  proposed,  I  would  like  to  thank  you, 

 

82 

Madam Speaker, and the hon. Minister. He can rely on me and my friends here for suggestions, 
like we always do to make this Government do its job in a proper way. 

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Minister! 

(4.10 p.m.) 

Mr  Bodha:  Madame  la  présidente,  je  ne  crois  pas  qu’on  a  fait  fausse  route  sur  les 
définitions. In fact, section 27 of the principal Act amended in the Roads Act (Act No. 29 of 
1966) the wording in section 1(a) at section 23 clearly states –  

“No occupier of premises (…).” 

So, the amendment has been properly done. In fact, here, we have “no occupier” and now it is 
going to read, as the amendment proposes, “no owner or occupier”. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank all my colleagues for participating in the debate. 
As I pointed out at the Second Reading of the amendment proposed, it is not an end in itself and 
I totally agree with hon. Dr. Sorefan that we still have to consult a number of other institutions 
because we are spending billions in waste management and for the sewerage so as to come with 
a holistic solution to address all the problems of land drainage in Mauritius because, as we are 
more and more aware, the environment is going to be one of the most important issues in our life 
today. In fact, we have the conference in Paris which is going to highlight this. For small islands 
like Mauritius, I think one of the precious assets that we have is the environment. After listening 
to the interventions of all my colleagues,  I  am still more convinced of the need  for  a holistic 
approach and a Master Plan and I must express my sincere thanks to all the orators who have 
expressed their support. 

I am going to see some of the issues which have been raised. As rightly pointed out by 
hon. Boissézon, Government has invested billions of rupees for the construction of drains and 
storm rain drainage and will continue to do so in the future. Therefore, it is high time that we 
take appropriate action as a responsible Government to address these problems hands on and to 

 

83 

do away with les dégâts. This is why we are coming with these amendments dealing with two 
specific issues.  

We  are  also  addressing  the  issue  of  communication  and  enforcement  which  has  been 
highlighted by hon. Bhagwan and, of course, we will take necessary measures to ensure proper 
control on rainfall management and we will provide the population with a sensitisation campaign 
on the importance of sustainable drainage system. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  concur  with  my  colleague,  hon.  Dr.  Husnoo,  on  the  issue  of 
pollution caused by water. In fact, water pollution often settles in waterways and the sea. Also, 
we  have  the  problem  of  soil  discharge  from  fields  of  construction  sites  which  discharge  into 
waterways can  adversely  affect the wildlife.  If  drains continue to be contaminated with waste 
and fluid which pollute the environment, we are bound to face major environmental issues. This 
is why we have to give the appropriate authorities - as we are doing - the powers required to 
discourage  contraveners  and  to  encourage  all  Mauritians  to  act  in  a  very  responsible  manner 
because the law can remain the law or, otherwise, the law will remain on paper so as not to put 
our living environment at stake.  

I  would  like  to  thank  my  colleague,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable 
Development and Disaster and Beach Management for his vibrant speech and support and I am 
sure  that  we  are  going  to  work  together.  In  fact,  on  Monday,  we  have  a  meeting  to  address 
another national issue which is about trees and all that can create a disaster on a national basis. 
Hon. Mohamed has raised an important issue about enforcement because while taking action to 
prevent  any  continuing  harm  being  done  by  the  occupiers,  we  still  have  to  ensure  that  the 
highway authority has the necessary powers to take action against contraveners. He proposed a 
centralised authority and I think this has to be examined, but I think that in disaster management, 
provided that we have clear national guidelines, decentralisation can be more effective.  

But still, I think it is a good suggestion just like we are having this national committee to 
consider  the  whole  issue  of  trees  along  roads.  Ultimately,  what  is  more  important,  Madam 
Speaker, centralise or not, we are proposing quality and safety coupled with security on the roads 
and here, I must again put emphasis on the need of wide scale consultations as this will help us in 
situating responsibilities later. 

84 

 
We  will  also  have  a  proper  sensitisation  campaign  with  all  Ministries  and  local 
authorities  involved,  the  Municipalities,  local  authorities  and  the  Ministry  of  Environment  to 
ensure  that  the  public  at  large  have  the  sensitisation  that  is  needed  because  what  is  more 
important, in fact, Madam Speaker, is the priority will be urgency and efficacy.  

Madam Speaker, after further discussions I have brought some minor amendments to the 
amendments proposed. Instead of having recourse to the Judge in Chambers, we are proposing 
that the contravener is taken to a Court in the region where the contravention was committed. I 
think  this  will  help  expediency.  This  major  amendment  will  go  a  long  way  to  help  the 
implementation and this effective measure against those who violate the law. Having recourse to 
the District Court will no doubt be more practical, less costly and even if site visits are needed 
this can be organised easily.  

Madam Speaker, with these words, I commend the Bill to the House. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Bill read a second time and committed 

COMMITTEE STAGE 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

THE ROADS (AMENDMENT) BILL 

(No. XII of 2015) 

Clauses 1 to 2 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 3 (Section 27 of principal Act amended). 

Motion made and question proposed:  “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

Mr Bodha:  I move for the following amendments in clause 3 – 

“(a) in clause 3(b) - 

(i) 

in the proposed new subsection (3) - 
 (A) 

in paragraph (b) - 
 (I) 

by  deleting  the  words "to  the  Judge  in Chambers" 

 

85 

and  replacing  them  by  the  words  ",  in  such  form 
as may be prescribed, to the Court"; 
in subparagraph  (ii),  by  deleting  the  word  "Judge" 
and replacing it by the word "Court"; 

(II) 

 (B) 

in  paragraph   (c)(ii),   by  deleting  the  word   "Judge"  and 
replacing  it  by the  word  "Court"; 

 (ii) 

by adding, after the proposed new subsection (3), the 
following new subsection - 

(4) 

In this section - 
"Court" means the  District  Court of the  area 
where the contravention takes  place.” 

Amendments agreed to. 

Clause 3, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 4 (Section 42 of principal Act repealed and replaced). 

Motion made and question proposed:  “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

Mr Bodha:  I move for the following amendments in clause 4 – 

 

“(b) in clause 4, in the proposed section 42 - 

(iii) 

in subsection (3) - 
 (A)  by  deleting  the  words  "to  the  Judge  in  Chambers"  and 
replacing  them  by  the  words  ",  in  such  form as  may 
be prescribed,  to  the  Court"; 
in   paragraph   (b),   by   deleting   the  word  "Judge" 
and replacing it by the  word  "Court"; 

 (B) 

 (iv) 

(v) 

in subsection  (4)(b),  by deleting  the  word  "Judge"  and 
replacing it  by  the  word  "Court"; 
by adding the following new subsection - 

 (5) 

In this section - 

 

86 

"Court"  means the  District  Court  of  the  area 
where the  contravention  takes  place.”  

Amendments agreed to. 

Clause 4, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

The title and enacting clause were agreed to. 

The Bill, as amended, was agreed to. 

On the Assembly resuming with Madam Speaker in the Chair, Madam Speaker reported 

accordingly. 

Third Reading 

On motion made and seconded, the Roads (Amendment) Bill (No. XII of 2015) was read 

the third time and passed. 

Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for half an hour. 

At 4.19 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 
On resuming at 5.11 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

Second Reading 

THE PHARMACY COUNCIL BILL 

 (No. XIII of 2015) 

Order for Second Reading read 
The Minister of Health and Quality of Life (Mr A. Gayan): Madam Speaker, I beg to 

move that the Pharmacy Council Bill (No. XIII of 2015) be read a second time. 

It is a privilege for me to bring this Bill to the House particularly as its gestation started 
as far back as 2003 and proved to be a difficult and complicated one.   I intend to bring this Bill 
to fruition this evening. 

Madam Speaker, at the very outset, I wish to seize this opportunity to congratulate the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, for his speech on the second economic miracle and 
vision 2030 on Saturday 22 August 2015. This statement was a defining moment in the history of 

 

87 

Mauritius  as  it  sets  the  stage  for  a  qualitative  boost  to  the  country  at  large.    It  confirms 
Government’s commitment to fulfilling its electoral pledges and to addressing the challenges in 
all fields. No economic miracle is possible without strong institutions, leadership and rigorous 
regulatory frameworks for all sections of the economy, including the health sector. 

Madam  Speaker,  advances  in  medicine  and  science  are  unstoppable.  There  are  new 
sophisticated medical technologies, vaccines and drugs regularly reaching the market and these 
are  very  expensive  to  acquire.    Despite  the  increasing  cost  of  pharmaceutical  products,  my 
Ministry is spending an amount of Rs675 m. for the purchase of drugs which are in line with 
internationally  recognised  standard  such  as  the  Good  Manufacturing  Practice.    This  amount 
represents 6.9% of the budget of my Ministry.   Per capita expenditure on drugs in the public 
sector is around Rs535.00. 

The Health Sector is also facing a lot of other challenges both at the international and 
local levels. Health security around the globe is being repeatedly threatened by the emergence of 
new diseases and the resurgence of vector-borne diseases.   No one could have predicted that 
Ebola,  which  killed  over  8,000  people,  including  health  workers,  would  dominate  the  global 
health agenda in 2014. 

Another major challenge is the rising prevalence of non-communicable diseases which 
remain the world’s biggest killer. Diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, cancer, chronic respiratory 
diseases  and  mental  diseases,  continue  to  be  the  leading  causes  of  morbidity,  mortality  and 
disability in many countries of the world, including ours. 

Madam  Speaker,  from  the  increasing  cost  of  medication  to  the  lack  of  adequate 
specialised manpower in areas of sophisticated and very advanced medicine, from the problems 
associated  with  an  ageing  population,  such  as  dementia  as  a  cause  of  great  concern  to  health 
delivery and a myriad of other ailments, it is evident from this non-exhaustive list that we have a 
‘vaste chantier’ to tackle. 

Madam Speaker, in order to address these challenges and, at the same time, to plan for 
our 2030 innovative strategy, my Ministry is revisiting its priorities to ensure that not only do we 
address the imminent ills of our present population, but we also initiate wellness programmes in 
line with the mandate of my Ministry to ensure the quality of life of our population. 

88 

 
These  strategies  will  also  pave  the  way  for  Mauritius  to  become  a  medical  centre  of 
excellence.  In order to achieve these, my Ministry has to ensure that it has the required qualified 
and skilled men force and workforce to sustain existing and forthcoming new health initiatives.   
Further,  we  require  new  modern  infrastructure  and  we  need  to  overhaul  the  existing 
infrastructure.    We  need  to  invest  in  medical  equipment  and  high  technology  machines  to 
provide the best affordable care for our people.  We are constantly revisiting the health services 
in order to keep improving them as the expectations of patients keep rising. 

In this context, my Ministry is reviewing and modernising all legislation pertaining to the 
health  sector.    This  Bill,  Madam  Speaker,  is  the  first  in  a  series  of  other  Bills  that  will  be 
introduced shortly in the House. The Medical Council Act, the Dental Council Act, the Nursing 
Council Act, the Opticians Registration Act, the Ayurvedic and Other Traditional Medicines Act, 
the Public Health Act and the Mauritius Family Planning and Welfare Association Act are being 
reviewed as they no longer respond to the new landscape and exigencies of health professionals 
and  patients.    In  addition,  new  legislation,  namely  the  Health  Professionals  Council  Bill  will 
soon  be  introduced  to  cater  for  allied  health  professionals  not  covered  so  far  by  existing 
legislation.  This Pharmacy Council Bill is a new piece of legislation to regulate the practice of 
pharmacists.  This Bill enhances the overall regulatory framework as part of Vision 2030.  

Madam  Speaker,  I  will  now  elaborate  on  the  rationale  for  the  introduction  of  the 

Pharmacy Council Bill.  

In  all  developed  and  most  of  the  developing  countries,  the  pharmacy  trade  and  the 
pharmacist  profession  are  regulated  by  separate  bodies.  For  example,  the  General  Pharmacy 
Council in the United Kingdom, “L'Ordre des Pharmaciens” in France and the South African 
Pharmacy Council in South Africa regulate the pharmacist profession whereas the trade aspect is 
under separate regulatory bodies such as the Medicine and Health Regulatory Authority (UK), 
L'Agence  Nationale  de  Sécurité  du  Médicament  et  des  produits  de  santé  in  France  and  the 
Medicines Control Agency in South Africa. 

So far in Mauritius, the Pharmacy Act 1983 has been addressing both the pharmacy trade 
and the pharmacy profession.  The environment of both the pharmacy trade and the pharmacy 
profession has evolved over time with corresponding challenges.   

Madam  Speaker,  there  are  342  retail  pharmacies  which  operate  in  the  private  sector.  
Pharmacies are open for long hours and although the presence of a pharmacist is mandatory to 

 

89 

exercise control on the sale of Dangerous Drugs, Codeine products and other substances having 
propensity for abuse, we are aware that this is not the case in practice.   

I  will  be  addressing  this  particular  issue  when  I  come  to  the  House  to  amend  the 
Pharmacy  Act  to  make  it  consonant  with  modern  concepts  and  current  international  best 
pharmacy practices. 

Madam  Speaker,  hon.  Members  are  aware  of  the  scourges  of  dangerous  psychoactive 
substances, commonly known as synthetic drugs. Pharmacists have an important role to play in 
the monitoring of suspect behaviour on the part of  customers.    These synthetic drugs pose  a 
serious threat to public health.  Despite strong regulatory framework, the drug traffickers seem to 
be simply ahead in the manufacture and distribution of harmful substances.  This is why, as a 
nation, we need to be extremely vigilant to prevent the introduction, distribution and sale of such 
substances in our country. 

Amendments  have  also  been  made  under  the  Dangerous  Drugs  Act  2000  to  reinforce 
control  over  synthetic  drugs  and  harmful  psychoactive  substances.    We  have  also  set  up  an 
Observatory on Drugs to collect and analyse all relevant information and we count on the nation 
at large to be part of the process to eliminate drugs and drug consumption. 

Madam  Speaker,  as  regards  the  pharmacy  profession,  the  number  of  pharmacists  has 
increased from 288 in 2005 to 500 in 2015. So far, the Pharmacy Board has been regulating the 
profession  within  the  existing  legal  framework  of  the  Pharmacy  Act  which  provides  limited 
control  and  regulation  of  the  pharmacist  profession.    It  has,  therefore,  become  imperative  for 
Government to modernise the regulatory framework of this profession through the introduction 
of this Bill. 

The object of this Bill is, therefore, to repeal some sections of the Pharmacy Act in order 
to  better  regulate  the  profession  of  pharmacists  by  setting  up  a  Pharmacy  Council.    The 
Pharmacy  Council  Bill  will  bring  fundamental  changes  in  the  practice  of  Pharmacy.    The 
Pharmacy Board will continue to operate in accordance with the provisions of the Pharmacy Act, 
but its activities will be limited to -  

Issue licenses to operate pharmacies; 

(a) 
(b)  Register pharmaceutical products; 
(c) 

Inspect pharmacies, and 

 
(d)  Withdraw  medicines  from 
Authorities around the world. 

90 

the  market  following  alerts  from  Regulatory 

Madam Speaker, let me now, with your permission, highlight the salient features of this 
Bill.    The  Pharmacy  Council  is  a  statutory  body  which  aims  at  regulating  the  profession  and 
practice of pharmacy and to promote its advancement in the country. The main activities of the 
Council relate to the registration of pharmacists and to laying down the standards of education 
required  for  the  profession.    The  Council  will  also  be  empowered  to  take  disciplinary  action 
against those who act in contravention of the law.   

When the process for the preparation of the Pharmacy Council Bill started in 2003, there 
were consultations with the Government Pharmacist Association, the Pharmaceutical Association 
of  Mauritius  as  well  as  other  pharmacists  in  the  public  and  private  sector.  The  views  of  the 
Pharmacy Associations and the public at large were then sought on the Bill and their suggestions 
as well as the recent ones have been taken on board in the finalisation of the Bill.   

Madam Speaker, I will now deal with some specific clauses of the Pharmacy Council Bill 

-  

(i)  Clause 5 of the Bill relates to the functions of the Pharmacy Council, which are: 
to  regulate  and  control  the  profession,  exercise  and  maintain  discipline  in  the 
profession, and ensure compliance with the Code of Practice that will be set by 
the  Council.  The  Council  will  also  be  responsible  for  the  registration  of 
pharmacists,  non-citizens  as  temporary  registered  pharmacists  or  visiting 
pharmacists and pre-registration trainees.   

(ii)  Clause  7  of  the  Bill  defines  the  composition  of  the  Council,  which  shall,  inter 
alia,  consist  of  8  pharmacists,  3  from  the  public  sector  and  5  from  the  private 
sector,  each  having  not  less  than  seven  years’  experience  as  pharmacist  in 
Mauritius.    These  pharmacists  will  be  elected  in  the  manner  specified  in  the 
Schedule.  There will also be a representative of the Prime Minister’s Office and a 
representative of the Attorney General’s Office. 
At Committee Stage, I will move to amend sub-clause 1 of clause 7 by - 
Replacing  “a  representative  of  this  Ministry”  and  “Director  Pharmaceutical 
Services” by “a pharmacist posted at the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life”; 

(a) 

 
(b) 

91 

Replacing a representative of the Department of Health Sciences at the University 
of Mauritius by a “representative of the tertiary education sector”; 
Deleting “a representative of a Consumer Protection Organisation.” 

(c) 
These amendments are being brought to ensure some kind of parity or an equilibrium in 
the pharmacist profession and have been aligned with the provisions of the Medical and Dental 
Council Act. The representative of Consumer Protection Organisation is being removed, as the 
Council deals with the pharmacist profession but not with pharmacy trade. 

The  inclusion  of  a  representative  of  the  Consumer  Protection  Organisation  will  be 

considered in a new Pharmacy Act. 

Clause 12, Madam Speaker, relates to the appointment of a Registrar of the Council. 

At Committee Stage, I will move to amend sub-clauses (2) and (7) to increase the number 
of  years  of  experience  from  5  to  10  years.    The  Registrar  should  have  more  experience  than 
members of the Council since he or she will have to manage all Council activities and participate 
in the deliberations of the meetings of the Council and may be called upon to advise the Council 
on technical matters. 

According to clause 17 of the Bill, for a person to practice pharmacy, he or she should be 
registered  as  a  pharmacist,  a  temporary  registered  pharmacist  or  a  visiting  pharmacist.  Up  to 
now,  there  are  no  specific  legal  provisions  for  the  registration  of  non-citizens  as  pharmacists. 
This measure will, no doubt, Madam Speaker, enable us to attract foreign expertise in the fields 
of pharmacy, which expertise is not available in the country. 

At Committee Stage, I will also move to delete paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of sub-clause 

(2), for the following reasons - 

(a) 

(b) 

there is a National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Committee which 
has been set up to deal with cases of emergency and the Committee may liaise 
with voluntary organisations for the distribution of medicine and provide any 
other pharmaceutical assistance; 
all activities pertaining to supply of medicines, dispensing of same and 
ascertaining the expiry date in Community Health Centres and Area Health 
Centres fall under the responsibility of a Government pharmacist. 

 
Clause  24  lays  down  the  conditions  under  which  a  non-citizen  may  be  temporarily 

92 

registered as a foreign pharmacist. 

And, at Committee Stage, I will move to amend sub-paragraph (c) by providing that a 
foreign  pharmacist  will  have  to  satisfy  the  same  criteria  set  for  the  registration  of  a  local 
pharmacist.    Exemptions,  however,  will  be  made  for  those  who  have  already  acquired  prior 
experience before registration in Mauritius. 

Clause  18  further  consolidates  the  requirements  to  maintain  a  high  standard  of  the 
profession and the need to upgrade the pharmacy profession to produce a competent workforce 
to meet the growing demands of the industry and the community. Henceforth, any prospective 
candidate willing to pursue a career in pharmacy will have to satisfy the basic eligibility criteria 
of 21 points at Advanced level or its equivalent before embarking on pharmacy studies. 

In  addition,  prior  to  registration  as  pharmacist,  the  applicant  will  have  to  undergo  an 
examination, held at least once a year, to be approved by the Pharmacy Council.  The Bill has, 
however, made provision to exempt those who have already embarked on such studies in order 
not to cause any prejudice to them.  In order to be registered, a pharmacist will have to complete 
at least a four-year degree course in pharmacy on a full time basis, followed by one year practical 
training in a pharmacy, as defined in the Pharmacy Act, either in Mauritius or elsewhere. 

Furthermore, he or she will have to pass an examination determined by the Council.  The 
pharmacist will then have the required qualifications and knowledge in the practice of pharmacy. 

According to sub-clause (2) (c), any person who has 3 years post qualification experience 

shall be exempted from passing the examination which I have just mentioned. 

At Committee Stage, I will move to amend the functions of the Council to provide for the 
Council to approve the conduct of an appropriate examination by an independent international 
examining  body  before  the  registration  of  pharmacists.  It  is  the  first  time  that  such  an 
examination  will  be  held.    Presently,  only  one  year  training  is  required  for  the  purpose  of 
registration. 

I will also move to delete sub-clause (2) (b) as provisions have already been made under 

sub-clause 1(c). 

93 

 
Madam Speaker, all these measures will help to have a qualified workforce to respond to 
the  many  challenges  in  the  pharmaceutical  field,  the  more  so  as  Government  is  committed to 
developing  our  country  into  a  bio-medical  hub  with  sectors  such  as  bio-informatics, 
pharmaceutical manufacturing, clinical research and drug discovery and research.  Mauritius is in 
the  process  of  establishing  the  appropriate  regulatory  frameworks  for  the  pharmaceutical  and 
biotech  industry  based  on  the  best  practices,  including  the  United  States  Food  and  Drug 
Administration, the European Union Directives and Good Manufacturing Practice of the World 
Health Organisation. 

Clause 22 provides for the registration of pre-registration trainee.  The institution, where 

the training takes place, has to be a pharmacy, as defined in the Pharmacy Act. 

At  Committee  Stage,  I  will  move  to  amend  sub-clause  (1)  (b)  by  replacing 
“pharmaceutical  institution  or  undertaking”  by  “pharmacy”  as  pre-registration  trainees  can 
follow training on pharmacy practice only in a pharmacy. 

Clause  23  makes  it  mandatory  for  a  pharmacist  to  follow  Continuing  Professional 
Development (CPD) courses or training programmes as the Council may determine.  Failure to 
follow CPD will result in deregistration of a pharmacist.  Under sub-clause (2), the Council may 
excuse a person from following CPD on grounds which will have been prescribed. 

Clause 26 deals with the interpretation of “pharmacist” for the purpose of discipline. 

At Committee Stage, Madam Speaker, I will move to add a new sub-clause “(c) a visiting 
pharmacist” after sub-clause “(b) a foreign pharmacist”.  A visiting pharmacist should also be 
subject to disciplinary action where appropriate. 

Clause 27 provides that the Council may investigate any complaint related to professional 

misconduct, malpractice or negligence, fraud or dishonesty, or a breach of the Code of Practice. 

The Council may summon and hear the pharmacist who shall be given an opportunity of 
being  assisted  by  a  legal  representative  of  his  choice  and  the  pharmacist  to  be  given  all 
opportunities to make representations. 

Clause 28 provides for disciplinary proceedings to be instituted against a pharmacist. 

Where, after a preliminary investigation, the Council decides to prefer charges against a 
pharmacist, it shall forward to the pharmacist a statement of the charges and call upon him to 

 

94 

state in writing, before such date as the Council may specify, any ground on which he relies to 
exculpate himself. 

Clause 29 defines the membership of the Medical Disciplinary Tribunal, set up under the 

Medical Council Act. 

The Tribunal, which also caters for officers of the dental and nursing cadre as well as the 

medical cadre, will now consider cases referred to it by the Pharmacy Council. 

Two  persons  who  are  pharmacists  with  not  less  than  10  years’  experience  will  be 

appointed as members of the Tribunal. 

At Committee Stage, I will move to amend the composition of the Tribunal by specifying 
that two pharmacists, one from the public sector and one from the private sector, be appointed as 
members of the Tribunal. 

On occasion arising, Madam Speaker, I will be coming to the House for an amendment 
under the Medical Council Act regarding the Medical Tribunal, which is at present presided by a 
Judge.  It is preferable that a person other than a sitting Judge presides over the Tribunal since 
there  may  be  challenges  to  the  decisions  made  by  the  Tribunal,  and  which  challenges  will 
inevitably come for adjudication before the Supreme Court. 

The  Council,  however,  has  the  power  to  either  suspend  or  deregister  a  pharmacist  or 
temporary  registered  pharmacist  without  any  proceedings  in  case  where  the  registered 
pharmacist has been convicted of an offence and is serving a sentence of imprisonment or penal 
servitude. 

In case the name and other particulars of a registered pharmacist have been removed from 
the Register of Pharmacists, these can be restored only by order of the Council or the Supreme 
Court. 

Madam Speaker, we consider that this Bill will go a long way to regulating the pharmacy 

profession and to enhance the quality of services provided by pharmacists. 

Madam Speaker,  at Committee Stage,  I will be moving the amendments which have 
already been circulated, and I am sure that all hon. Members have taken note of the amendments. 

95 

 
Let  me,  in  conclusion,  express  my  thanks  to  all  the  Pharmacist  Associations  for  their 
views and to all individuals, NGOs who have expressed their views and suggestions and made 
comments on the Bill. 

Finally,  I wish also to thank the Office of the Attorney General and the hon. Attorney 
General and his staff as well as my officers who have worked diligently in the preparation and 
finalisation of this Bill. I wish to extend my gratitude to hon. Members who have contacted me 
with suggestions about this Bill after the publication of this Bill. 

With these words, Madam Speaker, I commend the Bill to the House. 

 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

(5.34 p.m.) 

Mr  P.  Jhugroo  (Second  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien):  Madam 

Speaker, being given that I am a pharmacist, I would declare my interest. 

It is very sad to see that the left side of the House is empty. C’est triste de voir ce qui 
s’est passé ce matin dans cette auguste Assemblée. C’est triste de voir quelqu’un, qui, avec une 
carrière  politique,  et  dont  je  respectais,  venir  dire,  ce  matin  -  celui  qui  avait  comploté  avec 
l’ancien Premier ministre, je le dis bien, comploté avec l’ancien Premier ministre,  ils ont fermé 
cette Assemblée nationale pendant une année -  que j’ai comploté avec Madam Speaker… 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, I am sorry, you have to come back to the Bill. Because 
we  are  debating  the  Bill,  you  will  take  another  time  of  the  House  if  you  want  to  make  a 
statement. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Je  n’ai  pas  de  leçon  à  prendre  avec  celui  qui  a  comploté  avec  l’ancien 
Premier  ministre,  parce  que  ce  n’est  pas  dans  l’habitude  de  la  famille  Jhugroo  de  comploter, 
comme c’est le cas pour lui. Je lui lance un défi, pour la deuxième fois, depuis que je suis  dans 
cette  Assemblée,  s’il  a  le  courage  de  venir  prouver  que,  ce  matin,  Purmanund  Jhugroo,  le 
Government Chief Whip, a comploté avec la présidente de cette Assemblée. 

Madam Speaker:   Hon. Jhugroo, once  again, if  you are saying that they  are not here 

when the Bill is being debated, this is something else, but come back proper to the Bill. 

96 

 
Mr Jhugroo: Because I was hurt this morning. For this reason, it is my feeling, Madam 
Speaker.  Je  lui  lance  un  défi,  s’il  peut  venir  prouver  que  j’ai  comploté,  je  peux  démissionner 
comme Chief Whip et comme membre de cette Assemblée. Mais, si, lui, il ne peut pas le prouver, 
qu’il démissionne comme le Leader de l’Opposition et qu’il démissionne de cette Assemblée. Je 
lui lance un défi ! Malheureusement, il n’y a pas assez de journalistes dans cette Assemblée, ce 
soir, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, please, come back to the Bill. 

Mr Jhugroo: I am coming to the Bill, Madam Speaker. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker,  at  the  very  outset,  I  wish  to  thank  the  hon.  Minister  of  Health  and 
Quality of Life for bringing this piece of legislation to the House. This goes with the vision of 
the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  to  develop  the  pharmaceutical  sector,  as 
stated by him in the Economic Vision 2030 at Ebène, on 22 August of this year. 

This  Bill,  Madam  Speaker,  is  a  long  awaited  one,  housed  all  the  pharmacists  who  are 
keen pour mettre de l’ordre dans cette profession. I wish to point out that when the MSM formed 
part of the Government in May 2010, the then Minister of Health said this issue is a priority one, 
and  I  personally  witnessed  her  enthusiasm  for  the  project.  Malheureusement,  Madame  la 
présidente, le Premier ministre d’alors avait d’autres priorités.  

I, therefore, thank and congratulate my very good friend, hon. Minister Anil Gayan, for 
bringing  this  piece  of  legislation  only  8  months  after  his  assumption  of  office.  Bravo,  hon. 
Minister Anil Gayan! 

 Madam Speaker, the profession of pharmacist has always been a noble one. Pharmacy is 
the art and science of preparing and dispensing medications to the general public and counseling 
about drug related issues. It is, therefore, with great astonishment that we note that the profession 
of pharmacist was not recognised with the same range as those of the medical profession, the 
legal  profession  as  well  as  other  professionals,  such  as  engineers  and  accountants,  to  say  the 
least.  Even  though,  medicines  are  prescribed  by  Registered  Medical  Practitioners,  the 
responsibility to double-check the exact dosage, the drug interaction and side effects rests on the 
pharmacist.  The  pharmacist  acts  as  an  uncommon  between  the  prescription  and  the  patient, 

 

97 

thereby acting as a guardian, adviser, mentor, the confident and the counselor, to ensure that the 
health and safety of the patient is safeguarded.  

Madame la présidente, je tiens à rendre hommage au Pharmacy Board qui, depuis son 
existence, a contribué énormément à l’enregistrement et à la formation des pharmaciens opérant 
à Maurice. 

The  Pharmaceutical  Association  of  Mauritius  also  deserves  our  gratitude,  since  it  has 
contributed  enormously  in  the  management  of  the  pharmacy  profession  for  the  past  decades. 
L’Association des Pharmaciens de l’Ile Maurice, Madame la présidente, a, pour sa part, assuré 
la saine gestion de la profession durant ces dernières décennies. 

However,  in  an  era  where  things  are  supposed  to  be  met  with  broadband  speed  and 
intelligence,  applying  modern  technology,  the  Pharmacy  Board  should  revisit  its  criteria  of 
record keeping with regard to the returns of controlled drugs made by pharmacists. 

 A Council is of utter importance to the degree that it would perform in a way that would 
revolutionise  the  entire  profession  to  face  the  challenges  that  lay  ahead  of  us  in  line  with  the 
extraordinary delivery of the Prime Minister in his vision statement. 

Madam Speaker, in that context, I am making a plea to the hon. Minister so that the new 
Council  be  made  to  draw  clear  guidelines,  in  respect  of  the  recognition  of  qualifications  and 
institutions, so as to avoid the chaos which occurred in the past with regard to the D. Y. Patil 
Medical  College,  the  Moras  School  of  Dentistry  and  even  the  EIILM  University  which  have 
been famous for granting tainted degrees and diplomas during the Labour regime. 

I  believe,  Madam  Speaker,  that  the  Mauritius  Qualification  Authority  and  Tertiary 
Education Council need to submit to the new Council, on a regular basis, an updated list of the 
international universities and relevant qualifications that would enable prospective pharmacists 
to be recognised and registered in Mauritius. 

Being  given  that  many  known  pharmacists,  who  are  pharmacy  owners  and  who  are 
involved in several malpractices, tarnishing the image of the pharmacy profession, in general, I 
suggest,  in  this  august  Assembly,  that,  henceforth,  pharmacy  licences  should  be  granted  to 
qualified and registered pharmacists only. 

98 

 
Madam  Speaker,  allow  me,  as  a  member  of  the  Pharmaceutical  Association,  to 
acknowledge  the  honour  and  privilege  it  was  to  discuss  with  my  very  good  friend,  the  hon. 
Minister of Health and  Quality of  Life  and to express my  gratefulness for bringing in several 
amendments to the original Bill as per the proposals made by the Pharmaceutical Association 
after its meeting held on 04 September this year. 

Madame la présidente, permettez-moi de solliciter l’indulgence de mon ami, l’honorable 

ministre à l’égard de quelques remarques additionnelles sur le sujet.  

Firstly,  as regards the management of Council,  I am of the opinion that  3 pharmacists 
from the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life who would be members of the Council should be 
elected from the Government Pharmacists having at least 7 years of experience in Mauritius.  

Furthermore, I propose that the said election be carried out by the Electoral Supervisory 
Commission  as  it  is  the  practice  for  the  elections  to  the  Medical  Council  and  to  the  Dental 
Council. The Electoral Supervisory Commission should consequently also conduct the election 
of the 5 members from the private sector. I propose, therefore, that the relevant amendments be 
made to paragraph 5 (1) of the Schedule of this Bill.  

Secondly, in line with the spirit of democracy purported by this Government, I strongly 
believe that the Council should vote for a Chairperson and a Vice-Chairperson only for those 8 
Council members who have been elected to Council by their peers, that is, 3 from the Ministry 
and 5 from the private.  

Thirdly,  in  relation  to  absence  without  leave  of  the  Council,  I  suggest  that  two 
consecutive  absences  from  meetings  of  the  Council  to  warrant  removal  is  unfair  and 
unreasonable for a number of reasons which I do not propose to elaborate as there are a number 
of complex issues that may arise in construing this subsection, should a dispute arise in a Court 
of  Law.  It  would  assist  and  preserve  the  sanctity  of  democracy  as  set  out  in  section  1  of  the 
Constitution and, therefore, an amendment from 2 to 3 sittings would reflect fairness, justice and 
equity which is the very basis on which this Government was put into power by the people.  

Madam Speaker, as I stated in my opening words, this Bill is a long awaited one. The 
Pharmaceutical Association tel un syndicat défendant les intérêts de ses membres has constantly 
innovated. The Pharmacy Board, however, has been limited in its action.  

99 

 
Il  devenait  primordial  d’équiper  la  profession  de  pharmacien  de  son  propre  conseil 
d’ordre  apte  à  défendre  les  intérêts.  Un  organisme  professionnel  de  droit  privé  chargé  par  le 
législateur d’une mission de service public. Madame la présidente, avec ce projet de loi sur la 
table de l’Assemblée aujourd’hui, c’est une chose faite par ce gouvernement.  

Merci. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

(5.47 p.m.) 

Dr.  R.  Sorefan  (Fourth  Member  for  La  Caverne  &  Phoenix):  Thank  you,  Madam 
Speaker. I would like to congratulate the hon. Minister of Health and Quality of Life to come 
with the Pharmacy Council Bill which has been long overdue. 

The hon. Minister has mentioned the Medical, Dental and Nursing Council Bills. As a 
Dental  Surgeon  and  being  a  member,  in  the  past,  of  the  Dental  Council  also,  I  would  like  to 
remind the hon. Minister that the Dental Council Act was passed in 1989 and amended all along 
till today. When I went through the proposed Pharmacy Council Bill for the first reading, I had 
the  impression  that  the  Bill  was  as  if  a  replica  of  the  Dental  Council  Bill  of  1989.  I  had  a 
tendency to come with a lot of amendments that the Minister himself has come with after having 
a  lot  of  representations,  personally  or  through  the  press,  and  we  were  presented  with  lots  of 
minor amendments. To tell you frankly, when I was trying to read this to propose it in the main, I 
got lost because it was  so difficult!  I  had  a tendency to  come to the House to propose to the 
Minister  to  withdraw  and  put  everything  in  order  with  all  the  amendments  so  that  we  could 
follow it. But, as it is, it was very difficult to get ourselves.  

When I heard hon. Jhugroo, he mentioned that he is proposing to the Minister to come 
with amendments. But these amendments have already been made as proposed. I am sure hon. 
Jhugroo got lost also because what he is proposing has already been mentioned by the Minister, 
for the election of members by the Electoral Commissioner; all those things have been amended 
and proposed to the Council.  

Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister mentioned examination that will be taken once a year 
and he proposes to come with competent examining bodies. Very true! It is good because we had 

 

100 

the  experience  in  the  Dental  Council.  I,  sometimes,  as  an  examiner  with  an  experience  of  30 
years, to tell you frankly, I am a clinician but not an examiner! The problem we had, knowing 
that he is my colleague, there was some leniency. Then the Council came with external bodies, 
especially from India, to go for examination of those Dental Surgeons and we saw what problem 
we  had  from  representations  of  those  who  took  the  examinations.    Because  they  are  external 
bodies, they don’t know the reality of Mauritius. They don’t know how many, like in the Dental 
field, a lot of Dental Surgeons qualify from every corner of the world with different levels in the 
syllabus and the examining body was treating everyone on the same footing and there were lots 
of  failures.  I  hope  this  does  not  happen  that  the  Minister  and  his  advisers  will  take  that  into 
consideration so as not to get representations on failures. 

Madam Speaker, mention is made in the Bill about the A-level status and a number of 
points that one should have and it mentions 3 A-levels in one and the same sitting, 21 points. But 
at the level of the Medical Dental Institution we always queried that. We are just giving 3 A-
levels, any 3 A-levels, and we all know like hon. Jhugroo said, it is a science.   

Pharmacy is a science.  Dental is a medical science and yet we don’t include a science 
subject as a requirement. To go and study pharmacy and to get qualified as a pharmacist, for me 
it is mandatory that one should have an A level in chemistry. Pharmacy is nothing, but lots of 
chemistry. I don’t say that those who are doing non-science subjects can’t do it, but it will be 
difficult  for  that  student  to  appreciate.  It  is  not  just  studying  and  getting  your  degree  in  your 
hand,  but  appreciating  the  subject  in  which  you  are  qualified  so  that  when  you  deliver  to  the 
public you know what you are doing. It is very important.  

I will just cite one case.  Will you believe me? A student with a dental degree came in a 
panel, the dental Council in which I was.  He did “O”  level - I won’t say in which country - and 
Urdu was a subject. He was admitted in a University to do dentistry without “A” level and the 
University  was  recognised  in  Mauritius.  We  interviewed  that  Dental  Surgeon  by  certificate.  I 
won’t say what was the fate, but we could see that he did not appreciate the subject. He was a 
Dental Surgeon, but he did not appreciate what he was going to do because he did not have the 
science subject. It is very important that the hon. Minister considers this, be it for dental, medical 
or  pharmacy.  Like  the  hon.  Minister  said,  he  is  going  to  update  the  Nursing  Council  with  a 
proper Bill and that this issue, that is, they must have at least one science subject, be it chemistry, 
biology, physics or mathematics be mentioned. 

101 

 
Madam  Speaker,  now,  there  is  a  big  problem  which  probably  overlapped  with  the 
Pharmacy Board and the Council. I am sure the hon. Minister will reply to me later on that this is 
in the purview of the Medical Board. There’s a big problem of Pharmacists working for eight 
hours  and  the  pharmacy  dispensing  drugs,  medicines  without  a  pharmacist  in  the  pharmacy. 
They work for eight hours, they go and the proprietor becomes the pharmacist.  We have heard 
of so many dégâts, sale of pure addicted drugs by pharmacy. I would prefer that this falls under 
the purview of the Dental Council; that all pharmacies should have - as per the Pharmacy Act - a 
pharmacist at all times, from opening to closing. But this is not the case. On Sundays you don’t 
see  a  pharmacist  and  yet  we  have  about  450  pharmacists.  So,  this  is  a  big  drawback  in  this 
country.    We  are  talking  about  all  the  addicted  drugs,  methadone  and  so  on  and  so  forth.  I 
welcome the hon. Minister for coming with a statement this morning.  Well done! But those who 
are  dispensing  it  should  be  under  the  control.  It  is  not  that  the  proprietor  will  be  sued.    The 
pharmacist takes the responsibility, but if he is not there, how can he take the responsibility? I 
am sure members from the Pharmacy Board know what havoc is being done at Mesnil.  When 
husband and wife quarrel and get divorced, next door each one opens a pharmacy. One of them 
is selling drugs with the help of a member of the Pharmacy Board. I won’t name him, but I am 
sure the hon. Minister is aware of what we are talking and what is happening at Mesnil. 

Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister mentioned that members will be in the Tribunal, one 
from the public and one from the Private, and the Tribunal will be the same as the medical and 
dental. We had problems with the Medical and the Dental Tribunal when we get cases from the 
public sector. When they are found guilty, hardly things can be done because they are governed 
by the PSC and as regards the private sector, action can be taken.  We have to sort it out. This is 
a very big problem that we are having with medical and dental and I think it will be the same 
with the pharmacists. 

Well,  regarding  all  the  amendments,  it  is  in  good  line  because  the  hon.  Minister  has 
managed  to  do  the  corrective  works  or  else  there  would  have  been  a  lot  of  debates,  a  lot  of 
proposals. Thank God it took some time to come to this House, for the Second Reading. The 
public and other people also have plenty of time to make representations.  We are going in the 
right path and I wish the hon. Minister of Health and Quality of Life success.  

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

 
(6.02 p.m.) 

102 

Mr J. Leopold (Second Member for Rodrigues): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank 
the hon. Minister of Health and Quality of Life for bringing this Bill into this august House.  The 
only reason why I am intervening tonight is because I strongly believe in standards. The standard 
needs to be set so as to have high quality of health care in both the public sector and the private 
sector.  This  Bill,  Madam  Speaker,  after  it  is  passed  to  Law,  that’s  the  only  time  when  the 
pharmacy practice or pharmacists will be considered as professionals with the knowledge, skills 
and attributes to take responsibility for the management and utilisation of medicines in order to 
optimise medicine-related outcomes.  

The  regulatory  body  will  have  the  statutory  authority  to  govern  the  practice  of 
pharmacists. It is only at that time that standards will be set and monitored. It is the only time 
and  it  is  now,  well  after  the  law  is  passed,  that  the  principal  code  of  ethics  will  capture  the 
philosophical  foundation  of  pharmacy  practice  to  express  the  responsibilities  and  professional 
values that are fundamental and inherent to the pharmacy profession.  

This Bill will allow the setting up of necessary frameworks to support development in the 
profession  and  will  be  based  on  patient-centred  practice  and  take  into  consideration  patients’ 
rights  and  responsibilities.  The  Pharmacy  Council  must  have,  as  its  main  role,  to  protect  the 
health  and  well-being  of  the  public,  to  set  standards  of  education,  training,  conduct  and 
performance so that pharmacists can deliver high quality healthcare consistently throughout their 
careers ensuring that pharmacists keep their knowledge up to date and to uphold the Council’s 
standards;  standards  which  reflect  changes  in  healthcare  and  society.  The  law  will  allow  the 
regulatory body to handle complaints as well about pharmacists and investigate allegation where 
appropriate so as to build trust among the public.  

Although the primary role of Pharmacy Council is to protect the health, safety and well-
being of the public, it has to be able to determine the scopes of practice to pharmacists keeping 
pace  with  the  evolution  of  modern  health  services.  Pharmacists  need  to  be  more  and  more 
involved  in  medication  cost  management  strategies  for  hospital  and  health  system  because 
medication costs comprise the majority of the health system pharmacy budget and continue to 
increase  further  than  other  healthcare  expenditure,  drug  cost  is  a  constant  target  for  cost 
containment initiatives. One of the primary factors which drive drugs in the overall expenditures 

 

103 

is utilisation of drugs. When this law is passed, pharmacists will be accountable for their actions. 
Therefore,  they  will  have  as  responsibility  to  set  up  effective  plan  for  medication  utilisation 
management with a roadmap for continuous improvement in pharmaceutical management.  

You know, Madam Speaker, if now  I  go to Port Louis Hospital with a headache, they 
give me medication for maybe seven days or six days, if I am still not feeling well after two days 
of consultation with a doctor without asking whether I still have medication given to me, another 
lot of the same medication is given to me by common practice. This is not safe and it is wastage. 
Pharmacists need to play an important role in preventing unsafe dosage of medication.  

Another area where pharmacists need to be more involved - and I am sure in a way the 
regulatory body or the Pharmacy Council will address that - is the safe usage of prescribed drugs. 
Here, I am referring to the impact of pharmacy and ageing population. It is not a surprise that the 
Republic  is  shifting  towards  an  increasing  number  of  people  over  65  years  of  age.  Despite 
advancing age, an increased number of older adults continue to be very active and healthy, but 
we do have older patients with physiological and cognitive changes who are more likely to be on 
medication  than  younger  adults.  This  means  that  the  pharmacy  technician,  particularly  in 
community pharmacy, has an important role in helping to meet the healthcare needs of seniors. 
There are other changes with ageing that must be of great concern to pharmacy, for example, 
visual  changes.  Therefore,  pharmacists  have  a  very  important  role  in  delivering  medication 
safely to those people and that in many ways like preparing the medication as example in dosette 
box.  

Another aspect of which I believe this piece of law will bring in the modern management 
of healthcare service is the innovative role of pharmacists in the management of chronic pain. In 
order  to  both  optimise  the  treatment  and  prevent  the  unintended  consequences  of  potent 
analgesic, this is an evolving area in pharmacists’ role and I believe that the Bill will also give 
pharmacists  an  opportunity  to  offer  their  professional  services  to  assist  needy  patients  in 
managing their pain and to bring solace and comfort to them.  

This Bill is coming in such a decisive moment with the upgrading of healthcare service 
and I am talking about e-health services where that will play a very important role in managing 
medication.  

 

104 

I thank you, Madam Speaker, for your attention. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Gobin! 

(6.09 p.m.) 

Mr  M.  Gobin  (First  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  &  Souillac):  Thank  you, 
Madam Speaker. I am pleased this evening to speak on this Bill and I wish to share part of the 
experience I have gathered during the days that I was at the Attorney General’s Office, having 
sat for some time on the then, as it was then composed, the Nursing Council.  

Before coming to the Pharmacy Council itself, I wish first of all, to commend the hon. 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life for having brought this Bill, a much awaited one. In fact 
tonight there are 500 or so pharmacists right now who are closely following the debates, finally, 
in this House, the Bill recognising the profession of pharmacists. It is a matter of regret that the 
profession of pharmacists has not been recognised as such and it is only now in 2015 that this 
Pharmacy Council Bill is coming to the House.  

Why is it important to create such a Council?  It is important, in my opinion, first of all, 
because c’est pour la valorisation de la profession. The best way to recognise this profession is 
for the profession to be judged, to be disciplined by a body composed of one’s peers. I think this 
is the best way to recognise a professional so that when the Council is composed of pharmacists 
– of course, the Council will be composed of other persons, but the majority of the Council will 
be pharmacists such that a Council of peers will be deciding on issues pertaining to pharmacists 
and I think this is the best measure, most laudable which this Bill is bringing.  

The second issue I wish to highlight about this Bill is that it is setting the standards very 
high.  I  am  talking  about  the  standards  of  qualifications  and  the  standards  for  registration  of 
pharmacists. It is important to understand the regulatory set up at this stage and what it will be 
after this Bill is passed. Right now, we have the students under the actual Pharmacy Act who are 
registered and then go on to pass a diploma and then become pharmacists. With this Bill, the 
standards are raised because we understand now, we have more and more qualified pharmacists 
with  impressive  degrees  such  that  it  has  reached  the  stage  where  we  need  to  recognise  those 

 

105 

specific qualifications and it is laudable that the provisions of part four of the  Bill have been 
included and the standards have been raised on the question of registration of a pharmacist.  

The  third  point  which  is  laudable  about  the  Bill  and  which  goes  in  the  same  line  of 
recognition  of  the  profession,  concerns  the  question  of  discipline.  The  medical  and  allied 
professionals need to be disciplined, first of all, by their peers and, if need be, by a specialised 
Tribunal.  Such will now be the case with the Disciplinary Tribunal under clause 29, and it is 
very interesting to note that the Chairperson of that Tribunal will be assisted by two pharmacists 
with  not  less  than  10  years’  experience.  I  welcome  the  proposal  the  hon.  Minister  made  this 
evening that those two pharmacists will be both from the public and the private sector. 

The next point I wish to highlight is that the Pharmacy Council is being set up to take 
over from the Pharmacy Board the question of registration of pharmacists; not only registration, 
but also the question of maintenance of discipline and to promote advancement in the field of 
pharmacy.  Right now, the Pharmacy Board was bogged down with so much work. With this 
Bill, the registration of pharmacists, the discipline of the pharmacists will be taken over by the 
Pharmacy Council, while the Pharmacy Board will retain its jurisdiction over the trade, that is, 
licensing  of  pharmacy,  importation  of  drugs  and  licensing  for  manufacturing,  storage, 
inspections. 

In  fact,  I  seize  this  opportunity  to  mention  the  point  raised  by  my  colleague,  hon.  Dr. 
Sorefan,  about  the  question  of  the  presence  of  a  pharmacist;  that  would  still  be  with  the 
Pharmacy Board.  In my opinion, it should be like that. It should be for the Pharmacy Board to 
send their inspectors.  If there are no inspectors on Sundays or at late hours, then that ought to be 
taken up by the hon. Minister and the Pharmacy Board, but it is not for the Pharmacy Council to 
inspect the pharmacist’s on-site premises.  I think that should remain with the Pharmacy Board. 
And, if need be, beef up the Pharmacy Board and beef it up with respect to its inspectors. 

I have, lastly - and I had the opportunity of mentioning that to my colleague, the hon. 
Minister - a few suggestions regarding the Bill. My concern is, Madam Speaker - and I have seen 
this during some sittings of the then Nursing Council -that once the Council is set up, it should 
be set up with certainty  in the law.  Otherwise,  you have a Council being bogged down with 
questions  of  interpretation,  going  back  and  forth  to  the  Attorney  General’s  Office  for  advice, 
when they ought to be focusing on the question of the advancement of the profession.  This is 

 

106 

why I am expressing, tonight, my concern over a few aspects, which I wish to highlight for the 
attention of the hon. Minister as well as that of the hon. Ag. Attorney General. I understand that 
the substantive Attorney General is abroad. 

First  of  all,  on  the  question  of  the  composition  of  the  Council,  I  understand  from  the 
speech of the hon. Minister earlier that amendments will be brought during Committee Stage, but 
I wish to highlight clause 7 (1) (f), for instance - 

“the representative of the Attorney General’s Office.” 

If  it  is  the  intention  to  have  a  law  officer  from  the  Attorney  General’s  Office  to  be  on  the 
Council, of course, he will share his views as a law officer, then we ought to spell it out as such. 
Instead of a representative of the Attorney General’s Office, if such is the intention, to specify a 
law officer designated by the Attorney General. 

Secondly, in paragraph (d), if the intention about the representative of the Ministry is to 
designate a representative other than a pharmacist, to bring in his expertise on the administrative 
side, then such should be specified: “a representative of the Ministry other than a pharmacist.” 
On this clause (7) again, I would propose to add a sub-section (5), that the composition of the 
Council, once it is constituted, should be published in the Gazette and specified as such. 

Madam Speaker: This is the procedure, hon. Gobin.  It has not to be specified. 

Mr Gobin: Now, coming to the question of qualifications.  To ensure consistency on the 
question  of  degrees,  diplomas  under  paragraph  1  (c),  my  view  is  that,  with  regard  to  the 
university or other institution contained in clause 18 (1) (c), we specify whether the university or 
other institution be accredited by the Tertiary Education Commission. 

Now, at clause 29, on the question of the Medical Tribunal, the definition of ‘Tribunal’ is 

as follows - 

“‘Tribunal’  means  the  Medical  Disciplinary  Tribunal  set  up  under  the  Medical  Council 
Act”. 

 

107 

If I am not mistaken, Madam Speaker, it ought to be ‘Disciplinary Tribunal’ instead of ‘Medical 
Disciplinary Tribunal’.  However, the second issue is about that Tribunal in clause 29, in which 
the opening words are – 

“Notwithstanding section 15(2) (b) of the Medical Council Act (…)” 

If I am not mistaken, I stand to be corrected, it ought to be – 

“Notwithstanding section 15(1) (b) of the Medical Council Act (...)” 

Now, on this issue of the Medical Disciplinary Tribunal, I welcome the comment of the 
hon. Minister that, for this Tribunal, the composition would be reviewed and the jurisdiction will 
be enlarged at a later stage with an amendment Bill such that it would, if I understand correctly, 
be  a  Medical  and  Allied  Professional  Disciplinary  Tribunal  and  cover  Medical,  Dental, 
Pharmacists and other allied professionals.  That would solve any issue which may arise about its 
jurisdiction.  I have had the opportunity of sharing it with the hon. Minister, because the issue 
may arise that, this Tribunal is set up under the Medical Council Act and “under that law, the 
Tribunal is set up “for the purposes of this Act” and “this Act” being the Medical Council Act. 
So, unless we specify it, this may give rise to a challenge of jurisdiction and we do not want that 
because we want certainty in the law. 

At  clause  33,  concerning  the  removal  from  the  Register  of  the  name  and  other 
particulars of a pharmacist, this has to be read in conjunction with the publication of the annual 
list under clause 20.  We know that the annual list will be published not later than March.  

I am contemplating, let us say that a removal is ordered in September or November of a 
year, this will be made public only at the publication in March. What happens in the meantime? 
It is the public which will be at risk. We do not want to take the risk. We want to inform the 
public of such removal as soon as possible.This will be the point on which I will end. I will join 
in the suggestion of my friend, hon. Jhugroo, concerning the procedure for elections. We want 
the  Council  to  be  as  democratic  as  possible  and  we  want  the  profession  to  be  governed  by  a 
Council of Peers. I welcome and I join in the suggestion of hon. Jhugroo that elections be held 
under the independent supervision of the Electoral Commissioner and the Electoral Supervisory 
Commission. 

108 

 
I will also suggest that, concerning the schedule for the procedure for election that the 
notice of elections not only be published, I should say in the old fashion, in a newspaper, but we 
should add that the notice be published electronically, as wide as possible, whether be it on the 
website, whether be it on any electronic means, because a newspaper is not even, if we have to 
compare  it  with,  let  us  say  Public  Procurement  Act,  a  newspaper  having  wide  circulation  in 
Mauritius.  This  is  why  I  want  to  highlight  that  publication  can  be  done  otherwise  than  “such 
newspaper as may be determined”. 

Finally,  I  would  suggest  to  the  hon.  Minister  to  avoid  the  confusion  which  may  arise 
between  the  Registrar  of  the  Pharmacy  Council,  which  we  are  creating  now,  and  the  existing 
Registrar of the Pharmacy Board… 

(Interruptions) 

There would be two Registrars. I would suggest that the hon. Minister considers an amendment 
in the appellation of the Registrar of the Pharmacy Board. My suggestion is to review the title of 
the  Registrar  of  Pharmacy  Board,  because  he  will  no  longer  be  maintaining  any  Register  of 
Pharmacists. The Register will be maintained under this Act such that the Registrar of Pharmacy 
Board may be renamed in a more appropriate manner. 

These would be my comments and suggestions. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

(6.27 p.m.) 

Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien): Madam Speaker,  
on this side of the House, we welcome this Bill to the extent that it regulates and controls the 
profession of the pharmacists. 

Now, true it is that under the Pharmacy Act, we do have the Phamacy Board which, as 

the law stands, as the Pharmacy Act stands, has two main functions – 

(i) 
(ii) 

 to regulate and control the operations of pharmacies, and 
the regulation and control of pharmacists, as explained by the hon. Minister of 
Health. 

It is true that under the Pharmacy Act, the powers given to the Board for the control and 
regulation of pharmacists is not very clear. It is found in the function of the Board, we do not 
have any Tribunal, we do not have any procedure whenever a complaint is registered against a 

 

109 

pharmacist.  This  Bill  comes  to  make  it  very  clear  that  the  Council  will  investigate  and  the 
Tribunal  will  decide  whether  or  not  a  pharmacist  has  committed  any  breach  or  has  been 
negligent. So, to that extent, we welcome the Bill, on this side of the House. 

However, one more positive thing about this new Bill is that under the Pharmacy Act, the 
Board was only empowered to regulate and control the acts and doings of pharmacies working in 
the private sector, that is, retail pharmacists, and there were no such powers, no such control on 
the acts and doings of pharmacists who were employed in the Government service. This new Bill 
makes provision for the Council to have delegated powers from the PSC to be able to regulate 
the conduct of pharmacists who are employed in the Government service as well.  This is a good 
thing. 

There  are,  however,  some  points  which  I  shall  invite  the  hon.  Minister  to  consider. 
Firstly, there is one major problem and it is about pharmacy technicians, pharmacy dispensers. 
Under the Pharmacy Act, as it stands, the Board also had the power to control and regulate the 
acts and doings of pharmacy technicians. The pharmacy techicians is defined as those dispensing 
medicines over the counter. We all know that in Mauritius whenever we go to the pharmacies, 
the first people with whom we deal are the dispensers, not the pharmacists.  

I  find  it  strange  that,  in  this  Bill,  nowhere  is  it  mentioned  how  those  pharmacy 
technicians, those pharmacy dispensers are going to be regulated, whether the Council is going to 
supervise their acts and doings. There is a loophole somewhere in the Act and I will invite the 
hon. Minister to consider this issue. The hon. Minister talked about the Pharmacy Council Act in 
the  UK,  and  there,  because  of  numerous  complaints  that  have  been  reported  against  those 
pharmacy technicians, the legislators have deemed it fit to empower the Council for the Council 
to regulate the acts and doings of the technicians, and this has been made a profession in itself. 
So, maybe, I will invite the hon. Minister to look into the matter and come with amendments, if 
need be. 

I  have  some  difficulty  in  understanding  section  31  of  the  Bill.  It  deals  with  other 

disciplinary measures and it reads as follows - 

“(1)  Without any of the proceedings provided for in sections 27, 28 and 30 being 

instituted, the Council shall, where a pharmacist has been convicted of an offence 
and is serving a sentence of imprisonment or penal servitude –  

 

110 

(a) 

(b) 

suspend him as a pharmacist or (…)  

deregister him as a pharmacist (…)” 

Sections 27, 28 and 30 deal with the need for a hearing. This section 31 provides that in 
cases where a pharmacist has been convicted of an offence, there is no need for any hearing, the 
Council can straightaway just deregister the pharmacist. I find this unfair.  

Let  us  take  the  example  of  a  pharmacist  being  sent  to  prison  because  he  has  been 
involved in a tragic road accident or he has been sent to prison because of a case of drink-driving 
or even if he has assaulted somebody. This has nothing to do with his duties. Is it justified that 
we just deregister that pharmacist without giving him the opportunity to, at least, show why he 
should  be  deregistered?  I  will  invite  the  hon.  Minister  who  is  a  respected  lawyer  and  who 
happened  to  be  my  pupil  master  as  well  to  have  a  look  at  this  case.  The  recent  2015  case 
Rajabally v/s the Pharmacy  Board where the Chief Justice himself delivered a judgement and 
where it was clearly mentioned that even when a pharmacist has been convicted of an offence, 
there is a need to give that pharmacist a hearing before you take any action against him. So, I 
will invite the hon. Minister to have a look at this judgement which is a judgement which has 
been delivered a few weeks back. 

Section 28 (1) says that –  

“Where,  after  a  preliminary  investigation,  the  Council  considers  it  necessary  to  prefer 
charges against a pharmacist, it shall forward to the pharmacist a statement (…).” 

In my humble opinion, this term “where the Council considers it necessary” is too vague. When 
we draw an analogy with the Medical Council under the Medical Council Act, there, we have 
mentioned  some  parameters  in  cases  where  the  doctor  has  been  negligent,  in  cases  where  the 
doctor has committed a breach of the code of practice, etc. My friend, hon. Gobin made mention 
of being tried by his own peers. It is a good thing! Good! But then it leaves the door open for 
complacency and favouritism as well. So, this is why I say we have to set some parameters and 
mention in which situations should the Council start an investigation against a pharmacist. 

Section 32 provides the situation – 

111 

 
“Where  the  Council  is  satisfied,  after  having  carried  out  a  preliminary  investigation 
against  a  pharmacist,  other  than  a  pharmacist  in  respect  of  whom  the  Council  holds  a 
delegated power, that he has committed an act or omission which, in its opinion, is not 
considered  to  be  of  a  serious  nature,  it  may  inflict  upon  him  a  warning  or  severe 
warning.” 

We  have  the  Council  which  is  the  investigatory  body  and  we  are  giving  to  that  investigatory 
body the discretion to decide whether the complaint that has been reported is of a serious nature 
or not. Well, I find there is a lack of transparency there. We should leave it to the Tribunal. Let 
the Tribunal decide whether an act is of a serious nature or not, not the Council! 

So, I have said that I will be very short; I have mentioned some points. We have received 
complaints  from  pharmacists.  We  see  that  under  the  Bill,  we  are  opening  the  profession  to 
foreign pharmacists. The hon. Minister mentioned himself that there are about 500 pharmacists. 
The profession, I understand, is saturated. Now, opening the doors to foreign pharmacists, there 
are some questions that are being raised. There is one argument that has been put forward, if we 
allow foreigners to come, why don’t we have reciprocity? The hon. Minister may make use of 
his  good  office  and  make  it  possible  for  our  pharmacists  as  well  to  go  and  practise  in  other 
countries. Apart from these few remarks, as I have said, we welcome the Bill on this side of the 
House. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Minister Gayan! 

(6.39 p.m.) 

Mr  Gayan:  Madam  Speaker,  let  me,  first  of  all,  express  my  thanks  to  all  the  hon. 
Members  who  have  made  meaningful  contributions  to  this  Bill.  I  wish  also  to  express  my 
apologies  because  of  the  number  of  amendments  which  have  been  circulated  but  this  is  as  a 
result of the various representations which have been made and we are open to meaningful and 
helpful suggestions and  this is why we have such a number of amendments which have been 
circulated. 

112 

 
I have listened very carefully to all the points that have been made in the course of the 
debates  and  I  take  on  board  the  remarks  of  hon.  Ramful  with  regard  to  the  automatic 
deregistration  of  somebody  without  giving  that  person  a  hearing.  I  have  asked  the  State  Law 
Office  to  prepare  something  about  it.  So,  at  Committee  Stage,  I  will  make  the  necessary 
amendment to that. I think it is a valid point. 

Let me say, Madam Speaker, that listening to hon. Jhugroo, I wish to appease his qualms 
about the election of the members of the Council. In fact, amendments have been suggested in 
the Schedule so that all the elections of the members of the Council will be conducted according 
to the Electoral Commissioner and the members of the Council from the public sector will be 
elected by the members of the public sector and those from the private sector will be elected by 
the private sector. So, there is no difficulty with regard to that.  So, that is something that we 
have considered and we have made the necessary amendments.  

I also wish to say that the aim of this Pharmacy Council Bill is to give to the profession 
of the pharmacist the standing that it requires in a modern Mauritius. We are gone from the days 
when you had to go to a pharmacy and you used to see big jars and the pharmacist used to take 
all sorts of things to concoct a medicine. Today, most of the medications come in packages. But 
the role of the pharmacist, it is true, is a very important one because between the doctor and the 
patient stands the pharmacist. It is the pharmacist who can counsel and give the necessary advice 
to the patient and, in fact, be the mentor and people trust the pharmacist sometimes more than 
they trust the doctors. Anyway, we are looking at the profession of pharmacist in a manner which 
will  give  to  the  profession  the  status  and  the  image  that  it  requires  and  I  am  sure  that  this 
Pharmacy Council Bill will help a lot in enhancing the standing of all pharmacists in our country.  

I have also listened to the suggestion of hon. Jhugroo with regard to the absences whether 
it is 2 or 3 if there are valid reasons, then that particular clause will not apply. So, I do not think 
that it will make much difference whether it is 2 or 3 as long as there is a valid ground for a 
member to be absent, that should not really be a difficulty in that member continuing to be a 
member of the Council.  

113 

 
The  other  points  that  have  been  raised  by  hon.  Dr.  Sorefan  with  regard  to  the  science 
subject,  there  is  no  right  answer  to  this.  I  have  known  my  friends  who  were  laureates  in  the 
classics and who have turned out to be great surgeons. So, it makes no difference.  

Somebody  who  has  the  aptitude  and  the  will  to  embark  on  the  pharmacist  profession 
whether he is qualified in science subjects or other subjects, he will have to go through the test 
and the motions and he will need to live up to the expectations of the profession. So, I do not 
think that is really an issue.  In fact, you may have some hidden talents.  Some people who are in 
the classics go on to become great chemists. Who knows! But we will see. We are beginning this 
new journey with a Pharmacy Council Bill and we shall see how it develops. The studies for the 
pharmacists  are  pretty  long,  so,  anybody  who  wants  to  join  the  pharmacist  profession  will 
obviously and naturally be somebody inclined in the science subjects. Although I take the point, 
I  do  not  think  that  it  is  such  a  major  impediment  in  the  manner  in  which  this  Bill  has  been 
drafted. In fact, it is consistent with the Medical Council Act and the Dental Council Act. What 
we are trying to do is to have as much consistency as possible in all those professions. The other 
point that was raised also was in respect of the pharmacy technicians and all this. 

We have not included that particular part of the trade in this Bill because it deals only 
with pharmacists. What will happen, we are coming with an Allied Health Professions Bill. In 
that particular Bill, we are going to provide for all those allied health professionals so that there 
is  a  regulatory  framework  for  anybody  concerned  in  the  health  sector.  You  will  be  surprised, 
Madam  Speaker,  that  even  a  professional  psychologist  is  not  covered  by  any  particular 
regulatory authority today. Psychologists can just practise without any regulatory framework. So, 
we need to have a Bill that is going to cover all those allied health professionals so that we have 
a  background  of  law  for  anybody  practising  in  the  medical  field.  So,  these  are  some  of  the 
remarks from the hon. Member, Mr Ramful. I think he made a very valuable contribution. Let 
me also say, Madam Speaker, that the intention with regard to the Tribunal - I think that there 
were  some  remarks  made  about  the  Tribunal.  In  the  definition  section  of  the  Bill,  we  have 
defined  the  Tribunal  as  the  Medical  Disciplinary  Tribunal.  So,  ultimately,  we  need  to  have  a 
Tribunal that looks after the whole health sector.  

(Interruptions) 

 

114 

It  will  have  to  be  like  the  Supreme  Court,  a  kind  of  the  Supreme  Court  that  will  deal  with 
anything relating to the health sector. Right now, I think it has been a piecemeal approach. We 
have the Medical Council Act, the Dental Council Act, but we have to look at it comprehensively 
and the point will come when we have a wide ranging jurisdiction for the Medical Tribunal. I 
will  come  to  the  House  with  a  comprehensive  Bill  with  regard  to  the  Tribunals  and  also  the 
composition of the Tribunals so that we have an independent, impartial body that is going to look 
at all these disputes or whatever grievances that there may be, that can be addressed in a very 
professional way. So, the qualms that have been expressed can be assuaged by what I have just 
said. 

I  do  not  think  that  there  are  some  other  things  that  I  need  to  mention  with  regard  to 
preliminary enquiries and all these. I think this has been taken care of because the procedure is 
that no one should be condemned unheard. This is why I have taken on board the suggestions of 
hon. Ramful and we are going to look at his suggestions. There are some other things that have 
been mentioned in the course of the debate, but basically they do not go to the substance of the 
Pharmacy Council Bill and we will, of course, bear everything in mind when the code of practice 
and all the things will be worked out so that we have, within the pharmacy trade, things that will 
be done properly. 

The point was raised about pharmacist being physically in control of a pharmacy. Yes, it 
is  the  normal  practice  that  a  pharmacist  should  be  present  at  all  times  when  the  pharmacy  is 
open,  but  we  all  know  that  that  is  not  the  case.    This  is  why  we  will  have  to  address  that 
particular concern.  When the Pharmacy Act comes to the House, we will need to see whether it 
has  to  be  an  owner  pharmacist  trade  or  one  person  can  be  the  owner  and  then  employ 
pharmacists, but whatever it is there must be some control.  I  am fully  aware of the problems 
associated with pharmacists. Some pharmacies doing a great deal of business after dark, but we 
do not have the necessary inspectors to go and inspect all the pharmacies. This is why I make an 
appeal to all the pharmacists to be very careful about the dispensing of, specially cough syrup, in 
the evening because people tend to cough a lot in the evening! So, I think we need to be careful 
about these things.  

Let me say also, Madam Speaker, that things have been mentioned about examinations. 
In countries like Malaysia, South Africa, India and Singapore, any person wishing to read for a 

 

115 

degree in pharmacy has to spend four  years. The study is for four  years. In the UK, a master 
degree in pharmacy is four years’ studies plus one year preregistration training. In France, the 
degree course is of a six-year duration, including a minimum of one-year training after the fourth 
year  and,  basically,  all  countries  offer  a  four-year,  full-time  degree  course  followed  by 
preregistration training. Now, the point that I wish to make is that we want to have the highest 
standards for the pharmacist profession. For them to be able to reach that level, they will have to 
qualify in reputable Universities.  

The Pharmacy Council will have to do like the Medical Council, to have a list of those 
Universities where people can go and study so that when they come back, they are prepared to sit 
for the exam in Mauritius and pass that exam. If they do not pass that exam, of course, they will 
not be entitled to practise. We are thinking of having an international body that will come to set 
the exam.  I know that some people do not like  it, but then we have to  give credibility to the 
profession of the pharmacists.  We have a look at various international examining bodies that 
conduct examinations; we are exploring, for example, the General Pharmacy Council of the UK, 
the  South  African  Pharmacy  Council,  the  Singapore  Pharmacy  Council  and  the  Australian 
Pharmacy Council.  

The reason for this high standard is that if somebody passes and qualifies from that kind 
of an examining body, the whole of Africa or wherever these people want to go, they will have 
the credibility and the standing to go and practise anywhere. This is important because we want 
to open up the Mauritian doctors, dentists whoever to the rest of Africa. I say it not only for the 
pharmacists but also for the doctors.  We have lots of unemployed doctors in Mauritius and I 
hope that they will be open to the possibility of going to work in African countries as doctors. 
That is going to give us a great image in Africa, so that we have to look at the profession not 
only in terms of what Mauritius can do, but what also Mauritian doctors can do in Africa. I think 
we have to look at it in a much bigger perspective and this is not only for pharmacists but for 
doctors  we  need  to  have  the  maximum  qualifications  so  that  our  people  become  marketable 
anywhere in the world.  

With these words, Madam Speaker, I commend the Bill to the House. 

Question put and agreed to. 

 
Bill read a second time and committed 

116 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Members,  the  amendment  which  has  been  proposed  by  hon. 
Ramful has been agreed to by the hon. Minister of Health and Quality of Life and I understand 
that the amendments are being drafted right now. So, I suspend the session till the amendments 
have been drafted and we can proceed for Committee Stage.  

At 6.55 p.m. the sitting was suspended 
On resuming at 7.23 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

COMMITTEE STAGE 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

THE PHARMACY COUNCIL BILL 

(No. XIII of 2015) 

Clause 1 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

 Clause 2 (Interpretation) 

 Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

 Mr Gayan:  Madam Chairperson, I move that clause 2 be amended as follows - 

“in clause 2, in the definition of “practice of pharmacy” -  

(i) 

in paragraph (a), by deleting the words “prescribing,”; 

(ii) 

in paragraph (c), by deleting the words “and prescribing”; 

(iii) 

in paragraph (f), by deleting the words “of pharmaceutical products” and 
replacing them by the words “at each level of pharmacy operation”; 

(iv) 

by adding the following new paragraph -  

(h) 

reporting  adverse  drug  reactions  (ADR)  through  the  established 
mechanism of the pharmacovigilance unit of the Ministry;” 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 2, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

 
Clauses 3 and 4 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

117 

Clause 5 (Functions of Council) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

 Mr Gayan:  Madam Chairperson, I move that clause 5 be amended as follows - 

“in clause 5, by deleting paragraph (h) and replacing it by the following paragraph -  

(h) 

approve  the  conduct  of  such  examination  before  registering 
pharmacists;” 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 5, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 6 (Powers of Council) 

 Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

 

Mr Gayan:  Madam Chairperson, I move that clause 6 be amended as follows - 

“in clause 6 -  

(i) 

in paragraph (d) -  

(A) 

by deleting the words “subject to section 36,”; 

(B) 

by inserting, after the words “from, a”, the words “pharmacist or”; 

 (ii) 

in  paragraph  (e),  by  inserting,  after  the  words  “from  a”,  the  words 
“pharmacist or”;” 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 6, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 7 (Composition of Council) 

 Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

 Mr Gayan:  Madam Chairperson, I move that clause 7 be amended as follows - 

“in clause 7 -  

 

(i) 

in sub-clause (1) -  

118 

(A) 

by  deleting  paragraph  (a)  and  replacing  it  by  the  following 
paragraph -  

(a) 

3 pharmacists from the public sector, each having not less 
than 7 years’ experience as pharmacist in Mauritius, to be 
elected in the manner specified in the Schedule; 

(B) 

(C) 

in paragraph (b), by inserting, after the words “5 pharmacists”, the 
words “from the private sector”; 

by deleting paragraph (c), paragraphs (d), (e), (f), (g) and (h) being 
relettered as paragraphs (c), (d), (e), (f) and (g), respectively; 

 (D) 

by deleting the newly relettered paragraph (c) and replacing it by 
the following paragraph -  

(c) 

a pharmacist posted at the Ministry; 

(E) 

(F) 

in  the  newly  relettered  paragraph  (f),  by  deleting  the  words 
“Department  of  Health  Sciences  of  the  University  of  Mauritius” 
and replacing them by the words “tertiary education sector, to be 
appointed by the Minister”; 

in  the  newly  relettered  paragraph  (g),  by  deleting  the  words 
“posted  at  the  Ministry  and  a  representative  of  a  Consumer 
Protection Organisation” and replacing them by  the words  “from 
the public sector”; 

(ii) 

in sub-clause (3), by deleting the words “to (f)” and replacing them by the 
words “to (e)”;” 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 7, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 8 (Vacancy in membership of Council) 

 
Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

119 

Mr Gayan:  Madam Chairperson, I move that clause 8 be amended as follows - 

“in clause 8, in paragraphs (1) and (3), by deleting the words “to (f)” and replacing them 

by the words “to (e)”;” 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 8, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clauses 9 to 11 ordered to stand part of the Bill.  

Clause 12 (Registrar) 

 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

 Mr Gayan:  Madam Chairperson, I move that clause 12 be amended as follows - 

“in clause 12 -  

(i) 

(ii) 

in sub-clause (2), by deleting the figure “5” and replacing it by the figure 
“10”; 

in sub-clause (7), by inserting, after the words “another pharmacist”, the 
words  “having  at  least  10  years’  experience  as  a  pharmacist  in 
Mauritius”;” 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 12, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clauses 13 to 16 ordered to stand part of the Bill.  

Clause 17 (Practice of pharmacy) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

Mr Gayan:  Madam Chairperson, I move that clause 17 be amended as follows - 

“in clause 17(2) -  

 

 (i) 

(ii) 

120 

by deleting paragraph (a), paragraphs (b), (c) and (d) being releterred as 
paragraphs (a), (b) and (c), respectively; 

in  the  newly  relettered  paragraph  (c),  by  deleting  the  words  “,  or 
Ayurvedic” and replacing them by the words “, Ayurvedic”;” 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 17, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 18 (Registration of pharmacist) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

Mr Gayan:  Madam Chairperson, I move that clause 18 be amended as follows - 

“in clause 18 -  

(i) 

(ii) 

in  sub-clause  (1),  in  paragraph  (d),  by  deleting  the  words  “subject  to 
subsection (2)(b), ”; 

in sub-clause (2), by deleting paragraphs (b) and (c) and replacing them by 
the following paragraphs -  

(b) 

An  examination  referred  to  in  subsection  (1)(e) 

shall be held at least once every year. 

(c) 

Subsection  1(e)  shall  not  apply  to  a  person  who 
satisfies  the  criteria  in  subsection  1(c),  subject  that  he  is  registered  as  a 
pharmacist by the regulatory body of the country  where he obtained his 
degree, diploma or equivalent qualification in the field of pharmacy and he 
has at least 3 years’ experience as a pharmacist.” 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 18, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 19 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 20 (Annual list) 

 
Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

121 

Mr Gayan:  Madam Chairperson, I move that clause 20 be amended as follows - 

“in clause 20(2), by deleting the figure “1” and replacing it by the figure “15”;” 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 20, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 21 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 22 (Registration of pre-registration trainee) 

 Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

 Mr Gayan:  Madam Chairperson, I move that clause 22 be amended as follows - 

“in clause 22 -  

(i) 

in sub-clause (1)(b), by deleting the words “pharmaceutical institution, or 
undertaking,” and replacing them by the word “pharmacy”; 

(ii) 

by adding the following new sub-clause -  

(6) 

For the purpose of subsection (1)(b) -  

“pharmacy” has the same meaning as in the Pharmacy Act.” 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 22, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 23 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 24 (Foreign pharmacist) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

Mr Gayan:  Madam Chairperson, I move that clause 24 be amended as follows - 

“in clause 24 -  

(i) 

in sub-clause (1)(c), by deleting the words “and (c)” and replacing them 
by the words “, (c), (d) and (e)”; 

 

122 

(ii) 

in  sub-clause  (5),  by  inserting,  after  the  word  “annually”,  the  words 
“subject to the payment of the annual fee and”;” 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 24, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 25 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 26 (Interpretation of Part VI) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

Mr Gayan:  Madam Chairperson, I move that clause 26 be amended as follows - 

“in  clause  26,  in  the  definition  of  “pharmacist”,  by  adding  the  following  new 
paragraph, the word “and” at the end of paragraph (a) being deleted and the full 
stop at the end of paragraph (b) being deleted and replaced by the words “; and” –  

(c) 

a visiting pharmacist.” 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 26, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clauses 27 and 28 ordered to stand part of the Bill.  

Clause 29 (Membership of Tribunal) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

Mr Gayan:  Madam Chairperson, I move that clause 29 be amended as follows - 

“in clause 29(1), by inserting, after the words “2 persons”, the words “, one from 
the public sector and one from the private sector,”;” 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 29, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 30 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 31 (Other disciplinary measures) 

 
Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

123 

Mr Gayan: Madam Chairperson, I move that clause 31 be amended as follows - 

“in clause 31(1)(b), by deleting the words “deregister him” and replacing them by 
the  words  “give  him  an  opportunity  to  show  cause  why  he  shall  not  be 
deregistered”.” 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 31, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clauses 32 to 45 ordered to stand part of the Bill.  

Clause 46 (Consequential amendment) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

Mr Gayan:  Madam Chairperson, I move that clause 46 be amended as follows - 

“in clause 46 -  

(i) 

in paragraph (a) -  

(A) 

by  deleting  subparagraph  (i)  and  replacing  it  by  the  following 
subparagraph -  

(i) 

by  deleting  the  definitions  of  “assistant  pharmacist”, 
“Education Committee” and “student”; 

(B) 

inserting,  after  subparagraph 

by 
subparagraph -  

(iii), 

the 

following  new 

(iiiA)  in the definition of “pharmacy technician”, by deleting the 

words “or an assistant pharmacist”; 

(ii) 

in paragraph (b) -  

(A) 

by  deleting  subparagraph  (i)  and  replacing  it  by  the  following 
subparagraph -  

 

124 

(i) 

in  paragraph  (a),  by  deleting  the  words  “pharmacist, 
assistant pharmacist,” and “or student”; 

(B) 

inserting,  after  subparagraph 

by 
subparagraphs -  

(i), 

the 

following  new 

(iA) 

(iB) 

in  paragraph  (c),  by  deleting  the  words  “pharmacist, 
assistant pharmacist,” and “or student”; 

in  paragraph  (d),  by  deleting  the  words  “pharmacist, 
assistant pharmacist,” and “or student”; 

(iC) 

by repealing paragraph (f); 

(iii) 

by deleting paragraph (d) and replacing it by the following paragraph -  

(d) 

to  pharmacists, 

in section 11(b), by deleting the words “separately the particulars 
relating 
assistant  pharmacists,  pharmacy 
technicians  and  students”  and  replacing  them  by  the  words  “the 
particulars of pharmacy technicians”; 

(iv) 

by deleting paragraph (e) and replacing it by the following paragraph -  

(e) 

in section 12 -  

(i) 

in  subsection  (1),  by  deleting  the  words  “pharmacist, 
assistant pharmacist or”; 

(ii) 

by repealing subsection (4); 

(iii) 

in subsection (5) -  

(A) 

(B) 

in paragraph (a), by deleting the words “pharmacist, 
assistant pharmacist or”; 

in paragraph (b), by deleting the words “pharmacist, 
assistant pharmacist or”; 

 

125 

(v) 

by adding the following new paragraph -  

(f) 

by repealing sections 13 to 16.” 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 46, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 47 (Savings and transitional provisions) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

Mr Gayan:  Madam Chairperson, I move that clause 47 be amended as follows - 

“in clause 47(3), by deleting the words “referred to in the repealed sections 12 to 16 of 
that  Act’  and  replacing  them  by  the  words  “which  falls  within  the  purview  of  the 
Council”;” 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 47, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 48 ordered to stand part of the Bill 

SCHEDULE 

 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the Schedule stand part of the Bill.” 

 Mr Gayan:  Madam Chairperson, I move that the Schedule be amended as follows - 

“in the Schedule -  

(i) 

in item 1, by deleting the words “section 7(1)(b)” and replacing them by 
the words “section 7(1)(a) and (b)”; 

(ii) 

in item 5 - 

(A) 

in paragraph (1), by deleting the words “under the supervision of 
the supervising officer or his representative, who shall submit to 
the Minister the results of the election forthwith” and replacing 
them by the words “by the Office of the Electoral Commissioner 
who shall communicate the results to the Registrar”; 

 

126 

(B) 

by  inserting,  after  paragraph  (1),  the  following  new  paragraph, 
paragraph (2) being renumbered as paragraph (3) -  

(2) 

The  Registrar  shall  submit  to  the  Minister  the 

results of the election forthwith.” 

Amendment agreed to. 

The Schedule, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

The title and enacting clause were agreed to. 

The Bill, as amended, was agreed to. 

On the Assembly resuming with Madam Speaker in the Chair, Madam Speaker reported 

accordingly. 

Third Reading 

On motion made and seconded, the Pharmacy Council Bill (No. XIII of 2015) was read 

the third time and passed.  

ADJOURNMENT 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that this Assembly do now 

adjourn to Tuesday 20 October 2015, at 11.30 a.m. 

The  Vice-Prime  Mnister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 

Collendavelloo) rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned.  

(7.34 p.m.) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Leopold! 

MATTERS RAISED 

MAURITIUS-RODRIGUES – PASSENGER VESSEL & AIR FLIGHTS 

 
Mr J. Leopold (Second Member for Rodrigues): Madam Speaker, I would like to 

127 

bring to the attention of this august House and the hon. Minister concerned that, since February 
2014, the Mauritius Pride has ceased its operation liaising Mauritius to Rodrigues Island.  As a 
consequence, there has been a drastic change in tourists’ arrival, and this effect was immediate 
with a fall of 57% in the total number of arrival. 

I am raising this concern because now the only passenger vessel that liaise Mauritius and 
Rodrigues  is  the  Mauritius  Trochetia.    Mauritius  Trochetia  can  only  carry  106  passengers 
compared to Mauritius Pride which can carry 264 passengers at a go.  Mauritian tourists prefer to 
travel by ship, so that when they come back they can bring along local products, and the carrying 
capacity  by  boat  is  bigger  with  two-container  luggage  of  22  kgs  each  and  a  cabin  bag,  as 
compared to travelling by air with a carrying bag restricted to 15 kgs and a head luggage. 

Now, Mauritius Pride is no more in activity.  Obtaining a seat on Mauritius Trochetia is 
more  difficult,  with  longer  waiting  time.    Groups  of  tourists  and  adventurers  from  Mauritius, 
notably scout groups and senior citizens, are not able to go to Rodrigues because they can no 
more afford it, as there are not enough seats on the ship.  In consequence to that, so many people 
are obliged to travel by air despite the high demand of air tickets and they are unable to get a seat 
because  no  provision  is  made  to  increase  air  flights  from  Mauritius  to  Rodrigues.    So,  many 
people, every day travelling on either way, have to go to the airport to try their luck to obtain a 
seat.  In so many cases, they cannot have a seat to travel and they have to travel back and forth to 
Port Louis and Plaisance several times in a day, in an attempt to have a seat.  In so many cases, 
the amount of money they spend on taxi fares exceeds the airfare itself, and this is not proper. 

Therefore, I am making an appeal to the hon. Minister concerned to look into the matter 
urgently,  as  we  are  entering  into  peak  season,  to  solve  such  precarious  situation  so  as  not  to 
deprive all the people concerned from travelling and have their holiday. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  the  Minister  concerned  for  Shipping, 
hon. Bodha, is not here, but I will ensure that this matter be brought to his attention and also to 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister concerning services by Air Mauritius. 

 
Madam Speaker:  Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

128 

SOCIAL SECURITY OFFICES - WHEELCHAIRS 

Dr.  R.  Sorefan  (Fourth  Member  for  La  Caverne  &  Phoenix):  Thank  you,  Madam 
Speaker.    I  would  like  to  raise  an  urgent  matter  in  relation  to  wheelchairs  addressed  to  the 
attention of the hon. Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions. 

Madam Speaker, I have been informed that there is no wheelchair presently available in 
the Social Security Offices since February 2015.  May I request the hon. Minister to look into the 
matter  urgently,  as  there  are  hundreds  of  applicants  who  are  desperately  waiting  for  the 
wheelchairs while some cannot attend to their hospital appointments? 

The hon. Minister can come with a statement on that issue at the next sitting if she does 

not have the details on that issue today. 

The Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions (Mrs F. 
Jeewa-Daureeawoo):    Madam  Speaker,  I  will  look  into  the  matter  and  inform  the  House 
accordingly. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Ganoo! 

POINTE AUX SABLES SHELTER - 10-YEAR OLD GIRL – SUICIDE ATTEMPT 

Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River): Madam Speaker, I would 
like  to  raise  a  very  sad  matter  for  the  attention  of  the  hon.  Minister  responsible  for  Child 
Protection and Family Welfare.  In fact, it is an incredible and shattering affair which has taken 
place a few days ago.  It concerns the case of a young girl of 10  years old who attempted to 
commit suicide while she was being kept in a shelter at Pointe aux Sables. 

From  the  information  I  have  gathered,  this  girl  has  made  allegations  of  regular  ill-
treatment and brutality on the part of one or certain caregivers or care providers of the shelter at 
Pointe aux Sables. According to the mother of the child who was working as a maid servant, the 
child was committed to this shelter on the grounds of mendacity and she has been in the shelter 
for quite some time and no longer wanted to stay in that shelter as she was being subjected to ill-
treatment  and  violence  on  the  part  of  the  care  providers.    Then,  unable  to  bear  the  treatment 

 

129 

meted  out  to  her,  she  finally  decided  to  commit  l’irréparable  and  commit  suicide  by 
ingurgitating,  drinking  some  detergent,  un  produit  de  nettoyage  which  was  available  in  the 
shelter.  The mother was informed, Madam Speaker, that the child was admitted at the hospital 
only when a neighbour informed her of that dreadful situation. 

It would seem that the shelter did not even inform the mother of that attempted suicide.  I 
understand that the Police are enquiring in the matter, but I am sure that the hon. Minister can 
enlighten the House on certain aspects of this sad incident, of this incredible situation, Madam 
Speaker.  A shelter is a place of safety as we all know, according to our law, the Child Protection 
Act, and it is the previous Minister who designated that place as a shelter, which is a place of 
safety.  How can, therefore, an inmate, especially this girl of 10 years, been subjected to so much 
violence, which forced  her to commit that suicide?  Especially, as we know, according to the 
guidelines for alternative care of children, at paragraph 12, this is what I can read – 

“Children  must  be  treated  with  dignity  and  respect  at  all  times  and  must  benefit  from 
effective protection from abuse (…) whether on the part of care providers, peers or third 
parties, in whatever care setting they may find themselves.”  

This is the guideline for the alternative care of children of the UN. 

Madam Speaker, I am sure the hon. Minister must have been informed of what happened 
and inform the House also why the mother was not informed of this serious act of the girl, what 
is the level of experience of these care providers in this shelter, which I understand is also under 
the aegis of the Ministry, and how effectively does the Ministry monitor and control this shelter 
and the different shelters all over the country. 

I am sure the hon. Minister would, for the enlightenment of the House and the country, 

react to that situation. 

The Minister of Gender Equality, Child Development and Family Welfare (Mrs A. 
Perraud): I would like to inform the House and the hon. Member that Ms A. G., now aged 10, 
was first placed in a shelter after ill-treatment at home.  Thereafter, the father obtained custody of 
the child.  However, CDU lately had to bring the child back to a place of safety after she was 
found begging for money in the streets of Port Louis. 

130 

 
She was placed in a shelter at Pointe aux Sables and was followed by officers of my 
Ministry and by the psychologist assigned to the shelter.  On 14 September, she swallowed what 
was identified as being diluted liquid soap.  She was immediately seen by doctors at the Dr. A. 
G. Jeetoo Hospital.  Her mother, taking cognizance of the act of her daughter, explained that she 
is willing to take responsibility of the child.  At her discharge from hospital on 21 September 
2015, the child was placed in another shelter in the lower Plaine Wilhems. 

The  Police  is  presently  carrying  out  its  enquiry  following  the  allegations  made  by  the 
child  and  her  mother.  An  enquiry  is  also  on  at  the  level  of  the  shelter  at  Pointe  aux  Sables 
concerning this allegation. 

At this stage, I would like to state that there is a pardigm shift in the way I want the CDU 
to  function.  For  too  long,  the  CDU  has  been    bringing  children  in  shelters,  without  making 
appropriate  follow-up with a view to rehabilitate them and reintegrate them within the family 
setting, as far as this can be possible. I have asked that all the files of the 556 children in shelters 
be screened so that the possibility of reintegration in the family setting or placement in foster 
families are studied seriously. 

I  feel  that  placement  of  a  child  in  a  shelter  should  be  temporary  and  all  forms  of 
alternative care, be it family setting reintegration or placement in foster care, should, as far as 
possible,  be  the  preferred  option.  I  have  had  lengthy  discussions  with  representatives  of  the 
Kolektif Drwa Zanfan Morisien - which groups more than 12 prominent associations working on 
child welfare - and they are looking in that same direction. 

Thank you. 

PLAINE LAUZUN - DISPENSARY 

Mr  J.  C.  Barbier  (Fifth  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  East):  Madame  la 
présidente,  je  voudrais  soulever  un  cas  concernant  le  dispensaire  de  Plaine  Lauzun,  donc, 
concernant le ministre de la Santé. 

Madame la présidente, ce dispensaire de Plaine Lauzun qui desservait les habitants de la 
Cité  Vallijee,  de  Plaine  Lauzun  et  de  Camp  Chapelon,  malheureusement,  est  fermé  depuis 
quelque temps, et je suppose que c’est à cause de l’état de délabrement du bâtiment. Donc, ce 
même  bâtiment  délabré,  aujourd’hui,  sert  pour  la  distribution  de  la  Méthadone.  Donc,  c’est 

 

131 

ouvert uniquement le matin pour une heure ou deux et puis c’est fermé et il n’y a pas d’autres 
services dans ce dispensaire.  

Je  comprends  que  le  ministère  était  en  quête  d’un  bâtiment  ou  d’un  terrain  pour  la 

construction d’un nouveau  dispensaire. 

Je  fais  un  pressant  appel  au  ministre  pour  qu’un  lieu  pouvant  desservir  ces  mêmes 
habitants,  donc,  de  Camp  Chapelon,  de  Plaine  Lauzun  et  des  résidences  Vallijee,  puisse  être 
rapidement identifié et que ces services puissent être redonnés aux habitants de ces régions. 

Merci, Madame la présidente. 

The Minister of Health and Quality of Life (Mr A. Gayan): Madam Speaker,  I will 

certainly look into the matter as urgently as possible. 

At 7.47 p.m. the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Tuesday 20 October 2015 at 

11.30 a.m. 

WRITTEN ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS, REGIONAL INTEGRATION AND 

INTERNATIONAL TRADE – MINISTER/SUPERVISING OFFICER - 

RESPONSIBILITIES 

(No. B/658) Mr R. Bhagwan (First Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) asked 
the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National  Development  Unit  whether  he  will  state  if  he  has  taken  cognizance  of  a  report 
submitted to the Secretary to the Cabinet and Head of the Civil Service by a high ranking officer 
of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade in regard to the 
daily ministerial intervention in the day to day running of the Ministry and, if so, indicate if an 
inquiry has been carried out thereinto and the remedial measures taken, if any, in relation thereto. 
Reply: I am informed that there is no such report addressed to the Secretary to Cabinet 
and Head of the Civil Service.  The Secretary to Cabinet and Head of the Civil Service has, in 
fact, received a copy of a letter dated 24 July 2015, addressed to the Acting Secretary for Foreign 
Affairs, by a senior officer of the Administrative Cadre then posted at the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and  International  Trade.    In  his  letter,  the  officer  expressed  his 
concern over certain issues pertaining to the management of the Ministry. 

132 

 
I understand that the root cause of the problem was a dissention over the interpretation of 
the  provisions  of  section  68  of  the  Constitution  with  regard  to  the  respective  roles  and 
responsibilities of a Minister and a Supervising Officer. 
 
As  the  House  is  aware,  the  roles  and  responsibilities  of  a  Minister  and  Supervising 
Officer  are  couched  in  broad  terms  under  sections  62  and  68  of  the  Constitution.    These 
constitutional  provisions  do  not  tell  us  how  the  key  relationships  should  work  in  practice. 
Besides, the report of the Standing Committee on the Reform of the Civil Service, commonly 
known as the Burrenchobay Report, released in 1999, questioned whether sections 62 and 68 of 
the  Constitution  are  sufficiently  explicit  to  help  Ministers  and  Supervising  Officers  to  honour 
their  rather  fuzzy  mandate.    When  left  to  subjective  interpretation,  these  provisions  may 
occasionally  lead  to  confusion,  personal  and  institutional  stress  and  possibly  a  breakdown  of 
communication, which would be quite regrettable and should be avoided at all cost. 

There  is  a  need  therefore  to  bring  more  clarity  in  the  roles  and  responsibilities  of  the 
different actors within the Executive so that they can continue to work together constructively in 
the interest of the nation. 

This  is  the  reason  why  the  Government  has,  in  its  2015-2019  Programme,  pledged  to 
introduce a Public Service Bill, the main object of which is precisely to clarify and secure the 
boundaries  between  the  office  holders  within  the  Executive,  with  a  view  to  building  and 
sustaining  the  relationships  necessary  for  good  government  and  reinforcing  transparency, 
accountability and integrity. 

I  am  informed  that  work  on  the  drafting  of  the  Public  Service  Bill  has  reached  an 
advanced stage and the approval of Government will soon be sought for its introduction into the 
National Assembly, after appropriate consultations. 

AIR ACCESS – AIRLINE COMPANIES 

(No. B/663) Mr A. Ameer Meea (Second Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port 
Louis East) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  air  access,  he  will  state  the 
airline companies which – 

are presently serving Mauritius, indicating in each case, their country of origin, and 

(a) 
(b)  will be serving Mauritius. 

Reply: I am tabling the information requested by the hon. Member. 

 

133 

PORT LOUIS MARITIME & PORT LOUIS EAST – NDU PROJECTS 

(No. B/664) Mr S. Mohamed (First Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port Louis 
East)  asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to Constituency No. 3, Port Louis 
Maritime  and  Port  Louis  East,  he  will  state  the  projects  undertaken  thereat  by  the  National 
Development Unit, since December 2014 to date, indicating in each case the – 

(a) 
(b) 

nature thereof, and 
cost thereof. 

Reply:  I  am  informed  by  the  National  Development  Unit  that  one  project,  namely  the 
"Diversion of Existing Sewer Pipes and Drainage Water at Roche Bois" was awarded to Onix 
Co. Ltd. on 22 December 2014 for a project value of Rs2.8 m., inclusive of VAT. The project 
comprised diversion of sewer main lines, water pipeline, as well as the construction of 1.5 metre 
wide reinforced concrete culvert across Abattoir Road. Major works have been completed since 
07 September 2015 and snagging is in progress. 

I am also informed that a "constat de lieu" was effected in the first instance, given that 
the  NDU  had  previously  awarded  contracts  well  beyond  its  budget  and  executing  capacity.  
Moreover, the NDU had to clear the outstanding claims by contractors involved and funds were, 
therefore, not available for new projects. 

For  the  current  Financial  Year,  to  circumvent  problems  encountered  previously,  the 
NDU,  in  consultation  with  the  relevant  Parliamentary  Private  Secretary  has  prepared  a  list  of 
projects to be implemented in Constituency No. 3.  The full list of projects is being tabled. 

 

EBENE – POLICE STATION 

(No.  B/665)  Mr  V.  Baloomoody  (Third  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues 
and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  Ebene,  he  will  state  if  he  will  consider 
requesting  the  Commissioner  of  Police  to  look  into  the  advisability  of  providing  for  a  Police 
Station thereat for enhanced security services. 

Reply: I am informed by the Commissioner of Police that the need for the setting up of a 
Police  Station  in  a  specific  locality  is  determined  by  a  number  of  factors,  including  the 
population  density  of  the  region;  the  prevailing  crime  rate;  the  extent  of  socio-economic  and 

 

134 

commercial  activities;  industrial  development  and  assets,  and  the  geographical  area  being 
covered by the nearest Police Stations. 

I  am  further  informed  that  the  region  of  Ebène  falls  under  the  policing  jurisdiction  of 
Rose  Hill  Police  Station.    Ebène  has  a  resident  population  of  2,000;  however,  around  15,000 
persons call at Ebène for work on a daily basis.  In view thereof, the region does not meet the 
criteria for a full-fledged Police Station. 

According to the Police, the majority of offences recorded for the region relate to road 
traffic  contraventions,  namely  speeding  and  illegal  parking.    In  this  respect,  Police  have 
intensified their operations targeting drivers contravening the Road Traffic Act.   

In  addition,  the  region  is  policed  by  the  Emergency  Response  Unit,  Divisional  CID, 
Divisional Support Unit, Divisional Traffic Unit, Police Bike Patrol, Police de L’Environnement 
and Anti-Drug and Smuggling Unit.  As such, Police do not envisage the setting up of a full-
fledged Police Station at Ebène for the time being. 

Nevertheless, a Police post rather than a full-fledged Police Station will be set up in 
Ebène  to  reinforce  the  existing  measures  being  implemented  to  curtail  offences  and  enhance 
security.    Existing  space  in  the  Cybertower  1  has  been  reallocated  by  the  Business  Parks  of 
Mauritius  Ltd.  in  order  to  accommodate  the  new  Police  Post  which  is  expected  to  become 
operational early next year. 

CEB - CHAIRPERSON - APPOINTMENT 

(No. B/681) Mr R. Bhagwan (First Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) asked 
the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
Chairperson of the Central Electricity Board, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from 
the Board, information as to the - 

(a) name of the incumbent thereof; 
(b) date of appointment thereof, and  
(c) terms and conditions of contract of employment thereof. 
Reply: Section 5 (1) (b) of the Central Electricity Board Act provides that the Chairman 
of the Central Electricity Board shall be appointed by the Minister, shall hold office for a term of 
three years and shall be eligible for re-appointment. 

 

135 

Section 5 (11) (b) further provides that the Chairman shall receive such remuneration as 
the Minister may determine.  Consequently, the matter is not a matter falling within the purview 
of the Board but falls solely under my responsibility. 

In answer to parts (a) and (b) of the question, in virtue of the powers vested in me under 
section  5  (1)  (b),  I  appointed  Mr.  Mootoosamy  Naidoo  to  be  the  Chairman  of  the  Central 
Electricity Board. This was on 09 April 2015. 

In answer to part (c) of the question, the Chairman of the Board is not an employee of the 
Board  so  that  the  question  of  a  contract  of  employment  does  not  arise.  He  is  in  receipt  of 
remuneration amounting to Rs108,000. He also receives a petrol allowance of Rs19,350.  

The CEB also puts at his disposal a car make Mercedes Benz Model E 250 registered in 
2012. The car has an engine capacity of 1796 cc. This remuneration package was fixed by me 
under the relevant provisions of the law.  

The House may wish to note that the remuneration and benefits of Mr. Naidoo are the 
same  as  those  of  his  predecessor  and  are  in  line  with  the  recommendations  contained  in  the 
Review of Salaries and Conditions of Service exercise effective as from 01 July 2013. 

 

OVERSEAS MISSIONS - MINISTERS & DELEGATION 

(No. B/682) Mr R. Bhagwan (First Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) asked 
the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the overseas missions 
effected by the hon. Ministers, since January 2015 to date, he will give a list thereof, indicating 
in each case the - 

(a) duration thereof and countries visited;  
(b) composition of the accompanying delegation thereof, and  
(c) amount of money paid out in terms of air tickets, per diem and other allowances. 
Reply:  The  information  requested  is  being  compiled  and  same  will  be  tabled  at  the 

earliest. 

MARITIME LABOUR CONVENTION 2006 - RATIFICATION 

(No. B/683) Mr S. Mohamed (First Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port Louis 
East) asked the Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, Shipping and Outer 

 

136 

Islands whether, in regard to the Maritime Labour Convention 2006 which was ratified by the 
Republic  of  Mauritius  on  30  May  2014,  he  will  state  where  matters  stand  as  to  the 
implementation thereof. 

Reply: I am informed that a gap analysis covering the requirements under the Maritime 

Labour Convention 2006 had been prepared and finalised in April 2014. 

On 16 April 2014, Mr G. Seegobin, former Superintendent of Shipping, was appointed 

Consultant to draft the Maritime Labour Convention Bill.   

Subsequently, a National Tripartite Workshop on the ratification of the Maritime Labour 
Convention  2006  was  organised  with  the  International  Labour  organisation  from  12-14  May 
2014.  

Furthermore,  during  the  period  of  April  to  June  2014,  seven  meetings  were  held  with 

representatives of relevant Ministries and the Consultant to discuss the first draft.  

A second draft was submitted by the Consultant on 14 January 2015 which was examined 

by my Ministry and circulated to relevant Ministries for their views and comments.  

A  meeting  was  held  on  05  April  2015  between  officers  of  my  Ministry  and  the 
Occupational  Safety  and  Health  Inspectorate  of  the  Ministry  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations 
Employment and Training to discuss issues related to the Occupational Safety and Health and 
Accident Prevention which had been included in the draft Bill. 

The Consultant submitted a third draft on 23 September 2015 and a meeting under the 
aegis of my Ministry with Consultant and Ministry of Social Security, National Solidarity and 
Institutional  Reforms  was  conducted  on  28  September  2015  to  finalise  the  section  relating  to 
Social Security. 

Technicians  of  my  Ministry  attended  two  meetings  of  the  Advisory  Council  for 
Occupational Safety and Health at the Ministry of Labour, Industrial Relations Employment and 
Training on 20 April and 05 October 2015.  The objective of the meetings were to discuss and 
give  clarifications  to  members  on  the  occupational  safety  and  health  part  of  the  proposed 
legislation.  

Once the third draft has been thoroughly examined by all the relevant stakeholders, it will 

be submitted to the State Law Office for final vetting before the end of the year. 

MARITIME TRAINING ACADEMY - TRAINERS/INSTRUCTORS 

137 

 
(No. B/684) Mr S. Mohamed (First Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port Louis 
East) asked the Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, Shipping and Outer 
Islands  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Maritime  Training  Academy  of  Mauritius,  he  will,  for  the 
benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to the number of – 

(a) trainers/instructors posted thereat;  
(b) persons trained thereat in 2015 in the field of safety, and  
(c) persons trained to work on cruise ships, over the period January 2015 to date. 
Reply: The Economic Mission Statement of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has highlighted 
the  creation  of  25,  000  jobs  in  the  Ocean  Economy  over  the  next  5  years,  out  of  which,  it is 
estimated that some 20,000 jobs will come from the Maritime Sector. 

The Maritime Sector is very promising in terms of job creation. According to information 
gathered  from  stakeholders,  there  is  a  potential  yearly  demand  for  some  5,000  job  seekers  to 
work onboard fishing vessels, cargo vessels, tankers and cruise/passenger vessels.  

In the  course of my intervention on Budget 2015-2016,  I  announced two major policy 

decisions in order to maximise employment opportunities in the Maritime Sector, namely - 

a.  the training capacity of the Mauritius Maritime Training Academy, presently the sole 
provider of training of seafarers, will be increased from 200 to 2000 yearly, that is, by 
ten-fold, and  

b. opening up the market of training of seafarers to allow private institutions to dispense 

approved courses so as to fill the training gap of 3,000 trainees yearly. 

Regarding part (a) of the question, I am informed that the number of trainers dispensing 
courses at the MMTA stands at 19 as at date, compared to 11 in 2014, that is, an increase of 72 
percent. 

Regarding part (b) and part (c) of the question, I would like to clarify for the benefit of 
the House that any person who would like to work on board cruise/passenger vessels would have 
to follow these courses - 

 
 
 
 

(a)  
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 

Basic Safety Training; 
Crowd Management; 
Crisis Management and Human Behaviour Training, and 
Proficiency in Security Awareness. 

 
The MMTA has, from January 2015 to date trained 524 persons in these courses, which 

138 

includes 426 in Basic Safety. 

The 426 persons who have followed the Basic Safety Training have also completed the 

other three courses, which now make them eligible to serve on cruise/passenger vessels. 
MINISTRIES/GOVERNMENT INSTITUTIONS - RECRUITMENT 

(No. B/685) Mr S. Mohamed (First Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port Louis 
East) asked the Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations,Employment and Training whether, in 
regard to the unemployed registered with his Ministry, he  will state – 

(a) the number thereof, and 
(b) the number of requests for the employment thereof received from other 
Ministries  and  Government  institutions  in  respect  of  vacancies  existing  thereat  since 

December 2014 to date, indicating the;  

(i)  number of vacancies concerned therewith, and  
(ii) 

number  thereof  who  have  been  employed  in  each  Ministry  or  Government 
institutions as a result thereof. 

Reply:  In regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed that, according to statistics 
available at the Employment Service of my Ministry, the total number of registered jobseekers at 
the end of August 2015 stood at 48,737. 

However, I wish to point out that registered jobseekers are classified by the Employment 
Service  in  two  categories,  namely  the  unemployed  jobseekers  who  are  not  in  gainful 
employment, and those who, though already in employment, are registered in search of a better 
job. 

Therefore,  at  the  end  of  August  this  year,  the  figures  for  registered  unemployed  were 

25,588 and for those in search of a better job were 23,149. 

In regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed that since December last year, my 
Ministry  has  received  17  requests  from  Ministries  and  other  Government  Bodies  for  list  of 
candidates for filling of 684 vacancies on their establishment. 

As  the  hon.  Member  is  fully  aware,  it  is  only  after  the  selection  exercise  has  been 
completed  by  the  organisations  concerned  that  the  outcome  of  the  selection  process  are 

 

139 

communicated to the Employment Service of my Ministry.  I am given to understand that the 
selection process is underway. 

NATIONAL INSURANCE COMPANY - POLICY HOLDERS - PAYMENT 

(No.  B/698)  Mr  V.  Baloomoody  (Third  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked the Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms, Minister 
of  Technology,  Communication  and  Innovation  whether,  in  regard  to  the  former  British 
American  Insurance  Co.  (Mtius)  Ltd.,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the 
National  Insurance  Company,  information  as  to  the  number  of  life  insurance  policyholders 
thereof who have been paid by the Company following the maturity of their respective policy. 

Reply: The National Insurance Co. Ltd (NIC) started operations on 07 August 2015 with 
the transfer of undertaking from BAI Co. (Mtius) Ltd to NIC. Since then, a total of 407 regular 
premium life insurance policies fell due for maturity payments for a total amount of Rs49.6 m. 

I am informed by the National Insurance Co. Ltd that as at date, a total of Rs49.1 m. has 

been paid representing 395 policies. Therefore, the payout rate is 98%. 

I  am  further  informed  that  the  remaining  12  policies  could  not  be  paid,  as  a  result  of 
missing documentation from the policyholders (relating to bank  account  number not specified 
and missing signature from policyholders on the maturity forms). 

Payments to the 12 policies having reached maturity will be effected immediately upon 

receipts of the outstanding documentation. 

NINE YEAR SCHOOLING PROJECT - IMPLEMENTATION 

(No. B/699) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific  Research 
whether, in regard to the Nine Year Schooling Project, she will state – 

(a) if the present standards of the infrastructure at the primary and secondary levels meet the 

requirements thereof, and  

(b) the total costs of implementation thereof. 

Reply:  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  the  implementation  of  the  nine  year  basic 
continuous  schooling  project  will  necessitate  the  adaptation  and  upgrading  of  the  existing 
infrastructure as well as the provision of additional facilities such that the teaching and learning 
takes place in a more conducive environment. 

 

140 

Necessary action is being initiated to ensure that the infrastructure is well adapted for the 
new integrated curricular activities to take place in the best possible conditions in line with the 
new pedagogical approaches as spelt out in the NYS framework. We have to reckon with the fact 
that the NYS Project provides, inter alia, for the setting up of Academies where teaching and 
learning  would  take  place  in  a  co-ed  environment  and  also  for  new  technical  and  vocational 
pathways. 

We  are  conscious  of  the  fact  that  the  school  infrastructure  would  require  investment  at 

three levels, namely - 

(i)  improvement to existing school buildings; 
(ii)  adaptation of physical infrastructure as per the needs for a co-ed environment; and 
(iii) development of a proper ICT Infrastructure (upgrading and procurement). 
In the context of the implementation of this project, my Ministry has set up eight working 
groups to deal with key areas of intervention, one of which is specifically addressing the issue of 
ICT and Infrastructure. In fact, this working group is elaborating an implementation plan which 
will come forward with immediate, short-term and long-term measures while keeping in view of 
the fact that - 

(i) 

(ii) 

the first cohort of pupils that will sit for the Primary School Achievement Certificate 
(PSAC) at the end of Grade 6 in 2017 will transit to Grade 7 in Regional Schools as 
from January 2018;  
and this same cohort will take the National Certificate of Education at end of Grade 9 
in 2020 prior to moving to Grade 10 in 2021. 

With  regard  to  the  Primary  level,  I  wish  to  point  out  that  there  is  a  Primary  School 
Renewal Project wherein every year, primary schools infrastructures requiring upgrading works 
and reconstruction of new building blocks are undertaken on a priority needs basis. 

As far as the Secondary sector is concerned, there is already provision under the Ministry’s 
budget for regular upgrading, extension and construction of schools. I must point out that the last 
phase  of  infrastructural  works  pertaining  to  construction  of  gymnasium  and  playfields  in  the 
secondary schools are nearing completion.  

In  addition,  for  the  Private  Secondary  Schools,  a  Technical  Working  Group  is  currently 
reviewing the current comprehensive grant formula which includes provision of grants for use of 
infrastructure  in  private  schools.  I  wish  also  to  stress  that  in  the  NYS  Project,  infrastructural 

 

141 

improvement  and  development  will  also  cover  ZEP  schools  as  well  as  Integrated  Units  with 
Special Education Needs (SEN) children. 

All  infrastructural  adjustments/improvements  will  be  primarilybeffected  in  a  phased 

manner, without affecting the prevailing learning conditions in schools. 

As  regards  part  (b),  the  total  cost  implications  are  being  worked  out  not  only  for  the 
infrastructure  but  also  for  the  whole  NYS  Project  and  as  soon  as  the  project  costs  would  be 
finalized, I would keep the House informed of the provisions to be made for the project. 

I wish to reassure the House that with the investment planning which is under way and the 
current  appropriation  under  the  Primary  School  Renewal  Project  (PSRP)  and  Public  Sector 
Investment  Programme  (PSIP),  which  may  be  supplemented,  the  implementation  of  this 
infrastructure component of the NYS will be on target. 

CWA- PRIVATISATION 

(No.  B/700)  Mr  V.  Baloomoody  (Third  Member  for  G.R.N.W  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to the 
Central Water Authority, he will state if Government is proposing the privatization thereof and, 
if so, indicate if consultations have been held with all the stakeholders concerned therewith. 

(Vide Reply to PQ No. B/690) 

PUBLIC HOSPITALS  & PRIVATE CLINICS – CHILDBIRTH - DELIVERIES 
(No. B/701) Dr. Z. Joomaye (Second Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to childbirth, he will state the 
number  thereof,  which  have  taken  place  in  public  hospitals,  since  January  2014  to  December 
2014, through – 

(a) normal delivery, and 
(b) delivery by ceasarean section. 

Reply: I would like to reply to Parliamentary Questions B/701 and B/702 together as they 

relate to the same subject matter. 

For  the  year  2014  there  has  been  a  total  of  9,304  deliveries  in  public  hospitals.  The 
number  of  normal  delivery  is  4,980  and  delivery  by  Caesarean  Section  is  4,324,  thus 
representing of 46.5% of Caesarean Section on total deliveries. 

142 

 
For private clinics the total number of deliveries is 3,446. The number of normal delivery 
is 1,496 and delivery by Caesarean Section is 1,950, thus representing of 56.6% of Caesarean 
Section on total deliveries. 

PRIVATE CLINICS – CHILDBIRTH - DELIVERIES 

(No. B/702) Dr. Z. Joomaye (Second Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to childbirth, he will, for the 
benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  information  as  to the  number  thereof,  which  have  taken  place  in 
private clinics, since January 2014 to December 2014, through –  

(a) normal delivery, and  
(b) delivery by ceasarean section. 

(Vide reply to PQ No. B/701) 

 

