 

 

No. 07 of 2015 

1 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

  

 

FIRST SESSION 

THURSDAY 05 MARCH 2015 

 

 

2 

CONTENTS 

QUESTION (Oral) 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER 

MOTIONS 

MATTER OF PRIVILEGE 

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC)) 

Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, 

KCMG, QC  

Hon. Charles Gaëtan Xavier-Luc Duval, 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 

GCSK  

Communications 

Hon. Showkutally Soodhun 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public 

Utilities 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo 

Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 
Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Minister of Social Integration and Economic 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Empowerment 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 

Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and 

Sinatambou 

International Trade 

Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon. Mrs Marie-Aurore Marie-Joyce 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister of Gender Equality, Child Development and 

Perraud 

Family Welfare 

Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain 

Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and 

Institutional Reforms 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 

 

4 

Institutions 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 

Shipping and Outer Islands 

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, 

Minister of Environment, Sustainable Development and 

QPM 

Disaster and Beach Management  

Hon. Marie Roland Alain Wong Yen             Minister of Civil Service and Administrative  

Cheong, MSK 

 

 

 

       Reforms 

Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn                   Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, 

Employment and Training 

 

 

 

5 

 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

 
Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

           Clerk Assistant 

 

 Hansard Editor 

 Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

 

Navin 

(Temporary  

Gopall, 
Mr 
Transfer to RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Badal, Mr Ramesh 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 07 of 2015 

 

Sitting of 05 March 2015 

 

The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.50 a.m. 

 

 

The National Anthem was played 

 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

 

 

 

7 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Members,  I  wish  to  apologise  for  the  delay  in  starting  the 
business  of  the  day  due  to  an  administrative  and  technical  problem.  Hon.  Leader  of  the 
Opposition! 

 

ORAL ANSWER TO QUESTION 

MINISTER OF TECHNOLOGY, MINISTER OF FINANCIAL SERVICES, 
ATTORNEY GENERAL/Mr D. G. & DUFRY LTD REPRESENTATIVES - 

MEETING 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Rt. 
hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  discussions  allegedly  having  taken 
place recently between, on the one hand, the hon. Minister of Technology, Communication 
and Innovation, the hon. Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional 
Reforms and the hon. the Attorney General and Mr D. G., and the representatives of Dufry 
Ltd., the overseas supplier of Mauritius Duty Free Paradise Ltd., on the other hand, he will 
state if he has confirmed with the said Ministers whether same have indeed taken place and, 
if so, indicate –  

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

the content of the discussions;  

the involvement, if any, of Mr D. G. in the said discussions, and 

if the two representatives of Dufry Ltd. have been prevented from leaving 
Mauritius. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, as the hon. Leader of the Opposition is aware, 
this Government has been elected with a clear mandate to investigate into malpractices and 
irregularities with regard to all major Government contracts which have been entered into by 
the previous regime. 

In fact, the hon. Leader of the Opposition, himself, has pledged to the Nation that he 
would  clean  such  “pourriture”,  and  to  clean  such  “pourriture”  and  to  give  him  a  helping 
hand, he got me out of Réduit. 

The  people  of  Mauritius  has  witnessed  that  this  Government  has  already  unveiled 
serious  malpractices  and  irregularities  in  many  quarters,  including  major  Government 
contracts like the one with Betamax, Neo Town, Jin Fei and Terre Rouge-Verdun. 

 

8 

A new Ministry of  Financial Services,  Good Governance and  Institutional Reforms 
has been set up, and accountability and adherence to the principles of good governance are 
clearly high on the agenda of this Government. 

The  newly  created  Ministry  has  been  looking  into  processes  and  procedures  in  the 

awarding and performance of major contracts. 

As  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  is  also  aware,  a  lot  has  been  said  about  the 
Mauritius Duty Free Paradise Ltd. The House will recall incriminating statements made in 
relation to procurement contracts for goods and services. 

The second Member of Moka-Quartier Militaire, Hon. P. Jugnauth, had reported the 
matter to the Police in January 2013, but nothing had been done under the previous regime. 
This Government will certainly not turn a blind eye to such malpractices. 

Currently,  the  Mauritius  Duty  Free  Paradise  Ltd  falls  under  the  aegis  of  the  Prime 
Minister’s  Office.  This  was  not  always  the  case,  as  the  former  Prime  Minister  decided  to 
remove the Mauritius Duty Free Paradise Ltd from the portfolio of Ministry of Finance and 
Economic Development and brought it under his aegis. 

My  Office,  in  collaboration  with  the  Ministry  of  Financial  Services,  Good 
Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms,  started  a  thorough  review  of  the  activities  of  the 
MDFP and two major contracts which have been signed with a foreign supplier, Dufry A. G., 
namely one exclusive supply contract for  goods  to be sold at the shops of Mauritius Duty 
Free Paradise Ltd in Mauritius and Rodrigues and a Management Service Agreement also for 
more than one billion rupees. 

It is also worth mentioning that the Management Services Agreement provides that 

the CEO of MDFP is a representative of Dufry A. G. 

The Office of the Attorney General also collaborated in the review being conducted. 

I was personally being kept informed of all the developments relating to the ongoing 
review,  including  meetings  and  discussions  which  were  being  held  with  relevant 
stakeholders, and their outcomes. 

With regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed that, at one stage during the 
review, several documents were provided by Mr D. Gooljaury with regard to another contract 
which had been signed between the supplier Dufry A. G. and a company called Frydu which 
had been incorporated in Switzerland. 

 

9 

Mr  D.  Gooljaury  had  provided  several  emails  exchanged  between  the  top 
management of Dufry A. G. in Switzerland, Mrs Nandanee Soornack, Mr Laurent Obadia, a 
lawyer in Switzerland called Alexander Schwartz and himself relating to negotiations of the 
setting up of a structure for the payment of commissions through the creation of an agency 
sales agreement. 

A share purchase agreement was also provided, which showed that the shareholders 
of  Frydu  were  Mrs  Nandanee  Soornack  and  D.  Gooljaury  had  transferred  shares  to  a 
company called Wigam Holdings Ltd set up in Nicosia, Cyprus. 

A  meeting  was  scheduled  at  the  Prime  Minister’s  Office  on  Monday  16  February 
2015 at 15 hours in the office of Secretary for Home Affairs, at which a senior member of 
Dufry A. G. top management from Switzerland and the local CEO, Mr Simo Carevic, had 
been convened. However, the senior member of top management did not turn up and instead 
delegated a junior member from his team, who was dispatched from Tunisia, Africa. 

At that meeting, several questions were put to them, for which they could not provide 

any explanation. 

Later, on the same day, the two representatives of Dufry A. G., who were apparently 
having dinner with Mr D. Gooljaury, asked for a meeting that same evening, as Mr Galet was 
flying out the next day.  Accordingly, a meeting was held at the Attorney General’s residence 
where his colleagues and himself were present, and the two representatives agreed to meet at 
the Attorney General’s residence. 

The  discussions  revolved  around  full  and  frank  disclosure  of  all  documents  from 
Dufry A. G. to the Government of Mauritius regarding the agency sales agreement which had 
been signed by Frydu and the transfers of shares to Wigam Holdings Ltd. 

With  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  Mr  D.  Gooljaury  had  provided  documents 
relating to transactions which had taken place prior to 2013, when he was apparently kicked 
out of the structure when part of the ownership was transferred to Wigam Holdings Ltd. 

Mr  D.  Gooljaury  asked  the  representatives  of  Dufry  A.  G.  to  provide  to  the 
Government  of  Mauritius  all  other  documents  from  October  2013  to  date.  Both 
representatives  of  Dufry  A.  G.  could  not  provide  same,  and  had  to  contact  several 
representatives  of  their  higher  management  to  obtain  relevant  information  regarding  the 
structure of Dufry A. G., Frydu and Wigam Holdings Ltd post October 2013. 

 

10 

With regard to part (c) of the question, as no information or email were available for 
potential suspected offence that have been committed, the representatives of the Dufry A.G. 
were informed that the authorities had to be informed of the matter, which was done. 

I am informed by the Commissioner of Police that on Tuesday 17 February 2015, an 
objection to departure was lodged to prevent the two representatives from Dufry A.G. from 
leaving Mauritius. Subsequently, Senior Management of Dufry Ltd in Switzerland provided 
to Government a number of documents evidencing the following - 

(1) 

(2) 

with regard to the contract between the Mauritius Duty Free Paradise (MDFP) 
and its supplier, Dufry Travel Retail AG, it has come to light that substantial 
commissions  have  been  paid  by  Dufry  in  Switzerland  to  a  company  called 
Frydu, which has been set up in Switzerland as recipient of commissions of 
4.2% of net sales of MDFP. 

Frydu  was  initially  50%  owned  by  Nandanee  Soornack  and  D.  Gooljaury, 
each. A Swiss Bank a/c with VP Bank (Schweiz) AG in Zurich was opened 
for  Frydu  to  receive  commissions  on  the  supply  contract  with  MDFP  as 
follows - 

• 

• 

• 

On 24 October 2012, EUR 431,000.  

On 02 May 2013, EUR 211,351. 

On 21 October 2013, EUR 464,179. 

At  that  stage,  commissions  paid  on  the  MDFP  supply  contract  amounts  to  EUR 

1,106,530. 

Madam  Speaker,  on  12  October  2013,  Nandanee  Soornack  and  D.  Gooljaury,  then 
transferred their shareholding in Frydu to a company incorporated in Cyprus called Wigam 
Holding Ltd, which was apparently controlled and managed by an Irish national, resident in 
the UK. 

A  Share  Purchase  Agreement  dated  12  October  2013  was  signed  by  Nandanee 
Soornack  and  D. Gooljaury  to  change  the  ownership  structure  of  Frydu  apparently  to 
accommodate one Laurent Obadia and Wigam Holdings Ltd. Nevertheless, Frydu continued 
to receive commissions from Dufry Travel Retail AG in the Swiss bank account during the 
year 2014, as follows - 

 

• 

• 

11 

On 06 February 2014, an amount of EUR 389,558 was paid to VP Bank in 
Zurich,  but  then  Frydu's  bank  account  was  changed  to  another  bank  in 
Geneva, called Union Bancaire Privée, UBP SA, Rue du Rhone, Geneva, and 

On  16  July  2014,  commissions  of  EUR  337,134  were  received  in  the  new 
bank account. 

Madam Speaker, on 16 January 2015, a further amount of EUR 296,466 representing 

4.2% of net sales of Mauritius Duty Free Paradise Ltd was paid to Frydu. 

In total, Madam Speaker, Dufry has to date paid commissions of EUR 2,129,688 to 

Frydu on the supply contract only with Mauritius Duty Free Paradise Ltd. 

Madam Speaker, the Government will have no stone unturned to clean up the country. 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, is the hon. Prime Minister seriously telling us that it 
was proper for three Ministers in the middle of the night and until 2.00 a.m. to respond to a 
request from Mr Gooljaury for him to bring these two gentlemen to the Attorney General’s 
residence in Quatre Bornes, whereas Mr Gooljaury should himself have been arrested, as we 
all know, in the Roches Noires bungalow case. Is the hon. Prime Minister telling us that this 
was proper? 

The Prime Minister: Well, since at least one was to leave or both were leaving, and 
since the three Ministers were having a dinner at the place of the Attorney General and they 
wanted to have all relevant documents, I do not consider it improper. I think they were fully 
justified to do what they have done. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker,… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! Order, please! Please, allow the hon. Leader of the 

Opposition to ask his question. Hon. Jhugroo, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger: Zot pé faire expré pou pas pose question! The Prime Minister…  

Who said that? Madam Speaker, did you hear? 

(Interruptions) 

 

12 

Madam  Speaker:  I  did.  Hon.  Jhugroo,  could  you,  please  withdraw  what  you  just 

said. The mot ‘volere’ is unparliamentary. 

Hon. Jhugroo, I am asking you to withdraw the word! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger: Or if it was somebody else, he should be, at least, decent… 

Mr Hurreeram: I withdraw! 

Mr Bérenger: Mais ratt target, pas mo la faute! 

(Interruptions) 

So,  it  is  confirmed  that  the  three  Ministers  were  there,  that  these  two  gentlemen  came, 
proudly escorted by Mr Gooljaury. This is confirmed. Can the hon. Prime Minister tell me 
how, therefore, yesterday - en direct à la télévision - the hon. Minister for Good Governance 
said he was not present, because he was not in Mauritius, he was with the Queen in London? 

(Interruptions) 

He said that! It is recorded. It is on ION News. Shame! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No cross-talking, please! 

Mr Bérenger: If they want, go to ION News!  Last night, we heard him replying to 

that effect. 

(Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister: I did hear him, but there must have been some confusion about 
the date on which they met, because it is a fact that the hon. Member was absent for some 
time from the country. 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, he said that he was not in Mauritius when the dinner 
took place on 16 February.  Can I, therefore, ask the hon. Prime Minister whether he can tell 
us on what dates the hon. Minister was out of Mauritius and back? 

The Prime Minister:  He was absent from 21 February to 07 March. 

Mr Bérenger: The dinner took place on 16. 

(Interruptions) 

 

13 

The Prime Minister:  03 March ! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger: Therefore, it is established… 

The Prime Minister: Sorry, I also understand that hon. Minister Bhadain never said 

what is being alleged. 

Mr Bérenger: It is easy to obtain a recording from ION News last night. Easy! And, 

therefore, it is established that the Minister was in Mauritius, was at that dinner. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  that  I  have  already  said,  they  were  present,  they  were 

there and for what purpose. 

(Interruptions) 

What are we arguing about, Madam Speaker? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger: I invite the hon. Prime Minister to have his services, and if required, 

that we, Members, should hear the hon. Minister saying that last night. 

(Interruptions) 

Of course, they were there, including ION News, Madam Speaker! Is the hon. Prime Minister 
aware that on 26 February these two representatives sworn an affidavit before the Supreme 
Court here in Mauritius, damning, according to them? Has the hon. Prime Minister attempted 
to obtain a copy of that affidavit? 

The Prime Minister:  No, I have not got anything of that sort.  I have read on the 

papers that they have sworn affidavits, but how much can you rely on their affidavits? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger:  Shut up!   

The information is also, Madam Speaker… 

(Interruptions) 

… that the whole thing was recorded; the whole dinner, the whole conversation was recorded 
and it is being held by the firm concerned.  Can I ask the hon. Prime Minister – since we are 
talking about good governance - whether he will request both a copy of the affidavit and from 
the company concerned, a copy of the recorded conversations during the whole evening? 

 

14 

(Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister:  I will be pleased to have them.  I hope people concerned will 

send them to me. 

Mr Bérenger:  It was published in the press that this dinner took place and so on, 
very serious innuendoes, can I know whether the Police took statements from Mr Gooljaury, 
the three Ministers concerned, and the paper that published that, the ‘Weekend’ of 01 March 
2015? 

The Prime Minister: I cannot answer that because I have not got the information. 

Mr  Bérenger:    Can  we  know  whether  the  Police  has  impounded  phones  because, 
according  to  my  information,  Mr  Gooljaury  phoned  the  Ministers  before  bringing  the  two 
gentlemen in?  Has the Police impounded the phones of, especially Mr Gooljaury, but of the 
Ministers also?  

(Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister:  I am not aware of this. 

Mr Bérenger:  Is the hon. Prime Minister aware that during those conversations as 

per the affidavit, it was offered…. 

Madam Speaker, can I proceed? 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Bhadain, please don’t interrupt! 

Mr Bérenger:  So, Madam Speaker, will the hon. Prime Minister be surprised that 
according to the other side - that is why it is important that we get the recordings and the 
affidavit  –  dirty  business  was  proposed  to  them  in  exchange  for  information  against  the 
former Prime Minister and according to them … 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Order, please! 

Mr Bérenger:  … it was suggested by one of the three … 

 

15 

(Interruptions) 

…that they should enjoy the company of women and girls in Mauritius? 

(Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister:  I have no trust whatsoever in those dirty rotten fellows. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger:  It is good to hear, but will the hon. Prime Minister go to the bottom of 

the whole thing, request copies of both the affidavit and the recordings? 

The Prime Minister:  I just answered that! 

Mr Bérenger:  The hon. Prime Minister passes judgment before he hears witnesses. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, as far as Mr Gooljaury is concerned, it has been confirmed, I think, that the 
dinner took place, that he phoned and so on; so, can I insist at least his phone - and later on I 
am  given  to  understand  he  phoned  the  Police  also  in  that  affair,  before  turning  up  at  the 
airport on the day these two gentlemen left.  Has the Police or is the Police going to interview 
Mr Gooljaury, impound his phones and find out the truth about that? 

The Prime Minister:  I have no information about that. 

Mr Bérenger:  I take it that the hon. Prime Minister has no information that he was at 

the airport also on the day that these gentlemen left.  This also! 

The Prime Minister: How can I know whether they were there or elsewhere? 

Mr Bérenger:  The hon. Prime Minister could have asked his Chief Executive since 

apparently he had a meeting with them and so on. 

(Interruptions) 

Palabres! Palabres! This is the biggest shame that can fall on the country! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order, please! 

Order, please! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

Order, please! 

16 

(Interruptions) 

If there is no order, I will have to suspend the session!  

Order, please! 

Order!  

Order! 

(Interruptions) 

 (Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Bérenger:    Of  course,  Madam  Speaker,  we  are  absolutely  in  favour  of  every 
possible inquiry by the proper persons, not in the middle of the night by Ministers and Mr 
Gooljaury.  We are totally in favour of a full inquiry on the transaction of the former Prime 
Minister with Mauritius Duty Free Paradise, but this should not be a pretext for that kind! 

(Interruptions) 

Can  I  have  some  silence,  Madam  Speaker!  You  have  put  the  hon.  Member  to  order!  You 
have called him to order! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Okay, I have asked all hon. Members not to lose the time of the 
House.  Allow the hon. Leader of the Opposition to ask his question and allow the hon. Prime 
Minister to reply to his question.  

Mr Bérenger:  It has been confirmed that interdiction to departure was lodged against 
the two employees of the firm concerned.  Has the hon. Prime Minister checked who talked 
to  the  Police  for  that  to  be  lifted,  whether  it  was  not  one  of  the  three  Ministers  plus  Mr 
Gooljaury? 

The Prime Minister:  The only fact that I know is that Police took certain action. 

Mr  Bérenger:    You  don’t  want  to  know,  obviously!    Can  I  know  on  that  score 
whether any kind of representation has been made by the French Embassy concerning this 
interdiction  to  departure  and  so  on  and  we  have  all  learned  about  the  visit  by  the  French 
Ambassador to the Ag. Commissioner of Police at 08.00 in the morning? 

 

17 

The Prime Minister:  Well, I am not aware of this.  Neither the Ambassador nor the 

Commissioner has talked to me about that.  

Mr  Bérenger:    Okay!  My  last  question,  Madam  Speaker,  will  be:  being  given  the 
urgent  need  to  establish  the  full  truth,  d’aller  au  fond  de  l’affaire,  will  the  hon.  Prime 
Minister be prepared to invite these two representatives back to Mauritius on a guarantee of 
both their security and their immunity to come and to spell out their part of the truth being 
given that the three Ministers concerned and Mr Gooljaury are already here available to the 
Police? 

(Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister:  Well, I must say one thing… 

Madam Speaker:  Order! 

Order, please!  

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Order, please!  The Rt. hon. Prime Minister is replying. 

(Interruptions) 

Can I call you to order, hon. Bhadain!  The Rt. hon. Prime Minister is replying; allow him to 
reply!  

The Prime Minister:  I must make one thing very clear, Madam Speaker, the three 
Ministers had not been investigating.  Having got certain information, they simply wanted to 
help so that the necessary document and evidence can be made available to the Police.  That 
was the main concern and all the rest that the hon. Leader of the Opposition is speaking about 
is all superfluous. 

Madam Speaker:  Okay, no question!  

 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S. O. 10 (2) 

 

18 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, I move that all the business on today’s Order 

Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun) rose 

and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

 

(12.18 p.m.) 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER 

CT POWER PROJECT - LETTER OF COMFORT 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 

Collendavelloo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to make a statement.   

In  answer  to  the  Private  Notice  Question  of  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  on 
Tuesday  03  March  2015,  I  stated  that  my  Ministry  had  not  received  the  letter  of  comfort 
which CT Power had been asked to provide.  

Yesterday,  04  March  at  14.36  hours,  an  email  was  received  from  one  Dato 

Subramaniam reading as follows –  

“Dear, Sir, 

I refer to media reports on your response to the Public Notice Question on CT Power 
Project at Parliament yesterday. 

I  believe that  you had somehow not been informed that we had sent  a  copy  of the 
“Letter of Comfort” to the Ministry of Finance on 27 February 2015 and hence your 
response. 

We wish to correct the position and are pleased to advise you accordingly in letter as 
attached. 

I thank you for your kind support. 

Regards 

Dato M. Subramaniam” 

That email included a letter from Dato Subramaniam informing me that CT Power had, on 27 
February  last,  delivered  to  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  a  letter  of  comfort  alleged  to  be  in 

 

19 

compliance with Condition 15 of the EIA licence delivered to CT Power. I am going to table 
a copy of that letter. 

Attached  to  that  email  was  a  document  alleged  to  amount  to  a  “letter  of  comfort” 

emanating from a company called “Avendus Capital (UK) Private Limited”. 

I have consulted my colleague, the Minister of Finance who agrees that this letter is 

not a letter of comfort as required by Government. 

I have considered the letter from Avendus and I accordingly see no reason to alter the 
views  I  expressed  in  my  reply  to  the  Private  Notice  Question  of  the  hon.  Leader  of  the 
Opposition. 

I  have  to  stress  that,  at  the  time  I  gave  my  reply  to  the  Private  Notice  Question, 
neither  my  colleague  the  Minister  of  Finance  nor  myself  had  cognizance  of  that 
correspondence. I place on the Table of the Assembly a copy of the whole correspondence 
including the alleged letter of comfort. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! Hon. Bhagwan, please! 

 

PUBLIC BILL 

Second Reading 

THE FINANCE AND AUDIT (AMENDMENT) BILL 

(No. I of 2015) 

Order for Second reading read. 

The Minister of Finance and Economic Development (Mr S. Lutchmeenaraidoo): 
Madam Speaker, I move that the Finance and Audit (Amendment) Bill (No. I of 2015) be 
read a second time. 

The object of the Bill is to provide for – 

(a) 

(b) 

a  simplification  of  the  annual  estimates  of  revenue  and  expenditure,  both 
recurrent and capital, in respect of the services of the Government; 

the  appropriation  of  the  estimated  financial  requirements,  by  vote  of 
expenditure instead of by programme, and 

 

20 

(c) 

a change in Government financial year from calendar year to a period of 12 
months ending 30 June. 

In  the  Bill  we  are  presenting  to  the  House  today,  we  are  bringing  a  number  of 
amendments to the Finance and Audit Act before the budget to simplify the process of annual 
appropriation  of  budgetary  resources,  make  the  Estimates  documentation  much  simpler, 
clearer and more user-friendly.  We are also making provisions for the use of public funds. 

The Programme-Based Budget (PBB) Estimates in its current format has proved to be 
a document that is unnecessarily complicated not to say opaque for Members of the National 
Assembly and the public at large making the appropriation process at the National Assembly 
tedious and laborious. 

Madam Speaker, let me re-assure the House that the changes we are bringing, while 
simplifying  the  whole  process  will  adhere  fully  to  the  principles  of  a  modern  and 
performance-based budgeting approach. 

The Budget Estimates will continue to be presented in a 3-year rolling Macro Fiscal 

Framework and a Medium Term Expenditure Framework. 

There will continue to be a full disclosure of information on the financial resources 
being appropriated in relation to all the services of Government in the Budget. The details of 
expenditure will continue to be set out under each Vote of Expenditure in terms of sub-heads 
and  items  of  expenditure  and  the  House  will  continue  to  have  full  opportunity  to  put 
questions on their use at the level of the Committee of Supply. 

Appropriation  will  continue  to  be  for  a  total  sum  that  integrates  both  recurrent 

expenditure and capital expenditure. 

I should stress that all along my Ministry has had consultations with the IMF - in fact, 
a  delegation  was  here  last  week  with  whom  we  had  discussions  and  we  had  a  consensus 
reached on what I am just announcing - and other Development Partners were consulted also 
and we have taken into account their comments and observations. 

I would like to highlight the main provisions of the Bill. 

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for a definition of the term “head of expenditure” so as 
to harmonise with the term ‘vote of expenditure’ contained in the Standing Orders and Rules 
of the National Assembly. 

 

21 

Clause  3  also  provides  for  a  definition  of  the  term  “department”  for  budgeting 
purposes.  It can include a Ministry, a Government Department and the Centralised Services 
of Government. 

The  Budget  Estimates  will  now  be  presented  by  Vote  of  Expenditure  for  each 
department  and  the  sums  will  be  appropriated  by  the  National  Assembly  by  Votes  of 
Expenditure under a new budget format. 

The period of October to December has proved to be inconvenient and hectic for both 
Parliament  as  well  as  the  public  and  private  sectors  regarding  the  conduct  of  the  Budget 
exercise, and the enactment of the Appropriation Bill and the Finance Bill.  In addition, the 
requirement to close financial accounts on 31 December, on the eve of New Year, has been 
putting a lot of pressure on Government administration. Accordingly, Clause 4 provides for 
restoring the definition  of financial  year to  ‘a period of 12 months ending 30 June’.  This 
change will take effect on 01 January 2015. 

To  ensure  a  smooth  transition,  I  am  proposing  to  present  simultaneously  two 
Appropriation Bills together with their Budget Estimates: one covering the 6 months period 
of 01 January to 30 June 2015; and the second one covering the 12 months period of 01 July 
2015 to 30 June 2016. 

I would like now to explain the other provisions of the Bill. 

Clause  5  provides  for  the  possibility  of  carry-over  of  capital  expenditure  in  the 
context of our gradual move from cash accounting to accrual basis accounting in the Public 
Sector. 

Clause 6 provides for an alignment of the ‘Vote on Account’ provision in the Finance 
and Audit Act with those of the Constitution.  Thus, the maximum period of vote on account 
will be raised from 4 months to 6 months and the limit of expenditure from one-third to one-
half of previous year’s budget. 

Clause 7 provides for every Ministry or Department to submit a yearly report on their 
performance as well as its intended strategic direction in respect of the next three years. This 
will contribute to better performance management, better reporting and greater transparency 
in the Public Sector.  In fact and in essence, we are moving away from a Programme-Based 
Budgeting approach to a more Performance-Based Budgeting approach. 

 

22 

Clause 9 provides for exclusion from the ceiling of Advances of car loans to public 
officers as per the PRB entitlements and which are repayable over a period of five to seven 
years whereas Advances should normally be cleared within a period of one year only. 

Clause  11  specifically  empowers  the  Minister  of  Finance  to  issue  financial 
instructions for the making of virement of funds.  Previously, the authority of the Minister of 
Finance  in  respect  of  reallocation/virement  was  specified  in  the  Financial  Management 
Manual. 

Since the appropriation as from fiscal year 2015 will be made by Vote of Expenditure 
instead of by Programmes, the Supplementary Appropriation Bill for fiscal years 2013 and 
2014 will likewise be made by Vote of Expenditure. Provision to that effect has been made in 
Clause 14 of the draft Bill. 

Clause 17 provides for consequential amendments to the Local Government Act, the 
Rodrigues Regional Assembly Act, the Statutory Bodies (Accounts and Audit) Act and the 
Bank  of  Mauritius  Act.    However,  since  a  Municipal  Council,  a  District  Council  and  the 
Rodrigues Regional Assembly have already presented their 2015 Budget, the change in the 
financial year for them will take effect on 01 January 2016. 

I should mention that the Executive Council of the Rodrigues Regional Assembly has 
given its agreement in principle to the inclusion of the proposed amendments to the RRA Act 
in this Bill. 

The change in financial year will have to be accompanied by a number of adjustments 
in many other areas.  These are being studied and discussed with the relevant stakeholders in 
order to minimise any inconveniences. 

In respect of personal income tax, it is proposed to align the tax year with the new 
financial  year.  Accordingly,  there  will  be  exceptionally  two  income  tax  returns  during  the 
year 2015.  The first one will be the normal income tax return to be submitted by 31st March 
and the second one to be submitted by 30th September 2015 to cover the six months income 
for  the  period  January  to  June  2015.    Thereafter,  by  every  30th  September  the  annual  tax 
return will have to be submitted.  

Concerning corporate tax, companies will continue to submit their annual income tax 

returns 6 months after the close of their accounting year as at present. 

 

23 

Madam Speaker, hon. Members will note that following the enactment of the Finance 
and Audit (Amendment) Bill, the Standing Orders and Rules of the Assembly will have to be 
amended  accordingly.    In  this  respect,  the  hon.  Prime  Minister  will  move  a  motion  to  the 
House  for  the  Standing  Orders  Committee  to  look  into  the  provisions  relating  to  the 
procedures in connection with the Appropriation Bill.  

I  would  like  to  conclude  by  emphasising  that  the  amendments  to  the  Finance  and 
Audit Act are not only  simplifying the estimates and the process of  appropriation but will 
also  contribute  to  promote  accountability  and  transparency  in  the  management  of  public 
money. 

With these remarks, Madam Speaker, I commend the Bill to the House. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 

Collendavelloo) rose and seconded. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

 

(12.30 p.m.) 

The  Leader  of  the  Opposition  (Mr  P.  Bérenger):  Madam  Speaker,  as  the  hon. 
Minister  of  Finance  has  pointed  out,  there  are  two  main  issues  here,  one,  giving  up  on 
programme budgeting and secondly, going back to a financial  year that ends at the end of 
June every year instead of at the end of December. These are the two main issues and I will 
offer a few comments thereon, with your permission, Madam Speaker. 

In fact, the hon. Minister has tried to oppose programme budgeting and performance 
budgeting. This is not very serious! We all know that performance budgeting is one step or is 
supposed to be one step in the direction of programme budgeting. Programme budgeting well 
prepared,  well  done,  well  administered,  is  the  last  stage  on  the  way  to  more  and  more 
performance budgeting. So, it is not very serious to oppose one to the other.  

As far as we are concerned, in Government - I am sure the hon. Prime Minister will 
remember - in 2002-2003 in Government together, we moved one step ahead on performance 
budgeting  on  the  way  eventually  to  programme  budgeting.  We  introduced  what  was  then 
called and what we then called the Medium Term Expenditure Programme, that is, instead of 
looking  at  things  one  year  to  the  next  and  before  reaching  the  full  programme  budgeting 
stage, it was one step in that direction. 

 

24 

The  point  is  that  this  whole  matter  of  performance  and  programme  budgeting  is  a 
process  and we have been for  years now engaged in that process.  I  agree that programme 
budgeting was not well introduced in Mauritius and has not been well implemented either. 
But to me, it is a question of throwing the baby away with the dirty water. To us, it is clear 
that it is un pas en arrière. It is a step backward and no talk of performance budgeting instead 
of programme budgeting will hide the fact that it is un pas en arrière. It is throwing the baby 
away with the dirty water.  

There  is  no  use,  Madam  Speaker,  at  paragraph  4  (b)  to  bring  in  what  is  purely  an 
eyewash. In the Bill before us, paragraph 4B is entitled: “Report on performance”, and as the 
hon. Minister said earlier on, it says that – 

“Every department shall, not later than 31 October in every year, submit to the 
Minister, a report on its performance in respect of its previous fiscal year and on its 
strategic direction in respect of the following 3 fiscal years.” 

This is merely an eyewash! I suppose it is done so as to run into not too much trouble 

with the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, Madam Speaker. 

In fact, as we know, now programme budgeting has become - all over the world, not 
only in the developed countries - but has become the norm all over the world. I am given to 
understand  that  some  50%  of  the  countries  in  Africa  itself  have  reached  that  stage  of 
programme budgeting and we choose to move one step back and this point in time, Madam 
Speaker. We, therefore, disagree with that. We agree that the way programme budgeting has 
been devised, introduced, implemented laisse à désirer but, we should have kept on moving 
ahead. 

A lot of people are satisfied that we do away with the programme budgeting. Okay! 
Because ça demande des efforts. We should have improved on programme budgeting and not 
thrown,  as  I  said,  the  baby  away  with  the  dirty  water  and  it  is  the  wrong  signal  on 
performance  in  general.  That  is  what  worries  me.  The  hon.  Minister  has  tried  to  oppose 
performance  budgeting  to  programme  budgeting.  Artificial!  It  is  a  process  and  we  had 
reached,  in  an  imperfect  way  but,  we  had  reached  the  programme  budgeting.  When  we 
stopped that it is the wrong signal that we send to everybody not just the staff of the Ministry 
of Finance but to everybody in the country, it is the wrong signal as relates to performance in 
general. 

 

25 

As far as the second issue is concerned, I am not convinced that it is right now that we 
go back to the financial year as defined before, that is, ending 30 June of every year. Ça va 
tout  chambouler  and  it  costs  money  whenever  you  go  back  on  an  issue  like  that.  It  costs 
money when we move to calendar and now it is going to cost money for us to revert on that 
also. What worries me is that it will make, for a number of years, comparisons all the more 
difficult.  When  we  will  want  to  compare  financial  years,  performance  three  years  ago  as 
compared to this year and then next financial year, however defined, it will make that vital 
exercise of comparison much more difficult, at least, during a few years before we resettle 
down in the financial year that ends on 30 June. 

We are not for going back on the two issues. We think that we should have moved 
forward  with  the  programme  budgeting  and  that  we  should  have  kept  the  calendar  year 
procedures. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Sesungkur! 

 

(12.38 p.m.) 

Mr  D.  Sesungkur  (First  Member  for  Montagne  Blanche  &  GRSE):  Madam 
Speaker, I would like to speak in support of my colleague, the hon. Minister of Finance and 
Economic  Development  and  particularly  expand  on  the  nature  and  purpose  of  the 
amendments proposed to the Finance and Audit Act.  

I  have  heard  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  saying  that  the  Programme-  Based 
Budgeting has not been well implemented and he is also not agreeable for the change in the 
financial year. Being myself a practising accountant for over 25 years, I have always seen the 
benefit of a system in its actual result.  

When you looked back from the implementation of the Programme-Based Budgeting 
and the results that it has produced for the past Government, it speaks for itself. We have seen 
lots of cases of budget overrun, lots of cases of dilapidation of funds, many projects have not 
been well implemented and we’ve heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister stating last Tuesday the 
billions  of  rupees  of  arrears  that  have  been  accumulated  by  the  NDU.  These  are  gross 
mismanagement of public money and mismanagement of public funds. So, I fully support the 
initiative  of  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  in  bringing  all  necessary 

 

26 

changes and reforms which will improve productivity and efficiency of our economy. This is 
very important because this legislation is particularly focused on the budgetary process and 
the estimate of expenditure. 

Madam  Speaker,  it  is  Government  objective  to  transform  Mauritius  into  an 
economically vibrant country and to improve the quality of life of one and all. This is stated 
in  our  programme.  Government  is  committed  to  conducting  business  on  the  principles  of 
discipline, transparency, accountability and exemplary governance. This implies responsible 
and judicious use of public funds and a crusade to weed out wastage. The amendments which 
are  proposed  are  rightly  in  this  direction.  In  this  respect,  reforms  are  necessary  to  inject 
productivity, efficiency and quality of service. Money is a rare commodity and we need to 
manage it properly. Not the way the previous Government did. 

In this process, budgetary planning and control is singularly important as the rising 
aspirations  of  people  are  placing  more  demands  on  financial  resources.  Budget  is  the 
Government most powerful tool to meet the needs and priorities of a country and its people. 
It  helps  Government  in  decision  such  as  how  public  funds  will  be  raised  and  spent. 
Management  of  public  finance  basically  deals  with  all  aspects  of  resource  mobilisation, 
prioritisation of programmes, the budgetary process, efficient management of resources and 
exercising controls. No Government has a greater responsibility than its stewardship of public 
finances which is an essential part of the governance process. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  financial  planning  process  is  an  important  process  in  making 
sound financial decision for the country and implementing the governmental programme. The 
Bill  focuses  primarily  on  the  administrative  aspects  of  the  planning  of  Government  and 
budgetary  process  and  proposes  a  new  financial  year  to  end  on  30  June  instead  of  31 
December,  as  has  been  widely  explained  by  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development. 

The objects and reason of this Bill is to adapt the Finance and Audit Act to the new 
political  and  economic  context.  The  Bill  makes  better  provision  for  the  control  and 
management  of  public  monies.  Madam  Speaker,  the  Bill  provides  a  new  legislative 
framework  for  the  financial  planning  process.  It  is  necessary  to  allow  the  Government  to 
implement its programme, vision and goals. The Bill provides for the management of public 
finance in an economical, efficient and effective manner consistent with best practices. 

 

27 

The  Bill  proposes  a  new  architecture  for  financial  planning  and  budgeting  at  the 
national  level.  Government  wants  to  simplify  the  budgetary  process  which  will  be  easy  to 
understand with a view to getting a better outcome for the country and for the people. The 
Bill requires new arrangement to be in place before the next budget and it is urgent. The Bill 
proposes  a  shift  from  the  Programme-Based  Budgeting,  which  is  considered  to  be  too 
prescriptive, rigid and restrict Government action in certain cases. A more simplistic method 
is, therefore, proposed and explained by the Minister of Finance and Economic Development 
which will have the advantage of being understandable, flexible and will build capacity. 

The aim of the present legislation is to foster more open participatory approach with a 
flexible budget calendar. It is also aimed at measuring advancing transparency, accountability 
and  public  participation  in  the  budget  process  by  allowing  ample  time  for  discussion  and 
meeting with the stakeholders. 

Madam Speaker, the new law when voted, will bring in flexibility and allow budget 
reallocation in certain cases where this is necessary. This will allow greater effectiveness and 
efficiency and better outcomes for the Government and the country. Madam Speaker, in this 
Amendment Bill provision, provisions have been made for progress reports on achievement 
and  performance.  Continuous  assessment  and  progress  evaluation  with  regard  to  publicly 
financed project is a vital aspect of good governance. It should be the aim of everybody to 
ensure that each rupee of tax payers’ money is properly spent.  

The IMF report on Mauritius title: Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability 
Assessment released in 2011, highlights that in many instances, extra budgetary units are not 
fully  monitored  and  reported.  A  decline  in  performance  was  also  noted  with  regard  to 
expenditure outturn compared to original year approved budget. 

The Programme-Based Budgeting has not been successful instilling rigour in resource 
allocation and improving overall management of the public finances. There have been many 
abuses and, in some cases, massive budget overrun. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  will  end  my  remarks  here  because  I  know  that  there  are  other 
members  who  would  wish  to  contribute.  The  amendments  cover  vital  issues  that  need  the 
House urgent approval and I think that we need to vote this Bill. 

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Uteem! 

 

(12.46 p.m.) 

28 

Mr R. Uteem (First Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis Central):  Thank 
you,  Madam  Speaker.    Madam  Speaker,  this  Bill  is  being  debated  at  a  time  where  many 
African  countries  are  progressively  moving  away  from  Line  Budgeting  towards  a  system 
which is more focused on the outcome and places more emphasis on results. The rationale for 
this  move  is  well  explained  by  the  Collaborative  Africa  Budget  Reform  Initiative,  a 
professional  network  of  Senior  Budget  Officials  in  African  Ministries  of  Finance  and 
Planning, and I quote – 

“The shift from traditional budgeting methods to modern budgeting methods 
with results and performance at its focus is noted to be more useful as a policy 
or  decision-making  tool  and  assures  elected  and  administrative  officials  of 
what  is  being  accomplished  with  the  money  as  opposed  to  merely  showing 
that it has been used for the purpose of approved inputs.   

In  moving  towards  performance  budgeting,  countries  would  be  adopting  a 
system of planning, budgeting and evaluation that emphasises the relationship 
between money budgeted and results expected. The process often requires a 
programme  budgeting  structure,  which  many  African  countries  are  moving 
towards  and  at  a  more  advanced  stage,  incorporate  explicit  performance 
measures  and  systems  of  performance  assessment  including  higher  level  of 
accountability with associated sanctions and rewards.” 

Today, Madam Speaker, we are doing exactly the opposite. For this side of the House, this 
represents a giant leap backward. 

When Programme-Based Budgeting was introduced in 2008, there was consensus in 
this House whether from the Government side or from the Opposition side, whether it was 
from  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  or  from  hon.  Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun  and  hon. 
Bodha who intervened on the Bill. There was broad consensus. Of course, there were certain 
reservations,  certain  words  of  caution  uttered,  whether  our  civil  servants  were  properly 
equipped,  properly  trained  to  go  and  shift  into  this  new  way  of  budgeting.  But,  there  was 
broad-based consensus in this House.   

It  could  not  have  been  otherwise  Madam  Speaker,  because  this  represented  the 
culmination  of  a  process  that  started  as  far  back  as  2001  during  the  Government  of 
MMM/MSM;  as  far  back  as  June  2001,  when  the  MSM/MMM  Government  presented  its 

 

29 

economic  agenda  for  the  new  millennium.    And  this  policy  culminated  in  2003  in  the 
adoption of the medium term expenditure framework. 

In a paper issued by the Ministry of Finance in 2003, the rationale for replacing line 
budgeting to a programme-based budget under the medium term expenditure framework was 
explained as follows – 

“The medium term expenditure framework is the casting of the budget on a 
three-year rolling basis within a sustainable macroeconomic framework. It is 
presented  here  as  an  integrated  version,  which  includes  a  programme-based 
budgeting  component  so-called  result  based  budgeting.  The  current  budget 
system  line  itemisation,  which  MTEF  seeks  to  replace,  emphases  inputs  or 
budgetary resources without linking them to output or results achieved. The 
integrated version of MTEF on the other hand is intended to focus on outputs 
and  outcomes  as  a  means  of  improving  the  efficiency  and  effectiveness  of 
expenditure.” 

“Budgetary  allocations  are  tied  to  measurable  objectives  while  performance 
indicators  are  an  inherent  part  of  MTEF,  allow  progress  to  be  measured  in 
terms  of  attaining  the  objectives.  As  budget  programmes,  measurable  and 
realistic objectives and performance indicators substitute for line item, and the 
budget  is  presented  within  a  realistic  medium  term  framework,  greater 
discipline  is  introduced  in  the  budget  formulation.    The  sectoral  allocation 
becomes 
is  based  on  well-defined  policy  choices. 
Accountability is enhanced in the budget execution process as the Programme 
Manager is tied to performance and results. Public expenditure management is 
improved.”   

transparent  and 

Accountability  is  enhanced,  public  expenditure  management  is  improved.    That  was  the 
vision  of  the  2001-2005  MSM/MMM  Government  when  they  advocated  a  move  from  the 
line budgeting to a gradual project-based budgeting. 

The medium term expenditure framework was implemented in phases.  It started in 
five pilot sectors.  First of all, in 2004/2005, it was extended to the education and training 
sector.  Health, social assistance, environment, including sewerage, and public infrastructure, 
including transport sectors, were earmarked to undergo a similar transformation in the second 
phase. Of course, there were teething problems. As with any new system, there was bound to 

 

30 

be  teething  problems,  and  in  a  case  study  published  by  the  Collaborative  Africa  Budget 
Reform  Initiative  entitled  “Programme-based  budgeting:  Experiences  and  Lessons  from 
Mauritius”, this is what they had to say about the Mauritian experience – 

“Within the pilot ministries there was a no change in the culture of budgeting, 
which  remained  incremental  and  adversarial.  With  no  explicit  policy 
framework guiding the budget process, ministry officials had little incentive to 
prioritise  and  control  spending  within  politically  agreed,  hard  budget 
constraints.” 

So, Madam Speaker, there was a need for tougher fiscal management.  There was a need for 
greater coordination between the Ministries, greater coordination between the line Ministry 
and the Finance Ministry. There was need for civil servants to be more accountable, to start 
thinking  in  terms  of  delivering  output,  in  terms  of  delivering  results  as  opposed  to  just 
meeting targets set in every year’s recurrent and capital expenditure budget.  It is no surprise 
that  with  the  help  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund,  the  World  Bank  and  the  United 
Nations  Development  Programme,  the  then  Government  came  up  with  project-based 
budgeting. Addressing the House in 2008, the then Minister of Finance, hon. Sithanen, went 
at  length  to  explain  the  rationale  about  moving  from  line  budgeting  to  project-based 
budgeting. He gave concrete examples about how things would improve, how there would be 
a more efficient allocation of resources, how there would be more operational efficiency. 

I am not going to take the time of the House to repeat everything that was said by the 
hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  and  Minister  of  Finance  or  any  of  the  hon.  Members  who 
intervened on that matter in that Bill.  Suffices to say that in 2008, when this House moved 
from line budgeting to project-based budgeting, there was broad consensus, and that was in 
line with what was happening in the international arena, in line with best practices. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  introduction  of  programme-based  budget  has  resulted  in  more 
collaborative relationship between the Budget Strategy and Management Department in the 
Ministry  of  Finance  and  the  line  Ministries,  with  more  interaction  with  the  Ministries 
concerned. In fact, the Budget Strategy and Management Department itself has seen its role 
evolved,  because  now  it  has  to  sit  down  with  the  line  Ministries,  discuss  the  objectives, 
analyse the result, and see whether they have achieved the output that they had set themselves 
one year before, and what output they intend to target in one year’s time, because project-
based budgeting was on a three-year basis. 

 

31 

Similarly,  project-based  budgeting  enhanced  greater  professionalism  among  the 
various civil servants in line Ministries. At the level of each Ministry, focus was changed. 
Each Ministry had to have a strategic plan, each Ministry had to set objectives, set targets, 
determine priorities and implement policies in a cost effective and timely manner. There was 
an  on-going  monitoring  system  because  civil  servants  knew  that  they  were  going  to  be 
accountable  during  the  budget  allocation  process  when  MPs  would  question  whether  the 
targets that they had put on themselves had been achieved or not. 

Of course, the new system is not perfect, Madam Speaker.  Of course, there is room 
for improvement. The Director of Audit still highlights wastage and inefficiencies, but that is 
not a reason to stop the process and revert to a system of line budgeting, which is far more 
opaque, with no key performance indicators. 

Madam Speaker, the second change being brought by this Bill today is the change of a 
fiscal year from the calendar year end 31 December to 30 June.  Again, in 2008, when the 
decision was taken in this House to change the fiscal year, to align it with the calendar year, 
there  was  broad-based  consensus.    Madam  Speaker  would  remember  that  the  rationale  for 
having the fiscal year on 30 June was that back in the colonial years, most of the proceeds, 
most of the GDP of Mauritius relied on sugar cane, and by May, June, we had an idea about 
all the proceeds that were going to come in, and it was easier therefore and better to manage 
the cash flow also to have a budget on 30 June.  Of course, this rationale no longer exists. 
Today, we have a diversified economy, and there is no need to go back to 30 June. But there 
is also another reason the then Minister of Finance, hon. Sithanen, put forward in support of 
changing,  aligning  the  fiscal  year  to  the  calendar  year,  and  that  was  to  avoid  confusion, 
because today there is a lot of data collection, a lot of statistics that are collected.  Some are 
based on 30 June, some are based on the calendar year.  In order to avoid any uncertainty and 
to  have  consistency,  and  also  to  be  able  to  analyse  and  compare  economic  and  social 
indicators, it was felt that an alignment was necessary. 

Today, I have listened carefully to the hon. Minister of Finance, and I am totally not 
convinced.  He has not advanced a single reason to justify moving from December to June, if 
not because in December people are more busy and try to go on holiday or what not. 

So, for us this is also a big leap backward, Madam Speaker, and I don’t know if the 
hon. Minister realises the harm he is causing, that the Government is causing to the business 
community by taking this decision today. Because, today we do not rely only on the domestic 

 

32 

economy, we have the global business sector and the global business sector where we have 
thousands  of  companies,  dealings  in  trillions  of  dollars  and  they  are  used  to  filing  their 
accounting records within six months. I heard the hon. Minister saying that, and I am glad he 
mentioned that he is going to keep for companies this flexibility of six months. Fair enough! 
But what about for the individuals, what about the cash flow management, and there are other 
repercussions. When are we going to have increment? Will the workers be paid an increment 
as from 01 July; will they be paid as from 01 January? Would there be a realignment of PRB 
Report to provide that, this year, we are going to have a double compensation? Are we going 
to have one compensation in July and another one in December or are we going to have two 
compensations next year? All this will inevitably create problems, because you will have to 
readjust all your accounting programmes, all your cash flow, all your budgetary projections, 
and  again,  Madam  Speaker,  I  have  not  heard  a  single  convincing  reason  why  we  have  to 
backpedal and go back to how it was before 2008. Why get all the people through the stress - 
you know how stressful it is for a person to file his income tax return, especially people who 
are on pensions, especially people who are uneducated, people who are afraid that they may 
be  arrested  if  they  don’t  pay  their  tax  in  time.  Now,  we  are  going  to  make  all  these  poor 
people, including pensioners to file two times their income tax return. Why? We have not 
been given any convincing answer, I am sorry, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker, there is a third and very important change being brought by this Bill 
today before this House, and I am not surprised that it is not mentioned at all in any of the 
object in the Memorandum of Explanation that has been circulated with the Bill. I am talking 
about  the  amendment  being  brought  to  the  First  Schedule  under  the  Act,  Part  A  - 
DEPARTMENT,  Attorney  General’s  Office  where  the  office  of  the  Director  of  Public 
Prosecutions will henceforth be under the Attorney General’s Office. My learned friend, hon. 
V. Baloomoody on Tuesday, in his intervention on the Government Programme, expressed 
strong objections to bringing back the office of the DPP under that of the Attorney General. I 
am not going to repeat whatever he said, suffice it to say that, on this side of the House, we 
fully support the arguments put forward by hon. Baloomoody.  I would be failing in my duty 
as a Member of Parliament, I would be untrue to the oath that I have taken before this House, 
if  I  were  not  to  direct  the  attention  of  hon.  Members  of  this  House  to  the  potential 
Constitutional challenge to the decision that we are going to take today, approving this Bill. 
And, I am not the only one who feels this way. The very issue of the financial autonomy of 
the  office  of  DPP  was  considered  by  the  Law  Reform  Commission  in  an  issue  paper 

 

33 

published  in  March  2009,  entitled  the  “Office  of  Directors  of  Public  Prosecutions  and  the 
Constitutional Requirement for its Operational Autonomy”. We are not talking only about its 
Constitutional duties to prosecute, we are talking about its operational autonomy, and I would 
invite  hon.  Members  to  read  that  report  which  is  very  short,  only  four/  five  pages,  very 
succinct,  very  straight  to  the  point.  And  in  that  report,  Madam  Speaker,  the  Law  Reform 
Commission makes a very simple statement. We have the Constitution; the Constitution is the 
sovereign law of this land. Any Act of Parliament which is contrary to the Constitution will 
be declared null and void, and, in fact, even a Constitutional provision, an amendment to the 
Constitution can be deemed unconstitutional and can be struck down as has been reminded to 
us by the Privy Council. 

 (Interruptions) 

I will explain to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister.  There was in the case of Philibert, which is the 
case I was referring to, an amendment to the Constitution - the mandatory sentencing in drug 
trafficking  cases  and  the  Law  Lords,  the  Privy  Council  held  that  this  Constitutional 
amendment went against Section 1 of the Constitution, which provides that Mauritius shall be 
a sovereign democratic State. 

(Interruptions) 

So, that an unconstitutional provision automatically is deemed to be non écrit by virtue of the 
decision of the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, because under our Constitution after 
we became a Republic in 1992, we preserved the right of appeal to the Privy Council. So, the 
Privy Council is the apex court… 

Madam  Speaker:  Yes,  but  hon.  Uteem,  can  I  bring  you  back  to  the  object  of  this 
Bill? Can you come precisely to the object of this Bill, and come back to your speech with 
regard to the Finance and Audit (Amendment) Bill? You can mention, en passant, but you 
cannot go in extenso into another debate. 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, on a point of order, I would like to get your guidance on 
it.  We  are  debating  a  Bill.  The  Bill  proposes  an  amendment  to  a  Schedule.  We  have  to 
approve  this  new  Schedule.  So,  we  have  to  approve  having  the  DPP’s  office  under  the 
Attorney General’s Office and I am giving reasons why I think that this House should not 
approve the Second Schedule, in as far as it is making the DPP’s office no longer an item on 
its own, but a sub-item under the Attorney General’s Office. So, I would like to know in what 
way what I am talking is not relevant, Madam Speaker. 

 

34 

 

Madam  Speaker:  What  I  said,  hon.  Uteem,  is  that  you  can  mention  en 

passant, you explain, but you cannot go in extenso into that debate. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, it is in the Bill.  I am trying to refer to this House the 
reason why this Section has been held to be unconstitutional in the opinion of the Reform 
Commission. Why, because in Mauritius we have recourse to the Privy Council and there has 
been a case known as Mohit vs DPP where the Privy Council has reinforced the obligation to 
have an autonomous DPP’s Office, free from the Attorney General’s Office.  Lord MacKay 
in  his  Report,  he  revisited  his  Report  in  2006  precisely  to  say  that,  in  the  light  of  the 
judgement of the Privy Council of Mohit versus DPP, the DPP’s Office should be separate 
and distinct from the Attorney General’s Office, And, it is for that very reason that the Law 
Reform Commission formed the opinion that the operational autonomy of the DPP’s Office is 
a Constitutional requirement, and I quote - 

“Since  independence,  the  salary  and  other  allowances  of  the  DPP  appear  in 
Appropriation Acts as a vote item under the Attorney General’s Office. This 
practice  also  is  unconstitutional  and  must  cease.  We,  therefore,  recommend 
that  henceforth  in  Appropriation  Acts  the  budget  of  the  Office  of  the  DPP 
should  appear  as  a  vote  item  for  an  independent  body,  as  is  that  of  the 
Judiciary.”  

So, this is the opinion of Constitutional lawyers, you have Guy Ollivry, one of the leading 
authority on Constitutional law, you have representatives from the Attorney General’s Office. 

They formed the opinion that you need to have a vote item especially for the DPP.  And I am 
not here, Madam Speaker, in any way condoning the DPP.  In this House and outside this 
House, we have had chance to criticise the DPP. As a lawyer, I have challenged the opinion 
of the DPP.  That is why Courts are there for.  As a politician, I have challenged the decision 
of  the  DPP,  be  it  in  the  Yatin  Varma  affair  or  the  Med-Point  saga  or  recently  when  he 
decided to object to leave which the families of the accused party in the case of l’Amicale 
went before the Privy Council.   

As far as we are concerned, we are not here defending the DPP or the present person. 

We are talking about the office.  The office has to be autonomous. 

(Interruptions) 

 

35 

The hon. Member from a sitting position is talking about the expense incurred by the DPP’s 
office.  Yes, if the DPP is overspending, if the DPP is acting irrationally; it is for Parliament, 
it  is  for  us  to  come  and  decide  whether  to  increase  his  budget  or  to  decrease  his  budget.  
Parliament, as the Legislature, we will do that when we will come to the voting item, but it is 
not the Executive. It should not be the Attorney General.  It should not be the Executive who 
has to decide whether the DPP whenever he will have to buy furniture, whenever he will have 
to attend a conference, he does not have to go and knock at the door of an Executive. This is 
why the more so to avoid of the pressure on the office of the DPP that we need to have… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, as I said, we are not defending the DPP here. We are defending the office.  
Of course, I will not go as far as the hon. Vice-Prime Minister who invited the DPP to join 
the executive of the Labour Party. I don’t think that dragging the DPP in the political arena 
just because he is a relative, serves any purpose.  In fact, quite the contrary…. 

(Interruptions) 

…it is quite dangerous to do so because if we start with the DPP, we have also Judges who 
are  related.  So,  are  we,  next  time,  going  to  challenge  Judges  because  their  husbands  or 
children  are  in  a  political  party.  I  think  it  is  going  very  far  when  we  try  to  amalgamate 
between the office of the DPP and his relationship with his siblings. 

Madam  Speaker,  if  ever  there  is  a  constitutional  challenge  to  the  decision  of  the 
Government of the day to insist on making the DPP answerable to the Attorney General for 
its budgetary requirements, then let it be known that hon. Members on this side of the House 
took very strong objection to this course of action. 

Madam Speaker, it is not because this Government was elected on the slogan ‘viré 

mam’ that they think they can do anything… 

…and have a mandate… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order, please! 

 (Interruptions) 

Mr Uteem:  … to dévire tout enbas lahaut.   

 

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker:  Order! 

36 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Members, I am on my feet.  Order, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, hon. Minister!  You can proceed! 

 

(1.13 p.m.) 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, je suis dans une situation un peu cocasse 

aujourd’hui. 

(Interruptions) 

Because when I was Chairman of the Economic Commission of the MMM, systematically 
year in year out, we used to denounce the fact that the way the PBB was being misused by the 
then  Government,  had  led  to  a  situation  where  information  had  become  very  opaque  and 
where  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  then  with  Mr  Mansoor,  had  been  using  the  PBB  to 
mislead the House.  I said it, year in year out in the Opposition that the PBB was being used 
by the hon. Minister of Finance to hide information from the House, to mislead the house, to 
mislead the nation.  Why?  Because the document was so complex, the PBB document is so 
complex, Madam Speaker, that even professionals in this House cannot make any sense out 
of it.  I was having problem understanding it.  I  would say  also that the  hon.  Leader of the 
Opposition  knows  it  very  well,  had  also  problems  at  times  interpreting  the  whole  concept 
because it is very, very complicated. It becomes still more complicated when a Minister now 
is vicious enough to use this to hide information from public.  This is what we said and, at 
that  time,  I  promised,  I  said:  “The  day  there  is  a  change  in  Government,  we  will  have  to 
revert back to what I am suggesting today.”   

Therefore, that was the stand of the Opposition then.  It makes sense even more.  And 
the No. 2 issue is this: we are spending public funds; the House needs to understand how this 
money is being spent.  The country needs to understand how this money is being spent. Now, 
it is not because at one moment the IMF has used us as a cobaye to test and try to see whether 

 

37 

the  system  could  work  in  Mauritius  that  we  should  flow  with  it  without  questioning  the 
fundamental principles of accounts. It must be transparent. And that was what motivated my 
action  while  becoming  Minister  of  Finance.  I  said:  “People  need  to  understand  what  this 
Government is doing”. Not only people, the House itself! By changing from PBB to what I 
am doing now, in fact, I am exposing myself to more questions. I will go with it because this 
is in the name of transparency. You know, the document was so thick and added to it - you 
remember- the special funds.  The hon. Minister used to create special funds out of the air 
that was completely out of the control of the budget.  Those were dark times - and for you 
also that was dark times because the technique, the accounting system was being used in the 
wrong way.   

Therefore, I feel very comfortable today and I am sure the whole Government here 
feels very comfortable after all the abuse of power that the country has lived through year in 
year out, I think it makes sense that in our public meetings, out of Parliament, in Parliament 
we  say  we  want  this  country  to  know  that  we  are  transparent.    We  are  moving  for 
transparency and we want people to know what is happening.  In public funds, I am telling 
you I feel very comfortable to move to the former system.   

Naturally,  we  have  to  ensure  that  money  is  not  only  well  spent,  but  money  is  also 
accountable for, but that this fund also is used within a global context of performance for the 
country.  We  are  very  conscious  of  it.    This  is  why,  in  fact,  we  have  set  up  the  Public 
Expenditure Control Bureau which is under the responsibility of my colleague, hon. Minister 
Bhadain and this is why we have also instituted, in the Ministry of Finance, a system where 
Ministries will have to report back on the performance of their Ministry.  

So, we are very conscious that we have an engagement to explain, to justify and to 
feel good ourselves that what we are doing is good for the country.  This is the feeling I have 
today.    I  am  reverting  back  not  because  we  are  moving  back  from  modernity.    I  am  a  bit 
proactive by nature but this type of proactiveness has not helped the country, has not helped 
Parliament.  If we, in Parliament, cannot digest this PBB; for the new hon. Members here 
who are just elected, it is a real maze. It is very hard to make one’s way through it because it 
is very  complicated. And  I know very few countries in the world which have experienced 
with this method and would say: “Success”!  

If  you put the question to me, in the Ministry,  my own staff at the back here said:  
“Oh my god, fortunately we are stopping with it”.  Therefore, it hasn’t helped my officers. It 

 

38 

has  not  helped  this  Parliament  to  see  through  reality  as  to  the  expenditure  of  former 
Governments. I am sure the nation also would love to be able to read a budget which any 
young guy, any young man, any student can read and understand. This is the aim of accounts. 
People should be in a position to understand, to judge and to say that the expenditure is good 
or not. So, I am reverting to something which is very simple. 

All  Members  here  will  have  in  their  hand  a  budget  where  you  have  a  Ministry 
recurrent  expenditure,  capital  expenditure,  simple  and  easy  to  understand.  So  easy  that  I 
cannot  hide  when  I  need  things  to  explain!  So,  for  me,  today  this  Bill  is  not  only  an 
implementation  of  this  Government’s  intention  of  transparency.  I  wish  to  remind  hon. 
Members, on the other side also, that we were at that time favourable to stop this gimmick of 
using a technique whereby a Minister could hide information, hide figures, and I say again, 
mislead the House and the population when giving information. So, I am very happy that we 
are moving on the right track. 

Number two: the question of reverting back to the financial year as it was before. I 
agree with hon. Uteem when he says that this system was in force when the final price of 
sugar had to be awaited for in March of each year. But then, I am sorry, here again, we have 
made our experiences, we have to experience them and see whether it works or not. When we 
came  back  to  calendar  year  January  and  December,  problem  first  with  the  Ministry  itself 
working overtime in December, problem with Parliament having to sit up to 23 December to 
vote a Bill. So, the idea, the concept might have been good, but it worked out not in the right 
direction as we wanted to do it. So, this has compelled me, after careful consideration and 
thinking,  and  the  Ministry  also  and  Cabinet,  to  return  back,  therefore,  to  a  financial  year 
which is from 01 July down to 30 June. Those two decisions, I think, have been taken rightly. 

Hon. Utem put up the question of why the Schedule has provided for the decision of 
Cabinet to put the Office of the DPP under the Office of the Attorney General. I am sorry to 
say  that  we  are  here  to  implement  policies.  The  Cabinet,  in  its  wisdom,  has  taken  this 
decision and the Schedule, as it is here, reflects this decision. So, I have nothing more to add 
on this issue. 

On this, Madam Speaker, I wish to commend the Bill to the House. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Bill read a second time and committed. 

 

 

to. 

39 

COMMITTEE STAGE 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

The Finance and Audit (Amendment) Bill (No. I of 2015) was considered and agreed 

On  the  Assembly  resuming  with  Madam  Speaker  in  the  Chair,  Madam  Speaker 

reported accordingly. 

 

Third Reading 

On  motion  made  and  seconded  the  Finance  and  Audit  (Amendment)  Bill  (No.  I  of 

2015) was read the third time and passed. 

Madam Speaker: I suggest we break for lunch for one and a half hours. 

At 1.25 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

 

On resuming at 3.04 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

 

MOTION 

PRESIDENT’S ADDRESS – MOTION OF THANKS 

Order read for resuming adjourned debate on the following motion of the hon. Second 

Member for Grand River North West & Port Louis West (Mrs D. Selvon). 

"That an Address be presented to the President of the Republic of Mauritius in the 
following terms - 

We, the Members of the Mauritius National Assembly, here assembled, 
beg  leave  to  offer  our  thanks  to  the  President  of  the  Republic  of 
Mauritius for the Speech which he has addressed to us on the occasion 
of the Opening of the First Session of the Sixth National Assembly." 

Question again proposed. 

Mr S. Fowdar (Third Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or): Madam Speaker, 
I will join all the other Members of this House to congratulate you on your appointment as 

 

40 

the first  Lady Speaker of this House and  also my  good friend, hon.  Adrien Duval,  for his 
appointment as Deputy Speaker. I would also congratulate all the Members of this House for 
their election in December last year, all of them on this side and the other side as well. I know 
it has been a very hard work for the Members of this side of the House to get elected being 
given the aggressive campaign held by the other side. 

Madam Speaker, I am really thankful to the four leaders of this Alliance, the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, my leader, the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of 
Energy  and Public Utilities, hon. Collendavelloo, the Deputy Prime Minister, hon. Xavier-
Luc Duval and also the leader of the MSM, hon. Pravind Jugnauth. I must also congratulate 
my two friends of Constituency No. 6, hon. Minister Gungah and hon. Rughoobur who have 
been by my side.  Despite the campagne de mensonges against me, they have been by my 
side sans relâche and I really thank them deep down my heart. 

Madam Speaker, I am standing on this side of the House that is my luck. If I did not 
take the right decision in October, I would have been on the other side of the House, not in 
the House probably, most probably outside the House standing sur le chemin.  Fortunately, I 
took the right decision but still, it was really tough. I remember when I resigned from my ex-
party,  the  MMM,  one  of  the  journalists  told  me:  “My  God,  you  have  got  guts!  You  have 
guts!”  To  resign  against  the  ex-Prime  Minister  and  the  Leader  of  the  Opposition  was  like 
playing with fire.  I knew I was going to be in the line of fire and, I was in the line of fire. I 
was in the line of fire, Madam Speaker, and it was very unfair on behalf of the Leader of the 
Opposition, the way he  treated me.  I was la cible in all the public gatherings and congrès 
nocturnes. I was the star, the hero! He was talking about me. I was just a simple candidate! I 
was not going to be the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister or even a Minister! But 
everything was on me, he was talking about me! 

What is more serious, and he never expected, I always admired this person. I had so 

much respect for him; I admired him for his discipline and for his savoir-faire.  

But then, I was really upset on the day when he started venir avec les fausses 

allégations.  He said - and that was répercuté à la MBC, dans la presse - that I had a police 
case in the UK. He should have known that these things can be checked. How could he say 
something like this?  

You know, at that time, my mother who is over 70 was sick and I was worried for her. 
She was really upset and believed in that. She said: no, you are lying and hiding from me. 

 

41 

Because if the Leader of the Opposition, a person like him is saying that you had a police 
case in the UK, then it must be true. But, it wasn’t. It is not true. I have got a Police certificate 
from the UK, Madam Speaker, stating that I don’t even have a penalty fee paid in the UK for 
speeding or for over parking time or whatever. Nothing at all! The Leader of the Opposition, 
now, repeatedly, insinuated that I have a police case in in the UK. And, you know what was 
more insulting! This person always used to say: ‘MBC c’est la pourriture’ ‘MBC is what not’ 
– Callikan is this or that. He used that same MBC pour diffuser that I had a police case in the 
UK. He used that MBC, he should have said no, don’t put me in the MBC because I don’t 
like the MBC. They are not fair and just. 

Yes he did. In fact, he did. He joined them. He was with them. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, I listened to my very good friend, hon. Baloomoody last time and 
also to the other Members on the other side. They give us the impression  that we, on this 
side, we’ve been in Government for nine or ten years  and we have to answer for all the bad 
things that the previous Government has been doing. Right! What if we ask them! If we ask 
the Opposition questions Madam Speaker!  If I ask the opposition this question today: what 
have  they  been  doing  for  the  last  nine  years  to  discover,  to  uncover  what  the  ex-Prime 
Minister has been doing? They fail to depict this. Today it is grâce à ce gouvernement là 
qu’on a pu savoir, what is the evil behind and it is not the end, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker, I was in the UK, recently and I travelled back last week. I will tell 
you what, I was sitting next to a British fellow and we had a chat. He was asking: Oh, you are 
Mauritian. I say: yes.  Proudly, I am Mauritian. He said: Oh, you are Mauritian. I heard that 
there are some bad things going on in Mauritius. The ex-Prime Minister has been caught with 
a lot of money, there is money laundering case. I was really ashamed. I say: no, no it is just a 
sort of finding. At the end of the day, Mauritius is Africa. I had a feeling that Mauritius was a 
little  bit  out  of  Africa.  We  were  out  of  the  lot.  We  were  not  the  same  type  of  Africans, 
Leaders of African Government or politics in Africa. It was totally different from Mauritius. 
This is what the people are saying out. We are Africa at the end of the day because our ex-
Prime Minister has been keeping Rs220 m. 

Petty cash! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

42 

It is not the end, Madam Speaker. I can see that there is a lot more to come. It seems 
that there are a lot of things to be uncovered. We had our good friend, hon.  Minister, who 
has  informed  the  public,  how  Mrs  Soornack  has  been  taking  commission  on  behalf  of  the 
Government? But this is unacceptable. The Leader of the Opposition was going to condone 
this person and they were going to be in power. Now, for one minute, let’s say that they won 
the last election in December, we would have never known that Rs220 m. were held as petty 
cash, and more to come or all this money was going as commission. 

Madam Speaker, this is really unacceptable. The present Opposition are behaving as if 
this Government is responsible for everything. But it really hurt me when the Leader of the 
Opposition  started  having  fausses  allégations  against  me.  On  Tuesday,  I  learnt  from  our 
friend,  hon.  Sinatambou,  that  he  had  the  same  sort  of  allegation  and  he  even  went  to  the 
Police station to do a report because the Leader of the Opposition and the ex-Prime Minister 
made certain allegations regarding his family affairs. And now, we also know what he did 
with the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, allegations against his family. So, it has become a practice 
for the Opposition now hitting below the belt. When they do not have arguments, they start 
going  into  private  affairs  of  the  Members  on  this  side  of  the  House.  It  is  really  a  shame, 
Madam Speaker! 

This country has, up to now, known four Prime Ministers, namely, Sir Seewoosagur 
Ramgoolam, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, hon. Paul Bérenger and Navinchandra Ramgoolam. It is 
not a coincidence, Madam Speaker, that this Rt. hon. Prime Minister is elected for the sixth 
time. It is not a coincidence. It is not a coincidence that people voted for him again and again. 
They voted for him despite his age. I had so many chats with Sir Anerood Jugnauth in the 
past asking him if he is coming, he replied: I have to, it is because of the country. So, this is 
the philosophy of this man because of the country and now what about the others! We have 
seen the one who was so cherished - if you watched the news on the TV, everybody is just 
doing ‘arti’, singing, paid people to do sort of ‘sega’ dancing, to make people feel that he is 
so cherished. He is the Prime Minister who is liked by everybody. In fact, today, wherever 
you go, this is a fact. I know, people on this side know about this and when we meet people 
on the roads, there is only one thing they tell you ‘Zot pe mari bien faire! You go and tell the 
Prime Minister he has our support and tell him that we wish him good health’. This is what 
the  public  is  saying  today.  Fortunately,  even  those  on  the  other  side  of  the  House,  les 
partisans de l’alliance Travalliste et même le MMM sont pour cela.  They are wishing good 
luck and congratulations to this Government. 

 

43 

Madam  Speaker,  I  sincerely  wish  this  Government,  deep  down  my  heart,  that  they 
achieve what we have in the Government Programme presented by the President. I sincerely 
wish, for the benefit of this country, that we succeed in what we have in mind. Particularly, 
you know, there is one thing which really worries us all. And we know when we go to meet 
our fellow people in town, there is only one thing in their mouth: jobs. It really worries us. 
This Government has got this enormous task of creating jobs. Now, of course, jobs will be 
created  only  if  the  GDP  growth  is  positive  and  goes  on  increasing.  This  is  not  going  to 
happen in the immediate term or in the short term. We know that the GDP growth will take 
time  and  while  the  GDP  growth  increases  then  the  number  of  unemployed  people  also  is 
increasing  at  the  same  time.  Now  this  is  really,  really  worrying  that  the  number  of 
unemployed people is increasing and increasing.  

I know - because I was dans le comité économique de l’Alliance Lepep - that you have 
got certain plans for job creation.  But I know also that all these plans will be really focused 
on the SMEs and entrepreneurship, which is really a good thing; creating jobs through small 
scale  enterprises,  which  is  something  which  has  happened  in  many  countries.    Jobs  are 
created through SMEs.  But I would make a plea to the hon. Minister of Finance to look into 
the  possibility  of  bringing  jobs  to  Mauritius  instead  of  creating  jobs,  but  also  for  the 
immediate term to bring jobs to Mauritius, and there is a big opportunity for this. We can 
bring jobs to Mauritius by enhancing, developing the BPO sector and the call centres, and 
there is a massive potential for that. 

I would request the hon. Minister of Finance to do what we did for zone franche in the 
1970s, using government buildings, giving financial support, tax rebate, tax holiday.  We can 
do that to incite people to start BPOs and create jobs. BPO does not only mean accounting or 
secretarial duties or secretarial job, but they have other jobs also - laws.  There is a series of 
fields that can be used to start the BPO sector.  I know I have got limited time, but but I’ve 
got two more points which I would like to raise. 

Madam Speaker, I would also want to raise one more issue, which is a public pain, 
that is, the time the court takes to finalise cases.  I am not a lawyer, but I know the lawyers 
would know where the shoe pinches here.  But it is impossible that cases take three, four, five 
years to be finalised.  What I am saying is that we have got more than three-quarter majority 
votes here.  Why don’t we once for all trash out and get this done?  Cases must be finalised 
within a year.  This is what happens in the UK.  Why not in Mauritius?  Some cases take like 
four  years, five  years, ten  years to be finalised.   It is unacceptable. This is my plea to the 

 

44 

Government; to look into this issue, and see to it that we come up with a solution and get this 
done easily.  I know in the UK, before you go to court, you have to submit all your papers, 
and you have to be honest.  If you are not honest, you will be penalised by the judge.  Now, 
you  have  to  submit  everything  before  you  go  to  court,  and  the  court  will  sit  only  once; 
maximum two times, and then it is finalised. So, why don’t we start something like this in 
Mauritius and get things done?  Because probably we don’t know, but a small common man 
suffers a lot, and my friends lawyers are making a lot of money out of it. 

(Interruptions) 

It is a fact, but we have to find out a solution so that we get this done as quickly as possible.  

(Interruptions) 

Yes, I understand that my friends lawyers here are Members of Parliament, and they are for 
the  people  of  Mauritius,  not  for  themselves.    So,  they  must  be  fighting  for  the  people  of 
Mauritius. 

One last thing, Madam Speaker. One more public pain - the hon. Minister of Financial 
Services is not here - is insurance claims.  People keep telling us ‘you pay premium and you 
have to pay premium on time. If you don’t pay, you don’t get the policy.’  But when it comes 
to claim compensation indemnity, it is a lot of  pain, and it takes a hell lot of time.  So,  I 
would urge, I would make a plea to the hon. Minister - he is a very dynamic Minister by the 
way  –  that  he  needs  to  come  up  with  something  that  gets  the  insurance  claims  sorted  out 
without pain, and it must be done quickly. 

Madam Speaker, I am being told to stop.  I have got a lot of things to say, and I would 
come back at budget time.  I’ve got a lot of issues to raise.  Once again, I would congratulate 
all the Members of the House, and in particular the Rt. hon. Prime Minister.  I know he is a 
genuine Prime Minister, and under his leadership we are going to make things happen. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

 

 (3.24 p.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Social  Security,  National  Solidarity  and  Reform  Institutions 
(Mrs F. Jeewa-Daureeawoo): Madam Speaker, it is an honour and a pleasure to address this 
august Assembly on the Government Programme.  Let me from the outset congratulate you 
on your appointment as first lady Speaker and, at the same time, congratulate hon. Adrien 

 

45 

Duval  on  his  appointment  as  Deputy  Speaker.    I  wish  both  of  you  well.    I  also  seize  this 
opportunity to thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister on my appointment as Minister of Social 
Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions. My thank goes also to the people of my 
constituency, Constituency No. 19, for having brought me back to this august Assembly.  My 
colleague, hon. Collendavelloo, and myself have campaigned together during the last election 
as a real team, and we won the elections. 

The  Government  Programme  which  was  presented  on  27  January  2015  before  this 
august  Assembly  reflects,  in  fact,  the  “manifeste  électoral”  which  came  out  in  November 
2014, and upon which l’Alliance Lepep based itself during the electoral campaign and got the 
candidates elected.  We are now in Government – we have a vision.  Above all, a vision to 
bridge the gap which exists between the economically strong and the economically weak. The 
aim  of  this  present  Government  is  not  only  to  create  wealth  by  encouraging  economic 
development,  but  also  ensure  a  fair  distribution  of  that  wealth.    We  are  here,  Madam,  to 
ensure that our acts will be in the best interests of the nation as a whole. 

The recent events seem to confirm the voice of the people - a sense of “having had 
enough”  of  the  previous  Government  -  for  the  right  reasons.    That’s  why  we  say  that  the 
people have voted with their heads rather than with their heart.  

The  vision  of  the  present  Government  is  also  to  bring  meaningful  change.  The  Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister is a man of principle.  People connect with him easily.  On this side of 
the House, we form a wonderful team, with Members of long standing experience and new 
Members.  The people have nothing to fear. There is already a feeling good factor prevailing 
all  over  the  island.    We  may  not  be  miracle  makers,  but  we  have  the  will  to  transform 
Mauritius into a country où “il fait bon vivre”. As a caring and responsible Government, we 
reiterate an unflinching commitment to put things right and give the best service to the nation. 
The measures which have been announced in the Government Programme pave the way to 
efficiency, transparency, and above all care. 

I have been honoured of heading a Ministry, the Ministry of Social Security, National 
Solidarity  and  Reform  Institutions  –  a  Ministry  entrusted  with  a  duty  of  care  and  passion.  
Care  and  passion  for  the  most  vulnerable  sectors  of  the  community  –  elderly,  disabled, 
widows, orphans, juvenile delinquents. 

To meet the aspiration of those weaker persons in our community, we have a tall 

order.  My main focus, therefore, would be to provide a public service that do honour to their 

 

46 

dignity.  This can only be achieved through an efficient, speedy and transparent system, 
whereby everybody knows what to expect from all services provided. 

I wish to inform the House that in order to address this issue, in the coming weeks, the 

Ministry will come up with a Customer Charter on the services provider.  

This  document  will  not  only  set  out  the  wide  and  diverse  range  of  social  services 
which the Ministry  offers, but will also spell out the Ministry’s  Vision,  Mission and Core 
Values.  You  will  find  listed  the  Ministry’s  commitments  in  terms  of  service  delivery,  the 
rights of claimants and obligations of beneficiaries. The document will contain guidance on 
how to apply for pensions, social benefits, assistance, the eligibility criteria for each type of 
benefits and the relevant documents required therefore. This informative leaflet will help and 
facilitate the public in general to locate the different offices of the Ministry as it will include 
contact names, addresses and phone numbers.  

This  measure,  Madam  Speaker,  will  strengthen  our  position 

towards  good 
governance, provision of up-to-date information and timely delivery of services to the people, 
especially the most vulnerable.  

There  are  some  235,000  beneficiaries  of  different  pensions  relating  to  retirement, 
widowhood,  invalidity  and  orphan  which  are  concerned  with  monthly  payments.  Since 
December 2014, Government has initiated all necessary for payment of an increased monthly 
pension to all the 235,000 beneficiaries concerned. This measure which has been announced 
during the electoral campaign paves the way for care. The Ministry of Social Security and 
Ministry of Finance have acted diligently and promptly to implement this important measure. 
This shows the importance given to such vulnerable groups and ensuring that they have the 
necessary financial support to sustain the present cost of living. This is, Madam Speaker, a 
Government by the people and for the people. As such those aged 60 to 89 have obtained an 
increase  of  38%  from  Rs3,623  to  Rs5,000,  the  elderly  aged  90  to  99  have  obtained  an 
increase of 39% from Rs10,789 to Rs15,000 and centenarians have obtained an increase of 
63% from Rs12,300 to Rs20,000. 

It  has  been  noted  that  the  present  procedures  practised  for  the  processing  of  cases 

have major weaknesses which need to be dealt with to ensure good governance.  

You will agree with me, Madam Speaker, no meaningful progress can be made if we 
do not adopt new technologies. The Ministry is, therefore, embarking on a landmark project 
of reviewing all procedures, infrastructure and present schemes to ensure that the Ministry 

 

47 

will only adopt new technologies, but also provides a transparent, equitable and rapid service 
delivery.  You  will  agree  that  there  has  been  very  slow  progress  in  the  past  years  for  the 
Ministry  to  integrate  modern  communication  channels  such  as  the  internet  and  mobile 
technologies, which are now the basic channels to ensure proximity and transparency to the 
people. Services of the Ministry will be reviewed to become real citizen-centric ones whereby 
any claimant will be able to get information or benefit due in time and as per level required. 

Madam Speaker, let me now come to the ageing population. The world is ageing at an 
increasing  rate,  affecting  both  developed  and  developing  countries.  Mauritius  is  also 
experiencing  this  unprecedented  ageing  phenomenon.  The  elderly  population  stands  at 
around 184,000 representing about 13% of the total population which is 1.25 million. There 
is  around  181,000  elderly,  aged  60  to  89  and  the  population  aged  90  and  above  stands  at 
about 3,000. However, among the elderly, female life chances are higher than men. 

The  female  population  stands  at  103,000  (56%)  and  the  male  population  at  nearly 
81,000  (44%).  This  trend  is  likely  to  persist  in  the  future.  It  is  forecast  that  in  2050,  the 
elderly population will reach 30% of the total population of Mauritius. 

Madam Speaker, in this end, Government will ensure that the necessary measures are 
taken so that we succeed in catering for those elderly people. We will also ensure that the 
fourth Recreation Centre for the Elderly and Disabled at Riambel be set up to provide more 
residential  and  recreational  facilities  for  the  elderly.  The  Elderly  Day  Care  Centres  now 
known as Activity Centres will offer new and needs-related programmes to promote the well-
being of the elderly and persons with disabilities. Additional Activity Facility Centres will be 
opened, especially in urban areas where there is a lack of such activities. 

As announced in the Government Programme, special counters will be set up at the 
level of primary health care  centres and hospitals to cater for the needs of the elderly and 
disabled.  This  measure,  Madam  Speaker,  will  certainly  facilitate  their  access  to  health 
services in a prompt manner. I am making an appeal to other organisations like banks, post 
offices and other service providers to have special counters for the elderly and persons with 
disabilities. 

Madam Speaker, Government will also provide special support care to elderly persons 
with disabilities and those living alone as part of its strategy to provide a service de proximité 
to them. Home visits will be introduced to ensure that these needy elderly persons are being 
well cared for.  

 

48 

In  order  to  enhance  the  protection  and  security  of  our  elders,  in  line  with  the 
Protection  of  Elderly  Person’s  Act  2005,  Government  will  further  strengthen  the  existing 
legislation  in  respect  of  Charitable  Institutions.  Among  others,  these  institutions  will  be 
required  to  install  CCTV  cameras  in  their  premises,  ensure  the  presence  of  a  full-time 
Medical  Practitioner  and  the  recruitment  of  qualified  and  trained  carers  as  well  as  a 
psychologist. The network of Elderly Watch working at community level to identify, report 
and  prevent  abuse  will  be  surely  empowered.  Intensive  sensitisation  campaigns  will  be 
reinforced at school level to educate our children on the need to protect our elders. 

Madam Speaker, as a responsible Government, we have to fulfil our obligations to our 
people and the international community with regard to the issue of disability. Mauritius has 
signed and ratified the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. As a result, 
we are proposing to amend sections 3 and 16 of the Constitution to prohibit discrimination. 
We are also coming up with a full-fledged and comprehensive Disability Bill to better protect 
persons with disabilities against all forms of discrimination.  

The  Bill  will  also  make  provisions  for  a  one-stop  shop  which  will  integrate  all  the 
Units  presently  providing  services  in  the  disability  sector  with  a  view  to  providing  cost-
effective  and  customer-friendly  services  to  persons  with  disabilities  while  avoiding 
duplication and dispersal of resources.  

In the same vein, we propose to align ourselves with the Disability-  Inclusive Post 

2015 Development Agenda presently being elaborated by the UN to mainstream disability.  

One important philosophy of the present Government Programme relates to the care 
of  the  most  vulnerable  one  and  their  empowerment  for  individual  and  collective 
advancement. To realise its vision, Government and the Ministry will forward to working in 
partnership with the civil society and NGOs as they play a key role in complementing the 
Government’s social agenda. 

Madam Speaker, since my assignment of the portfolio of Reform Institutions, I have 
made  it  a  duty  to  personally  attend  to  the  existing  problems  of  the  Rehabilitation  Youth 
Centres, the more so as it concerns young children. I have conducted two visits at the RYCs 
and held two meetings with the State Law Office and the Commissioner of Prisons and others 
to  find  ways  and  means  to  improve  the  aspects  of  security  and  proper  rehabilitation.  The 
Commissioner of Prisons has been requested to assist in the maintenance of discipline at the 
RYCs.  Regular meetings to monitor the situation at the RYCs are being held with a view to 

 

49 

improving the conditions of the youth of the inmates as well as exploring the possibilities of 
allowing  them  to  attend  schools  and  participate  in  outdoor  activities.  Furthermore, 
consultations  have  already  started  with  the  State  Law  Office  to  consider  the  possibility  of 
creating a new set-up for the RYCs through the setting-up of small homes to cater for the 
detention of smaller groups of inmates in a more conducive environment that would pave the 
way for proper and real rehabilitation. 

Madam Speaker, in the past months, it has been noted that the present procedures and 
response with regards to provisions of social assistance following heavy rainfalls and other 
such calamities require  a major review. We have, for example, noted a lack of emergency 
shelters  for  the  region  of  Port  Louis,  a  lack  of  standard  procedure  for  processing  of 
applications,  lack  of  coordination  between  stakeholders  and  lack  of  information  for  the 
public. 

Discussions have been held with the Police Force and the National Disaster Risk and 
Management  Centre  to  define  procedures  to  attend  events  following  heavy  rainfall  for  the 
whole island and a special Emergency Flood Scheme for the region of Port Louis. A standard 
reporting form is being designed by the Ministry and the Police Force to standardise the input 
received by the Police, which triggers benefit payment. The list of emergency centres for the 
region  of  Port  Louis  has  been  increased,  and  a  similar  review  will  be  done  for  the  other 
regions of the island. The opening of an additional office for the region of Port Louis is being 
worked out to decentralise work from the single office deserving the region. A fresh list of 
flood  prone  areas  is  being  finalised  and  will  be  circulated  for  discussions  and  policy 
formulation with stakeholders such as the Mauritius Police Force, National Disaster and Risk 
Management Centre, the Ministry of Social Integration and Empowerment and the National 
Empowerment Foundation. May I remind the House that we are now here dealing with public 
funds and that there should be check and balances to ensure that the real needy are assisted. 
We have at heart, of course, the vulnerable, but we should not be seen to have a ‘laissez-
faire’ policy that results in abuse of public funds. 

On a long term basis, the Government has been clear in its programme with regards to 
new innovative social housing policy. The relocation of the most vulnerable households to 
non-flood prone areas will be considered.  

Madam  Speaker,  before  ending,  let  me  say  a  few  words  on  my  constituency.  
Government is very keen to put the Plaza theatre in service and this has been highlighted in 

 

50 

the Government Programme.  The roof of Plaza has already been repaired under Phase I.  I 
understand that procedures have started with regards to Phase  II  and that consultants have 
been  hired  and  documents  have  already  been  forwarded  for  the  tendering  procedures 
regarding Phase II.  We do hope that Plaza theatre be restored and repaired soon.  

We have also - and this is very important - to pull down or bring necessary repairs 
with regards to Rose Hill market. It is long overdue.  I understand that things are at the level 
of my colleague, hon. Nando Bodha and needful will be done.   

Some new drains project would have to be implemented to cater for Crétin Street and 
other regions of Camp Levieux.  We have also to enlarge, upgrade and resurface Berthaud 
Road which is the main link between the town of Rose Hill to Quatre Bornes and which is 
being used by hundreds of people daily. 

With these words, Madam Speaker, I thank you. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Uteem! 

 

(3.44 p.m.) 

Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis  Central):  
Madam  Speaker,  elections  are  over;  the  euphoria  is  gone;  we  are  back  to  reality  and  the 
reality is that thousands of people in Mauritius are suffering. Thousands of people are in dire 
poverty.  

Last week, when we were in this august Assembly, at the same time, on a Tuesday, 
dozens  of  inhabitants  from  Tranquebar  had  gone  to  the  Police  Station  of  Pope  Hennessy, 
almost assaulting the Police Officers to get a voucher which would have enabled them to get 
a meagre Rs160 compensation for damage to their houses due to heavy rainfall. And this was 
also a reminder that my constituency, Tranquebar, is the constituency which was most badly 
hit together with Constituency No. 1 following the flash floods of 2013.  Although, there had 
been a Fact-finding Committee headed by former Judge Domah telling the Government that 
there were flood prone areas, the report was shelved and what had to happen on 30 March 
2013 happened.  Unfortunately, 11 people perished out of whom one young Sithanen from 
my constituency who was washed by the river overflowing behind his house.   

The  Government  started  a  programme  of  building  canals  and  drains  in  my 
constituency  and  then  as  often  happens,  for  some  reasons  somewhere  everything  stopped.  

 

51 

Today, in Tranquebar, the place at the foot of mountain Le Pouce where the flood started, 
that is, where the water started to go into the rivers and then ended in Caudan, today, we still 
don’t have canals; we still don’t have proper drainage.  I hope that the hon. Prime Minister 
who is now responsible for the National Development Unit will give priority to those flood-
prone areas so that we no longer have to see a queue before every Police Station as soon as 
there is a heavy rainfall.   

The  elections  are  gone;  the  euphoria  is  over;  thousands  of  people  are  suffering; 
thousands of people live in absolute poverty; thousands of people around the country don’t 
have proper housing; don’t have basic necessities; don’t have sewerage connection.  A big 
task!  An uphill task is what the new Government has to face. 

Madam Speaker, Port Louis is our capital.  It is the economic nerve of the country.  
We have the port.  We have skyscrapers.  We have banks.  Yet, only a kilometre away from 
these icons of prosperity, hundreds of families live in houses made of rusted iron sheets.  In 
Crown Land Tory, Nazareth, Camp Manna, families are living in dire poverty.  Children are 
not sent to schools because there is not enough food to feed them and the parents are ashamed 
to send their children without food to eat.   

A few years ago, the people of Tranquebar held a procession.  They walked all the 
way  from  Tranquebar  to  the  office  of  the  then  Minister  of  Social  Integration,  hon.  Xavier 
Duval, and handed over a petition, urging the  Minister to come down  and see the state in 
which  they  are  living;  to  give  them  financial  assistance.    Unfortunately,  that  was  not  the 
priority of the then Minister.  I hope that with the coming into power of this new Government 
and the appointment of hon. Roopun as the Minister for Social Integration, their plight will 
finally be heard.  

Madam  Speaker,  as  hon.  Fowdar  stated  before  me  today,  we  have  a  serious 
unemployment problem in this country. Most of our unemployed are youngsters and women. 
Can we, in Mauritius, when we are trying to target to become a high income nation, afford to 
have  so  much  wasted  manpower?  Today,  our  youth  are  educated,  they  have  legitimate 
dreams, legitimate expectation, they want a decent job. 

Madam Speaker, a few years ago, I went to India with my wife. We visited the Taj 
Mahal. I remember I met a gentleman in his early thirties, he was wearing some torn clothes, 
not very appealing. He approached us and told us that he was going to give us a tour guide. 
He was not an official guide, but we felt sorry for him and he asked only, I think, Rs50. So, 

 

52 

he gave us a guided tour and I was really impressed by his command of the English language 
and  his  mastery  of  the  History  of  India,  not  only  about  the  Taj  Mahal,  but  of  the  Mughal 
empire and all the kings who came before and after that. So, I asked him, out of curiosity: 
“What are your qualifications?” I was surprised to learn that this gentleman who is charging 
fifty Indian rupees to make us visit the Taj Mahal, had a double doctorate with distinction and 
he had no job. 

Unfortunately,  Madam  Speaker,  the  plight  of  our  youngsters,  our  young  graduates 
today, are not far from that gentleman in India. I am not exaggerating, Madam Speaker. Two 
weeks ago, we had a vacancy in our office for a secretary and we did not receive one, but five 
applications from graduates - graduates in History, graduates in Politics, graduates in Human 
Resource - who were happy to take the job of a secretary because they needed the money. 
They  needed  the  money  because  their  parents  have  been  taking  loans  to  pay  for  their 
education,  there  were  other  brothers  and  sisters  behind  them  waiting  to  get  with  their 
education and they would accept anything. Overqualified, underpaid, this is the plight of our 
youngsters today! 

I remember when I was a child, my parents used to tell me: ‘You know, study hard, 
work hard and you will get a job”. But, can we today look in the eyes of our children and tell 
them: “Study hard, work hard and you will get a job in Mauritius”? How many of us who 
have children studying outside of Mauritius will tell our children: “Come back to Mauritius, 
you are sure to  get a job, a decent job. You are sure to  get promoted whenever there is  a 
vacancy”? How many of our children would we in a way tell them to go and migrate because 
the grass is greener outside of Mauritius? 

At the root of the problem, Madam Speaker, is the mismatch between demand and 
supply  in  our  workforce.  We  all  know  that.  But,  what  are  we  going  to  do  to  remedy  the 
situation? I think we need to look into our education system, have a dispassionate debate and 
examine whether the type of education system that we have today is equipping our children 
to get a job. 

I listened carefully to the second half of the speech of hon. Hurreeram on Tuesday, 
full  of  passion,  enthusiasm,  talking  about  how  innovation  is  the  wayforward.  He  is  right; 
innovation is the way forward. I really hope that the hon. Minister of Finance will give a big 
budget for research and development in Mauritius. But it serves no purpose to talk about the 

 

53 

ICT sector if we do not have a proper academy to train our people, if we do not have a world 
class academy headed by competent staff and regularly visited by business leaders. 

The ICT Academy was a good idea, but it was never given effect to by the former 
Government. It was a good idea, it was going to be a joint initiative between the Government 
and stakeholders, people who know the business, who know the demands of the ICT sector. I 
hope that with the new Minister of ICT, a new impetus would be given to this ICT Academy 
because,  Madam Speaker, there is a lot of scope in the ICT sector. 

Last week, I had lunch with some businessmen from France. I recall ten years ago, I 
had invited them to come and invest in ICT sector in Mauritius. I even had to go to France 
and do a presentation to the top management. They came, they stayed, they prospered, but, 
instead  of  employing  Mauritians,  they  ended  up  employing  Malagasy,  people  for 
Madagascar.  Why?  Because  year  in  year  out,  Mauritian  students  from  the  University  of 
Mauritius  were  failing  the  aptitude  test.  Univesity  of  Mauritius  were  churning  people, 
engineers  who had strong  academic backgrounds, who could  reproduce text by heart what 
they have learned, who can give you a technical textbook solution to any problem you asked 
them. But if you then ask them to think, to come up with a solution, to come up with ideas, to 
think outside the box, they could not do that. I think it is very important that we review the 
whole education system because our education methods are outdated and if we do not evolve, 
if we do not adapt, we will perish. 

Madam Speaker, I must confess that, being given the number of jobless people, I was 
very  disappointed  when  I  read  the  Government  Programme  under  the  heading  “Job 
Creation”. If I may say so, that showed a total lack of imagination and vision.  

We were told that 15,000 jobs would be created annually. How? At paragraph 31 and 

I quote – 

“A  new  dynamism  will  be  instilled  in  the  existing  economic  sectors  and,  later  on, 
from new development poles, such as regional bunkering hub, the ocean economy, duty free 
shopping and the ICT enabled services sectors.” 

Du déjà vu! It was as if it was cut and paste from the previous year’s budget. But, may 
I ask out of these 15,000 jobs, how many jobs will be created for our graduates? How many 
of our graduates will be employed in the bunkering sector? How many of our graduates will 
be absorbed, if not drowned, by the ocean economy? How many of our graduates will work 
on cruise, in shipping and hospitality sectors? 

 

54 

Madam Speaker, if we want to sustain growth and achieve long-term prosperity, we 
are bound to diversify our market; we are bound to diversify our products. Being an island, 
we  are  too  vulnerable  to  external  factors.  We  have  seen  how  the  high  price  of  petroleum 
product  coupled  with  mismanagement  and  dubious  hedging  had  hampered  growth  a  few 
years ago. Now that the petroleum prices are down, we are faced with new challenges, what I 
call the double currency impact. On the one hand, a weakening euro, on the other hand a high 
dollar. We are hit twice, because as the euro goes down, our proceeds are less, our tourism 
proceeds  are  less,  our  proceeds  from  the  sale  of  our  product  are  less.  At  the  same  time, 
because of the high dollar, our import is more expensive, our raw material is more expensive 
and this resolves in our product being not competitive, and, therefore, we lose on the market. 
I  will  wait  eagerly  for  the  budget  to  see  what  measures  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  will 
propose in response to these new challenges. But, I am sure, Madam Speaker, that like my 
predecessor, he will give us a lecture on how we have to turn to Africa, and so, we should, 
Madam Speaker. 

The  McKinsey  Report  on  Africa  published  in  2010  predicts  that  by  2020,  Africa’s 
collective GDP will be around 2.6 trillion dollars and Africa’s consumer spending will be 1.4 
trillion USD.  

According to the Economist, 7 out of 10 of the fastest-growing countries will come 
from Africa in the next five  years. 60% of unused arable land in the world lies in Africa. 
Africa has an important internal demand driven by a market of 1 billion people and a constant 
increase of purchasing power. 

Mozambique  has  hit  gas.  Several  sub-Saharan  African  countries  are  booming.  But, 
what are we doing to take advantage of the situation? We are part of Africa, we are part of the 
African Union, of SADC and of COMESA, but are we doing enough? 

Madam  Speaker,  there  was  a  question  put  by  hon.  Mohamed  on  Tuesday, 
unfortunately,  we  did  not  reach  this  point  and  I  have  been  looking  for  the  written  answer 
which I did not receive. The question was: who represented Mauritius at the African Union 
Summit which was held between 23 and 31 January 2015? That was an important Summit 
and we, being part of Africa and telling people that they have to come to Mauritius to invest 
into Africa, who represented us at that Summit? Was it the hon. Prime Minister? No. Was it 
the hon. Minister of Foreign Affairs? No. We were represented by a chargé d’affaires from 

 

55 

our Addis Ababa! How can we, on the one hand, try to sell Mauritius as a gateway to Africa 
and we don’t even participate and meet our peers from African nations? 

Madam Speaker, I have just mentioned the potential with the emerging middle class 
and  upper  class  population  in  Africa.  But  do  we  have  a  strategy  to  attract  tourists  from 
African  countries  other  than  South  Africa?  How  much  effort  is  put  by  the  MTPA  into 
roadshows  to  attract  tourists  from  African  countries?  Are  our  hotels  ready  to  meet  their 
demands?  Do  we  know  what  their  demands  are?  Do  we  have  a  strategy  to  penetrate  the 
African  market  for  our  products?  Are  we  still  going  to  be  focused  only  on  South  Africa? 
Have  we  carried  out  an  in-depth  study  as  to  the  comparative  advantage  that  Mauritian 
products  have  over  our  competitors?  Again,  have  we  identified  the  demand  or  projected 
demand for the African market and then go and market for investors to come and set up in 
Mauritius? So, I may ask and I hope the hon. Minister of Finance in his Budget Speech will 
answer me. Do we have a strategy for Africa at all?  

I  hope  that  this  Government  will  learn  from  the  mistakes  that  were  made  by  the 
Deputy Prime Minister, hon. Duval, when he was then Minister of Finance. He came up, I 
think  it  was  two  years  ago  in  2013,  with  the  idea  of  having  two  roving  ambassadors  for 
Africa. One of them roved so much that she ended up in Moscow! The other one who is a 
good  friend  of  mine  roved  only  around  the  office  of  hon.  Duval.  He  did  not  even  have  a 
proper budget. He did not even have an office in the Ministry of External Affairs and this is 
how  we  are  going  to  promote  la  diplomatie  économique  in  Africa!  This  is  not  serious, 
Madam Speaker. We need to have a strategy for Africa. If we need to open more embassies 
we have to do it. If we need to open more trade mission, we have to do it and we will have to 
increase our connectivity. Again, another idea thrown two years ago by hon. Minister Duval, 
but nothing happened. 

Can you imagine if you have a business meeting in Kenya, you have to wait for one 
week before you can get another direct flight back? If you go through South Africa, you lose 
one day; if you go through Dubai, again you lose one day because of the connecting flight. 
How  can  we,  Mauritius,  be  the  hub  to  Africa  when  we  are  so  badly  connected  to  Africa? 
Again, I hope hon. Duval, who is now the Minister for External Communications, will speed 
up contract signing for code sharing with existing airlines in Africa or even encourage Air 
Mauritius to fly more frequently to African market.  

 

56 

The point is, Madam Speaker, most of us do not know about Africa. We are next door 
to Africa, we do not know Africa and this state of affair cannot continue. Last year, a group 
of students who were graduates and in the final year of the University of Mauritius, came for 
an  interview  and  were  asking  me  questions  about  Government  policies.  Inevitably,  the 
question came about Africa because everybody talks about Africa. So, I asked these elites of 
ours a few basic questions on Africa.  I asked them: what is the capital of Tanzania? They 
were unable to tell me. They did not know.  I  asked them: what is the language spoken in 
Mozambique? They did not know. So, I lowered the standard and I said: what is the capital of 
South Africa? Then, they  said they knew! They said: “Of course, Sir, it is Johannesburg.” 
They have never even heard of Pretoria. And we are talking about the University of Mauritius 
students, people who will be selling Mauritius as a gateway to Africa! This has to change. We 
need to introduce African studies in the cursus.  We need to get people to learn Portuguese, 
Spanish and Swahili so that we can communicate and not just say we are part of Africa. We 
must really start feeling like Africans, thinking like Africans. Only then, we will be able to 
get the respect of the international community and only then we will be recognised as the 
gateway to Africa. 

Madam  Speaker,  we  will  have  to  revisit  these  issues  in  a  few  weeks’  time  during 
budgetary debates. Budget is not just about spending; it is also about financing the budgetary 
deficit. In an interview given to Week-End newspaper last Sunday, the Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  hon.  Lutchmeenaraidoo,  announced  that  there  will  be  no 
increase in value added tax. This is most welcome. But this is so typical to what people are 
used to hear from the hon. Minister. I still remember his dramatic budget speeches in the 80s 
when after preparing people for the worst, he would come and say that it is a no tax budget. 
So, we are very familiar with no tax budget, but what we did not know, we were not familiar 
with is that today we no longer have no tax budget, today we have no budget taxes. We have 
taxes without the budget. We have taxes outside the budget. Yes, Madam Speaker, in this 
very House, the hon. Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection informed us 
in an answer to my parliamentary question that users of petroleum products will be paying an 
additional Rs1.3 billion in new taxes. Of course, he did not use the term ‘new taxes’. He used 
terms  like  ‘contribution  to  build  Mauritius  Fund’.  But,  by  whatever  name  it  is  called,  tax 
remains  tax!  The  end  result  is,  without  going  through  budget,  without  going  through 
parliamentary approval, Rs1.3 billion additional taxes! 

 

57 

That  is  not  all,  Madam  Speaker.  The  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  has  also  introduced 
another new tax which, I am sure, many hon. Members of this House are not even aware of 
because that was done even more surreptitiously.  In January, the hon. Minister of Finance 
passed  a  regulation  amending  the  second  schedule  of  the  Income  Tax  Act.  The  second 
schedule relates to exempt income, income that is exempt from taxation. Now, by amending 
the second schedule he has introduced short-term capital gains tax realised on sale of units 
and securities held by entities other than global business companies for less than six months. 

If  you  are  a  pensioner  and  you  have  decided  to  invest  your  increased  pension  into 
some  stocks,  you  have  decided  to  buy  some  stocks  on  the  stock  exchange,  and  before  the 
expiry of six months the price has gone up and you decide to sell at a profit, this would now 
be subject to tax. 

Previously, all profits and all gains realised from sales of shares and unit on the Stock 
Exchange was exempt because it was not deemed to be in the course of the business. The 
Income Tax Department had recognised that. Investors can invest in stocks and when they 
sell the stock at the profit, this is capital gains and that is not taxable income. But, today as 
from  January,  a  new  tax  has  been  introduced  without  most  of the  Members  of  this  House 
even  realising  it.  I  don’t  know  how  much  the  hon.  Minister  expect  to  collect  in  these 
additional capital gains tax. I hope that he will come in the Budget speech and tell us what is 
the provision made under that item. What I do know, Madam Speaker, is that taking such a 
measure  will  do  no  good  for  the  Stock  Exchange.  It  will  affect  the  already  illiquid  Stock 
Exchange and it will certainly not encourage savings. 

Madam Speaker, at paragraph 189 of the Government Programme it is provided that 

and I quote – 

“Government will implement an equitable tax policy based on the philosophy 

of ‘fiscalité légère’”. 

What is ‘fiscalité légère’? Is ‘fiscalité légère’ so light that you don’t even know when 
you’re being taxed? You are no longer told that you’re going to be taxed. Taxes are being 
imposed  by  regulation.  Taxes  are  being  imposed  on  petroleum  products  using  different 
names.  Is that the ‘fiscalité légère’ that this Government is  going to offer to us? Anyway, 
Madam Speaker, I am sure that we will be able to revisit all these aspects of collection in the 
coming Budget Speech. 

 

58 

Madam Speaker, there is a long list of orators after me. I don’t want to take more time 
of  the  House,  I  would  leave  by  saying  that  elections  are  over,  the  euphoria  is  gone,  the 
population is watching us and surely sooner, far much sooner that we think, we will have to 
answer back to the population.  

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

 

(4.11 p.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 
Scientific Research (Mrs L. D. Dookun-Luchoomun):  Madam Speaker, allow me at the 
very outset to extend to you, Madam, my warmest congratulations for occupying such a high 
constitutional  post.  Knowing  you  and  especially  keeping  in  view  the  way  you  have  been 
managing the proceedings of this august Assembly so far, I have absolutely no doubt that all 
the hon. Members feel the gavel is in the right hand. My congratulations also go to the young 
Deputy Speaker, hon. Adrien Duval. 

Madam Speaker, I stand before you as Minister of Education and Human Resources, 

with the additional responsibilities of Tertiary Education and Scientific Research.  

But  I  also  stand  as  a  politician  who  would  wish  to  start  her  intervention  on  the 
Government  Programme  with  words  of  reassurance  meant  for  the  hon.  Members  of  the 
Opposition.  

Yes, it is true that we do have a substantial majority in this House, and yes, we could 

easily override any objection or opinion emerging from the other side of the House.  

But  we,  who  have  been  called  upon  to  assume  the  heavy  and  demanding 
responsibilities of Government will not shy away from the viewpoints albeit from the other 
side of the House.  

I believe, Madam Speaker, that there is one lesson that the last elections taught us, 
that is, provided we are willing to open our eyes and ears to see and hear. It is a lesson in 
humility. 

At this stage, I will allow myself a digression to take up something that is still fresh in 
all our minds. Last year, at this time of the year, we recall the ‘birthday cake episode’ when 
the MMM/MSM Remake had reached cruising speed. At that time, nobody would have bet a 
single cent on the capacity of the then Government to return to power.  

 

59 

But then, Madam Speaker, that was before the bait was dangled to catch the shark! 

Madam Speaker,  I am not being facetious or  even seeking to twirl the  knife in the 
wound. The reason that I am going back to this ill-fated alliance between the MMM and the 
Labour Party is to precisely indicate what happens when overconfidence holds supreme sway 
and goes to the heads of people. 

Moral  thinking  often  refers  to  what  are  called  ‘7’  Deadly  Sins’:  wrath,  greed,  lust, 

envy, gluttony, sloth and pride.  

Remember  this  last  one  -  pride  and  its  brother  in  arms,  arrogance  -  and  how  they 
manifested  themselves  all  through  the  electoral  campaign.  Some  leaders  felt  they  were 
invincible. They were unbeatable because they felt they could take the people for a ride.  

Indeed, they believed that ‘le peuple admirable’ could be taken for granted. That le 
peuple  would  unquestioningly  and  placidly  accept  to  swallow  anything  and  everything  – 
hook, line and sinker. They felt they would be out and out winners.  

But, Madam Speaker, they forgot one universal truth: what really matters – “is not the 
size of the dog in the fight, it is the size of the fight in the dog”. I have to salute le peuple 
admirable, indeed for being pellucid and open eyed. We have to show our appreciation for 
the  people  for  being  coherent  in  their  thinking,  for  not  allowing  considerations  other  than 
national well-being to be in the forefront.  

You  will  appreciate,  therefore,  Madam  Speaker,  why  I  referred  earlier  to  the 
importance of being humble. The people, in their wisdom, preferred to place their trust in 
those  who  demonstrated  no  pride,  no  arrogance,  but  who  are  humble  despite  the  landslide 
victory.  

So,  I  would  state  again  the  important  lesson  in  humility  that  the  last  elections 
highlighted. As a humble person, I am willing to accept that I do not have the monopoly of 
knowledge, that is, infinite, let alone the monopoly of wisdom. The hon. Members of this 
House will appreciate that the world of education and training is a domain that logically cuts 
across-party politics and partisan lines. 

We all have a stake in education. Someone somewhere whom we know, whom we are 
related to, is impacted upon directly by educational policies and decisions we take. In fact, a 
diversity of views and opinions can only be welcomed.  

 

60 

Not simply because such diversity enriches the debate on education, but also because 
it shows that everybody feels highly concerned about it. So, I would be more than willing to 
listen  to  alternative  views  and  suggestions.  However,  it  is  worth  underlying  that  this 
Government has a mission to fulfil, goals to meet and targets to attain. We are, therefore, not 
likely to have spanners thrown into the wheel just because of political gimmickry. 

Madam Speaker, Stephen Covey, the management guru, once said - 

“You  can  retire  from  a  job,  but  don't  ever  retire  from  making  extremely 

meaningful contributions in life”. 

Professionally, I started as a teacher and I hope my students will remember me as a 
person who made some difference to their lives. And although I am away from the school 
compound today, I must confess that I am actually very honoured to have belonged to the 
family  of  educators.  I  feel  all  the  more  honoured,  now  that  I  have  been  invested  with  the 
responsibility  of  the  education  portfolio,  to  be  given  the  opportunity  to  make  extremely 
meaningful contributions to the lives of so many learners. 

In  parenthesis,  Madam  Speaker,  allow  me  to  express  my  heartfelt  gratitude  to  our 
Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, for having shown so much of trust in me and putting 
me in charge of a portfolio that is a driver of change, of innovation and of development.  

The contributions that I was just talking about, Madam Speaker, are not going to be 

just meaningful, but far-reaching as well. 

Madam Speaker, let us take the pre-primary subsector of our education system. We all 
know the significance we attach to the learning experience at a formative period in a child’s 
life. There is no doubt that some sound work has been done so as to enrol more and more 
children in pre-schools and this since the 1980’s. It is important for all children to secure the 
experience  of  early  childhood  education,  an  experience  that  will  act  as  a  foundation  to 
scaffold new learning on. Madam Speaker, we must now think beyond enrolment rates.  We 
must think seriously  about enhancing the quality of education.  We need a proper  Quality 
Assurance  Unit  for  the  Early  Childhood  Care  and  Education  Authority,  to  ensure  that  a 
proper and uniform standard is attained in all pre-primary schools, public and private, so as to 
elimate the wide disparity that exists today. 

It is important that we do not limit ourselves, however, to our boundaries. We have to 
go  continental,  so  as  to  share  our  experience  and  our  expertise  with  others.    I  am  glad  to 
inform  the  House  that  the  Association  for  the  Development  of  Education  in  Africa  has 

 

61 

requested  Mauritius  to  lead  and  drive  the  Inter-Country  Quality  Node  on  Early  Childhood 
Development.    It  is  from  this  perspective  that  in  February  itself  I  had  the  opportunity  to 
formally  launch  the  Inter-Country  Quality  Node  on  Early  Childhood  Development, 
commonly referred to as the ICQN ECD.  

As  hon.  Members  are  probably  aware,  early  childhood  development  is  one  of  the 
priority areas of the African Union Plan of Action for the Second Decade in Education in 
Africa. The Inter-Country Quality Node for an Early Education Development is thus an inter-
governmental  organisation  for  policy  dialogue  and  collaborative  action  among  African 
Ministers of Education, strategic partners for advancing early childhood development agenda 
in Africa. 

The collaborative approach relies on a networking of African countries, institutions 
and experts for exchange of knowlegde on concepts, research findings and capacity building. 
Mauritius  will  lead  the  ICQN  for  early  childhood  development,  and  will  act  as  a  regional 
platform for capacity building, knowledge sharing, peer-learning, establishing community of 
practice and disseminate findings of policy research for countries to translate into effective 
early  childhood  development  policies,  and  this  will  develop  common  core  skills  in  early 
childhood development that countries can put at the heart of good quality and relevant basic 
education. 

With regard to the primary  and secondary sub-sectors, the Government  Programme 
states  in  clear  terms  our  determination  to  make  9  years  of  basic  continuous  schooling  a 
reality.  For quite some time, my predecessor in office had been proposing to make the 9-year 
basic  continuous  education  operational.  The  concept  of  the  nine-year  schooling  itself  is  in 
line  with  international  trends,  with  many  countries,  including  Finland,  having  adopted  the 
principles of inclusive and holistic basic education. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  also  the  preparatory  stage  for  lifelong  learning,  which  has 
become  a  crying  need  today.  This,  in  order  to  free  our  children  from  highly  competitive 
system that is burdening them since long time, and which has prevented their proper holistic 
development. 

It has become our duty today to relieve our children and to give back to our children 

their childhood, and allow them to learn and develop in a right and conducive environment. 

 

62 

It is of crucial importance for children to be given the opportunity to develop all their 
potentials  and  talents,  and  to  grow  up  to  become  creative,  versatile  and  critical  thinkers 
having problem solving skills, and ready to face the challenges of this new era. 

I believe that we have today reached a defining moment in the history of education.  
Today, Government, teachers, parents all have the same objective, that of giving our children 
the best education and allowing them to have a holistic development. The French critic and 
historian,  Hippolyte  Adolphe  Taine,  once  wrote  that  history  is  clearly  made  when  three 
factors synergistically come into operation – 

« L’homme, le moment et le milieu. » 

Et le gouvernement est pleinement conscient de cette synergie, et sous aucun prétexte, 
nous ne laisserons échapper cette opportunité qui se présente à nous de faire de Maurice un 
pays où les enfants pourront s’épanouir pleinement. Si la population  a placé sa confiance en 
ce gouvernement, c’est justement pour qu’il se fixe comme objectif principal le bien-être de 
ce peuple. On ne peut se permettre d’échouer quand on a quelqu’un de visionnaire, d’avant-
gardiste, mais aussi surtout pragmatique que notre Premier ministre Sir Anerood Jugnauth. 

Les parents sont soucieux de l’avenir de leurs enfants ; cela tout à fait légitime. Mais, 
quand ce même enfant est dépourvu des moments de loisir, comment peut-on prétendre à un 
épanouissement complet? Madame la présidente, il est essentiel que tout cela change, et la 
tâche de combattre cette perversion de l’aprentissage chez les jeunes nous revient à nous. On 
veut que renaissent ce dynamisme, cet entousiame, ce sens de débrouillardise, et surtout la 
curiosité tellement nécessaire pour un aprentisage fructueux et sain. 

On  a  beaucoup  parlé  de  taux  d’échec  des  enfants  au  niveau  de  la  CPE.  L’ancien 
régime  est  même  venu  avec  une  mesure  pour  qu’ils  puissent  reprendre  les  examens  une 
deuxième  fois  en  décembre.  Mais,  pour  vraiment  aider  un  enfant  à  réussir,  il  est  crucial 
d’identifier très tôt les élèves ayant des difficultés d’apprentissage, afin d’éviter un échec plus 
tard. Je voudrais informer mes collègues du Parlement que mon ministère met sur pied une 
unité, la ‘Remedial Unit’, dans chaque école primaire, pour s’assurer que les enfants ayant 
des difficultés d’apprentissage, dès la première année du cycle primaire, soit pris en main. 
Aussi, l’éducation physique et les arts feront aussi parti du cursus scolaire. 

 Let  me  assure  the  House  that  my  Ministry  is  very  soon  coming  with  the 
implementation  of  the  9-year  basic  schooling  plan.  Of  course,  that  will  be  subjected  to 
widespread  discussions  with  stakeholders  prior  to  full  execution.    But  let  me  inform  the 

 

63 

House in no uncertain terms that, during the nine years of continuous and basic schooling, 
learners  will  be  expected  to  acquire  appropriate  levels  of  literacy,  numeracy,  and  most 
importantly  life  skills  while  also  imbibing  the  relevant  moral,  ethical  and  civic  values.  
Madam Speaker, values education will certainly form part of the curriculum.  Reference to 
values, Madam, brings to my mind this quote from Theodore Roosevelt – 

“To educate a person in mind and not in morals is to educate a menace to society”. 

For a long time, questions have been raised as to the type of person we want to see 
emerging  from  our  education  system.    Do  we  want  to  perpetrate  the  existing  system  that 
leaves a number of pupils and students on the wayside?  Is it not our responsibility to give 
them a school of experience that is fulfilling in more ways than one?  Should an education 
system worthy of the name not seek to cater for the emergence of a whole person?  It is true 
that,  today,  companies,  whether  national  or  international,  the  corporate  sector,  are  all 
headhunting for people with higher skills set.  They are looking for people who are capable of 
thinking in an independent way and have easy communication skills, epecially, the openness 
to novel ideas and adapting to changes of the new fundamentals of high-end occupations. 

The discourse today is on the 21st century skills.  Jacques Delors “Learning to Learn” 
and “Learning to Live Together” are today gaining greater currency than never before.  All 
these  certainly  posit  new  challenges  to  the  education  system  and  demand  that  they  be 
confronted  and  addressed.    And  this  Government,  Madam  Speaker,  will  deliver.  But  what 
also comes out loud and clear, Madam Speaker, is that, if, on the one hand, we do not want a 
skills slowdown that would be catastrophic for the country, on the other hand, we do not want 
one-dimensional people who concentrate exclusively on their material well-being. We want 
the  system  to  cater  for  the  integral  development  of  our  learners.    You  will  note  that  the 
private providers of primary and secondary education do that quite well – but there is still a 
dearth of activities in the public schools that would cater for the whole person.  It is in this 
context  that  I  would  wish  to  highlight  one  major  measure  mentioned  in  the  Government 
Programme.  This relates to the setting up of a school of arts to promote the holistic learner 
development. 

Madam  Speaker,  Dreda  Say  Mitchell,  the  award-winning  crime  novelist  as  well  as 

freelance Education Consultant, wrote in The Guardian in April 2014 - 

“Art  isn’t  an  extra;  it’s  an  integral  part  of  a  well-balanced  education 
curriculum.  The  private  school  youngsters  standing  at  a  bus  stop  with  a 

 

64 

musical  instrument  strapped  to  their  back  is  a  familiar  sight.  We  need  state 
school students with instruments, easels and scripts standing there too.”  

Lest we forget, the Arts - whether it is Performing Arts, the Crafts, etc. – help us to look at 
life differently, to use our imagination differently and, especially give a booster to potentials 
that are latent for so many students and youths.  

However, Madam Speaker, this also presupposes that we are able to provide for 

genuine equity in the system.  

Today, in the world of Education, a concept that is fast catching on is what has been 

termed as the Education ‘tri-lemma: the ‘tri-lemma’ of access, quality and equity.  

We  have,  today,  won  the  access  battle  and  the  drive  for  quality  in  education  is 
inevitably bound to be an on-going feature. But, you cannot work wonders with kids coming 
to school on an empty stomach. Nor can we break the cycle of poverty, if we do not ensure 
that the home environment becomes a vector of change.  

There are vulnerable groups in this society of whom it would be immoral to ask that 

they dig a little deeper in their pockets! 

The Government Programme has hit the bull’s-eye with its series of equity measures. 
I will only mention some of them, especially those having a bearing on the educational set-
up.  

• 

• 

• 
• 

The special financial assistance scheme to help students from modest families 
to  pursue  tertiary  education  and  thus  contribute  to  their  own  economic  and 
social advancement. 
Measures that will facilitate the home ownership for economically and socially 
disadvantaged. 
The provision of hot meals to primary school pupils. 
The provision of 100% subsidy for examination fees for SC and HSC students. 

Madam Speaker, let me now come to a very important point. When we say that we are 
providing  100%  subsidy  for  examination  fees  for  SC  and  HSC  students,  we  are  removing 
hurdles. We are allowing young people from any walk of life to access to education and this 
is extremely important and this has always been in our philosophy. 

Madam Speaker, let me now come to the tertiary sub-sector, the one that has remained 

in the news for a long time now - but for the wrong reasons altogether.  

 

65 

Allow me at the very outset state that we are very much keen on developing Mauritius 

into an Education and Knowledge Hub.  

Et qui dit ‘centre de savoir’, dit ‘centres d’excellence’.  

Allow  me  to  use  the  definition  of  an  Education  Hub  as  given  by  Observatory  on 

Borderless Education for the benefit of the House.  

It is defined as, I quote - 

‘The process of building a critical mass of local and foreign actors - including 
students, education institutions, companies, knowledge industries, science and 
technology  centres  -  who  collaborate  in  a  strategic  way  on  cross  border 
education, training, knowledge and innovation initiatives.’ 

No one can deny the significance of investing in this sub-sector.  

The benefits are indeed numerous - 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Innovative national development can only become a reality when we have a 
fit-for-purpose human capital formation.  
Higher levels of education are a guarantee for economic growth and therefore 
for breaking the cycle of poverty.  
Equally significantly, higher education is strongly conducive to a successful 
participation in the global knowledge economy.  
It is also critical for the promotion of faster technological growth and building 
human capabilities.  

So, yes, we have to invest in Higher Education.  

We have to encourage the provision of cross-border education and encourage regional 

student mobility.  

We  also  need  to  create  conditions  that  will  attract  the  setting  up  of  off-campus 
branches and brand-name Tertiary Education Institutions in Mauritius. Many countries have 
shown  that  this  has  worked  well  for  them:  Dubai,  Singapore,  Malaysia  are  some  of  the 
favoured student destinations that come to my mind here. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  question  needs  to  be  asked:  why  has  this  scenario  then  not 
worked for us?  I believe we all in this House know exactly why. Somewhere, institutions 
have  failed  to  fulfil  those  obligations  and  responsibilities  that  have  been  part  of  their 

 

66 

mandate.  Some  of  the  institutions  that  have  come  here  have  been  driven  exclusively  by 
‘Profit  Motive’.  And  during  the  last  Regime,  obtaining  easy  access  to  ministerial  offices 
opened the door for a clear flouting of basic rules and regulations governing the sector.  As 
Minister of Tertiary Education,  I  find myself opening a Pandora’s Box  every time  I  come 
across one of those institutions. 

Madame la présidente, il serait bon de souligner que l’ancien gouvernement, après les 
élections  de  2010,  est  venu  de  l’avant  avec  la  création  du  ministère  de  l’enseignement 
supérieur  sous  la  tutelle  de  l’ancien  ministre  Jeetah.    Dans  pratiquement,  chacun  de  ses 
discours  et  de  ceux  de  l’ancien  Premier  ministre,  mention  été  faite  de  cette  initiative.  Le 
gouvernement se félicitant à chaque fois de l’avènement de ce ministère. Tantôt qualifiée de 
sans  précédent,  tantôt  qualifiée  de  décision  audacieuse,  tout  a  été  fait  pour  présenter  ce 
ministère à la population comme la réponse à la problématique que représentait le chômage 
parmi les jeunes et l’incapacité de l’Université de Maurice d’accueillir un plus grand nombre 
d’étudiants, mais surtout aussi pour vendre le slogan creux qu’avait trouvé le ministre d’alors, 
‘One Graduate per Family’.  

Madame  la  président,  quatre  ans  après,  le  bilan  était  des  moins  honorables !  Une 
période durant laquelle,  le ministre Jeetah n’a  fait que protéger ses proches. Je citerai, ici, 
l’exemple flagrant de l’EIILM University, dirigée par le Trust familial dont il est, lui-même, 
un membre. Et aujourd’hui, il nous faut répondre de ses actes irréfléchis et irresponsables aux 
parents  d’étudiants.  Ces  jeunes  ont  effectué  en  toute  confiance  des  études  à  l’EIILM 
University. Leurs diplômes ne sont pas reconnus et ils ne savent plus à quel saint se vouer. 
Pire, ces parents ont dû s’endetter pour financer les études de leurs enfants et, aujourd’hui, ils 
se retrouvent engloutis sous des dettes de plusieurs millions de roupies. Alors que le ministre 
Jeetah,  en  tant  que  ministre  de  l’enseignement  supérieur  était  mandaté  au  premier  lieu  de 
faire respecter la législation régissant ce secteur, il n’a fait qu’aller lui-même à l’encontre des 
procédures établies. Inacceptable ! C’est toute une nation indignée, Madame la présidente. À 
tel point que Rajesh Jeetah a été qualifié d’indésirable par les alliés de son Parti. Il n’aura eu 
d’investiture aux dernières élections législatives mais son bilan aurait été à faire sombrer son 
Parti avec pour résultat la débâcle de décembre 2014. 

Madame la présidente, l’EIILM University n’est qu’un exemple. D’autres institutions 
ont  été  autorisées  à  dispenser  des  cours  et  à  délivrer  des  diplômes  sans  qu’elles  aient  les 
accréditations  nécessaires  des  universités  internationales  auxquelles  elles  étaient  affiliées. 
Nous  avons  aussi  la  fameuse  École  de  Médecine,  D.  Y.  Patil  Medical  College,  sommée 

 

67 

d’arrêter  le  recrutement  de  nouveaux  étudiants  par  nous,  Madame  la  présidente.  Et  nous 
avons des jeunes aujourd’hui, qui, après trois années d’études de spécialisation en médecine, 
se retrouvent sur la route.  Ils ne trouvent pas de place, ils ne peuvent même pas faire une 
application au ministère pour se présenter comme spécialiste. Quatre ans d’existence pour un 
nouveau ministère, censé de faire de Maurice un véritable Knowledge Hub ! Quatre ans de 
gâchis ! Gaspillage de temps et de ressources motivées par les intérêts premiers d’un ministre 
insoucieux, arrogant et pensant seulement à remplir les caisses du Trust familial ! 

Je ne souhaiterai, Madame la présidente, m’attarder davantage sur ce personnage. 

My mandate is to clean the rot and I will do precisely that. 

The Quality Assurance Agency for Higher Education of UK is making an audit of the 
tertiary  education  institutions  and  will  soon  submit  its  final  report  to  the  Ministry  of 
Education. And the House would wish to know that my Ministry has already discussed with 
the Audit Team and given a set of pointers as to the direction we would wish the sector to 
take. 

It is unsound, even improper, for the accreditation agency, TEC, to itself undertake 

quality assurance of those institutions to which it has issued operating licences.   

Hence, the present regulatory framework for Higher Education in Mauritius needs to 
be stengthened so as to ascribe an even greater credibility to the higher education and training 
provided locally.  We have to ensure that only reputable institutions are allowed to operate 
and that their programmes are recognised by all professionals and academyic bodies and are 
of an international standard. 

I  want  to  give  the  guarantee  to  the  House,  henceforth,  extreme  vigilance  will  be 
exercise  to  ascertain  that  fraudulent,  spurious  and  low-quality  providers  -  those  infamous 
‘degree mills’- are not allowed to set base in Mauritius. 

On bona fide Tertiary Educational Institutions whose diplomas and degrees are fully 
recognised and have international currency and portability, these will be welcome. Quality in 
Tertiary Education Provision will never be sacrificed on the altar of quantity. 

Allow me also to inform the House, Madam Speaker, that we have already engaged in 
proactive discussions with different Embassies, most notably, the British High Commission 
as  well  as  the  French  side,  so  as  to  attract  some  of  the  best  universities  to  set  up  campus 
branches in Mauritius. 

 

68 

The Government also intends to strengthen the Tertiary Education Commission as a 
regulatory body and review its Act.  On the other hand, we need a new legal framework for 
the sector and my Ministry will come up with a Higher Education Bill. 

What I would like to stress is my determination to modernise the Tertiary Education 
System, to bring greater collaboration and stronger working relationships between public and 
private universities and have a better coordination of the entire system. 

And  it  becomes  all  the more  important  that,  as part  of  the  mission  of  transforming 
Mauritius  into  a  Knowledge  Hub,  our  Tertiary  Education  Institutions  be  encouraged  to 
improve  their  research  and  innovation  capacity  and  output  and  hence  generate  new 
knowledge. 

I am accordingly working on a scenario where, with the support of the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs, our Embassies and High Commissions could serve as focal bodies to market 
Mauritian institutions for higher education. 

Madam Speaker, one of the mainstays of the Government Programme 2015-2019 is to 
transform Mauritius into a higher income economy. This entails developing existing sectors 
and triggering new ones – and, in turn, this further entails placing a premium on furthering 
skills development. 

International evidence has shown that a major determinant of enhanced productivity 
and competitiveness as well as economic success is the capacity of countries to invest in a 
skilled  and  technically  qualified  human  resource  base.    The  private  sector  expects  to  see 
emerging from the education and, especially, the training sector, the kind of persons whose 
skills are aligned to its needs. 

This is where I expect the Human Resource Development Council to conduct regular 
research  on  skills  shortages.  As  the  House  knows  the  HRDC  acts  as  a  bridge  between 
education and training systems and the workplace.  The research it undertakes will be used as 
a means to feed information to the education and training institutions so as to improve the 
relevance of their outputs. 

Madam Speaker, Technical and Vocational Education and Training has to be scaled 
up and its relevance improved. That also means strengthened partnerships with the private 
sector. I intend to re-engineer TVET sector as a whole. We all know the stigma traditionally 
attached to it: it is supposed to be meant for the intellectually weak, the school drop-outs, 

 

69 

does not guarantee better job prospects and so on and so forth.  We have to move away from 
this narrow perception. 

TVET  needs  to  incorporate  and  integrate  entrepreneurial  and  generic  skills  in  its 
delivery and, especially, it has to move towards establishing pathways for higher and further 
learning instead of being seen as a dead end, a cul de sac. 

In this context, we could perhaps take a leaf off the book of countries like Ghana and 
Singapore where polytechnics are being given University status. The MITD will accordingly 
be called upon to establish strategic partnerships with training institutions of world repute. 
This will have the twin benefits of enabling  MITD to benchmark with the best international 
practices in the TVET sector and also increase its international courses and qualifications. 

Madam  Speaker,  let  us  not  forget  that  the  SMEs  are  called  upon  to  be  one  of  the 
major torchbearers of our economy.  People with higher level skills that the TVET sector can 
provide, will be the ones to cause the wheels to run more smoothly.  It is in this context that, 
as per the Government Programme, the HRDC is being called upon to initiate the ‘skills for 
growth’  scheme  with  a  view  to  support  small  and  medium  enterprises  and  promote  skills 
development. This scheme aims at matching SMEs with young graduates to assist them in 
terms of manpower, knowledge-sharing, creativity and innovation. 

Prenons,  l‘exemple  de  l’agro  industrie,  Madame  la  présidente.  L’université  de 
Maurice produit les meilleurs agronomes de la région mais malheureusement, la plupart se 
trouvent dans la fonction publique et très peu ont réussi à monter leurs propres entreprises et 
à utiliser leur connaissance et leur créativité afin d’innover le secteur agricole.  

Chaque  année,  avec  un  surplus  de  légumes  ou  d’autres  produits  sur  le  marché,  les 
petits planteurs encourent des pertes considérables. Ce problème perdure depuis des années. 
Il est temps d’y remédier car l’agriculture aujourd’hui n’est plus ce qu’elle était auparavant. 
Si le concept de l’agro-industrie a été tout ce temps rendu incompréhensible et difficile aux 
petits  planteurs,  ce  gouvernement  entend  faire  les  choses  différemment  et  Madame  la 
présidente, je peux vous dire qu’avec la vision et les ambitions qu’on prône, bientôt les petits 
planteurs à travers une formation ciblée pourront intégrer le marché de la transformation et 
aussi  conserver  le  produit!  Le  but  ultime  c’est  de  s’assurer  que  les  jeunes  ayant  des 
connaissances, étant familiers aux nouvelles technologies puissent eux-mêmes se lancer dans 
l’agriculture et l’agro-industrie. 

 

70 

I  must  also  add  that,  given  the  agenda  of  this  Government  to  develop  the  Ocean 
Economy,  the  HRDC  has  been  mandated  to  assess  the  current  and  future  skills  needs  and 
proposed new skills development programmes for this emerging sector. 

Madame la présidente, pas plus tard que ce matin, on vient de lancer le site web du 
‘Career  Development  Stairway’,  un  outil  pédagogique  permettant  d’explorer  les  divers 
profils d’emploi et indiquant une échelle de progression de carrière par type de compétence. 
Dans ce cas précis, cette l’industrie des TIC/BPO qui était concernée.  

Cela  démontre  clairement 

la  nécessité  primordiale  d’un  Integrated  Career 
Counselling System.  Such an integrated system covering career orientation, information and 
management services will play a pivotal role in informing people about the career choices at 
various stages of their life.  

Obviously,  the  system  will  involve  both  private  and  public  stakeholders  to  provide 
that information. There is an existing system but with a view to making it more relevant and 
integrated, it is being re-assessed and proposals are forthcoming on how to enhance career 
counselling locally so that individuals could make more informed career choices. 

Madam Speaker, one of the key incontrovertible realities that emerged from the last 
General Elections is the fantastic role played by the youth. It was a treat to see the extent to 
which the social media went berserk with the number of well thought through and educated 
comments  and  views  that  made  the  buzz  and  went  viral.  Young  people  expressed  their 
expectations. 

In  December  last,  Madam  Speaker,  we  saw  democracy  at  work.  Especially,  we 
witnessed the powerful effect of the vox populi in deciding to give a new meaning and a new 
orientation  to  their  lives  -  the  lives  of  all  people,  irrespective  of  their  race,  religion  or 
ethnicity. 

It  became  the  people’s  wish  to  have  the  country  fulfil  its  legitimate  and  forward-
looking  destiny  by  mandating  the  Government  to  achieve  meaningful  change.    In  this 
endeavour, the youth of this country contributed enormously to make this change a reality. 
We had seen, Madam Speaker,  youth activism at its best.  Let me reassure the House and 
through  this  House,  the  youth  outside  this  Government  has  heard  their  voice.    Can  it  be 
otherwise? 

(Interruptions) 

 

71 

Most  of  them  are  the  ones  who  are  directly  affected  by  the  phenomenon  of  graduate 
unemployment,  underemployment  and  employability.    They  are  also  the  ones  who  find, 
despite their hard earned Masters and Doctoral and post-doctoral qualifications, that they are 
unwanted on the labour market because of the skills mismatch issue. 

And above all, the young people aptly demonstrated their capacity for participatory 
politics.  They  wanted  to  see  “clean”  politics  at  work.  They  certainly  rejected  the  diet  of 
underhand immoral tactics that they had been fed upon for so long. 

It is the youth who wanted to live in a country that successfully nurtures their needs 

and aspirations, despite the acceptance that there will be peaks and valleys. 

Madam  Speaker,  this  Government  has  got  the  thumps-up  from  the  youth  of  this 

country and we are duty-bound to listen to their clarion call. 

This is the way to  give  meaning to the political engagement of the  youth and  give 

back to politics its “lettres de noblesse”. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: I suspend for tea for half an hour. 

At 4.49 pm, the sitting was suspended. 

 

On resuming at 5.33 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bodha! 

The  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  (Mr  N.  Bodha): 
Madam Speaker, in a few days, a very towering personality will stand by your side to address 
this august Assembly. 

And he will appreciate, as it should, to see the Parliament of Mauritius chaired by a 
lady, the first one in our history. He is used to that, at the Lok Sabha. Madam Speaker, the 
Prime  Minister  of  the  greatest  democracy  in  the  world  will  grace  our  Parliament  and  our 
country. 

In January, Narendra Modi welcomed, for the National Day of the Republic of India, 

the President of the United States of America, one of the greatest democracies. 

 

72 

We are blessed, Madam Speaker, de jouer dans la cour des grands, Washington, New 
Delhi, Port Louis. And we can proudly say as Shrimati Indira Gandhi said, we are a great 
little country. 

Great because of our nation, because of our people, because of their resilience, their 
wisdom,  their  faith  in  our  future  and  their  democratic  fibre.  Great  also,  Madam  Speaker, 
because of our leaders of today, their courage, their unflinching belief in goodness, Madam 
Speaker, and of course, great because of their uncommon integrity and great vision of one 
man, Sir Anerood Jugnauth. 

Madam  Speaker,  some  believe  that  we  are  little.  So  little  like  the  former  Prime 
Minister that this country can belong to him and that he can hold this country in the palm of 
his hand. 

Madam Speaker, we are 10 weeks into this new mandate. After 10 years of fascism, 
of terror touching the life of people every day, we turn the page, of course. We turned the 
page on the 10th of December and the verdict is clear. 

Madam Speaker, Mauritius for all that we have endured, for all the resilience and the 
courage required to win this extraordinary election in December, for all the challenges that lie 
ahead,  we  know  this  that  the  shadow  of  Ramgoolam  has  passed,  and  our  nation  is  more 
united than ever, Madam Speaker. 

Madam  Speaker,  what  is  the  historic  significance  of  the  10th  of  December?  The 
historic significance is that our motherland has known two peaceful democratic revolutions: 
one  in  1982  and  one  in  2014  and  both  were  engineered  by  one  man  and  one  Leader,  Sir 
Anerood Jugnauth. In 1982, there was a marked difference in history, because the writings 
were  on  the  wall  in  1982.    It  was  the  end  of  the  cycle  of  prime  ministership  of  Sir 
Seewoosagur Ramgoolam. We had the PSM which had been created, we had the alliance of 
the MMM/PSM for  years. They went, they taught the island. So, the writings were on the 
wall when we had the 60-0 of 1982, but in 2014 the alliance was, in fact, engineered in only a 
few weeks. Therein lies the greatness of what happened in December, Madam Speaker. 

This marvellous nation, defying all odds, has taken its own destiny in its own hands. 
And today there is a message that the people of ours are sending to the whole political class 
and we have to bow down to that message. What are our people saying to us? We, the people, 
yield ultimate power and secondly we can believe in you, but you have to deliver. You have 
to deliver on all the principles and the values we mentioned, Madam Speaker. 

 

73 

What are our people fighting for years? In front of us was the incarnation of fascism 
and  tyranny,  personalised  by  a  very  few,  who  held  our  entire  nation  to  ransom,  Madam 
Speaker. 

The deep-rooted fascist  regime of the previous  government was sealed  as instilling 
perpetual fear, hijacking all the democratic institutions of our country: the Police, ICAC, the 
MBC. And the fuel of that tyranny was greed. Hon. Minister Dookun-Luchoomun mentioned 
it; it was greed for more power and greed for wealth with a debauched appetite. The moral 
compass of our society had completely lost its bearings, Madam Speaker. A wrong signal was 
sent and a wrong signal was captured in the country. What did it say? To sit in the tower of 
power, everything could be put up for sale, everything had a price and everyone had a price. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  country  was  crawling  under  the  burden  of  this  tyranny.  To 
worsen the prevailing calamity, all the watchdogs and the institutions became mistresses of 
this regime. Sociocultural leaders, instead of upholding the essential values of our society to 
sustain  the  social  fabric  of  our  society,  became  conniving  allies  for  a  plot  of  land,  for 
facilities, for a permit, for their own interest… 

(Interruptions) 

…and where the wealth of our nation, the wealth of our people was being bartered to cling to 
power and to enjoy the fruits of an immoral Government. This is what we have been fighting, 
Madam Speaker. In the National Assembly, I have been here, we were sitting there, when we 
saw the then Prime Minister, he came like a peacock. 

(Interruptions) 

He would answer a PNQ, take the files and just leave and, when he was to take the floor, 
there  was  the  recess,  we  had  to  wait  for  him  and  then  he  would  have  bell.  The  National 
Assembly was held at ransom, Madam Speaker. 

There  was this violation of the role of Parliament. For nine months, what were we 
doing?  For  nine  months,  we  were  there  watching  the  body  language.  We  were  trying  to 
capture the chemistry… 

(Interruptions) 

What did we do for nine months? We sat there. There were no laws. The country was 
at a standstill because of what was happening between two leaders and they were not leaders, 
one was the leader of the House the other was the Leader of the Opposition, Madam Speaker!  

 

74 

Then, in those days, few warriors of democracy dared to stand up and lead the people 
by  waging  a  war.  I  remember  my  friend,  hon.  Jhugroo,  putting  questions  to  the  Prime 
Minister. Madam Speaker, we were answering five questions at Prime Minister’s Question 
Time for 30 minutes, 15 parliamentary questions for two hours, for most of them you never 
got a written answer! We never got a written answer. After the Prime Minister’s Question 
Time …. 

(Interruptions) 

I remember when hon. Bhagwan was here, he was always asking questions in the interest of 
the House, of the people and the nation out there! How many of these questions were never 
answered, Madam Speaker? 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, let me say a word on the role of the MSM. What has not been said of the 
MSM! Ti parti… 

(Interruptions) 

Even in 2010 when we won the victory, we had six ministers. I think we had contributed to 
the victory of 2010. The MMM people will agree with this. 

(Interruptions) 

we were labelled as a ti parti and there were so many who said we were worth only 2% and 
they wanted this label to stay on our back, 2% and 2%... 

(Interruptions) 

But I am proud today to stand up as an MLA of the MSM, that we stood the test of time, we 
had the resilience to wage a war. When we turned our back in July 2011, when we had seen, 
comme on dit dans le film de Bergman, l’œuf du serpent, that is, we could see what were the 
fascism. When we said we were leaving, we never turned our back again.  

When we see the dates, Madam Speaker, the famous night of Roches Noires was, I 
think, on 02 July and all the conflicts we had with the Prime Minister and the Labour Party 
was only a few days later. I am asking myself whether this was not a diversion, the whole 
saga  of  the  MedPoint,  Madam  Speaker.  We  never  turned  our  back  again  and  we  waged  a 
relentless battle. We toured the country. We went everywhere. Our message was the same: 
we want this regime out of the country!  

 

75 

Then  came  the  Remake  and  I  am  going  to  say  a  few  words  on  this  fatal  day  of 
Varusha Pirappu, 14 April, 2014. Do you remember the case of hon. Pravind Jugnauth, on 
that  day  the  MedPoint  case  was  heard  and  he  had  asked  for  an  early  trial?  That  was  the 
excuse then - we have forgotten about it - to say that we can’t continue with the Remake. 
There was something terrible which has happened. 

(Interruptions) 

On that day, supposedly hon. Pravind Jugnauth had not made a request for early trial. But we 
know what has happened.  In fact,  I was with the  Leader of the Opposition at the Varusha 
Pirappu, at the IGIC, and the next day we sat in Parliament and all the parliamentarians of the 
MMM had a meeting. They cancelled the meeting on Wednesday, at Sir Anerood Jugnauth’s 
residence, pas capav, pas capav. Then, it is always one thing: “if what we have heard about 
the MSM is true, then it is even worse.” On that day, we forgot about this birthday cake. I 
was talking to Sir Anerood Jugnauth: “his birthday is coming again in Roches Noires”.  

So much has happened, Madam Speaker, that we do not believe that it is only one 

year! It is only one year and everybody has this photo… 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, it forms part of our political history. The hon. Leader of the Opposition wore an orange 
sweatshirt on that night and I asked him where he got it. Madam Speaker, what I am saying 
… 

(Interruptions) 

On that day the Remake was shattered, Madam Speaker, and the MSM was left stranded, that 
was on 14 April, we were left stranded, the MSM was all alone and we were hearing in the 
far distance the chanting of a new mantra: Paul pu vine premier ministre pou 5 ans dans 4 
moins bans camarades and the 60-0… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, the MMM left for the uncharted seas of the mythical second Republic seen 
as the pinnacle of the militant dream.  

Madam  Speaker,  whilst  le  pêcheur  de  requins  had  already  thrown  his  bleeding  bait, 
what  did  the  MSM  do?    That  was  on  14th  and  11  days  later,  on  25th  we  start  the  rally  in 
Rivière du Rempart and that was the beginning – just as you have the Salt March, it was the 
march towards Parliament…. 

 

76 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, it was the beginning of our march to Parliament with a majority.  Because two things 
had happened in the meantime, Madam Speaker, which heralded another battle, Sir Anerood 
Jugnauth  and  the  MSM  of  Pravind  Jugnauth  showed  their  resilience  and  rallied  a  massive 
crowd at Rivière du Rempart on Friday 25 April.  The second thing which happened … 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, because we wanted to do something before the 01 May.  I remember when we had this 
meeting, Sir Anerood Jugnauth had said: ‘nou pu faire 01 mai ensemble, to bizin dire nou!  Si 
nou pas pé faire 01 mai ensemble, au moins nou capave prend nou banne disposition’. That 
was said in this meeting.  Two things have happened.  Sir Anerood Jugnauth and the MSM 
showed  their  resilience  and  the  second  thing  was  Ivan  Collendavelloo  started  his  crusade 
which had to cripple the huge machine of the MMM six months later.  

This reminds me of something, Madam Speaker. In our Scriptures it is said: ‘When 

you have a cycle of immorality, when the equilibrium of immorality has come to an end…. 

(Interruptions) 

… Then God himself or democracy in the form of the people vox pupuli comes forward to 
save the country. This is what we did. Because our slogan of remake was ‘Sauver le Pays’.  
Et  nous  voulons  sauver  le  pays.    Nous  avons  sauvé  déjà  beaucoup  de  choses  et  je  vais  y 
revenir tout à l’heure. 

Yes. 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Bodha:  Madam  Speaker,  our  victory  of  December  bears  the  mark  and  the 

workings of a divine spirit and the relentless lessons of history. 

Let me say a few words of the mirage of the 2nd Republic. My friend told me after the 
break  of  the  remake,  we  were  told  nu  pu  dan  désert.  And  what  was  the  reply  of  the  hon. 
Leader of the Opposition, he said: ‘même pas dan désert parski dans désert éna mirage’. But 
the greatest mirage in the political history has been the 2nd Republic, Madam Speaker. It is a 
relief  because  the  people  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  2nd  Republic.  Their  daily  lives  have 

 

77 

nothing to do with the 2nd Republic. Can we imagine Navin Ramgoolam with seven years of 
immunity sitting in Réduit? Can we imagine what would have happened if the MMM within 
Government have been able to uncover whatever … 

(Interruptions) 

…is happening in this country, there was only this alliance. There was only this leadership, 
Sir Anerood Jugnauth, Xavier-Luc Duval, Ivan Collendavelloo and Pravind Jugnauth. We are 
the only one who could have uncovered what we have uncovered so far and it is only the tip 
of the iceberg, Madam Speaker. Praise be our people. But there are two words which led to 
the blackout of all our sorrows and  griefs and all our concerns. There are two words which 
led to that blackout. We forgot about – 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

• 

rampant poverty;  
chronic unemployment; 
the breakdown of law and order; 
the rape of democracy and paralysis of our institutions; 
there was  a culture of  cynical plundering of all  our assets and public funds, 
and 
a fascist climate of fear. 

There are two words which were supposed to obligate all this. What were those two words? 
Réforme électorale! Réforme électorale were the words the most popular, the most debated in 
every  press  conference.  I  am  sure  in  every  meeting  of  the  politburo  of  the  MMM,  of  the 
central committee of the MMM and of the Assemblée des délégués of the MMM, those two 
words were written in gold: Réforme électorale. This was the panacea, the solution to all the 
problems of our country. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, please! 

Mr Bodha:  Madam Speaker, what has the electoral reform to do? There are so many 
details and I will not go on that. It was seven years of immunity to an autocratic President and 
a prime ministerial mandate in the namesake. And because of that parliamentary democracy 
was stifled. Greed for power, greed for more billions was the mantra of the day. 

Today,  history  is  testimony  to  one  thing.  The  MMM  has  been  in  the  National 
Assembly since 1976. This is the minority of all the cohorts of Parliamentarians. Never in the 

 

78 

history  of  Parliament  has  there  been  a  lesser  parliamentary  group  of  nine  members  of  the 
MMM. Never! 

(Interruptions) 

No, it is a reality. For the first time in history, we have only nine MMM Members. And for 
the first time in history as well we have only four Members of the Labour Party since 1976. 
What has happened? I think it is a subject to be discussed. 

(Interruptions) 

I read an article where hon. Mohamed said: in five years the Labour Party is going to be in 
power again. And he said in 1995, Sir Anerood Jugnauth was beaten 60-0 and he came to 
power. The only difference is Sir Anerood Jugnauth.  The only difference is our Ferguson. 
That’s the difference. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  former  Leader  of  the  Labour  Party,  the  former  Leader  of  this 
House, the former Prime Minister said that his life is an open book. And today we all know 
that his life was about close files and locked safe containing hundreds of millions of rupees 
and  foreign  currencies.  The  revelation  of  the  on-going  enquiry  is  as  revealing  as  it  is  far-
reaching.  As far as Cyprus, Chicago, London, Switzerland, Venice, Singapore, such is the 
web, Madam Speaker. 

The pillars of this House are based on truth and transparency, Madam Speaker. The 
former Prime Minister answered a PNQ here and had a press conference which was aired on 
the radios. He said that on the famous night of Roches Noires, he took his powerful car early 
at dawn without any security to rush to his bungalow because there had been a burglary of 
Rs20,000.  And  now,  when  we  know  what  his  fortune  is  worth!  Madam  Speaker,  there  is 
something you have to compare. He was rushing at 1 o’clock in the morning from Riverwalk 
to Roches Noires and you know what he does! And the same Prime Minister orders almost 70 
policemen  on  the  highway  from  Riverwalk  to  Plaisance  whenever  he  is  going  to  take  the 
plane.  How  can  you  reconcile  these  two?  And  the  same  Prime  Minister  orders  almost  70 
policemen  on  the  highway  from  Riverwalk  to  Plaisance  whenever  he  is  going  to  take  the 
plane.  How can you reconcile these two?  When he has to take a plane on mission, you have 
70  policemen  waiting  on  the  roundabouts  and  on  the  footbridges.    And  then,  because  of 
Rs20,000, he rushed in a powerful car without security and bodyguards; he went to Roches 
Noires.  But, anyway, we will know.  The enquiry is on, and we will know about the truth. 
But what did we see, Madam Speaker?  We saw a cult of secrecy, we saw the cult of greed as 

 

79 

a  political  tool  to  hold  power,  we  saw  the  culture  of  believing  that  everything  could  be 
bought; a vote, a seat, an election, a ministerial portfolio. 

As I have said always, sometimes it takes you five years to move from the Opposition 
to come to Government.  But when you cross the floor, it takes you one day.  The way those 
who crossed the floor looked at us; as if we were fools!  What are you doing there?  Because 
we were sincere and loyal to a party, we were seen as being fools.  Because crossing the floor 
became a model.  And what have we seen?  The arrogance, the insolence to believe that fear 
could be a formidable weapon. 

Madam  Speaker,  we  have  also  seen  a  mix  of  African  presidential  grandeur  and  a 
decadent  Berlusconi.    But  on  10  December,  above  all,  it  is  the  victory  of  one  man:  Sir 
Anerood Jugnauth. 

Madam Speaker, in 1970, in his forties, he chose to be a compagnon d’armes of a 
young Paul Bérenger révolutionnaire in the grips and in the prison cell of a country where 
you had  a state of emergency and a blind censorship.  He was 40.   In 2000, he chose the 
youngest Minister of Youth and Sports, and in 2014 he choose the youngest Deputy Speaker 
of this Assembly. 

(Interruptions) 

This is the great path of history with its hallmarks of a man who has been a great leader for so 
many years, starting in 63.   This is undeniably the greatest faith Sir Anerood Jugnauth has 
always  had  in  the  young  generations  every  time,  and  his  commitment  to  build  a  better 
Mauritius. 

Madam  Speaker,  what  must  we  do  now?    I  have  said  it.    Il  nous  faut  bétonner  le 
changement. Often, what happens?  We come, we do the cleaning, we set up new institutions, 
the country is different - the way we have done it, 2000-2005.  And then, what happens?  In 
five months, you have the Labour Party regime, and everything is destroyed. 

Comment  peut-on  bétonner  le  changement?    Because  the  people  are  saying  “never 
again.”  There are certain things that the people of this country do not want anymore, never 
again, and we should do everything as regards to the institutions - the right man in the right 
place  -  so  that  never  again  our  country  falls  prey  to  what  we  have  seen:  nepotism, 
dictatorship,  tyranny,  fascism.    Never  again.    So,  we  have  to  work  on  it,  and  the 
Programme… 

 

80 

(Interruptions) 

…that we have to build this nation, this Parliament, give it again its decorum, being the voice 
of the people out there.  As regards the Constitution - I will not say much about the DPP - 
what I will say is that we have a majority, but we will not tamper with the Constitution.   This 
is sacred.  We can rely on the legalist spirit of the Prime Minister or we can also rely on this 
majority.  We will not amend the Constitution, except if it has to be done in the best interest 
of our people, in the best interest of the future. 

Let me come now to the Programme, Madam Speaker.  We will do more to restore the 
link between hard work, meritocracy, effort, because these are the values which have brought 
Mauritius to where we are.  Hard work!  Not maja karo or ABC!  Hard work!  It is the only 
solution!  All the nations that have achieved greatness is hard work!  Hard work, meritocracy, 
growing  opportunity  for  every  Mauritian.    We  need  to  be  a  competitive  economy  where 
businesses  want  to  locate,  and  we  need  to  create  new  jobs.    We  have  to  do  that,  Madam 
Speaker.  We need to have 21st century infrastructure, modernise the port, the airport, bridges, 
have safer roads and the fastest internet for what we want to do as regards to innovation, as 
regards to technology.  21st century businesses have to be given the opportunity, the bright 
business climate, and above all, we have to produce to export in the region and to Africa.  
That is the only way forward, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker, change can be a blessing, as was the case of 10 December.  It can 
also be a threat, as in the case of climate change.  Nobody has addressed this issue.  So, I 
want to say a few words on it.  In both cases, it poses formidable challenges.  2014 was the 
planet’s  warmest  year  on  record;  the  warmest  year  in  history’s  record  was  2014,  and  the 
warmest years on record have all fallen in the first 15 years of this century, which means that 
it is the warmest of the 15 years that we have a record.  Our activities - economic, social, 
urban, agriculture - are changing the climate.  We need to act because we will continue to see 
rising oceans. 

The other day I was passing through Pointe aux Cannoniers, and I could see that the 
water had already flooded the beach.  We will have rising oceans, longer, hotter heat waves; 
we will have dangerous droughts, floods and massive disruptions in our everyday life.  We 
are seeing it, Madam Speaker!  We had a subtropical climate over the years, that is, where we 
had hot days, and then you had rainy seasons; we were used to it.  You know, the climate in 
Mauritius has changed dramatically, because now we are nearing an equatorial climate. 

 

81 

What  do  we  see?    We  see  hot  days,  high  humidity,  and  in  the  afternoon  sudden 
thunderstorms and heavy rain for a few hours.  This is equatorial climate, what you see in 
Nairobi, what you see in Thailand, in Bangkok.  We need to adapt to this, and we have had 
the  vision  to  create  a  Ministry  for  Management  of  Disasters,  and  to  protect  forcefully  our 
small  islands,  manage  landslides,  as  we  have  the  problem  in  Terre  Rouge-Verdun.    Flash 
floods and droughts! 

As  regards  to  the  economy,  Madam  Speaker,  we  have  to  get  the  macroeconomic 
fundamentals right.  We cannot become a high income earning country if we have a growth 
rate of 3%, which we have had  for the last five  years.  Last  year, 2014,  there was not one 
single decision taken to  promote businesses and  business facilitation, to  allow investors to 
take a decision to invest and to create jobs.  Not one single decision was taken because we 
know what has happened last year.  It was only a year of ‘Kozer Kozer’. 

Madam  Speaker,  this  country  has  had  one  terrible  reality:  the  concentration  of 
economic activities in the hands of a few. We have lived through history, through the slavery 
period,  through  the  indentured  labour  period,  through  after  independence,  and  one  of  the 
biggest challenges has always been what we have call the democratisation of the economy. 
We have not succeeded but the time has come, there is a paradigm shift and I congratulate the 
hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development to be bold enough to say that the SMEs 
can be the backbone of  our economic  growth and create jobs, and he’s  going to put Rs10 
billion  to  see  to  it  that  this  happens.  This  is  for  the  first  time  a  real  challenge  to  this 
concentration of economic activity and ce qu’on appelle la vraie démocratisation. We know 
what happened as regard to la démocratisation de la fraude et de la corruption pendant les 
dernières années. 

Madam Speaker, there is this paradigm shift to the Small and Medium Enterprises. 
We  had  questions  asked;  you  know  how  many  businesses  closed  last  year,  per  quarter? 
Thousands of them! How many shops closed? If we had not injected billions in the economy 
last  year  when  we  came  with  the  pension,  with  the  bonus,  many  more  shops  would  have 
closed for good.  

Madam  Speaker,  with  the  SME  on  va  promouvoir  le  génie  mauricien.  We  will 
promote the entrepreneurship spirit of our country and I would like to say, here, that I share 
the comments of the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development as regard the role 
of  banks.  We  see  in  the  papers  that  the  banks  have  made  Rs1.2  billion,  Rs2.3  billion.  So 

 

82 

much, why and how? They are making money out of our money. The banks have to thrive 
but the banks should play their role, because if you don’t give the funds to the promoters, to 
the investors, we will not be able to do what we want to do as regard to investment and job 
creation. 

Madam Speaker, for example, in the housing sector, you had to bring in 30% of the 
cost of the price of a property. But there has been a request to the Minister to see to it that we 
reduce  this  percentage  to  allow  more  people  with  a  lesser  deposit  to  become  household 
owners.  

Now, Madam Speaker, the fight against poverty. This is a mandate, this is a mission. 
We cannot have poor people in Mauritius today. We have this Government and that was one 
of our top priorities in all our speeches, in all our rallies.  In fact, what was happening, people 
became poorer and poorer, while some were fumbling for coins in their pockets others were 
fumbling with freshly printed dollar notes. Whilst some were remembering their codes to get 
a few hundred rupees at the cash machine, others were playing with the code number of their 
safes worth millions. This is the Mauritius we have had for the last five years. We know the 
figures, we always said so many households are living with Rs7,000, so many households are 
living  with  Rs125,000.  We  put  so  many  questions.    We  had  the  Minister  for  Social 
Integration, he never answered. The people got poorer and poorer and the regime got richer 
and  richer.  And  you  know  why  because,  I  think,  there  is  a  machiavélique  thinking  in  the 
propaganda of the Labour Party: you make them the poorer to buy them better. 

 When the time comes, you remember, the elections was on 10 December, what were 
all of us hearing on 08 and 09,  that people will come with millions to buy all the votes. Was 
not this something which was in our minds?  

(Interruptions) 

Yes, in Constituency No. 13! This goes with the culture that everything can be bought, a vote, 
an election. I will not reflect on what happened in Flacq, I will not reflect on the macaroni, I 
will not reflect on the by-election in Beau Bassin where Mrs Labelle was a candidate. 

Madam Speaker, whilst some people are dreaming to have a house like a matchbox 
with a PEL account, some were buying villas in Venice and Lugano. This is the Mauritius 
that we have seen. 

(Interruptions) 

 

83 

 Lugano, yes! In Venice and Lugano, I have forgotten London.  

(Interruptions) 

So, whilst some people were dreaming to have a house like a matchbox of 400 square feet 
worth Rs400,000, others were thinking of buying villas in Venice and Lugano. 

Madam  Speaker,  it  is  a  complex  battle,  but  we  have  to  do  it  and  I  know  that  the 
Minister  for  Social  Integration  will  do  it.  We  have  to  do  it,  because  I  think  that,  as  Sir 
Anerood Jugnauth said in 1982,  first, we have to address the issue of unemployment and 
then, Sir Gaëtan Duval said: ‘Le premier problème de Maurice c’est le chômage, le deuxième 
c’est le chômage, le troisième c’est le chômage.’ 

We have to address this problem of poverty. It is a very complex issue. But, I think 
we will get there and the programme also provides, Madam Speaker, that we have a private 
television  network,  and  we  will  stand  to  our  word.  We  have  also  proposed  a  Freedom  of 
Information Act and that will be a bid to promote good governance and transparency just like 
we have set up a Ministry. We have already done a lot, Madam Speaker. Never in the history 
of Mauritius, was so much done in so little time.  In ten weeks!  Our track record is amazing. 

As regards law and order, we can rely on Sir Anerood Jugnauth’s firm grip to see to it 

that it is restored and we are going to have a Commission of Enquiry on Drugs. 

Madam Speaker, I am still in the dark alleys of the past, I have yet to come to the 
roads leading to our future, but time is running. As regards my Ministry, I will not say much. 
I am going to sum up our action and our commitment in very few words. 

• 

• 
• 

• 

We will have safer roads, better networks; we will have a national transport 
system which will reflect the sophistication of our nation. 
New buses, new bus shelters, new stations transformed. 
We will have a new town and country planning vision with satellite cities in 
Highlands, technoparks, a new urban design of our roads and streets to cater 
for all road users, un nouveau cadre de vie moins moderne qui reflète le niveau 
de sophistication de notre société.  
We will work to see to it that every cent, Madam Speaker, of public funds is 
well  used  in  whatever  projects  we  undertake.  We  can’t  have  variations  of 
billions; we can’t waste public funds, Madam Speaker.  

 

84 

We  want  to  build  a  new  Mauritius  which  will  be  the  beacon  and  the  jewel  of  the  Indian 
Ocean. 

Madam  Speaker,  we  have  a  dream.  We  have  started  our  business  of  remaking 
Mauritius. The Remake 2000 is gone, but we are remaking Mauritius for 2020 and beyond, 
Madam Speaker. There is one essential pillar of our leadership, that is, example of our values 
and  our  principles,  because  political  action  has  no  sense  if  it  is  not  based  on  values  and 
principles,  Madam  Speaker,  and  if  there  is  one  person  who  embodies  these  values  and 
principles, it is Sir Anerood Jugnauth at the head of the alliance. 

(Interruptions) 

As for the MSM, we have a profound commitment to loyalty.  Madam Speaker, we cherish 
our  values  and  principles,  we  respect  our  given  word,  that’s  how  the  hon.  Leader  of  the 
Opposition became Prime Minister in 2003. We look to the future instead of the past and we 
strongly believe that good people of every community and every faith, share certain values 
which we cherished and which will make modern Mauritius. 

Madam  Speaker,  we  believe  in  the  goodness  and  the  optimistic.    We  belive  in  the 
generosity of our people and we believe also that out there, the people want us here to give 
the example and to behold those values and principles and to build a better Mauritius. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Members, the Deputy Speaker will now take the Chair. 

At this stage, the Deputy Speaker took the Chair. 

 

(6.20 p.m.) 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Mohamed! 

Mr S. Mohamed (First Member of Port Louis Maritime and Port Louis East): 
Thank  you,  Sir.    Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  last  year,  before  the  nomination  day  preceding 
elections of December 2014, I never thought that I would be in Parliament in 2015. 

(Interruptions) 

I  was  not  supposed  to  even  be  a  candidate.    I  was  not  supposed  to  be  a  candidate  in  the 
elections of 10 December 2014 and if I am here today, some call me le rescapé. 

 

Thank you for the compliment.   

85 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: No interruptions, please! 

Mr  Mohamed:    Some  wonder  in  disbelief.  Even  members  of  the  press,  analysts, 
political gurus wonder in disbelief and so do I, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that I would never 
have thought that one day I would have been honoured - I must admit - to be in this august 
Assembly as the le chef de file of the Labour Party. 

(Interruptions) 

It is an honour.  When I was listening to hon. Bodha, I couldn’t help myself… 

(Interruptions) 

I was about to say that.  Thank you, Sir!  Now, you should stop reading my mind! 

(Interruptions) 

When I was looking at hon. Bodha, we were younger in those days, and so was Sir Anerood 
Jugnauth.  That was the first time I had started my political address on TV and he was in the 
middle and we were on both sides.  Now, we may be on opposing sides, Mr Deputy Speaker, 
Sir,  with  the  hon.  Prime  Minister  and  his  team,  but  it  will  indeed  be  a  pleasure  to  cross 
swords because it will be done in only one interest; the interest of the nation and nothing else.  
That is my pledge that we will work together.  We will critise one another, but as long as it is 
constructive, this is going to be – what we in the Labour Party have promised to do and this is 
what you heard when each and every hon. Member of the Labour Party has addressed this 
august Assembly. This is what we have done. When I think about all of us here today, when I 
think about the speech of hon. Rutnah and how he described the meeting of two souls. The 
meeting  of  two  souls  who  once  met  and  decided  one  day,  they  would  have  someone  who 
would be a candidate maybe and be in this august Assembly and here he is.  Then, it takes me 
down memory lane.  It reminds me of who I am because sometimes in life you do have to put 
questions to yourself.  Where did we come from? We are all the same.  We all come from 
various continents and we have all ended up in this little piece of rock in the middle of the 
Indian Ocean we are all one people.  I think of my grandfather on my maternal side.  The 
hon. Prime Minister knew him well, Mr Omar Ramjanaly, a habitant of Vacoas.  I remember 
him. Humble beginnings! Working once upon a time in Uganda and fier de le dire, was a 

 

86 

driver; un domestique.  And he is my maternal grandfather; on my mother’s side coming from 
Uttar Pradesh, on my father’s side coming from Calcutta. My paternal grand mother being a 
mademoiselle  Ducasse.  I  think  about  today,  being  the  proud  father  of  three  sons,  three 
Mauritians  and  I  think  about  my  father-in-law.    When  he  was  aged  ten,  he  was  forced  in 
Algeria to see his father naked on a chair being tortured and he was forced to see his father 
killed.  La guerre d’Algérie en 1954! 

When you have all those experiences, when you live through those lives, when you 
make such choices, choices of whom you go towards and whom you end up with; you learn 
from others.  It shapes your future.  It shapes your vision and it shapes what you want for this 
country.  It does shape you.   

Very often, some people accuse me for being trop franc.  I say what I think. Some 
believe it is a defect, maybe it is. For those whom I have offended, I apologise to them. For 
those whom I will offend, I apologise now also.  

 (Interruptions) 

It is never meant out of harm, but out of this democratic game; the nation first and nothing 
else.   

Now that I am here before you, there is change and that is a new Government.  But 
change, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, is not only about change of regime.  Oh no! Change is not 
only,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  about  the  change  of  a  Prime  Minister  or  a  change  of 
backbenchers or a change of Ministers.  This is not change! Change is when we realise what 
the people want, when we understand what the people want and when we understand how we 
are to give them what they want.  This and only this will be real change. 

Let me continue!  

(Interruptions) 

I had the opportunity when I was backbencher of standing up and I was known for 
that and the Hansard is there as testimony. I never hesitated even as a backbencher to stand 
up and put questions that had to be put to the Ministers of the day as backbencher. I never 
hesitated to even participate in debates and criticise the Government I belonged to because I 
believe in constructive criticism. I did it as Member of the Labour Party, as hon. Minister, 
proud to have served this nation.  I said what I had to say whenever I had to say it. Now I 
listened hon. Bodha who talked about the last ten years.  The last ten years, he said, has been 

 

87 

a scourge to this country. Am I to believe him, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir? The last ten years 
have been such a déroute to this nation.  It has been rotting this nation to the bone.  I don’t 
believe it! I don’t believe it! Because if what the hon. Minister says is true, then it is very, 
very sad indeed because people have a short memory. It reminds me of the time when I came 
as  a  new  Member  of  Parliament  in  this  august  Assembly  in  2005  and  I  also  did  that.  
Turnaround, the previous Government in front of me, now in the Opposition and criticised 
them and said that they were guilty of all the woes of the world. 

They were responsible for all the worries of Mauritius. I did that. Was I right? Not 
really!  I  was  not.  Because  if  hon.  Bodha  is  to  be  believed  then  the  time  when  the  MSM 
during  those  last  10  years  was  in  Government,  also  forms  part  of  the  time  when  it  was  a 
scourge to this country. I will tell you something else I have learnt in politics in a minute. 

The  time  that  hon.  Etienne  Sinatambou  was  Minister  of  Cabinet  from  2005  until  a 
certain time, I cannot remember when was that a scourge? Did he form part of the Cabinet 
that was damaging to this country? Did hon. Xavier-Luc Duval, now Deputy Prime Minister, 
form part of that scourge for almost 10 years? Did hon. Henry form part of that scourge? All 
of the Members of the PMSD? Let us not now start saying: “Wait a minute, let us rewrite 
history. I did not form part of that Government.” A collegue of mine will stand here and say: 
“10 years have gone down”. And all the 10 years are wrong! Let us be serious! Not all the 10 
years! If you tell me that they have been wrong, I will not tell you that we hold the monopoly 
of good. I am not saying we hold the monopoly of good. 

I  have  had  the  opportuity,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  of  addressing  some  of  my 
concerns to the former Prime Minister, when I was in Cabinet. I remember – let me talk about 
that - a time when I stood up and said to him: “Sir, I would like to see people, youngsters out 
there, in the north, the south, the east, the west, in the centre of the Island, from villages, from 
towns. We do not want to have many Mauritius. We do not have one in the north, one in the 
south, one in the east, one in the west, a village or a town. We have one Mauritius, we are one 
people. I would like to see them, their parents who have sacrificed years and years sending 
them  to  university,  who  have  toiled  the  way  and  obtained  an  education,  who  can  make 
Mauritius proud. I would like to see a bipartisan Parliamentary Committee interview those 
youths. I have said that to him. I would like to see them, the sons and daughters of Mauritius, 
be called upon appel de candidature. Let us have this bipartisan Parliamentary Committee 
interview them and send a report to the Ministers or the Prime Minister responsible pour les 
corps paraétatiques under his Ministry and let that Minister or the Prime Minister decide who 

 

88 

will be recruited. Now if the Prime Minister or Minister decides to recruit the best, he stands 
by that if he decides to recruit the worst based on the report, he also has to stand by it. This is 
what I suggested. My suggestions, my proposals fell on deaf ears. It was as though, what I 
was saying as a youngster, was not important, precisely, because I was too young; precisely, 
because when you are of a certain age, people do not take you seriously or they believe that 
you are trop un rebelle, too much of a revolutionary. But this is what I want for my country 
for things to change. Yes, Mr Deputy Speaker, when we talk of change, this is what I mean 
by change, a fundamental change in the approach, in the way we embrace the future of this 
nation. This is what people out there want. 

When they brought in Sir Anerood Jugnauth as Prime Minister of this country, they 
did  it  with  hope;  with  hope  that  things  would  change.  With  hope  that  many  issues  would 
change, but let me stick to one of them. As far as employment would go, it would change. I 
read your electoral manifesto - beautifully written - of l’Alliance Lepep! Not only beautifully 
written,  beautifully  presented  -  I  must  admit,  but  do  forgive  me,  I  only  read  it  after  the 
elections. If only I had seen that before the elections, maybe I could have predicted the result. 
Now I read it, I have seen the Government Programmme and it starts out even the same, and 
there, there is consistency, I must give that to the Government, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. Note 
9 page 5 – 

“This implies: 

A transparent and merit-based recruitment and appointment policy to ensure 
meritocracy;” 

This  is  what  I  have  just  been  talking  about.  Meritocracy,  basically,  that  is  the  opposite  of 
nepotism. Hon. Bodha was just talking about the word ‘nepotism’, wasn’t he?” And I just 
decided to go into my Ipad and see what exactly does that mean? It means a nephew of the 
pope,  basically,  favouring  those  who  are  close  to  us.    That  is  nepotism!  That  is  not 
meritocracy! And yes, the Labour Party also is guilty of having done that. Let me lay that to 
rest once and for all, I am not saying we hold the monopoly of having done good. When, we, 
the Labour Party have chosen certain people to sit on Boards as Members or Chairmen or 
CEOs  of  Boards,  be  it  at  the  SIC  or  the  STC  or  others  where  there  was  no  appel  à 
candidature,  that  was  not  meritocracy!  When  was  it?  And  all  Governments  since 
Independence, most posts and appointments have been done in a such way. It is so much so, 

 

89 

it has become tradition and that is  this whole change that I am talking about, the change that 
the people want to really embrace. But, have we gone there? Or is nepotism still going on? 

I have sent a message, Mr Deputy Speaker, through the press and to the hon. Prime 
Minister, because I believe that the hon. Prime Minister is in a unique position that no other 
Prime Minister has been in the past. No other Prime Minister has been in the unique position 
he finds himself in. No one! Because he is, indeed, un Premier ministre de transition. He can 
afford, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, to take decisions and take courageous and bold decisions in 
the interest of the nation, because he is not concerned about his own re-election. That is the 
truth! You have an hon. Minister of Finance who is in the same position as the hon. Prime 
Minister. They are, therfore, not concerned about being re-elected or not. In other words, they 
are not concerned and they can afford not to be concerned about pleasing a or b or c or d. 
They can, therefore, keep up with this courageous decision to change and to really mean what 
the word ‘change’ means, not simply words with beautiful speeches, not simply a beautiful 
brochure  with  a  nice  presentation,  not  simply  nice  colours  put  together,  not  simply 
photographs being photoshopped, not simply a nice print job at the printers, not simply a nice 
lighting done by a photographer, because those are just du maquillage and empty in words 
and meaning.  Out there,  you have students, professionals who have waited for the  Labour 
Party to do it, but the Labour Party did not do it. Now you have the MSM and the others in 
power. They are waiting for you to do it. 

Have you not started by doing it? Let me stop you there. 

(Interruptions) 

Recently, in this august  Assembly,  I have heard  hon. Gayan talk. Hon.  Gayan said 
Government  has  decided  and  when  Government  decides  that  is  it.  Government  decides  to 
appoint someone at the Cardiac Centre Trust Fund, Trust Fund for vulnerable disease. How 
was that appointment made? Was that appointment made on merit base? When you go to the 
defintion of meritocracy – the very first page of your programme, the very paragraph nine - la 
méritocracie, la transparence, la discipline. Voilà les mots que le gouvernement a choisi de 
mettre en avant. Hon. Bodha said so rightly that the 100 days have not even gone by. There 
has already been a violation of that promise, there has already been a violation of that pledge 
to the nation. Must I really go through each and every Board because here the reason why I 
feel so strongly about it is because, precisely, we have an hon. Prime Minister who is in a 
unique position.  

 

90 

When will we have such a unique situation again, I know not! Because each and every 
Prime  Minister  that  comes  in  thinks  about  getting  re-elected  and  when  you  think  about 
getting re-elected, there are vested interests. When you think about vested interests, you want 
to protect A, B and C and when you have that you do not have meritocracy, you have exactly 
the opposite, nepotism. 

When we talk about the appointment of Mr Sherry Singh at the Mauritius Telecom, is 
this meritocracy? Are we saying that he is not good? I am not saying he is not good. Most 
probably, he is the best candidate there is. But the Labour Party failed to implement what I 
am saying and I am saying here, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that there is a chance that we can 
embrace change for good. Let us embrace it, let us change. Let us really give the chance to all 
those out there.  When you talk about those out there, they are the reasons why you are in 
power. Nothing else! Those out there, their children, are they not good enough? If the Labour 
Party did not even believe and have the courage to try to change, have that courage! Embrace 
it! You have been anointed by the people to do it. Do not fail even before the hundred days 
are over. 

I  am  sorry,  there  is  something  called  nepotism  and  there  is  something  called 
meritocracy, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. You cannot choose to sit on the fence, you cannot start 
saying part of it is going to be meritocracy and part of it is going to be nepotism. That does 
not make sense because it spoils the whole barrel. What I am saying is there is a chance for it. 
I am not doing politics here. I am just being very honest and very candid. The Labour Party 
did  not  do  it.  I  formed  part  of  that  Government,  hon.  Sinatambou  formed  part  of  that 
Government, hon. Xavier Duval formed part of that Government. Let us be honest about it 
and let us not try to pretend that those things did not happen. 

(Interruptions) 

What I am saying here is there is a chance to change. 

(Interruptions) 

That is the reason, because of such reactions that I fear for the future of this country. Words 
will be great. Maybe the good thing is that it is not necessary for everyone to understand what 
I am trying to say here. It is only enough for one man to understand it; that is the hon. Prime 
Minister. Only one man! 

(Interruptions) 

 

No! 

91 

(Interruptions) 

Do we want to really participate in a political system that is just about revenge? Do we want 
to do that? Because everyone has done it, each and every time there has been a change of 
regime this is what we have seen.  

Do you want to know what I am talking about? There is a lady in my constituency and 
that lady has obtained  a job in a parastatal  body some three  years back. She lives in a tin 
shack in Roche Bois. Finally, she gets a job in a parastatal body. Actually, it was just over a 
year back she gets a job. Now, because she sends in a medical certificate to say that she is not 
well and the medical doctor of the hospital certifies that she needs rest and because she has 
not worked for more than a year, she is not confirmed in her position. On top of it, she is told: 
“we will put you on probation for another six months.” 

(Interruptions) 

That is not the law! I am talking about the parastatal body. Don’t talk about something that 
does  not  apply!  The  Employment  Rights  Act  and  the  Employment  Relations  Act  do  not 
apply. 

The Deputy Speaker: Please address the Chair, hon. Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed: That is not the law!  

This lady is a victim precisely because she worked for me in the general elections. 

(Interruptions) 

If what I am saying is not right, then I challenge you, hon. Collendavelloo, have her 
appointed tomorrow morning! 

(Interruptions) 

I do not want to embarrass Ministers. I will give it to you. 

(Interruptions) 

No! In the meantime, then, what will happen? 

(Interruptions) 

Why choose the long route when there is a shorter route, justice?  

(Interruptions) 

 

92 

There is another lady - is it a politics of revenge - who lives in Plaine Verte and that lady is 
past 60 years old, all of a sudden… 

(Interruptions) 

Really!  Someone  who  took  the  moral  high  ground  who  has  decided  that  he  shall  not  go 
through what meritocracy is, does not have the real ability and the licence to talk about what 
is right for us or not. And, that is hon. Gayan, I mean it!  

(Interruptions) 

Mr Gayan: I think the hon. Member is out of order because if he goes on that track, 

we are going to speak about Gorah Issac and we are going to speak … 

Mr Mohamed: Speak! 

Mr Gayan:… about the Bangladeshi workers and your… 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Gayan, what is your point of order exactly? 

Mr Gayan: That the hon. Member is out of order! 

The Deputy Speaker: For what reason? 

Mr Gayan: For the reason that he is attacking hon. Members of this House.  

(Interruptions) 

The  Deputy  Speaker:  I  have  listened  to  the  point  of  order.  I  will  ask  the  hon. 

Member not to attack any Members here! 

Mr  Mohamed:  Fair  enough!  As  long  as  I  am  not  interrupted  by  anyone,  I  will 

continue according to what the Deputy Speaker says. 

The Deputy Speaker: The hon. Member may continue! 

Mr Mohamed: There is another lady who all of a sudden, out of the blue, for the first 
time in her life, has a visit from the ADSU, a whole team. She calls me in a panic, crying. I 
said  what  is  going  on? The  ADSU  officers  have  gone  there,  have  searched  and  obviously 
there was nothing. They made her sign a document, there was nothing and while leaving an 
officer of that ADSU told her: “Oh! I see that you kiss Shakeel Mohamed on both sides of the 
cheek when you see him in front of the Labour Party office!” Then he left. What is this lady 
supposed  to  think?  Obviously,  I  am  not  saying  that  there  is  anything  sinister.  Maybe  they 

 

93 

were doing their duty. But when you have remarks of that nature, obviously, it puts the fear 
of God in your heart and says: wait a minute, what is going on? 

When earlier today we heard that Police officers are saying inne gagne l’ordre depi la 
haut,  it  does  not  mean  it  is  true.  I  am  not  saying  it  means  it’s  true,  that  la  haut  means 
Government. But, it also means that sometimes you have Police officers who should be more 
responsible and not use names just in order to make themselves look more important.  It gives 
a bad impression on Government. That is what I am saying. What I am trying to get at here is 
we need to embrace a politics where all of us unite as one people.  

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Please, hon. Jhugroo, do not interrupt! 

Mr Mohamed: We need to unite as one people. We cannot keep on challenging one 

another, that one is wrong, that one is right. 

(Interruptions) 

As  far  as  I  am  concerned,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  if  everything  in  this  Government 
Programme is achieved, then it will be great for the country. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Please, hon. Jhugroo, for the last time, do not interrupt! 

Mr Mohamed: What I am trying to say here is very simple: wrong is wrong. It does 
not mean that when it is red it is wrong and when it is orange, it is not wrong. Any colour, if 
it is wrong, is wrong. That is what I am trying to say. There is wrong that all of us have to 
attack.  

If I have taken the bold decision to be honest in this august Assembly with what the 
past has been and what we want to achieve in the future, it is precisely because I am someone 
who loves my country and I am sure that every single one of you here are people who are 
patriots. That is the reason why we joined politics because we want to work for our country. 
We can decide not to look at the truth en face like some. Then only, people will judge us at a 
later stage.  

What I am trying to get at here is that I have heard many talk like the hon. Minister of 
Labour. The hon. Minister of Labour, I met him immediately after the elections and I decided 
to meet him. 

 

94 

It was indeed a pleasure to meet the person who was going to take over the office of 
Minister of Labour and Employment because I believe it was necessary pour avoir le passage 
de témoin.  It was necessary because this is what is important in a democracy. Let us call it 
Mauritian type.  Let us stop talking about that because European means the best! I am sorry. 
This is Mauritius as it should be. The way I see it. And we did it, passage de témoin. But 
there are important facts that should not go astray. We talk about unemployment.  Obviously, 
it is a scourge that is affecting many countries, not only Mauritius. But when one talks about 
unemployment, let us really talk about facts and statistics. There is a lot to be done, but to 
come  and  tell  me  that  you  will  create  15,000  jobs  a  year;  5,000  in  civil  service.  If  this, 
according to this Government, will sort out the problem of unemployment, then I humbly put 
it,  that  this  is  wrong.  Because  15,000  jobs  a  year  will  never  sort  out  the  problem  of 
unemployment. It will bring it to a stable level and keep it to a figure between 7.5% and 8%.  
Nothing more nothing less.  

(Interruptions) 

I  am talking  about 15,000 jobs a  year.  I am sorry.  I  am talking about statistics. Go to the 
Labour statistics. Go to the Employment statistics, for the past 10  years the jobs that have 
been created on a  yearly basis, have been an average 13,000 to 14,000 to even sometimes 
15,000 jobs a year. That has been the trend and those are the figures of the Central Statistical 
Office.  Those  are  the  figures  that  I,  myself,  was  not  aware  of,  but  I  had  the  honour  and 
privilege  to  learn  it  from  one  Minister  of  Finance,  who  was  hon.  Xavier-Luc  Duval.  He 
showed me that is the number of jobs we are creating. He was right when he put it. We have 
to create more.  Hon. Bodha was right, 3% is not enough, we have to go for more and even 
reach double-digit growth. That indeed will be a miracle. But, what I am saying here is that 
15,000 jobs a  year will not be sufficient because we are actually doing approximately that 
every year. 

When I came into office in 2010, the unemployment figure was about 8.3%. When we 
came into power in 2005, the unemployment rate was 9.5%. When I left in December 2014, 
the hon. Minister of Labour, Mr Deputy Speaker Sir, rightly said it and I use his own figure, 
it  was  only  7.8%.  So,  we’ve  managed  to  bring  it  down  from  8.3%  to  7.8%  and  the  third 
quarter of 2014 was 7.6%. But, we’ve brought it to an average of 7.8% for 2014 from 8.3% in 
2010 by having created precisely 13,000 to 15,000 jobs a year. So, what I am trying to get at 
here,  yes,  there  is  the  need  to  create  jobs.  Yes,  there  is  a  need  to  ensure  that  lots  of  our 
youngsters find jobs. Yes, there is a need to train people. 

 

95 

I am happy that under the now portfolio of the hon. Minister, you have the issue of 
training. I, now, make a prayer to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, forgive me it is another one. It 
is  only  in  the  interest  of  the  country  that  not  only  must  he  be  the  Minister  of  Training  - 
without  manquer  de  respecter  à  qui  que  ce  soit  -  he  should  not  only  be  the  Minister  of 
training with HRDC not attached to him. He cannot be the Minister of Training, if he does 
not  have  MITD  not  attached  with  him.  He  has  to  be  the  Minister  of  Training  with  all  the 
possibilities of training people who are unemployed. Because then he will be in a situation 
where  he  will  identify  those  scarcity  sectors,  those  are  the  people  I  will  train  under  one 
umbrella. I will be able to ensure that everyone obtains the training that is required and we 
will be able to forecast what are the required skills for the next five years or ten years. That is 
a way which is a serious way of addressing the problem of unemployment. I did not have the 
possibility of having those portfolios.  It was split. You had one with the Minister of Finance, 
you had one with the NEF, you had some with the Ministry of Education and that does not 
help. So, we, in the interest of the country, what I am saying here is to give the opportunity to 
this young, dynamic Minister of Labour. 

What I am saying here is that we should be given the opportunity and whoever else is 
Minister of Labour, that he can connect. We use Singapore as an example.  Let us use good 
examples.  The  Ministry  of  Manpower  in  Singapore,  they  don’t  call  it  Labour,  they  call  it 
Manpower because it also has Training underneath it. So, that is what I am trying to get at. 

The  second  issue  is  about  unemployment  because  it  is  something  that  has  to  be 
addressed. I appreciate the honesty of the hon. Minister. He said in his address that we have 
to ensure that we are going with a lot of bilateral agreements with other countries. Bilateral 
agreements with other countries and just before he said that, we had another orator from the 
Government side, hon. Gobin who basically said: ‘oh, well the hon.Minister Mohamed was 
sending people abroad and too many are being sent abroad to work’. We never sent people 
abroad to migrate. That is the difference. We sent people abroad for circular migration and 
circular migration is all about labour mobility. And, it is precisely what the now Minister of 
Labour  is  talking  about;  signing  of  agreements  to  ensure  that  the  programme  of  circular 
migration and labour mobility continues. That is what he was talking about. This is exactly 
what I was doing and what he is talking about.  

I had an opportunity of talking to the Minister of Finance, hon. Lutchmeenaraidoo and 
he is totally in agreement that we should try to send people abroad and see how they could go 
and get more experience, earn more money in terms of foreign exchange, send more foreign 

 

96 

exchange to Mauritius, bring to Mauritius when they return their expertise and the skills that 
they have learnt. But when we talk in the Programme of 5,000 people being sent to work sur 
les  cruise  ships,  that  is  not  possible.    I  tell  you,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  why  it  is  not 
possible. I’m being very honest. It is impossible for this country, as it is right now, to train 
5,000 people to be qualified to go and work on a cruise ship in one year. Let alone 500. The 
Naval Academy of this country does not have the capacity to train more than 500 in a year. 
Let me go further, not even 300. They can train in three months: 50. And what is this figure? 
It’s nothing. 

In other words, what I do propose is, at least, to bring in people who are in the field, 
other countries like in Greece, for example, other countries where there are mariners, that are 
really strong in cruise ships businesses like in the Philippines where those people can train 
and  get  the  right  certification,  British  approved  within  a  period  of  two  weeks  whereas  in 
Mauritius some say we need three months. Either we want to ensure that our youngsters can 
obtain good jobs by giving them the right training, but unfortunately, once again, Mr Deputy 
Speaker,  Sir,  that  trainee,  the  Naval  Academy  was  under  the  Ministry  of  Public 
Infrastructure. Maybe now, it is under hon. Koonjoo. But if that is the case, it does not make 
sense in my humble view.  If it is a Training Academy, it should be with the Minister that has 
the  portfolio  for  training.  That  will,  therefore,  put  more  order  in  the  whole  process. 
Unemployment goes with training. It should go together. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, when people want change as I have said - if everything is 
done right as far as this programme is concerned then there is an opportunity which does not 
come again for people at the level of the MHC, at the level of the Bank of Mauritius, at the 
level of the State Investment Corporation, at the level of the Road Development Authority, 
the MPCB, the DBM, MSC and all the other parastatals, it is to do exactly what is proposed 
at paragraph nine of the Programme. I am not inventing it, you suggested it. I said you are 
right in having made the suggestion. I said that your programme is excellent. But, it can only 
start working if you do not violate the very beginning of it.  

All  the  rest  will  become  a  mess  and  the  puzzle  will  not  come  together,  if  the 
beginning  itself  starts  wrongly.    So,  there  is  an  opportunity  to  correct  all  that  at  the  very 
outset.  You are at the beginning of your mandate.  Try to correct it.  When we talk about 
change … 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, please address the Chair! 

 

97 

Mr  Mohamed:  Yes.  So,  what  I  am  saying,  is  that  they  should  change.    There  is 
something else which I say, and people also, we have not heard at all here.  Hon. Bodha said 
that no one has talked about climate change.  That is what he said just now in his speech.  He 
said  no  one  before  him  has  talked  about  climate  change,  and  that  is  quite  sad,  because 
obviously hon. Dayal has also addressed this august Assembly, and his colleague Minister 
has just said that no one has talked about climate change.  Now, I have not had the pleasure 
of listening to hon. Dayal, but if that is the case, then, that is serious!  - If the hon. Minister of 
Environment has not addressed climate change, or maybe hon. Bodha is wrong.  I leave that 
to both Ministers to sort it out.  And I’ll leave it at that. 

But I am trying to create order here! 

(Interruptions) 

Now,  as  far  as  another  issue  which  was  not  addressed  is  the  case  of  Rezistans  ek 
Alternativ.  No one has talked about that.  No one has talked about the case of Rezistans ek 
Alternativ.    The  message  of  the  people  is  clear.    There  will  and  shall  not  be  any  second 
Republic.  Clear.  But, we still have a situation we have to tackle, and the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir will realise and agree that there was a ruling from experts 
saying ‘either you change the system, and if you don’t change the system and you keep the 
best  loser  system,  then  there  is  no  other  choice.’  C’est  précisemment  de  réactualiser  the 
census of 1972.  This is precisely what the experts of the United Nations have said.  Then, I 
believe  that  either  we  are  a  mature  country  enough  pour  réactualiser  le  census.    Because 
what I found is that, when we talk about réactualiser le census sur une base ethnique, does it 
necessarily mean that we have to divide our country? 

(Interruptions) 

I have seen some countries where it is done.  As the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is suggesting, 
maybe it could be done as an option.  It is done, and in some countries when it is done, Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir, it is used as an economic planning tool to find out what exactly are the 
problems in certain ethnic groups, if at all, in order to bring corrective measures.  So, that is 
the way.  I know that the hon. Deputy Prime Minister also talked about that openly when he 
was in Government.   I  was the one  who talked about the necessity  for  un recensement de 
1972 also.  And I think it is important, because if we are a mature country, where there is no 
Mauritius for this community or another community, there is one Mauritius, then we have to 

 

98 

be  able  to,  now  in  2015,  say  ‘this  is  a  recensement,  we  use  it  for  the  construction  of  the 
country and not the division of the country.’ 

There is also the need to talk about other issues that are extremely important when we 
talk about change.  A better health care; what people want out there. Let’s simplify it.  And 
here, I am not saying that we don’t have a Minister of Health and Quality of Life who hasn’t 
got the ability. I believe that the hon. Minister of Health and Quality of Life has all the ability 
to do an excellent job in his department.  I’ve known him as a lawyer, and I admit the person 
has ability.  But I also say things that are also true.  

As far as his ability is concerned, I am sure that what people out there want is that 
they do not want to continue, even though we have improved a lot in the last years as far as 
health  is  concerned,  hospitals  are  concerned;  less  waiting  time,  more  beds  available,  less 
people dying in operation theatres, less women dying at child birth, less babies dying at child 
birth, complicated operations being carried out in Mauritius.  This is what people want!  To 
know  that  when  their  loved  ones  have  a  problem,  they  have  a  solution.    Ils  sont  reçus  as 
patients,  they  are  taken  care  of,  and  not  taken  away  as  cattle  and  livestock.  This  is  what 
people  want,  and  this  is  what  we  would  like  to  judge  a  Government  at  the  end  of  their 
mandate on.  Better education!  Why is it that, in certain villages, the schools are not as good 
as the schools in towns?  Why is it that some of the teachers in towns  are better than the 
teachers in villages? Why is it … 

(Interruptions) 

… and I am here not talking about your government!  That’s what is talked about honesty, Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir.  That is being honest.  Maybe the hon. gentleman should get used to 
that.  I am being very candid.  What I am saying here is that those issues must be addressed 
because education is not as though you are having a switch and you put it on and off.  What I 
am saying here is that those are issues that must be addressed, and this is how we judge a 
government at the end of their mandate; this is how the people judge. 

What  about  the  open  sky  policy?    I  asked  the  question  to  the  hon.  Minister; 
unfortunately,  he  was  not  here.    Hon.  Collendavelloo  tried  to  answer,  and  he  was  right.  
Maybe I should come with a substantive question.  But the open sky policy is as such.  I was 
in Abu Dhabi.  I met with the hon. Ministers of Labour, I met in Qatar with the Emir, and he 
said: ‘Hon. Minister - I was Minister then - why should I come to Mauritius? Why should I 
come to Mauritius and take a flight from Qatar, Doha, to go to Dubai?’ The people from Abu 

 

99 

Dhabi said: ‘Why should we go to Dubai to come to Mauritius, when the national carrier of 
the United Arab Emirates is Etihad and not Emirates?  So, what is open sky? 

In  other  words,  do  we  give  an  opportunity  to  another  company  to  monopolise  the 
situation and have the prices they wish, or do we increase the number of flights?  That is the 
question!  Yes, I belonged to a government that, in my humble view, should have brought in 
people from Abu Dhabi - Etihad.  We should have allowed people from Qatar to come in, 
because I have transmitted letters, and this is an opportunity here. 

When  I read the speeches of hon. Members of  Government,  I read the  speeches of 
Ministers of this Government, I see there is a will and a wish to open up.  There is a wish not 
to restrict competition, there is a wish not to create monopolies.  And if that is the wish, then 
my prayer - another - is that we open our skies, that we create competition. A difficult choice 
we  will  have  to  make  is  whether  we  are  to  go  for  Air  Mauritius  as  being  our  priority  or 
Mauritius.  That is a harsh decision we have to make.  Either Air Mauritius follows suit, but 
Mauritius cannot sink because of Air Mauritius. 

We have more hotels that have to be built.  We have more tourists that have to come 
in.  We have more foreign exchange that has to be spent in Mauritius.  But that does not mean 
we should restrict the number of flights that come in.  The Minister of Labour of Abu Dhabi 
said to me: ‘Why should I come to Mauritius?  I can’t see Mauritius because Seychelles is 
blocking the view.’  What I said to him is: ‘Hon. Minister, if you could simply just stand up, 
then you would see Mauritius on the other side.’  He does not want to have to take a car and 
go there to Dubai, and then fly down to Mauritius.  So, those are issues which I invite the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister and this Government to look into. 

The cost of living.  Let me say one thing, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  You go to any 
hypermarket in this country right now, and you buy any make of yoghurt.  I give an example: 
Activia.  Activia is a yoghurt that is imported from France.  It is also made in Reunion Island.  
In Reunion Island, six pots of Activia are sold for 1.40 euro.  In France, they are sold for 1.10 
euro.  In Mauritius, they are sold for 10 euros.  I’ve carried out the experience that when one 
looks  at  the  cost  of  living  in  Mauritius  as  far  as  milk,  as  far  chicken,  as  far  the  denrées 
alimentaires are concerned - your monthly bill - it is cheaper to live in France that it is in 
Mauritius. That is true!  So, what am I saying here, is those are stark realities.  Maybe the 
Competition Commission should do something.  Now you have someone else there.  I am not 
agreeable with the method in which he was appointed, but if that is the case, so be it!  But 

 

100 

let’s get working, let get cracking.  People have to see the change has come because for now 
they are still waiting. 

Something else which I would like to address is the minimum wage.  For the first time 
in  history,  I  have  gone  to  the  ILO,  I’ve  spoken  to  Professor  Eraut,  I  have  met  with  the 
Director-General, I’ve got the experts to come to Mauritius; there is now a huge report on 
minimum wage. 

Now, I received the report when I was Minister on 11 September 2014; the report is 
there,  it  has  been  taken  to  Cabinet.  So,  my  humble  request  is  that,  -  yes,  I  see  it  in  the 
Government Programme, I see it in the political manifesto - we should, as soon as possible, 
implement the good parts of this report in the humble view of Cabinet, in your discretion, 
whatever is recommended there by experts, those are people who have  no interest of their 
own to serve, but this is the first time that there is a complete report on the national minimum 
wage.  And I am proud to say that I have managed to contribute by bringing this report to 
Mauritius, and making it available with the help of excellent experts, and excellent officers of 
the Ministry of Employment who have contributed for this report to be written. So, use it and 
make sure to implement it.  

I have spoken long enough, but let me say something which is very important, there 
are certain issues that are urgent. Yes, you have the Government Programme, but you also 
have the political manifesto, that nice shiny document that I read, and in that document I read 
something very important, les douze priorités des trois premiers mois au gouvernement.  That 
did not talk about five years,  that did not talk about one year or six months, it talked about 
three months.  You have done the first one: augmenter la pension de vieillesse. You have not 
introduced a minimum salary pour les travailleurs au bas de l’échelle. This was in there, les 
douze priorités des trois premiers mois.   

(Interruptions) 

Les trois premiers mois! Almost two weeks are gone. It’s impossible for you to do it in the 
first three months; let’s be serious. 

 (Interruptions) 

I am saying what’s in here, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, and I am only trying to remind my hon. 
friends that there is an urgency to comply with the promises they made to their electorate. 
And, I am not saying that they will not, there is an urgency. 

 

101 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Please, do not interrupt! 

Mr  Mohamed:  As  far  as  the  Commission  of  Enquiry  on  Drugs  is  concerned,  I 
congratulate the hon. Prime Minister for that, maybe we should have it as soon as possible, 
because that also was something that should have been done in the first three months.  

As far as the reorganisation of the MBC is concerned, that was also what should have 
been done in the first three months but, once again, we cannot talk about reorganisation of 
MBC if the person that is nominated there - I say it in all humility, maybe he’s the best, but 
the method of nomination does not comply with paragraph 9 of your Programme. So, having 
said that, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir,… 

(Interruptions) 

When I listened to the hon. Members on the other side, it reminds me of 2005 when we came 
to power, and it reminds me of the MMM who were just in Government on the other side, 
and everything they said, even though it was not all wrong, even though it was in the interest 
of the country, just because we were in power we thought that they were wrong. But, that is 
basically where I have to admit, I have learned because the lessons that the people sent on 10 
December was not only for the Labour Party or the MMM, it was for all of us. And, what I 
am  saying  here  is  that  I  will  not  make  the  same  mistakes  of  criticising  another’s  view 
because, very often, the person opposite us maybe is right, and I just have to learn to listen, 
and I have learned how to listen. This is what I’m saying. I am saying that a lot of your views 
in  your Programme are  excellent measures and  I  only  pray  that  you will implement them. 
And, I will also say… 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Silence! 

Mr Mohamed: I will also say, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that the track record of the 
hon. Prime Minister has been explained in a lot of details. Yes, we cannot deny that the hon. 
Prime Minister is, indeed, the one who was the architect de la révolution industrielle and the 
boom économique. 

(Interruptions) 

We cannot deny that hon. Sir Gaëtan Duval, as he was then, was the architect of the tourism 
industry in this country. 

 

102 

(Interruptions) 

We cannot also deny that hon.  Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam, as he was then, has done a lot 
for this country, and those are the words used by the very Prime Minister we have before us. 
He has also said that  Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam has done a lot for this country and has 
brought  us  out  from  the  colonial  rule  into  an  independent  Mauritius.  He  has  brought  free 
education, that is also a fact. What is also a fact, is that the former Prime Minister - I will not 
judge what I have just seen on TV like many of you, I will not get into that because there is a 
case pending, but what I will say is that, to come and tell me that for the past ten years the 
Labour Party has done nothing is unfair. 

 (Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Please, silence! 

Mr Mohamed: And, that is why… 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Silence, please! 

Mr Mohamed: That is why I say, I remember the days when hon. Jhugroo… 

You were not there! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

I remember hon. Jhugroo talking on Monday at Parliamentary meetings, talking to the hon. 
former Prime Minister and basically congratulating him on many issues. 

(Interruptions) 

I remember hon. Xavier-Luc Duval sitting in Cabinet - and that is not disclosing secrecy -  
next to the former Prime Minister and basically talking about how things are moving in the 
right direction according to his vision, the same vision of two leaders. I remember the time 
that hon. Pravind Jugnauth in this august Assembly, sitting where hon. Baloomoody is sitting, 
and  I remember the time when hon. Bérenger was sitting there and how hon. Jugnauth was 
criticising hon. Bérenger, and saying that the vision of the Prime Minister … 

(Interruptions) 

 

103 

I remember all that. So, that is true, but basically  what  I  am saying is that those are stark 
realities, and if that is the case, let us, at least, say if there is change - and I’ll come back to 
that - let there be a real change. Because we are in 2015, the world had changed; no one owes 
us a living and that is a fact. The world has changed. Now, if we do not embrace change as it 
should be, and if you don’t bring real change, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, things will catch up 
on us and we will really be caught and this country will suffer.  

So, what I would like to say here is that everything is not simply about winning and 
losing an election, because I was not supposed to be a candidate and let me finish on that. I 
was already ready for civilian life. I was already ready to go back to my profession and go 
and stop with politics. I was supposed to have stopped, but then, now, it makes me think that 
everything is not about being elected or not, everything is not about winning an election or 
not, it is about what do you do with the win. What do you do with the prize? Because, you 
have  not  got  the  prize  yet,  because  the  country  deserves  to  win  and  it  is  not  us  that  is 
important, it is the people that matter, and until  we will realise that as one people,  as one 
nation, it is only then that we will be able to live in peace, justice and liberty, because right 
now the division that is behind us, around us is not doing us good. 

(Interruptions) 

The division that is going on is not doing us good! What I am asking, Mr Deputy Speaker, 
Sir, to the hon. Prime Minister, there is a rift in the country, unite it. There is a rift in the 
country, bring the people together. As I have said, we can sit vis à vis one another, but as long 
as there is no decision that will do harm to the country, I am all for it, and I will help even 
your Government, even from here.  Thank you. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Vice-Prime Minister! 

 

(7.19 p.m.) 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):  Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  I am sorry to disappoint you. I am 
not going to be as lyrical as my friend, hon. Mohamed and I am not going to be poetic.  I am 
going to speak plain common sense. 

(Interruptions) 

 

104 

Because the electorate, at the last elections, acted in a simple common sense without fiery 
language, without passion, without rhetoric, but calmly and silently they did their job, just as 
we are doing now since we have been in Government. 

(Interruptions) 

Let me come straight to the matter in hand.  I shall start by quoting paragraphs 62 and 63 of 
the Government Programme. 

“ 62.   Government will adopt a responsible and environmentally sustainable 
policy  regarding  energy  production,  waste  management  and  physical 
infrastructural development. 

  63.   Fiscal  incentives  will  be  provided  to  encourage  renewable  energy 

production.” 

Not much has been said about this. This comes under the section devoted to the environment.  
Under the section devoted to my Ministry, the Ministry of Public Utilities, we read –  

“Energy  is  an  important  sector,  considered  as  the  engine  for  economic 
development (…).”  

There  we  are.  We  start  with  that  basic  fundamental  problem.    We  have  got  our  economic 
development  to  look  after  and  our  policy  on  energy  will  determine  our  future  economic 
development, but, at the same time, we have our environment to look after. Whatever we do 
on the energy front and  on the development front, must cater for the environment. This is 
why we had from the hon. Leader of the Opposition that vexed question on Sarako.  

Sarako, an eyesore from the air as the hon. Leader of the Opposition put it and we 
grant it, that is, for development’s sake. But then if we want to have the environment safe and 
this is what I have said: “we can have MCB which from the air is as beautiful as any building 
we see in Dubai”.  And that is what we want to achieve altogether. I shall be working hand in 
hand with my  colleague, the hon. Minister for  Environment.  Dynamic,  as he said,  active, 
proactive and reactive! 

(Interruptions) 

I think the two of us, we can do a marvellous job on this front. In the last 15 years, there has 
been  a  dramatic  and  drastic  evolution  on  the  environmental  aspects  of  energy  production. 
Fifteen years ago, when the current Prime Minister was Prime Minister and the hon. Leader 
of the Opposition was Minister of Finance and then, the Leader of the Opposition became 

 

105 

Prime Minister and, if I am not mistaken, hon. Ganoo was in charge of energy, a plan was 
started.  The emphasis was on the economics of the matter.  And they were right at that time 
because we had to see how to secure energy production for the future and they were planning 
for twenty years. This is why a huge programme was started by Sir Anerood Jugnauth with 
the support of his Minister of Finance for the boosting of coal-fired power plants and coal 
bagasse power plants.  Our sugarcane, bagasse became the fuel of our economy and I am not 
making a play on words when I say ‘fuel’.   

The  idea  was  to  ensure  constant  production  and  the  fear  was  the  blackout.    Then, 
came 2005! However much my good friend, hon. Mohamed may speak of the ten years of the 
Labour Party, they may have been successful on many fronts whether it be on the west coast 
or on the east coast, but there is one thing where they failed.  It is in the field of energy.  That 
is what I call the ‘Navin era’. 

(Interruptions) 

Utterly they failed! What had been started under Bérenger, Jugnauth, Ganoo, whatever our 
political differences may be today, Navin Ramgoolam halted this.  He made energy with a 
new dimension.  It became a political issue.  It became a racial issue.  Independent power 
producers  became  a  target  just  because  of  the  colour  of  their  skin  and  nobody  dared  to 
challenge this.  This is one of the many harms caused by the Ramgoolam era. There was no 
logic. 

(Interruptions) 

Navin Ramgoolam era! I call it the Navin era.   There was no logic except to make of energy 
an emotional issue and he succeeded because it halted what had been started in 2000.  Then, 
everybody was scared because whatever they would do, then they would be labelled as being 
allies  of  the  white  population,  etc.,  etc.    And  he  came  up  was  a  concept.    That  is  how  it 
started. It started as independent power producers and it came up with a concept: ‘nous bizin 
democratise l’économie.’  Democratisation of the economy! This was just a pretext for the 
worst that this country has known; the Woochits and the Sungkurs and all the lot of them, 
including their Soornacks and whatever. 

Special democracy!  

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

Upside down democracy! 

106 

(Interruptions) 

It was just a way of making money by putting up the name ‘democracy’.  Even the duty-free 
shop where they sell whisky, this also, democratisation!  Today, we know Dufry and Frydu. 

(Interruptions) 

Synonymous of democracy!  Millions of rupees syphoned out of this country. Stolen! They 
were daylight robbers. That’s what they were and today I hear criticisms.  

Plunderers! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Thank you, hon. Prime Minister.  Carry on, give me words! 

(Interruptions) 

This  is  what  they  were.  Today,  I  heard  the  Private  Notice  Question  of  the  Leader  of  the 
Opposition, as if we were the ones the culprits, because we are trying to unearth what they 
had been doing for 10 years. How do you call that? Plunderers! And this becomes the subject 
of a Private Notice Question. Is it wrong for our friends, our Ministers to try and investigate? 
And what is the problem that it is at 2 o’clock in the morning? At least, they were not in 
Roches Noires! That is the issue. And whether they like it or not, we obtained the evidence, 
Mr what? Obadia! I never heard of that. My enquiry showed me that, apparently, he was on 
the payroll of our Embassy in France. This has got to be checked. This is what I heard today. 
And apparently, it is not the only one, there is another one, Augusto. I do not know what is 
Augusto? I never heard of these. But it was unearthed by our friends, our colleague Ministers 
who, today, are being criticised, because they are investigating perhaps the biggest crime that 
has been committed against our country. But let me say one thing, Mr Deputy Speaker. I have 
come back into the world of politics when I did not intend to do this, but I will be by your 
side. We will hunt them, we will look for them, we will stalk them. No ocean will be too deep 
for them to hide!  No mountain too high for them to climb! No desert too big, too hot for 
them! We will get them and they will have to return this money to Mauritius, including these 
Directors of the AML, who blindly followed instructions of whoever it was, instead of doing 
their jobs as Directors; they will have to pay and I urge the Minister responsible for AML to 
try and enter civil proceedings under the Companies Act now so that for the future all public 

 

107 

officers may know that they are in danger by following blindly illegal and unlawful orders 
that they receive, and even some civil servants. If we remain quiet, our sons and daughters 
will reproach us of this for ever and ever, and then my time would have been wasted. I am 
sorry, I digress from my paper. I have got to go back to it. 

(Interruptions) 

Matters of corruption and all that are important, but what is important is that it was in the 
name, insofar as my Ministry is concerned, it was in that heavily charged political context of 
democratisation of the economy that CT Power appeared. We know, we have heard lots of 
things  about  CT  Power.  As  I  have  said,  in  answer  to  the  PNQ  of  the  Leader  of  the 
Opposition, I have not seen such evidence on my files and in my records and I am not going 
to stand up and say things which are unverified. One day perhaps, somebody will come to see 
me  at  one  o’clock  in  the  morning  and  give  me  documents  and  then  I  will  be  accused  of 
having met people at one o’clock at night in my house. 

With the campement pas dire narien! But if you want I can go to campement as well. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

And I will take you along with me in the campement. 

(Interruptions) 

Insofar as I am concerned, on CT Power I remain focused on the contractual issues, and here 
we must face facts. Whether we like it or not, the Labour Party Government directed the CEB 
to sign the contracts. This is what we are faced with, we cannot do otherwise. We have this 
contract.  But  CT  Power  had  insisted  that  Government  concludes  an  implementation 
agreement.  I  am  mentioning  this,  because  it  has  become  the  subject  of  parliamentary 
questions  and  it  is  good  that  I  speak  of  this  in  my  speech.  Implementation  agreement  in 
essence  means  that  Government  was  to  guarantee  the  payments  to  be  made  by  CEB.  The 
matter landed on the desk of my hon. colleague.  I am supposed to address you. How do I call 
him your hon. father or your hon. Minister, I do not know. 

Mr Deputy Speaker: Please address him as… 

Mr Collendavelloo: The Deputy Prime Minister. It landed in his desk when he was 
my Minister of Finance and he refused to give that guarantee, this as much is what I know. 
And then when we got into power, we said: “We cannot give that guarantee unless you show 

 

108 

us your financial capabilities. We cannot guarantee that we will pay you if you are not worth 
what you say that you are worth”. And we said: “Give us a letter from a reputable bank to 
show that we can be comforted and this is what we call a Letter of Comfort to give you this 
guarantee. And, of course, this could not come from anybody. That was in January last. It is 
good to know that one condition of the EIA Licence was that CT Power should provide proof 
of its financial capabilities to the satisfaction of the Ministry of Finance. When I answered the 
PNQ  on  Tuesday,  I  had  not  received  the  document  nor  had  my  colleague  the  Minister  of 
Finance received that document, but yesterday, at 14.36 hrs, I received a document which I 
have  tabled  before  you,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  It  is  a  document  which  comes  from  a 
company called Avendus Capital (UK) Private Limited. It is a long document, but I just shall 
read a few extracts – 

“This letter is provided to you with the consent of the company - that is CT 
Power - for information only in relation to your due diligence” 

In other words, you have to go and look for the information because we are providing only - 
and what information do they provide? They say that they confirm that, to the best of their 
knowledge and belief, CT Power has the financial capabilities to allow it to meet the equity 
contributions of the project company, that is, of the company which is going to do CT Power. 
They give all sorts of phrases to limit the scope of their letter and then they say – 

 “We have acted for the company and for no one else in connection with the 
transaction. On your instructions we have provided this letter.”  

That is not true. The hon. Minister of Finance never instructed Avendus to provide this letter. 
I have to say it because of the legal implications. 

Yes, a certificate! It further says – 

(Interruptions) 

“We have provided this letter for information purposes only and accordingly 
we  accept  no  legal  liability  to  you  or  any  other  person  in  relation  to  the 
confirmation set out above. This letter is not a substitute for persons interested 
in the transaction performing their own due diligence (…).” 

In other words, you go and find out whether what we are saying is true –  

“(…)  in  respect  of  and  reaching  their  own  conclusion  with  regard  to  the 
company, the transaction and the documents.” 

 

Then, they say –  

109 

“We are authorised and regulated by and are subject to the applicable rules of 
conduct of business of the Financial Conduct Authority of the UK.” 

Then there is another part of the letter where it says that they want confidentiality – 

 “Save for a disclosure to the Prime Minister or Cabinet of Ministers of the 
Government  of  Mauritius,  this  letter  may  not  be  disclosed  to  any  person  or 
referred to or quoted in any other context.”  

Who do they think they are? We went to look for information on this Avendus and we have 
received the information. If they act as financial advisers, they are not licensed to act as a 
bank;  they  are  not  entitled  to  hold  clients’  money.  They  are  people  who  act  as  financial 
advisers, and that is what they are. 

Therefore,  I  am  saying  that  up  to  now  CT  Power  not  having  proved  its  financial 
capabilities, and on this we insist because the only business which we know the people are 
involved in is that of being printers. They print posters, T-shirts, but they have nothing to do 
with power unless they show us the contrary. 

(Interruptions) 

Even posters of the Prime Minister they can do, if you want posters of politicians and all this. 

Yes, mal imprimer tout… 

Non, 2005! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: No cross talking, please! 

Mr Collendavelloo: Therefore, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, there is nothing in this letter 
that  will  cause  me  to  change  my  opinion  which  I  gave  and  I  am  going  to  recommend  to 
Cabinet that we definitely shelve the CT Power project on sheer… 

(Interruptions) 

… contractual and legal grounds. There are, of course, other grounds like environmental and 
the  harm  that  it  will  do.  The  coal-fired  power  plants  are  being  disapproved  of  by  funding 

 

110 

agencies.  I  have  met  Agence  française  de  développement  and  all  the  reputable  funding 
agencies are telling us that they will not subsidise coal-fired power plants contrary to what it 
was 15 years ago. 15 years ago, that was the way for our energy independence. Why? I have 
got  the  paper  now,  Avendus.  Because  it  does  not  hold  any  banking  licence;  there  is  no 
publicly  available  information  on  their  balance  sheet  or  financial  statements  and  they  are 
registered  with  the  US,  UK  and  Indian  regulators  as  a  financial  advisory  firm.  You  will 
understand that I cannot take that very seriously. 

(Interruptions) 

What do we do? What is our philosophy? First of all, it is to remove all partisan politics out 
of the energy situation. If we are going to be serious about the future of Mauritius, we have 
got to put our heads together on that issue. Secondly, we have got to understand the danger 
which we are facing and I am so happy that hon. Bodha devoted a part of his speech to this. 
We  are  a  small  island  State.  We  are  subject  to  climatic  change.  Have  you  realised  that 
cyclones now start in the West and work towards the East? Since when do cyclones go into 
that direction? 

 (Interruptions) 

The rains?  What we are seeing is equatorial, droughts, floods… 

(Interruptions) 

But the sun will never set! We are an economy which relies a lot on tourism and tourists are 
high consumers of water and energy, ten times more than the average Mauritian. All this is 
the fate of many small islands like Seychelles, Vanuatu, Samoa and we are all in the same 
boat. On top of that, we have a lot of municipal wastes from tourists and Mauritians. What do 
we do with it? We take it, we dig a hole and we put all the wastes in it and all this goes to 
pollute  our  leaching  fields,  that  is  the  harm  that  is  caused  to  small  islands.  And,  we, 
Mauritius, do not contribute to climate change, we are innocent victims in this matter. We are 
surrounded by Australia, Indonesia, China, India and even South Africa. They are the largest 
contributors  to  the  climate  change  and  we  suffer  the  consequences  of  this.  We  must, 
therefore, take the lead.  

In 2000, hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, again started with the idea of the Small Island 
Developing States together with the hon. Leader of the Opposition and we were the proud 
host  of  the  first  SIDS  conference  in  Mauritius  in  2004.  Even  today,  that  is  called  the 
Mauritius Strategy  and it is the basics of all environment protection international rules for 

 

111 

Small Island Developing States. Ten years later, we are lagging behind! What we started in 
2004 was shelved into 2005 for sheer political reason, just because it was Jugnauth/Bérenger. 
They just put it aside and did not attend to any conference on Small Island Developing States 
just because people were going to say hon. Bérenger was Prime Minister when SIDS started. 
That is the only reason! The third SIDS conference was held in Samoa in September 2014. It 
was an important conference on climate change for small islands. Do you realise the Prime 
Minister  had  booked  his  ticket  and  all  for  Samoa  and  then,  finally,  he  decided  to  go  to 
Europe? Now, we know why! He sent Dr. Boolell to Samoa. When all these countries had 
high-level  delegations,  we  had  low-level  delegations.  The  result  is  that  Seychelles  has 
overtaken us, Samoa is in the lead, Vanuatu and all these countries are ahead of us. 

I will just read an extract of the SAMOA Pathway –  

“We  reaffirm  that  small  island  developing  States  remain  a  special  case  for 
sustainable development in view of their unique and particular vulnerabilities, 
and we acknowledge that climate change and sea-level rise continue to pose a 
significant risk to small island developing States and their efforts to achieve 
sustainable  development  and,  for  some,  represent  the  gravest  threat  to  their 
survival and viability”. 

We, in Mauritius have not gained big consciousness of that threat to our physical existence. 

If you want me to stop. I will. So, it’s time. It’s alright!  

(Interruptions) 

This is why we must take the lead again in 2015. Mauritius must again come back to 
what it was in 2004; the leader of the Small Island Developing States in the struggle. How do 
we do it? In December 2015, in a few months, there will be UN Climate Talks in Paris. These 
talks  are  supposed  to  produce  a  global  agreement  to  cut  greenhouse  gas  emissions.  Two 
things can happen – 

(i) 
(ii) 

they don’t agree, and 
the agreement will be between the large countries of the world.  

And they will forget the small islands that we are unless we put up a united front of small 
islands and Mauritius must be in the lead. I have talked to my hon. colleague of Environment. 
I have told him that we must go together; energy and environment together to lead that fight. 
I have started it. I have gone to Abu Dhabi and Paris for that purpose.  Mauritius has lost a lot 
of self-respect, a lot of its reputation, but we have to work back on this so that we get back 

 

112 

our  reputation  and  we  can  go  to  COP  21  -  this  is  the  name  of  that  conference  -  with 
confidence. 

Now, we have 18% of our electricity from renewable sources.  This is bagasse, water 
and solar photovoltaic.  We’ve got to increase it.  The target of my predecessor was 35% in 
2025, we’ve got to meet it.  But, we’ve got to try and achieve 50%.  For this, it’s easy.  We 
have to go and see in Reunion what is happening and get the expertise.  Arena which is a 
United  Nations  Organisation,  which  sits  in  Abu  Dhabi  is  ready  to  help  us.  We’ve  got  to 
change our structures. Our CEB Act dates back to 1939.  Each time there has been an attempt 
to change the CEB Act, we’ve had resistance.  Resistance from all quarters, but we are going 
to fight the resistance because we need to change the structure.  We need to put a regulator.  
We need to do all the structural and legal changes, whether it be at the CEB, the Independent 
Power Producers or what have you, we’ve got to put order in the House because today what 
is happening?  I want to do a solar photovoltaic in Bambous, if I am on good terms with the 
Prime Minister and I make my son change from MSM to Labour Party, I negotiate, and I get 
a good deal and I do solar photovoltaic.  It is private negotiation with confidential agreement.  
I  must  say  that  the  Directors  of  Sarako  agreed  to  my  tabling  the  contract  before  the 
Assembly.  I am thankful to them because or else I would not have been able to do so.  It is 
now on the Table of the Assembly for anyone to read it.  It is not a good contract, it is not a 
bad contract, either.  But we’ve got to learn from these experiences and see what we have to 
do.   

CEB, we will issue expressions of interest to call for future projects.   Bagasse,  we 
have  almost  reached  our  top  capacity  because  sugar  cane  plantation  is  decreasing.  The 
experts  tell  us  seriously  that  what  we  were  laughing  at  10  years  ago,  that  is,  fatak  and 
bambous, now are being used for energy production. So, what used to be a romantic exercise, 
a flight of fancy, today is an economic reality. We’ve got to go about it. Waste to energy. 
There  is  in  Mauritius  a  projet  pilote  which  has  worked  very  well,  our  good  friend  hon. 
Jahangeer who is much more of an expert in these matters than I am, he knows how to take 
waste and do turn it into electricity. It’s almost magic. But they do it and we should do it as 
well. 

I  must  also  talk  about  CWA,  water.  People  can  live  without  electricity,  but  people 
cannot leave without water. This is a sad situation indeed. We have suffered from years and 
years of incompetence. I have met the cadres of CWA individually, they are bright, they are 
energetic  and  they  want  to  do  things.  But  as  soon  as  you  put  three  of  them  together, 

 

113 

everything  collapses.  There  is  no  leadership.  There  is  no  sense  of  the  future.  We  have  to 
restructure the whole thing and this is probably my prior objective. There are, of course, the 
changes in the water pipes. I’ve got the figures with me, but I don’t think at this time of the 
night, we want to go into metre cubes. We’ll go about it as I am sure one of my good friends 
of the Opposition will, one day, ask the question which will enable me to provide the figures.  

We’ve got a mandate to do this. What is more, we have the money and we’ve always 
had the money to do that work for the water pipes. That money was stashed away because 
you know, if you do that sort of job, there is very little room for commissions. So, it was not 
an interesting project. I have today… 

(Interruptions) 

Not interesting! I have today invited to be in the VIP’s gallery, the person who used to be the 
Chairman of the Central Water Authority, Mr Saddul. He has been of good help to me, in 
spite of me having asked him to step down as Chairman of the Central Water Authority. He is 
a  good  man.  He  knows  these  things.  I  am  getting  help  from  many  people  to  help  me  to 
resolve that water crisis. Because you know, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am not an engineer, I 
am not a technician and everything that I have done in my life is only law. So, I need expert 
advice  and  I  am  going  to  put  experts  and  not  politicians  at  the  Head  of  the  CEB  and  the 
CWA. I am not going to do appel international and all that. We wasted a lot of time trying to 
identify the right person. I did my own headhunting and I think now I have reached the target.  
They will be on board within the next seven or ten days and with instructions to go full steam 
ahead. 

Let me say one last word on Wastewater Management because it is also important. 
Again, I have asked the Director to be present today in the House while I do the speech. I am 
sorry I am not going to say all that is suggested, I should say. But it is good to know that 
there  are  projects  because  wastewater  is  important,  we  need  to  continue  with  the  project 
which was started in 2000.  

Again  I  think  it  was  hon.  Ganoo  who  started  it  at  the  Waste  Management.    At  a 
certain time, it became political.  In 2005, it was the subject of a political issue, but now it has 
gone  down,  we  can  carry  on  with  our  work.  That  is  as  much  as  I  wanted  to  say  on  my 
Ministry.  No, it is not as much as I wanted to say.  I wanted to say much, much more, but I 
am sure I would be facing an almost empty House if I continue on that vein. 

 

114 

I think it is important that I answer one or two points.  The first point is what I have 
heard  about  the  Director  of  Public  Prosecutions.    With  the  utmost  respect  to  many  of  my 
learned friends at the Bar, I have never heard so much nonsense being said in so little time as 
I have heard on the DPP.  For years and years and decades, the DPP has always functioned 
administratively within the Attorney General’s Office.  We have in this House four who have 
worked  in  the  State  Law  Office,  anciently  the  Crown  Law  Office.    Had  we  lost  our 
independence when they were dealing with the file?  Was there any attempt to remove our 
powers?  On the contrary, we were junior State Law Officers, Crown Law Officers; even the 
DPP respected our independence, and nobody would have dared, and nobody will dare even 
today. This is … 

(Interruptions) 

What the present DPP does not say, and what our learned friends do not know, is that well 
before the decision was taken, the Attorney General had consulted the DPP over this matter, 
in presence of the Minister of Financial Services.  He had voiced his disagreement, but he 
cannot say he had not been consulted.  Government is here to govern, and provided we do 
everything within the Constitution, we are entitled to do it.  Let me remind ourselves what is 
that Office of the DPP.  Who is that DPP?  Section 72 tells us – 

“There  shall  be  a  Director  of  Public  Prosecutions  whose  Office  shall  be  a 
public Office, and who shall be appointed by the Judicial and Legal Service 
Commission.” 

We have not changed this!  The Director of Public Prosecutions shall have power.  What are 
his powers?  It is good that we remind ourselves of that question.  What are his powers? 

“To institute and undertake criminal proceedings,” 

Have we eroded this power? 

“To take over and continue any such criminal proceedings.” 

Have we eroded this power?   Have we even questioned this? 

“To discontinue at any stage before the judgement is delivered.” 

I am tempted to ask, like the Leader of the Opposition: “Ki ena dans so la tête?”  What is 
there in his mind?  Then…  

(Interruptions) 

 

115 

…there are the powers of the Director of Public Prosecutions, and that is the most important 
part. 

“In the exercise of the powers conferred upon him by this section, the Director 
of Public Prosecutions shall not be subject to the direction or control of any 
other persons or authority.” 

In  other  words,  is  not  under  the  control  or  authority  of  any  person  when  he  is 
exercising the powers.  But when he is buying a pencil, doesn’t he need to account whether 
he is buying a pencil in gold?  What type of pencil?  If he wants to put furniture costing Rs45 
m.!  Can he just buy, and then say ‘Oh!  My powers are being eroded’?  But, then, what is 
worse is that when he came, he did not talk… 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Vice-Prime Minister, let me interrupt you here.  Please, 
don’t  comment  on  the  conduct  of  the  DPP  as  such.    I  will  allow  you  to  comment  on  the 
Office of the DPP … 

Mr Collendavelloo: Of course! 

The Deputy Speaker: But not on his conduct. 

Mr Collendavelloo: But, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that is the debate which has been 

brought before the House! 

The Deputy Speaker: But, then, I will draw your attention... 

Mr Collendavelloo: The fact is that hon. Baloomoody and hon. Uteem have said - 

and we know what is the debate, that is, we are a république bananière!  Who said that? 

(Interruptions) 

No!  The hon. Member never said that.  I know.  Although the hon. Member was in favour of 
the second Republic.  But he never said that we were a république bananière. 

(Interruptions) 

Therefore, to close on this chapter, we just have to remind ourselves that the Bar Council has 
met,  and  they  summoned  the  Attorney  General.    They  called  him  and  asked  him  for  his 
explanations, and now they have said they are satisfied with the explanations of the Attorney 
General. 

(Interruptions) 

 

116 

Oh, yes, yes! The Bar Association will come with all the State Law Officers working at the 
DPP’s Office!  Of course, they will do all that!  We are used to that coming from him!  I am 
sorry, but I have got to say that because it retorts to the comment. The Bar Council is the 
body  which is in charge of looking  after these  matters.   I have been Chairman of the Bar 
Council; the DPP’s wife has also been Chairman of the Bar Council.  Today, we have Mr 
Domingue  who  is  the  Chairman  of  the  Bar  Council.    All  previous  Chairmen  know  the 
responsibilities  of  the  Council,  and  my  friend  hon.  Gayan  has  been  Chairman  of  the  Bar 
Council.  My hon. friend Gayan is right to send me little piece of paper.  The DPP exercises 
his powers, but that Office of the DPP spends more time - the Office now!  

You can sit back and relax … 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The Office of the DPP.  What do they do?  Advisers sitting on Boards of SICOM, parastatal 
bodies!  Is that exercise of their powers under the Constitution, and we can’t put it right?  We 
are going to put all this right! 

I think I have said enough on this. 

(Interruptions) 

I want to say one last thing.  I am sorry if I abuse for a few minutes before your dinner 
time,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.    I  am  stunned  by  admiration  for  my  hon.  and  good  friend 
Mohamed.  It has taken him ten years, but finally he has come to realise with whom he had 
been  working  all  this  time.    Finally,  I  am  very,  very  happy  to  have  heard  from  him  the 
recognition which he has given to Sir Anerood Jugnauth as being a contributor of the country. 
I say this because I must, in all fairness, say that from the beginning of this Assembly, our 
friend hon. Mohamed as well as his colleagues, especially the young colleagues of the Labour 
Party  have  been  extremely  fair  in  their  comments  although  they  have  acted,  of  course,  as 
Opposition. And, that is an extremely good statement. I don’t agree with many things that the 
hon. Member has said, but then if we are all to agree with everything that the hon. Prime 
Minister says, well then, we don’t need to come. 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, but what I cannot agree is when my good friend hon. Mohamed talks of people losing 
their jobs and that sort of thing under this regime. Has anyone heard of that sort of complaint? 

 

117 

But, on the other hand, what I know, during the electoral campaign they were scrutinising the 
photographs which appeared in newspapers and they were identifying who had gone to the 
meetings of l’Alliance Lepep, and the next day they were out of their jobs, they were sacked. 

(Interruptions) 

This is what happened!  And the threats: ‘After elections, we will take care of you!’ Do you 
remember this: ‘Zot a conner are nous, after elections!’ 

(Interruptions) 

The workers at the public meeting of 07 December! I was not there, of course, at Place Du 
Quai, but somebody told me… 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Please, no cross-talking! Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Collendavelloo: Somebody told me that, at that meeting, hon. Bérenger made a 
nice  joke  with  his  famous  words  ‘Ou  conner  ou’,  and  then  nobody  clapped,  and  nobody 
laughed. Why? Because, they had put 500 Bangladeshi workers in front! 

(Interruptions) 

And, these poor workers did not understand a word of what was happening! But what was 
most unfair during the campaign, and I personally think that this was what the determining 
factor was.  We were explaining our case, we started from zero and MSM had a long start, 
but we, ML, nobody had heard of us.  But then, the sort of language we heard on our women 
candidates, I am sorry, we have been together for 35 years, I have never heard MMM talking 
in  this  way.  ‘Frottement  à  Ramgoolam’,  this  contaminated  the  minds  of  the  MMM,  I  am 
sorry to say! The language used on our female candidates, not only female candidates, the 
wives  of  candidates,  Mr  Sinatambou’s  wife,  hon.  Jugnauth’s  wife!  Not  only  wives,  their 
daughters, became subject of a campaign, and you know when they came out with this talk, 
they did not come with the cassette in Rose Hill, they came with the talk on 05 December. 

Yes, granted! I grant you. 

(Interruptions) 

 (Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Order! Allow the hon. Vice-Prime Minister to continue! Order, 

please! 

 

118 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Members, I am on my feet! Hon. Vice-Prime Minister, please continue! 

Mr Collendavelloo: Thank you. What I am just saying is, I know that in Rose Hill it 
cost a lot of votes to the MMM. This was unacceptable. They put up posters in Rose Hill near 
the market, but when I looked at that, I said: ‘this can’t have been put up without the blessing 
of the candidates. How can it be?’ I was so shocked. We looked at that and we said, ‘Ine 
perdi la tête!’.  I understand Labour Party doing it, not this Labour Party, I can understand 
that, but I could not understand the MMM going in this bandwagon of the Labour Party to 
that extent.  

Let me conclude with Muvman Liberater. 

(Interruptions) 

I grant you, I am not pinpointing anyone. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Vice-Prime Minister, please, address the Chair! We have 

made the point clear. 

Mr Collendavelloo:  I grant this to the hon. Member, I am not saying that such and 
such persons actually put up the posters, because I did not know. I was not there, but it was 
clearly part of that campaign.  

Now, let me finish with two minutes on Muvman Liberater. On 16 April after I had 
heard that the remake was off and I was of the opinion that it was on very flimsy grounds 
indeed, and then, I heard the talk of the Alliance, the Second Republic and I looked at my 
friends of the political bureau of the MMM, my good friend hon. Ganoo made his statement 
about the future of the MMM together with Navin Ramgoolam, I felt that I could not be part 
of it. It was my personal decision and I resigned from the MMM. And then,… 

(Interruptions) 

I had been ten years out of active politics, but then, certain people came to me and said we 
need to come together and we formed that Party. Among the first ones was Ravi Rutnah, now 
hon. Rutnah.  

(Interruptions) 

What sorts of insults were not said about him! As he reminded us, even his hairstyle became 
the subject of mockery. He was called all sorts of names; pressure was put on the people of 

 

119 

Rivière du Rempart, ‘Attention zot laisse Ivan faire reunion!’ This is what we had to face.  
Finally we had a meeting almost in a sugarcane field, in a garage which reminded me of the 
days which I did not know, but which I have read of the first days of the MMM. That is how 
we were in Rivière du Rempart. We went to Riambel, four 4 x 4 travelling in front of the 
meeting, but then there were so many people, they could not do anything. In fact, one of these 
drivers is now part of ML and he has told me all about it.  

So, that was the sort of things we had to face up with. Eddy Boissezon, Anil Gayan, 
there were four of us, we said we had to do something. We clamoured for the unity of the 
Opposition,  we  said  something  dangerous  is  going  to  happen.  I  could  not  agree  that  the 
Opposition  and  Government  pooled  together,  this  was  a  hijacking  of  the  State!  Let  alone 
seven  years  immunity  to  Ramgoolam,  do  you  know  what  it  would  have  meant?  In  seven 
years’ time no coffer would have been big enough to put his wealth. He would have been 
owning HSBC! This is what would have happened and, we, Mauritians, would have ended up 
in poverty and slavery and starvation. This is what was awaiting us.  The people of Mauritius 
woke up and for the first time in the history of Mauritius the electorate won the elections. 
There was no lobby, no communal, no racist, no argument which could stop the flood of the 
Mauritian people.   

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we are going to carry out the work which we have said we 
are going to do and we are going to succeed and I hope that the Opposition is able to refaire 
les morceaux because we need a strong Opposition.  We don’t need to use our three-quarters 
majority.  We don’t want this. This is not our purpose.  We don’t want any 60-0s.  We want 
democracy to continue to flourish in this country. 

So, that’s all right! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Let me end by something, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  I have heard many of my young friends, 
my young colleagues - I am from another generation - I must say that I will not single hon. 
Members out because it is unfair, but some of the speeches I have heard, whether it is on this 
side or whether it is on the other side from these young new hon. Members, are extremely 
promising for the country.  I have heard high-value speeches.  I was in Parliament for the first 
time in 1983.  I still believe the best Parliament was 2000 to 2005 and I still believe this was 
the best Government.  I still believe that if we had done the Remake, this would have been a 

 

120 

wonderful  Government  for  Mauritius.    It  is  unfortunate  that  my  voice  could  not  be  heard.  
But, nevermind, what I  have heard from our  young friends means that Mauritius is a very 
lucky country indeed.   

Let me congratulate you at the end, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, first of all, for having 

been so patient with me… 

(Interruptions) 

…and  for  having  allowed  me  sometimes  to  go  astray  and  I  am  sorry  about  this,  but  this 
happens  when  we  talk.  Let  me  ask  you  to  transmit  to  Madam  Speaker  my  personal 
congratulations as everybody has done.  Let me congratulate all the  young hon. Members, 
once again, those who have come with maiden speeches, for the wonderful speeches which 
they have done in this House. 

Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Members, I now suspend the sitting to break for dinner.  

We shall resume in one hour. 

At 8.21 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

 

On resuming at 9.31 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

 

MATTER OF PRIVILEGE 

 ‘LE MAURICIEN’ NEWSPAPER –  

05 MARCH 2015 – PRIVILEGE COMPLAINT 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Members,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  I  have  today 
received a privilege complaint from the hon. Attorney General relating to an article which 
appeared in today’s edition of the newspaper ‘Le Mauricien’ under the caption -  

‘ASSEMBLEE NATIONALE/Private Notice Question 

 L’affidavit accablant confirmé par SAJ’ 

I have had a look at the article and I am of the view that the contents of the article 
may  constitute  an  offence  under  section  6(1),  paragraph  (o)  of  the  National  Assembly 
(Privileges, Immunities and Powers) Act. 

121 

Mr Yerrigadoo: Madam Speaker, in the light of your ruling, I beg to move as follows 

 

- 

“This Assembly is of the opinion that the article which appeared in today’s 
edition of the newspaper ‘Le Mauricien’ under the caption, I quote – 

‘ASSEMBLEE NATIONALE/Private Notice Question 

 L’affidavit accablant confirmé par SAJ’ 

be referred to the Director of Public Prosecutions for such action as he may 
deem appropriate.” 

Mr Jhugroo rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Wong Yen Cheong! 

 

(9.34 p.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms  (Mr  A.  Wong  Yen 
Cheong): Madam Speaker, at the very outset, I would like to express my congratulations to 
Madam Speaker for her election as the first lady to chair our National Assembly and hon. 
Adrien Duval for his election as Deputy Speaker. 

C’est  un  grand  honneur  pour  moi  de  m’adresser  pour  la  première  fois  devant  cette 
auguste Assemblée. J’ai eu le privilège d’écouter les différents honorables membres de cette 
Chambre et j’ai bien compris que nous sommes tous, ici, pour le même but, qui est celui de 
bâtir  une  nation  saine  et  solide.  Tout  comme  a  été  la  précédente  Assemblée  d’après  les 
discours qui ont été prononcés, la différence entre la précédente et l’actuelle Assemblée est 
sans équivoque. Nous avons présentement un gouvernement solide, incarné par une Alliance 
Lepep  homogène  avec  au  centre  un  pilier  inébranlable  en  la  personne  de  Sir  Anerood 
Jugnauth,  consolidé  par  des  bases  solides:  Xavier-Luc  Duval,  Ivan  Collendavelloo, 
Showkutally Soodhun, Vishnu Lutchmeenaraidoo et d’autres, comme mon collègue. 

Par  contre,  j’en  passe  des  commentaires  à  propos  de  l’administration  de  l’ancien 
régime gouvernemental, le précédent Premier ministre, qui s’autoproclamait ‘Le Roi Lion’. 
Je savais qu’un vrai lion pouvait s’accoupler 20 fois par jour mais sans viagra. Il a su jeter la 

 

122 

poudre aux  yeux de tous avec des développements cosmétiques à la pelle en faisant payer 
cher au peuple d’aujourd’hui: ring road, autoroute Verdun-Terre Rouge, j’en passe, ou sinon 
un  dernier  et  pas  des  moindres  -  un  poisson  sounouk  maquillé  se  faisant  passer  pour  une 
sirène. 

Madam Speaker, this country does not belong to us, we are only tenants. It belongs to 

the future generations. We, therefore, need to prepare a healthier future for our children. 

C’est une certitude que la terre que nous labourons aujourd’hui et les semences que 
nous mettons en terre ne sont pas destinées à remplir nos assiettes mais celles de nos enfants 
et  de  nos  petits-enfants.  Il  ne  faut  pas  que  les  futures  générations  aient  honte  de  nous.  Le 
travail,  qui  n’a  pu  être  accompli  par  nos  prédécesseurs,  sera  aujourd’hui  notre  tâche.  Pour 
atteindre nos objectifs, il faut des hommes et des femmes de valeur pour atteindre le but que 
nous  nous  sommes  fixés.  Nous  n’abdiquerons  pas  devant  nos  responsabilités  et  nos 
engagements. L’heure est à l’action et celle-ci demande la participation de tout un chacun. Il 
y a des deux côtés de cet hémicycle des hommes et des femmes de valeur. Travaillons donc, 
main dans la main, pour construire ensemble cette île Maurice que nous voulons tous pour 
nos enfants. 

Madame  la  présidente,  je  voudrais  féliciter  mes  amis,  les  honorables  Jean  Claude 
Barbier,  Georges  Lesjongard,  Raffick  Sorefan,  pour  leur  courage  d’avoir  exprimé  leur 
position afin d’aider à la reconstruction du pays. Comme le disait si bien Albert Einstein: le 
monde ne sera pas détruit par ceux qui font le mal, mais par ceux qui le regardent sans rien 
faire. Mieux vaut tard que jamais, chers amis! 

Pendant notre campagne durant les portes à portes, nous avons pu constater comment 
le précédent gouvernement avait abdiqué devant ses responsabilités. Pratiquement, toutes les 
administrations  publiques  ont  été  abandonnées,  dilapidées.  Pour  reconstruire,  la  tâche  est 
énorme sinon titanesque. Le peuple a faim, un appétit gargantuesque! Cela se comprend! Le 
peuple est impatient de voir nos promesses se concrétiser. Nous, nous ne sommes ni Dieu ni 
magicien.  Nous  ne  sommes  que  des  hommes  et  des  pécheurs  devant  l’Eternel.  Il  faut 
comprendre que Rome ne s’est pas construit en un jour. Quand on agit dans la précipitation, 
c’est toujours avec des actions et des solutions cosmétiques. Il faut donc penser à long terme. 
Et je peux vous rassurer que la réalisation de nos promesses ne sera pas renvoyée sine die. 
Comme on l’a souvent vu dans le passé, nous ferons tout ce qui est nécessaire pour bâtir une 
nation mauricienne, saine, heureuse et prospère. Au bout de notre mandat, quand nous aurons 

 

123 

accompli  notre  mission  et  réalisé  nos  promesses,  il  faudra  alors  rendre  à  César  ce  qui 
appartient à César. Nous œuvrons en symbiose avec la population car nous ne voulons pas 
non  plus  d’un  peuple  d’assisté.  Nous  devons  tirer  des  enseignements  de  cette  citation  de 
Confucius qui a dit  – 

Donne un poisson à un homme et il mourra de faim 

Donne une canne et il pourra nourrir sa famille. 

Le faux lion s’est lourdement trompé concernant la définition de valeur car il pensait 

que valeur était synonyme de coffres remplis de billets de banque.  

La valeur, la méritocratie, l’honnêteté sera notre leitmotiv. Nous avons de la chance 
d’être  issu  de  métissage  asiatique  qui  a  le  sens  inné  de  l’hospitalité  et  de  servir,  cultivons 
avec fierté cet avantage opportun. Je pense ainsi à Saint François Xavier qui a dit : « c’est en 
donnant  qu’on  reçoit.»  Faire  de  la  politique  n’est  pas  synonyme  d’améliorer  sa  situation 
personnelle. Il ne s’agit pas de se servir, mais de servir le peuple. 

Madame la présidente, nous avons un gouvernement qui a compris qu’une nation en 
bonne  santé  est  une  nation  prospère.  Je  félicite  l’honorable  Sawmynaden,  ministre  de  la 
Jeunesse  et  des  sports  pour  sa  vision  d’ensemble  et  son  initiative  de  mettre  un  accent 
particulier sur le potentiel d’encourager la pratique des sports dès le plus jeune âge. Comme 
on  dit,  les  bonnes  habitudes  s’apprennent  dès  le  début.  Le  ministre  l’a  si  bien  résumé : 
« Mens sana in corpore sano - un esprit sain dans un corps sain. »  

Madame  la  présidente,  j’ai  grand  espoir  dans  l’avenir  de  notre  nation  quand  je 
constate le travail, la conviction et la vision de chaque collègue ministre pour leur ministère 
respectif.  Nous  avançons  tous  ensemble  sous  le  leadership  de  notre  légende  vivante, 
l’honorable Sir Anerood Jugnauth. Je tiens à remercier le conseil de mes aînés et pour leur 
confiance placée en moi.  

Madame la présidente, le tourisme est sans nul doute un des piliers de notre économie 
et nous pouvons faire confiance à mon ami et leader l’honorable Xavier-Luc Duval et pour 
cela,  nous  sommes  heureux  de  pouvoir  compter  sur  l’ensemble  du  Cabinet  et  des 
parlementaires présents.  

Par exemple l’environnement, la mer, l’administration régionale, l’agriculture, notre 
histoire à travers la culture et la force des travailleurs de ce pays, sont tous  des atouts sine 

 

124 

qua  non  et  l’engagement  a  déjà  été  pris  par  ces  différents  ministères  pour  contribuer  à 
l’épanouissement des différents secteurs. 

C’est certain. Nous retrouverons nos plages blanches quand nos récifs et nos barrières 
de corail retrouveront leur santé. Nous avons de la chance d’avoir un vrai soldat, un homme 
de terrain et d’action qui a compris que le mal ne peut être guéri à la légère car il doit être 
attaqué à la racine pour aller au cœur du problème. Nos forêts seront de nouveau verdoyantes 
une fois que nos rivières et cours d’eau ne seront plus pollués et obstrués. Pour cela, il nous 
faut des actions courageuses. Le plastique, des bouteilles et des canettes, il faut peut-être les 
bannir. 

Madame la présidente, le PMSD a subi beaucoup de critiques, notamment de la part 
de certains membres de cette Assemblée, pour avoir été aux côtés du Parti travailliste lors de 
ces  neuf  dernières  années.  Sur  ceci,  je  peux  vous  témoigner  qu’avec  mon  ami  et  leader 
l’honorable  Xavier-Luc  Duval  c’est  à  vélo  et  à  la  force  de  nos  jambes  en  pédalant  qu’on 
sillonne l’île régulièrement pour être au plus près de la réalité locale. Je peux vous affirmer 
que l’honorable Xavier-Luc Duval, de par ses discours à l’époque à l’encontre des décisions 
du leader du Parti travailliste depuis fin 2010 début 2011, je savais que notre union avec le 
Parti travailliste était usée. Mais comme dans toute union, un divorce ou une séparation n’est 
pas  une  décision  facile  à  prendre.  J’en  suis  heureux  qu’il  ait  eu  le  courage  de  prendre  la 
bonne  décision  au  bon  moment.  Nous  pouvons  être  fiers  que  nous  ne  nous  sommes  pas 
séparés  parce  que  nous  avons  pris  un  autre  partenaire,  c’est  plutôt  le  leader  du  Parti 
travailliste  qui  avait  décidé  de  commettre  l’adultère.  On  ne  peut  blâmer  le  PMSD  pour  sa 
prise  de  position  par  rapport  au  Parti  travailliste,  car  au  lendemain  même  des  élections  de 
2014, la dulcinée de Navin Ramgoolam lui imputait toute la faute de la cinglante défaite du 
décembre 2014. Avec le PMSD ça a toujours été le leitmotiv: l’île Maurice avant tout. 

Madam Speaker, the rapid transformation of a country into a modern nation state is 
leading  to  major  societal  changes.  Furthermore,  better  education  and  growing  affluence  is 
leading to greater needs and demands for quality public goods and services within a reduced 
response time. Although the public service has  undergone substantial  reform over the past 
decades,  there  is  growing  perception  that  due  to  the  upholding  of  highly  bureaucratic 
principles,  the  Civil  Service  has  not  been  able  to  keep  pace  with  developments  in  an 
extremely dynamic and challenging environment.  

 

125 

Madam Speaker, in the face of new and emerging challenges, there is no doubt that 
the Civil Service has to be an effective vehicle for sustainable growth. We have, therefore, no 
option but to move ahead to a more strategic and transformational mode of operation so that 
the public service can contribute effectively in the change process and become an engine of 
growth for creating the new economic miracle for our country.  

it  operates  within  an 

The  Civil  Service,  in  fact,  forms  an  integral  part  and  plays  a  crucial  role  in  any 
modern  democratic  Government.  As  the  backbone  of  the  whole  administration  set  up  in  a 
democracy, 
increasingly  dynamic,  complex  and  demanding 
environment. The transformation process of the organisational landscape of the civil service 
has, therefore, to continue geared towards modernisation so as not only to better respond to 
the changing needs and aspirations of the citizens and stakeholders but to also enable it to 
effectively  support  the  economic  agenda  of  this  Government  within  a  dynamic  global 
environment.  

In this context, my Ministry is committed to build a responsible and responsive civil 
service.  A  series  of  cutting-edge  measures  will  be  implemented  to  bring  about  a 
transformational  change  in  the  civil  service  with  focus  on  human  capital  development, 
streamlining of processes and optimisation of information and communication technologies.  

Madam Speaker, as one of the major reform initiative, the Performance Management 
System  has  formally  been  implemented  in  the  Civil  Service  for  some  time  now  in 
replacement  of  the  former  opaque  annual  confidential  reporting  system.  Today,  PMS  is 
recognised as  a sole performance evaluation tool in the Civil Service. While sustaining its 
implementation in the correct manner, we will also ensure that the whole public service is 
adequately covered under the system by taking on board parastatal bodies, top civil servants, 
supervising officers and contract officers with clear objectives and measurable management 
targets.  

Beyond  individual  performance,  the  system  will  also  lead  towards  institutional 
capacity building for enhancement of the performance of public organisations as well.  In that 
regard, we are going to work out and put in place the necessary mechanism to better manage 
and monitor organisational performance in collaboration with other stakeholders. 

Another major reform that will undoubtedly become a reality as from this year itself 
relates to the establishment and operation of HRMIS project. The system will not be only 
about setting up an online human resource database for the Civil Service, but will in parallel 

 

126 

be a valuable tool for officers of the human resource and financial operation cadres to better 
perform  their  respective  duties  using  re-engineered  business  process  within  a  modern 
environment. Strategic human resource management will indeed become a reality in the Civil 
Service thanks to the capability of the system to deal automatically with routine tasks thus, 
relieving  senior  members  of  staff  of  the  Civil  Service  from  basic  operational  activities  to 
strategy ones. The HRMIS will thus contribute considerably towards eliminating unnecessary 
waste in the use of scarce resources, both human and financial. The country will benefit both 
from efficiency gains and enhanced delivery of services across the Civil Service through a 
judicious utilisation of human resources.  

The  long-awaited  Public  Sector  Re-engineering  Bureau  will,  for  sure,  take  off  the 
ground and made operational under the purview of my Ministry as a dedicated unit to provide 
real time and continuous advisory services regarding organisational reviews and restructuring 
exercises.  In  addition  to  facilitating  coordination  within  the  Government  machinery  and 
ensuring an effective implementation of reform strategies, it will work in tandem with, inter 
alia,  the  Ministry  of  Technology,  Communication  and  Innovation  to  drive,  implement  and 
monitor e-Government strategies. 

I must say that a Public Service Bill has been drafted by the previous Government, but 
it  never  proceeded  beyond  infancy  stage.    However,  in  view  of  this  Government’s  firm 
intention to take the public service to a new level of commitment, we will step forward boldly 
by introducing a ‘Public Service Bill’ in the National Assembly in the weeks to come.  As an 
unprecedented step towards strengthening the capability of the civil service on the part of a 
Government which means business, this Bill will clarify and secure the boundaries between 
the  Executive  and  Administration  and  it  will  be  a  major  instrument  in  enhancing  and 
reinforcing transparency, accountability and integrity. 

Madam  Speaker,  with  all  the  reform  initiatives  mentioned  above,  my  Ministry  is 
taking the pledge to give a new dimension and orientation to the human resource function 
with a paradigm shift from transactional HR to Transformational HR to be in tune with our 
modernisation programme and achievement of meaningful change in the civil service.  There 
is need to ensure that at all levels, the human resource development strategy is aligned with 
broader  strategic  imperatives  of  the  Government  and  that  lot  of  emphasis  is  placed  on  the 
human  resource  development  function.    In  this  context,  emphasis  will  be  placed  on  a 
Strategic  Human  Resource  and  Talent  Development  as  this  will  be  a  key  contributor  to 

 

127 

ensuring  organisational  effectiveness  and  the  maximum  return  from  their  most  important 
asset: the people in the organisation. 

Madam Speaker let me here recall a famous Chinese proverb - 

 “If you want one year prosperity grow rice;  

  If you want ten years prosperity grow trees;  

  If you want hundred years prosperity grow people”.  

In fact, people and talented development will remain one of the main pillars of my 

Ministry. 

Madam Speaker, the Civil Service College, Mauritius is a long-awaited project dating 
back to the late nineties and for the last decade, the Government in power had shown no sign 
of  commitment  to  set  up  the  college.  This  Government  will  leave  no  stone  unturned  to 
crystallize this highly laudable project.  We are going to give a more meaningful dimension 
to Training and staff development in the Civil Service by the setting up of the Civil Service 
College  which  will  set  the  foundation  and  framework  for  the  institutional  support  towards 
capacity building and  Human Resource Development through lifelong learning, training in 
ICT, e-learning and also multi-skilling.   

Madam Speaker, this Government, as a caring employer, is committed to the creation 
of  a  safety  and  health  culture  in  the  Civil  Service  through  my  Ministry.  It  is  our  firm 
conviction that a healthy and safe work environment is conducive to motivation, productivity 
and higher performance. In this connection, Government places safety and health high in its 
development agenda.  

This  Government  will  continue  to  implement  the  enhancement  of  the  work 
environment  projects  so  that  officers  operate  in  an  entourage  which  is  conducive  to  good 
health, well-being and work efficiency. Furthermore, in order to promote a culture of safety 
and health, my Ministry will ensure sustainable prevention and greater participatory efforts 
within the Civil Service. 

Madam Speaker, we are also proposing the setting up of a Public Service Call Centre 
to act as a one stop shop and information centre to help track applications made by citizens 
and provide quick information on Government services. 

Madam  Speaker,  our  civil  service  is  considered  as  a  model  by  many  African 
countries. I should also add that countries like South Africa and Senegal are looking forward 

 

128 

for the help and collaboration of Mauritius in view of upgrading the organisation and service 
delivery in their respective civil service.  

Madame  la  présidente,  ce  gouvernement  est  à  l’écoute  de  la  population  qui  attend 
beaucoup de nous. Nous sommes déterminés à honorer nos engagements. D’ailleurs, on peut 
le  constater,  dès  le  début  de  notre  mandat,  beaucoup  de  nos  adversaires  parlaient  d’effet 
d’annonce. Nous, au niveau de l’Alliance Lepep, nous avons promis un vrai changement. Qui 
pourrait dire le contraire ? À chaque lever du soleil, au chant du coq c’est ‘carré carré’ que le 
changement est visible quotidiennement. La bonne gouvernance est au centre de toutes nos 
actions indistinctement. C’est l’évidence même que nous respectons nos engagements.  

Nos  compatriotes  de  Rodrigues  n’ont  pas  été  oubliés  notamment  avec  la  baisse  du 
prix  du  transport  aérien  sans  oublier  que  bientôt  nous  pourrons  compter  sur  de  nouveaux 
moyens de transport maritime pour une meilleure fréquence reliant nos familles de Rodrigues 
et d’Agalega. De par l’intermédiaire de notre ministre des Affaires Etrangères, l’honorable 
Etienne Sinatambou,  nous continuerons à nous battre pour l’archipel des Chagos et les autres 
territoires appartenant à l’île Maurice et sans lesquels notre République ne sera pas complète. 
Rodrigues  recevra  le  soutien  obligatoire  et  nécessaire  pour  redevenir  ce  qu’elle  fut  jadis, 
comme étant le grenier de l’île Maurice.  Aujourd’hui c’est un réservoir de matière brut pour 
la  collecte  de  nos  futures  moissons  de  médailles  aux  différentes  disciplines  sportives. 
L’amélioration concernant la bande passante pour la connectivité ὰ internet sera une réalité.  

Madame la présidente, et pour tous les changements annoncés, indistinctement chaque 
membre  de  la  fonction  publique  sera  mis  à  contribution  pour  que  ce  secteur  connaisse  un 
nouvel  essor  et  agisse  comme  un  des  moteurs  pour  la  nouvelle  île  Maurice  que  ce 
gouvernement propose. Je réitère mon appel à tous les parlementaires de bonne volonté que 
nous devons œuvrer main dans la main comme un seul homme pour le futur de nos enfants.  

Madame la Présidente, je ne peux m’empêcher d’évoquer ma Circonscription, Grande 
Rivière  Nord-Ouest/Port-Louis  Ouest.  Depuis  que  le  pouvoir  du  peuple  nous  a  confié  les 
commandes, les choses évoluent positivement. Les exemples sont multiples. Surtout depuis 
mardi, tout récemment suite à la réponse donnée dans cette Assemblée par mon collègue Ivan 
Collendavelloo  lors  de  la  PNQ,  les  habitants  du  No.1,  surtout  ceux  de  Pointe-aux-Sables, 
Kensington  Place,  Morcellement  Rey  et  des  alentours  et  même  leurs  voisins  d’Albion  et 
Petite Rivière sont plus que ravis et retrouvent l’espoir que le projet CT Power n’aille pas de 
l’avant.  J’accueille  favorablement  cette  déclaration  de  l’honorable  Collendavelloo,  qui 

 

129 

contemple la possibilité de recommander au Conseil des ministres de ne pas aller de l’avant 
avec ce projet. Dans le passé, il y a eu tant d’arguments disant que cette centrale à charbon est 
indispensable pour éviter un ‘black-out’, quitte à ce que cela affecte la santé de milliers de 
personnes, mais la position adoptée par le ministre Collendavelloo démontre le réel agenda de 
ceux qui affirmaient mordicus que ce projet est plus que nécessaire et qui le défendaient bec 
et ongles. 

 Il  faut  aussi  saluer  la  vision  de  ce  gouvernement  d’apporter  un  soulagement 
concernant  l’embouteillage  monstre  au  quotidien  au  niveau  de  Terasson,  Grande  Rivière 
Nord  Ouest,  Canal  Dayot  jusqu’à  Port-Louis.  Cela  en  mettant  en  place  un  système  de 
transport maritime pour relier Pointe-aux-Sables à Port-Louis.  

 Madame  la  présidente,  il  y  a  deux  choses  qui  m’interpellent.  Tout  d’abord  j’avais 
promis à mes collègues de la gent féminine de ce Parlement qu’il y a quelque chose qui m’est 
arrivé particulièrement. Et je pense surtout à la gent féminine ici dans ce Parlement, avec le 
travail, l’heure tardive à laquelle elle rentre à la maison.  Il y a certaines qui ont encouru des 
difficultés concernant la sécurité. Et je souhaite que ce Parlement vienne de l’avant afin de 
formuler quelque chose pour assurer leur sécurité quand elles rentrent chez elles. 

(Interruptions) 

Merci.  Et ceci, bien sûr, afin d’encourager plus de femmes à accéder au Parlement. 

Il y a autre chose que je voudrais ajouter.  Je suis heureux d’avoir entendu l’honorable 
Shakeel Mohamed faire son mea culpa sur le Parti travailliste et de ce qu’il a vécu. Il y a cette 
phrase que j’ai déjà entendu «Faîtes ce que je vous demande de faire et ne faîtes pas ce que je 
fais». Je demande à l’honorable Shakeel Mohamed d’avoir le courage de répéter ce même 
discours au Square Guy Rozemont. Je crois que le pays fera un grand pas en avant en mettant 
définitivement hors service les gens qui ne sont plus compétents dans ce pays.  

Madame la présidente, il y a tant de choses que je voudrais dire mais je sais qu’il est 
tard. Je suis certain qu’avec le budget qui sera très prochainement présenté, les choses vont 
s’améliorer davantage.  

Tout ce que je peux souhaiter, c’est que Dieu bénisse notre République et Vive l’île 

Maurice. 

Je vous remercie, Madame la présidente.   

 

 

(9.59 p.m.) 

130 

Mr J. F. François (First Member for Rodrigues): Madame la présidente, mesdames 
et messieurs les honorables membres, la volonté du peuple nous engage tous ici à des actions 
collectives envers notre pays qui a besoin de nous sur le chemin du changement, qui appelle à 
dépasser les clivages idéologiques afin de servir notre pays et bâtir une nation. La nation c’est 
notre responsabilité. 

Madame la présidente, tout d’abord, je veux remercier le peuple de Rodrigues, mon 
parti  l’OPR,  son  leader  Serge  Clair,  et  mes  collègues  politiciens,  ainsi  que  mon  colistier 
l’honorable Buisson Léopold, pour la confiance placée en moi pour être la voix de Rodrigues 
au sein de cette auguste Assemblée. 

Je  tiens  aussi  à  remercier  ma  famille  qui  m’accompagne  et  me  soutient  dans  ma 
mission de servir le peuple. Je voudrais vous féliciter, Madame la présidente, aussi bien que 
le vice-président pour votre nomination pour diriger cette Assemblée. Vous, en tant que la 
gente féminine, et notre ami, l’honorable Adrien Duval, le plus jeune vice-président de cette 
Assemblée. Je félicite les députés des deux côtés de la Chambre et leur souhaite bon succès. 
J’apporte aussi les salutations fraternelles et les félicitations du peuple de Rodrigues à toute 
de la République de Maurice. 

Madame la présidente, c’est véritablement un honneur pour moi, en ce début de mon 
deuxième mandat, en tant que député national, de prendre la parole ici pour remercier son 
honneur, son Excellence le président de la République, Kailash Purryag, d’avoir prononcé le 
discours  2015-2019,  et  l’honorable  Madame  Selvon  pour  sa  motion,  à  qui  j’adresse  mes 
félicitations. 

Mon  intervention  se  situe  dans  une  perspective  bien  précise,  celle  de  renforcer  le 
symbolisme de notre engagement politique pour le bien-être de la nation en tant qu’élus au 
nom du peuple, par le peuple et pour le peuple. Je vais citer Edgar Morin qui disait, je cite – 

« La  politique  c’est  de  s’occuper  de  l’urgence,  alors  que  l’urgent  est  de 
s’occuper de l’essentiel. » 

Madame la présidente, l’avenir et l’urgence de la République pour donner du sens au 

progrès – 

a) 

c’est cette volonté d’un changement profond vers une nouvelle société et une 
nouvelle culture d’action politique; 

 

131 

b) 

c) 

c’est une nouvelle direction face aux défis tels que le changement climatique, 
l’économie, la géopolitique, entre autres, et 
c’est de mettre l’homme au centre du développement. 

De  ce  fait,  je  m’associe  à  la  phrase  du  discours  qui  parle  d’un  développement  à  visage 
humain  et  des  chances  égales  pour  tous.  Notre  responsabilité  aussi  c’est  d’accentuer  la 
confiance  et  l’optimisme  dans  ce  peuple,  pour  que  nos  enfants  puissent  voir  et  avoir 
confiance  dans  l’avenir  du  pays.  Madame  la  présidente,  nous,  les  dirigeants  en  ces  temps 
modernes, ont cette responsabilité de renforcer notre démocratie et être à l’écoute continue de 
nos citoyens pour mieux comprendre ses besoins, attentes et aspirations. 

Je suis ravi que le Premier ministre nous ait bien fait comprendre sa vision dans ce 
sens, surtout nous, les PPS, dans notre rôle de politique de proximité avec le peuple, et notre 
rôle  au  service  de  la  population,  à  ce  que  leurs  problèmes  quotidiens  qui  relèvent  des 
responsabilités  de  l’État  soient  résolus  avec  rapidité  et  dans  la  transparence.  Notre 
République a besoin d’un regard visionnaire et une orientation responsable et durable vers le 
futur dans un espace démocratique et réinventé. 

Madame la présidente, permettez-moi, maintenant de me référer à quelques domaines 
spécifiques du programme gouvernemental 2015-2019. L’éducation, Madame la présidente ; 
notre  système  d’éducation  mérite  une  réflexion  profonde  et  une  révolution.  Quel  type 
d’éducation pour les 20 ans à venir? Un aspect fondamental pour l’éducation est l’accès aux 
finances pour les études tertiaires. Le taux des intérêts bancaires varie entre sept à 14 %, et 
c’est trop cher. Est-ce que le gouvernement révisera aussi les montants des bourses d’études 
et démocratisera les prêts des études tertiaires pour nos jeunes? 

La fraude et la corruption, Madame la presidente; la course vers l’argent domine et 
ouvre  la  porte  de  la  corruption  et  des  comportements  inacceptables.  Là,  je  soutiens 
l’innovation  du  Premier  ministre  pour  porter  une  attention  considérable  à  la  bonne 
gouvernance avec la création du nouveau ministère de Financial Services, Good Governance 
and Institutional Reforms, pour combattre la fraude et la corruption. D’où l’importance aussi 
d’un Freedom of Information Bill pour la transparence. 

Je viens d’écouter mon ami, l’honorable Wong Yen Cheong.  La  fonction publique, 
Madame  la  présidente.  Un  seul  qualificatif  pour  la  fonction  publique :  c’est  la  réforme, 
l’efficience,  l’efficacité  des  services  possibles,  une  bonne  qualité,  et  plus  de  productivité. 
Notre fonction publique a besoin d’une nouvelle culture de la gestion des affaires publiques, 

 

132 

et  doit  aussi  se  diriger  vers  une  nouvelle  étape  de  modernisation  comme  préconisée  par 
l’honorable ministre Wong Yen Cheong. 

Des modifications ou assouplissements de la loi sur la fonction publique doivent être 

apportés en vue de moderniser son fonctionnement. 

La santé, Madame la présidente. Notre République a une lourde tâche dans la lutte 
contre les maladies telles que le cancer, le sida et l’Alzheimer. Je m’attarde sur la maladie 
d’Alzheimer qui touche beaucoup de personnes à Maurice et à Rodrigues. Le gouvernement 
doit concrétiser un plan national d’Alzheimer. Et je plaide aussi pour une révision à la hausse 
des carers allowance pour ces parents qui souffrent – je crois que l’honorable ministre est 
très  d’accord  avec  moi.  Madame  la  présidente,  nos  aînés  ont  été  entendus  par  le  présent 
gouvernement, et l’augmentation de la pension de vieillesse à R 5000 a été favorablement 
accueillie à Rodrigues. 

Maintenant, c’est un cri du cœur depuis janvier 2013 venant des femmes rodriguaises 
qui  demandent  la  présence  d’un  gynécologue  pour  une  plus  longue  période  à  Rodrigues. 
Actuellement, une femme enceinte est prise en charge par neuf à dix gynécologues pendant 
sa grossesse de neuf mois. Un gynécologue est posté à Rodrigues sur une base mensuelle ou 
pour  une  quinzaine  de  jours.  En  2014,  on  a  connu  20  gynécologues  en  12  mois.  Vous 
imaginez-vous ! Et neuf mois de grossesse !  J’espère de tout cœur que le nouveau ministre 
de  la  Santé  va  remédier  à  cette  situation  en  partenariat  avec  l’Assemblée  régionale  de 
Rodrigues, et c’est urgent. 

Madame la présidente, la terre est un patrimoine national. Le gouvernement doit faire 
preuve  de  leadership  dans  la  gestion  des  terres.  Mais,  le  souci  du  point  de  vue  technique 
aujourd’hui  c’est  la  planification,  et  la  République  de  Maurice  a  besoin  d’un  nouvel 
urbanisme moderne afin de mieux contrôler l’urbanisation rapide en cours. Je saisis de cette 
opportunité pour que le projet LAVIMS soit étendu aussi à Rodrigues. 

Le sport, Madame la présidente. Nos sportifs sont aussi des rassembleurs pour le pays. 
Les  performances  de  nos  sportifs  comme  Linley  Perrine,  Kennedy  St-Pierre  et  Christiane 
Legentil continuent à contribuer au patrimoine sportif de notre République. 

Je plaide pour une meilleure reconnaissance de nos sportifs qui servent et ont servi 

avec honneur le pays. 

J’ai en tête l’ex-Judokate et Haltérophile, la  championne Glorieuse Guillaume avec 
une remarquable réalisation sportive, médaillée d’or lors des Jeux des Iles de Madagascar, 

 

133 

Seychelles,  championne  d’Afrique  intercontinentale,  et  championne  nationale  sur  plusieurs 
années. Aujourd’hui, elle souffre de l’osteoarthritis, maladie liée à son passé sportif. 

Madame la présidente, vous imaginez que cette demoiselle, aujourd’hui handicapée,  
ne peut plus travailler et vit juste avec une Basic Invalidity Pension, et risque même de perdre 
sa maison NHDC et de se trouver sans toit. Qu’en est-il d’une assurance spéciale sport pour 
nos athlètes? 

J’apprécie  la  démarche  du  ministre  de  la  Jeunesse  et  des  Sports,  l’honorable 
Sawmynaden,  qui  a  rassuré,  lors  du  Gala  Sport  Night,  qu’il  fera  tout  pour  une  meilleure 
reconnaissance à nos ambassadeurs, nos sportifs.  

Rodrigues est cité comme une pépinière d’athlètes pour la République. 

La communauté sportive Rodriguaise souhaite avoir plus de moyens et une instance 

moderne qui cadre avec l’autonomie de Rodrigues. 

La  classe  sportive  Rodriguaise  souhaite  mettre  en  place  un  Comité  Régional 
Olympique Sportif à Rodrigues (un CROS), comme une branche du Comité Olympique de 
Maurice.  Cela  leur  permettra  d’avoir  des  ouvertures  vers  l’extérieur  avec  d’autres 
organisations  ou  bailleurs  de  fonds  sportifs.  Une  démarche  mal  comprise  par  certains 
dirigeants  sportifs  nationaux,  alors  que  c’est  dans  l’intérêt  suprême  des  sportifs  de  la 
République.  Toute  la  population  est  témoin  de  l’ampleur  des  compétitions  internationales 
comme  le  judo,  le  volley-ball  et  la  boxe  organisées  à  Rodrigues.  En  passant,  le  22  mars 
courant,  Rodrigues  organise  sa  seconde  édition  du  tournoi  d’international  de  judo,  et  c’est 
garanti vous allez voir un gymnase rempli à craquer.  

Je fais un appel au ministre de la Jeunesse et des Sports à rencontrer les différents 
représentants sportifs de Rodrigues pour une discussion approfondie dans le respect sur ce 
sujet. 

Je plaide aussi pour une rupture avec les discriminations et les dysfonctionnements 
relevant de certaines fédérations sportives nationales face  aux athlètes élites de Rodrigues. 
On a eu le cas de la lutteuse, Joyce Milazar, qui a subi une discrimination et  l’exclusion.  
Aujourd’hui, ce sont d’autres sportifs comme Fackson Perrine notre boxeur national, Kevin 
Larose volleyeur. D’autres disciplines en souffrent et il importe de tout faire pour éviter que 
cela ne se reproduise chez d’autres athlètes. J’en passe, Madame la présidente. 

 

 

134 

Lutte contre la pauvreté - logement 

Madame la présidente, réduire la pauvreté nécessite un effort collectif de la part de 
tout le monde. Esther Du Flo, Conseillère de Barack Obama, a une phrase redoutable dans 
son livre « Repenser la Pauvreté ».  Et je cite – 

 « On ne croit aux valeurs de la République que quand on a le ventre plein ».  

Cette phrase m’a incité à réfléchir davantage sur ce sujet. 

Maurice  ou  la  République,  on  a  besoin  d’un  Grand  Colloque  National  sur  la  lutte 

contre la Pauvreté extrême. 

Il nous faut une conscience commune pour le problème des squatters, sortir les SDF 
de la rue et abriter tous les pauvres, sans distinction. Le problème de la misère urbaine pose 
des défis qui doivent être relevés et nous devrions nous préoccuper davantage de ces lieux de 
pauvreté. 

Le programme gouvernemental préconise un Plan Marshall contre la pauvreté. C’est 
bien. Je crois que nous avons besoin d’un Plan d’Education et d’Empowerment bien défini, 
ensemble avec le concours des ONG.  A Rodrigues je vois que le gouvernement régional est 
venu avec deux plans dans ce sens, un Plan de Prestation Transitoire et un Employment Relief 
Programme sur une base pilote dans ce souci de combattre la pauvreté et de permettre à ceux 
qui reçoivent des allocations sociales de travailler sur une base pilote. 

 

Agriculture 

Brièvement, sur l’agriculture.  La sécurité alimentaire est une priorité pour l’avenir. 
Avec la vision de faire de la République une nation d’entrepreneur, l’agri business reste un 
pilier important du développement agricole et de l’économie rurale. 

Madam  Speaker,  hon.  Seeruttun  said  it  well,  which  is  being  substantiated  by  what 

Kanayos Nwanze, the President of IFAD said and summarises well, and I quote - 

“We need to dramatically change the way we look at agriculture. Smallholder 
farming  is  a  significant  economic  activity,  a  business  enterprise  and  is  a 
dignified profession that feeds people and guarantees wealth.” 

Madame  la  présidente,  le  respect  de  la  force  de  l’ordre  nous  concerne  tous.  Nos 
policiers  ont  le  besoin  de  participer  sur  ce  qui  touche  à  sa  vie  professionnelle,  mais  la 

 

135 

possibilité  que  la  Police  soit  syndiquée  m’interpelle.  Pourquoi?  Je  reste  sur  un  point 
fondamental à ce que notre sécurité ne soit pas compromise, vu le système centralisateur et 
hiérarchique  de  notre  Police.  C’est  très  important  ce  que  j’ai  dit,  centralisateur  et 
hiérarchique. There is point to ponder about this. 

La SSU, la SMF et la Police régulière sont tous sous la commande du Commissaire de 
Police. Contrairement à d’autres pays, vous avez la Police régulière et vous avez l’armée à 
côté. Séparées ! Je souhaiterais un projet de loi  novatrice dans  ce sens.  La Police  reste un 
service  essentiel  pour  le  pays.    Il  faut  continuer  le  recrutement  des  jeunes  et  donner  des 
moyens logistiques pour un meilleur service. 

Madame 

la  présidente, 

le  changement  climatique  nous 

tous 
quotidiennement, comme l’honorable Dayal et l’honorable Ivan Collendavelloo l’ont si bien 
souligné.  On  dispose  des  exemples  de  l’intensification  de  la  fluctuation  du  climat  et  la 
multiplication de phénomènes météorologiques extrêmes, les flash floods à Port Louis, et les 
récentes inondations des radiers à Rodrigues. 

interpelle 

Il  est  prévu  que  les  inondations,  qui  normalement  ont  lieu  tous les  100 ans,  auront 
désormais lieu tous les 5 à 25 ans à travers le monde. La vigilance est donc de mise et la 
résilience doit devenir le maître mot pour nous tous.  

 

Autonomie de Rodrigues 

Madame la présidente, permettez-moi maintenant de dire brièvement quelques mots 
sur  Rodrigues,  ce  beau  pays  que  j’aime.    Premièrement,  son  autonomie ;  deuxièmement, 
l’élection 2014, et troisièmement son développement économique et social. Permettez-moi de 
parler sur Rodrigues. I have to. This is very important. 

Madame  la  présidente,  aujourd’hui,  face  au  destin  et  l’histoire,  après  le  discours 
éloquent de l’honorable Bodha ce matin sur Sir Anerood Jugnauth, je voudrais profiter pour 
réitérer  au  Premier  ministre,  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  ce  que  j’avais  mentionné  dans  mon 
discours inaugural en 2010, que: « Tout le peuple de Rodrigues est reconnaissant envers la 
décision  majeure  que  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth  avait  prise  en  2001  comme  Premier  ministre, 
ensemble  avec  l’honorable  Paul  Bérenger,  pour  accorder  à  Rodrigues  son  statut  d’île 
autonome. » 

 

136 

En passant, je voudrais saluer l’humilité et la sagesse de Sir Anerood Jugnauth.  J’ai 
vu qu’il reste parmi nous jusqu’à fort tard pour écouter chacun de nous. C’est extraordinaire ;  
c’est un honneur. 

Madame  la  présidente,  il  est  bon  de  souligner  que  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth  et  son 
partenaire  d’alors,  l’honorable  Bérenger  ont  su  entendre  et  comprendre  les  besoins  de 
Rodrigues en tant que société.  

J’ai déjà dit et je le redis, le plus beau cadeau que la République a offert à Rodrigues 
et au peuple de Rodrigues, c’est son maximum autonomie après un long combat de 25 ans par 
mon parti, l’Organisation du Peuple de Rodrigues, (l’OPR) sous le leadership de Serge Clair.  

Je  me  souviens  encore  de  l’effet  de  la  parole  de  l’honorable  Premier  ministre,  Sir 
Anerood  Jugnauth,  accompagné  de  l’honorable  Joe  Lesjongard  en  2000  à  Rivière  Coco  à 
Rodrigues, en annonçant que : « Nou pou donne Rodrigues so maximum l’autonomie »  

En 2001, le projet de loi de l’autonomie de Rodrigues a été voté à l’unanimité dans 
cette auguste assemblée. C’était un grand pas pour la démocratie mauricienne. L’image de 
cette  avancée  démocratique  et  institutionnelle  est  aujourd’hui  en  chantier  continuel  à 
Rodrigues.  Après  treize  ans  de  notre  autonomie,  des  amendements  à  la  loi  de  l’autonomie 
sont  nécessaires.  Madame  la  présidente,  l’autonomie  c’est  l’aspiration  du  peuple  de 
Rodrigues vers son destin. Rodrigues est non seulement une région autonome avec son destin 
en  main  au  sein  de  la  République  de  Maurice  mais  une  entité  géographique  et  stratégique 
dans  cette  région  de  l’Océan  Indien  avec  le  projet  d’extension  de  la  zone  économique 
exclusive  autour  de  Rodrigues  et  des  nouvelles  dynamiques  de  mondialisation  sur  l’axe 
Chine-Inde-Afrique. 

Le  peuple  de  Rodrigues  est  bien  conscient  de  cette  valeur  et  richesse  au  sein  de  la 
République.  Il convient de souligner que Rodrigues aujourd’hui a besoin d’égalité de chance 
et  de  justice  sociale  pour  relever  les  défis  qui  nous  guettent  au  sein  de  la  République  et 
l’honorable Lutmeenaraidoo, le ministre des finances l’a bien compris et l’a exprimé lors de 
sa visite à Rodrigues en annonçant des mesures exceptionnelles sur le plan économique pour 
Rodrigues et nous sommes très reconnaissants. 

(Interruptions) 

Permettez-moi,  Madame  la  présidente  –  je  dois  parler  sur  cette  autonomie,  l’honorable 
Jhugroo - de citer un extrait de ce que disait Sir Anerood Jugnauth en 2001, par rapport à 
cette autonomie de Rodrigues et c’est très important, surtout pour les nouveaux députés dans 

 

137 

cette Chambre, cette autonomie de Rodrigues que nous devons tous comprendre et respecter 
et je cite – 

“The Rodrigues Regional Assembly Bill constitutes… 

This is what hon. Jugnauth said in 2001. 

…a landmark in the history of our country.  The objective is to give the island 
of Rodrigues the opportunity to shape its own destiny through a decentralised 
system of Government.  Neither the unity nor the indivisibility of our State 
will in any way be affected by this development.  However, for the first time, 
decisions  regarding  the  political,  economic  and  social  development  of 
Rodrigues will be taken on the island itself.” 

For many Rodriguans this is a dream coming true. 

The hon. Prime Minister also clearly spelt out that – 

“The tasks of the Rodrigues Regional Assembly will be immense.  It will have 
to provide leadership, direction and guidance to the people of Rodrigues.  I am 
confident  that  the  political  forces  in  Rodrigues  will  assume  fully  their 
responsibilities and rise to the occasion.  If they fail to do so, the people of 
Rodrigues will not forgive them”.  

And that’s absolutely correct and this is what is going on right now. 

Madame  la  présidente,  Rodrigues  aujourd’hui  sous  la  direction  de  l’OPR  et  le 
leadership  de  Serge  Clair,  Chef  Commissaire  de  Rodrigues  et  toute  la  collégialité  d’une 
équipe des jeunes politiciens, nous sommes engagés à réussir et à faire de cette autonomie un 
exemple pour la République. 

Je  voudrais  appeler  toute  la  République  de  respecter  cette  avancée  démocratique 
qu’est l’autonomie de Rodrigues. Vous avez pu constater certaines décisions prises parfois 
impopulaires, mais importantes pour l’avenir, à l’exemple du bannissement de l’utilisation de 
sacs en plastique et la fermeture de la pêche à l’ourite en lien avec une vision écologique pour 
Rodrigues. 

Madame  la  présidente,  la  République,  ‘kapav  conte  lor  le  serieux  de  l’OPR  pour 
l’avancement de Rodrigues’ et j’en suis sûr qu’avec son grand retour, Sir Anerood Jugnauth 
poussera encore plus loin et plus haut cette autonomie de Rodrigues. 

 

138 

Je  ne  pourrais  continuer  sans  parler  de  l’élection  nationale  de  2014  dans  la 
Circonscription numéro 21 à Rodrigues. Le grand changement et le choix d’une rupture avec 
la  politique  dégradante  et  déshonorante  d’un  parti  politique  local  ont  commencé  depuis 
février 2012.   

La qualité des résultats des élections a été particulièrement importante pour Rodrigues 
et  l’OPR  qui  est  aujourd’hui  un  parti  important  au  sein  de  la  République.    La  victoire 
historique,  écrasante  et  sans  précédent  de  l’OPR  le  11  décembre  2014,  restera  dans  les 
annales politiques de Rodrigues, sous notre slogan : « Ensam dan Enn Sel Vision, Enn Sel La 
Voix ». 

Mon colistier, l’honorable Buisson Leopold et moi-même – écoutez bien l’honorable 

Jhugroo… 

(Interruptions) 

… ont mis à terre par K.O. et Ippon, trois leaders des partis politiques,  « C’était enn bâté 
condiré enn baté bef : 3-0 » 

(Interruptions) 

2-0 !    You  are  listening !  Pourquoi  une  telle  victoire ?  C’est  parce  que  l’opposition 
Rodriguaise menaçait la stabilité politique dans le pays en voulant, je cite –  

«Gouvernement  Régional  OPR  ek  Serge  Clair  pou  bisin  démissionné  si  zot 
gagne  élection  nationale »   dixit  d’un  ex-ministre  et  Leader  d’un  parti 
politique local. Ce même politicien que je dirai a boycotté Rodrigues pendant 
son  mandat.    A  l’exemple  du  statement  de  l’honorable  Soodhun  sur  les 
règlements  l’arpentage  à  Rodrigues.  Le  peuple  a  été  plus  intelligent  et 
responsable. Le peuple les a envoyés dans ‘caro pikanloulou’. 

(Interruptions) 

Madame la présidente, Abraham Lincoln disait, je cite -  

«Un bulletin de vote est plus fort qu’une balle de fusil ».  

Dans  le  cas  des  élections  à  Rodrigues,  les  bulletins  de  vote  étaient  des  ‘coups  de 
canon et bazooka’ du peuple. Une observation importante est que notre élection ne s’est pas 
faite  avec  de  grands  moyens  logistiques  ou  financiers,  mais  reposait  sur  la  volonté,  la 
maturité  et  l’intelligence  du  peuple.    Certains  partis  politiques  misaient  sur  leurs  millions 

 

139 

mais l’OPR on a misé sur notre vision, «Nou Napa Million».  Dieu seul sait comment ils ont 
reçu ces millions.  On a été témoin des épisodes ‘donne botine, donne bagaz, donne ti-poule, 
donne du vin’ pour acheter la conscience des électeurs.  

Madame  la  présidente,  notre  fierté  aussi  est  que  les  jeunes  de  Rodrigues  se  sont 
mobilisés et ralliés massivement derrière l’OPR. Je leur félicite et remercie chaleureusement. 
Rodrigues  est  appelé  à  diriger  par  des  hommes  et  des  femmes  Rodriguais  sérieux, 
responsables  et  capables.  C’est  pourquoi  le  11  décembre  2014,  l’OPR  a  fait  le  grand 
nettoyage politique et nous travaillerons pour que le bon sens politique prévale à Rodrigues. 

Ceux qui ont sali l’image de Rodrigues, à l’exemple de ce politicien condamné à trois 
mois de prison et qui a fait appel, ceux qui ont dilapidé les terres de l’État, ou abuser des 
biens publics ou pouvoirs publics par de multiples façons, qu’ils payent le prix nécessaire. 
Nous  souhaitons  que  l’ICAC  et  le  nouveau  ministère  de  la  bonne  gouvernance  fassent  un 
travail dans ce sens. 

J’avais  demandé  entre  2010  et  2012  une  commission  d’enquête  sur  la  gestion  de 
Rodrigues par le gouvernement MR sur certains dossiers concernant des abus de pouvoir et 
de gaspillage de fonds publics à Rodrigues par l’Office of Good Gouvernance, mais cela n’a 
pas été abouti.  

Je reviendrai à la  charge pour l’ouverture d’une commission d’enquête  sur certains 
dossiers à Rodrigues.  Madame la présidente, Rodrigues fait un bond en avant dans sa quête 
de développement. Rodrigues veut être partie prenante dans cette vision de deuxième miracle 
économique.   

(Interruptions) 

L’honorable  ministre  des  finances  a  annoncé  la  création  d’une  institution  financière  pour 
démocratiser  l’accès  aux  finances  et  un  meilleur  accès  au  marché  pour  les  entrepreneurs 
Rodriguais.  Un  partenariat  sérieux  s’installe  entre  le  nouveau  gouvernement  central  et  le 
gouvernement régional pour le progrès de Rodrigues en termes de développement social et 
économique. 

Le gouvernement régional OPR a de belles pistes pour ses actions gouvernementales 
sous  son  programme  quinquennal  2012-2017 :  faire  de  Rodrigues  une  île  écologique, 
développer une culture entrepreneuriat favorisant une économie émergente et durable dans le 
secteur  de  l’informatique,  l’agriculture,  les  petites  et  moyennes  entreprises,  combattre  la 

 

140 

pauvreté, favoriser un développement infrastructurel prioritaire comme le port, l’aéroport et 
la câble optique, les secteurs de l’eau et un regard particulier pour la jeunesse Rodriguaise. 

Le  développement  de  Rodrigues  passe  aussi  par  une  vision  de  connectivité  vers  le 
modernisme, dont le développement de l’aéroport avec l’ouverture de l’espace aérien bientôt 
vers la Réunion, la baisse des prix des billets d’avion de R7,186 à R 5,430; le remplacement 
du  bateau  Mauritius  Pride.  Le  développement  du  port  reste  aussi  très  important  pour  le 
développement économique en terme de sécurité de la ville de Port Mathurin. On a perdu six 
ans avec l’ex-gouvernement régional MR. L’incendie du filling station le 23 février dernier 
devrait nous inciter à réorganiser l’urbanisation de Port Mathurin. 

Le secteur de l’informatique à Rodrigues est  appelé à devenir le prochain pilier du 
développement de Rodrigues. L’arrivée bientôt du câble optique: Rodrigues répondra à une 
attente grandissante de la jeunesse rodriguaise. Le projet câble optique sera le moteur d’une 
croissance économique nouvelle et de la création d’emplois pour l’île. La construction des 
infrastructures  modernes  comme  un Rodrigues  Intelligent  Building  sera  un  landmark 
decision. 

Le  secteur  de  la  pêche  est  un  secteur  porteur  pour  l’avenir  avec  des  projets  de 
développement  de  la  pêche  hauturière,  de  la  pêche  des  crabes  de  fonds  et  de  la  culture 
d’algues. 

Madame la présidente, le zoning dans le lagon de Rodrigues, entré en vigueur en 2006 
par  le  ministère  de  la  Pêche  pour  contrôler  le  Bad  Weather  Allowance,  n’a  plus  sa  raison 
d’être avec les différents parcs et réserves marins dans nos lagons. 

Je  voudrais  demander  au  nouveau  ministre  de  la  Pêche,  l’honorable  Koonjoo, 
d’enlever ces quatre zones et de les uniformiser en une seule zone vu la petite taille de l’île 
Rodrigues dans l’intérêt de nos pêcheurs. 

Pour  permettre  le  développement  du  secteur  de  la  pêche  à  Rodrigues,  on  a  besoin 
d’une école de pêche professionnelle et d’une école navale pour préparer les jeunes à intégrer 
le secteur porteur. 

La  NDU,  sous  le  leadership  du  Premier  ministre,  prend  une  nouvelle  orientation, 
surtout par rapport à la sécurité et le bien-être des citoyens. Dans le cas de Rodrigues, les 
projets sous la NDU seront surtout pour pallier aux problèmes d’inondations pour assurer la 
connectivité des villages en rehaussant les radiers ou en construisant des ponts ou des drains 
tout autour de l’île. 

 

141 

C’est une grande première après ma nomination comme PPS pour laquelle, d’ailleurs, 
je  remercie  chaleureusement  le  Premier  ministre  pour  la  confiance  placée  en  moi  et 
Rodrigues. 

Pour  terminer,  Madame  la  présidente,  nos  frères  et  sœurs  d’Agaléga,  méritent  une 
attention  particulière  pour  une  approche  renouvelée  de  leur  développement.  Au-delà  du 
développement  des  infrastructures,  l’accompagnement  social  du  peuple  Agaléen  mérite  un 
approfondissement surtout par rapport à la question de la démographie. 

Madame  la  présidente,  je  termine  en  disant  ceci:  avec  une  politique  réaliste,  nous 
sommes appelés à réussir la promesse de développement de notre république, l’heure est donc 
à l’engagement, la responsabilité et l’action. Sur ce, je vous remercie pour votre attention. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mrs Monty! 

 

(10.33 p.m.) 

Mrs M. C. Monty (Third Member for Port Louis North & Montagne Longue): 
Madame la présidente, permettez-moi tout d’abord, d’exprimer ma joie, mon honneur et ma 
fierté de m’adresser pour le première fois à cette auguste Assemblée que vous présidez en 
tant  que  première  femme  Speaker  de  l’Assemblée  Nationale,  laquelle  nomination  fait 
honneur à la femme mauriciennce et pour laquelle je vous présente, Madame la présidente, 
mes plus vives félicitations. 

Permettez aussi, Madame la présidente, que j’adresse mes plus vives félicitations au 
plus jeune membre de l’Assemblée Nationale, l’honorable Adrien Duval, pour sa nomination 
en tant que Deputy Speaker, qui fait la fierté du vice-Premier ministre, l’honorable Xavier-
Luc Duval et qui fait honneur à feu Sir Gaëtan Duval. 

Madame la présidente, mes félicitations vont aussi au Premier ministre, Sir Anerood 
Jugnauth; au vice-Premier ministre, l’honorable Xavier-Luc Duval et à tous les Leaders de 
l’Alliance  Lepep  pour  leur  brillante  victoire  et  pour  avoir  su  inspirer  le  peuple  de  l’île 
Maurice;  aussi  pour  avoir  si  habilement  convancu  la  population  quant  au  danger  qui  la 
guettait. 

On a eu la chance, Madame la présidente, d’avoir des Leaders habités par l’humilité. 
Notre  Premier  ministre  n’a  pas  hésité  une  seule  seconde  à  quitter  son  fauteuil  présidentiel 
pour reprendre le poste de Premier ministre et servir son peuple et son pays. 

 

142 

Le vice-Premier Ministre Xavier-Luc Duval, le vice-Premier ministre constitutionnel 
a su aussi montrer à la nation qu’à n’importe quel ministère qui lui était confié, il pouvait être 
performant et rester humble et simple. 

Permettez  aussi,  Madame  la  présidente,  que  je  présente  mes  félicitations  et  mes 
souhaits à tous mes collègues, honorables ministres, députés, aussi à l’honorable Leader de 
l’opposition, Paul Raymond Bérenger et à tous les honorables députés de l’autre côté de la 
Chambre. 

Cependent,  il  n’en  demeure  pas  moins,  Madame  la  présidente,  qu’une  question  me 
taraude. Comment l’incontestable et l’incontesté Leader du MMM, vrai Leader historique de 
ce  parti  ait  pu  se  laisser  prendre  au  filet  de  ce  grand  pêcheur  à  la  tête  du  gouvernement 
d’alors? Mais je préfère me faire une raison, car vous conviendrez, Madame la présidente, 
que le cœur a ses raisons que la raison ne connait pas. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  firmly  believe  that  the  era  of  change  has  come.  The  heroes  of 
change are at the command of this country, and nothing but meaningful change can really 
happen.  The  Leaders  of  l’Alliance  Lepep  have  united  the  best  team  ever  and  with  the 
dedicated work of one and all, we are bound to pave the way to success and wipe away all 
that stuck filthiness. Our journey has, indeed, well started at the service of the nation and we 
all will stand to our mission and translate our vision in bringing our country on the path of 
newness and innovation. 

Madam  Speaker,  my  election  in  Constituency  No.  4  is  but  the  fruit  of  hard  and 
continuous work supported by my campaign manager, my two other fellow candidates and 
having as motivating force the faith the Leader of the House had placed in me. I had to strive 
hard against highly experienced women politicians. The newness of my name in the political 
arena was one of the main obstacles during that campaign, but by and by  I stride my way 
through in winning the hearts and minds of people. I intend to serve my years as deputy with 
a  profound  spirit  of  service  en  étant  une  députée  de  proximité  with  the  inhabitants  of 
Constituency  No.  4,  which  I  have  had  the  pleasure  to  discover  in  all  its  urban  and  rural 
particularities and with all its warmhearted people whom I heartily thank for my election. 

Madam Speaker, I am proud to be among the rare few women called upon to humbly 
serve  the  people  of  our  beautiful  country.  I  cannot  help  having  words  of  thanks  for  my 
humble  and  most  generous  parents  who  have  spared  no  effort  to  help  me  grow  into  a 
determined woman of heart. 

 

143 

Madame la présidente, un peuple bafoué, leurré et meurtri a besoin de retrouver ses 
repères  et  de  se  sentir  pris  en  charge.  Le  programme  proposé  par  le  gouvernement  vient 
combler ce manque et je me sens parfaitement à l’aise quant au principe fondateur de son 
plan d’action. Je réitère  ici mon engagement à servir la nation en ma capacité de députée. 
Enthousiaste  et  déterminée,  je  suis  prête  à  participer  à  la  réalisation  des  projets  de  ce 
programme gouvernemental de l’Alliance Lepep. 

Chose  promise,  chose  due,  nous  avons  déjà  commencé  à  honorer  nos  promesses 
envers  les  aînés,  les  veuves  et  les  orphelins,  donc,  Madame  la  présidente,  les  plus 
vulnérables.  L’augmentation  de  la  pension  de  vieillesse  a  été  faite  aussitôt  que  le 
gouvernement a été mis en place, à la satisfaction de nos aînés méritant notre respect et notre 
reconnaissance. 

Madame la présidente, la jeunesse est l’avenir du pays et pour offrir des opportunités 
et un bel avenir à nos jeunes, nous leur devons une éducation de qualité leur permettant un 
épanouissement  dans  un  encadrement  digne  de  ce  nom.  Il  ne  suffit  pas  de  leur  offrir  des 
bâtiments  ressemblant  à  des  hôtels  cinq  étoiles  et  où  l’infrastructure  au  coût  souvent  trop 
onéreux aura permis aux promoteurs de construction de s’enrichir. Il convient de leur offrir 
un environnement adéquat pouvant assurer leur formation et leur sécurité tout en leur offrant 
des matières répondant à leur compétence et respectant les besoins du marché du travail. 

L’éducation,  Madame  la  présidente,  est  la  clé  du  succès  et  le  début  d’un  avenir 
meilleur pour nos jeunes. Je parle en tant qu’enseignante de carrière et en tant que directrice 
de collège, dotée d’une longue expérience dans le domaine de l’éducation. Il est grand temps 
qu’on  inscrive  les  valeurs  humaines  comme  matière  obligatoire  non-examinable  dans  le 
cursus scolaire de nos jeunes. Les avancées technologiques en dépit de tous les avantages y 
relatifs, font de nos enfants des êtres pouvant de moins en moins communiquer, ne sachant 
pas respecter l’autre, faute d’interaction, de manque d’exposition directe à la culture d’autrui. 
Nous avons besoin, Madame la présidente, des  êtres fully human and fully alive, des êtres 
capables de faire des compromis et pardessus tout d’aimer et de créer la paix autour d’eux. Si 
le sport tiendra toujours une place prépondérante aidant au développement du corps sain. 

L’éventail proposé pourrait être élargi. Il n’y a pas que des athlètes ou des sportifs de 
haut niveau n’ayant pour but que de rafler des médailles mais il  y a aussi d’autres formes 
d’exercice plus appropriées pour ceux qui ne sont pas à l’aise avec l’effort soutenu en plein 
air. 

 

144 

Madame la présidente, nous connaissons tous l’importance de la cellule familiale dans 
l’équilibre psychologique des enfants, et bien souvent ce n’est pas par manque de volonté que 
beaucoup de parents démissionnent. Ils ne savent souvent pas comment s’y prendre. Donc, un 
partenariat soutenu est de mise. L’école des parents viendrait parfaire ce qui se fait déjà et 
conscientiserait mieux ces derniers quant à leur rôle dans le développement intégral de leur 
progéniture. 

Madame la présidente, le plan d’offrir un repas chaud à tous nos petits du primaire est 
une  initiative  fort  louable  de  notre  programme  gouvernemental.  Mais  toujours  est-il  qu’on 
pourrait aussi penser à ceux qui, encore de nos jours, arrivent au collège sans avoir rien à se 
mettre sous les dents et qui viennent principalement des régions défavorisées. Une étude de 
cas aiderait dans une large mesure ceux qui s’absentent continuellement, faute de nourriture. 

Madame la présidente, s’il y a un fait marquant de ma circonscription que j’aimerais 
partager  avec  les  membres  de  cette  Assemblée  c’est  bien  ces  conditions  les  plus 
inimaginables  dans  lesquelles  un  groupe  d’enfants  font  leurs  devoirs  à  la  lumière  d’une 
bougie suspendue à un arbre et qui plus, est avec la lumière empruntée à un voisin.  

Madame  la  présidente,  les  mesures  annoncées  pour  le  secteur  éducatif  sont 
nombreuses. The 9-Year Schooling will allow the slow learner to grow at his own pace and 
not to be considered as a wreck at 10 years old. Moreover, the relief of parents will be great 
without exams fees even though serious conditions should be attached to this measure so as 
to discourage une mentalité d’assistés chez certains and encourage parental participation in 
a way or the other.  

Madam  Speaker,  if  the  hand  that  rocks  the  cradle  governs  the  world,  I  wish  to  the 
head that leads education much success in planning to bring up our youth within schools that 
should not be mere buildings but true institutions infused with values and not only walls to 
harbour young people.  

Madame la présidente, dans notre programme, les femmes ne sont pas en reste. Des 
facilités de formation seront mises à leur disposition afin de leur permettre de monter leur 
propre  business.  Par  ailleurs,  la  violence  envers  les  femmes  interpelle  plus  d’un  et  il  est 
nécessaire qu’elles puissent être protégées.  

Madame  la  présidente,  nous  prônons  l’égalité  des  chances.  En  combattant  la 
corruption,  nous  aspirons  à  une  société  plus  juste.  On  se  rend  bien  compte,  Madame  la 
présidente, que ce gouvernement entend bien remplacer le noubanisme par la méritocratie. Le 

 

145 

terme ‘noubanisme’ a été utilisé des centaines de fois pour qualifier les actions du précédent 
régime.  Mais  la  victoire  écrasante  de  l’Alliance  Lepep  vient  mettre  fin  à  cette  pratique 
discriminatoire en faisant autant d’appels de candidatures que nécessaire afin de déceler les 
précieuses compétences des mauriciens d’ici ou de l’étranger et qui sont disposés à servir le 
pays mais en particulier dans des domaines comme celui de l’éducation et des universités. 
Ces  appels  de  candidatures  déjà  en  place,  comme  CEO,  ou  comme  membre  de  conseil 
donneraient aux concitoyens et au pays cette conviction essentielle que nul n’est, au départ, 
exclu. 

Madam Speaker, I refer now to item 52 on sustainable and eco-friendly development 
and to item 68 on environmental awareness. Since 1975, environmental awareness has been 
introduced in lower secondary and eventually in the primary education curricula, especially 
with the introduction of environmental studies as a full subject in the primary. The result has 
been an astounding increase in the environmental awareness of our youth. But much remains 
to be done. The Government will do its utmost to develop E.S.D. programmes adapted and 
suitable for schools, responding to the main environmental needs of the country namely, self-
sufficiency in food and energy, renewable energy use, freshwater resources and its rational 
use for domestic and agricultural use. 

Madam Speaker, this Government has grit, that is, the willingness to commit itself to 
long-term  goals  and  persist  in  the  face  of  difficulty.  As  a  dedicated  and  responsible 
Government, we intend  to focus on  getting better rather than just being  good. We will, in 
togetherness like a dedicated and committed whole, unite our strength to combat corruption 
and adversity.  

Pour ne pas tenir en haleine l’Assemblée, Madame la présidente, je vais vite arriver 
vers la conclusion pour dire que je suis honorée. I am honoured to be associated to add my 
humble  contribution  to  the  reconstruction  of  an  injured  nation.  Je  souhaite,  Madame  la 
présidente, que nos honorables membres de l’autre côté de la Chambre ne tombent pas dans 
la malhonnêteté intellectuelle ou dans la démagogie. En fins intellectuels, on devrait pouvoir 
reconnaître le travail quand il est bien fait, être honnêtes dans nos critiques si acerbes soient-
elles et porter notre regard sur le bien-être des concitoyens et le progrès de notre pays.  

Nous  devrions,  Madame  la  présidente,  nous  laisser  porter  sur  nos  chemins  par  ce 
soleil déjà levé si haut car nul ne peut cacher ni diriger ses rayons. Si le coq chante toujours 

 

146 

au  matin,  le  cœur  ne  peut  que  se  réjouir  du  nouveau  jour  qui  se  lève  et  qui  annonce  des 
lendemains meilleurs même si d’un autre côté, la clé est bel et bien rangée sous le paillasson. 

(Interruptions) 

Before concluding, my plea to this Assembly, Madam Speaker, is to keep our hands clean, as 
they are meant to serve, to keep our minds focused on our mission, to unite forces and to 
work  relentlessly  for  the  needy,  to  combat  poverty  at  all  levels  and  to  raise  our  people  to 
dignity. 

On these words, Madam Speaker, I beg to leave the floor and wish to thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo! 

 

(10.48 p.m.) 

Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River): Madame la présidente, 
nous voilà à l’aube d’un nouveau quinquennat. Le vent de l’histoire a soufflé de nouveau. 
Conformément  à  notre  riche  tradition  parlementaire,    permettez-moi  de  vous  adresser  mes 
félicitations pour votre  élection en tant que première dame Speaker de la Chambre et mes 
félicitations s’étendent aussi au jeune Deputy Speaker. 

J’ai dans le passé,  moi-même, servi en tant que Speaker de cette Chambre en 1982 
sous le premier mandat de Sir Anerood Jugnauth en tant que Premier ministre. L’honorable 
Bodha nous rappelait que dans quelques jours, vous aurez l’honneur et cette Chambre aura 
également l’honneur d’accueillir le grand homme politique qu’est Monsieur Modi. En 1982, 
moi aussi, quelques semaines après mon élection comme président de la Chambre, j’avais eu 
l’insigne  honneur  d’accueillir  Madame  Indira  Gandhi  qui  nous  avait  rendu  visite  quelques 
semaines après les élections de 1982. Madame la présidente, le Speaker constitue le pivot de 
la  démocratie  parlementaire  et  comme  on  le  dit  très  souvent  ‘The  Speaker  mars  or  makes 
parliamentary democracy’. 

L’essence  de  votre  fonction  a  été  bien  résumée  dans  ce  qu’avait  dit  feu  Pandit 

Jawaharlal Nehru et je cite -  

“The Speaker represents the House, the dignity of the House, the freedom of 
the House and because the House represents the nation in a particular way the 
Speaker becomes the symbol of the nation’s will, the nation’s freedom and the 
nation’s liberty.” 

 

147 

The Speaker, donc Madame la présidente, incarne la volonté d’un peuple et symbolise ses 
aspirations et sa liberté. C’est pourquoi de ce côté de la Chambre nous comptons sur vous 
pour promouvoir la démocratie au sein de cet hémicycle et pour donner une chance égale à 
tous les membres de cette Chambre, quels qu’ils soient, pour s’exprimer librement dans le 
cadre de nos Standing Orders et dans le cadre de notre jeu démocratique. 

Je salue également, Madame la présidente, les nouveaux membres fraîchement élus 
des deux côtés de la Chambre. Et je félicite l’honorable Mme Monty pour son maiden speech 
et à tous ces nouveaux membres nouvellement élus.  It is the start of a new journey. Et je leur 
souhaite tous mes vœux de bonheur dans leur engagement si noble, si exaltant, si gratifiant 
bien que quelquefois ingrat. La politique est en vérité un sacerdoce qui exige de la passion, de 
la patience, de l’humilité et de la résilience. 

Permettez-moi aussi, Madame la présidente, d’adresser mes sincères félicitations au 
Leader  de  la  Chambre  après  la  victoire  de  l’alliance  qu’il  a  dirigée  et  je  tiens  donc  à  lui 
souhaiter bonne chance, à lui, et à son équipe. 

Je  voudrais,  en  dernier  lieu,  Madame  la  présidente,  remercier  l’électorat  de  ma 
circonscription qui compte, comme vous le savez, le plus grand nombre d’électeurs du pays.  
Elle  est  aussi  la  plus  grande  circonscription  en  termes  de  superficie.    Je  remercie  cette 
circonscription  qui  m’a  fait  confiance  pour  la  huitième  fois.  Et  elle  est  aussi,  vous 
conviendrez, une des plus belles régions de notre pays.  

Madame  la  présidente,  les  clameurs  de  la  dernière  campagne  électorale  s’étant 
définitivement tues, c’est donc avec une grande lucidité, que je m’adresse à la Chambre cet 
après-midi. Le parti auquel j’appartiens - pour des raisons qui lui sont propres - avait élaboré 
une stratégie électorale en vue des dernières élections et le Leader de mon parti avait alors 
jugé apte de me confier une mission considérée par certains comme ingrate pour la mise en 
œuvre de cette stratégie. 

Certains se sont évertués à me faire porter le chapeau de notre défaite électorale lors 
de  ces  législatives.  Cette  campagne  de  dénigrement,  si  injuste  soit-elle,  n’a  aucunement 
entamé mon ardeur pour continuer à œuvrer pour des lendemains pour mes mandants et aussi 
pour mon pays. 

Je ne m’attarderai pas sur cette campagne inique à mon égard. Mais il est utile de se 
rappeler  que  pour  nous,  au  MMM,  la  réforme  électorale  qui  était  considérée  par  certains 
comme un appât, était avant tout, une réforme nécessaire et urgente, non seulement pour se 

 

148 

conformer aux recommandations de la commission des droits de l’homme des Nations Unies, 
mais surtout pour approfondir et élargir le champ démocratique de notre république. Nous y 
avons  cru  et  nous  y  croyons  toujours.  Nous  souhaitons  donc  ardemment  que  le  présent 
gouvernement tienne ses promesses à cet effet. 

The more so, Madame la présidente, parce que nous savons tous que le gouvernement 
de  l’Alliance  Lepep  si  overwhelming  sa  victoire  était,  contrôle  aujourd’hui  plus  de  ¾  des 
sièges à cette Chambre, mais elle a recueilli seulement 50% des suffrages.  En fait, seulement 
37% de la population ont accordé leur soutien au gouvernement lors des dernières élections. 

(Interruptions) 

Je viens au programme, Madame la présidente.   

(Interruptions) 

50% de 74% des suffrages. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Member, could you address the Chair, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Ganoo: J’ai dit 37% de la population. 

Madam Speaker: Please, address yourself to the Chair! No cross-talking!  

Mr Ganoo:  Yes, Madam Speaker.  I am sorry I have been interrupted.  I am sorry. 
As already indicated by my colleagues on this side of the House, Madam Speaker - because I 
have come now to the programme - most of the propositions in the programme are in line 
with  the  core  of  our  own  aspirations  for  the  country.  In  fact,  the  DNA  of  this  present 
Government Programme matches exactly with that of the remake MMM/MSM. I am happy 
to see that the Government has included social inclusion as one of its first priorities. The fight 
against  poverty  is  high  on  the  agenda  of  the  Government  as  far  as  we  can  see  from  this 
Government Programme. I quote – 

“A medium to long-term Marshall Plan will be elaborated to combat poverty 
and social exclusion. The National Empowerment Foundation (NEF) will be 
restructured to render it more productive and improve service delivery to the 
poor.” 

Indeed, Madam Speaker, overcoming poverty is not a gesture of charity. 

I am quoting Nelson Mandela – 

 

149 

“It is an act of justice. It is the protection of a fundamental human right, the 
right to dignity and to decent life. As long as poverty persists, there is no true 
freedom.” 

I will not go into the theoretical definition of poverty or focus on the theoretical aspect of the 
matter, Madam Speaker, but suffice it to say that there has been widespread acceptance now 
that poverty is not a social phenomenon that can be measured solely by income. It has to be 
conceptualised and defined within its own specific context.  

The debates around the definition of poverty, in fact, have allowed us to define and 
understand this problem and this is how the distinction between relative and absolute poverty 
has been shaped in the course of years. 

Madam Speaker, we cannot deny that during the last decade also, we have seen the 
impoverishment of the middle class and the lower middle class in our country, the notable 
increase  in  the  Gini  coefficient.  It  is  hoped  that  the  new  Government  does  not  confuse 
measures to eradicate absolute poverty with measures to alleviate relative poverty. 

Madam Speaker, I note that most of the measures that have been announced in this 
Programme  are  intended  to  alleviate  the  burden  of  mostly  the  lower  middle  income 
households  indiscriminately  of  their  needs.  For  example,  increasing  social  aids,  increasing 
pension and this is most unlikely to eradicate absolute poverty. But it will certainly contribute 
to alleviate the burden of the lower middle income households. 

We  will  see  that  under  the  item  of  ‘Social  Inclusion’  most  of  the  Government 
measures  are  targeted  towards  the  lower  middle  income  citizens  of  this  country.    This,  of 
course, is a necessary measure during the difficult economic period we are in.  We definitely 
need a thriving middle class which will be spending for economic growth and to reboot our 
economy.    But  we  are  in  2015.    Since  eight  or  nine  years  ago,  the  Mauritian  State  had 
committed itself to halve the 1990s extreme poverty on our territory by 2015.  We are far 
from the target, but Government can live up to this pledge if it has the will.  This is why I will 
plead  to  this  new  Government  to  make  a  conscious  effort  to  eradicate  poverty  in  the  229 
poverty pockets, which touches directly about 7,000 families.  These are the figures of UNDP 
Mauritius. 

Madam Speaker, the increase in pension payments, as I said, will surely contribute to 
the increase in the standard of living of these families, but it won’t take them out of absolute 
poverty.  I am insisting on absolute poverty, Madam, because recent studies have shown how 

 

150 

poverty  passes  from  generation  to  generation.    Indeed,  stress,  trauma  linked  to  poverty  is 
responsible for damaging the working capacity of poor children.  Stress shrinks the volume of 
the  prefrontal  cortex  and  the  hippocampus,  which  is  the  part  of  the  brain  most  closely 
associated  with  the  working  memory.    This  is  the  scientific  basis  of  how  poverty  induces 
stress to the poor children of this country and hinders the development of their brain.  In a 
book entitled “The Spirit Level: Why More Equal Societies Almost Always Do Better”, the 
author  adduces  probative  evidence  how  in  countries  where  there  is  a  big  gap  between  the 
incomes  of  the  rich  and  the  poor,  mental  illness,  drug,  alcohol  abuse,  obesity,  teenage 
pregnancy are more rampant. The homicide rate is higher year, life expectancy is shorter, and 
children’s educational performance is seriously jeopardised. 

At this point, I would like to highlight that if the Government intends to come up with 
a  Marshall  Plan  to  combat  poverty  and  social  exclusion, it  has  also  to update  the  relevant 
figures.  The last publicly available report on poverty at the CSO dates back to 2006/2007. 

The Government Programme also mentions that it intends to restructure the NEF to 
efficiently  provide  the  adequate  services  to  the  poor.    The  eradication  of  absolute  poverty 
requires that the NEF work closely with those 7,157 families who are too often marginalised 
from our socioeconomic development.  I hope, Madam Speaker, that the restructuring of the 
NEF will provide space also for working hand in hand, in consultation with the NGOs who 
are the frontliners in the combat against absolute poverty, and can be said to be the closest 
representatives of marginalised groups. 

Madam Speaker, I would also suggest that the Ministry of Social Integration is given 
all the means necessary to empower NGOs as development partners, and in the same breath, I 
suggest that the CSR Fund be transferred under this Ministry to enable it to implement its 
ambitious programme of a Marshall Plan to combat poverty and social exclusion. 

Madam Speaker, since I am on the subject of social inclusion, I would like to say a 
few words on social housing, which is directly related to the matter.  Year in and year out 
during the past eight or nine years, the different budgets which were presented to this House 
regularly  and  consistently  mentionned  the  construction  of  social  housing  for  those  at  the 
bottom of the ladder.  On this score also, Madam Speaker, the results have been catastrophic, 
so  much  so  that,  today,  when  we  look  at  the  figures  available  at  the  NHDC,  we  are 
flabbergasted. 

 

151 

I  put  a  PQ  to  the  hon.  Minister  Soodhun  this  week,  and  I  must  say,  although  the 
question was not reached, the hon. minister gracefully circulated the answer, which is very 
enlightening and at the same time depressing. 

Let me, for the interest of the House, read the answer which was given to me – 

“Madam Speaker, since 2006 to 2014 - that is, during the past nine years - you 
would be surprised to know how many housing units have been constructed 
across the island.”  

“For the past nine years …” 

According to the answer given by the hon. Minister – 

“… 1,923 housing units have been constructed…” 

Which  means  that,  for  the  nine  years,  on  an  average,  214  units  have  been  built  per  year.  
When I asked also about the number of households who have registered themselves at the 
NHDC,  the  figure,  as  at  now,  is  39,573;  nearly  40,000  households  have  registered  for  a 
housing unit.  And we when we look at the breakdown of the monthly households, which I 
asked also - I asked another question to categorise the house seekers on the NHDC list - the 
answer I was given, Madam Speaker, is that… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order please! 

Mr Ganoo: … - when I computed the percentage - 66% of those household seekers 
draw a monthly salary of less than Rs6,000; 87% draw a monthly household income of less 
than Rs15,000, which means that out of these 40,000 house seekers - if I round up the the 
figure - 87% are in the category of those earning less than Rs15,000.  I asked also a question 
about  my  own  constituency,  Madam  Speaker.    I  was  informed  by  the  hon.  Minister  that, 
during  the  period  of  2006-2014,  the  NHDC  has,  in  fact,  constructed  only  78  units  in  the 
constituency.  For a period of nearly nine years, only 78 units have been constructed in my 
constituency, Savanne/Riviere Noire, and there are about 1,700 families in that constituency 
who have applied to the NHDC for a housing unit. 

So, Madam Speaker, I, therefore, was right, I think, in saying that the situation on the 
housing front is really urgent in view of the number of house seekers at the NHDC.  This 
Government has pledged to build 10,000 housing units.  I hope parole donneé will be parole 
sacrée, and we can find a solution to this thorny problem, that is, the housing problem. 

 

152 

Madam Speaker, this new Government has taken the initiative of creating a Ministry 
of Good Governance, and good governance has a bearing on the struggle to alleviate poverty. 
In the past years, just like in many countries governance in Mauritius has been characterised 
by, in fact, a lack of good governance, a lack of transparency and meritocracy. It is relevant 
to  assess  the  impact  of  such  governance,  if  we  wish  to  move  towards  a  poverty  free 
Mauritius. The successive high profile scandal and corruption events like the STC hedging, 
the Air Mauritius hedging, the shady deals that we have heard between the State and foreign 
corporate  bodies,  the  recurrent  wastage/mismanagement  of  public  funds  detailed  by  the 
annual  audit  report,  the  growing  culture  of  political  patronage  and  cronyism  sometimes 
causing our best brains to migrate to other countries; the suspicious stimulus packages which 
we heard of give us an idea of the massive amount of money that went on waste, and which 
could have been spent in a more judicious manner to solve many of the problems faced by the 
7,000 families to be living below the poverty line and how many more welfare projects which 
could  have  been  set  up.  That  money  could  have  been  easily  distributed  to  empower  those 
individuals  to  move  out  of  the  poverty  line.  And  what,  Madam  Speaker,  about  all  those 
stimulus  packages  granted  to  undeserving  cronies,  the  Special  Funds  for  which  no 
accountability  mechanism existed. How often did the Director of Audit  highlight the huge 
amount  of  public  funds  invested  in  private  companies  where  Government  has  a  stake  but 
which have yielded no dividends? 

The nexus between corruption and poverty is well illustrated in the multiple examples 
which we heard during those past years.  For example, the distribution of building materials 
by the Trust Fund for Vulnerable Groups or the misdistribution of building materials by the 
Trust Fund for Vulnerable Groups, the misallocation of housing units designed for the poor, 
but  which  landed  with  relatives  of  the  staff  of  Government  institutions,  the  number  of 
successful appeals before the Independent Review Panel in cases of public procurement. 

Madam  Speaker,  good  governance  calls  for  improvements  that  are  related  to  all 
aspects  of  public  sector  from  institutions  that  regulate  economic  and  political  interaction, 
agencies that manage the administrative system to human resources that staff our civil service 
and the officials of our political and bureaucratic arenas. 

Indeed,  for  good  governance  to  be  a  vital  and  a  necessary  ingredient  to  reduce 
poverty, we should endeavour to free our institutions from their weakness and lethargy. Our 
public service should be better trained and motivated. There must be a genuine commitment 
to deep reforms and administrative change, unlike previously, where a lack of political will 

 

153 

was blatant. Hence, the urgency of a governance agenda and commitment for more intense 
anti-corruption measures and a more sophisticated public expenditure management. 

Commitments to fight corruption should mean a more independent and autonomous 
anti-corruption agency insulated of any kind of  political influence and  relentlessly bent on 
inculcating  a  culture  of  integrity  and  probity  in  the  public  administration  with  special 
consideration to our procurement bodies. 

Madam Speaker, our long experience teaches us that, as long as segments of citizens 
are excluded from the public services, or given inequitable treatment, as long as we fail to do 
away with so much wastage, as long as corruption and lack of accountability rear their ugly 
heads, as long as the data for the number of poor people wishing to gain access to service 
deliveries is still elusive, as long as due to clientelism political elites managed to trade access 
to jobs or other resources for their own political support, good governance will be a nebulous 
concept.  This  is  why  this  country  needs  a  good  governance  agenda  and  firm  commitment 
with what has to be achieved to respond to those commitments because, at the end of the day, 
good governance is about strengthening our watchdog institutions. 

Let  me  say  a  few  words  on  a  problem  deeply  affecting  our  youth  today,  Madam 
Speaker.  The  Youth  Unemployment  Programme  (YEP)  was  launched  in  2013.  This 
Programme’s objective was to enable the unemployed youth to obtain training/placement in 
private  enterprises  for  an  initial  period  of  one  year,  with  the  possibility  of  permanent 
employment. 

We can see that a budget of Rs330 m. was earmarked for the year 2013. The 2014 
YEP  report  shows  that,  out  of  11,097  youngsters  registered  and  eligible  to  the  YEP,  only 
4,178 were successfully given a placement. From this report, it is unclear as to why such a 
large amount of applicants to the YEP were not able to secure a placement. We can guess, 
Madam Speaker, that given the current economic climate the private sector was reluctant to 
invest in labour training. That’s why we should come up with innovative measures to give the 
opportunity to our young unemployed to have placements, short-term jobs and apprentices in 
a working environment to help them acquire the skills which is required in jobs. This measure 
not only will alleviate the unemployment burden of those unemployed young people, but will 
also help us to improve the quality of the labour supply.  

The Government has announced in this programme that the YEP will be extended to a 
two-year basis in the Programme. But, the question I would like to make is: did Government 

 

154 

consider extending such types of Programmes to the African continent and the surrounding 
islands? For several years the Mauritian Government has had the ambition of positioning the 
country as a Centre of Excellence in the African region. Earlier on, I heard hon. Reza Uteem 
commenting a lot and making a lot of suggestions on our ambition to position ourselves vis à 
vis the African regions. 

Our  young  graduates,  Madam  Speaker,  our  young  professionals  are  the  best 
testimonies  of  the  quality  of  our  education  and  service  sector.  While  the  problem  of 
unemployed graduates is on the rise, we have to acknowledge that the main problem is the 
increasing supply of these graduates and the supply is exceeding the demand day by day. 

Therefore, this Government could have promoted temporary circular migration to the 
African continent through overseas youth programmes for young graduates, whereby young 
Mauritians are sent on the African continent where they can put in practice their knowledge. 

This  measure  will  not  only  allow  for  brain  circulation  and,  therefore,  give  an 
opportunity  for  our  young  graduates  to  grow  by  learning  to  apply  their  knowledge  in  a 
different context, but also build networks which can promote stronger ties between Mauritius 
and the African continent. 

The aim is to empower our young intellectuals to tap in the endless opportunities that 
the African market offers and, at the same time, make the quality of education in Mauritius 
known  on  the  continent.  One  example  is  the  current  shortage  of  health  workers,  including 
nurses and doctors on the continent. Sending our young medical and nursing graduates is a 
means of promoting our local medical and nursing schools. 

Youth unemployment has deep roots which are a threat to our society. Combating it, 

Madam Speaker, requires from us to challenge conventional wisdom. 

I will just say a few words on the Tertiary Education Commission, Madam Speaker. 
This  week  has  been  very  interesting  for  the  TEC  sector  in  this  House.  There  were  two 
Parliamentary  Questions.    We  have  witnessed  the  hurried  and  long  awaited  departure  of 
Professor Bakshi, the Executive Director and we also read about a question which was put 
about one cadre with dubious intellectual integrity whom the House has been querying for an 
even long period of time. 

We just read from ION News, I think, that Mr Bakshi has been arrested at the airport a 
few hours ago. To come back to what I was saying - with these two offices in the limelight, 
the subject matter of these two PQs - we have some extra visibility about the sector.  We note 

 

155 

that in almost every round hole in the TEC, there is a square peg.  This situation has satisfied 
two conditions.  The dubious private universities were given a longer lease of life and the 
then Minister whose involvement in the mushrooming of some institutions is unquestionable, 
which explains, Madam Speaker, the ‘diplomatic immunity’ of those officers and the ongoing 
complicity of the then Board of Investment, which adopted roles that are not its own. 

These  two  officers  have  been  associated  with  many  of  the  different  problems 
encountered in this sector. After the usual problem faced by the École de Médecine  Louis 
Pasteur,  the  infamous  D.Y.  Patil  Medical  College  issue,  the  no  better  situation  that  had 
besieged JSS Academy, the opaqueness surrounding the registration of Wolverhampton and 
Aberystwyth universities, the bigger picture has become a bit clearer. 

Unfortunately - the hon. Minister of Education is not present - this is indeed still the 
main problem  at the TEC.  Square pegs still in  round holes! Many of the people who  are 
occupying the current positions should not have been there in the first place.  They are either 
not qualified or experienced at the level that they should have been. Saturday last, we heard 
during a Saturday radio show, how poor research by one particular department of the TEC 
has led to the mismatch between the country’s employability needs and the required training 
and  education  options.    On  the  eve  of  elections,  Madam  Speaker,  two  persons  highly 
connected with individuals operating within the DBM and the STC have been employed at 
the TEC whose Chairman, we know, was accidentally, equally Chairman of the STC at that 
time. In this regard, we need not be surprised about the current state of affairs, the square peg 
in the round hole. 

Currently, unfortunately, we find that this new Government has stepped into the shoes 
of the other.  Who is there now in the absence of the Executive Director, as the Officer-in-
Charge?  Beyond seniority, is this person in any way qualified to answer queries?   Is this 
officer expert in regulatory matters, which is the core of the TEC business? 

The pace at which Government is proceeding is very disappointing, especially as we 
remember how a few hon. Members of the previous House, now hon. Members of the present 
Cabinet very consistently and forcefully, every Tuesday, monitored the situation at the TEC 
and  pinned  down  the  then  Minister  Jeetah.    But  we  would  have  thought  that  this  Cabinet 
would  have  been  prepared  since  it  had  so  much  time  when  it  was  in  the  Opposition,  but, 
unfortunately, Madam Speaker, we still ask so many questions.   

 

156 

Recently,  a  Court  judgment  required  the  illegal  nomination  of  one  officer  to  be 
quashed because of the faulty procedures of our appointment. Do you know, Madam Speaker, 
that  the  then  Chairperson  substituted  himself  for  a  Supreme  Court  Judge,  disregarded  the 
Court judgment, maintained this officer as well as, at least two others in their positions that 
they are illegally occupying. 

With the new Government Programme, we are surprised to find a very tepid interest 
in the TEC sector. It is not clear how only a Higher Education Bill will change the present 
scenario. In fact, nothing has been heard again about the Internal Audit that should have been 
carried out at the TEC. 

Madam Speaker, it is worrisome and sad that the ex-Prime Minister should have put 
Mr  Jeetah  as  the  Minister  of  Tertiary  Education.  Worrisome,  because  Mr  Jeetah  the  then 
Minister of Tertiary Education, had been bristling with conflicts of interest in this sector and 
sad because he has nastily tinkered with the lives of so many youngsters leading to a serious 
rising youth unemployment.  Indeed, Mr Jeetah has bumbled has way through history as the 
most  incompetent  Minister  riddled  with  fatal  flaws.    With  the  fatal  Jeetah  touch,  he  has 
compromised all the sectors he had touched upon: industry, health, leaving higher education 
as a gaping.  

It is only hoped that the new Government will overcome its induction flippancy and 
move into this sector with the seriousness that it had treated the Higher Education during the 
time it had been in the Opposition. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to say a few words on another issue that appears in the 
Government Programme: the funding of political parties.  We know that in the wake of recent 
events  involving  the  previous  Prime  Minister  and  the  amount  of  substantial  money  found, 
there  has  been  a  unanimous  outcry  in  the  country  for  regulating  the  financing  of  political 
parties. Indeed, Madam Speaker, as we all know, political finance can undermine democratic 
values  or  lack  of  control  of  political  finance  can  undermine  democratic  values  and  good 
governance. And even resources can distort electoral processes and may improperly influence 
decisions taken by elected representatives.  

The issue relating to controlling private donations to political parties and whether the 
State  should  fund  political  parties  and  electoral  campaigns  has  already  been  canvassed,  I 
think, in this House. We remember that the Sachs Commission itself addressed this issue and 
made very pertinent and concrete recommendations which I will not go into, but suffice it to 

 

157 

say, Madam Speaker, that in a last survey which was organised by Afrobarometer, we read 
that:  “90%  of  Mauritians  interviewed  did  not  agree  that  Government  should  fund  political 
parties  with  taxpayers’  money.”    They  expressed  a  preference  for  additional  powers  to  be 
given to the ESC especially for the control and sanction of electoral fund and also the control 
of  fraud  and  corruption  as  well  as  control  over  political  funding  and  abuse  of  position  of 
power. 

Therefore,  this  issue  is  a  live  issue  and  will  remain  a  live  issue  for  a  long  time  to 
come,  Madam  Speaker.    This  is  why  I  would  have  thought  that  Government  should  have 
come with a motion in this House and proposed that a Select Committee be set up to look into 
the matter and make new recommendation regarding the funding of political parties, taking 
into consideration the aspirations, the wishes of our electorate as indicated in the survey, that 
is, 90% of Mauritians did not agree that Government funds political parties. But the crux of 
the matter is that, I think, the Leader of the House should urgently come up with a motion 
before  this  House  with  a  view  to  set  up  a  Select  Committee  to  look  into  or  to  propose 
recommendations regarding the funding of political parties. I think this is what the people of 
this country are expecting and I think all of us, politicians and whatever side of the House we 
are, we have a duty to show to the nation that we take this matter seriously and we should 
respond to the wishes of our people, once for all, to settle this question of control of funding 
of political parties.  

Of  course,  this  Select  Committee  should  also  be  mandated  to  come  up  its  report 
within a timeframe. I should have thought, Madam Speaker.  I don’t think anything prevents 
the House to resolve that the report of the Select Committee should be ready and tabled on 
the Table of the Assembly within a definite time frame. Interestingly enough, in this same 
Afrobarometer  Survey,  Madam  Speaker,  a  question  was  also  asked  to  those  who  were 
surveyed concerning the limit of two mandates for the Prime Minister, for any next Prime 
Minister. In that survey, therefore, the issue of whether the mandate of the Prime Minister 
should be limited to two terms was also on the Table. 68% of Mauritians believe so. They 
answered that, according to them, the mandate of the Prime Minister should be limited to two 
terms. Of course, it cannot be retroactive so it means it will apply to anybody, I suppose. So, I 
think this is a proposal that all political parties should seriously consider, Madam Speaker, 
because I think it is another proposal which can enhance democracy in our country. 

Madame la présidente, j’avais parlé de la campagne des dernières élections au début 
de mon discours. Je voudrais terminer mon discours en disant aussi que les leçons de cette 

 

158 

récente campagne, nous devons tous en tirer, pas seulement les partis d’opposition et je peux 
vous confirmer, Madame la présidente que nous avons certainement beaucoup appris de nos 
déboires. L’électorat nous a envoyé un signal et nous saurons l’interpréter pour effectuer des 
changements  là  où  il  le  faut.  Toute  la  classe  politique,  à  commencer  par  les  ministres  du 
gouvernement  doivent  aussi  savoir  décoder  le  message  de  l’électorat  et  tirer  les  leçons 
nécessaires.  Une  d’entre  elles,  d’après  moi,  a  été  manifestement  l’excès  de  confiance  et 
l’arrogance  dont  ont  fait  preuve  certains  dirigeants  et  responsables  pendant  la  campagne. 
Madame  la  présidente,  le  bon  fonctionnement  de  toute  organisation,  y  compris  un 
gouvernement ou un parti politique, exige de l’autorité suprême deux caractères distincts. Le 
premier,  d’après  moi,  à  mon  avis,  est  l’humilité  et  le  droit  de  reconnaitre  l’erreur.  Ce  qui 
parait de soi est tout sauf évident. Nous saurions probablement mieux gouverner et diriger s’il 
était  plus  facile  au  politique  d’admettre  des  erreurs  pour  les  corriger  alors,  que  seule  la 
sacralisation pousse à la prétention d’infaillibilité. Or, après une décision malheureuse pour 
faire amende honorable, réagir vite et entrainer l’adhésion, il faut assumer clairement l’erreur. 

Le deuxième caractère pour toute autorité politique est la collégialité de l’intelligence. 
La décision même d’un chef ne doit être solitaire, mais beaucoup de nos dirigeants suprêmes, 
faute  de  consultation,  de  dialogue  et  de  partage,  sombrent  très  souvent  dans  un  isolement 
mégalomaniaque et ombrageux. 

Madame  la  présidente,  l’arrogance  dont  a  fait  preuve  aussi  certains  membres  du 
gouvernement  sortant,  l’institutionnalisation  de  la  politique  de  petits  copains  et  de  petites 
copines,  les  abus  répétés  du  pouvoir,  l’affairisme  des  courtisans  et  des  partisans,  et  les 
scandales à répétition avaient fini par gangrener le régime d’avant. L’électorat à travers son 
vote a certainement condamné ces pratiques et s’est prononcé pour un vrai changement de 
cap  et  non  pour  un  changement  d’acteur  incarnant  les  mêmes  rôles.  Je  dois  vous  dire, 
Madame  la  présidente  que  certaines  décisions  et  nominations  de  ce  gouvernement  ont  été 
accueillies comme une douche froide par la population. Je ne cherche certainement pas à faire 
la leçon au gouvernement nouvellement installé mais, au contraire, je me permets simplement 
d’adresser une opinion contre de telles pratiques qui finiront inévitablement à provoquer les 
mêmes conséquences.  Le changement promis  must not only be done, but seen to be done. 
Déjà certains échos, qui nous sommes parvenus, ne sont guère rassurants. C’est certes une 
pratique  courante qu’un  nouveau  gouvernement installe une nouvelle  équipe pour mener à 
bien son programme, mais de là  instaurer une politique revancharde, de terroriser les cadres 
par  le  biais  d’une  nouvelle  version  de  l’opération  ‘lev  paket  aller’,  il  y  a  des  pas  qu’il  ne 

 

159 

faudrait franchir. Il est également hors de question qu’on passe sous silence certaines dérives 
qu’on  a  constatées  lors  de  la  campagne  électorale.  Nous  condamnons  sévèrement  ces 
pratiques, tout comme nous dénonçons les atteintes inacceptables à la vie privée des hommes 
politiques et leur famille. Les attaques à la vie privée sont l’apanage des faibles. 

(Interruptions) 

Une république qui se prétend moderne. 

(Interruptions) 

Laisse mo kozer! 

Madame Speaker: Order! 

Mr Ganoo: Une république qui se prétend moderne ne peut et ne doit tolérer de tels 
écarts.  Nous  souhaitons  vivement  que  dans  le  cadre  de  la  réforme  électorale  promise,  des 
changements soient apportés afin de garantir des campagnes électorales plus saines et plus 
centrées sur les vrais enjeux. 

Madame la présidente, pour conclure, les élections générales sont maintenant derrière 
nous, une page de notre histoire est tournée. Quant à nous, de ce côté de la Chambre, nous 
serons  une  opposition  constructive  -  tous  ceux  de  ce  côté  de  la  Chambre  -  constructive  et 
patriotique. Nous ne ferons pas de politique de terre-brulée. Autant que l’opposition doit être 
constructive et patriotique, le gouvernement doit faire montre d’ouverture, de transparence et 
d’humilité, précisément. 

La roue de l’histoire tourne Madame la présidente, et vite et ce gouvernement aussi 
fort  qu’il  soit  n’a  pas  lieu  de  pavoiser  pour  deux  raisons.  Primo,  ce  gouvernement  n’a 
recueilli l’adhésion que de 37% de l’électorat, 50% de 74%... 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

Order! Order, please! 

Mr Ganoo: revient à…. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

160 

Vous  êtes  le  gouvernement,  vous  dirigez  le  pays,  vous  parlez  d’un  overwhelming 

victory. Donc, je vous rappelle que 60% de mauriciens ont voté contre ou se sont abstenus. 

Je  disais,  Madame  la  présidente,  qu’il  n’y  a  aucun  lieu  pour  le  gouvernement  de 
pavoiser ou d’être euphorique. La deuxième raison, depuis 1969, depuis l’indépendance, tous 
les gouvernements qui ont dirigé notre pays ont été des gouvernements d’alliance. Il y a eu 10 
gouvernements, 8 parmi ces 10 gouvernements n’ont pas duré, ils ont explosé en cours de 
route. 

Only  two  party  coalitions  have  survived  the  full  five-year  term  of  office  in  their 
original  form  for  a  complexity  of  factors;  the  longevity  of  party  coalitions  in  Mauritius  is 
known,  Madam  Speaker  and  the  collapse  of  party  coalitions  also.  It  is  an  integral  part  of 
Mauritian culture. This is a historical fact. Donc, ce gouvernement a 80% de chance de ne 
pas terminer son mandat… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! Order, please! It is already late, order! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Ganoo: …parce que l’histoire nous démontre que sur dix gouvernements depuis 

l’indépendance, huit ont explosé en cours de route. 

(Interruptions) 

Madame la présidente, il me reste que cinq lignes… 

(Interruptions) 

Madame la présidente, le verdict de la main invisible du destin est sans appel, … 

(Interruptions) 

Je  le  reconnais,  écoutez-moi!  Le  verdict  de  la  main  invisible  du  destin  est  sans  appel. 
L’univers  de  la  politique  ressemble  cruellement  à  un  bateau  ivre  naviguant  une  mer 
démontée, Madame la présidente. C’est vrai, les forces de la nature nous ballottent d’un bord 
à l’autre. 

 (Interruptions) 

Heureux,  ceux  qui,  comme  le  PMSD,  ont  su  braver  les  caprices  de  la  nature  et  restent 
toujours au pouvoir, Madame la présidente. 

 

161 

(Interruptions) 

Cette défaite historique pour le MMM - vous l’avez dit vous-même, c’est vrai, Madame la 
présidente,  nous  le  reconnaissons  -  a  suscité  un  grand  désespoir  à  notre  électorat,  j’en 
conviens.  Nous  avons  fait  notre  autocritique.  Mais  à  Maurice,  Madame  la  présidente,  les 
partis  politiques  ne  disparaissent  pas.  Les  chefs  politiques,  même  s’ils  n’ont  pas  la  même 
épaisseur que SAJ, sont toujours renés de leurs cendres comme le Phénix. On a vu, Madame 
la présidente, des partis politiques broyés à 60-0 sont revenus au pouvoir plusieurs fois dans 
l’histoire de notre pays. Donc, à notre électorat qui nous a soutenu inlassablement, nous de ce 
côté de la Chambre… 

(Interruptions) 

Je terminerai en leur disant, Madame la présidente, je citerai un grand érudit Soufi qui a dit 
ceci – 

«Dans la profondeur de la nuit la plus ténébreuse se cache l’aube la plus radieuse. » 

Merci. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jahangeer! 

 

(11.42 p.m.) 

Mr B. Jahangeer (Third Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac): Madam 
Speaker,  in  the  name  of  God,  most  gracious  and  most  merciful,  I  will  like  to  extend  my 
heartiest congratulation to you for your election as the Speaker of this august House. I had, 
during the last electoral campaign, the privilege to be with you on the same podium once in 
Chemin Grenier during a public meeting and I just could appreciate  your strong character. 
Congratulations!  I  congratulate  also  the  Deputy  Speaker,  hon.  Adrien  Duval,  le  jeune  coq 
combatant for his new position and who is an icon to aspiring politicians of his generation. 

Madam Speaker, in 1995, after spending 21 years in the Middle East specifically in 
Kuwait, coming back home I was invited to join the MSM by my good friend, late Mr Shariff 
Surfally, who used to be close to the Jugnauth family. He introduced me to the hon. Prime 
Minister,  Sir,  Anerood  Jugnauth,  for  the  first  time  and  it  was  on  the  eve  of  the  general 
election and I did join the party. I still remember the phrase from Sir Anerood Jugnauth who 
said:  “you  want  to  join and  you  know  the  odds  are  against  us”  and  I  joined.  Today,  I  am 
proud to be under his command. I sincerely thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for his trust and 

 

162 

I  extend  my  gratitude  and  thanks  also  to  our  leader,  hon.  Minister  Pravind  Jugnauth  who 
believe in me. No doubt, he is our next Prime Minister!  

I would also like to congratulate the hon. leader of the PMSD, hon. Xavier-Luc Duval 
and  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Mouvement  Libérateur,  hon.  Ivan  Collendavelloo.  My 
congratulation also goes to all the Members of the House. Finally, I am indebted to the people 
of Constituency No. 13 for their trust and to whom I am accountable for the next five years. 
They also helped us to coupe laké sat which was not an easy task. We did it. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  have  scrutinized  the  ambitious  but  realistic  Government 
Programme  and  I  saw  no  nonsense  in  it.  All  the  hon.  Members  here  have  expressed  their 
views on the Programme for and against but still, I see not much to say more. We, under the 
leadership of our hon. Prime Minister, are a team of knowledgeable professionals. Our hon. 
Members know that to fly from Mauritius to Zimbabwe we don’t need to go to London first, 
contrary to our ex-Prime Minister. 

Madam Speaker, I would like now to make two humble requests to complement the 
Government Programme. We are in 2015 yet we still have asbestos houses in Mauritius. This 
is inacceptable! In 1977, the use of asbestos in construction was banned internationally. In 
my constituency, specifically at Batimarais, we still have around 40 of these houses. Asbestos 
is a mineral fibre which, when you breathe in, can cause cancer. Asbestos is used in houses 
for  separation  of  walls.  Once  a  piece  of  the  wall  is  broken,  the  fibre  flies  and  the  people 
inside the houses breathe in and that causes lung cancer. 

Thus, I appeal to hon. Ministers concerned to have concerted effort to eradicate these 
houses the soonest possible because the World Health Organisation has strict rules against 
these existing houses now. At present, one of our main agents is suffering from cancer and I 
hope that it is not due to this because it is like sitting on a time bomb if these houses are not 
eradicated as soon as possible. 

Madam Speaker, we, in l’Alliance Lepep, we have a vision and can anticipate future 
problems. I would like to address the issue of drones. Drone is that minicomputer equipped 
with a camera which flew over Vacoas and Quatre Bornes on 26 October, took some pictures 
of both public meetings and gave an upset stomach to the ex-Prime Minister, it also dresse 
moustache requin on that day because of the crowd existing there.  

Madam  Speaker,  drones,  commonly  known  as  unmanned  aerial  vehicles  have  two 
uses;  one  is  the  military  drones  which  are  used  by  the  US  military  in  Syria,  Pakistan, 

 

163 

Afghanistan etc. and then, there are commercial drones which are used for land surveying, 
crop scouting in agriculture and in the energy sector to have preventive maintenance of high 
rise pylons, electrical poles etc.  

But when we are talking about drones - it will be a social chaos, if we do not have a 
proper legislation right now.  For example, it is being used by DHL. It is used by Amazon to 
deliver  books  in  the  USA.  My  concern  is  the  commercial  drone.  This  year,  the  Federal 
Aviation  Administration  (FAA)  of  USA,  released  some  commercial  permits,  which  mean 
more  people  will  be  allowed  to  manufacture  and  commercialise  drones.  Drones  are  being 
manufactured  in  countries  like  Israel,  India,  South  Africa,  USA,  China,  Switzerland  and 
many others. Their presence in the sky can cause social chaos. Imagine, you wake up or you 
see on your balcony, a mechanical object looking at you. 

Exactly!   

(Interruptions) 

Therefore, I kindly appeal to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to come up with some kind 
of legislation to control the influx in Mauritius. Imagine those businessmen or hawkers going 
to China and buy one of these drones and put it in their luggage. If ever they are stopped at 
the custom, they will say that it is a toy. So, it will come in. Indeed, no one can stop them. 
Once,  we  have  so  many  of  them  in  the  country,  it  will  be  very,  very  difficult  to  control. 
Imagine one owner of the drone - he has one - which flies over the fuel tanks in the quay and 
drops a bomb on it. There are so many bad things that can be done with a drone.  It can be 
personal attack, so we have to take legislation right now. We don’t want it to happen too late. 
It is the right time now because in year 2015, there are many countries that are allowing these 
drones to be manufactured. 

Exactly!   

(Interruptions) 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I hope you will convey to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister my 

appeal to consider this issue seriously before it is too late. 

Madam  Speaker,  during  the  electoral  campaign,  much  was  said  regarding  the 
necessity of the construction of a desalination plant. Thus, I would like to appeal to the hon. 
Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities,  hon.  Ivan  Collendavelloo  for  such  project  to  be 
included in his long-term water policy. Why? Because we cannot remain at the whims and 

 

164 

caprices of nature or El Niño effect. If we do not have rain for a long time what will happen 
to us? We need a source where we can get the water.  Desalination plant is being constructed 
or  already  existing  in  South  Africa,  Australia  or  even  in  Africa,  in  Senegal  and  even  in 
Europe and in the Middle East. 

Yes, in Rodrigues.  

(Interruptions) 

But on a large scale, we need one in Mauritius to cater for future lack of water. 

Madam  Speaker,  on  our  road  trip  driving  to  reach  the  goal  set  in  our  Government 
Programme, it might be possible that one of us might fall asleep. Luckily, we have good co-
drivers from the Opposition to give us a wakeup call.   

Welcome! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude by referring to my favourite dictum from 
Mr René Descartes, a well-known French philosopher and mathematician of the 17th century 
and I quote – 

“Cogito ergo sum” 

I think, therefore, I am. Well, we, under the leadership of Sir Anerood Jugnauth, l’Alliance 
Lepep, we think, therefore we are the hope of this beloved nation. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Mr Oree: Madam Speaker, I move that the debate be now adjourned. 

Mrs Monty rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Debate adjourned accordingly. 

 

ADJOURNMENT 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):  Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  that  this  Assembly  do  now  adjourn  to 
Tuesday 10 March 2015 at 11.30 a.m.  

 

165 

Mr Bodha rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned.  

At 11.54 p.m. the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Tuesday 10 March 2015 

at 11.30 a.m.  

 

