 

 

1 

 

 

 

No. 26 of 2015 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

 

 

FIRST SESSION 

 

WEDNESDAY 13 MAY 2015 

 

 

 

 

 

2 

                              CONTENTS 

 

PAPERS LAID 

QUESTION (Oral) 

MOTION 

BILLS (Public) 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 

KCMG, QC  

Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 

GCSK  

Communications 

Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo, GCSK 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 

Utilities 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Minister 

of 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Integration 

and  Economic 

Empowerment 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 

Sinatambou 

International Trade 

Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 

Perraud 

Family Welfare 

Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain 

Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 

Institutional Reforms 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 

 

4 

Institutions 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 

Shipping and Outer Islands 

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, 

Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 

QPM 

Disaster and Beach Management  

Hon. Marie Roland Alain Wong Yen             Minister of Civil Service and Administrative  

Cheong, MSK 

 

 

 

       Reforms 

    Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn            

Minister  of  Labour, 
Employment and Training 

Industrial  Relations, 

 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Madam Speaker 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, 

      GCSK 

Deputy Speaker 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Hurreeram,  Hon.  Mahendranuth 
Sharma 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

(Temporary  

Gopall,  Mr  Navin 
Transfer to RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra  

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

 

            Hansard Editor 

  Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 26 of 2015 

 

Sitting of 13 May 2015 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
                                                            PAPERS LAID 
The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table – 

7 

Office of the President 
 
The  Municipal  City  Council  and  Municipal  Town  Council  Elections  (Amendment) 
Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 102 of 2015). 
 
Ministry of  Energy and Public Utilities 

The  Ground  Water  (Amendment)  Regulations  2015  (Government  Notice  No.  71  
of 2015). 
 

   C.  Ministry of Finance and Economic Development 

  
A
.  
 

B
. 

 

E
. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

 

The  Agreement  on  Exchange  of  Information  on Tax  Matters  (Republic  
of Austria) Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 72 of 2015). 
Virement (Contingencies) Warrant Nos. 1 to 48, 50 to 59 and 61 to 63  
of 2014. (In Original) 
Retrospective  Virement  (Contingencies)  Warrant  No.  64  of  2014.  
(In Original) 
Virement  Warrant  Nos.  1  to  60,  62,  64  and  66  to  70  of  2014.   
(In Original) 

 

 

 

D.  Ministry of  Local Government   
  The Local Government (Adequate Representation of Each Sex on Local Authority and 
Validity of Reserve Lists) (Revocation) Regulations 2015 (Government Notice 101 of 
2015). 
Ministry of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training  

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

(f) 

(g) 

(h) 

and  Tourism 

The  Attorneys’  and  Notaries’  Workers  (Remuneration)  (Amendment) 
Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 73 of 2015). 
The  Baking  Industry  (Remuneration  Order)  (Amendment)  Regulations 
2015 (Government Notice No. 74 of 2015). 
The Blockmaking, Construction, Stone Crushing and Related Industries 
(Remuneration  Order)  (Amendment)  Regulations  2015  (Government 
Notice No. 75 of 2015). 
The  Catering 
(Amendment) Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 76 of 2015). 
The  Cinema  Employees 
(Remuneration  Order) 
Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 77 of 2015). 
The  Cleaning  Enterprises  (Remuneration)  (Amendment)  Regulations 
2015 (Government Notice No. 78 of 2015). 
The Distributive Trades (Remuneration Order) (Amendment) Regulations 
2015 (Government Notice No. 79 of 2015). 
The Domestic Workers (Remuneration) (Amendment) Regulations 2015 
(Government Notice No. 80 of 2015). 

(Remuneration  Order) 

(Amendment) 

Industries 

 

8 

(i) 

(j) 

(k) 

(l) 

(m) 

(n) 

(o) 

(p) 

(q) 

(r) 

(s) 

(t) 

(u) 

(v) 

(w) 

(x) 

(y) 

(z) 

(aa) 

(ab) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

(Remuneration  Order) 

and  Orchard  Workers 

The Electrical, Engineering and Mechanical Workshops (Remuneration) 
(Amendment) Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 81 of 2015). 
The Export Enterprises (Remuneration Order) (Amendment) Regulations 
2015 (Government Notice No. 82 of 2015). 
The Factory Employees (Remuneration Order) (Amendment) Regulations 
2015 (Government Notice No. 83 of 2015). 
The  Field-crop 
(Amendment) Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 84 of 2015). 
The  Light  Metal  and  Wooden  Furniture  Workshops  (Remuneration 
Order)  (Amendment)  Regulations  2015  (Government  Notice  No.  85  of 
2015). 
The Livestock Workers (Remuneration Order) (Amendment) Regulations 
2015 (Government Notice No. 86 of 2015). 
The  Newspapers  and  Periodicals  Employees  (Remuneration  Order) 
(Amendment) Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 87 of 2015). 
The  Nursing  Homes  (Remuneration  Order)  (Amendment)  Regulations 
2015 (Government Notice No. 88 of 2015). 
The  Office  Attendants  (Remuneration)  (Amendment)  Regulations  2015 
(Government Notice No. 89 of 2015). 
The Pre-Primary School Employees (Remuneration Order) (Amendment) 
Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 90 of 2015). 
The  Printing  Industry  (Remuneration)  (Amendment)  Regulations  2015 
(Government Notice No. 91 of 2015). 
The  Private  Secondary  School  Employees  (Remuneration  Order) 
(Amendment) Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 92 of 2015). 
The  Public  Transport 
(Amendment) Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 93 of 2015). 
The  Road  Haulage  Industry  (Remuneration)  (Amendment)  Regulations 
2015 (Government Notice No. 94 of 2015). 
The  Salt-Manufacturing  Industry  (Remuneration  Order)  (Amendment) 
Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 95 of 2015). 
The  Sugar  Industry  (Agricultural  Workers)  (Remuneration  Order) 
(Amendment) Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 96 of 2015). 
The  Sugar  Industry  (Non-Agricultural  Workers)  (Remuneration  Order) 
(Amendment) Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 97 of 2015). 
The  Tailoring  Trade  (Remuneration  Order)  (Amendment)  Regulations 
2015 (Government Notice No. 98 of 2015). 
The  Tea 
Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 99 of 2015). 
The  Travel  Agents  and  Tour  Operators  Workers  Remuneration 
(Amendment) Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 100 of 2015). 
 
 

(Remuneration  Order)  (Amendment) 

(Buses)  Workers 

(Remuneration  Order) 

Industry  Workers 

9 

F  Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection  

 

 
The Annual Report 2012 of the Fashion and Design Institute. 
 
 

G.   Ministry  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipp

Outer Islands 
The Annual Report 2012 of the Mauritius Oceanography Institute. (In Or

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

10 

ORAL ANSWER TO QUESTION 

AIR MAURITIUS LTD. - FINANCIAL SITUATION 

The  Leader  of  the  Opposition  (Mr  P.  Bérenger)  (by  Private  Notice)  asked  the 
Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications  whether,  in 
regard  to  Air  Mauritius  Ltd.,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  therefrom, 
information as to -  

(a) if it is in a dire financial situation considering its accumulated losses and its debts 
and overdrafts and, if so, indicate the remedial measures being taken in relation 
thereto;  

(b) if a new hedging agreement is in force;  

(c) if the purchase of new planes is in process;  

(d) if it has been informed of the details of the new more liberal open air access policy 

of Government, and  

(e) the present composition of the Board thereof and the status of the Chief Executive 

thereof. 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  would  like  to  point  out  that  Air 
Mauritius  is  a  public  company,  incorporated  under  the  Companies  Act  and  managed  by  a 
Board of Directors. Moreover, it is a Listed Company on the Stock Exchange of Mauritius 
with around 13,000 shareholders, Government being one of them. In this context, it would be 
pertinent to recall that Listing Rule 11.3 of the Stock Exchange, in particular, requires that all 
sensitive information likely to affect the share price should be given in priority to the Stock 
exchange. This is further reinforced by section 87 of the Securities Act.  

I will, therefore, disclose such information as is possible within the limits of the law.  

Madam Speaker, in regard to part (a) of the question, the aviation industry worldwide 
is dominated by intense competition, depressed economic environment especially in Europe 
and volatile price of fuel.  On the regional front, major developments have occurred with the 
investment of Etihad in Air Seychelles, and the bail outs of South African Airways, Kenya 
Airways and Air Austral by their respective governments. 

 

11 

It is within this extremely volatile environment that Air Mauritius is called upon to 
operate and compete with its existing ageing fleet.  Indeed, the A340s are four engines long-
haul aircraft having a high fuel consumption and requiring higher maintenance.  

The House will note that the results of Air Mauritius were as follows since Financial 

Year 2010/2011 - 

2010/2011: Profit Euro 9.9 m. 

2011/2012: Loss of Euro 29.2 m. 

2012/2013: Loss of Euro 3.6 m. 

2013/2014: Profit of Euro 7.3 m. 

9 months to December 2014: Loss of Euro 9.1 m. 

Notwithstanding, the results of previous  years, the company has retained earnings  - 
therefore,  no  accumulated  losses  -  of  36.4  m.  Euro  as  at  31 December  2014.    I  am  also 
informed  by  the  Board  of  Directors  that  the  Company  has  sufficient  funds  and  banking 
facilities to meet all its debts and its other financial obligations as and when they fall due as 
stated in its Communiqué of 04 May 2015.   

The Board is fully aware of the actual difficult situation and is taking important 

measures to ensure the viability of the Company.  These include - 

•  The appointment of an international firm of consultants to review the business 

model. 

•  Improving productivity and efficiency. 

•  Carrying out an HR audit. 

•  Carrying out a Cargo Forensic Audit. 

•  Improving quality. 

•  Further cost reduction measures across the board. 
•  Further improvement of alliances with airlines to all destinations served. 
•  New aircraft and planned interim measures to improve product (such as Inflight 

Entertainment and seats). 

 

12 

Madam Speaker, my Ministry has on 13 January 2015 requested the Ministry of 

Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms, to carry out a full inquiry on 
the purchase of airplanes.   Further, the same Ministry is carrying out another inquiry on the 
Cargo Department of Air Mauritius. 

The House may note that following the recruitment of Seabury, a firm of consultants, 
in February 2012, a 7-Step recovery plan was implemented covering, inter alia, the following 
areas - 

•  Network concentration and optimisation; 
•  Improvements in revenue management and commercial function; 
•  Cash conservation and cost reduction, and 
•  A major Customer Service Improvement project. 

Madam Speaker, the House will also note that the depreciation of the Euro vis-à-vis 
the USD and other currencies is accentuating. As the House is aware, whilst expenditure of 
Air Mauritius is mostly denominated in US dollars, its revenue is essentially derived in Euro.  
During  the  year,  the  EUR/USD  exchange  rate  dropped  from  1.38  to  1.08  resulting  in  a 
negative impact of some EUR 24 m. compared to the corresponding period ending December 
2013. 

In addition, Air Mauritius was affected by the slower growth on mainland China with 
capacity outpacing expected growth. Load factor dropped from 79% to 63% for the period 
ending December 2014. 

In  addition,  increasing  competition  from  foreign  carriers  on  all  markets.  Revenue, 

again, Madam Speaker, went down by Euro 6.3 million for that period. 

Notwithstanding these financial challenges, the cash flow of Air Mauritius is stable 
and the gearing ratio well within industry norms. Indeed, the airline generates adequate cash 
to meet its financial obligations as and when they fall due. In addition, it has secured banking 
facilities upon which it can draw, as and when required. 

Madam Speaker, in regard to part (b) of the question, I would like to inform the 

House that hedging is broadly meant to lock-in the cost of future purchases.  

The  driving  principle  is  to  protect  the  company  from  price  risk  that  would  have  an 
adverse  impact  on  key  financial  parameters,  that  is,  fuel  and  foreign  exchange  essentially. 
Since 2011, the hedging strategy of Air Mauritius has been purely focussed on mitigating the 

 
impact  of  fuel  and  foreign  exchange  volatility  on  profitability  as  well  as  protecting  the 
balance sheet. 

13 

International experts, Lazard Frères, were appointed in 2009 to assist the company to 
redesign  its  hedging  policy,  revise  and  update  its  Risk  Manual  and  put  in  place  tools  and 
appropriate mechanisms to better manage the financial risks. 

The current hedging policy prescribes for a minimum of 30% and a maximum of 70% 
hedge ratio of the company’s requirements over a maximum period of 2 years on a rolling 
basis. 

Madam Speaker,  I  am informed by Air Mauritius that, with the assistance of  Lazard 
Frères, it has continued its hedging activities within the new policy framework.  The financial 
instruments  used  currently  are  plain  vanilla  instruments  as  opposed  to  the  riskier  leverage 
instruments  on  the  downside  that  had  been  subscribed  by  the  airline  in  2008  such  as  the 
double-down  extendible.  The  choice  of  financial  instruments  is  determined  by  the  Risk 
Manual which was revised to take into account lessons learnt from the 2008 hedging. 

Hedging activities are carried out in line with the legal and regulatory framework under 
the  International  Swaps  and  Derivatives  Association  (ISDA)  Master  Plan.    This  document 
outlines  the  terms  applied  to  a  derivatives  transaction  between  Air  Mauritius  and  its 
counterparties, that is, financial institutions.   

Consequently, Air Mauritius has signed an agreement, in line with the revised manual 
recommended by Lazard Frères, with the eight counterparties to carry out hedging activities. 
As regards part (c) of the question, Step 5 of the 7-step Recovery Plan constitutes the 
refleeting  of  the  existing  long-haul  wide-budy  A340fleet  with  the  new  generation  aircraft.  
The rationale for the fleet re-equipment is as follows - 

• 

• 
• 

The ageing A340 fleet with an average age of 14 years at end March 2015, 
with  the  age  of  the  two  oldest  aircraft  being  20.4  years  and  18.4  years 
respectively; 
The high operating cost of the four engines aircraft; 
Loss  of  competitive  edge  vis-à-vis  other  airlines  operating  more  efficient 
aircraft. 

Air Mauritius is replacing its 6 aged Airbus A340 with 6 Airbus A350-900 two engine 
new generation aircraft, which have lower maintenance costs and fuel savings estimated at 
25%. 

 

14 

Two will be leased  from AerCap and  come into service in 2017 and  four have been 

purchased from Airbus with two being delivered in 2019 and two in 2020. 

The two operating leases from AerCap have been approved and security deposits will 
be  financed  from  internal  resources.  The  deposits  for  the  four  purchased  from  Airbus 
amounting to 12% of the cost will be financed from internal resources and existing facilities.  
The balance is to be financed with Export Credit Agency (ECA) supported financial leases. 
Air Mauritius has been historically using Export Credit Agency backed financing to finance 
aircraft acquisitions.   

With  regard  to  part  (d)  of  the  question,  the  Government  Programme  2015/2019 
provides that the air access policy  will be reviewed to transform Mauritius into a regional 
aviation and tourism hub. This is in line with our tourism strategy which is geared towards 
further diversification of source-markets, that is, a gradual blend of the traditional segments 
with emerging markets like Asia and Africa. Developments in these sectors will inevitably 
call  for  a  re-engineering  of  our  air  access  policy  without  jeopardizing  the  interest  and 
viability of our national carrier. Notwithstanding the challenges posed by a gradual air access 
liberalisation, Air Mauritius remains an essential strategic partner in the development of our 
tourism industry, indeed economic development of our island as a whole. Government will 
strike the right balance between the interests of all stakeholders including that of the national 
carrier.  We  will  encourage  airlines  to  operate  on  new  routes  from  new  markets  including 
seasonal and opportunity flights.   

Madam Speaker, in regard to part (e) of the question, I am tabling the composition of 

the Board. 

The Chief Executive Officer is on contract expiring in August 2015. 
Mr Bérenger:  Madam Speaker, we have been provided with the figures for losses up 
to December 2014, if I heard the hon. Deputy Prime Minister rightly, but it has been reported 
that, for the full financial year ending March of this year, Air Mauritius will meet with a loss 
of  Rs800  m.  and  this  has  been  widely  reported;  can  I  know  from  the  hon.  Deputy  Prime 
Minister whether this figure is confirmed? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, whichever figures are being branded 
about, are unaudited figures provided for probably through rumours, but also based on some 
of the actual unaudited figures of Air Mauritius. It would not be possible for me, given the 
listing  and  the  impact  on  the  company’s  shares,  to  pre-empt  what  the  audited  figures  will 
eventually be. 

 

15 

Mr  Bérenger:    Can  I  know  whether  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister  has  the  figure  for 

overdrafts as at now? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: I don’t have the figure for overdrafts as at now, but I do 

know that the company has something like Euro 70 m. of unutilised overdraft facilities. 

Mr Bérenger:  I have not heard the hon. Deputy Prime Minister make any reference to 
licenciement,  but  again,  in  the  Press,  it  has  been  widely  reported  that  licenciements  are 
envisaged. Can I know from the hon. Deputy Prime Minister whether, at this stage, at Air 
Mauritius itself or at its subsidiary Airmate Limited, any licenciements are envisaged? 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  the  current 
overdraft of Air Mauritius is Euro 5.5 m or so which is not substantial. As far as licenciement 
or any other cost reduction measures, Madam Speaker, I think the House will agree that rien 
ne sera écarté.  We will look at all the measures that are necessary. Air Mauritius is in a 
difficult situation. It is facing a very competitive environment. The near parity between the 
Euro and the US dollar is creating havoc to its revenue which is falling and the revenues are 
mainly in Euros; so, at 60%.  Costs are mainly in US dollars around 60 % again.  So, the near 
parity of the Euro and the US dollar is creating a disrupting situation for Air Mauritius. On 
top of that, we have to add the ageing fleet and the high costs of operation.  So, nothing will 
be set aside.  The Board of Air Mauritius has decided to take whatever action is required to 
return the company to profitability. 

Mr Bérenger:  Licenciement apart, can I know from the hon. Deputy Prime Minister 
whether he has any idea what is going to happen to the Air Mauritius subsidiary Airmate Ltd? 

The Deputy Minister: Madam Speaker, although I am sympathetic to the cause of the 
employees, this must be put in a general context of the company. Now if something has to be 
decided, obviously it is for the Board to take that decision, but it has to be in the context of 
the current competitive situation or the current losses that are being incurred and, of course, 
of  the  need  to  preserve  as  much  employment  as  possible.  So,  it  may  not  be  the  time  for 
largesses in the company, but although I must say that personally, as a human being, I am 
sympathetic to the cause.  But it will be up to the Board of Air Mauritius to take the decision 
that is necessary, given the current economic context. 

Mr  Bérenger:  The  hon.  Deputy  Prime  Minister  has  told  us  that  the  gearing  ratio  is 

normal for the industry; is it a fact that the gearing ratio is 4:1? 

 

16 

The Deputy Prime Minister: No, Madam Speaker. Thank you for the question.  It is 
1:1.5. I am told that other companies - although I have not checked personally - like British 
Airways are 1:2.  So, it is 1:1.5; thank you for that question. 

Mr Bérenger:  Can I know from the hon. Deputy Prime Minister whether, at this stage, 

the suggestion of a strategic partner is being envisaged? 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  I  would  say,  Madam  Speaker,  that  the  point  of 
appointing international firm or consultancy is to look at all the options. We are a very small 
company.  We are faced with a lot of competitions and like it or not, not just for tourism, but 
for  the  whole  concept  of  Mauritius  being  a  hub  to  Africa,  being  a  medical  hub,  being  a 
financial services hub, being an educational hub, all that requires connectivity.  So, in fact, 
nothing is being left out.  I am not an expert in aviation. We leave it to the experts and let 
them  come  up  and  then  the  Board  of  Directors,  obviously,  with  the  input  from  the  main 
shareholder, will decide. 

Mr Bérenger:  If I can, Madam Speaker, move on to the hedging issue.  Can I know 
from the hon. Deputy Prime Minister whether there is any figure for losses, if any, sustained 
under  the  new  present  hedging  arrangements  and,  finally,  what  is  the  final  sum  “that  was 
lost” under the previous hedging arrangement? 

The Deputy Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, there are three types of figures we are 
going to consider. One is the situation as at 31 December which has been published. I think a 
loss of about 1.2 million Euros, and we are talking of both foreign exchange hedging and fuel 
hedging. We have, generally again, on the foreign exchange further loss on the fuel hedging. 
So,  without  going  –  it  is  difficult  for  me  to  answer,  but  I  will  give  the  figure  because 
speculation  would  be  worse,  Madam  Speaker.  I  say  again,  the  unaudited  figures  roughly 
amount  to,  again,  of  something  like  Rs2.5  m.  on  foreign  exchange  hedging,  but  a  loss  of 
about Rs10 m. on the fuel hedging. So, the next loss for 31 March would be about Rs7.5 m. 
What I need to say, Madam Speaker, is the point of hedging is to lock-in the cost of fuel. 
Now,  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  raised  a  matter  of  2008.  I  was  not  Minister 
responsible for Air Mauritius in 2008, but after that I did become responsible. But, at that 
time, Air Mauritius had gone for a large amount of hedging, that is, 80% to 90% of its fuel 
requirements. And not only had it done that, Madam Speaker, but it had taken the cheapest 
product. Hedging is like an insurance.  We can take an expensive insurance or we can take a 
cheap insurance. That was a very cheap insurance and the cheap insurance resulted – it was 

 
commonly called double extendable - Madam Speaker, in a loss of 144 million Euros.  We 
have to multiply by 40 rupees, of course. 

17 

Mr  Bérenger:  If  I  can  move  on  to  the  purchase  of  new  planes.  Very  serious 
allegations were made by the Minister concerning the deal between Air Mauritius and Airbus 
under the previous Government, but, now, I understand that Government is going ahead with 
the purchase of the airbus planes, although we are informed that an enquiry is on. But can I, 
therefore, put it on record, have it from the Minister, that the order to Airbus has, indeed, 
since the general elections, been confirmed? 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition 
may know that, in fact, the Memorandum was signed by the previous Government on 06 July 
2014 and the order was placed a little before Nomination Day for the six airplanes. Now, this 
has been done.  The aircraft lease will be coming, as I mentioned, in 2014, the four others a 
little later. Immediately as I took office, with the concurrence of Cabinet, Madam Speaker, 
the full documents were sent to the Ministry of Good Governance because there had been 
rumours - we want to check the rumours – but, at the same time, we cannot stop the operation 
of  Air  Mauritius  and  all  the  benefits  that  will  come  from  obtaining  these  aircrafts. 
Notwithstanding  this,  if  there  has  been  any  maldonne  -  I  am  sure  you  will  agree  that  my 
colleague is doing very good forensic work - and I am sure that if there is anything wrong, he 
will find the culprits, Madam Speaker. 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, as far as air access is concerned, I am glad to have 
heard the Minister say that Government will strike the right balance between the interest of 
Air Mauritius, Tourism and the other sectors of the economy, including Rodrigues also. Can 
we  know  what  can  be  expected  in  terms  of  increases  in  flights?    There  are  requests,  I 
understand,  from  Emirates  Airlines  and  others  to  increase  their  number  of  flights  to 
Mauritius. At this stage - the new more liberal open air access policy referred to in the Budget 
Speech - can we know whether that will result in increase and, if yes, how many increased 
flights operated by Emirates and the others? 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  must  perhaps  also  say  that  Air 
Mauritius is in a difficult situation. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister was right to ring the alarm 
bells and point out that the Board has to take the appropriate action.  

As  regards  the  air  access  policy  which  is  in  line,  obviously,  affects  Air  Mauritius. 
There  is  air  access  and  air  access,  Madam  Speaker.  There  is  air  access  towards  the  main 

18 

 
markets and air access towards the region. So, these are two different aspects. What I know is 
that  hopefully,  as  I  mentioned  here  in  Parliament  recently,  there  may  be  substantial 
developments between China and Mauritius, India and Mauritius and Africa, which, I think, 
the whole House will agree, is an exceptionally good thing for the country. As far as the other 
markets  are  concerned,  Madam  Speaker,  we  are  waiting  for  the  review  of  the  air  access 
policy before any decision is taken. 

Mr Bérenger: The last part of my question, Madam Speaker, is that with the present 
composition of the Board which has been circulated, can I know - because again there have 
been  reports  in  the  Press  -  whether  conflicts  of  interest  between  Members  of  the  Board 
present  or  recent  past,  have  been  detected  and,  if  yes,  whether  those  cases  or  conflicts  of 
interest have been referred to the Police? 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  presume  the  hon.  Leader  of  the 
Opposition is referring to the Air Cargo.  There is an inquiry going on. I think the report will 
be out on Friday and whatever action needs to be taken - I have not seen it - if it has to go to 
the Police, I am sure the Board will do that, because the whole point of the Air Cargo inquiry 
was  to  determine  whether  anything  is  at  fault  and  if  things  are  at  fault,  then,  obviously, 
decisions will need to be taken. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Jhugroo: Madam Speaker, can the hon. Deputy Prime Minister state whether it is 
in order to purchase aircrafts six days before the Nomination Day and, if so, can we know 
how many aircrafts, the types of aircrafts and the amount involved? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I must say I left Government in June 
and the aircrafts were purchased in July; the first agreement and then the actual signature a 
little before the Nomination Day. I would think that it is certainly not good governance, given 
that huge cost of the aircraft and given the question marks that have been raised during the 
campaign; we could have avoided all this, Madam Speaker, by postponing the purchase of the 
aircraft. I certainly do not consider it as good governance. 

Madam Speaker: Hon Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed: Madam Speaker, we have heard the hon. Deputy Prime Minister said 
that everything will be done by the Board of Directors, by the administration, in order to try 
to bring down costs and he also referred to the possibility - in a roundabout way - of people 
working at Airmate or Air Mauritius for that matter of loss of jobs. Could I invite, therefore, 

19 

 
the hon. Deputy Prime Minister to look into all the facilities that cost a lot of money to the 
company, that Executives are getting and to former Executives and to Directors of the Board 
and former Directors of the Board, their children, their wives, family members and all those 
golden handshakes that have been the practice through various regimes, whether this could be 
looked into first and at the last then look at the small, little man and woman who is toiling a 
way to keep his job? Maybe we should look into those high-fliers at the level of company 
first before… 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, we have understood your question, please! 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  within  the  parameters  of  the 
requirement  to  attract  and  maintain  the  best  brains  to  the  airline,  we  are  competing  an 
international  environment,  I  understand  that  the  Board,  in  looking  at  the  cost  cutting 
measures, nobody will be spared, no rank will be spared and everything that needs to be done 
will be done and whatever decision that is required, if a person is not performing, then he has 
to expect the worst. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Speaker, in the recent past, there have been talks about Air 
Mauritius selling its subsidiaries, more specifically the Paille- en-Queue Court and also other 
subsidiaries, to finance the loss of the company. Is this still being considered? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: It can be considered. The issue with selling Paille-en- 
Queue  Court  was  that  the  price  that  was  obtained  was  not  up  to  Air  Mauritius  liking  and 
that’s why it was not sold. So, I personally think it has to go in order to generate the cash.  

I must also say, Madam Speaker, that whatever we can say about Air Mauritius Ltd., 
is that it lost, on hedging issue, 144 m. Euros.  It never actually got any bail out from the 
Government, it never got additional money from the Government and it finally went back to 
profitability. I was still Minister of External Communications in 2010-2011. So, it resumed 
profitability. It was after that, that it fell again into loss making. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: Thank you, Madam Speaker. One of the main causes of the downfall - 
I  would  say  downfall  in  terms  of  problems  which  Air  Mauritius  has  been  facing  over  the 
years - is direct political interference from Government and Ministers. Can the hon. Deputy 
Prime Minister give the assurance to the House, the country and the nation that this question 

 
of  political  interference  in  terms  of  recruitment  and  purchase  of  equipment  will  no  longer 
take place? 

20 

The Deputy Prime Minister: I won’t make any point. Madam Speaker, the Board of 
Directors will quite easily tell you that neither any Member of the Government nor myself 
interferes with the running of the company. It is in a difficult situation, it has to be brought 
back to profitability and it will do so by taking whatever measures needs to be taken without 
interference. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr  Bérenger:  I  am  sure  the  hon.  Deputy  Prime  Minister  is  fully  aware  of  the 
profound  anxiety  amongst  the  employees  of  Air  Mauritius  in  general  and,  in  particular, 
Airmate Ltd. Can I therefore request the hon. Deputy Prime Minister to see to it that these 
employees are provided with as much information as possible to help them get over this very 
difficult path? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Certainly, Madam Speaker, the fully audited results of 
the company will be out on 18 June and, no doubt, as we expect, there will be a loss. But, at 
the same time, Madam Speaker, and as the hon. Prime Minister has mentioned, it is important 
for  everyone  to  realise  the  difficult  situation  that  Air  Mauritius  finds  itself  in  and  that 
everybody  in  his  own  like  from  the  Messenger  up  to  the  Chief  Executive  Officer  should 
know that, from now on, things have got to change. They will all have to work together for 
the  success  of  the  airline.  Of  course,  we  are  committed  to  the  success  of  the  airline, 
Government is committed to the success of the airline, but we cannot do it on our own. We 
do require the help and assistance of every single employee at Air Mauritius and there are 
over 3000 of them. Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: No other question, hon. Leader of the Opposition? Time is over! 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10 (2) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move that all the business on today’s Order 

Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

 

21 

PUBLIC BILLS 

Third Reading 

On motion made and seconded, the Supplementary Appropriation (2013) Bill (No. VII 

of 2015) was read the third time and passed. 

Second Reading 

THE FINANCE (MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) BILL  

(NO. X OF 2015) 

Order for Second Reading read. 

(12.05 p.m.) 

The Minister of Finance and Economic Development (Mr S. Lutchmeenaraidoo): 
Madam  Speaker,  the  Bill  provides  for  the  implementation  of  measures  announced  in  the 
Budget  Speech  and  in  its  annex,  and  for  matters  connected,  consequential  or  incidental 
thereto.   

Madam Speaker, the main theme underlying the 2015/16 Budget is that our country is 
at  the  Crossroad.    We  therefore  presented  a  ‘Projet  de  Société’  which  requires  various 
changes in the legal framework across different sectors of our economy and society. 

Thus,  Madam  Speaker,  the  Finance  (Miscellaneous  Provisions)  Bill  (2015)  brings 
amendments  to  53  enactments.  Clause  2  amends  the  Advertisements  Regulation  Act  to 
provide for a penalty of 50 per cent for non-registration of an advertising structure with the 
Mauritius Revenue Authority within the prescribed time limit. 

Clause 3 amends the Bank of Mauritius Act mainly to revitalise the secondary market 

for Government Securities and improve the implementation of monetary policy.  

Clause 4 amends the Banking Act to – 

(a) 

(b) 

provide  for  the  creation  and  licensing  of  a  new  SME  bank  and  other 
specialised financial institutions; 

make  better  provisions  in  the  context  of  restructuring  of  the  business  of  a 
bank, and 

 

(c) 

22 

provides for a simplified licencing procedure in the case of the setting up of a 
temporary financial institution to take over assets and liabilities of a financial 
institution which has been put into receivership by the Central Bank.  

Clause 5 amends the Borrower Protection Act to provide for a lender to perform due 
diligence on the debt repayment capacity of the guarantor in addition to that of the borrower.  
This clause will come into operation by Proclamation. 

Clause  6  amends  the  Business  Registration  Act  to  include  a  Schedule  listing  the 
Government  agencies  which  will  make  use  of  a  unique  identification  number  to  facilitate 
sharing of information and avoid multiple registrations among those agencies. Consequential 
amendments are made in clauses 8, 14, 23 and 38 to relevant legislations.   

Clause  7  amends  section  13  of  the  Central  Water  Authority  Act  to  strengthen  and 

professionalise its Board of Directors. 

Clause  9  amends  the  Code  de  Commerce  to  enable  the  Registrar  of  Companies  to 
strike off after 3  years a  société which has not been renewed  after its expiry and  for non-
payment of fees and charges. However, provisions have been made so that such a société can 
be reinstated after compliance with the procedures and settlement of arrears.  

Clause 10 amends the Companies Act to – 

(a) 

(b) 

extend eligibility to act as Company Secretary to any member of a recognised 
accountancy body or person who possesses equivalent qualifications, and 

allow a small company registered with SMEDA having net assets of less than 
Rs50 m., and having annual turnover not exceeding Rs20 m. to be exempted 
from  the  obligation  to  file  with  the  Registrar  of  Companies  its  financial 
statements and financial return for the first eight years of incorporation. 

Clause 11 amends the Consumer Protection (Price and Supplies Control) Act to make 
it mandatory, with effect from 1st July 2015, for the selling price of a product or service to be 
displayed either VAT inclusive or where there is no VAT, the selling price indicating VAT is 
nil.    Failure  to  do  so  will  be  an  offence  liable  to  a  fine  of  up  to  Rs300,000  and  5  years 
imprisonment. 

 

23 

Clause 12 amends the Customs Act to reflect the measures announced in the Budget 

Speech to make provisions for better and fairer customs administration. More specifically,  

(a)  

(b) 

(c) 

it provides that the Director-General of MRA must prove to the satisfaction of 
a  new  panel  within  the  Assessment  Review  Committee  namely  the 
Independent Tax Panel, that there is a prima facie case for fraud to be able to 
raise an assessment beyond the statutory limit of 3 years.  Similar provisions 
have been made in clauses 21, 24, 35 and 53 of the GRA Act,  Income Tax 
Act, MRA Act and VAT Act, respectively; 

empower  the  Director-General  under  customs  laws  to  recover  unpaid  duty, 
excise duty, taxes and charges, through attachment, distress, etc. as is the case 
under other revenue laws, and  

allow Customs to suspend the clearance of goods suspected to be counterfeit, 
on its own initiative, for 3 working days.  

Clauses  15,  27,  30,  40,  45  and  52  amend  the  Electronic  Transactions  Act,  the 
Inscription of Privileges and Mortgages Act, the Notaries Act, the Road Traffic Act and the 
Transcription and Mortgages Act respectively to cater for the coming into operation of Phase 
2 of the e-Registry Project at the Registrar-General’s Department as from 01st July 2015. 

Clause 17 amends the Excise Act to provide for – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

new definitions for “cordial”, “matured local rum” and “matured rum”; 

removal of MID levy of 30 cents per litre on petroleum products that 
are sold as ship bunker or re-exported, with effect from 01 July 2015; 

repealing the provisions relating to the method of determination of the 
CO2 emission threshold for the purpose of the CO2 levy/rebate scheme 
and its verification by the Technical Certification Committee in order 
to give greater flexibility in setting the CO2 threshold, and 

(d) 

replacement of the graduated scale of refund under the Tax Refund 
Scheme for PET bottles by a flat refund of Rs5 per kg. 

Clause 18 makes provision for the reinstatement of the Financial Services Promotion 

Agency. 

 

24 

Clause 20 amends the Freeport Act to clarify the term “support services” as ship 

management services or such other services as may be prescribed.  In addition, the Freeport 
activities specified in the Second Schedule are being streamlined and global trading, that is, 
paper trading, will now be allowed. 

Clause 21 amends the Gambling Regulatory Authority Act to provide for – 

(a) 

banning of Instant-Win Scratch Games, that is, “cartes à gratter”, as 
from 30 June 2015; 

 (b) 

banning of advertisement on gambling; 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

(f) 

the validity of the licence to conduct the Mauritius National Lottery 
will be for a period of up to 10 years instead of a fixed term of 10 
years; 

the implementation of the budget measures regarding gambling licence 
fees; 

the alignment of licence fee for Gaming House “A” and gaming 
machines in Rodrigues with that of Mauritius, and 

penalty provisions to be toughened to combat illegal gambling 
activities. 

Madam Speaker, following the Budget Speech, the GRA has, after consultations with 
stakeholders, decided to keep the rate of betting duty and the fixed betting duty in respect of 
horse racing and football matches unchanged. All the other changes announced in the Budget 
speech have been incorporated in the Finance Bill. 

Clause 22 amends the Human Resource Development Act with a view to facilitating 

decision-making process by abolishing the Executive Committee, reducing the size of the 
HRD Council from 27 members to 11 and providing for monthly Council meetings instead of 
quarterly. 

Clauses 23, 38 and 39 bring amendments to the Immigration Act, Non-Citizens 

(Employment Restriction) Act and Non-Citizens (Property Restriction) Act in connection 
with the Mauritian Diaspora Scheme, the Smart City Scheme and the Property Development 
Scheme to be prescribed under the Investment Promotion Act. 

 

25 

Clause  24  amends  the  Income  Tax  Act  to,  inter-alia,  give  effect  to  the  revision  in 
personal income tax allowances and exemptions, minimise hassles for SMEs, and provide for 
the change in the operation of CSR and tax year. 

Clauses  25  and  26  amend  the  Independent  Broadcasting  Authority  Act  and 
Information  and  Communication  Technologies  Act  to  provide  for  the  switching  from 
Analogue Television Broadcasting to digital broadcasting. 

Clause 28 amends the Insolvency Act as follows – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

for  the  Act  to  apply  to  a  Private  Pension  Scheme  under  the  Private 
Pension Schemes Act; 

to provide that a petition for the winding up of a company may also be 
presented by an administrator or the Registrar of Companies; 

to clarify that money withheld under PAYE, TDS and VAT on behalf 
of MRA shall not form part of the property of the debtor, as already 
specified in the VAT Act and Income Tax Act, and 

in the Fourth Schedule, to provide, in the event of the winding up of a 
private pension scheme, for the distribution of the assets to be effected 
in  accordance  with  FSC  Rules  made  under  the  Private  Pension 
Schemes Act. 

Clause  29  amends  the  Insurance  Act  to  correct  an  omission  regarding  income  tax 
exemption  on  restructuring  of  insurance  companies,  which  were  required  to  separate  their 
long term business from their general insurance business under the new Insurance Act. 

Clause 31 amends the Investment Promotion Act to provide for – 

(i) 

(ii) 

the  replacement  of  the  IRS  and  RES  Schemes  by  the  Property 
Development Scheme, and the introduction of the Mauritian Diaspora 
Scheme and Smart City Scheme by way of regulations; 

the  setting  up  of  a  one-stop  shop  to  be  known  as  the  BOI  One-Stop 
Shop,  the  objective  of  which  is  to  facilitate  business  start-ups  with 
project value exceeding Rs20 m. The BOI One-Stop Shop will provide 
all  the  support  and  information,  facilitate  the  application  for  and 
delivery of permits/licences and will collect the fees or charges payable 
by an enterprise on behalf of any public sector agency.  A SME One-

 

26 

Stop  Shop  along  the  same  lines  is  being  set  up  under  the  Small  and 
Medium  Enterprises  Development  Authority  Act  for  project  value 
below Rs20 m., and 

(iii) 

the  review  of  the  composition  of  the  Investment  Projects  Fast  Track 
Committee which will deal with cases where applications for permits 
or  licences  are  not  likely  to  be  determined  within  the  statutory  time 
limit, as reported by the public sector agency to the Committee and the 
relevant One-Stop Shop. 

Clauses 32 and 44 amend the Land (Duties and Taxes) Act and the Registration Duty 

Act to provide as follows – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

the  maximum  registration  duty  exemption  for  a  first-time  buyer  of 
residential bare land is being increased from Rs50,000 to Rs75,000; 

the Housing Estate Scheme is being extended to 2018 and 2019; 

the Arrears Payment Scheme introduced in 2013 is being renewed for 
another year; 

the Registrar-General is being given the power to enforce payment of 
duty  or  tax  owed  to  the  Department  by  way  of  an  attachment  as 
provided for in the Attachment (Rates and Taxes) Act. 

Clause 33 amends the Limited Partnerships Act to enable the issue of a Certificate of 
Current  Standing  for  limited  partnerships  and  facilitate  settlement  and  compounding  of 
offences as is the case for companies. 

Clause 34 amends the Local Government Act to – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

provide  for  exemption  from  the  requirement  of  a  Building  and  Land 
Use Permit for certain classified trades as may be prescribed; 
provide a person, who carries out a classified trade, with the possibility 
to effect payment of the appropriate fee for a period of up to 3 years, 
and 

make  transitional  provisions  to  reflect  the  change  in  financial  year 
from year ended 31 December to year ended 30 June. 

Clause 35 amends the Mauritius Revenue Authority Act to – 

 

27 

 (a) 

(b) 

require the Director General to issue statements of practice in cases as 
may  be  prescribed,  specifying  the  circumstances  in  which  his 
discretionary powers under revenue laws are applied, and 
require the Director General to give, in respect of an assessment, the 
basis  of  the  amount  computed  and  its  justification  as  well  as  the 
reasons for making the assessment. 

Clause  36  amends  the  Morcellement  Act  to  review  the  composition  of  the 

Morcellement Board. 

Clause  37  amends  the  National  Pensions  Act  to  enable  the  terms  and  conditions 
relating to payment of basic retirement pension to be set by the Minister of Social Security by 
way of Regulations and any beneficiary of the basic retirement pension who wishes to donate 
his monthly pension to an approved charitable institution, a charitable trust or a Foundation to 
make a request in writing to the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Social Security. 

Clauses 41 and 48 amend the Pensions Act and the Statutory Bodies Pension Funds 
Act to provide for the method of computation of the pension benefits payable to be made by 
way  of  regulations.    Provision  is  also  being  made  to  facilitate  merger  of  various  pension 
funds. 

Clause 42 amends the Public Debt Management Act to provide that the type, form and 
manner  and  terms  and  conditions  on  which  Government  securities  are  issued  may  be 
approved by the Minister instead of having to be prescribed.  Provisions are also being made 
regarding the calculation of the ceiling of public sector debt. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  Finance  Bill  also  reflects  our  deep  commitment  to  greater 

transparency and better governance. 

Clause 43 amends the Public Procurement Act to provide for the following – 

(i) 

(ii) 

the  Chief  Executive  of  the  Central  Procurement  Board  to  conduct 
compliance  audit  and  certify,  before  the  review  of  the  Evaluation 
Committee by the Board, that all procurement rules at the level of the 
Board have been complied with in accordance with the Act; 
for the Chief Executive Officer of a public body to conduct compliance 
audit  and  certify,  prior  to  award  of  a  contract,  that  the  procurement 
rules under the Act have been complied with; 

 (iii)   enabling CPB to set up another Bid Evaluation Committee when the 

initial one does not comply with the CPB’s requirements; 

 

(iv) 

28 

for the determination of cases for review by the Independent Review 
Panel  (IRP)  within  a  period  of  time  to  be  prescribed  after  which 
suspension  of  procurement  proceedings  will  lapse,  thus  allowing  the 
public body to award the contract while the IRP can continue with the 
determination of  the review, and 

(v) 

for  an  increase  in  the  procurement  value  threshold  for  Rodrigues 
Regional Assembly not requiring the approval of CPB from Rs15 m. to  
Rs25 m. 

Clause  47  amends  the  State  Lands  Act  to  enable  sale,  by  private  contract,  of  State 
lands, excluding Pas Géométriques, for the development of a Government approved project. 

Clause 49 amends the Sugar Industry Efficiency Act to provide for – 
(a) 

a lessee or a non-citizen to apply for land conversion; 

(b) 

a  land  owner  in  cases  of  conversion  of  large  acreage  of  land  for  a  specific 
purpose, e.g. a golf course to reapply for land conversion if he subsequently 
decides to use  the land for other purposes. 

Clause  50  amends  the  Sugar  Insurance  Fund  Act  to  provide  mainly  for  a  one-off 
special payment of Rs3,400 per ton of sugar to planters producing up to 60 tons, and Rs2,000 
per ton to all other categories in respect of the 2014 sugar crop. 

Clause  51  amends  the  Tourism  Authority  Act  to  provide  for  the  regrouping  of  the 
various licences associated with the operation of a hotel,  guesthouse or  a tourist residence 
under  a  certificate  which  will  cover  accommodation  and  related  activities.  Similarly,  a 
“domaine certificate” will be introduced to cater for estate or premises offering nature-based 
activities (eco-tourism).  These certificates  will be issued for a period of  3  years subject to 
established norms and standards being complied with. 

Clause 53 amends the Value Added Tax Act to – 
(a) 

set the legal framework, which will allow the MRA to require a person to use 
an electronic fiscal device to record any matter or transaction which may affect 
the liability to VAT of that person; 
abolish the 10 cents levy on SMS and MMS; 
provide for raising the compulsory VAT registration threshold from Rs4 m. to 
Rs6 m. annual turnover; 

(b) 
(c) 

 

29 

(d) 

provide for jewellers to  be subject to the standard VAT registration turnover 
threshold of Rs6 m., and  
extend the duration of the VAT Refund Scheme for middle income households 
in respect of construction or acquisition of a new residential unit to June 2018. 
Clause 54 repeals the National Economic and Social Council Act with effect from 30 

(e) 

April 2015. 

Madam  Speaker,  with  your  permission,  I  am  bringing  a  number  of  amendments  at 

Committee Stage as circulated.  I will explain the main changes, namely – 

 
(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

Clause 4 relating to the Banking Act is being amended to provide in the case 
of  restructuration  of  a  banking  business  for  transfer  of  its  undertaking  to 
include also a specialised financial institution; 
Clause 24 relating to the Income Tax Act is being amended to clarify that the 
VAT  registered  person  making  both  taxable  and  exempt  supplies  will  be 
allowed at his option to join the simplified cash accounting system both under 
income tax and VAT. 
Clauses 27, 40, 44 and 52, clarify that in the context of the e-registry project, 
the  ‘original’  deed  or  document  will  be  the  one  kept  in  the  custody  of  the 
notary.  
the  coming  into  operation  of  the  amendments  to  the  Pensions  Act  and  the 
Statutory  Bodies  Pension  Funds  Act  will  be  effective  as  from  1st  January 
2013, that is, the date of the application of the PRB report.  

The  various  amendments  being  brought  by  the  Finance  (Miscellaneous  Provisions) 
Bill 2015 will come into effect on different commencement dates, namely on a date specified 
in the Bill or by way of Proclamation or on the date of Gazetting. 

Madam Speaker, I now commend the Bill to the House. 
 
The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

 (12.26 p.m.) 

Mr R. Uteem (First Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis Central): Madam 
Speaker, in December 2013, the last time the Finance (Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill was 
voted in this House, I welcomed the initiative of the then Minister of Finance, hon. Xavier 

30 

 
Duval, who had circulated an Explanatory Note on the two Bills which were highly technical 
and I also expressed the wish that other Ministers of Finance, in the future, would take this as 
a  good  example  and  circulate  that  Explanatory  Note  well  in  advance  so  that  all  hon. 
Members, even those not intervening on the Bill, can follow and understand the reason for 
every section of these highly technical Bills. Unfortunately, the new Minister of Finance has 
decided to discontinue with this practice and we are now left with a 166-page Bill amending 
no less than 53 different pieces of legislation.  

The  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  has  also  chosen  to  discontinue  with  the  practice  of 
having two separate Bills, a Finance Bill that would cover mainly the tax and public finance 
measures announced in the Budget Speech and an Economic and Financial Measures Bill that 
would  provide  the  legal  framework  for  the  implementation  of  other  budgetary  measures 
which are not related to taxation and national finance. 

Madam Speaker,  you would recall that the practice of having two separate  Bills to 
implement measures announced in the Budget came after a ruling of the then Speaker on 21 
July  2009,  following  a  Point  of  Order  raised  by  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition.  In  his 
ruling, the Speaker stated, and I quote – 

 “(...) that the Finance (Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill should not contain provisions 
intended  to  make  permanent  changes  in  existing  laws  unless  they  are  essentially 
connected  with  national  finance,  or,  are  consequential  upon,  or  incidental  to  the 
taxation proposals and may also include provisions that are sufficiently closely related 
to those matters within the spirit and scope of the Bill as defined in the long title”. 
Yet,  Madam  Speaker,  the  Bill  before  this  House  contains  amendments  to  existing 
laws  which  have  no  relation  whatsoever  with  taxation  or  national  finance.  To  take  just  an 
example,  what  does  amendment  to  the  Central  Water  Authority  Act,  which  relates  to  the 
composition of the Water Advisory Council, has to do with national finance. The same thing 
can  probably  be  said  about  proposed  amendments  to  the  Borrower  Protection  Act,  to  the 
Human Resource Development Act, etc.  Madam Speaker, I don’t know if the earlier ruling 
of the Speaker has been overruled or if going forward, we will be going back to having only 
one Finance Bill and all the amendments lumped together. 

For  this  time,  we  are  not  raising  any  Point  of  Order,  but  I  hope  that  this  does  not 

become the practice and we should go back to... 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Member, I just wish to draw your attention to Standing Order 

52 (b) which says that – 

 

31 

“A  Finance  Bill  may,  in  addition  to  the  measures  relating  to  taxation  and  national 
finance  announced  in  a  Budget  Speech,  contain  provisions  relating  to  the  other 
measures  announced  therein  and  provide  for  matters  connected,  consequential  or 
incidental to those measures”.  
I am just drawing your attention to this Standing Order. 
Mr Uteem: Yes, Madam Speaker, that is what I have said. That was consistent with 
the ruling given by the Speaker and the point I was making is there are provisions in this Bill 
which have absolutely nothing to do with finance, for example, I’ll give the example of the 
amendment to the Central Water Authority Act and the Human Resource Development Act. 
It is not incidental at all. 

Coming  to  the  provisions  of  the  Act,  to  the  commissioning  of  the  Bill,  Madam 
Speaker, the Bank of Mauritius Act is being amended to allow the Central Bank to invest in 
units in Gold Funds. The famous Gold Funds, now it’s in plural, and yet, not a single word 
either in the Budget or in the summing up by the hon. Minister of Finance as to what those 
Gold Funds would be. Would they be sovereign funds? Do we envisage the Central Bank to 
invest in private Gold Funds? I hope that the hon. Minister, in due course, will give us more 
clarifications as there are obvious governance issues the Central Bank would be investing in 
private gold funds.   

The Central Bank will also be allowed to create Reserve Funds for monetary policy 

purposes or such other specific purposes as the Bank may determine.  

Madam Speaker,  as  you may  be  aware, today, the Central  Bank is only allowed to 
transfer 15% of its net profit to a general fund and any balance after the deduction of these 
15% must be allocated to the Consolidated Fund. Now, with this Bill, the Central Bank will 
be allowed to create Reserve Funds and there is no restriction on the amount of its net profit 
that can be transferred to those Reserve Funds. The Central Bank is also given a blank cheque 
- sans jeu de mots - to use this fund as it wishes subject only to best international practices. 
We  do  appreciate  the  need  to  give  flexibility  to  the  Central  Bank  to  implement  monetary 
policy, but we believe that it would have been more prudent to set a limit on the amount that 
can be used at the discretion of the Central Bank. If we need to come back to the Minister or 
to the House to increase that amount, we could have done so as and when required instead of 
giving a blank cheque to the Central Bank just to use any amount it wishes to put in these 
special reserves. 

 

32 

The Banking Act is also being amended. The annex to the Budget Speech provided 
that  the  Banking  Act  will  be  amended  to  exempt  foreign  banks  providing  loans  to  global 
business  companies  and  specified  entities  such  as  the  new  SME  Bank  from  the  need  of 
having a moneylender’s licence. This is a welcome initiative. However, when we look at the 
Schedule which exempts those institutions from the requirement of the Moneylenders Act, it 
is all but clear-cut. It is very ambiguous and it would have been much more efficient if it was 
clearly stated that banks providing finances to global business companies are exempt rather 
than having the long definition that is included in the Schedule.  

One amendment which is being brought to the Banking Act, and which was certainly 
not referred to in the Budget Speech, is the amendment to the power of the receiver appointed 
by  the  Central  Bank.  The  provision  was  probably  motivated,  Madam  Speaker,  by  the 
appointment  of  the  receiver  over  the  assets  of  Bramer  Banking  Corporation.  Under  the 
amended Section 82 (1) of the Banking Act, the receiver will now have the power to suspend 
or reduce the right of creditors to claim or receive interest. So, once you have put a bank in 
receivership, the receiver can decide not to pay any more interest on amount that is already 
due and outstanding. Now, I am not sure whether this will pass the test of constitutionality, 
but  I  am  pretty  sure  that  any  aggrieved  creditor  will  probably  take  up  this  matter  in  court 
because  that  would  amount  to  a  deprivation  of  its  property  and  a  breach  of  the  existing 
contractual obligation.  

The hon. Minister Finance and Economic Development stated numerous times in his 
answers to PNQs that the Central Bank, in the case of Bramer Bank, did not have a choice, 
they  had  to  appoint  a  receiver.  They  had  to  revoke  their  licence,  they  had  to  appoint  a 
receiver. We don’t agree with this interpretation, but, be that as it may, we think that this was 
an appropriate moment. If there was any shortcoming in the Banking Act, the hon. Minister 
of Finance and Economic Development could have proposed ways and means to improve the 
situation if ever a bank in the future finds itself in the same situation as the Bramer Banking 
Corporation by giving special powers to a conservator, to an administrator without the need 
to  revoke  the  licence.  The  hon.  Minister  Finance  and  Economic  Development  often 
mentioned  that  he  didn’t  have  these  powers  under  the  existing  legislation.  I  hope,  in  the 
future, he will come with a specific legislation to give the appropriate framework so that we 
do not have to revoke a banking licence. 

The Borrower Protection Act is being amended to provide that any lender, before it 
grants any credit facility, has to look at the ability to repay not only of the borrower, but also 

33 

 
of the guarantor. Previously, he only had to check that the borrower was able to repay, now 
he  also  have  to  check  the  financial  viability  of  the  guarantor.  This  is  a  welcome  measure 
because  all  too  often  guarantors  have  their  property  seized  following  a  default  by  the 
borrower and if the lender had done its due diligence, probably the guarantor would not have 
qualified in the first place. This is a welcome step but, as I had mentioned in my intervention 
during the Budget Speech, it does not go far enough and, again, I hope that the hon. Minister 
of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  will  have  a  look  on  the  whole  of  the  Borrower 
Protection Act and will increase the powers given to the Commission as well as increase the 
threshold  amount  of  loan  agreement  which  qualified  to  be  under  the  purview  of  the 
Commissioner. Up to now, every Thursday, at least a dozen of people are still losing their 
house in Sale by Levy. I know the hon. Prime Minister, in one of his answers to a question 
that  I  raised  myself,  stated  that  there  is  a  special  Unit  in  his  Ministry  looking  at  the 
recommendation made by the Commission of Inquiry on Sale by Levy. I hope that will also 
be implemented in a forthcoming amendment to the Borrower Protection Act. 

It is proposed to amend the Code de Commerce and give the power to the Registrar of 
Companies to strike off sociétés that have not paid their dues. We have no issue with that. In 
fact,  this  provision  already  exists  in  the  case  of  companies;  if  companies  do  not  pay  their 
licence  fees,  the  Registrar  of  Companies  can  strike  off  the  company  on  the  basis  of  non-
payment of fees. But, under the Companies Act there is a whole section 307 which deals with 
the consequences of striking off a company. In particular, it clearly states that the fact that the 
company is no longer on the register of companies, does not cause any prejudice to any Court 
proceedings or any right that it has to properties, etc. Unfortunately, when we are amending 
the Code de Commerce, we are providing for the power to strike off, but we are not providing 
for the consequences of striking off unlike what we have in the Companies Act. So, maybe 
this  is  something  that  the  hon.  Minister  will  have  to  consider  to,  at  least,  have  a 
corresponding section as we have in the Companies Act.  

The Companies Act is being amended, as the hon. Minister Finance  and Economic 
Development mentioned, to allow SMEs to file financial summaries and to exempt them from 
filing annual return. Fair enough, this is a positive measure. We are fully supportive because 
it is a business facilitation provision for small SMEs. However, what we do not understand is 
why are we using a criteria for the SME under the Companies Act and a different one under 
the SMEDA Act. Under the Companies Act - I do not know if this is an oversight - the SME 
must  have  assets  not  exceeding  Rs50  m.  and  an  annual  turnover  not  exceeding  Rs20  m. 

34 

 
However,  when  we  look  at  the  Seventh  Schedule  to  the  Bill  which  sets  out  the  eligibility 
criteria  for  SMEDA  under  micro-finance,  small  and  medium  enterprises,  we  see  that  for 
microenterprise turnover is up to Rs2 m., for small enterprise turnover up to Rs10 m. and 
medium  enterprise  between  Rs10  m.  and  Rs50  m.  So,  there  is  nothing  about  the  value  of 
assets and there is nothing about turnover exceeding Rs10 m. So, maybe, if we could have 
uniformisation of all companies, it would probably be administratively more workable for the 
companies’ registry and for SMEDA if we applied the same criteria for eligibility, whether it 
is for exemption from taxation or exemption for filing of documents.  

One  thing  which  we  have  to  bear  in  mind,  and  that  will  certainly  crop  up,  those 
provisions relating to SMEs, those favourable provisions which enable them not to file their 
accounts and not to pay taxes, only apply to SMEs set up on or after June 2015. Now, we are 
going to have two classes of SMEs after June 2015; one will be exempt and one which will 
not be exempt.  

I can see the rationale when it comes to income tax collection that the new incentive 
will  come  for  the  new  companies  and  not  existing  ones.    But  for  the  filings,  for  the 
exemptions  to  prepare  full  accounting  financial  statements,  why  should  existing  small  and 
medium enterprises not have the same treatment as the new SMEs? And also, when we create 
these two categories of SMEs, aren’t we encouraging existing SMEs to create a subsidiary or 
a  sister  company  after  June  2015  just  solely  for  the  purposes  of  benefiting  from  the 
favourable regimes? 

Concerning Customs Act, we welcome the decision to set out a limitation period within 
which the Director General of the MRA can make assessment. Any assessment after a delay 
of  three  years  will  require  the  prior  approval  of  the  Independent  Tax  Panel  who  must  be 
satisfied that there is a prima facie evidence of fraud. We have similar amendments to the 
Gambling Regulatory Authority Act, to the Income Tax Act and to the Value Added Tax Act. 
We are, of course, totally supportive of the decision to reduce the limitation period to three 
years.  But, when we look at the way the hon. Minister is proposing to frame the assessment 
going forward, after three years the Director General now needs to go to the Independent Tax 
Panel and have to show prima facie evidence of fraud. Already fraud is quite a high burden of 
proof for lawyers.  When we talk about fraud, it is almost a criminal burden of proof.  

So, how do we reconcile prima facie which is a very low burden of proof with fraud? I 
am  not  too  sure  how  it will  work,  but  our  main  concern  is  now  the  Director  General  will 

35 

 
transfer  the  responsibility  to  this  Independent  Tax  Panel.  The  Independent  Tax  Panel  is  a 
panel of the Revenue Assessment Committee which has been set up under the MRA Act. But 
we  already  know  that  the  Assessment  Review  Committee  (ARC)  is  understaffed.  I  have 
personally asked question in this House; there are backlogs of hundreds of files.  Already we 
have  an  ARC  which  is  not  operating  properly  and  now  we  are  going  to  burden  that  same 
ARC by having a new panel to deal with claims for raising assessment after the prescribed 
period of three years.  If the hon. Minister of Finance wants the scheme to work, he would 
need to look into the staffing issue at the ARC and put more resources to the panel so that 
there is no backlog. 

One point that we have to bear in mind is that the provision relating to the limitation 
period  will  only  come  into  force  on  proclamation.  So,  we  don’t  know  the  date  yet.  As  at 
today revenue authorities can raise assessment within four years.  We are going to change it 
to three years. I hope that there will not be a temptation on the staff of the Mauritius Revenue 
Authority to start raising assessment for four years just before the promulgation, the coming 
into force of the new provisions which limit the time period for raising assessment to three 
years.  In  another  words,  the  sooner  the  provisions  are  promulgated,  the  better  for  the 
taxpayers. 

The  Financial  Services  Act  is  being  amended  to  create  again  the  Financial  Services 
Promotion Agency. On this side of the House, we welcome this decision. We were opposed 
to  its  closure.  We  were  opposed  to  the  transfer  of  the  FSPA  to  the  Board  of  Investment 
because  we  always  believe  that  we  need  to  have  a  dedicated  agency  for  the  promotion  of 
financial services. However, there have been some changes to the composition and the role of 
the new FSPA.   It is unfortunate that the Minister responsible for financial services is not 
here because maybe he could have enlightened me on the issue that I am going to raise. First 
of all, previously, we used to have one Chairman and six members. Now, we will have only 
one  Chairman  and  four  members.  That’s  not  the  issue.  The  issue  is  previously  those  six 
members  should  have  been  suitably  qualified  and  experienced  in  the  field  of  financial 
services which makes sense because they are going to sit on the Financial Services Promotion 
Agency. But with this amendment, there is no longer any requirement for the members to be 
suitably qualified in financial services.  

So,  the  Minister  is  given  carte  blanche  to  nominate  whoever  he  wants  to  sit  on  the 
Board.  My question is: is that good governance? And as Minister of Governance, I hope he 

36 

 
would answer.  Previously, the agency also used to manage its own budget and only required 
to notify the Minister concerned of its annual income and expenses.  Now, under the new 
amendment, a notification is not enough.  They actually require the Minister’s approval. The 
Minister  is  going  to  control  the  budget  for  the  FSPA.    I  can  understand  the  urge  of  the 
Minister to control the spending of the agency, but this power should not be abused and the 
agency should, as far as possible, be autonomous because otherwise they would always be at 
the beck and call of the Minister and not seem to be independent.  

Now, when it comes to the objects and functions of the FSPA, I note that the FSPA 
will no longer have any role in training in the field of financial services. Again, I’m not sure 
why this decision has been taken because in the past, one of the greatest roles of the FSPA 
was to organise courses which were very pertinent to the financial sector and delivered by 
trainers of international repute.  I, myself, have benefited from those courses.  I think, as a 
promotion agency, they  are best suited to know  the demands  and supplies of the financial 
services market. Maybe this is something which the hon. Minister of Financial Services can 
look into.  

Finally, the FSPA will not offer the one-stop shop services that it used to previously. 
Again,  as  a  practitioner,  I  found  it  very  useful  to  have  to  deal  with  only  one  agency,  the 
FSPA,  especially  when  we  had  to  channel  work  permits,  visa  applications,  residential 
permits, leases and what not. The FSPA then acted as a liaison office with the governmental 
agencies.  Now,  this  role  was  assumed  by  the  Board  of  Investment.    When  the  FSPA  was 
transferred to the Board of Investment, unfortunately, now, it is no longer a role of the FSPA. 
So, I don’t know if this will still be done by the Board of Investment or how it is going to 
work in practice. 

In relation to the Freeport Act, we welcome the proposed amendment which increases 
the scope of activities that are qualified as report activities. In particular, we are very pleased 
with the inclusion of global training whereby goods can be shipped directly from the port of 
origin  to  the  final  destination  without  having  to  transit  to  Mauritius,  without  having  to  be 
physically unloaded in Mauritius.  This will reduce greatly the costs of re-exporting the goods 
to the final destination. So, this is definitely a measure which is going to boost, I hope, the 
Freeport Sector. 

Concerning  the  Gambling  Regulatory  Authority  Amendments,  again,  we  welcome 
those amendments to the extent that they are meant to discourage gambling by increasing the 

37 

 
costs of operation and by prohibiting advertisements. We take note that the controversy about 
cartes à gratter has been resolved and they would be banned as from 30 June 2015.  It is a 
step in the right direction.  But, as  I mentioned  in my intervention on the Budget Speech, 
there is still a long way to go to get rid of this tag of nation ‘zougadère’.  The lobbies are still 
around. It is not an easy task - I can understand the predicament of the Minister of Finance - 
to take head-on the gambling industry.  Still I hope, in the future, appropriate measures will 
be  taken  to  implement  the  recommendations  of  the  Commission  of  Inquiry  which  was 
particularly critical of the operation of the Gambling Regulatory Authority. 

Turning to the amendments to the Income Tax Act, the hon. Minister of Finance has 
announced  in  his  Budget  Speech  that  he  would  be  removing  all  existing  CSR  guidelines, 
which  he  did.    However,  he  replaced  the  guidelines  by  restricting  CSR  programme  to  a 
programme having as its objects the alleviation of poverty, the relief of sickness or disability, 
the  advancement  of  education  of  vulnerable  person  or  the  promotion  of  any  other  public 
object beneficial to the Mauritian community.  So we have removed the guidelines, but we 
have provided a definition.  Unfortunately, in my opinion, this definition is very ambiguous 
and is bound to raise more questions about what qualifies as a CSR programme or not. 

Let us take the example of a company which decides to give a scholarship, and the 
scholarship  is  purely  on  a  merit  basis.    So,  it  is  not  means  tested.        Will  it  qualify  as 
educational purpose if it is not limited to the vulnerable group because anyone is eligible to 
get the scholarship?  Probably not, if we construe strictly the term ‘vulnerable person’.  Then, 
why should it, if it is for the promotion of education and actually anyone, even those who 
have the means, is able to benefit from the scholarship?  Similarly, if a company decides to 
construct a lab for a school, will it qualify, being given that anyone can have access to the 
school, not necessarily the vulnerable?  Then, it will be ridiculous if you cannot have, as part 
of your CSR programme, donations to schools to enhance educational projects.   

Now, what is the meaning of ‘public object beneficial to the Mauritian community’?   
Are sports included?  Under the CSR guidelines, there was controversy.  In the beginning, it 
was not, and then it was.  At least, if they were set out clearly as one, we would not have to 
lump it into ‘public object beneficial to the Mauritius community.’ 

What  if  a  company  creates  a  CSR  programme  that  benefits  only  its  employees, 
whether  it  is  by  way  of  education  or  relief,  but  only  for  a  specific  group,  only  their 
employees?  Will that be beneficial to the Mauritian community? Would a specific group be 

38 

 
included in the definition of ‘Mauritian community?’ And if the benefit is only to a section of 
the community, for example, for a religious group, will that qualify?  If the donation is made 
to a NGO which carries out a purpose  which is beneficial to  all Mauritians, but the  NGO 
happens to be run by a religious institution, will that qualify as a CSR programme?  These are 
things  that  we  need  to  think  out  because  it  creates  a  problem  for  the  company  paying  the 
CSR.  It is a legal requirement that they have to pay 2% of their chargeable income, and it is 
also a problem to the Director of the MRA because he has to monitor that the taxpayer has set 
aside 2% in a CSR programme. 

Madam Speaker, the amendment to the Income Act is the most technical aspect of the 
Bill, and I do not propose to go in any further details.  Suffice it to say that, the decision of 
the Government to change the financial  year from calendar  year to the year starting on 01 
July has resulted in a number of consequential amendments, and there is bound to be teething 
problems.  I have come through some of the provisions, and I am happy to talk to the officers 
of the Ministry later on.  Let’s take two obvious cases.  Let’s say there is a société.  A société 
has, as partners, individuals who are bound to file their return end of June, and has companies 
who choose their year-end to be 31 December, which they can under the current structure.  
So, how would the société operate?   Will it have to keep double accounting and provide a 
statement of income to the individuals by 31 June, and then have a second set of accounts and 
provide it at the end of December?  This is going to be a practical problem that will happen to 
sociétés which have as partners both companies and individuals. 

There  is  also  another  consequential  problem  with  the  definition  of  ‘residents’  for 
individuals.  As hon. Members may know, one of the criteria to establish ‘residents’ is if you 
have been in Mauritius for a certain number of days.  For the past three years, it was 270 
days, but especially for 2015 this has been changed to 225 days, which is prorated, which is 
fair enough for 2015.  But what about for 2016 and 2017?  Because for 2016, you still have to 
count the two years previously, and the same thing for 2017.  So, you will have to think about 
it, because it does create a problem when you have a prorated system just for 2015. 

Madam  Speaker,  we  welcome  the  amendment  to  the  Independent  Broadcasting 
Authority  Act.    The  amendment  provides  for  the  licensing  of  Internet  TV  Services.  This 
amendment is no doubt plugging a loophole in the existing legislation, which has resulted in 
an  uncontrolled  proliferation  of  web  TVs.  Previously,  only  TV  rebroadcasting  services, 
where  they  were  receiving  pictures  via  satellite  and  diffusing  it  via  dish  antennas,  were 
required to be licensed. 

 

39 

Now, with this amendment, we would be able to have cable TVs, and TVs which will 
be  able  to  be  diffused  by  wireless  and  other  technologies.    So,  this  is  a  very  welcome 
amendment,  but  the  more  important  and  interesting  feature  is  in  regard  to  internet  service 
providers.  They are entitled to be issued a TV service licence even if more than 20% of their 
shares  are  owned  by  foreigners,  and  even  if  more  than  20%  of  their  directors  are  foreign 
nationals. 

So, the threshold on foreign ownership and foreign directorship, Madam Speaker, has 
been the single stumbling block to really developing private TV in Mauritius because foreign 
investors and foreign expertise are required for any TV to be financially viable, and there are 
very few investors who are willing to invest only 20% in a TV station in Mauritius.  So, this 
is a welcome amendment with respect to cable TVs. 

But then, the necessary question is why limit it to only internet TVs, cable TVs and 
why not extend it also to terrestrial TVs, so as to give a greater choice to motion viewers.  I 
hope, in the future, the hon. Minister of Information Technology will look into the matter and 
see how we can encourage private TVs in Mauritius. 

In relation to the Inscription of Privileges and Mortgages Act, following the proposed 
amendment, a person will now have a choice of either filing an original document with the 
Conservator of Mortgages or make electronic filing, file a PDF copy of a deed.  We have the 
same provision not only for the Conservator of Mortgages but also for the Registrar General 
and in relation to the Transcription and Mortgage Act. 

We, of course, welcome this decision because this is going to lower cost; there would 
be  less  storage  space,  there  would  be  durability,  so  less  risk  of  paper  being  destroyed,  or 
having problems.  But there is a practical problem.  If we give a PDF document the same 
legal status as an original, which is what is provided in the Bill, we have to bear in mind that 
there is always a risk of tampering with a PDF copy because with the software that we have 
now, including the Adobe, it is very easy to change terms of a scanned document, including 
the signature page.  So, maybe one solution for this would be to require the original to be 
produced at the same time as the electronic copy. 

Quickly turning to the  Insurance Act, the amendment exempts the insurer from the 
payment of registration duty upon a transfer of any of his property or asset. Previously, the 
exemption  of  registration  duty  related  to  only  direct  transfer  of  assets.    Now,  it  includes 
indirect transfer.  The problem with this is that we are giving it a retrospective effect. So, it 

40 

 
will be backdated to 31  December 2010.   I would like to know from the hon. Minister of 
Finance how many insurance companies are concerned by this measure because, no doubt, 
there  must  have  been  lobbies  from  insurance  companies,  and  what  will  be  the  manque  à 
gagner to the State with this amendment. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  have  dealt  previously  with  most  of  the  other  provisions  of  the 
remaining Acts that are being amended.  We don’t have any serious qualm with any of the 
other provisions of this Bill. 

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for one and a half hours for lunch. 

At 1.03 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 2.35 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Minister Bholah! 

The  Minister  of  Business,  Enterprise  and  Cooperatives  (Mr  S.  Bholah):  Thank 
you, Madam Speaker.  Let me first of all thank the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development  as  well  as  the  hon.  Attorney  General  for  having  produced  this  Finance 
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill after so much hard work, I believe. 

I will also thank hon. Uteem for his intervention, and we have taken good note of his 
concerns  regarding  certain  amendments  to  the  Bills,  more  particularly  the  taxation,  the 
periodicity for those enterprises in as far as from June 2015 is concerned and those who were 
already there previous to June 2015, as well as the categories of  enterprises, that is, those 
having asset value of Rs20 m. and those having less and those having more.  I am sure that 
the hon. Minister of Finance will address these issues in due course. 

This  Bill  amends  some  52  Acts  of  Parliament  with  the  objective  to  create  an 
appropriate legal framework through which measures, as announced in the Budget, will be 
implemented. The Bill, when passed, is set to create a conducive environment, inter alia, to 
promote business overall, attract potential entrepreneurs to venture into taking business risks 
and, at the same time, curbing down betting and gaming, which has proliferated throughout 
the  island.    It  is  no  surprise  why  the  Gambling  Regulatory  Act  is  being  amended  with 
stringent rules with regard to fees, licences, etc.  Furthermore, the Bill also aims at improving 

 
the quality of life of the population at large through proposed amendments to the Consumer 
Protection Act. 

41 

As Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives, I will focus my intervention on 
the business side of this Bill with particular attention to the amendment to the SMEDA Act.  
Since coming into office of this Government, we have on a non-stop basis mentioned about 
the SME bank and the one-stop shop. The amendment proposed to this SMEDA Act is going 
to address this issue, as it will incorporate this long overdue one-stop shop. The objective is 
to facilitate potential entrepreneurs with project value of less than Rs20 m. to obtain licences 
and patents with the least possible hassle or no hassle at all.  The cumbersome and hectic 
procedures in procuring those licences will be behind us now. The one-stop shop which will 
be located in the centre of the island is very conducive and, so far, many projects have been 
abandoned  en  cours  de  route  because  there  is  no  such  one-stop  shop.  This  one-stop  shop 
represents a milestone in the process of doing business. 

However, the one-stop shop with the SMEDA, as presented in the Bill, is meant for 
those entrepreneurs who have project value of less than Rs20 m.  But, at the same time, the 
Investment  Promotion  Act  is  going  to  address  the  issue  of  those  entrepreneurs  who  have 
project  value  of  more  than  Rs20  m.    Therefore,  all  potential  entrepreneurs  will  be  treated 
fairly.  Again, with the amendment to the SMEDA Act, enterprises will be now categorised 
into three different categories. We will now have micro entrepreneurs, small entrepreneurs 
and medium entrepreneurs, as set out in Schedule 7.  It will be MSM now – micro, small and 
medium! 

(Interruptions) 

The Bill also empowers the Minister to adjust the level of - he talked of SMEs, now 

we will talk of … 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No cross talking! Please, proceed Minister! 

Mr  Bholah:  The  Bill  also  empowers  the  Minister  to  adjust  the  level  of  turnover 
figures through regulations and we know that with inflation, rate of exchange, these do have a 
direct  bearing  on  turnover  and,  therefore,  the  classification  of  micro-medium  and  small 
enterprises will be handled in the light of inflation and all that, which is the regular practice. 

 

42 

The other thing which is good with categorisation of micro-enterprises  is we know 
that most of those micro-entrepreneurs, they operate in the informal sector. The SMEDA Act, 
as amended, will tempt to bring those enterprises into the formal sector and it is a good thing 
as we will have statistics for them. It will also be counted in as far as GDP is to be computed. 
So, it is good. We have got a lot of businesses into the informal sector. But the SMEDA Act, 
with  regard  to  the  micro-enterprises,  will  bring  into  the  main  stream  of  business  and, 
therefore,  add  into  the  statistics  of  the  country  in  as  far  as,  as  I  said  GDP  is  concerned, 
production is concerned, which is  very positive. 

Now, regarding the Board of SMEDA; so far the SMEDA Act provides for a Board 
consisting of 13 members.  Now, this is being reduced to 11. The amendment also provides 
for representatives of institutions just like the Board of Investment, the MCCI as well as the 
Chief Executive of the coming SME bank to form part of the Board. Again, I thank the hon. 
Minister  of  Finance  for  strengthening  not  in  quantity  but  to  have  quality  people  on  the 
SMEDA  Board.  This  will  also  help  to  harmonise  business  because  most  of  the  businesses 
will come through SMEDA, but others will also go through BOI. The representatives of the 
BOI and the MCCI as well will harmonise our business strategy and everybody will look in 
the same direction. This will be very fruitful. 

We  have  also  noted  under  the  Companies  Act  that  a  series  of  incentives  will  be 
provided to SMEs, namely the tax holidays for eight years, which is a very good initiative. 
Again, this will help because there was this hurdle of coming to the formal sector and not 
declaring the tax and all that. Once they get this comfort that they won’t be paying tax, of 
course, they will have profit in their businesses, but the comfort is given that they won’t have 
to pay tax and eight years is a very long time for them. So, this will help them to come into 
the mainstream of business community and, at the same time, as I have said earlier, to have 
statistics, which is very crucial for Government in order to apply appropriate strategies in all 
them. 

Again, the Income Tax Act goes in the direction of having small enterprises, which 
have a turnover of less than Rs10 m. to file their accounts under the cash basis as opposed to 
the  accrual  basis.  This  is  a  very  good  measure  because  those  enterprises  which  have  a 
turnover  of  less  than  Rs10  m.,  they  hardly  appoint  any  Finance  Officer  or  hardly  any 
Accountant and all that, but their business is only what they get as many in their drawers and 
this is business for them; this is turnover for them. Well, a formal company is whatever they 

 
sell on credit as well and this is accounted as accruals. So, this is a very good thing, again 
giving all the comfort to the business community. 

43 

The  Banking  Act,  as  amended,  will  enable  the  setting  up  of  a  specialised  financial 
institution. I think this is a major breakthrough for this Government. As it is, from there we 
have  the  new  SME  Bank  that  we  have  so  talked  about,  mentioned  about  everywhere,  on 
every  forum  regarding  business,  it  will  take  shape  and  become  a  reality.  This  is  very 
interesting too. 

Madam Speaker, again, as the Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives, this 
sector is a growing sector and it requires constant updating. Allow me, Madam Speaker, just 
to mention that even in India, with the new Government, the Prime Minister, Shri Narendra 
Modi, passed a Bill in April last for the creation of the MUDRA Bank. What MUDRA stands 
for?    It’s  Micro  Units  Development  and  Refinance  Agency.    India,  which  is  cited  as  an 
example or as a pioneer in as far as micro and small businesses are concerned, is revamping 
itself year after year. And the business community, specially the small and the medium - now 
micro  here  -  they  need  to  be  updated,  they  need  to  be  looked  into  frequently  because 
problems do crop up as time goes along. It is in this way that we, here, are going to set up the 
SME Bank and in India in April last, the MUDRA Bank was set up. In his speech, the Prime 
Minister,  Shri  Narendra  Modi,  said  that  the  Finance  Ministry  said  –  the Minister  said  that 
‘measures to be taken up by MUDRA are targeted towards mainstreaming young, educated or 
skilled workers and entrepreneurs including women entrepreneurs’. This was the target for 
MUDRA Bank. And we are replicating the same thing here through our SME Bank yet to 
come and I am sure that it will be a reality soon. 

Madam  Speaker,  allow  me  -  because  c’est  l’actualité,  even  in  the  52  Acts  of 
Parliament that we propose to bring amendments, the Cooperative Act does not fall into that.  
Mais actualité oblige.  We have to look into this.  I will tend to look into the Cooperative Act 
to  bring  amendment  because  under  the  Cooperative  Act,  there  are  institutions  such  as 
cooperative  societies  which  deal  in  with  cooperative  credit  unions.  This  is  a  must  that  we 
have to look into and I feel that à la rentrée, on va apporter des amendements. 

I  thank  you,  Madam  Speaker,  for  my  short  speech  which  is  more  targeted  towards 

business with more specific attention to SMEDA. 

Thank you. 

 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo! 

44 

 (2.49 p.m.) 

Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River):  Thank  you, Madam 
Speaker. I shall be perhaps as brief as the previous orator, just to make a few comments on 
the Finance Bill before this House today.  

As  we  know,  the  Finance  Bill  provides  for  the  implementation  of  the  budgetary 
measures announced in the 2015 Budget Speech and, therefore, the purpose of the Bill today 
is  to  translate  in  concrete  terms  the  objectives  of  Government  and  matters  related  or 
consequential to the different announcements and the updating to reflect the fresh needs as a 
result  of  the  changes  that  have  been  announced  and  also  to  correct  the  weaknesses  in  the 
previous legislation. 

Madam Speaker, I see that a major component of the Bill relates to the changes in the 
banking sector. It is clear that much relates to what has been happening in the sector or what 
could have been anticipated to happen and, therefore, these amendments do the needful to 
reflect  remedial  measures  and  to  create  the  climate  for  the  Central  Bank  to  operate  more 
effectively and play a more enabling role in its supervisory capacity as well as in managing 
its reserve requirements. However, we have to be careful to monitor this aspect judiciously, 
especially  with  respect  to  gold,  which  we  think  should  be  a  small  proportion  of  our  total 
reserves. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  provision  regarding  licensing  and  overseeing  and  the  clearing 
houses is a positive step because despite our goal of becoming a leading financial hub for the 
region, our clearing house still takes much time. I think we would be taking a big stride to 
improve the liquidity issue and also further facilitate business activities if payments, once for 
all, could be cleared within 24 hours.  

With regard to Clause 4 (b) of the Bill, this is a positive step as it would reduce the 
operating cost of big conglomerations and make them more competitive on the international 
market, particularly, with regard to exchange rate and to interest rate. Moreover, this would 
reduce the concentration in the banking sector as it would provide some form of competition 
to the existing banking structure. We, therefore, support this measure. 

 

45 

Madam Speaker, it would be pertinent as we are on this issue to examine or to have 
given thought to the possibility of introducing the suspension of a banking licence in case of 
non-compliance or diminished compliance of any bank. Presently, the Bank of Mauritius can 
only revoke the licence in the event of a default or non-compliance. As we know, revoking a 
licence is a double-edge knife. It can, of course, improve the image of the country or it can 
also send the wrong signals and one might argue that the recent turbulence in the banking and 
financial sector may have sent the wrong signal. May this be, Madam Speaker, I think  it is 
opportune to reflect on the possibility of amending the Act to provide for suspension as a first 
step before outright revokation of licence if the bank continues to default. This could have 
saved the country of much colateral damage or the legislation could have also provided for 
Central Bank officers to be posted for short periods to monitor operations rather than to resort 
to drastic sanctions and gamble the future of jobs, growth but more importantly the goodwill 
of the nation.  

Madam  Speaker,  the  Finance  Bill  also  devotes  much  space  to  address  legal 
obligations relating to tax and other fiscal matters, such as procedures for VAT registration 
and securitiy bond. This clause in tax also provides for the obligation of the MRA to respond 
within  defined  time  period  to  operators;  therefore,  this  shifts  the  onus  on  the  MRA  and  
creates a world of better and greater certainty to operators which, in a nutshell, has the effect 
of creating a propitious friendly business environment to operate. It can only be hoped that 
this will act as a catalyst to speed up growth. 

Clause 18 of the Bill, Madam Speaker, deals with the financial promotion agency, that 
is, the Financial Services Act is being amended and the Bill therefore deals with the financial 
promotion agency. In fact, this is a measure which was long overdue. If we take lessons from 
past experiences, the sector needed an agency to promote, to dissiminate information and to 
defend its interest, both locally and internationally. The agency’s objectives and duties are 
clearly defined and, according to me, this will consolidate capacity building and come at an 
opportune  time  to  service  a  sector  that  accounts  for  about  10%  of  GDP  and  we  wish  this 
agency good luck.  

Madam Speaker, this Board, from what  I can see from the Bill, which will run the 
agency, shall consist of a Chairperson and not more than four other members and all of them, 
be it the Chairperson and the four members, shall be appointed by the Minister responsible 
for this financial sector.  

 

46 

The Director, that is, the Chief Executive, from what I can read from the Bill, in his 
turn,  shall  be  appointed  by  the  Board  with  the  approval  of  the  Minister.  So,  the  Board  is 
appointed by the Minister, the Director is appointed by the Board with the approval of the 
Minister, which means the Minister will have an important say or perhaps a total say in the 
appointment of the Chief Executive of such an important agency. I have just highlighted the 
role of this agency and I wish just to underline, Madam Speaker, that in choosing the Director 
-  and I am sure the Minister is concious of that - transparency should be the rule of the game 
and the key factor in choosing this high profile  position; this high profile Chief Executive 
rests in the wise and sound decision of the Minister.  

With  regard  to  another  clause  of  the  Bill,  Madam  Speaker,  the  Solar  Energy 
Investment  Allowance,  it  is  a  good  thing,  of  course.  It  is  a  big  step  forward  but  the  only 
remark I wish to make is that this allowance relating to solar energy investment is positive 
but I think it is not enough. I would have thought that concessionary interest rates should also 
have been considered if we intend to promote green energy seriouly. 

Madam Speaker,  Clause 31, with regard to the Investment Promotion Act, also brings 
certain important amendments and these amendments have been introduced to reflect the new 
budget measures and to make provision to accommodate a member of the mauritian diaspora. 
From the  Bill, we can see that all the schemes: the  IHS, the PDS or the SCS (Smart City 
Scheme)  have  been  set  up  to  widen  the  scope  of  investment  and  to  open  the  country  to 
foreign  investment.  Although  the  initiative  is  laudable,  the  scope  of  success  remains  to  be 
seen.  The  openness  of  the  scheme  may  be  contrasted  to  the  complexities  of  the  various 
opportunities which could complicate matters for control purposes or for revenue collection 
purposes.  

I was asking myself the question: could there have been a simpler or more rational 
approach which could have serve the same purpose without all these administrative hassles? 
Under the same chapter, Madam Speaker, with regard to the IPFTC - the Investment Projects 
Fast-Track Committee, we have no quarrel with this Committee except that we all remember 
that such a Committee was set up by the previous Government under the office of the then 
Prime Minister.  I don’t  know how many projects, today, have been materialised under the 
previous Government, under the direction of such a Committee - a Broad-based Committee. 
For the present Committee in our Bill, I can see that the Financial Secretary is being entrusted 
with the Chairmanship of this very important Committee. Of course, we know the capacity, 

47 

 
the competence of the Financial Secretary, but, once again, I think the remark to be made is 
that  the  FS  is  already  being  entrusted  with  too  many  responsibilities  to  humanly  deliver 
quality services. Unfortunately, too much work, too much power is being concentrated again 
in the hands of this Senior Officer.  I should have thought that perhaps an alternative officer 
could have been chosen to chair this Committee so as not to delay determining actions.   

Madam Speaker, with regard to another clause of this Bill - I am commenting on the 
Public  Procurement  Act,  the  amendments  brought  to  this  Act,  I  have  no  doubt  have  been 
devised  to  ensure  greater  compliance.  They  have  been  introduced  to  correct  previous 
vagueness  through  greater  precision  and  to  promote  better  accountability  given  the  recent 
abuses,  especially  in  making  variations  in  different  contracts  in  the  past.  But  there  is  one 
section which has retained my attention, at page 110, Clause 43 (j) (5) of the Bill, I read - 

“Where  public  procurement  proceedings  are  cancelled  by  a  public  body  under  this 
section, no challenge under section 43 and no application for review under section 45 
shall be entertained in respect of the cancellation.” 

I have, of course, looked at the commencement section in the Bill, section 55, and I 
have, of course, realised when this particular clause will come into operation.  It will come 
into operation when it will be fixed by proclamation. But the question I wish to ask is: what is 
the bearing of this provision on the tender launched recently by the CEB with regard to the 
four engines of 15 MW? I hope the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development 
will  clear  the  issues  and  enlighten  the  House  on  whether  this  particular  clause  has  been 
introduced because of the recent tender exercise launched by the CEB with regard to the four 
engines of 15 MW. We know that in this case there was a challenge and there was also a 
cancellation.  The procurement proceedings were cancelled in this particular project. So, has 
this clause been introduced because of what took place in the exercise I have just referred to? 
The hon. Minister would, I am sure, be helpful and elaborate on this issue. 

The last point I wish to make, Madam Speaker, is regarding the first time buyers, that 
is, amendments which are being brought to the Registration Duty Bill. The hon. Minister has 
made  an  announcement  in  his  Budget  Speech.  Today,  the  Registration  Duty  Bill  has  been 
amended and we know what is the problem. As we all know, the First Time Buyer Scheme 
was abolished in 2006, the registration duty was uniformised and, today, as we all know, the 
registration duty is 5%.  In 2010, when hon. Pravind Jugnauth was Minister of Finance, this 
regime  was  reintroduced  and  in  2012  the  ceiling  was  lifted,  raised  up  to  Rs1  m.  for  les 

48 

 
terrains  vagues  and  Rs4  m.  for  apartments  and  immovable  property,  houses.    Today,  of 
course, we support the decision of the hon. Minister to again raise le plafond pour les terrains 
à R 1.5 million, although the ceiling pour les appartements et les immeubles bâtis have been 
maintained and have remained up to Rs4 m.  

What  I think the hon.  Minister should explain to the House today is the following, 
Madam Speaker: he had announced the amendment to the Act to increase the exemption of 
first time buyers from Rs50,000 to Rs75,000. This is, of course, for bare land. But, what we 
wish to know is because we all know that the injustice in this measure was, for example, if 
somebody, - the ceiling has been raised from Rs1 m. à R 1.5 million aujourd’hui - a first time 
buyer buys a plot of land up to Rs1.5 m., he pays no registration duty. But what happens if 
somebody buys a plot of the land of Rs1.6 m., that is, Rs100,000 more or Rs50,000 more? 
Can the hon. Minister enlighten us as to whether by the measure he has announced we are 
getting rid of the price threshold or is it only first time buyers who purchase a plot of land up 
to Rs1.5 m. who will benefit from the exemption of Rs75,000? This is still not clear in our 
minds. That is, is it the case that whatever the sale price will be, the first time buyer will be 
eligible for the exemption of Rs75,000 for a plot of bare land, that is, even if the land is Rs5 
m. and the first time buyer buys a plot of land of Rs5 m. he will benefit from an exemption of 
Rs75,000 which is 5% of Rs1.5 m.?  

We have listened to the hon. Minister in his introductory speech and I am not too sure 
whether the issue was still clear.  My second question on the same issue is whether the hon. 
Minister envisages removing the price threshold also for the purchase by a first time buyer 
for an apartment or for built-up land. As I said earlier on, the price threshold today is Rs4 m.  
Why did not the hon. Minister provide for an exemption of 5% of Rs4 m., that is Rs200,000, 
whatever the sale price of the apartment be? That is, if somebody buys an apartment of Rs5 
m. today or Rs6 m. tomorrow, will that first time buyer benefit from the exception of 5% of 
Rs4 m. which is the threshold today, that is, of Rs200,000? This is also not clear. This has 
also not been commented upon by the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development. 
I am sure the House would like to be clarified on this issue. 

I have done, Madam Speaker. Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Minister of Finance! 

 

 
 (3.11 p.m.) 

49 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Madam  Speaker,  let  me,  first,  thank  hon.  Members  of  this 
House  who  have  commented  on  the  Finance  Bill;  my  colleague,  the  hon.  Minister  of 
Industry, hon. Reza Uteem and hon. Alan Ganoo.  I must say that, globally, there has been 
consensus  on  the  strategy  adopted  by  Government  and  on  the  various  projects  which  are 
being  implemented.  I  fully  realise  also  that  nothing  is  perfect  in  the  sense  that  we  are 
proceeding through experience and that, therefore, changes are happening. I can promise all 
hon. Members here that the proposals they have made this morning have been noted by my 
officers in the Ministry, as well as those of hon. Ganoo and also of my friend at my back, the 
hon. Minister of Industry.   

I will start maybe with the latest comment of hon. Ganoo which needs to be cleared; in 
fact, which is the incentive that has been given to first time buyers.  The question has been 
whether someone who purchases a plot of land that goes beyond Rs1.5 m. will still benefit on 
the first Rs1.5 m.  He will not because, then, the cost of the budget will be too high.  This 
applies also for the purchase of apartments up to Rs4 m. The exemption will be for Rs4 m. 
and if the price goes beyond it, then the buyer will have to pay the full amount of 5% on the 
total amount.  It is mainly due to budgetary provisions.  I have checked and it seems that the 
cost of the budget will be too high.  We can regulate it, probably, when times are better.  We 
might review and ensure, therefore, that the first time buyers, whatever be the price, benefit 
from the first Rs1.5 m. We adopted the same principle also with water when we said that the 
first 6 m³ of water would be totally free. We mean it. But then, at the same time, we don’t 
want it to be sort of free use of 6 m³ just because it is free. So, it is no doubt that those 6 m³ 
comes to 15 drums, I think.  It is quite a lot of water.  Consumers who go beyond the 6 m³ 
will have to pay the full amount.  It is a sort of incentive to allow poor families to consume, 
to stay within the range of 6 m³.  It is again for one reason, for budgetary reasons. But still, it 
is an incentive and it is a good one and I am sure that a normal lower income family will not 
consume more than 6 m³.   

There have been quite a few issues taken up on the question of the Bank of Mauritius 
and also on the tender procedures. Hon. Ganoo put the question as to whether the amendment 
has been carried out because of the cancellation of the tender procedures for the 15 Megawatt 
engines.   

(Interruptions) 

50 

 
No,  it  not  for  this!    In  fact,  the  principle  is  that  when  a  tender  is  cancelled,  there  is  no 
substance for which a challenge can be undertaken.  This is an explanation coming from my 
officers. I wish, once again, to thank hon. Members. But, maybe, I should explain also on the 
question  of  the  package  of  incentives.  In  fact,  hon.  Members  have  taken  up  the  issue  of 
package of incentives which we are developing now to encourage accelerated development. 
We have, in fact, cancelled the IRS and RES Schemes and they are being replaced by three 
schemes. One is the Smart City Scheme which applies to development that goes beyond 50 
acres. Then, under the Property Development Scheme, we have two schemes.  One would be 
for small property development concerning mainly small planters, people who have a plot of 
land and would wish to develop it.   

Therefore, up to five acres of land, there will be a specific package of incentives that 
will apply when it comes to property development.  It will apply, in fact, to all those small 
planters  and  small  landowners  who  would  like  also  to  go  on  their  own  and  have  some 
development.  The third element of this package would be for property development between 
5 to 50 acres, that is, in-between the small one and the smart city. We are working on this 
now  and  I  need  to  say  that  the  incentives  will  be  quite  generous  because  international 
investors don’t love us because of our eyes, blue eyes.  They come here because Mauritius 
means business and the destination is good.  So, the package will be quite generous.  The 
question of whether it is not too generous, I would say: let’s start with this.  It’s like going 
fishing.  We put the best bait, we attract the best fish then, when we have enough fish, we 
reduce the bait.  So, in principle, once the country would be flooded… 

(Interruptions) 

Sharks won’t bite!  Once the package takes up fully, I think, we will then review the whole 
package.  But for the time being, all the three packages would be extremely generous, just to 
kick-start  the  development  process.    The  good  news  also  is  that  the  eight  Smart  Cities 
Projects have been finalised. So, we are extending the list to 15 smart cities. I need to see that 
the  level  of  confidence  in  the  country  is  very  high.  I  speak  as  Minister  of  Finance  and  as 
someone  who  is  connected  to  development.  After  the  election,  there  was  a  transition  of 
uncertainty. Then, we took probably the right decisions in the sense that, now, I would say it, 
the mood is very bullish. It is one of the most bullish moods I have seen in in the country 
since  independence.  People  want  to  invest.    People  want  to  invest  because  they  feel  that 
investment makes sense.  This explains why.   

 

51 

(Interruptions) 

No, I’m just speaking about what is happening. We saw, yesterday, two days back, on the 
stock  market  of  Port  Louis  -  I  know  the  stock  market,  I  set  it  up  in  1987.  This  market  is 
extremely volatile because it is small.  Once you put a large order to sell, you can end up with 
the price crashing.  I need to tell you one thing.  The market absorbed Rs1.2 billion of sales 
yesterday and did not budge by one cent.  This is very rare.  This, in fact, proves that there is 
a stock market that is also reflecting the mood in the country. The people I am meeting now, 
the foreign investors I am meeting are confirming.  They said: “Look here, you are on the 
right track.”  Moody’s also said this to us. Moody’s were here last week.  They said: “We feel 
that you are on the right track, that you are putting order in your house and this is good news 
for the world.  We think that  you are being more transparent.  This is good news also for 
investors”. Therefore, it is a combination, I think, of all this. Then, also, the strong leadership 
of  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  his  vision  himself,  that  has  created  in  the  country,  actually,  an 
incredible level of bullishness for investment. 

(Interruptions) 

So, the package of incentives will come and beef up this momentum. This, together with the 
package of incentives, I think, have put us on the right track, now, to attain the incredible rate 
of growth we are projecting of 5.7%.  I think that FDI would be increasing quite substantially 
in the months ahead.  Therefore, the budget, finally, is an expression of the will of the people, 
of the will of Government to see things moving. I am quite happy to see that at this level of 
the Finance Bill there is global consensus on what we are doing and I wish, once again, to 
thank the hon. Members, to tell them that their proposals have been noted and will be taken 
care of.  

With these words, Madam Speaker, I wish to commend the Bill to the House. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Bill read a second time and committed. 

(3.21 p.m.) 

COMMITTEE STAGE 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

52 

THE FINANCE (MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) BILL 

(NO. X OF 2015) 

Clauses 1 to 3 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 4 (Banking Act amended) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill”. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, I move for the following amendment – 

“in  clause  4(h)(i),  in  the  proposed  subsection  (1)(d),  by  adding  the  words  “or  a 
specialised financial institution”;” 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 4, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clauses 5 to 23 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 24 (Income Tax Act amended) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill”. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, I move for the following amendment – 

“in clause 24 – 

 

 

 

 

 

(i) 

(ii) 

in  paragraph  (e),  in  the  proposed  new  section  49B(2),  by  adding  the 
words “, whichever is the later”; 

in  paragraph  (f)(i),  by  deleting  the  words  “and  “from  the  end  of  the 
second quarter”” and replacing them by the words “and “from the end 
of the third quarter””; 

(iii) 

in paragraph (y), by deleting subparagraph (ii) and replacing it by the 
following subparagraph – 

 

 

(ii) 

 

by inserting, after subsection (1), the following new subsection 
– 

 
(1A)  Where the person is a small enterprise which has 
an  annual  turnover  not  exceeding  10  million  rupees,  the  total 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

53 

penalty  payable  under  subsection  (1)  shall  not  exceed  5,000 
rupees. 

(iv) 

in paragraph (z), by deleting subparagraph (ii) and replacing it by the 
following subparagraph – 

 

 

 

 

(ii) 

 

by  inserting,  after  subsection  (1),  the  following  new 
subsection – 

 
(1A)  Where the taxpayer is a small enterprise 
which has an annual turnover not exceeding 10 million 
rupees,  the  penalty  payable  under  subsection  (1)  shall 
be 2 per cent. 

(v) 

in paragraph (zb), in the proposed new Sub-part D, in section 122E(4), 
in  the  definition  of  “small  enterprise”,  in  paragraph  (b),  by  deleting 
subparagraph  (iii),  the  word  “and”  being  added  at  the  end  of 
subparagraph (i) and the words “; and” at the end of subparagraph (ii) 
being deleted and replaced by a full stop; 

(vi) 

in paragraph (zc), in the proposed new section 123A, in the heading, 
by deleting the word “beyond” and replacing it by the word “before”;” 

 

 

 

 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 24, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 25 (Independent Broadcasting Authority Act amended) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill”. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, I move for the following amendment – 

“(c) 

in clause 25, in paragraph (d)(i), in the proposed subsection (1), by deleting 
the  words  “subsections  (4)  and  (5)”  and  replacing  them  by  the  words 
“subsection (4)”;” 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 25, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 26 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

 

 

 

 

 

54 

Clause 27 (Inscription of Privileges and Mortgages Act amended) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill”. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, I move for the following amendment – 

“(d) 

in clause 27, in paragraph (a), in the proposed new section 2A, by deleting the 
words  “considered  to  be  the  original”  and  replacing  them  by  the  words 
“deemed to meet the requirements and reproduce the contents of the original 
deed or document, as the case may be, for the purpose of this Act”;” 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 27, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clauses 28 to 39 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 40 (Notaries Act amended) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill”. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, I move for the following amendment – 

“by deleting clause 40 and replacing it by the following clause – 

 

 

40. 

Notaries Act amended 

 

The Notaries Act is amended – 

(a) 

in section 2 – 

(i) 

(ii) 

in  the  definition  of  “original”,  in  paragraph  (a),  by 
inserting,  before  the  words  “the  original”,  the  words 
“notwithstanding any other enactment,”; 

in the definition of “Repertory”, by inserting, after the 
word “deeds”, the words “, including those in electronic 
form,”; 

(b) 

in section 3 – 

(i) 

in subsection (2), by deleting the words “A notary” and 
replacing  them  by  the  words  “Notwithstanding  any 
other enactment, a notary”; 

 

55 

(ii) 

in  subsection  (3)(a),  by  inserting,  after  the  word 
“original”,  the  words  “,  including  an  original  in 
electronic form,”.” 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 40, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clauses 41 to 43 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 44 (Registration Duty Act amended) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill”. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, I move for the following amendment – 

“in clause 44 – 

(i) 

in paragraph (a)(i), in the proposed definition of “deed or document”, 
by deleting paragraph (a) and replacing it by the following paragraph – 

(a) 

means  a  deed  or  document  meeting  the  requirements  and 
reproducing the contents of the original deed or document, as 
the  case  may  be,  for  the  purpose  of  this  Act  when  submitted 
through the RDDS; and 

(ii) 

in  paragraph  (b),  in  the  proposed  new  section  2B,  by  deleting  the 
words “considered to be the original” and replacing them by the words 
“deemed to meet the  requirements and reproduce the  contents of the 
original deed or document, as the case may be, for the purpose of this 
Act”; 

(iii) 

in paragraph (e)(ii), in the proposed new subsection (8), by inserting, 
after the words “scanned and”, the words “the registered copy thereof 
is”;” 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 44, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clauses 45 to 51 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 52 (Transcription and Mortgage Act amended) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill”. 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

56 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, I move for the following amendment – 

“in clause 52, in paragraph (a), in the proposed new section 3A, by deleting the words 
“considered to be the original” and replacing them by the words “deemed to meet the 
requirements and reproduce the contents of the original deed or document, as the case 
may be, for the purpose of this Act”;” 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 52, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 53 (Value Added Tax Act amended) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill”. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, I move for the following amendment – 

 “in clause 53, by deleting paragraph (g) and replacing it by the following paragraph – 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(g) 

in section 27 – 

 

 

 

 

 

(i) 

in subsection (1), by deleting the words “Where” and the figure 
“26” and replacing them by the words “Subject  to subsection 
(3), where” and “26(1)”, respectively; 

(ii) 

in subsection (2), by deleting the figure “26” and replacing it by 
the words “26(1)”; 

(iii) 

by adding the following new subsections – 

 

 

 
(3)  Where the person referred to in subsection (1) is 
a small enterprise and it fails to pay any tax due on or before 
the last day on which it is payable under section 21(7), 22, 23, 
27E(3) and (10), 37, 39 or 67, the penalty shall be 2 per cent of 
the tax. 

(4) 

The penalty under subsection (3) shall apply to 
 
the tax excluding any penalty under section 15A, 24(9), 26(2), 
26A or 37A and any interest under section 27A.” 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

57 

Clause 53, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clauses 54 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 55 (Commencement) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill”. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, I move for the following amendment – 

“in clause 55 – 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(i) 

in subclause (1) – 

 

 

(A) 

by inserting, after the word “Sections”, the words “5,”; 

(B) 

by deleting the words “41,”; 

(ii) 

in subclause (2), by deleting the words “48,”; 

(iii) 

by inserting, after subclause (7), the following new subclause – 

 

(7A)  Sections  41(a),  (c)  and  (d)  and  48(b)  and  (c)  shall  be 

 
deemed to have come into operation on 01 January 2013.” 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 55, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

The Schedules ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

The title and enacting clause were agreed to. 

The Bill, as amended, was agreed to. 

On  the  Assembly  resuming  with  Madam  Speaker  in  the  Chair,  Madam  Speaker 

reported accordingly. 

Third Reading 

On motion made and seconded, the Finance (Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill (No. X of 

2015) was read the third time and passed. 

Second Reading 

THE EMPLOYMENT RIGHTS (AMENDMENT) BILL 

(NO. IX OF 2015) 

 

58 

Order for Second Reading read. 
The Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training (Mr S. 
Callichurn): Madam Speaker, I move that the Employment Rights (Amendment) Bill (No. 
IX of 2015) be read a second time. 

The object of this Bill, as stated in the Explanatory Memorandum, is to extend the 
duration  of  maternity  leave  from  12  to  14  weeks  so  as  to  better  support  working  mothers 
fulfilling their family obligations. 

This piece of legislation must be viewed as part of the array of measures being taken 

by this Government to reinforce social inclusion. 

Madam Speaker, the House will recall that in the Government Programme 2015-2019, 
it  was  announced  that  the  labour  legislation  would  be  amended  with  a  view  to  ensuring  a 
better protection of the rights of the workers, including the extension of maternity leave from 
12 to 14 weeks.  This measure was also in our electoral manifesto and the landslide electoral 
victory  of  December  2014  gives  us  a  clear  mandate  to  bring  about  the  reforms  we  had 
promised. 

Madam Speaker, Government could have considered the extension of maternity leave 
in the context of the whole review of the labour legislation which is  currently  under way.  
However, it is considered that the reinforcement of maternity protection is a sacred right and 
we should not await the completion of the general review of the labour legislation which, as a 
matter of fact, will take some time, I must admit. 
 
Government  has,  therefore,  decided  as  a  matter  of  priority  to  come  up  with  this 
amendment.    We  are  here,  Madam  Speaker,  talking  about  the  basic  rights  of  our  working 
mothers  and  their  children.  We  should  not  forget  that  women  constitute  an  important 
component of our labour force.  In 2014, there were some 207,000 female workers out of a 
total workforce of 559,000.  With the additional two weeks, working mothers will be able to 
provide  more  care,  love  and  security  to  their  new-born  babies.  This  measure  will  also 
facilitate their reintegration in the world of work, after confinement.   

Madam Speaker, the introduction of this piece of legislation demonstrates clearly that, 
as a caring and responsible Government, we have the interests of our working mothers. We 
are honouring our electoral promise.  ‘Parole donnée, parole tenue’, Madam Speaker.  
 
Declaration of Human Rights.   

Maternity  protection  is  a  basic  human  right.    It  is  enshrined  in  the  1948  Universal 

Article 25 (2) of the Declaration actually provides that - 

 

59 

 “Motherhood and childhood are entitled to special care and assistance.  All children, 
whether born in or out of wedlock, shall enjoy the same social protection” 
The  human  rights  of  women  and  of  the  girl  child  are  also  considered  as  an 
“inalienable,  integral  and  indivisible  part  of  universal  human  right”  according  to  the  1993 
Declaration of the World Conference on Human Rights. 

Madam  Speaker,  as  the  House  may  be  aware,  currently,  the  situation  of  women  is 
quite  alarming  in  some  countries  around  the  world.    According  to  the  World  Health 
Organisation,  about  8  million  women  around  the  world  have  pregnancy  related  problems.  
Many women are also discriminated due to their reproductive role and we are now faced with 
a situation where the fertility rate is below the replacement rate.  The UN has warned that in 
83 countries, women are not having enough children to ensure that on average each woman is 
replaced by a daughter who survives the reproductive age. 
 
Although the situation is not alarming in Mauritius, statistics in regard to birth rate, 
the  infant  mortality  rate  and  the  still  birth  rate  in  our  country,  are,  however,  a  cause  of 
concern.  In fact, our crude birth rate has decreased from 10.9 per 1,000 population in 2013 to 
10.6 in 2014; our infant mortality rate has increased from 12.1 per 1,000 live birth to 14.5 in 
2014, and the number of stillbirth has increased from 8.5 per 1,000 total birth in 2013 to 10.2 
in 2014. 

It is, therefore, imperative that the rights and the health of women who constitute 37 
percent  of  our  labour  force  are  protected  and  reinforced.  That  is  why  Government  has 
decided to deal with the issue of the extension of maternity leave as a matter of priority.  

Madam  Speaker,  the  broad  guidelines  governing  the  rights  of  female  employees  in 
relation to maternity leave, have been established by the International Labour Organisation 
(ILO) and these are ratified by member States, of which Mauritius forms part.  
Government’s  decision  to  increase  the  duration  of  maternity  leave  from  12  to  14 
 
weeks  is  in  line  with  the  ILO  Maternity  Protection  Convention  2000.  The  Convention 
provides, inter alia, that a woman be entitled to a period of maternity leave of not less than 14 
weeks and that maternity leave shall include a period of compulsory leave after child birth. It 
has not been possible for Mauritius to ratify the said Convention due to the fact that actually 
the Employment Rights Act and all Remuneration Orders provide a 12-week maternity leave. 
The granting of only 12 weeks maternity leave to pregnant women is a major constraint to the 
ratification of the said Convention. With the current proposed amendment, Mauritius would 
be able to ratify the Maternity Protection Convention 2000, which is an important instrument 

60 

 
to promote equality of women in the workforce and the health and safety of the mother and 
the child. 
I  wish  to  point  out  that  the  worldwide  trend  is  towards  the  extension  of  maternity 
 
leave to 14 weeks.  According to a survey carried out by ILO in 185 countries, 53 per cent of 
the countries provide at least 14 weeks maternity leave.  Additionally, it is to be pointed out 
that  42  countries  meet  or  exceed  the  18  weeks  maternity  leave  as  suggested  by  the  ILO 
Maternity Protection Recommendation 191, which provides guidelines on the issue and -  I 
must put emphasis - is not binding. 

Madam Speaker, research shows that longer the maternity leave, the better it is for 

both the mother and the child.   

Extending maternity leave from 12 to 14 weeks will certainly go a long way towards 

ensuring a better protection not only to the mother, but to the child as well. 

Madam  Speaker,  currently,  the  conditions  of  employment,  including  maternity 
protection of workers in the private sector, are governed by the Employment Rights Act and 
30 Remuneration Regulations.  Clause 3 of the Bill provides that notwithstanding any other 
enactment  or  Remuneration  Regulations,  a  female  worker  who  remains  in  continuous 
employment  with  the  same  employer  for  a  period  of  12  consecutive  months  immediately 
preceding the beginning of maternity leave shall, on production of a medical certificate, be 
entitled to 14 weeks maternity leave on full pay.  

It  goes  without  saying  that  the  extension  of  maternity  leave  from  12  weeks  to  14 

weeks will apply to all female workers in the private sector.  
 
weeks, it is also proposed to – 

The  House  may  also  wish  to  know  that  while  extending  the  maternity  leave  to  14 

(a) 

 increase the minimum leave before and  after confinement from 6 to 7 weeks, 
and  
to increase the leave for stillbirth from 12 weeks to 14 weeks.  

(b) 
Madam  Speaker,  I  am  pleased  to  inform  the  House  that,  in  a  spirit  of  equity,  the 
Ministry  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms  would  implement  the  measure 
concurrently in the public sector as from the same date.  

Thank you. 
The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun) rose 

and seconded. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody! 

 
 (3.41 p.m.) 

61 

Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West): Thank you, 
Madam  Speaker.  Madam  Speaker,  this  is  the  second  time,  I  think,  we  are  amending  the 
Employment Rights Act since it was proclaimed in 2008. Today, at the time we are amending 
this Act, there is much anxiety outside, especially in the labour market.  

We learnt this morning that there are around 800 employees of Airmate, who, at any 
moment,  may  have  their  contract  of  employment  terminated.    I  would  like  to  take  this 
opportunity to make an  appeal to the hon. Minister to try to preside  a meeting himself.   I 
know that he has tried.  His PS has been there but, unfortunately, there has been no change of 
mind  with  regard  to  the  Directors  of  Airmate.  There  is  anxiety  as  well  in  other  sectors, 
especially the SMEs sector. 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Member,  please  come  straight  to  the  Bill  because  the 

Explanatory Memorandum is clear.  I wish that you come straight to that Bill. 

Mr Baloomoody: I am being informed that, among those employees, there are people 
who are expecting babies as well. So, it concerns those people who would not benefit from 
their maternity leave.  Never mind! 

Now, what is Government doing in fact? We are legislating to be in consistent with 
the ILO Convention - Maternity Protection Convention which came into force into 2002. In 
this Convention, it states that the minimum should be 14 weeks. I am sure the hon. Minister is 
aware. In some countries like in Albania they give one year maternity leave; in Austria, 16 
weeks; in Belarus, 126 days, and we know in Europe it is nearly 6 months. So, what we are 
implementing, today, is the minimum which the ILO requires. Mauritius has not, up to now, 
ratified this Convention. The hon. Minister has given the reason, but we know, as a fact, that 
there are so many Remuneration Orders which have not been revised. There are around 30, 
some of which dated more than 30 years.  In the sugar industry, both the agricultural and non-
agricultural workers, the Remuneration Order has not been revised for 30 years, also in the 
security guard industry. So, we have a problem with regard to the Remuneration Orders and 
when  we  are  implementing  the  minimum  which  the  ILO  requires,  we  are  only  abiding  to 
International Convention. It is not that our Government is doing that people will agree. There 
is an  International Convention and we have  chosen to abide to the minimum, which is 14 
weeks and not more than 14 weeks where many countries have adhered to. 

 

62 

Now, there is one principle. We know that, with regard to the hours of labour, the 
Employment Rights Act is clear that we cannot force somebody who is pregnant to do more 
such hours of labour. She has to work normal working hours. But, in 2012, there was a Bill 
which  was  passed  where  we  amended  the  Employment  Rights  Act  to  add  an  additional 
Section 14, which is Section 14A which deals with shift system. This is where the problem 
lies. Section 14A (6) especially is of concern with this Bill, I quote -  

“Notwithstanding section (1),  where a female worker who may be required to 
perform night work produces a medical certificate certifying that she is or was 
pregnant, her employer shall not require her to perform night work during a 
period at of at least 8 weeks before, and after, confinement”.  

This  is  the  amendment  which  came  in  by  the  Bill  of  2012,  but  this  Section  has  not  been 
proclaimed up to today. So, we are not treating all women equal. Those who work night shifts 
even  when  pregnant,  the  employers  are  imposing  on  them  to  work.  So,  we  are  not  giving 
equal treatment to all the women. I would like to know from the hon. Minister why, when 
revising the law, we have decided not to proclaim this. Because, the objective of the ILO is 
clear  in  its  preamble  that  we  should  have  equal  treatment.  Its  aim  is:  ensuring  equality  of 
opportunity and treatment for men and women workers in this Convention. I am pleased to 
see that the hon. Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms is here because I was 
going  to  raise  that  point.  I  think,  in  the  Civil  Service  it  is  limited  to,  at  least,  three 
confinements. Now this will apply to the Civil Service, but why not those who work on shift 
system? So, we are not doing justice to those women who are working on shift system.  

So,  I  will  invite  the  hon.  Minister  to  tell  us  exactly  why  section  14A  has  not  been 
proclaimed up to now, because this is where the harm is being done. Generally speaking, all 
the employers respect the law with regard to 12 weeks maternity. There are some cases of 
discrimination - perhaps when the hon. Minister will revise the Act again to see Section 14 of 
the Act which says – 

“An  employer  shall  not  give  to  a  female  worker  who  is  on  maternity  leave 

notice of termination of employment.’  

but section (b) says – 

“For  any  reason  unless  the  ground  relates  to  economic,  technological, 

structural or similar nature affecting the employers activities.” 

63 

 
I am being informed by some trade unions that some employers do make an abuse of this 
section.  Economic  reasons,  unfortunately  under  the  Employment  Act,  do  not  have  to  be 
proved. The amendment brings a little sort of explanation, but I heard the hon. Deputy Prime 
Minister,  himself,  say  that  the  accounts  of  many  private  sectors  today  do  not  reflect  the 
reality. So, it is very easy to come with a balance sheet showing losses, debts, and you say 
‘for economic reasons’. There are some employers who have used that section to terminate 
the contract of employment of women - not for their first pregnancy - who have given birth to 
a second child and sometimes to a third child. Probably, when we will come to the revision of 
the Act itself, this will be taken into account. 

So,  on  the  all,  we  do  not  have  any  objection  to  that  amendment.  Of  course,  we 
welcome it. But, as I have said, we are only going to the bare minimum as imposed by the 
ILO. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

 (3.51 p.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Social  Security,  National  Solidarity  and  Reform  Institutions 
(Mrs F. Jeewa-Daureeawoo): Madam Speaker, allow me, at the outset, to congratulate my 
colleague,  hon.  Soodesh  Callichurn,  Minister  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment 
and Training for bringing the Employment Rights (Amendment) Bill to this august Assembly 
for the purpose of extending the duration of the maternity leave from 12 to 14 weeks so as to 
better support working mothers in the fulfilment of their family obligations. 

This Bill, Madam Speaker, seeks to give a better recognition of the maternity rights of 
working  women.  Women  indeed  play  a  vital  role  in  the  economic  development  of  our 
country  and,  therefore,  there  is  a  pressing  need  for  our  law  to  further  protect  the  right  of 
working women and their infants.  

This Bill intends to further this very endeavour. This amendment to the Employment 
Rights Act promotes maternity protection by increasing the duration of paid maternity leave 
for  those  women  who  are  in  continuous  employment  with  an  employer  for,  at  least,  12 
consecutive  months.  Increased  maternity  protection  for  working  women  has  a  deep  and 
positive impact on human rights, women rights, rights to health and the rights of a child.  

 

64 

This Government is, indeed, minded towards the promotion of human rights and will 
leave no stone unturned to achieve its objectives. The International Labour Organisation, in 
its report on maternity protection, stresses that expectant and nursing women require special 
protection to prevent harm to their infants’ health and they need adequate time to give birth, 
to recover and to nurse their children. This laudable initiative of hon. Callichurn, Minister of 
Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and  Training  will  draw  Mauritius  closer  to 
achieving  the  established  international  standards  of  workers  rights,  particularly  those 
concerning  freedom  from  discrimination  at  work  and  getting  equal  pay  for  work  of  equal 
value provided for under the ILO Convention 100 on Equal Remuneration and Convention 
111  on  Discrimination  in  Employment  and  Occupation.  Both  these  two  Conventions  have 
been  already  ratified  by  the  Government  on  18  December  2002  when  my  colleague,  hon. 
Soodhun, was then the Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations and Employment.  

It  should  be  emphasised  that,  in  general,  maternity  protection  has  significant 
implications on efforts of women towards  attaining decent work. Women are in need of a 
minimum amount of economic security to ensure that they are able to contribute adequately 
to the household expenses as they are today living in a society with an ever increasing cost of 
living. Working women would need the guarantee that their economic activities do not put 
their  health  and  that  of  their  children  at  risk.  They  also  need  the  reassurance  that  their 
economic role does not pose any impediment to the reproductive role in the family sphere. 
Maternity protection at work thus caters for the aspiration of these working women. Thus, as 
more women are joining the workforce, it is imperative for Government policies to ensure 
access to employment opportunities even for expectant and nursing mothers.  

Raising a family is a cherished goal for many working people.  So, conditions should 
be  established  so  that  pregnant  women  and  nursing  women  are  not  pressured  to  make  a 
difficult choice between work and family life. It is therefore just, fair and reasonable that the 
Government gives special attention to working women by expanding the existing maternity 
protection policies seeking to adopt working conditions for pregnant women workers. This 
would be a real boost for women who are slowly but surely becoming the driving economic 
force  in  the  growth  of  our  dear  country.  We  should  also  not  forget,  Madam  Speaker,  that 
working women  require sufficient protection to ensure that they  will not lose their jobs or 
face  difficulties  in  getting  a  job  simply  because  of  pregnancy  or  because  they  require 
maternity leave to ensure that their own health or that of their child is not in jeopardy.  

 

65 

We  are  living  in  a  country  which  militates  towards  the  promotion  of  human 
conditions  at  work,  the  reason  we  have  ratified  more  than  40  Conventions  with  the 
International Labour Organisation till now. Mauritius is not an exception since we have more 
and  more  women  in  our  labour  market  as  compared  to  30  years  ago.  In  many  of  the 
households, women still provide the main source of income. It is during this sensitive and 
crucial period that women need to be protected so that they do not have to sacrifice time for 
their babies, for the benefit of having to work for extra earnings. This additional maternity 
protection will not only further guarantee a women equal access to employment, it will also 
ensure  the  continuation  of  often  vital  income  which  is  necessary  for  the  wellbeing  of  the 
family.  

Throughout the world, returning to work is a major factor in women’s decision to stop 
or to reduce breastfeeding, lessening the nutrional, developmental and health benefits for the 
child. The health and development of children can only be at risk when their mothers face 
hazard, long working hours or physically demanding tasks at work. Policies and practices in 
the  employment  world  that  address  these  issues,  ensuring  social  health  protection  are  an 
important part of the package of measures required to improve new born and child health. On 
the other side, I am also of the view that an increase in the duration of the maternity leaves 
from 12 weeks to 14 weeks will also have the extra advantage for the economy.  

A  positive  change  in  the  law  will  undoubtedly  act  as  a  motivational  factor  in  the 
employment world. Let it be remembered that we, in this Government,  have strong belief in 
the protection and wellbeing of the working women class, as reflected in our policies and this 
proposed  amendment.  As  safeguarding  the  health  of  expectant  and  nursing  mothers  and 
protecting them  from job discrimination is a precondition for  achieving  genuine egality  of 
opportunity and treatment for men and women at work and enabling workers to raise families 
in conditions of security by extending protection to working mothers, we are also helping to 
improve the quality of employment. 

We are a caring Government; quality of employment is also indicated by the existence 
of measures that afford flexibility in setting working conditions, including those on working 
time; where measures are available so that a worker may adjust working time to achieve a 
tenantable  balance  between  work  and  family  responsibilities.  In  this  case,  more  time  for 
attending to pregnancy requirements or for nursing a new born child, quality of employment 
may  be  achieved.  Benefits to be derived from this balance may be seen  in having women 

66 

 
workers who are able to maintain their health and wellbeing during and after pregnancy, thus 
having a positive impact on productivity. It should be noted, Madam Speaker, that, towards 
this  end,  the  Government  has  also  ratified  ILO  Convention  156  on  workers  with  family 
responsibilities on 05 April 2004, again, when my colleague, hon. Soodhun, was Minister of 
Labour, Industrial Relations and Employment. 

However, we should also note that our national labour law actually provides for 12 
weeks’ maternity leave and we are, now, moving towards a new standard of 14 weeks.  Yet, 
it  is  with  regret  that  I  have  realised  that  we  have  never  ratified  any  ILO  Convention  on 
maternity protection, namely, that of 1919 and 1952. I will keep on hammering on the need 
for  increasing  maternity  protection  at  the  workplace,  as  this  is  also  a  legal  and  social 
recognisance of the contribution that women make by having babies. There is a widespread 
consensus that early years are crucial time for children’s social and emotional growth.  In this 
regard,  Madam  Speaker,  we  should  not  stress  too  much  on  the  cost  aspect  of  extending 
maternity leave, thus obscuring less tangible benefits such as health effects as well as socio-  
economic benefits. 

We  should  not  forget  that  we  have  an  ageing  population  with  all  its  implications. 
Hence,  increasing  fertility  and  reducing  the  risk  of  child  poverty  are  two  of  the  most 
important  priorities  of  a  maternity  leave  policy.  This  is  where  we  are  heading  with  this 
present amendment today. This Government cannot remain insensitive on this crucial issue. 
Already,  the  State  provides,  with  a  view  to  better  protecting  working  and  non-working 
mothers, free health care benefits, pre- and post-natal care. All this has further strengthened 
social protection towards women.  

The  Employment  Rights  (Amendment)  Bill  has  come  at  a  very  opportune  time. 
Indeed, by extending maternity leave from 12 to 14 weeks, we are fullfilling the promise we 
have made during the last electoral campaign. We are about to implement the commitment 
we  have  undertaken  in  line  with  this  Government  Programme  2015/2019.  This  is  another 
hallmark  in  the  history  of  this  country  and  in  the  long  and  continuing  struggle  for  the 
emancipation of women. Hopefully, if, in practice, we fullfill some of the conditions of the 
ILO Convention 183, the main condition being the very extension of maternity leave from 12 
to 14 weeks, it will not be very far for Mauritius to contemplate the ratification of the ILO 
Maternity Protection Convention 2000 (No. 183).  I am confident that under the leadership of 

 
our Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth,  we should be able to ratify this important  ILO 
instrument during this mandate. 

67 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. François! 

 (4.02 p.m.) 

Mr  J.  F.  François  (First  Member  for  Rodrigues):  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker. 
Madam Speaker, I rise to join the other hon. Members who preceded me to say a few words 
in relation to this Employment Rights (Amendment) Bill for an extension of two weeks for 
the  duration  of  maternity  leave  from  12  weeks  to  14  weeks  in  favour  of  all  our  working 
mums.  

This  Bill  is  a  specific  measure,  small,  useful,  but  making  a  huge  difference  with  a 
deep sense of human values and high sensibility for parent bonding to new-born child who 
requires as much nurturing during the first weeks of its life and to protect the situation of 
working women during the vulnerable time of pregnancy, birth and recovery.  

Madam Speaker, I stand proudly in support of this Bill on behalf of, I have say, all 
these beautiful 207,000 working mothers of our Republic and, in particular, those from the 
autonomous Rodrigues Island. Madam Speaker, the proposed sustainable Amendment Bill by 
my  colleague,  hon.  Callichurn,  Minister  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and 
Training proves Government’s commitment to women and promotes Government’s objective 
for a modern caring society protecting women and children whilst in the same breath creating 
a balance between family and professional life.  

This is clearly a signal as we are catching up with worldwide trends and meeting the 
ILO  Convention  2000  No.  183,  Requirement  on  Maternity  Leave  where  Article  4(1),  as 
adopted on 15 June 2000, stipulates, as rightly said by the hon. Minister, a woman to whom 
this Convention applies shall be entitled to a period of maternity leave of not less than 14 
weeks. Unfortunately, not ratified by Mauritius, but what is important is by catching up with 
ILO  requirements,  we  are  progressing  towards  equality  and  meaningful  change.  This  is  a 
vision for future generations of our society. Madam Speaker, one of the beauties of life and 
society today is how caring we are towards our family while creating tight family bonding 
ties. Our mothers, as rightly said by the hon. Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity 

 
and Reform Institutions, are primary caregivers. Our family is the image of our society, and 
Pope Francis on 27 October 2013 said, and I quote - 

68 

“That  family  is  the  salt  of  the  earth  and  the  light  of  the  world.  It  is  the  leaven  of 
society.” 

Madam Speaker, hon.  Members of the House  are all aware of the lack of qualified 
babysitters  with  sufficient  knowledge  in  early  childhood  development  and  education.  This 
extra  two  weeks  will  compensate  partly  this  problem.  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  also  of  the 
opinion that consideration shall also be given in some exceptional circumstances maternity 
leave for further extension beyond the 14 weeks. I know a case where a public female officer 
was penalised at promotion time. After her 12 weeks’ maternity leave was over, she had to 
have  recourse  to  all  her  sick  and  casual  leaves  for  additional  recovery  duration.  Her 
appointment confirmation was even delayed and she lost her hierarchical position in her job.  

Madam Speaker, in addition, special consideration also shall be given to the fishers’ 
community. I refer here to registered fishers in our Republic and in Rodrigues. Those who are 
traditionally  called  ‘Madame  Pêcheur’  et  ‘Madame  Piqueuse  d’Ourites’,  they  earn  their 
living in the sea and during their pregnancy, birth and recovery time, they are left without any 
income or cash benefits or aid. They face a very hard and difficult life.  

Madam  Speaker,  in  a  holistic  approach,  notwithstanding  any  other  enactment  or 
remuneration regulations, I will suggest that in the same line compulsory public funds shall 
be  made  available  through  social  security  by  amending  the  Social  Aid  Act  to  enable 
fisherwomen to become entitled for such kind of aid during their late period of pregnancy, 
birth and recovery during the 14 weeks, especially those who are single headed family.  

Madam Speaker, this amendment brings much more fairness to both woman; I mean, 
the mother and the baby, in particular, those who delivered by surgery and caesarean. This 
amendment  is  a  psychological  boost  for  more  performance  and  dedication  for  our  female 
working force in the development of our country and I do hope that employers out there will 
see no economic constraints as regard to productivity and necessary payment adjustment shall 
be  carried  out  as  well  and,  in  some  cases,  a  legal  agreed  percentage  of  payment  by  the 
employer and the employees.  

Madam Speaker, I have to say that working mothers, from what I gathered, appreciate 
the extension of two weeks to the benefit of new-born babies who will be having a longer 

69 

 
breastfeeding instead of baby food, most often, commercial baby milk. It is worth to note that 
the global concept of exclusive breastfeeding is for a minimum of four months to six months 
and our legislation today, here, is bringing ours to three and a half months instead of three 
months.  This  is  a  laudable  move.  This  Bill  shall  also  allow  us  to  study  the  breastfeeding 
trends and practices in our country.  

Madam Speaker, if you will allow me, in this same vein and pending a full new labour 
legislation, it would be perhaps opportune to start considering the equal introduction of 14 
weeks or at least four to six weeks of what I call ‘papa leave’, instead of the actual paternity 
leave of only five continuous working days entitlement as being prescribed in our law. This is 
not only to address gender equity issues, but to allow both parents to take care of their child.  

(Interruptions) 

You see the men are laughing here!   We, men, can be great carers and be responsible papas.  
Why not?  

Madam  Speaker,  before  concluding,  while  listening  to  the  debate,  a  fundamental 
question came to my mind with regard to assumption of care of an adoptive new-born child 
within this maternity leave duration of 14 weeks; how about two working spouses who are 
close  relatives,  parents  or  stepparents,  that  is,  grandparent,  brother,  sister,  uncle,  aunt  of  a 
child or full blood, half blood or by marriage affinity, or probably by custodial arrangements 
and they are not the natural parent or mother of a child who intend to adopt or to assume 
legally or officially the care of a new-born child whose mother - and I specify that – say, had 
just passed away after giving birth or who became unfit to do so within these 14 weeks. My 
question is: will they be entitled for secondary maternity leave in that context?  

Madam Speaker, to conclude, as we celebrate the act of motherhood and family day 
worldwide and in our Republic this month of May, I seize this opportunity to wish all our 
mothers a happy family day and Mother’s Day, especially  hon. Members of this House. God 
bless them all, love and peace! Madam Speaker, that is my contribution and support in favour 
of this Employment Rights (Amendment) Bill. 

I thank you for your kind attention. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Mohamed! 

  

 
(4.11 p.m.) 

70 

Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port  Louis  East): 
Madam  Speaker,  thank  you  very  much.    I  am  quite  happy  to  participate  in  this  debate  as 
regards this piece of legislation.  Let me start at by saying, while looking at the hon. Minister 
of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training that it is commendable on his part 
to have come up with that piece of legislation. 

What a lot of people maybe don’t realise or maybe a lot of people realise it, but don’t 
like  admitting  it,  is  the  following:  it  is  not  easy  for  the  Minister  of  Labour,  Industrial 
Relations, Employment and Training to have done what he is doing right now; to come up 
with this piece of legislation, to move it from 12 to 14.  Some people may think it is only two 
weeks, but the effort that it requires to negotiate with the Mauritius Employers’ Federation, 
the effort that it requires to negotiate with the stakeholders, the industries, the employers as 
well  as  the  trade  unionists  is  immense.    That  is  why  I  congratulate  the  hon.  Minister  for 
coming up with this piece of legislation that is, in true, in line with Convention 183 of the 
ILO as far as maternity leave is concerned. 

Here,  in  this  august  Assembly,  it  seems  as  though  there  is  consensus  as  regards  the 
issue of maternity leave, and we must, Madam Speaker, say that we are very lucky. We are 
very lucky because if, in Mauritius, today, with so much ease and comfort, we are moving 
forward  from  12  to  14.  But  then,  again,  with  regard  to  other  countries  such  as  the  United 
States  of  America,  if  one  looks  at  the  grid,  at  the  graph  with  regard  to  paid  leave  in  any 
developed  country,  Mauritius  is  higher  than  the  United  States  of  America.    In  the  United 
States of America, there are only 12 weeks of protected leave.   

The concept of paid leave in the United States of America, in the country of the free 
and the country of the brave, does not exist.  Only last  year, in 2014, there was this huge 
issue.  And why is it that they have not managed to pass the law, a Bill in the United States of 
America to guarantee that, at least, women there are also given not only protected leave but 
paid  leave?   It  is  precisely  because  there  is  no consensus  in  the  United  States  of  America 
between the Republicans and the Democrats.  There is a lot of bickering, and finally it is the 
women there who are suffering.  

Everyone is aware of the great generosity that is shown by Scandinavian countries vis-
à-vis women.  Everyone knows of how the State in the Scandinavian countries contributes to 

71 

 
the whole concept of paid leave.  I speak under the correction of the new Minister of Labour, 
Industrial Relations, Employment and Training.  The concept of paid leave in Mauritius still 
does not exist because it is indeed the private sector that pays for the leave.  Maybe a time 
will have to come, because when one looks closely at not only Convention 183 but also at les 
travaux préparatoires that led to Convention 183, one would realise that the constituents of 
the  International  Labour  Organisation  have  made  it  clear  that,  for  them,  in  their  view  and 
their authority and precedence - to sustain what I am saying - the State must pay for leave for 
maternity. Now, it is something that is not easy to be able to face.  How does one manage to 
ensure that the State can pay not 12, but now 14 weeks?  In this country, the State, we call it a 
Welfare State, but the truth is that the State does not pay at all with regard to maternity leave.  
And  I  say  this  because  it  is  true  that  it  is  a  measure,  a  way  of  measuring  a  country’s 
development,  a  country’s  progress,  a  country’s  commitment  towards  our  women  and 
mothers, when we can see how much of the State contributes to new mothers in childhood, 
how much does the State itself from its own coffers pay in terms of benefits to each new 
future mother.  How much?  The answer is: in Mauritius it does not.  It is true that we only 
pass legislation to make it a point for the private sector to pay, which is good because they 
are at the service of the private sector.  But a time, I hope, will come, when not only - as I did 
when I was then Minister of Labour and I came to change the maternity benefits.  I see here, 
in this august Assembly, officers who were les chevilles ouvrières of that piece of legislation 
in those days; the second amendment or the first amendment to the Employment Rights and 
Relations Act. 

The maternity benefit ranged from Rs300 to Rs2,000, and we increased it to Rs3000 
across the board.  But the issue is, once again, it is the benefit that is going to be paid by the 
employer.  So, I would like to see a day, Madam Speaker, when the State will have to take its 
own responsibility, because each and every working mother in this country, each and every 
working woman in this country contributes to the coffers of the State not only in terms of 
indirect taxes, but they toil away day in day out in all spheres of life, in order to ensure that 
our country has reached such heights and develops so much economically.  Why we all say 
“c’est  un  pays  où  il  fait  bon  vivre”  is  precisely  because  the  women,  the  mothers  of  this 
country have done so much. 

If  they  have  done  so  much  for  the  State,  if  they  have  done  so  much  for  the  future 
generations  -  I  have  not  been  able  to  do  it  when  I  was  Minister  of  Labour  -  the  present 
Government, I hope, will be able to do it, and if it is not this Government, maybe, in a near 

72 

 
future, we will see a Government that will be able to say to the women out there: “Not only 
can we pass legislation to force your employer to pay you, but we can also pay you”.  Just as 
this Government has increased pension vieillesse from what we had proposed to Rs4,000 to 
Rs5,000, by a thousand rupees, just like the State can pay the elderly who have contributed to 
the economic upliftment and the development of this country, the State must be able to also 
contribute maternity benefit. 

There is a second aspect that I would like to address on this particular legislation, which 
I am totally in favour of.  When I look at the graph that exists, to compare what exactly is the 
state of affairs the world over with regard to parental leave or parental benefit, there is one 
issue which hon. Soodhun raised during the previous regime when he was in the Opposition, 
when I was presenting the amendments to the employment laws.  He was the one who raised 
the issue of paternal leave.  This was an issue which we discussed at the level of the Ministry 
at that time.  We left it to five, but it was an issue that hon. Soodhun raised, and rightly so.  
When I look at other countries and I look at the map of maternity leave around the world, and 
when I read recently on ‘guardian.com’ an article of 29 November 2013, it talks about the 
concept of shared parental leave.  It talks about the concept of shared parental leave, because 
whether we like it or not, when we look at our laws and we see only five days for fathers and 
we see 14 weeks for mothers, if this is not a chauvinist society I do not know what is.  It is a 
society that is telling us that the mother must be the one who will be the most responsible for 
the child and the father has the less of the problem.  But then, again, how things have evolved 
in other countries?  In other countries, developed countries, societies realise the importance 
of a father in the upbringing and the nourishing of a new-born.  For a new-born, a father’s 
role is of utmost importance; so is that of a mother. 

So, in Europe, in England right now, you have 52 weeks that are shared between father 
and mother. A mother can decide to go back to work earlier and give the rest of her leave to 
her spouse or to her partner. So, this is the standard which I wish that we can really reach one 
day in this land of ours. 52 weeks where we can share it between mother and father because, 
understand, it is not only a question of 52, it is not only a question of 50 plus 2, it is not only 
a  question  of  figures  and  multiplication.    Imagine  and  understand,  Madam  Speaker,  what 
exactly is the result when one changes and really underlines the importance of a father having 
to take responsibility for his child from the moment that child is born and he has to stay home 
to  take  care  of  that  child,  the  day  it  comes  where  we  can  have  it  equal,  where  man  and 
woman, father and mother will take care of their child equally in terms of leave, when it is 

73 

 
recognised in our laws, then we will be able to say that the laws that talk about employment 
in Mauritius, as far as leave is concerned for parents, it is not a chauvinist or discriminatory 
law. Because as it stands, it is discriminatory; as it stands, it is chauvinist; as it stands, it is 
discriminatory vis-à-vis women. 

So, I commend with those words, the excellent move of the hon. Minister, I commend 
the Government for having had the courage to come forward. And I, not only commend, but I 
encourage the Government to be able to go one step further. I hope it is only one small piece 
of  legislation.  Let  us  go  further!  Let  us  go  for  the  52  weeks!    Let  us  go  for  the  shared 
parenthood! Let us at least remove! Let us remove…. 

(Interruptions) 

The hon. Chief Whip is basically telling us that there are a lot of people who would be absent 
from this Chamber. I gather that there are lots of people who would like then to be father and 
I will not get into the details at this particular stage, but they would then absent themselves 
from l’hémicycle.  

(Interruptions) 

But then, again, I did not talk about the possibility of having more than a wife, I am talking 
about sharing parenthood. 

But then, if one calculates, it becomes logistic. 

(Interruptions) 

Now, what I am trying to deal at here is, let us together, when this is consensus, try to 
remove - and that’s my call to Government – this discriminatory element in legislation and let 
us see how we could do it, because it is very unfair to have future generations, to turn back 
and look at the laws that say that a woman has to take care of a child more than a man. This is 
how we start, us, here; we have to show them out there that we should not discriminate vis-à-
vis a woman. A man also has to take his share of responsibility. 

Thank you very much. 

 (4.24 p.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 
Scientific Research (Mrs L. D. Dookun-Luchoomun): Madam Speaker, before I start my 
intervention, I would like to say that I am really happy to note the optimistic note with which 

74 

 
the hon. colleague from the other side ended his speech. I am glad that our hon. Member, on 
this side, hon. Soodesh Callichurn has acted very fast, in a matter of a few months, he has 
come  up  to  this  House  with  this  amendment  and  although  after  five  years,  all  the  good 
intentions that the hon. Member had when he was the Minister of Labour, he could not bring 
it… 

(Interruptions) 

I must say that I am really glad, he has good intention and I hope that hon. Callichurn will 
manage to come up with these points forwarded by the hon. Member of the Opposition. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  deem  it  important,  not  only  as  a  Parliamentarian,  but  also  as  a 
woman and a mother, to add my voice to those of the hon. Members who have intervened on 
this proposed amendment to the Employment Rights Act. This, as we know, relates to the 
extension from 12 to 14 weeks of the duration of maternity leave. I would like, at the very 
outset,  to  congratulate  my  colleague,  hon.  Callichurn,  for  bringing  this  amendment  to  this 
House. 

Madam Speaker, it is now clear that this Government does not intend to linger on its 
promises  towards  the  population.  Actions  are  being  taken  and  that  too,  very  quickly.  Our 
motto, Madam Speaker, remains the welfare of our people and this at the centre of all our 
moves. 

Madam Speaker, our Government has already proved that it is not only caring, but it 
is  also  a  soothing  one,  one  who  cares  for  the  people  and  who  cares  for  each  and  every 
member of the society. And, today, for the Mauritian women as well as for the children of 
this country, it is indeed an important date. My colleagues of this august Assembly, I am sure, 
will agree that the extension of maternity leave was a long overdue promise. 

Despite all the good words we have heard during the last regime, very little was done 
in this favour. Madam Speaker, this Government, under the able leadership of Sir Anerood 
Jugnauth, is a responsible one and means business. We have proved it, as I have said earlier, 
in our actions and now with this amendment, we are showing to what extent we want our 
people to evolve in a better environment, might it be physical or moral. 

Madam  Speaker,  in  the  early  days,  women  were  considered  and  perceived  to  be 
individuals  having  a  major  role  to  play,  mainly  within  the  family  at  home  and  men  were 
considered  to  be  the  main  bread-winners  going  out  to  fend  for  the  family.  For  long, 
employers preferred to recruit male employees, thinking that they were the ones who could 

75 

 
really work and deliver. But now, Madam Speaker, women have entered the world of work. 
But  yet,  employers  still  prefer  sometimes  their  male  counterparts  for  several  reasons.  For 
example, one would be the question of having to give leave due to pregnancy would not arise. 
The idea of maternity leave remained a major obstacle for pregnant women who had, in the 
past, to stop working and this often resulted in a form of lay off and for many without any 
guarantee  for  employment  on  re-entry  after  confinement.  But  much  has  certainly  been 
accomplished  since,  through  relevant  legislations.  Now,  the  maternity  leave  is  an  acquired 
right,  yet  for  working  mothers,  even  today,  there  is  that  unspoken  sense  that  they  need  to 
buckle  down  and  prove  that,  having  family  responsibilities,  would  not  act  as  a  hurdle, 
affecting their productivity at work and we have felt the need to show that they are as good as 
their male counterparts. Finally, they end up doing twice as much as their friends, their male 
counterparts and to get the same recognition, Madam Speaker. 

Often  career-oriented  girls  or  women  have  even  to  delay  or  sacrifice  their 
childbearing years in order to ensure that they do not lose the opportunity of getting a job or a 
promotion for that matter. How many employees in the private and in the public sector as 
well,  have  to  ensure  continuous  service  so  as  to  be  part  of  the  promotion  process  and 
sometimes even to be confirmed at their respective post after a given period of probation, as 
rightly pointed out by the hon. Member from Rodrigues. 

Today, it is essential that we all  recognise that if Mauritius has prospered over the 
years and is poised to become, through the efforts of Government, a high income country, it 
is thanks largely to the  untainted efforts of the labour force and this labour force, Madam 
Speaker, comprises both men and women.  I have also heard of many women who entered 
motherhood  and  who  realised  the  importance  of  providing  the  sustained  maternal  and 
physical presence, so instrumental in the psychological development of a new-born baby, and 
this, without placing their professional commitment on a lower scale or at a lower ebb.  Far 
from it!  

We now know of thousands of women who perform the balancing act between their 
career and family obligations and often it is a tight rope-working act. The mothers, but also 
the fathers, present in this august Assembly will, therefore, appreciate that times spent with 
the child is a crucial factor in his or her development. 

 

76 

I believe that those additional two weeks will go a long way towards making women 
better poised to come back to work, knowing that the new born has been properly cuddled 
and nuzzled during the first most important weeks of its existence.  

Let us agree that we now have more and more women making their presence felt in 
the world of work, thanks largely to their cognitive but also to their emotional intelligence 
and their ability to be empathetic.  

Aujourd’hui c’est nullement un secret, Madame la présidente, la femme a un rôle tout 
aussi important que l’homme, et on ne peut se passer de sa compétence et de la contribution 
surtout quand elle constitue plus de 50% de la population. Plus de 50% de matière grise d’une 
population sans laquelle le pays n’aurait su connaître un développement socio-économique 
accéléré  que  nous  avons  témoigné.  Avec  le  rôle  qu’elle  occupe,  il  est  impératif,  voire 
primordial,  qu’elle  jouisse  des  conditions  de travail  qui  soient  correctes  et  acceptables.  Ce 
serait plus qu’injuste si on ne donnait pas à la femme la chance d’évoluer dans un meilleur 
cadre, que ce soit dans le domaine professionnel ou comme une mère de famille. On ne peut 
exclure  son  rôle  de  travail  de  ses  responsabilités  au  foyer.  C’est  pour  cela  que  cet 
amendement à la loi va dans la bonne direction. 

Madam Speaker, the Bill will promote a stronger mother-child bond. After growing in 
the safety and comfort of the mother’s womb, the first days following birth are crucial to the 
baby’s future development and being taken care of by the mother during this period provides 
the right conditions for a healthy and moral well-being for both of them. It actually leaves the 
foundation for positive physical and emotional development that will last a lifetime and such 
a moment should be spent in all serenity. 

I know that the paternity leave does exist in Mauritius, but we have to consider the 
short lapse of time attributed to paternity leave which needs, as the hon. Member on the other 
side of the House mentioned, to consider the possibility of introducing the shared parental 
leaves.  The  baby  needs  both  parents  for  its  stable  development.  The  attention  of  both  the 
mother and the father is essential. Truly speaking, if we are talking about equality and equity, 
we need to impress upon the fathers that they also have to take care and to be responsible for 
their child since the very early days in the life of their child. 

The amendment to this Act is, indeed, a step in the right direction. Proper legislation 
should aim to help our society in the long term. A society that looks after its children is a 

77 

 
healthy society and making sure that the child starts off in life properly will ensure that the 
child does not become prey to other social problems. Taking into consideration that we have 
an ageing population and that there is a marked drop in the country’s birth rate, it is the duty 
of a responsible Government to encourage and support young couples who wish to expand 
their  family.  This  is,  indeed,  a  very  sensible  thing  to  do  in  a  country  with  a  declining 
population. In other parts of the world, certain incentives are given to parents so that they 
bear children. 

Madame la présidente, cet amendement, je venais de vous le dire, viendra donner une 
chance nouvelle aux mamans de prendre soin de leurs bébés et dans les meilleures conditions 
pour le nouveau-né et pour que le nouveau-né puisse grandir en toute sérénité. En plus, le 
temps  allongé  de  la  période  où  la  maman  reste  avec  l’enfant  permettra  l’allaitement  de 
l’enfant  et  cela,  bien  sûr,  pour  le  bien  de  l’enfant.  Un  enfant  qui  connaît  un début  de  vie 
stable, plus équilibré verra son existence avec moins de probabilité qu’elle soit la proie des 
fléaux sociaux. Certes, la présence de la mère permet le développement d’une entente entre la 
mère et l’enfant mais permet aussi, comme je vous le disais tout à l’heure, l’allaitement qui 
offre au nouveau-né plus de chances. Ce qui est intéressant à noter c’est que les recherches 
ont prouvé que plus long le congé de maternité, plus bas est l’infant mortality. There is a 
decline in infant mortality and this is proportional to the length of the maternity leave.  

Pour aller très vite, la dernière des nouvelles que nous venons de trouver c’est que le 
lait  maternel  contient  de  plus  une  protéine,  l’alpha-lactalbumin, qui  constitue  un  agent 
antitumoral  puissant  qui  va  pouvoir  aider  l’enfant  et  le  protéger  contre  les  cancers.  Les 
recherches  scientifiques  découvrent  encore  aujourd’hui  l’importance  de  l’allaitement 
maternel mais je ne pourrais aller sur tous les bienfaits de l’allaitement maternel. 

L’Organisation mondiale de la santé d’ailleurs aujourd’hui recommande de nourrir les 
bébés  au  lait  maternel  dès  la  naissance  et  cela  durant  les  cinq  premiers  mois  de  leur  vie. 
D’ailleurs, apprend-on, l’allaitement mène à une rémission chez les mères diabétiques. Je ne 
vais pas élaborer plus longtemps là-dessus  mais ce que je voudrais surtout dire c’est que les 
bénéfices,  que  ce  soient  psychologiques  ou  économiques  à  la  mère  et  à  la  famille  sont 
maintenant pas discutables. 

Madam Speaker, a quick glance at what happens elsewhere in the world would also 
give an indication that this amendment is really going in the right direction. As mentioned 

 
earlier, in the United States, the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 guarantees a worker 
not only her maternity leave, but post-maternity leave as well.  

78 

Here, in Mauritius, we are going… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Some silence in the House, please! 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun:… from 14 weeks of maternity leave and 14 paid weeks 
of  maternity  leave  and,  elsewhere  in  the  world,  even  as  mentioned  earlier,  in  the  United 
States, they do get 12 weeks of maternity leave but which are not paid leave! This is where 
we really have made a step forward. We are going for 14 paid weeks of maternity leave. 

What is also interesting is that some people, after bearing a child, decide not to go to 
work because they can afford to do so to take care of their children; to stay with their children 
at home. But, this is not given to everyone. Not everyone can afford such measures. So, the 
paid maternity leave helps the low-income people to ensure that they can give the minimum 
amount of care to their children without having to bother about money or loss of income. But, 
before we go any further, I would like to mention that for European countries the figure for 
the length of maternity leave varies, stretching from 14 weeks in Germany to 16 weeks… 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Minister,  everybody  is  wondering  why  you  are  addressing 

yourself to your colleague there! 

(Interruptions) 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Madam Speaker, I will make sure that I address to you 

only from now onwards. 

(Interruptions) 

For European countries, to go back to what I was saying… 

(Interruptions) 

I do take it that everyone is interested on the other side to hear from me so I will turn round to 
them… 

 

79 

(Interruptions) 

I was saying, Madam Speaker, that, in the Netherlands, we have 16 weeks of maternity leave 
with full pay and in Denmark 18 weeks of maternity leave. As we can see, we are in line with 
some of the good practices prevailing internationally, putting a human face to our concern 
and  consideration  for  new  mothers.  We  are  on  the  right  track,  Madam  Speaker.  So,  I  was 
saying  that  it  is  not  only  a  matter  of  care  but  it  is  also  a  matter  of  giving,  empowering 
families, even the low-income families, to be able to take care of their children at the most 
crucial moment in the life of a child. 

Madam  Speaker,  before  I  resume  my  seat  and  considering  that  there  is  general 
consensus on this issue, may I suggest to the hon. Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, 
Employment  and  Training  to  see  to  it  that,  once  the  law  comes  into  effect,  the  two  extra 
weeks be extended to all mothers, who, at that point in time, are already on maternity leave.  

Once  again,  Madam  Speaker,  let  me  congratulate  my  colleague,  hon.  Callichurn, 
Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training for this amendment to the 
Employment Rights Act. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Fowdar! 

 (4.40 p.m.) 

Mr  S.  Fowdar  (Third  Member  for  Grand’  Baie  &  Poudre  D’or):  Thank  you, 
Madam Speaker. I would like, first of all, to congratulate the Minister of Labour, Industrial 
Relations, Employment and Training to bring this Bill so fast. Although people are saying we 
are very late in implementing our promises, it is really fast - 4 to 5 months after, the Bill is in 
the House!  

Madam Speaker, this is  the second thing that this Government is doing in order to 
create  family  bonding,  family  welfare,  togetherness  and  social  life.  The  first  one  was 
increasing the pension to Rs5000 for our grandparents, our fathers – those who are over 60 
years and this is the second one. Now why this is the second one, we all know – I think I 
heard the hon. Minister Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun mentioning this and it is very important – 
the infant mortality rate has got a direct bearing on this maternity leave. In fact, it is found 

 
with statistics; in countries where the maternity leave is low or where there is no maternity 
leave, the infant mortality rate is high and this has got a direct bearing. 

80 

Now, if we look at figures, the latest figure for infant mortality rate in Mauritius in 
2010 was 12.65% for 2005 and 13.35% for 2010 for 1,000 births in the country. So, this is, 
indeed, a very good Bill, which is to increase family welfare and create the family bonding. 

Madame la présidente, il y a eu une dégradation conséquente et inquiétante dans la 
vie familiale and this Bill is one of them, together with the increase in the pension, in order to 
prevent all this. In the spirit of family bonding, I really welcome this Bill to the House. Out of 
196 countries, there are 163 countries where women are paid maternity leave once a child is 
born, thus allowing parents the time to provide for prenatal and postnatal care, thus giving the 
family  the  opportunity  to  unite,  to  relax  and  to  be  together  before  works  disrupt  the  time 
spent together.  

We are making good progress, Madam Speaker and I totally agree with hon. François 
and hon. Mohamed regarding paternity leave. We make a joke out of it. It is not a joke. We 
know, we have been fathers and we had great responsibilities while the child was born. You 
know very well, Madam Speaker, the nappies, we do change them. We look after the child at 
night. So, there are quite a lot of things that we do together and, I think, fathers also deserve 
to have paternity leave. I totally agree with hon. Mohamed that it has to be shared. The 52 
weeks or the 14 weeks need to be shared between the father and the mother. The father also 
has got responsibility together with the mother. 

I am not going to be long, Madam Speaker; I am not going to repeat what the previous 
orators have already said. But there is one thing which I want to raise here, Madam Speaker. I 
worked and lived in the UK for over 10  years and the law in the UK regarding maternity 
leave is really good. It is 52 weeks for maternity leave and there is paternity leave. But there 
is a danger here, Madam Speaker. The thing is because the leave is exhaustive, that is, 52 
weeks, employers are very reluctant to recruit female workers. Why? Because they will have 
to incur heavy costs regarding maternity leave and the same for paternity leave as well. So, 
there  is  discrimination  in  recruitment  because  maternity  leave  may  incur  a  heavy  cost  for 
them.  Now,  there,  both  Government  and  private  sector  contribute  to  make  the  cost  for 
maternity leave. I think, here also, we are not rich enough, Madam Speaker. Mauritius is not 
a rich country, but with time, probably, we will be able to subsidise this maternity leave, pay 

 
part of it together with the employers, so that we can stretch it further in order to get mothers 
to look after their child properly. 

81 

One more thing that I want to add, Madam Speaker, is I heard the MEF complaining 
that 14 weeks is too much. I understand it’s a cost, but they need also to understand that a 
happy  employee  increases  productivity  and  increases  wealth  to  the  employer.  A  happy 
employee works better and brings more to the company, which means more money to them. 
It is not incurring the costs on maternity leave. 

Last thing, Madam Speaker, is that we all know that breastfeeding is so important. It 
is  recommended  that,  at  least,  six  months  breastfeeding  is  needed  for  a  child  to  grow 
securely, to be safe from diseases and to be safe from illnesses. It is important that these 14 
weeks, definitely, give the opportunity to the mother to breastfeed her child. 

Madam Speaker, as I said, I am not going to repeat what other hon. Members have 
already  said.  I  am  not  going  to  waste  the  time  of  the  House.  At  the  end,  I  would  again 
congratulate the Government to come up so quickly with the Bill. After the Rs5,000 given to 
the  pensioners,  this  is  the  second  thing  that  we  are  giving  in  order  to  increase  the  family 
bonding and family welfare in Mauritius. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mrs Perraud! 

 (4.47 p.m.) 

The Minister of Gender Equality, Child Development and Family Welfare (Mrs 
A.  Perraud):  Madame  la  présidente,  en  tant  que  ministre  de  l’Egalité  des  Genres,  du 
Développement de l’Enfant et du Bien-être de la Famille, c’est avec une immense joie que 
j’accueille cet amendement à l’Employment Rights Act qui vient étendre le congé maternité 
de 12 à 14 semaines. Et je ne peux que remercier et féliciter le gouvernement, en particulier 
le  ministre  du  Travail,  des  Relations  industrielles,  de  l’Emploi  et  de  la  Formation,  mon 
collègue,  l’honorable  Callichurn  et  l’honorable  Premier  ministre  pour  apporter  cet 
amendement aujourd’hui. 

Cette  proposition  figure  dans  le  manifeste  électoral  de  l’Alliance  Lepep  et  dans  le 
discours-programme  du  gouvernement.  Voilà  donc  une  autre  promesse  que  l’actuel 
gouvernement  honore  par  le  biais  de  l’amendement  à  l’IRA.    Si  dans  certains  pays, 

82 

 
notamment de l’Union Européenne, en particulier de l’Europe Centrale, ou des pays comme 
le Canada, le Danemark ou la Suède, le congé de maternité est de 52 semaines voire plus, 
chez  nous,  de  quelque  manière  qu’on  l’appréhende,  cette  augmentation  de  deux  semaines 
additionnelles au congé de maternité constitue une avancée des droits des femmes à Maurice. 
En  termes  de  Conventions  internationales,  cette  prolongation  est  aussi  conforme  à  la 
Convention 183 de l’OIT qui recommande qu’une employée puisse jouir de 14 semaines de 
congé  de  maternité.    Vue  de  manière  globale,  cette  mesure  progressiste  débouche  sur  une 
situation gagnant-gagnant dans l’environnement du travail.  

Madame la présidente, ce vendredi, le 15 mai, le monde entier est appelé à célébrer la 
Journée  internationale  des  familles.  Et  à  la  fin  de  ce  mois-ci,  nous  allons  fêter  aussi  les 
mamans  et  c’est  l’occasion  pour  moi  de  souhaiter  une  bonne  fête  des  mères  à  toutes  les 
mamans de la République de Maurice. Cet amendement à l’Employment Rights Act vient à 
point  nommé.  L’allongement  du  congé  de  maternité  de  12  semaines  à  14  semaines  vient 
consolider davantage la cellule familiale parce que la famille est le premier lieu où l’homme 
entre en relation avec ses semblables. La famille est la cellule originelle de la vie sociale. Cet 
amendement  permet  à  la  maman  de  passer  plus  de  temps  avec  son  bébé,  de  l’entourer  de 
tendresse, d’amour pour que ce passage de la vie du ventre de la mère au monde, qui est une 
violence en lui-même, une déchirure, une séparation, se fasse avec douceur. 

Madame  la  présidente,  la  société,  malheureusement,  devient  de  plus  en  plus 
impersonnelle, anonyme, conflictuelle où la vie devient une lutte, où nous serons unanimes à 
reconnaître, Madame la présidente, que cet investissement affectif de la maman, de la famille 
dans les premiers jours, au le début de la vie de bébé est primordial, bénéfique et essentiel. 
C’est aussi mettre toutes les chances du côté de bébé pour qu’il devienne un citoyen épanoui, 
sûr de lui et bien armé pour affronter le monde.  

Madame la présidente, Françoise Dolto clame que les trois premières années de la vie 
d’un  enfant  sont  déterminantes.  Un  enfant,  un  bébé  a  à  devenir  lui-même.  C’est  un  petit 
homme,  un  homme,  une  femme  en  devenir.  Donner  la  vie  à  un  enfant  implique  que  les 
parents l’aident à devenir véritablement lui-même ; lui donner l’espace pour grandir. Cela se 
fait dans liens qui se tissent dès les premiers instants de la vie dans cette relation naissante, 
cet échange de tendresse et d’amour. Avoir plus de temps, être ensemble est bénéfique pour 
la mère et l’enfant. Toutefois, le père ne doit pas être exclu de la vie du bébé et c’est là que je 
rejoins l’honorable François sur ce qu’il avait dit concernant le papa leave.  Je suis d’accord 

83 

 
parce que pour la femme qui enfante, elle ressent l’enfant comme la chair de sa chair. C’est 
une partie d’elle-même qu’elle donne au monde. Si pour une femme elle ne devient pas mère 
elle l’est dès l’instant où elle sent son enfant vivre en elle ou dès qu’elle le prend dans ses 
bras ; par contre pour l’homme lui, il devient père. L’homme reçoit l’enfant de sa femme, il a 
besoin de créer des liens, d’apprivoiser le bébé pour qu’il devienne véritablement le sien d’où 
l’importance de la présence du père au début de la vie de bébé ; une présence primordiale 
pour le bien-être de l’enfant et du papa. 

Madame  la  présidente,  il  faut  donner  de  la  place,  l’espace    au  père  d’être  père,  de 
pouvoir jouer le rôle de père auprès de l’enfant: s’occuper du bébé, lui changer les couches, 
lui donner le biberon, lui faire faire son rot, lui chanter une berceuse, jouer avec lui. Tout cela 
doit être fait et par la mère et par le père. C’est pour cette raison que c’est important que les 
parents passent du temps avec leur enfant. Comme le rappelle Laurence Pernoud dans son 
livre ‘J’attends un enfant’, je cite – 

‘Dès la naissance le bébé est désireux d’entrer en relation avec son entourage. 
Il a besoin qu’on s’occupe de lui, qu’on le reconnaisse.  
Si le message  envoyé  est reçu, l’enfant est satisfait; le contact est établi. Si 
malgré son insistance et ses efforts, on ne lui répond pas, à la longue il risque 
d’être frustré et son développement en pâtira. C’est là l’origine de certaines 
carences affectives.’ 

Madame la présidente, si comme démontré plus tôt, étendre le congé de maternité de 12 à 14 
semaines  est  grandement  bénéfique  pour  l’enfant,  cet  allongement  de  congé  de  maternité 
apporte beaucoup de bienfaits à la femme, à la maman. L’extension du congé de maternité 
aura  aussi  des  effets  bénéfiques  sur  la  santé  mentale  de  la  maman.  Seront  ainsi  mitigés  le 
stress qui accompagne parfois un accouchement de même que le sommeil contrarié. 

Madame  la  présidente,  prolonger  le  congé  de  maternité  va  permettre  à  la  femme 
d’allaiter  son  bébé  le  plus  longtemps  possible.  On  ne  le  dira  jamais  assez  les  nombreux 
bienfaits de l’allaitement pour le bébé. Mais donner le sein reste un choix personnel, est une 
décision  qui  n’est  pas  toujours  facile  à  prendre  même  si  l’envie  et  l’enthousiasme  y  sont. 
Après un accouchement, la femme se sent un peu dépassée, débordée, fatiguée avec bébé qui 
ne fait pas encore ses nuits. Allaiter peut être pour certaines un parcours de combattant. Donc 
avoir un plus long congé de maternité permet à la mère de bénéficier de plus de temps pour 
allaiter son enfant. L’enfant peut ainsi profiter des bienfaits de l’allaitement. L’enfant nourri 
au sein  est protégé contre certaines infections. Les anticorps présents dans le lait maternel 
assurent une protection naturelle à l’enfant. 

 

84 

Madame  la  présidente,  l’amendement  à  l’Employment  Rights  Act  représente  une 
avancée non seulement pour la femme mais pour la société mauricienne parce que quand la 
famille  va  bien  la  société  va  bien.  On  ne  peut  avoir  de  bons  citoyens  si  on  n’a  pas  des 
hommes  et  des  femmes  qui  ont  raté  le  départ  dans  la  vie.  A  ces  quelques  employeurs  qui 
élèvent  la  voix,  qui sont  mécontents  parce  que  l’extension  du  congé  de  maternité  de  deux 
semaines additionnelles représente un coût, nous leur disons que le bien-être, le bonheur, une 
famille heureuse n’a pas de prix. Il ne faut pas que le développement économique se fasse au 
détriment du développement humain. Dans tout développement, l’humain doit être au centre 
de tout, sinon nous aurons à payer un prix fort.  

Madame  la  présidente,  ce  gouvernement,  le  gouvernement  de  l’Alliance  Lepep  a 
compris que le succès d’une nation réside dans le bien-être de son peuple. Une famille stable 
est  importante  pour  avoir  la  paix,  l’unité,  la  prospérité  et  un  développement  durable. 
L’amendement qui sera voté aujourd’hui est fort louable. 

Madame  la  présidente,  permettez-moi  de  conclure  avec  ces  quelques  paroles  du 

chanteur John Lennon. Je cite – 

«Quand j’étais petit ma mère m’a dit que le bonheur était la clef de la vie. À 
l’école  quand  on  m’a  demandé  d’écrire  ce  que  je  voulais  être  plus  tard  j’ai 
répondu heureux. Ils m’ont dit que je n’avais pas compris la question, je leur 
ai répondu qu’il n’avait pas compris la vie». Fin de citation.  

Merci beaucoup. 

 

 (4.58 p.m.) 

The Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training (Mr S. 
Callichurn): Madam Speaker, I wish to extend my thanks to all Orators on both sides of the 
House who have intervened on this Bill. I am glad to note that there is a broad consensus on 
both sides of the House on the amendment I have proposed.  

Madam  Speaker,  I  would  like  to,  however,  react  on  the  comments  and  suggestions 
made  by  a  Member  on  the  other  side  of  the  House.  Regarding  shift  system,  Section  14A 
indeed  has  not  been  proclaimed  under  previous  Governments,  I  should  say.  I  am  giving 
assurance to my learned friend, hon. Baloomoody, that due consideration will be given to this 
section and I will do my utmost best to come up with the necessary amendment in the law.  

As regard to parental leave, there have been a lot of suggestions for the introduction 
of  parental  leave  for  sharing  and  upbringing  of  a  new  born  child  by  parents.  There  is,  at 
present,  no  provision  in  our  labour  legislation  for  parental  leave.  The  suggestion  for  the 

 
introduction  of  a  Parental  Leave  Scheme  will  be  considered  in  the  general  review  of  the 
Employment Rights Act which is currently underway. 

85 

As regards the issue raised by hon. Mohamed, in fact, it is true that, according to the 
ILO Convention, employers should not be individually liable for the cost of maternity leave. 
In fact, Convention No. 183 provides, inter alia, for financing of maternity leave cash benefit 
by social insurance or public fund or in a manner determined by national law and practice. 
The Convention also provides that the employer liability is only permissible if the employer 
agrees or it is in force in the national legislation or if there is a tripartite agreement thereafter.  
It  is  true  that  according  to  Article  8  of  the  Maternity  Convention  No.  183  of  2000  an 
employer shall not be individually liable for the direct cost of any monetary maternity benefit 
to a woman employed by him.  I wish to reiterate that Article 8 of the Convention authorises 
employers to bear the cost of maternity benefit where this was determined by national level 
before the adoption of the Convention in 2000, which is the case for Mauritius. 

I should like to remind the House that Convention No. 183 was adopted by the ILO 
members  ever  since  2000,  and  the  former  Government  has  not  deemed  it  fit  to  consider 
extending the maternity leave from 12 to 14 weeks nor to address the issue of the employers’ 
liability. 

Madam Speaker, even though we have not ratified the Convention, we are, however, 
giving effect to its principle, which is a step forward in consolidating the rights of the woman.  
This is more important.  We certainly can shift away from reliance on employers to provide 
maternity leave benefits, but we will have to put in place a completely different mechanism. 

Madam Speaker, this Government has been in power for only five months, and we are 
today  passing  a  Bill  to  extend  the  maternity  leave  from  12  to  14  weeks  in  line  with  the 
Convention.  This shows our commitment to the protection of the female worker.  To enable 
Mauritius to be in a better position to ratify the Convention, all implications will have to be 
assessed, including the mode of financing the maternity cash benefit.  In this regard, I have to 
reassure hon. Mohamed that I have already instructed my officers to seek technical assistance 
from  the  ILO  to  move  in  that  direction.    Moreover,  I  will  be  attending  the  International 
Conference of the  ILO  next month, and  I will seize this opportunity to  take up the matter 
personally with the Director of International Labour Standards Department. 

Madam  Speaker,  this  present  Bill  is  coming  at  the  right  time,  as  the  world  will  be 
celebrating la Journée mondiale des familles this Friday, 15 May 2015, and the theme chosen 

 
this  year  is:  ‘Men  in  charge?  Gender  Equality  and  Children’s  Rights  in  Contemporary 
Families.’ 

86 

Madam Speaker, the Employment Rights (Amendment) Bill is a major landmark for 
the protection of maternity benefit.  History will remember  Sir Anerood Jugnauth as a great 
visionary  and  an  ardent  defender  of  the  cause  of  feminism.    It  was  under  his  prime 
ministership  during  the  period  of  2000  to  2005  that  the  Government  ratified  the  Equal 
Remuneration Convention No. 100 and the Discrimination Employment Convention No. 111, 
which aim at promoting gender parity.  It is, again, under his prime ministership that this bold 
and laudable amendment to the Employment Rights Act is being brought forward in favour of 
women. 

Questions  have  been  asked  in  this  House  about  whether  this  amendment  will  also 
favour women who are already on maternity leave.  I am glad to announce that women who 
are  on  maternity  leave  when  the  Act  is  proclaimed  will  be  entitled  to  14  weeks  maternity 
leave. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker,  as  I  stand  in  this  House  presenting  this  Bill,  there  are  already 
thousands of women out there rejoicing on this amendment.  So, without any further delay, I 
commend this Bill to the House. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Bill read a second time and committed. 

COMMITTEE STAGE 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

The  Employment  Rights  (Amendment)  Bill  (No.  IX  of  2015)  was  considered  and 

agreed to. 

On  the  Assembly  resuming  with  Madam  Speaker  in  the  Chair,  Madam  Speaker 

reported accordingly. 

Third Reading 

On motion made and seconded, the Employment Rights (Amendment) Bill (No. IX of 

2015) was read the third time and passed. 

 
(5.08 p.m.) 

87 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

OBITUARY - MR CHANDRIKA MOURBA 

 The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, with  your permission, I would like to state 
that,  it  is  with  deep  regret  that  we  have  learnt  of  the  demise  of  Mr  Chandrika  Mourba, 
commonly known as Suresh Moorba, who passed away on 12 May 2015 at the age of 73. 

Mr  Mourba  was  born  on  02  October  1941  at  Rose  Belle.    He  attended  the  Aryan 
Vedic School for his primary education and the Royal College of Curepipe for his secondary 
education. 

Mr Mourba studied law and history in England, France and the United States.   He 

was called to the Bar in 1969. 

Mr Mourba ran for the 1976 general elections in Constituency No. 4, Port Louis North 
and Montagne Longue, under the banner of the MMM, and was returned First Member for 
the said constituency. 

Mr Mourba occupied the post of Minister of Information and Broadcasting from April 

1980 to December 1981. 

In 1980, he left the MMM to support the then Labour Government. 
Mr Mourba also ran for the 1982 general elections in Constituency No. 13, Rivière 
des Anguilles and Souillac, but was not returned.  Thereafter, he put an end to his political 
career. 

Mr  Mourba  was  also  a  writer,  and  in  1980,  he  published  a  book  entitled  “Misère 

Noire”. 

Madam  Speaker,  may  I  request  you  to  be  kind  enough  to  direct  the  Clerk  of  the 

National Assembly to convey the deep condolences of the Assembly to the bereaved family. 

Thank you. 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, I associate myself with the tribute paid to late Mr Suresh 
Mourba  by  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  and  we  kindly  request  you  to  convey  our  deepest 
condolences to the bereaved family. 

Madam  Speaker:  I  associate  myself  with  the  tribute  paid  to  late  Mr  Chandrika 
Mourba by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and hon. Uteem, and I direct the Clerk to convey to 
the bereaved family the assurance of our sincere condolences. 

 

 

88 

ADJOURNMENT 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  that  this  Assembly  do  now 

adjourn to Tuesday 01 September 2015 at 11.30 a.m. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned. 

Hon.  Members,  I  have  been  apprised  that  hon.  Shakeel  Mohamed  was  to  raise  a 

matter on adjournment. 

 (5.12 p.m.) 

MATTER RAISED 

RDA & MTPA – EMPLOYEES – TERMINATION OF CONTRACT 

Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port  Louis  East):  
Very briefly, since I know everyone, including myself, Madam Speaker, I think you would 
like  to  proceed  to  the  lunch  room  for  some  good  tea  that,  I  believe,  is  there  for  us.    But, 
rapidly, what I would like to address here is to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister. 

The Rt. hon. Prime Minister will be aware, Madam Speaker, that until recently I have 
come  across  a  lot  of  people  all  around  Mauritius  who  have  come  to  see  me  and  other 
Members of the Opposition and also Members from Government who have been working in 
certain institutions such as the Road Development Authority, such as the Tourism Authority 
and other institutions where they have been employed there and have lost their jobs.  

Now, a lot of them have been told by management, in no uncertain terms, that the 
reason why their jobs have come to an end is because they were employed after June 2014.  
There  was  also  a  Government  circular,  Madam  Speaker,  that  was  issued  and  I  have  come 
across that circular where it is said that all those who are employed after June 2014 will not 
have their contracts renewed. There also has been talk that it is precisely because it was too 
close to General Elections of last year that their contracts have come to an end. Now, let me 
put it very simply to try to say that because those people have been employed immediately 
after June 2014 makes it, in any way, wrongful or, in any way, close to General Elections is 
not  true  and  it  is  quite  unfair  to  those  people.  The  reason  I  say  that  is  because  everyone 
knows that until the last minute, as far as the General Elections were concerned, be it July, be 

89 

 
it August, be it September, be it October, we still did not know when the General Elections 
would be. And something else was also important.  As far as the Alliance is concerned, it is 
quite sad that those people have been put off, whereas this Alliance was still on and off. So, 
as far as justice requires it, fairness requires it to come with – and this is what my plea to the 
Rt. hon. Prime Minister is concerned - to generalise and to put a cut-off date based simply on 
the fact that it is June and it was close to General Elections, is very unfair on those people 
who  were  working  and  who  were  still  working  in  January,  February,  March,  April,  May 
under a new Government.   

So, for those reasons, what I humbly request is that all those people who are asking 
Government  through  us  and  through  even  the  backbenchers  on  the  Government  side,  to 
please  reconsider  their  position  in  the  name  of  justice,  in  the  name  of  fairness  and  not  to 
simply  come  with  the  cut-off  point  that  applies  to  everyone.    So,  if  they  could  please 
reconsider - those hundreds of men and women who have lost their jobs - their request and 
their plea to find their jobs anew. This is my humble request. 

Thank you. 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, I will look into the matter and come with a 

statement in due course.  

At  5.16  p.m.,  the  Assembly  was,  on  its  rising,  adjourned  to  Tuesday  01  September 

2015 at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

 

 

 

