 

1 

 

 

No. 09 of 2015 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

THURSDAY 12 MARCH 2015 

 

 

 

 
 

 

2 

CONTENTS 

•  Welcoming remarks by the Honourable Mrs Santi Bai Hanoomanjee, GCSK, Speaker 

of the National Assembly of the Republic of Mauritius 

•  Address by H.E., Shri Narendra Modi, Prime Minister of the Republic of India 

 

•  Vote of  Thanks by the Rt. Honourable Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC, 
Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National Development Unit of the  Republic of Mauritius. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC)) 

Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 

KCMG, QC  

Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 

GCSK  

Communications 

Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo, GCSK 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 

Utilities 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Minister 

of 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Integration 

and  Economic 

Empowerment 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 

Sinatambou 

International Trade 

Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 

Perraud 

Family Welfare 

Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain 

Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 

Institutional Reforms 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 

 

4 

Institutions 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 

Shipping and Outer Islands 

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, 

Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 

QPM 

Disaster and Beach Management  

Hon. Marie Roland Alain Wong Yen             Minister of Civil Service and Administrative  

Cheong, MSK 

 

 

 

       Reforms 

Hon.  Soodesh  Satkam  Callichurn                      Minister  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations, 

Employment and Training 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Hanoomanjee,  Hon.  Mrs  Santi  Bai, 

GCSK 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Hurreeram,  Hon.  Mahendranuth 
Sharma 

 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

 

Hansard Editor 

 Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

(Temporary  

Gopall,  Mr  Navin 
Transfer to RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra  

Badal, Mr Ramesh 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 09 of 2015 

 

Sitting of 12 March 2015 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 10.55 a.m. 

 

7 

 

Madam Speaker, accompanied by His Excellency, the Prime Minister of the Republic 
of India, Shri Narendra Modi, preceded by the Serjeant-at-Arms, bearing the mace, and Mrs 
Bibi Safeena Lotun, the Clerk of the National Assembly, entered the Chamber in procession. 

Madam Speaker seated His Excellency the Prime Minister of the Republic of India to 

her right.  

The National Anthem was played. 

HIS EXCELLENCY, THE PRIME MINISTER OF THE REPUBLIC OF 

INDIA, SHRI NARENDRA MODI – ADDRESS 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Members, it is my proud privilege and honour to extend on 
your behalf and in my own name a very warm welcome to an illustrious son of India in the 
person of His Excellency Shri Narendra Modi, Prime Minister of the Republic of India. This 
special  sitting  of  the  National  Assembly  on  the  day  of  the  47th  anniversary  of  our 
Independence is a very significant event as it has been convened to welcome in our midst a 
great visionary, the leader of the largest democracy in the world. 

Excellency, we are deeply thankful to you for your kind acceptance of our invitation to 
address our National Assembly. It is indeed a great privilege, Your Excellency to have you 
mark the history of this National Assembly through your dignified presence today. Through 
this, you reconfirm the common belief of Mauritius and India in the virtues of parliamentary 
democracy and the rule of law and democracy. 

This  House,  Excellency,  is  a  pillar  among  the  institutions  that  uphold  the  vibrant 
democracy  of  Mauritius.    It  is  the  embodiment  of  the  collective  will  and  aspiration  of  its 
people and the repository of the evolving history of this country. 

Excellency,  your  presence,  amongst  us  today  epitomizes  the  deep  friendship, 
affection, and goodwill that India has always displayed towards Mauritius. It is an affection 
and a goodwill which we, in Mauritius, happily and warmly reciprocate. 

Excellency, it is the first time in the history of our Parliament that a Prime Minister 
from the Republic of India would be addressing the House on the date itself that Mauritius 
acceded to its Independence, that is, 12 March.  As you stated in your speech at the Banquet 
yesterday, 12 March is a date symbolically chosen as a fitting tribute to Mahatma Gandhi, as 
it was the date on which Gandhi Ji started his Dandi March, the Salt Satyagraha. 

8 

 
Today, you will be the fifth Prime Minister of India to address the National Assembly 
of  Mauritius  since  we  attained  Independence  in  1968,  a  testimony,  to  the  unique  relation 
which Mauritius and India share.  Indeed Shrimati Indira Gandhi was the first foreign Head 
of Government to address this House following our Independence.  

Hon. Members, to introduce His Excellency Shri Narendra Modi, Prime Minister of 
India,  is  no  small  challenge.  The  high  qualities  of  the  Prime  Minister’s  acclaimed 
statesmanship have spread beyond the frontiers of India and he is one of the most followed 
and  revered  global  leaders  of  our  time.    Shri  Narendra  Modi  joined  the  BJP  in  1997  and 
became the General Secretary of the BJP Gujarat Unit in 1998. He rapidly emerged as a key 
strategist  and  successfully  campaigned  for  his  Party  in  1995  and  in  the  1998  Gujarat 
Elections which brought BJP to power in the State of Gujarat.  He became the Chief Minister 
of the State of Gujarat for the first time in October 2001 and subsequently served three other 
terms. 

Hon. Members, in June 2013, His Excellency was chosen as Leader by the BJP for 

2014 General Elections.  He and his party vigorously won a landslide victory. 

Excellency, your place of birth, Vadnagar, or Anartapur as it was referred to in the 
Mahabharat,  was  once  a  vibrant  centre  of  Buddhist  learning  and  spirituality  and  no  doubt 
inspired you in many ways. 

From  Vadnagar  to  Panchvati  or  7,  Racecourse  Road  as  it  is  better  known;  from 
humble beginnings to the post of premier of your country, you have travelled a long road, 
often a difficult journey. Yet you never swayed from the path of service to the people at all 
times, the concept of seva that was so dear to Mahatma Gandhi. You continue to live your 
life by the principle of ‘Antyodaya’, which means serving the last person in the queue. 

You also found time, Excellency, amidst  your activities, to pen some fifteen books 
including  one  on  Education  is  Empowerment  and  on  The  Yoga  of  Education.  Under  your 
authority, India submitted to the United Nations General Assembly a Resolution on World 
Yoga Day, a Resolution that holds the record for the highest number of sponsorships. 

Your success, Excellency, knows no boundaries. From Yoga to business, you turned 
Gujrat  into  a  lead  Industrial  State,  based  on  the  principles  of  people-centred  governance 
which became a model for the whole of India. Although struck by a devastating earthquake in 
2001, Gujarat went on to attract huge investments and the economy grew at least 10% higher 
than the Indian yearly average for much of a decade, making it a growth engine for India. 

 

9 

Your inspired decision of hosting the Vibrant Gujrat meet bi-annually in Gandhinagar, still 
brings thousands of people at high level, flocking to take advantage of the business facilities 
offered by your Home State. 

Hon. Members, we have today in our midst an extraordinary man who, through sheer 
intelligence, hard work, perseverance, patriotism and a principled approach to life inspired by 
Gandhian principles, has risen to the highest echelon of governance. Your Excellency, you 
have undertaken the mission to lead over 1.3 billion people to a higher  destiny and to the 
transformation of India into an India mindful of the needs of its people, proud of its history, 
confident in its role in the comity of nations. 

We salute the exceptional person that you are, Excellency. 

Hon. Members, I now have the pleasure to invite His Excellency, Sri Narendra Modi, 

Prime Minister of the Republic of India, to address the House. 

Your Excellency, you have the floor. 

(11.30 p.m.) 

His Excellency Shri Narendra Modi, Prime Minister of the Republic of India: 

Madam Speaker, Mrs Santi Bai Hanoomanjee, 

Prime Minister Sir Anerood Jugnauth Ji, 

Leader of the Opposition, Paul Bérenger, 

Members of the Assembly 

Greetings on the Independence Day of Mauritius! 

It is always a great honour to speak to a National Assembly. 

But, it is truly special to do so in the Assembly of a people with which we share the 
deepest bonds of history and culture; and, of a nation that we are proud to call a friend and a 
partner. 

To be here with you in this Assembly on your National Day is a blessed moment for 

me. 

On Independence Day we not only celebrate liberty, but also remember the struggles 

and sacrifices that gave birth to freedom. 

Today is also a special day in the history of India’s freedom struggle. 

 
On this day, in 1930, Mahatma Gandhi began his Dandi March. 

10 

And, India took a great step forward to Independence. 

Your National Day honours Mahatma Gandhi. And, it forms a deep bond of emotion 

between our two countries. 

Today, I also pay homage to Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam for leading Mauritius to 

freedom and for his vision and leadership in building our partnership. 

I stand here today not just in celebration of our relationship, but also in admiration of 

your achievements. 

There are many countries that have seen the joys of freedom fade into the gloom of 

lost direction. 

In Mauritius, though, the hopes and promises of independence have become brighter 

by the passing day. 

Mauritius has stood as a bright beacon of democracy. 

This  is  a  nation  of  a  little  over  a  million  people  of  huge  diversity  living  in  great 
harmony. It is a nation that has lived up to the words of its national anthem - one nation, one 
people, in peace, justice and liberty. It is a nation moving firmly on the path of prosperity. I 
have always admired how Mauritius has made smart choices and encouraged hard work and 
enterprise.  It  has  gone  from  an  agricultural  economy  to  a  middle  income  and  diversified 
economy, tapping the opportunities in textile and tourism and now to offshore finance and 
information technology. 

Generations ago people from India chartered an unknown course to an uncertain new 
life in an unfamiliar world. As they built their lives, they lived on the memories of Himalaya 
and Ganga; through the rituals of Shivaratri and Cavadee, the colours of Holi and the joy of 
Eid; through songs that welcomed the rains and dances that celebrated the harvest. Today, 
they are proud citizens of Mauritius; thriving in the dynamism of their country; contributing 
to its success. The island pulsates with the beauty of their preserved beliefs and culture. Yet, 
they  blend  easily  into  a  way  of  life  that  has  been  formed  by  the  winds  and  waves  from 
different parts of the world.  

This morning I went to Ganga Talao. I felt a personal connection that comes from the 
banks of Ganga in my parliamentary constituency – Banaras. And, I understood the powerful 
links of heart that have endured time and distance in this magnificent land.  

11 

 
Today, these links form the firmest foundation of our relationship. They have created 
goodwill and warmth rarely seen in international relations. They have built an unbreakable 
chain of trust between us. Today, we are equally proud to have a relationship that speaks of 
the needs of our times. We relate to each other from the comfort of our shared democratic 
values. We are partners in our economic progress. We shoulder our shared responsibility to 
advance security in the Indian Ocean. We speak in one voice in the cause of the developing 
world and the future of our planet. I see Mauritius as a leader in the Indian Ocean Community 
and as a bridge to Africa. Your leadership is helping promote Hindi in the world. India thanks 
you for hosting the World Hindi Secretariat. 

Madam  Speaker,  this  is  the  wealth  of  our  inheritance.  This  is  the  richness  of  our 
partnership. Last year, we had democratic transition in both countries. There are two things 
that  are  similar  to  both.  After  a  long  time,  a  single  party  won  absolute  majority  in  both 
countries and in both Parliaments - it is very interesting - I have the honour to say, Madam 
Speaker!    We  know  that  democratic  changes  make  no  difference  to  the  strength  of  our 
relationship.  What  we  now  have,  though,  in  both  nations  is  a  stable  platform  to  speed  up 
economic development.  

Over the last nine months, we in India have moved with a clear vision of inclusive 
development.  We  have  acted  with  speed,  resolve,  innovation  and  boldness  to  increase 
economic growth, reform for our economy and transform the lives of our people and create 
opportunities for the most excluded youth, the remotest farmer and the farthest village. I am 
confident that under the hon. Prime Minister, Sir A. Jugnauth, development in Mauritius will 
become more impressive and I can assure you that, as always, we will be with you in support 
of your efforts and in joy for your success. 

Yesterday,  I  told  the  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Sir  A.  Jugnauth,  that  we  understand  the 
importance  of  the  offshore  banking  sector  for  your  economy.  We  are  conscious  of  its 
dependence on India. We will work together for our shared objective to avoid the abuse of 
our double taxation avoidance convention. I thank you for  your support. But, I also assure 
you that we will do nothing to harm this vibrant sector of one of our closest strategic partners. 

It  has  been  a  great  privilege  to  be  a  development  partner  for  Mauritius.  We  will 
always be ready to do more, in accordance with your wishes. Yesterday, we announced a new 
Line  of  Credit  of  500  million  U.S.  dollars  for  the  development  of  civilian  projects  in 
Mauritius.  The  hon.  Prime  Minister  Vajpayee  had  supported  the  construction  of  the  first 

 

12 

cyber city in Mauritius in 2003. That became a symbol of our thriving economic partnership. 
I am pleased to announce our support for a second cyber city in Mauritius.  While we are on 
the subject of information technology, the e-health project in Mauritius is a laudable initiative 
and we would be happy to support its development.  

We are honoured to be  Mauritius’s partner for  meeting its petroleum requirements. 
We are embarking on a  new project to build the petroleum storage  facility here. This will 
further strengthen the position of Mauritius as a regional economic hub. Mauritius has shown 
great vision in the development of its ocean economy from fishing to tourism. India is also 
highly dependent on the seas. We are seeking to develop our marine economy and discover 
new possibilities.  

We are doing this in a sustainable manner that preserves the delicate ecosystem of our 
oceans.  Indeed,  the  oceans  hold  vast  potential  to  advance  our  prosperity  and  meet  the 
challenges of the world. 

That  is  why,  I  consider  the  blue  chakra  in  our  national  flag  as  a  symbol  Blue 
Revolution; just as saffron represents energy revolution, white the milk revolution and, green 
the  energy  revolution.  This  offers  a  great  opportunity  to  cooperation  between  our  two 
countries. We can learn from  you. Together, we can better understand our marine ecology 
and the new opportunities. We can improve our ability to pursue more sustainable practices. 
Our partnership must also cover the challenges of climate change. 

For India, it is a mission that we are pursuing on an entirely new scale and with a new 
sense of urgency. We have set an ambitious target of 100 Gigawatts of solar energy and 60 
Gigawatts  of  wind  energy  by  2022.  We  will  seek  to  dramatically  increase  our  energy 
efficiency,  which  is  the  cleanest  form  of  energy.  This  is  a  choice  that  is  driven  by 
commitment to the future, but also by principles. And, for me it is an article of faith. 

We are the inheritors of an ancient tradition and wisdom that elevated preservation of 
nature to a sacred duty; that worships Earth as a mother; and, that treats reckless exploitation 
of nature as a crime.  

Mauritius  has  been  a  leading  international  voice  on  climate  change,  not  just  as  an 

advocate for island states, but for the sake of our collective future. 

We look forward to working with you for a more resolute global action against climate 

change. 

 

13 

We can pursue our dreams of a sustainable and prosperous future if we are confident 

about peace, security and stability in our world. 

 For India and Mauritius, our destinies are linked by the currents of the Indian Ocean. 
Our security partnership has been a strong pillar of our relationship. And, it has stood the test 
of  time.  It  is  founded  on  unmatched  mutual  confidence  and  trust.  It  is  rooted  in  the 
responsibility to each other that comes naturally from our friendship. It stems from our shared 
commitment to peace and prosperity in the Indian Ocean Region. As Mauritius seeks to make 
islands and water safer; as you seek to secure your vast Explosive Economic Zone, we will 
always there for you. We will deepen our cooperation. And, we will also do everything we 
can to strengthen your own capabilities. Later, today I will have the honour to commission 
the Barracuda into the service of your National Coast Guard.   

Today, proudly flying the flag of Mauritius, she will sail as a symbol of our partnership. 
India is grateful for the faith that you have placed in us. And, as Mauritius assumes greater 
responsibility for securing this part of the Indian Ocean, we know that our region will be a 
safer place. But, we share a broader vision for lasting stability and prosperity in the region.  

We  believe  that  all  the  nations  in  our  region  should  come  together  to  shoulder  our 
shared  responsibility.  We  seek  a  comprehensive  partnership  of  closer  security,  economic, 
cultural, scientific and people-to-people ties in our region.  

That  is  why  we  are  grateful  that  Mauritius  hosts  the  Indian  Ocean  Rim  Association. 
Your leadership will remain important to realise our vision. Your steadfast support in global 
institutions gives us more strength to speak on our common interests.  

Now, as the United Nations reaches its 70th  year at a time of great turmoil, we seek 

your support to reform this institution to make it more relevant to the needs of our age. 

I  want  to  thank  Mauritius  for  the  strong  support  for  the  United  Nations  Resolution 
declaring June 21 as the International Day of Yoga. This Resolution was passed by a record 
co-sponsorship in a record time frame.  

This  is  a  tribute  to  our  shared  heritage.  I  know  you  will  celebrate  it  with  fervour  in 

Mauritius. 

Madam Speaker, in the life of a nation, as in the life of an individual, there is nothing 
more  precious  and  satisfying  than  a  true  friend  and  well-wisher;  nothing  more  comforting 

 

14 

than  his  embrace;  nothing  more  valuable  than  his  trust;  nothing  more  reassuring  than  his 
support; nothing more enriching than his partnership. 

So,  we  are  blessed  to  have  your  friendship.  And,  I  always  say  that  if  there  is  one 
country  that  has  full  claims  on  us,  it  is  Mauritius.  It  is  the  relationship  of  our  hearts  and 
sentiments. And, it will never be limited by boundaries. To we in India will do everything to 
nurture it.  

This relationship will always be a source of great joy and strength to our two countries. 
And, it will also be of immense value to our region and our world. Thanks for this honour and 
thanks to everybody. Again I wish my best wishes on this National Day. 

Thank you very much. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Prime Minister! 

(Applause) 

(11.52 p.m.) 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, I would like, on your behalf and on behalf of 
all  the  Members  of  this  House  to  express  our  deepest  gratitude  to  His  Excellency  Shri 
Narendra Modi for accepting our invitation to address this Assembly and for delivering such 
an enlightening and elevating speech. 

 
It  was  indeed  a  privilege  for  all  of  us,  to  receive  in  this  august  Assembly,  another 
illustrious son of India and to listen to his insightful words, imbued with the wisdom of India. 

We wish to assure you, Excellency, that we have great admiration for the grand and 

 
noble ideals which you stand for and your mission to shape a glorious future for India. 

Your life journey is a perfect illustration of the triumph of perseverance, courage and 

determination, and is a source of great inspiration to all of us. 

Excellency, we feel greatly honoured by your distinguished presence in this Assembly 
today.    We  share  the  same  values  and  principles,  and  are  driven  by  the  same  passion  and 
determination to secure a better and brighter future for our people. 

You  are  the  fourth  Prime  Minister  of  India  to  address  this  Assembly,  and  your 
presence  here  today  bears  testimony  to  the  unshakable  friendship  and  unbreakable 
partnership between our two countries. 

15 

 
Your visit to Mauritius, Excellency, is for us a great moment and an opportunity to 
reiterate our close affinities with Mother India.  The special nature of our relations imposes a 
duty on us to carry forward our cooperation to new heights, and we see in you, Mr Prime 
Minister, a harbinger of a new era of more fruitful cooperation between our two countries. 

India is pursuing its drive to expand its economic scope and influence under your able 
leadership.  Mauritius is also embarked on an economic transformation journey with the aim 
of moving the economy to a much higher plane. 

Your visit, Prime Minister, is an opportunity for us to re-engineer our framework of 

cooperation to a more meaningful level. 

Mr  Prime  Minister,  it  is  my  privilege,  on  behalf  of  Madam  Speaker,  of  all  the 
Members  of  the  Assembly  on  both  sides  of  the House,  and  the  Clerk  of  the  Assembly,  to 
thank you once again for the distinct honour that you have bestowed on our Parliament by 
your distinguished presence and your inspiring address. 

It is certainly a day that we shall remember for long and that will be written in history 

of both Mauritius and India. 

Thank you a lot. 

(Applause) 

At 11.56 a.m. the Assembly rose and stood adjourned, as already resolved, to Friday 

13 March 2015 at 2.00 p.m. 

