No. 41 of 2015 

 

1 

 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

 

 

FIRST SESSION 

 

TUESDAY 24 NOVEMBER 2015 

 

 

 

 

2 

CONTENTS 

 

 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

PAPERS LAID 

QUESTIONS (Oral) 

MOTION 

BILL (Public) 

ADJOURNMENT 

QUESTIONS (Written) 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 
KCMG, QC  
Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 
GCSK  
Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 
Communications 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo, GCSK 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 
Utilities 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 
Sinatambou 
Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 
Perraud 
Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain 

Integration 

and  Economic 

of 
Minister 
Empowerment 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 
International Trade 
Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 
Family Welfare 
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance, 
Technology, 
Institutional  Reforms,  Minister 

of 

 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, 
QPM 
Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 
Cheong, MSK 
Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 

4 

Communication and Innovation 
Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 
Institutions 
Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands 
Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 
Disaster and Beach Management  
Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms 

Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and 
Training 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Gopall, Mr Navin (Temporary Transfer to 
RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 41 of 2015 

 

Sitting of 24 November 2015 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

7 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

NATIONAL ASSEMBLY - L’ASSEMBLÉE NATIONALE DE L’UNION DES COMORES 

& L’ASSEMBLÉE NATIONALE DE MADAGASCAR - DELEGATION 

Madam Speaker: Honorables membres, j’ai le plaisir de vous annoncer la présence parmi 
nous  ce  matin  d’une  délégation  de  parlementaires  de  l’Union  des  Comores  dirigée  par 
l’honorable  docteur  Abou  Ouseni  Houmadi,  le  Président  de  l’Assemblée  nationale  de  l’Union 
des Comores ainsi qu’une délégation de parlementaires de la République de Madagascar dirigée 
par l’honorable Mananjara, le Vice-Président de l’Assemblée nationale de Madagascar. 

Les  distingués  invités  qui  sont  accompagnés  de  Son  Excellence,  M.  Jean  Claude 
de l'Estrac, Secrétaire général de la Commission de l’Océan Indien sont à Maurice dans le cadre 
de la première réunion de la réactivation de l’Association parlementaire de l’Océan Indien.  

En  votre  nom  et  en  mon  nom  personnel,  je  leur  souhaite  la  bienvenue  ainsi  qu’une 

fructueuse session de travail et un agréable séjour chez nous.  

 

 

PAPERS LAID 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table. 

A.    Ministry of  Agro–Industry and Food Security – 

 

The  Annual  Report  2011  and  the  Financial  Statements  of  the  Mauritius 
Sugar Industry Research Institute for the year ended 31 December 2011 and 
18 March 2012. 

B.    Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection  – 

(a)  The  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Price  of  Petroleum  Products)) 
(Amendment)  Regulations  2015.  (Government  Notice  No.  222  of 
2015) 

(b)  The  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Price  of  Taxable  and  Non-
Taxable Goods) (Amendment No. 2) Regulations 2015. (Government 
Notice No. 223 of 2015) 

(c)  The Rodrigues Consumer Protection (Control of Price of Taxable and  
Non-Taxable  Goods)  (Amendment  No.  30)  Regulations  2015. 
(Government Notice No. 224 of 2015) 

 

 

 

 

 

8 

(d)  The Rodrigues Consumer Protection (Control of Price of Taxable and  
Non-Taxable  Goods)  (Amendment  No.  31)  Regulations  2015. 
(Government Notice No. 225 of 2015) 

(e)  The Rodrigues Consumer Protection (Control of Price of Taxable and  
Non-Taxable  Goods)  (Amendment  No.  32)  Regulations  2015. 
(Government Notice No. 226 of 2015) 
 

ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

DOMESTIC VIOLENCE 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Minister 
of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and  Family  Welfare  whether,  in  regard  to  domestic 
violence, she will –  

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

state  the  total  number  of  reported  cases  thereof  both  to  the  Police  and  to  the 
Family  Support  Bureaux,  since  2010  to  date,  on  a  yearly  basis,  indicating  the 
number of prosecuted cases thereof and the outcome thereof;  
state if a fresh study on the extent, nature and cost thereof will be carried out and, 
if so, indicate when;  
state  how  the  implementation  of  the  2014  Domingue  Report  is  progressing, 
indicating the measures being taken in relation thereto at the level of the Police, 
and  
for the benefit of the House, obtain from the National Coalition against Domestic 
Violence Committee, information as to the composition thereof, indicating if the 
report thereof has been finalised. 

Mrs Perraud: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the hon. Leader of the Opposition for 
this question. It comes at an opportune time as we are commemorating the International Day for 
the Elimination of Violence against Women tomorrow, 25 November 2015.   

Allow me, at the very outset, to inform the House that domestic violence takes different 
forms such as physical, sexual, psychological and also economic exploitation, occurring in the 
family and in communities with devastating effects.  It harms families and communities across 
generations and reinforces other violence prevalent in society.  Domestic violence is not confined 

 

9 

to  a  specific  culture,  region  or  country  or  to  particular  groups  of  people,  but  spans  across  all 
segments and strata of society. Mauritius is no exception to this phenomenon. 

Madam Speaker, in regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed by the Commissioner 
of Police that the number of cases of domestic violence reported to the Police since 2010 to date 
is as follows - 

No of cases 
reported  

2010 

2011 

2012 

2013 

2014 

2015 

(Jan - 
Oct) 

Total 

3078 

3046 

3285 

2842 

3062 

2375 

 

Convicted 

362 

331 

286 

341 

301 

228 

Cases of Domestic Violence registered to Police Family Protection Unit for Mediation and 

Counselling 

Year 

2010 

2011 

2012 

2013 

2014 

2015  

(Jan - Oct) 

Total 

4332 

4208 

4811 

4767 

4701 

3534 

As regards the number of domestic violence cases reported at the 6 Family Support 
Bureaux of my Ministry - 

YEAR 

TOTAL 

2010 

2011 

2012 

2013 

2215 

1817 

1974 

1786 

 

2014 

2015 (Jan - Oct) 

10 

1680 

1259 

I must, however, point out that there may be a duplication of figures being given that some 

 
cases are both reported at the Police as well as at the Family Support Bureaux of my Ministry. 

Regarding part (b) of the question, I would like to inform the House that a study on the 
extent, nature and cost of domestic violence to the Mauritian economy for the period 2008 - 2009 
was conducted by the Mauritius Research Council and was launched in 2010.  The study also 
attempted  to  place  a  monetary  value  on  the  burden  that  such  type  of  violence  has  on  the 
economy.  The total cost was estimated at Rs1.4 billion for the period 2008 - 2009.  According to 
the  Report,  the  most  common  type  of  gender-based  violence  were:  emotional,  physical  and 
sexual. 

Given  the  importance  of  such  a  study,  my  Ministry  has  already  initiated  action  to 
commission a new study on Intimate Partner Violence that will focus on the Prevalence, Causes, 
Consequences and Cost of Intimate Partner Violence on the Mauritian Economy. The Terms of 
Reference have already been worked out.  The study will provide policy recommendations, with 
specific  indicators,  that  will  enable  the  development  of  a  Costed  Action  Plan  and  appropriate 
strategies to deal with Intimate Partner Violence through prevention and appropriate intervention 
mechanisms  and  measures.    The  study  will  be  partly  financed  under  the  UNFPA  assisted 
programme. Call for Proposals will be sought by the end of this month and it is expected that the 
consultancy contract, which would be for a duration of six months, would be awarded by mid-
January 2016 and completed by July 2016. 

Insofar as part (c) of the question is concerned, I would like to inform the House that the 
Domingue Report was launched on 17 August 2015 following which, a three-day consultative 
workshop  was  held  with  all  stakeholders.  The  objective  of  the  workshop  was  to  elaborate  a 
strategic plan for the effective implementation of the recommendations of the Report.  

Madam Speaker, the  recommendations of the Domingue Report  concur  that our laws in 
respect of domestic violence, including Protection from Domestic Violence Act (PDVA) as well 
as  the  Penal  Code  and  other  related  Acts  still  have  numerous  lacunas  and  weaknesses  and 
changes are needed to make them more compliant.   

 

11 

My  Ministry  is  in  consultation  with  the  Attorney  General’s  Office  to  bring  about  the 

required amendments to the legislation.  The proposed amendments include, amongst others – 

(i) 

the PDVA to provide for a more comprehensive definition of ‘domestic violence’ so 
as  to  include  psychological,  sexual  and  economic  violence  that  occur  within  the 
family  or  between  former  or  current  spouses  or  partners,  whether  or  not  the 
perpetrator shares or has shared the same residence with the victim; 

(ii)  provision to be made in the Criminal Code for the following - 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

(f) 

all forms of domestic violence to be criminalised, including the intentional 
conduct of seriously impairing the psychological integrity of a spouse or 
partner through coercion or threats; 

for harsher penalty when offences committed, inter alia, against a person 
with  special  need,  a  pregnant  woman  or  a  person  who  due  to  whatever 
reason  is  incapable  of  resisting,  a  weapon  was  used,  or  the  act  was 
committed in the presence of a minor or in repeated incident of domestic 
violence, regardless of the level of injury; 

for manslaughter committed by a spouse or partner of the victim be treated 
as aggravating circumstances and the related sentences be inflicted; 

rape, to include marital rape; 

Section 242 of the Code, which provides that manslaughter committed by 
any  person  on  his  spouse,  as  well  as  on  his  accomplice,  at  the  very 
moment he finds them in the act of adultery is excusable,  be repealed; 

provision  to  be  made  for  deferred  prosecution  agreements,  whereby  the 
Director  of  Public  Prosecutions  can  enter  into  an  agreement  with  an 
alleged perpetrator not to prosecute for a domestic offence, subject to the 
alleged  perpetrator  taking  the  commitment  to  attend  a  rehabilitation 
programme and not to indulge in further acts of domestic violence; should 
the perpetrator fail to meet the requirements laid down in the agreement, 
prosecution would ensue; 

 
(iii) 

12 

Provision to be made in the Court Act for video link when victims and witness do 
not  want  to  confront  the  perpetrator  during  Court  proceedings.  Specialised 
Domestic Court should be set up to guarantee the rights of victims of domestic 
violence. 

As regards the Police, consultations were carried out and it has been agreed that provision 
be made in the Police Act so that “Police may arrest without warrant upon reasonable ground of 
suspicion, a person who committed an offence of Domestic Violence of an aggravated nature”.  
The Police is also willing to extend its assistance to Court Ushers whenever required in cases of 
domestic violence. 

I  am  confident  that,  by  the  next  session  of  the  National  Assembly,  we  would  have 
brought  the  necessary  amendments  to  strengthen  the  legislative  framework  in  respect  of 
combatting the scourge of domestic violence in our Republic. 

Madam Speaker, concerning part (d) of the question, I am informed that following the 
announcement  in  the  Government  Programme  2015-2019,  the  National  Coalition  Against 
Domestic Violence Committee was set up under the aegis of the Prime Minister’s Office, with 
representatives from the following Ministries/Departments/Organisations – 

(i) 

Prime Minister’s Office (Home Affairs Division); 

(ii)  Ministry of Gender Equality, Child Development and Family Welfare; 

(iii)  Ministry of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reforms Institutions; 

(iv) 

Police Department; 

(v)  Ministry of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment; 

(vi)  Ministry of Health and Quality of Life; 

(vii)  Ministry of Housing and Lands;  

(viii)  Ministry of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training (Employment 

and Training Division); 

(ix)  Attorney General’s Office; 

(x)  MACOSS; 

13 

 
(xi) 

SOS Femmes, and 

(xii) 

the  private sector. 

The  involvement  of  NGOs  and  the  private  sector  were  considered  essential  for  the 
adoption of a holistic approach to the problem of domestic violence. However, no representative 
from the Private Sector turned up for the Committee meetings when convened. 

Nine meetings of the Committee have been held over the period March to 23 November 

2015. 

Two subcommittees have been constituted to look at the following – 

•  streamlining of procedures for victims of domestic violence, and 

•  proposals for accommodation and employment. 

A Wrap up meeting is scheduled for Tuesday 24 November 2015, that is, today, at 3.00 
p.m. to finalise the report. Thereafter, approval of Cabinet will be sought early December 2015 
for the implementation of the recommendations made in the report. It should be pointed out that 
the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life is already implementing the guidelines and protocol in 
order to fast-track cases where victims of domestic violence call at the hospital. 

Madam  Speaker,  domestic  violence  is  a  “fléau  sociale”  which  has  far-reaching 
consequences on society if not addressed properly. We must halt and reverse the trend and this is 
what I have tasked myself with as a priority since my assumption of office. Many programmes 
and projects are under way. Our approach is three-pronged, that is, intervention, prevention and 
rehabilitation  which  is  being  provided  through  our  six  Family  Support  Bureaux.  We  have 
reinforced our human resource capacity with additional Family Welfare and Protection Officers 
and the recruitment of additional legal persons on sessional basis.  It is a national issue and the 
collaboration of all stakeholders is required.  

Mr  Bérenger:  The  figures  provided  by  the  hon.  Minister  for  the  number  of  cases 
reported and sent to Court of domestic violence is quite disturbing. Can I ask the hon. Minister 
whether she will agree with me that, in fact, what is reported, what goes to Court and so on, is 
the tip of the iceberg, here, in Mauritius, as is elsewhere, if I can refer to a study in the European 
Union in 2014 which established, I quote – 

 
“About a third of all women in the European Union have experienced either physical or 
sexual violence since the age of 15” 

14 

and which puts the number of women killed by domestic violence around 3,000 every year? Can 
I ask whether any kind of guesstimate has been worked out, basing ourselves on the experience 
elsewhere and what we know of Mauritius, what are the real figures? 

Mrs Perraud: Madam Speaker, as I have stated in my reply, we have figures from the 
Police and also figures of cases reported at our six Family Support Bureaux. I totally agree with 
the hon. Leader of the Opposition that this problem is very serious. This is why, at the level of 
my Ministry, we are taking it seriously and we are working on all the recommendations of the 
Advisory Committee. 

Mr Bérenger: The hon. Minister has just made reference to the six bureaux. Can I know 
from the hon. Minister what is their geographical distribution over the island and whether she is 
satisfied that the existence of six bureaux is sufficient or whether a request has been made for 
other bureaux to be opened? 

Mrs  Perraud:  I  can  say  that,  six  Family  Support  Bureaux  are  found  at  Port  Louis, 
Goodlands, Flacq, Bambous, Phoenix and Rose Belle. So, we have six Family Support Bureaux 
at the level of our Ministry and we have been talking with the Police so that we can also use the 
seven bureaux that the Police have so that we can have more bureaux and a complete service 
offered to the victims of domestic violence. Indeed, six is insufficient. 

Mr Bérenger: Concerning the National Coalition against Domestic Violence Committee, 
I thank the hon. Minister for providing us with information, but can  I know who chaired this 
Coalition Committee? 

Mrs Perraud: The person who chaired the Committee is the PS at PMO. 

Mr Bérenger: If  I can move on to the Domingue Report, of course, the hon. Minister 
will  understand  that  I  talked  about  the  2000  routine  Domingue  Report,  because  it  was  set  up 
then, but it reported, if  I  am not mistaken, at the end of 2014, but was  made public  after the 
general elections. Will the hon. Minister agree with me that it is a strong report? I consider it a 
very strong, very good report, except for the part dealing with the Police. Will the hon. Minister 
agree with me that, in fact, the Police in Mauritius is part of the problem and not part of the 

 

15 

solution,  when  young  girls/women  report  to  Police  Stations  in  cases  of  domestic  violence,  of 
sexual violence, they are humiliated by most officers - you have good officers, but humiliated! 
Sometimes they are raped a second time, verbally, I mean.   Will she agree with me that on that 
the  report  is  weak  and  has  she  taken  that  up  with  the  Prime  Minister,  especially  the  idea  of 
having female Police officers present in every Police station? 

Mrs Perraud: Indeed, we got cases reported at the Ministry’s level that for some people 
when they  go to the Police station to find assistance, they  are not well  welcomed. So,  I have 
already talked about this problem to the Commissioner of Police himself. I have met him more 
than three times to discuss this matter and we have regular meetings with the Police and officers 
of my Ministry to talk about this problem. 

Mr  Bérenger:  I  didn’t  get  an  answer  whether  we  are  progressing  in  terms  of  female 
Police  officers  presence,  who  should  be  in  every  Police  station  as  soon  as  we  can  reach  that 
stage. But can I ask - since the hon. Minister mentioned the Commissioner of Police – whether 
we can also have sessions de formation for policemen because they are what they are; we are all 
what we are with our prejudices, our mentalities and so on?  Therefore, will she agree with me 
that  sessions  de  formation  for  the  Police  officers  of  the  whole  Force  is  urgently  required  and 
should be ongoing? 

Mrs Perraud: Yes, this is already on. We have capacity building for the Police officers. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo! 

Mr Ganoo: May I ask a question to the hon. Minister - a matter which I have raised some 
time back in this very House concerning the abusers and the perpetrators - whether we should not 
inspire  ourselves  when  amending  the  law  from  what  takes  place  in  other  countries?    When  a 
protection order is issued against the husband, he is formally ordered and compelled to follow 
sensitisation courses so that he may understand where things are going wrong and these courses 
can yield positive results with regard to the husband. 

Mrs Perraud: I have already stated in my reply that we are working for rehabilitation of 

perpetrators.  

Mr Sesungkur: Madam Speaker, I think the plight of women, of couples should interest 

all our Members here and I am happy that the Leader of the Opposition… 

 
Madam Speaker: Don’t make a statement hon. Sesungkur, ask your question! 

16 

Mr Sesungkur: Yes, I am coming to it. Based on the figures quoted by the hon. Minister, 
will she agree that despite so much money spent on various programmes, there seems to be no 
meaningful and no productive result because I can see that since 2010 the number of cases did 
not  go  down? Can  the  hon.  Minister  enlighten  the  House  if  the  cases  reported  are  in  specific 
regions so that we can assess whether it is linked with poverty or any social issues? 

Mrs Perraud: Madame la présidente, j’ai déjà dit dans ma réponse qu’en ce qui concerne 
la violence faite aux femmes, cela ne concerne pas de région, de race, de couleur ou de social 
background. Donc, tout le monde est concerné. Mais j’aimerais aussi dire que mon ministère fait 
de la prévention et de la lutte contre les violences faites aux femmes une priorité et que notre 
objectif c’est qu’aucune violence déclarée ne doit rester sans réponse. Il nous faut sensibiliser la 
société. Les violences faites aux femmes ne doivent plus être ni une fatalité ni un tabou.   

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Minister  mentioned  that  the  Units  are  now 
adequately staffed. May I know from the hon. Minister how many psychologists are attached to 
her  Ministry  and  whether  there  is  any  agreement  with  the  Police  that  each  time  there  is  a 
domestic violence case reported, the victim has access immediately or as soon as possible to a 
psychologist? 

Mrs Perraud: We have six psychologists attached to the Family Welfare Protection Unit 

and 12 to the CDU. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Can  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  whether  in  view  of  the  alarming 
situation a comprehensive study is being carried out with regard to capacity as a whole within the 
Ministry, taking into consideration the staff and what does the Ministry consider urgent to have 
for the coming years? 

Mrs  Perraud:  As  I  have  already  said  in  my  reply,  we  are  looking  forward  for  a  new 

study. 

Mr Bérenger: Can I have a last question ? J’ai écouté attentivement la ministre. Est-ce 
qu’elle sera d’accord avec moi – je pense que oui – que tout reste à faire – beaucoup, mais moi je 

 

17 

dis tout reste à faire à Maurice - pour combattre la violence domestique ? Est-elle d’accord avec 
moi qu’à l’occasion de la Journée Internationale demain contre la violence domestique qu’il faut 
faire un appel spécial, à travers ce Parlement, surtout aux hommes et aux jeunes à l’occasion de 
cette Journée Internationale contre la violence domestique et nous tous ensemble faire en sorte 
que le combat contre la violence domestique prenne un nouveau départ à l’île Maurice ?  

Mrs  Perraud :  Effectivement,  je  pense  qu’il  faut  faire  un  plaidoyer  pour  que  tout  le 
monde se sente concerné par rapport aux violences faites aux femmes. Et demain, comme j’ai 
annoncé hier lors de ma conférence de presse, il y a toute une série d’activités organisées pour 
justement commémorer cette journée et beaucoup a été fait  depuis que nous sommes arrivés en 
décembre  de  l’année  dernière.  Nous  travaillons  beaucoup  avec  le  monde  associatif,  avec  les 
ONG  pour  combattre  ce  problème.  Nous  avons  demandé  et  obtenu  lors  du  dernier  exercice 
budgétaire – je tiens à remercier le ministre des Finances – des effectifs additionnels justement 
parce  que  le  problème  est  conséquent,  donc  il    nous  faut  avoir  du  personnel  pour  pouvoir 
soutenir et aider ces femmes qui sont victimes de violence. Donc, je fais un appel à tous mes 
collègues qui sont là. Demain c’est la Journée Internationale contre la violence faite aux femmes, 
que chacun soit un ambassadeur, que nous soyons de l’Opposition ou du gouvernement et des 
associations et aussi les journalistes qui sont là, que nous soyons  tous demain et tous les jours 
des ambassadeurs pour protéger les femmes à Maurice et que nous soyons tous dans ce combat 
pour que nous ayons une société vraiment beaucoup plus bénéfique pour les femmes et pour tous 
les mauriciens. 

(Interruptions) 

 Madam Speaker: The Table has been advised that Parliamentary Question No. B/947 

has been withdrawn. Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

VIPSU OFFICERS - OVERSEAS MISSIONS 

(No. B/945) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked the 
Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Very Important Persons Support Unit, he 
will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, a list of the officers 
thereof who have accompanied Very Important Persons on overseas missions, since 2005 to date, 
indicating in each case the – 

 
(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

18 

grade and posting thereof; 

countries visited and duration thereof; 

personalities they had accompanied, and  

total  amount  of  money  spent  in  terms  of  air  tickets,  per  diem  and  any  other 
allowances. 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker,  the  following  VIP’s  are  entitled  to  be 

accompanied on overseas missions by officers of the Very Important Persons Support Unit – 

(i) 

(ii) 

the President; 

the Prime Minister; 

(iii) 

the Vice-President; 

(iv) 

the Deputy Prime Minister; 

(v) 

former Presidents;  

(vi) 

former Prime Ministers, and 

(vii) 

the Leader of the Opposition. 

The information requested by the hon. Member is being compiled and will be placed in 

 
the Library of the National Assembly. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan: Madam Speaker, may we know from the hon. Ag. Prime Minister when the 

VIPs travel for private visits whether they get Police officers to accompany them? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Yes, Madam Speaker, there have been occasions on private 
visits where several of these VIPs have taken Police officers.  I have not, but there have been 
occasions. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea is not here!  

HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION – LEGISLATION- AMENDMENT 

(No.  B/947)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 

 

19 

Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Human Rights Commission, 
he  will  state  if  consideration  will  be  given  for  the  law  in  relation  thereto  to  be  amended  to 
increase the powers thereof to investigate into alleged cases of miscarriage of justice. 

(Withdrawn) 

PMO – LEGAL ADVICE - COST 

(No. B/948) Mr D. Sesungkur (First Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) asked 
the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National Development Unit whether, in regard to external legal advice sought by his Office, he 
will state, for the years 2011, 2012, 2013 and 2014 respectively, the cost thereof, indicating in 
respect of each case the –  

(a) 

(b) 

reasons why external legal advice was warranted, and  

names of the legal Counsel whose services were retained. 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker,  the  information  relating  to  external  advice 
sought by the Prime Minister’s Office for the years 2011 to 2014, as well as the names of the 
respective Legal Counsel and the fees paid in each case, has already been provided to the House 
in reply to Parliamentary Question No. B/313 on 28 April 2015. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  Attorney  General’s  Office  is  the  principal  Legal  Adviser  to 

Government. 

 
In relation to external advice sought, except for the case brought by Mauritius against the 
United Kingdom under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, there is no record 
on the files of the Prime Minister’s Office as to the specific reasons therefor. 

ABORTION – GIRLS UNDER 16 YEARS – REPORTED CASES 

(No. B/949) Mr D. Sesungkur (First Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) asked 
the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National Development Unit whether, in regard to abortion, he will, for the benefit of the House, 
obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to the number of reported cases of girls 
under the age of 16 having allegedly undergone same, since January 2010 to date, indicating the 
– 

 
(a) 

(b) 

20 

number of prosecuted cases thereof and indicate the outcome thereof, and  

if an assessment of the situation has been carried out recently and, if so, indicate 
the findings thereof. 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  abortion  or  unlawful  termination  of 
pregnancy is criminalised under section 235 of the Criminal Code and anyone convicted under 
that section is liable to a penal servitude for a term not exceeding 10 years. 

Termination  of  pregnancy  is  also  regulated  under  section  235A  of  the  Criminal  Code, 
 
section  38A  of  the  Medical  Council  Act,  which  was  introduced  by  the  Criminal  Code 
(Amendment) Act 2012, and the Medical Council (Termination of Pregnancy) Regulations 2012. 

 
I  am  informed  by  the  Commissioner  of  Police  that,  between  January  2010  to  20 
November 2015, there have been four reported cases of girls under the age of 16 years who have 
allegedly undergone unlawful termination of pregnancy. 

In  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  by  the  Police  of  the  following 

 
outcome of each case - 

(i) 

(ii) 

the  Director  of  Public  Prosecutions  has  advised  no  further  action  in  two  cases 
reported in 2011 and 2013 respectively; 

one  case  reported  in  2012  is  awaiting  advice  of  the  Director  of  Public 
Prosecutions, and 

(iii) 

one case reported in 2013 is pending Court judgment. 

The  House  may  wish  to  note  that,  following  the  passing  of  the  Criminal  Code 
 
(Amendment) Act 2012 and the Medical Council (Termination of Pregnancy) Regulations 2012, 
13 cases of termination of pregnancy in specified circumstances have been authorised in public 
hospitals, including one case of a girl under the age of 16. 

Madam Speaker, in regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed by the Ministry of 
Health and Quality of Life that although there has not been any formal assessment of abortion in 
general, teenage pregnancy is being closely monitored at their level. Sensitisation on sexual and 
reproductive health, including teenage pregnancy, is carried out in upper primary and secondary 
schools  and  community  centres.    Furthermore,  the  Ministry  of  Gender  Equality,  Child 

 

21 

Development  and  Family  Welfare  ensures  that  counselling  services  and  medical  sessions  are 
provided in the Drop-in-Centre managed by the Mauritius Family Planning Welfare Centre for 
the victims of Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children. 

Mr Bérenger: Can I ask the hon. Ag. Prime Minister whether we have figures for illegal 

abortions that have gone wrong and that, therefore, end up in hospital? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I do not have the information.  It would be 

probably available at the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life. 

DANGEROUS DRUGS – SNIFFER DOGS 

(No. B/950) Mr R. Bhagwan (First Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) asked 
the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National Development Unit whether, in regard to the sniffer dogs, he will, for the benefit of the 
House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to – 

(a) 

(b)  

the number thereof operating at the Police Dogs Section, indicating the number 
thereof  posted  at  the  Central  Investigations  Department,  Anti-Drugs  Smuggling 
Unit, and other Units respectively, and  

if consideration will be given for an increase in the number thereof to address the 
dangerous drugs problems and, if so, indicate the measures that will be taken in 
relation thereto. 

The Ag.  Prime  Minister: Madam Speaker, in regard to part (a) of the  question,  I am 
informed by the Commissioner of Police that the Mauritius Police Force presently has 52 Police 
dogs, among which are 18 drug sniffer dogs and two general purpose cum drug sniffer dogs. 

All  the  Police  dogs  are  attached  to  the  Police  Dogs  Unit  based  at  the  Special  Mobile 
Force at Vacoas.  They are deployed from the Police Dogs Unit upon formal requests received 
from the various Divisions and Branches through the Police Information and Operations Room. 

Madam  Speaker,  in  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  am  further  informed  by  the 
Commissioner  of  Police  that  the  present  number  of  sniffer  dogs  is  currently  meeting  the 
operational requirements of the Police. There is consequently no immediate need to increase the 
number.  Nevertheless, due consideration is being given to increase the number in the years to 
come,  so  as  to  enhance  Police  response  to  dangerous  drugs  problems.    In  that  respect,  eight 

 

22 

puppies born at the Police Dogs Unit are presently undergoing training and will be ready to be 
used in Police operations by mid-2016. 

 

Any additional dogs required will be purchased from local breeders. 

Mr Bhagwan: How does the hon. Ag. Prime Minister reconcile the fact - he can ask the 
Commissioner  of  Police  –  that,  when  the  Head  of  the  ADSU  deponed  at  the  Commission  of 
Inquiry, one of the complaints which he made – which has become public – is about the lack of 
sniffer dogs?   Can the hon. Ag. Prime Minister  take up the matter with  the Commissioner of 
Police and inform us accordingly? 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  I  will,  Madam  Speaker.    This  has  not  been  brought  to  my 

notice. 

Mr Bhagwan: Can I know from the hon. Ag. Prime Minister whether requests have been 
made for our local Police trainers to go and follow courses overseas and whether such a request 
has  been  entertained?  Can  I  know  also  whether  there  is  a  plan  to  send  our  Police  officers    - 
because it is a specialised job - for training, especially in UK and in other European countries? 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:    Yes,  Madam  Speaker,  the  trainers  have  been  trained  in 
Durham, UK, in India and also in France.  So, it appears to have been, at least, ten cases.  In fact, 
three persons have undergone training in the last five years and maybe that is not sufficient. 

 

POLICE RIDERS - MOTORCYCLES - REPRESENTATIONS 

(No. B/951) Mr R. Bhagwan (First Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) asked 
the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Police  Traffic  Branch,  he  will,  for  the 
benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to the number of 
motorcycles attached thereto, indicating if he has received representations from the Police Riders 
attached thereto to the effect that the low saddle thereof is causing them severe health problems 
and, if so, indicate if due consideration will be given thereto, including the renewal of the fleet 
thereof and, if so, indicate – 

(a) 

when the exercise will be carried out, and  

23 

the number and types thereof that will be purchased. 

 
(b) 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  Commissioner  of 
Police that 172 motorcycles have been allocated to the Traffic Branch, out of which 54 are of 
low saddle type. 

I am further informed that several Police riders have verbally complained of backache as 
 
a result of riding these low saddle motorcycles over a certain period of time. They have received 
appropriate medical treatment at the Police Medical Unit. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  low  saddle  motorcycles  were  purchased  in  years  2008,  2009  and 
2012, and subsequent to the verbal complaints of backache, the Police are no longer purchasing 
this type of motorcycle. 

 
With regard to parts (a) and (b) of the question, I am informed by the Commissioner of 
Police that two tender exercises have so far been initiated by the Police for the purchase of 22 
and  36  motorcycles  fitted  with  ergonomic  saddle  seats,  so  as  to  mitigate  any  discomfort  that 
could be experienced by the riders. 

 
The  first  tender  exercise  for  the  22  motorcycles  has  been  completed  and  the  contract 
awarded on 20 August 2015.  Delivery is expected to be within six months as from the date of 
the award.  The second tender exercise for the 36 motorcycles was initiated on 31 August 2015 
and evaluation is in progress. 

I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  these  58  motorcycles  will  be  allocated  to  the  Traffic 

Branch following Government’s decision to increase Police patrol and visibility on our roads. 

Madam Speaker, as regards the 54 low saddle motorcycles, I am informed that necessary 
action has been initiated by the Commissioner of Police to dispose of them, as per established 
procedures, and subsequently procure new ones with the appropriate specifications. 

Mr Bhagwan: With the new and good initiative taken by the Commissioner of Police to 
have women Traffic Officers on the road, can the Ag. Prime Minister direct the Commissioner of 
Police to give these courageous women Traffic Officers good and efficient motorcycles? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, the matter is that Police officers - whether 
men or women - have complained and the Commissioner of Police has agreed to replace all the 
54 with new ones.  In the meantime, I will ask him to see what he can do for one and all. 

24 

 
Mr  Bhagwan:  On  the  same  line,  can  I  ask  the  hon.  Ag.  Prime  Minister  whether  the 
Prime Minister’s Office has received representations through the Police officers  that the Traffic 
officers are not given adequate equipment such as helmets, jackets and gloves?  We can see it on 
the road de visu. I think that, for modern Mauritius, we need a better traffic section with more 
efficient and good looking equipment. 

The Ag. Prime Minister: I am not aware, Madam Speaker, of any particular complaint. 

Mr Jhugroo: Madam Speaker, with regard to the 54 low saddle motorcycles purchased, 
can the hon. Ag. Prime Minister inform the House whether there had been any tender procedures, 
and if so, can we know if it was with regard to the specifications that these motorcycles were 
purchased? 

Mr Bhagwan: Can I make a request to the hon. Ag. Prime Minister pending the purchase 
of new low saddle motorcycles? Can he direct the Commissioner of Police, at least for the time 
being, to replace or make necessary arrangement to replace all the low saddle motorcycles given 
to these Women Police Officers?  

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  I  must  say,  Madam  Speaker,  that  we  have  asked  the 
Commissioner  of  Police  to  replace  these  motorcycles  as  quickly  as  possible.  They  were  not 
planned to be replaced, we have asked him to replace them as quickly as possible. I will ask him 
to pay particular attention as it is within the day tomorrow to have a look at this issue. 

PMO – FORMER PERMANENT SECRETARY - OVERSEAS MISSIONS 

(No. B/952) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked the 
Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National Development Unit whether, in regard to Mrs K. B., former Permanent Secretary posted 
at the Private Office of the former Prime Minister over the period 2010 to December 2014, he 
will state the –  

(a) 

parastatal bodies/State owned companies of which she was a Board Member, and  

(b)  

number of official overseas missions she attended, indicating the -  

(i) 

countries visited;  

(ii)  

date and duration thereof, and  

 

25 

(iii) 

total cost incurred in relation thereto. 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  Mrs  K.B,  former 
Permanent Secretary posted at the Private Office of the former Prime Minister was for the period 
2010  to  December  2014,  representing  the  Prime  Minister’s  Office  on  the  Boards  of  the  State 
Bank of Mauritius Ltd and the Mauritius Post Ltd respectively. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (b) of the question, I wish to refer the hon. Member 
to the reply made by the hon. Prime Minister to Parliamentary Question No. B/56 on Tuesday 24 
February 2015, wherein he indicated that the information requested for was being compiled and 
would be tabled in the National Assembly.   

The information has indeed been placed in the Library of the National Assembly on 23 

March 2015. 

Dr. Sorefan: Madam Speaker, will the hon. Ag. Prime Minister inform the House if Mrs 
K. B. upgraded herself from economy to business class in our national airline on Monday 23 
December 2013, if yes, whether she is entitled as Permanent Secretary to enjoy upgrading free of 
charge?  

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker,  you will appreciate that I do not have that 

information.  

Dr.  Sorefan:  Madam  Speaker,  is  the  hon.  Ag.  Prime  Minister  aware  that  she  has 
upgraded about 500 passengers on multiple occasions and whether a list of beneficiaries can be 
tabled in the National Assembly, that is, between January 2012 till December 2014? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I have no idea whether this information is 
right or wrong and we did respond previously that such information at the Air Mauritius would 
not be replied to or provided in this House.  

NDU – DRAINS PROJECTS – EMERGENCY PROCUREMENT 

(No. B/953) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked the 
Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National Development Unit whether, in regard to the construction of drains projects, he will state 
the number of contracts therefor the National Development Unit awarded through the emergency 
procurement method in 2013, indicating the number thereof approved by the Ministry of Finance 

 

26 

and  Economic  Development  without  the  prior  approval  of  the  Central  Procurement  Board, 
indicating in each case –  

(a) 

(b) 

who gave instructions to seek the approval of the said Ministry, and  

the amount of money approved by the said Ministry. 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I would like to refer to the reply I made to 
Parliamentary Question No. B/751 on 03 November 2015 and also to a list of projects that I had 
then tabled. 

As pointed out previously, there is an ongoing Police inquiry at the level of the NDU on 
this  issue  and  consequently,  it  would  not  be  appropriate  to  provide  all  the  information  being 
requested. 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Madam  Speaker,  I  agree  that  the  hon.  Ag.  Prime  Minister  gave  such  an 
answer last time, but it was at the CCID on a technical issue. This is purely a financial issue.  
Can I ask the hon. Ag. Prime Minister to inform the House whether six projects valued to about 
Rs71  m.  have  started  work  without  the  approval  of  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development?  

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  in  fact,  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development did draw the attention of the then Ministry of Public Infrastructure that 
projects had been undertaken without prior financial clearance.  

Dr. Sorefan: One more question, Madam Speaker. Is the hon. Ag. Prime Minister aware 
that 7 contract projects allocated between February and May 2013 have exceeded the approved 
contract value of Rs70 m. and have gone up to Rs124 m.? Is the hon. Ag. Prime Minister aware 
of this variation? 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  think  particular  questions  regarding 
contracts or projects undertaken by MPI should be addressed firstly to MPI and not to the Prime 
Minister’s  Office.  Secondly,  Madam  Speaker,  you  will  appreciate  that  there  is  currently  an 
ongoing Police enquiry by CCID and I think it would not be appropriate for us to delve too much 
into this issue. 

Mr Jhuboo: Madam Speaker, it seems that the issue lies in the Public Procurement Act, 
section  21  (1),  whereby  a  public  body  may  purchase  goods,  services  or  works  from  a  single 

 

27 

supplier without competition in case of extreme urgency. I think this is where the problem lies. 
Can we know from the hon. Ag. Prime Minister if it is his intention to bring some amendments 
to this Act? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: I think, Madam Speaker, in the light of what has happened and 
possible abuses thereto, I am sure that consideration will be given eventually by the Minister of 
Finance and Economic Development in his budget or prior to that, to tighten the law to ensure 
that things are not repeated but, anyway, I think the whole Police enquiry is also a lesson for us 
all. We should respect the Public Procurement Act. 

Madam  Speaker:  The  hon.  Ag.  Prime  Minister  has  made  a  request  that  questions 
addressed to him be taken out of turn as he has to perform the Opening Ceremony of the General 
Assembly of the Association of National Olympic Committees of Africa. I have acceded to his 
request.  Consequently, I shall now call PQ Nos. B/957, B/983 and B/984.  

Furthermore, the Table has been advised that PQ No. B/983 in regard to the 42 cases of 
alleged  dispossession  of  land  by  the  sugar  barons  will  now  be  replied  by  the  hon.  Ag.  Prime 
Minister as I have just said.  

PQ  No.  B/998  in  regard  to  the  landslide  prone  area  of  Hermitage,  in  Coromandel  and 
addressed  to  the  hon.  Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and 
Beach Management will now be replied by the hon. Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land 
Transport.  

PQ No. B/955 has been withdrawn. Hon. Jhugroo! 

MAHEBOURG WATERFRONT - REGATTA ACTIVITIES 

(No.  B/957)  Mr  P.  Jhugroo  (Second  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien) 
asked the Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External Communications whether, in 
regard to the Mahebourg Waterfront, he will state if consideration will be given for measures to 
be taken for the promotion and organisation of Regatta activities thereat. 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, Regatta is part of our local folklore and is a 
popular  leisure  activity  among  our  people.  My  Ministry,  through  the  MTPA,  is  encouraging 
more and more people to participate in this activity.  

28 

 
Apart  from  preserving  and  encouraging  Regatta  as  a  popular  leisure  activity  amongst 
locals,  our  aim  is  also  to  develop  it  into  a  major  tourist  attraction.  The  concept  of  “Heritage 
Regatta” is being used to enrich our tourism product in the cultural as well as water sports niche 
segments. In this context, I am informed by the MTPA, that since the beginning of the year, no 
less  than  eight  Regattas  have  been  organised  at  Mahebourg,  the  last  one  being  on  Sunday  22 
November within the Festival International Kreol. I understand that a final one is scheduled on 
13 December. This is the first time that so many Regattas have been organised within a single 
year.  

I  am  further  informed  that  the  Mahebourg  Waterfront  is  among  one  of  the  preferred 
locations  for  the  organisation  of  Regatta  activities  in  view  of  its  rich  cultural,  historical  and 
heritage values and infrastructural facilities.  

Madam Speaker, the Regatta activity is already being actively promoted by the MTPA as 
a  folkloric  tourist  attraction  in  all  its  promotional  materials  and  its  international  marketing 
campaigns. 

LAND RESEARCH AND MEDIATION UNIT – ALLEDGED DISPOSSESSION 

OF LAND - INVESTIGATIONS 

(No. B/983) Mr G. Lesjongard (Second Member for Savanne & Black River) asked 
the Attorney General whether, in regard to the forty two cases of alleged dispossession of land 
by the sugar barons identified in the report of the Land Monitoring and Mediation Unit referred 
to his Office, he will state where matters stand, indicating the names of the families concerned 
therewith and if officers of his Office have established contacts therewith. 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  with  your  permission,  I  shall  reply  to  PQ 

Nos. B/983 and B/984 at the same time as they refer to the same issue.  

Madam Speaker, I believe that the hon. Member is referring to the “Land Research and 

Mediation Unit” rather than the “Land Monitoring and Mediation Unit”.  

I informed the House on 17 November 2015 that a Land Research and Mediation Unit 
had been set up and the Unit had started its operations on 16 November. This Unit will carry out 
in-depth investigations in all the cases of land dispossession mentioned in the report of the Truth 
and  Justice  Commission,  and  will  advise  the  complainants.  They  will,  in  the  first  instance, 

 

29 

attempt to resolve the disputes through mediation or advice whether legal assistance is required. 
A Press Communiqué has already been issued with contact details of the Unit. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  have  previously  informed  the  House  that  there  are  42  cases  where 
there is enough evidence of land dispossession and which have been forwarded to the Attorney 
General’s Office as to the way forward.  

I am informed that these cases are very complex as they date back to more than 100 years 
and are still under consideration. Thereafter, the Attorney General’s Office will send their advice 
to the Land Research and Mediation Unit which will then call these persons. I am tabling a list 
indicating the names of the families concerned.  

Madam  Speaker,  as  regards  part  (b)  of  Parliamentary  Question  No.  B/984,  I  wish  to 
inform the House that the Head of the Land Research and Mediation Unit is a former Deputy 
Chief Surveyor at the Ministry of Housing and Lands. He has 39 years of experience in the field 
of land surveying and has never had any adverse report. He has already carried out research in 
some of the cases mentioned in the Truth and Justice Commission Report and has submitted an 
interim report in April 2015. He is well qualified and has necessary experience to head a Unit.  

At this stage, there is no evidence of conflict of interest of the person heading the Unit 
and same has been confirmed by the person himself. However, in the event any member of the 
Land Research and Mediation Unit finds himself or herself in a situation of conflict of interest, 
the  member  will  have  to  disclose  his  or  her  interest  and  will  take  no  further  part  in  the 
proceedings. 

Mr Lesjongard: Madam Speaker, with regard to the 42 cases that have been referred to 
the  Attorney  General’s  Office,  I  thank  the  Ag.  Prime  Minister  for  tabling  the  list  of  those 
concerned. May I ask him whether those concerned will be informed in writing that their cases 
have been referred to the Attorney General’s Office? 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  the  procedure  is  as  follows:  the  Attorney 
General’s Office is looking at these cases and the Attorney General has told me himself that they 
are very complex cases. They will then be sent batch by batch back to the Land Research and 
Mediation Unit which will then interact with the persons involved. We hope, Madam Speaker, to 
have a first batch before the end of the year. 

 

30 

Mr Lesjongard: We understand, Madam Speaker, that those 42 cases are in the pipeline 
for  the  mediation  process.  May  we  know  for  cases  concerning  Rodrigues  how  do  we  move 
forward? Will the Unit sit in Rodrigues or will those people be called to come to Mauritius? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: It is a good question, Madam Speaker. We will see whether we 
have sufficient cases for the Unit to go to Rodrigues or whether we will call them here, but we 
will try to facilitate the procedure in some way. 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, one of the problems with expropriation of property is that, 
in the meantime, they have been prescribed without the knowledge of the victim. Has the Ag. 
Prime  Minister  considered  whether  there  is  any  amendment  that  needs  to  be  brought  to  the 
legislation, to the prescription ordinance, in order that the victims, who were not aware of the 
prescription procedure, are able to be adequately compensated? 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  do  understand  that  the  legal  situation  is 
quite complex with regard to the prescription which probably has been done in a legal way in a 
way. So, the one problem that we have is the issue of prescription and that is why we are waiting 
for the Attorney General’s views on the matter, but there are other issues as tracing back all the 
heirs today and also maybe the land has been parcelled, etc. So, there are many issues and that is 
why it is so complex. 

Mr  Lesjongard:  Madam  Speaker,  the  Ag.  Prime  Minister,  in  his  statement,  last  week 
said  that  there  were  224  cases  which  were  referred  to  the  Land  Research  and  Monitoring 
Commission.  Out  of  those  224  cases,  42  are  straightforward  cases,  91  cases  need  further 
investigations. May we know what will happen to the other 91 cases left? 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  there  are  cases  which  require  further 
investigation; there are cases which came in too late and were not looked at. All these cases are 
going to be taken on board by the new Unit, Madam Speaker. 

Mr Ganoo: My question is linked to the answer of the hon. Ag. Prime Minister. Does 
that mean that the Unit now will be opened to anybody who has discovered at a late stage that his 
ancestors have been dispossessed of their property? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Because of the amount of work involved - in fact, there are 
cases  which  were  reported  to  the  Truth  and  Justice  Commission  but  which  the  Unit  -  the 

 

31 

Commission  then  -  could  not  look  into  in-depth.  These  will  be  looked  into.  Then,  there  were 
cases  which  could  not  be  looked  into  by  the  Truth  and  Justice  Commission  because  of  late 
submission, these will also be looked into and we are stopping there at the moment otherwise we 
will never get to an answer. 

Mr  Lesjongard:  Madam  Speaker,  is  the  Ag.  Prime  Minister  aware  that  the  former 
Commission, that is, the Land Research and Monitoring Commission did get into the mediation 
process, but unfortunately when those concerned were convened, they did not turn up. Doesn’t 
the Ag. Prime Minister think we will go through the same process again with the same Unit that 
has been put up? 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  Well,  I  am  not  aware,  Madam  Speaker,  whether  they  were 
convened and did not turn up. I left Government, as you know, in the middle of last year so, I am 
not aware of that, but I will look into that and eventually I will report to the House whether that 
is the case and how progress is being made or otherwise. 

LAND RESEARCH AND MEDIATION UNIT – ALLEGED DISPOSSESSION OF LAND 

- REPORT 

(No. B/984) Mr G. Lesjongard (Second Member for Savanne & Black River) asked 
the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications  whether,  in 
regard to the alleged dispossession of land identified in the report of the Land Monitoring and 
Mediation Unit, he will state if - 

(a)  

(b)  

the Land Monitoring and Mediation Unit will inquire into all the cases that have 
not been referred to the Attorney General’s Office, and  

there exists a possibility of conflict of interest regarding the person heading the 
Land Monitoring and Mediation Unit. 

(Vide reply to P.Q. No. B/983) 

Madam Speaker: The Table has been advised that PQ No. B/978 has been withdrawn. 

Hon. Jhugroo! 

 

 

 

32 

PUBLIC PRIMARY & SECONDARY SCHOOLS - LOCKERS - PROVISION 

(No.  B/954)  Mr  P.  Jhugroo  (Second  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 
Research whether, in regard to the students of the public primary and secondary schools, she will 
state if consideration will be given for the provision of lockers thereto with the implementation 
of the Nine Year Basic Schooling. 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  advised  that  a  proposal  for  the 
provision of lockers to students had been envisaged in the past but due to implications in terms 
of school infrastructure and space, resources and investment, it could not be pursued.  

However, consideration may be given for the provision of lockers to students of higher 
classes of the Primary and Upper Secondary especially for those doing activities such as sports, 
music and other such activities which may require storage facilities.  

The implementation of the Nine-Year Continuous Basic Schooling both  at the primary 
and secondary levels will entail an enhanced use of digital contents and materials in the teaching 
and learning at school level. Digitalisation of teaching and learning resources and the use of ICT 
mediated methods will be promoted.  

Bearing this in mind, it is considered that the need for lockers to all students may not be 
fully warranted. Yet, in cases where it is found that a real genuine need is felt, lockers may be 
provided. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Jhugroo! 

MAHEBOURG WATERFRONT - UPGRADING 

(No.  B/955)  Mr  P.  Jhugroo  (Second  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien) 
asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the Mahebourg 
Waterfront, he will state if any project for the upgrading thereof is being envisaged and, if so, 
when and, if not, why not. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

 

 

33 

MAHEBOURG SOCIAL WELFARE CENTRE – FORMER BUILDING - REPAIRS 

(No.  B/956)  Mr  P.  Jhugroo  (Second  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien) 
asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the building 
which  formerly  housed  the  Mahebourg  Social  Welfare  Centre,  situated  in  the  vicinity  of  the 
Mahebourg  Waterfront,  he  will  state  if  he  has  been  informed  of  the  abandoned  state  thereof, 
indicating if consideration will be given for the pulling down thereof. 

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Ministry of Social Security, National 
Solidarity  and  Reform  Institutions  that  the  building  which  formerly  housed  the  Mahebourg 
Social  Welfare  Centre  at  Swami  Sivananda  Street,  Mahebourg  was  a  property  of  the  Sugar 
Industry Labour Welfare Fund. With the development of the Mahebourg Waterfront under the 
aegis of the State Property Development Company Ltd (SPDC Ltd), the land and building were 
vested  in  the  SPDC  Ltd.  In  March  2007,  the  Social  Welfare  Centre  was  shifted  to  another 
building  constructed  by  the  State  Property  Development  Company  Ltd  at  Hollandais  Street, 
Mahebourg, some 150 metres away from the initial site.  

Madam Speaker, I am further informed by the SPDC Ltd. that the second phase of the 
Mahebourg Waterfront Project is currently in abeyance. Hence, the pulling down of the building 
does not arise.  

Future development will be undertaken by the SPDC Ltd. In the meantime, maintenance 
works have been carried out at the building which formerly housed the Social Welfare Centre 
and the area has been fully fenced. Further maintenance works are planned early next year to 
repair the leaking roof and to repaint the building with a view to possibly leasing it. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

 HP INDIA – CONTRACT AWARD  

(No. B/958) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked the 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the contracts awarded by 
Government institutions to HP India for computerising projects, he will state where matters stand 
as to the implementation thereof in each case. 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  no  contracts  have  been 

awarded by any Government institutions to HP India for computerization projects. 

 

34 

I  am  also  informed  that  the  SBM  Ltd  has  awarded  a  contract  to  HP  India  for  a 
computerization  project.    However,  in  view  of  the  fact  that  the  awarding  body  is  a  company 
listed on the Stock Exchange of Mauritius and is governed by the Companies Act, it would not 
be appropriate for me to disclose the information requested. 

Dr.  Sorefan:    I  thank  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  for  his 
answer.  Is he aware that HP India has been paid to the tune of Rs5 billion for a contract sum of 
Rs7  billion  for  only  30%  of  the  work  done  up  to  now?    A  contract  which  should  have  been 
completed  in  2014,  up  to  now  they  have  done  only  30%  and  they  have  already  enjoyed  Rs5 
billion and also Rs3 billion have been paid to the Architect Accenture in IT.  Is the hon. Minister 
aware  that  this  is  a  huge  sum  and  Mauritius  is  losing  a  lot  of  money  for  work  not  being 
completed so far? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  I cannot confirm, but I can say that the new Chairman of SBM 
Holdings Ltd, Mr Kee Chong Li Kwong Wing and a group of consultants are looking into the 
matter. 

(Interruptions) 

Dr.  Sorefan:    Madam  Speaker,  is  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development aware that for HP India to continue with the project, the company is insisting to the 
remaining payment of Rs2 billion to be paid before carrying on with the project and to enter into 
a management contract on a yearly basis, for seven years, to the tune of Rs1 billion? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:   I  am not aware, Madam Speaker, but as  I said the committee 

chaired by Kee Chong Li Kwong Wing is looking into the matter. 

Dr. Sorefan:  Can the hon. Minister inform the House whether the IT system is located 

physically in India with all the primary IT data there under Indian law and control… 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Dr. Sorefan, are you requesting your question within the province 

of this question? 

Dr. Sorefan:  Yes. 

Madam Speaker:  Okay. 

 

35 

Dr. Sorefan: …employing hundreds of Indian Software Engineers in India? It should have 
been in Mauritius, creating jobs for our youths. Is the hon. Minister aware that there were about 
400 IT young Mauritians who have lost their jobs because of this project gone to India? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Madam Speaker, I am not aware of this information. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Ameer Meea, next question! 

CSR - POCHES DE PAUVRETÉ – SPONSORING COMPANIES 

(No.  B/959)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis East) asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the 
Corporate Social Responsibility, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain a list of the thirty-
eight companies which are sponsoring poches de pauvreté, indicating in each case, the poche de 
pauvreté which is being sponsored. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Madam Speaker, as the House is aware, in my reply to PQ B/592 
on  29  September  2015,  I  emphasised  that  ‘parrainage'  is  a  new  approach  for  empowering 
vulnerable families, in lieu of ‘l’assistanat’.  This is in line with the Anti-Poverty Marshall Plan 
announced  by  the  Prime  Minister  during  the  electoral  campaign.  This  approach  was  further 
emphasized in the Economic Mission Statement by the Prime Minister whereby the collaboration 
of the private sector was sought to address, inter alia, the issue of poverty. 

It is in this perspective that the private sector has taken full responsibility to implement the 
national parrainage project through the Love Bridge concept.  In this respect, I am informed that 
the Love Bridge Ltd has been incorporated as a private company.  The Board of Love Bridge Ltd 
is currently co-chaired by Mr Raj Makoond of the JEC and Mr Harold Mayer. The company has 
requested nomination of two representatives of Government to serve on the Board.  

Madam Speaker, there are far more than 38 companies which have decided to adopt ‘Les 
Poches de Pauveté’.  In fact, Madam Speaker, there are 110 companies that have expressed their 
firm determination to be fully involved in the national effort to eradicate absolute poverty. 

I am tabling the list of those 110 companies. 

Once  Love  Bridge  completes its current recruitment exercise and finalise its operational 

framework, it will work with those companies to define its action programme. 

 

36 

On our part, Government has pledged to provide an amount of Rs100 m. to Love Bridge 
Ltd from the unspent CSR funds remitted to MRA. We are confident that the private sector will 
contribute  its  fair  share  through  the  Love  Bridge  Project  to  empower  the  poor  and  eradicate 
absolute poverty in our country. 

Mr  Bérenger:  Madam  Speaker,  we  are  talking  about  the  CSR,  the  Corporate  Social 
Responsibility.  Probably, the hon. Minister will remember that when he presented the Finance 
Bill, the CSR Committee was cancelled, he cancelled, in the law, all CSR guidelines and so on.  
Now, can I know whether it is not a fact that the CSR Committee is still in operation?  There are 
still guidelines.  Therefore, the law which we voted then, at Finance Bill time and which the hon. 
Minister  commented  upon  on  29  September:  “We  have  done  away  with  all  guidelines.”    He 
talked about the defunct, the then National CSR Committee.  Where are we? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Well, we are where we are, on the right path.  

(Interruptions) 

And the CSR Committee, Madam Speaker, is there. 

(Interruptions) 

Mrs Danielle Wong is the Chairperson.  What has been changed in the CSR Committee is the 
approach.  The approach in the past was that the CSR Committee had to give guidelines to the 
private sector as to how they had to allocate their CSR funds.  We came to the conclusion that it 
is not our responsibility to give guidelines to the private sector on how and where they should 
allocate funds which belong to them.  It is very important that the House knows that the 2% of 
CSR is not tax which is being lost.  It is above the 15% tax paid by companies to MRA.  So, I 
have done what had to be done.  The guidelines have been removed, but the CSR Committee is 
ongoing  and  is  participating  fully  in  the  Marshall  Plan  that  my  colleague  is  working  on.  
Therefore, there is no distortion or no contradictory approach as far as this is concerned. Now, 
within  this  framework,  we  also  announced  in  the  Budget  what  we  termed  in  a  beautiful  way 
‘parrainage’ which is the concept which goes beyond l’assistanat whereby - the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister took the commitment - all those poches of absolute poverty will disappear in the next 
five  years, and he will  do it. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister also requested the private sector to 
contribute their share in this fight against absolute poverty.  This is how the Love Bridge Project 

 

37 

was born.  It is a private sector motivated project, build up by the private sector, managed by the 
private  sector  and  it  is  the  way  through  which  the  private  sector  wants  to  say:    “We  want  to 
contribute in this massive effort to eradicate absolute poverty”.  I am quite satisfied that as it is 
today, the private sector is playing its role totally as far as combating absolute poverty. 

Mr Bérenger:  Can I remind the hon. Minister that through the Finance Bill, we deleted 
the two sections of the law where that CSR Committee is set up.  It is stated, therefore, that: “the 
Committee  referred  to  shall  be  appointed  by  the  Minister  and  shall  consist  of  a  Chair.”    We 
deleted  these  two  paragraphs.    Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  under  which  paragraph  is  he 
appointing that Chairperson? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  I don’t have to be under any paragraph.   

(Interruptions) 

The CSR Committee is functioning.  Mrs Danielle Wong who is a national figure is the one who 
is chairing it. I am, in fact, coordinating more and more, now, with my colleague responsible for 
ensuring that absolute poverty disappears in Mauritius.  The Opposition also, I am sure, share the 
same view as us that we have reached a level of development that we can no longer continue 
with a divided society where those who are left aside are forgotten.  I want to express the total 
commitment  of  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  who  is  absent  today  that  in  five  years,  Madam 
Speaker, there will no longer be any poche de pauvreté in this country and we will do it. 

Mr Bérenger: All this is bla-bla-bla! In the Finance Bill, the hon. Minister provided for 
the end of the CSR Committee. He cannot appoint a Chairman of a CSR Committee. I challenge 
him to give us the section under which he is appealing. What was provided, on the other hand, 
for the MRA, through the Finance Bill, to exercise a lot of responsibilities, can I know whether 
the MRA is exercising those responsibilities? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: The MRA is doing the job of collecting the CSR funds which 

have not been spent like companies which are making a profit. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Speaker, in my question, I asked the hon. Minister a list of the 
38  companies  which  are  sponsoring  the  poches  de  pauvreté  in  each  case.  May  I  ask  the  hon. 
Minister whether the list which he has just tabled - which I have not yet seen - is per region-wise, 
per  company-wise,  that  is,  as  the  Appendix  that  we  had  in  the  Budget  Speech,  of  the  38 

 

38 

companies? Is it a list of those 38 companies with each company which will sponsor each of 
these poches de pauvreté? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: I see the point of the hon. Member. I am sorry the project is 
much more popular than what we indicated in the Budget. We were 38 in the Budget, we are 
now 110. This is why I am very excited to see this reaction of the private sector to the request of 
Government. We are now in the presence of 110 companies, and it is now the responsibility of 
Lovebridge Ltd, private sector company, to ensure implementation of this project. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Ganoo: Can I ask the hon. Minister who will decide which particular company will 
look after which particular poche de pauvreté?   Has this been done? Can the hon. Minister of 
Finance,  therefore,  inform  the  House  which  are  those  companies  looking  after  the  different 
poches de pauvreté? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  We  are  referring  to  parrainage.  We  are  not  referring  to  the 
whole Marshall Plan, which is managed by my colleague the Minister here, which involves much 
larger  number  than  38.  The  Minister  is,  in  fact,  monitoring  all  the  poches  de  pauvreté  in 
Mauritius. I want to spell out this word ‘parrainage’.  It is a specific project within the Marshall 
Plan. Within this project, the parrainage is a project which is being implemented by the private 
sector through the Love Bridge Project. Therefore, we should not confuse parrainage with the 
Marshall Plan which is being carried out by my colleage the Minister. I think, Madam Speaker, 
this is very clear. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Madame  la  présidente,  la  ministre  est  en  train  de  noyer  le  poisson. 

Laissez-moi revenir par rapport au PQ B/592, where I quote what the hon. Minister stated – 

“We have 38 companies which have already adopted mainly les cités ouvrières.” 

Maintenant,  laissez-moi  venir  avec  la  liste  des  38  pockets  of  poverty  with  a  specific 
question. No. 4 is Quartier Shell. Quartier Shell se trouve dans ma circonscription à Roche Bois, 
dans la circonscription No. 3. Est-ce que je peux savoir quelle est la compagnie qui est en train 
de parrainer le Quartier Shell ? 

39 

 
Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Well, be happy know that Quartier Shell will be taken care of. 
Now,  the  company  that  will  take  care  of  this  poche  de  pauvreté  will  be  determined  by  Love 
Bridge  and  not  by  Government.  We  have  to  go  with  it  now  that  parrainage  project  is  being 
implemented by Love Bridge. I am saying it, maybe my friends, on the other side, have not quite 
seized  the  concept.  Parrainage  is  now  totally  in  the  hands  of  Love  Bridge.  They  are  not  38 
companies; they are now 110 companies that will distribute and share this work at national level. 
I can assure the hon. Member that the poche de pauvreté he mentioned will be taken care of. 

Madam Speaker: Last question on this, hon. Lesjogard! 

Mr Lesjongard: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Le concept de parrainage, comme on le 
comprend,  c’est  une  famille  qui  va  parrainer  une  autre  famille.  Est-ce  que  je  peux  savoir  du 
ministre comment est pris cette décision ? Qui décide qui va parrainer qui et quelle famille qui va 
être parrainée ? 

Madam Speaker: Order please ! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Madam  speaker,  it  is  naturally  incumbent  on  the  Board  of 
Directors  of  Love  Bridge  to  determine  which  are  the  companies  and  in  what  way  they  will 
intervene. There is no doubt that when we speak of poches de pauvreté, there is not only type of 
poches  de  pauvreté.  Each  poche  de  pauvreté  demands  something  very  specialised.  Let  us  say 
Batimarais in the constituency of my  friend there. Batimarais is very specific. You can’t deal 
with Batimarais as we would deal with another poche de pauvreté. That’s No. 1. And No. 2, the 
concept of Love Bridge is beautiful in the sense that it is no longer assistanat. It is long-term, it 
is a marriage, it is a long-term adoption of a poche de pauvreté by the company. It goes on; it is 
generational. I am confident that what we are doing today will influence positively all the poches 
de pauvreté… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:…in the long-term. This is how it is. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Rughoobur! 

 

40 

SME PARKS – SETTING-UP 

(No.  B/960)  Mr  S.  Rughoobur  (Second  Member  for  Grand’Baie  &  Poudre  d’Or) 
asked the Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives whether in regard to the proposed 
setting up of Small and Medium Enterprise Parks in specific regions, he will, for the benefit of 
the House, obtain from the Small and Medium Enterprise Development Authority, information 
as to where matters stand, indicating the measures being taken for the promotion of small and 
medium enterprises in mainland Mauritius and in Rodrigues, respectively. 

Mr  Bholah:  Madam  Speaker,  SME  Parks  are  being  set  up  so  as  to  provide  industrial 
space  facilities  to  entrepreneurs  to  operate  their  business  in  appropriate  locations  throughout 
Mauritius. 

In this respect, provision has been made for 100 arpents of land under the 2,000 Arpents 

Scheme agreed between Government and the Mauritius Sugar Producers’ Association. 

These  parks  are  constructed  by  the  State  Land  Development  Co.  Ltd.  (SLDC)  and  are 

thereafter leased to prospective entrepreneurs who apply for industrial space. 

Madam Speaker, as at date, three SME industrial parks are operational, namely at Roche 

Bois, La Valette Bambous and La Tour Koenig. 

In addition, lands have already been acquired by the Ministry of Housing and Lands and 

leased to the SLDC at Plaine Magnien, Petit Bois Caroline, Solitude and Vuillemin. 

The construction works are scheduled to start next year after completion of all required 

formalities, survey and design works. 

Furthermore,  lands  have  been  identified,  but  not  yet  acquired  at  Chebel,  Henrietta, 

Gokoola and Beau Climat. 

Today,  I  am  informed  that  a  total  land  area  of  around  30  arpents  have  already  been 

acquired out of the 100 arpents. 

Madam Speaker, my Ministry is also working in close collaboration with the Ministry of 
Agro-Industry and Food Security, the Ministry of Housing and Lands, the SMEDA, the SLDC 
and  the  Mauritius  Sugar  Producers’  Association,  amongst  others,  to  identify  lands  in  other 

 

41 

locations  where  there  is  a  demand  for  industrial  parks  and  to  ensure  that  such  facilities  are 
available on a regional basis. 

With  regard  to  the  measures  being  taken  by  SMEDA  for  the  promotion  of  Small  and 
Medium Enterprises in Mauritius and Rodrigues, I wish to inform the House that the SMEDA 
acts as a facilitator and receives daily request for assistance and support for SMEs, especially 
entrepreneurs willing to start new businesses or to grow the existing ones. In this respect, the 
measures being initiated by the SMEDA include – 

(i) 

(ii) 

The  provision  of  counselling  services  through  its  business  facilitation  and 
Counselling Unit. Since January 2015 to date, 10,758 potential and existing SMEs 
in  Mauritius  have  been  provided  with  counselling  services  and  2,728  in 
Rodrigues.  In  addition,  334  site  visits  to  entrepreneurs  have  been  effected  in 
Mauritius and 85 in Rodrigues. 

The organisation of training programmes, seminars, workshops and conferences 
for  the  entrepreneurs.  These  need  based  training  programmes  aim  at  improving 
knowledge  and  competencies  of  SMEs  in  technical,  marketing,  financial 
compliance policy, regulatory, legal, commercial and other important functions of 
enterprises. 

Since January to date, 31 training programmes have been attended by 919 participants in 
Mauritius and 308 entrepreneurs attended 11 such sessions in Rodrigues. Moreover, last week a 
one-day workshop was organised on Building Export Capacity for SMEs in the Africa Region 
and it was attended by some 80 entrepreneurs.  

Madam  Speaker,  one  of  the  major  constraints  faced  by  local  SMEs  relates  to 
opportunities  to  market  and  sell  their  products.  Indeed,  a  wide  range  of  quality  products  is 
produced by local SMEs but local consumers are hardly aware of them. With a view to easing 
their access to local markets, the SMEDA organises trade fairs. Thus, SMEDA has organised 
three trade fairs this year. 20 SMEs participated in the trade fair that was held in May this year at 
Vieux Conseil, Port Louis… 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Minister, do you think your reply is long? How many pages do 

you have? Otherwise, you can circulate your reply, if you wish. 

 
Mr Bholah: I will circulate.  

42 

Madam Speaker: But you can address the measures indicated in the second part of the 

question. 

Mr Bholah: Yes, Madam Speaker. Another important measure that is being initiated by 
SMEDA,  in  collaboration  with  my  Ministry,  is  the  setting-up  of  SME  one-stop  shop  in  Port 
Louis which will allow a coordinated service to be provided to SMEs. 

This  innovative  service,  which  will  be  fully  operational  as  from  January  2016,  will 
provide under one roof all assistance and support required by SMEs to start business or to grow, 
including the processing and delivery of permits and licences, wherever needed.  

Mr  Rughoobur:  Madam  Speaker,  there  has  been  a  series  of  measures  taken  by  the 
Government for this important sector. Will the hon. Minister agree that there is an urgent need to 
restructure completely this important organisation that we call SMEDA? 

Mr Bholah: I agree with the hon. Member that there is a need to restructure, especially 
when we want the SMEs to become the backbone of the economy. My Ministry has instructed 
the SMEDA Board to consider urgently modalities for restructuring the SMEDA with a view to 
meeting the needs and aspirations of the SMEs. 

Mr Jhuboo: The SMEDA just carried out the SME Industrial Park Survey in 2015. Can 

we know from the hon. Minister how many SMEs did register up to now? 

Mr  Bholah:  There  are  around  25,000  SMEs  registered,  I  mean,  on  the  roll  of  the 

SMEDA. 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister just mentioned that there is urgent need to 
restructure SMEDA. But back in the Budget in March this idea had already been debated in this 
House. So, may I know from the hon. Minister why after nine months, the SMEDA has still not 
been reorganised and the one-stop shop that was promised is still not operational? 

Mr Bholah: Well, in fact, the Finance Act has addressed the issue of the composition of 
the Board and we reduced the members from 13 to 11. Now, we have Members from the MCCI, 
BOI and from the MauBank who are sitting on the Board in order to have a concerted approach 
to address the issues of SMEs.  

43 

 
Again, my Ministry is conducting a Master Plan on a 10-year basis. I believe that this 
issue of SMEDA, which is a unique institution to address the issues of SMEs, will be taken into 
account. 

Mr Rughoobur: On this issue of restructuring exercise, there has been a report of the 
Office of Public Sector Governance which was prepared in June 2013. May I know from the hon. 
Minister  if  he  is  aware  of  its  recommendations  and  we  might  use  these  important 
recommendations and implement them for the benefit of SMEDA itself? 

Mr Bholah: Yes, I am aware of the report following the survey carried out by the OPSG 
and the report is dated June 2013. But I am afraid that none of the recommendations have been 
implemented and some of the recommendations listed that there should be a reduction in non-
technical  staff  and  putting  up  a  research  unit.  But,  instead,  more  and  more  staff  have  been 
recruited. 

Mr  Sesungkur:  Madam  Speaker,  the  Government  is  putting  a  lot  of  emphasis  on  the 
development of small and medium enterprises. Can I know from the hon. Minister whether his 
Ministry has conducted a performance appraisal of SMEDA, what results it has delivered so far 
and what programme his Ministry is conducting to educate our youngsters to stand on their own 
two feet and to do some business on their own? 

Mr Bholah: I can inform the hon. Member that the OPSG is carrying out a survey on all 

the parastatals in Mauritius and this question will be addressed too. 

Madam Speaker: Last question! 

Mr  Rughoobur:  Madam  Speaker.  There  is  a  series  of  institutions  which  is  quite 
confusing for the small and medium enterprises. A lot of institutions are bringing support to the 
SMEs.  You have got the MBGS and the National Women Entrepreneur Council. May I request 
the  hon.  Minister  to  please  look  into  the  possibility  of  bringing  all  these  institutions  under  a 
single umbrella and to ensure that there is no such confusion in the country regarding this? 

Mr Bholah: Unfortunately, not all the institutions fall under my Ministry. Institution like 
Enterprise Mauritius falls under the Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
and  therefore,  the  regrouping  is  quite  difficult  at  this  moment.  However,  we  do  proceed  in  a 
concerted approach so that the SMEs are well served. 

 
Madam Speaker: The  Table has been advised  that Parliamentary  Question No. B/981 

44 

has been withdrawn! I suspend the sitting for one and a half hours. 

At 1.03 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 2.35 p.m. with the Deputy Speaker in the Chair 

REAL ESTATE SECTOR - EXPATRIATES - OCCUPATION PERMIT 

(No. B/961) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the Occupation 
Permit, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Board of Investment, information as 
to – 

(a)  

the number of expatriates having been issued therewith in the real estate sector 
since January 2010 to date, indicating the respective nationalities thereof, and  

(b)   when  the  criteria  for  the  allocation  thereof  was  last  reviewed,  indicating  the 

reasons which warranted the said review. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with regard to part (a) of the question, 
I am informed by the Board of Investment that from January 2010 to date, 289 non-citizens have 
been issued with an occupation permit in the real estate sector and the information as regard to 
their nationality is being tabled. 

As far as part (b) of the question is concerned, the criteria for issue of Occupation Permit 
for the Investor Category was last reviewed in April 2010 to introduce the requirement for an 
initial investment amount of USD100,000 by the potential investor. The purpose was to ascertain 
the genuineness and the financial worthiness of the applicant. 

As for the Professional Category, the criterion to qualify for the Occupation Permit was 
amended in October 2015 whereby the monthly salary threshold of the Professionals outside the 
ICT  sector  was  increased  from  Rs45,000  to  Rs60,000.  The  salary  threshold  was  reviewed  to 
encourage employment of local graduates. 

Mr Rughoobur:  In regard to this Occupational Permit, there have been a lot of debates 
on the fact that we need to give priority to Mauritians but I don’t know if the hon. Minister is 
aware  of  the  series  of  complaints  regarding  the  delays  that  there  is  in  the  processing  of 

 

45 

applications  for  Occupational  Permit,  but  also,  of  renewals.  The  fact  that  we  need  foreign 
expertise and the companies that we require in the sector with the requirement of expatriates, 
may  I request the hon. Minister to please look into the possibility of accelerating the issue of 
those Occupational Permits; renewal and issue? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Yes, I am aware of the delays in the approval of the permits. 
This is due to the fact there are not sufficient numbers of meetings of the Joint Committee which 
comprises BOI, the Prime Minister’s Office and other Ministries. So, I will request the Board of 
Investment to increase the frequency of those meetings. 

Mr  Rughoobur:  There  is  one  important  point  that  I  wanted  to  mention  to  the  hon. 
Minister. Will the hon. Minister agree that these expatriates coming to Mauritius bring expertise, 
but there is also the issue of networking? I mean, we can use them to network and to bring in 
business in other sectors. Will the hon. Minister agree that we need to put a mechanism in place 
at the Board of Investment to ensure that we take advantage of such networking and the expertise 
that we get from them, so that we can probably see how this can benefit the country in terms of 
formation et tout le reste? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  We  already  have  a  database  of  consultants.  Well,  the  idea  of 
disseminating the information that we have on those consultants is a valid one. So, I will ask the 
Board of Investment to ensure that it is widely circulated with the private sector especially. 

Mr Sesungkur: Can the hon. Minister confirm if the Board of Investment does carry out 
routine checks on those who have benefited from occupancy permit from time to time to ensure 
that they comply fully all the way throughout with the conditions of the permit? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Yes,  there  is  a  mechanism  for  the  monitoring  of  those 
consultants,  whose  request  has  been  approved.  So,  there  is  one  already  at  the  Board  of 
Investment. 

The Deputy Speaker: Next question, hon. Rughoobur! 

CAP MALHEUREUX - RESIDENCE LE PAVILLON – RENOVATION WORKS 

(No.  B/962)  Mr  S.  Rughoobur  (Second  Member  for  Grand’Baie  &  Poudre  d’Or) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in regard to the Housing 
Estate located at Pavillon, in Cap Malheureux, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from 

 

46 

the National Housing Development Company Ltd., information as to if a survey was carried out 
prior to the implementation of the  renovation  works thereof, indicating the expected start and 
completion dates thereof. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun):  Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am informed that, following complaints from residents of some NHDC 
housing  estates  all  over  the  island,  including  “Residence  Le  Pavillon”  in  Cap  Malheureux,  in 
respect of leakage from water pipes, the National Housing Development Company Ltd. (NHDC) 
appointed, in November 2011, a Consultant to carry out  a survey  and design of rehabilitation 
works  to  be  undertaken  to  the  water  reticulation  network  there.  The  Consultant  submitted  a 
feasibility Report in July 2012 and defined the scope of works. 

 The contract for the rehabilitation works in respect of three housing estates, including 
“Residence Le Pavillon” in Cap Malheureux, was awarded on 10 April 2013. The rehabilitation 
works started on 07 May 2013 and were completed on 28 April 2014 to the satisfaction of the 
Consultant  and  of  the  NHDC.  Since  then,  no  complaint  relating  to  water  leakage  has  been 
received at the NHDC. 

Mr Rughoobur:  I thank the hon. Vice-Prime Minister for the answer. Let me confirm to 
the hon. Vice-Prime Minister that presently, we have got quite some leakage problems there in 
the housing estate, but we also have flooding problems as well in the yard. So, may I ask the hon. 
Vice-Prime Minister if he can request the NHDC to please conduct a survey at the NHDC at Le 
Pavillon Cap Malheureux and to look into the possibility of having some renovation works done 
at the level of waterproofing, painting and the rest? 

Mr  Soodhun:  The  hon.  Member  will  appreciate  that  we  don’t  have  problems  now 
concerning water leakage. It is true to say that we have received, according to my information, 
concerning the roof waterproofing. In September 2015, some residents of Residence Le Pavillon 
have made representations to the NHDC regarding problem of roof. It is true to say that, but, on 
the other side, the water problem had already been solved. I am informed that the matter is being 
actively looked into and remedial measures as appropriate will be applied at the earliest possible. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Members, the Table has been advised that PQ Nos. B/964, 

B/971, B/972 and B/980 have been withdrawn.  Hon. Rughoobur! 

 

47 

NEF - SCHOOL MATERIALS - DISTRIBUTION 

 (No. B/963) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked the Minister of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment  whether, in regard to the 
distribution of school materials, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the National 
Empowerment Foundation, information as to if the list of the students who are eligible thereto 
for the school year 2016 has been finalised and, if not, why not, indicating the expected start and 
completion dates for the carrying out of the exercise in relation thereto. 

Mr Roopun: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am informed by the Foundation that the list of 
students eligible for school materials for the academic year 2016 is being compiled and the cut-
off date is 30 November 2015.  As at yesterday, 19,017 children have been found eligible. 

With regard to the distribution of the educational support, I am informed that the NEF is 
making all the necessary arrangements for same to be completed by the end of January 2016 at 
latest.  The  House  may  wish  to  note  that  the  distribution  exercise  for  the  year  2015  spanned 
between December 2014 up to mid-February 2015. 

The House may also wish to note that, despite the declared policy since 2013, only wards 
of  households  eligible  under  SRM  were  to  receive  school  materials,  the  NEF  used  its  own 
database for such distribution until 2015. Following Government decision on 03 April 2015 to 
the effect that only households eligible under the SRM will benefit from services provided by the 
NEF,  a  fresh  national  survey  had  started  with  the  collaboration  of  the  Ministry  of  Social 
Security,  National  Solidarity  and  Reform  Institutions  and  the  closing  date  was  20  September 
2015. 

With a view to ensuring maximum outreach, a press communiqué was re-issued on 24 
October 2015 by the NEF to remind all those households who had not yet been registered to do 
so until 06 November 2015. In this connection, the field visits by staff of the NEF are presently 
on-going as well as the data capture on the SRM database by the Ministry of Social Security, 
National Solidarity and Reform Institutions, which is expected to be completed by 30 November 
2015. 

Mr  Rughoobur:  The  hon.  Minister  stated  that  the  SRM  is  the  main  criteria  for 
identifying those who will be eligible. Is he aware that there have been lots of complaints based 

 

48 

on the fact that lots of applications for such facilities have not been approved simply because 
those families who were eligible in the past, this time are not found in the list, even if these are 
genuine cases. So, may I request the hon. Minister to, please, review the criteria and ensure that 
apart from this SRM we have a more humane approach and we ensure that people who genuinely 
require these facilities are taken on board and that materials are supplied to these families.  

Mr  Roopun:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  in  fact,  the  number  of  persons  covered  by  the 
SRM and receiving schools materials has increased significantly since 2010 and this is the main 
reason why we have to come with a mechanism to ensure that all those who are really in need 
benefit  from  these  facilities.  The  SRM  register  is  based  on  a  proxy  means  test  and  there  are 
objective criteria which have been used. But, of course, I must state that any system has got its 
loopholes and there is a Standing Committee set up at the level of my Ministry together with 
officers of the Ministry of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions to try to 
deal with any specific case where there is a feeling that persons have been left out. There is a 
complaint desk at the level of the Ministry of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 
Institutions to review whatever complaints there may be. 

Mr Uteem: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, distribution of materials relates to people who are 
living in a poor condition, people who are below a certain seuil de pauvreté. May I know from 
the hon. Minister what measures are being taken to ensure that these distributions are made in a 
way not to stigmatise those children and make them feel as if they were different from those who 
have the means to go to school and don’t have to rely on the State? Is there going to be a public 
show  where  these  children  are  invited  and  Ministers  and  local  MPs  go  and  hand  over  these 
school materials or are we going to do away with it and procede in a very discreet way having 
regard to the human dignity of the parents and the children concerned? 

Mr Roopun: In fact, initially, distribution was being done at the level of the school and 
eventually,  with  this  in  mind,  we  changed  the  method.  Now,  it  is  being  done  outside  school 
premises in certain dedicated places. But, unfortunately, we are under pressure because we have 
to wait till the result of the CPE is made public. Now, we have also got the issue of  students 
taking  a resit again in one subject which is going to be by 20 December.  This means that there 
is a lot of pressure for us to do the distribution as early as possible.  I understand the point made 

 

49 

by the hon. Member, but if there are ways and means to try to do it in a more serene and discreet 
manner, we will explore this possibility. 

SAINT FRANÇOIS XAVIER STADIUM - LIGHTING 

(No. B/964) Mr A. Ameer Meea (Second Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port 
Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Youth  and  Sports  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Saint  François 
Xavier Stadium, he will state if consideration will be given for the covering of the bleachers and 
for the provision of lighting thereat and, if so, when and, if not, why not.  

(Withdrawn) 

BAI – EMPLOYEES – TERMINATION OF CONTRACT 

 (No. B/965) Mr A. Ameer Meea (Second Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port 
Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 
Reforms, Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the BAI 
Co. (Mtius) Ltd. and related entities, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain information as 
to  the  number  of  the  employees  thereof  whose  contract  of  employment  have  been  terminated 
since April 2015 to date, indicating in each case the –  

(a) 

(b) 

company in which the said employee was employed, and  

quantum of compensation paid out thereto. 

Mr  Bhadain:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  am  informed  by  the  Financial  Services 
Commission that the information relates to private companies incorporated under the Companies 
Act which are either under Special Administration or where the undertaking has been transferred 
as provided under section 110 (b) of the Insurance Act.  

I can, therefore, only inform the House that out of a total of 3,515 full-time employees of 
the BAI Group and 817 insurance sales persons representing a total of 4,332 employees, 3,923 
jobs have been safeguarded representing 91% of the total workforce.  

Mr Ameer Meea: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the hon. Minister is very clever not to tell us 
how many have been fired. He worked it the other way round, how many jobs have been saved. 
Can I ask him, apart from Courts Mauritius Ltd whereby 188 employees have lost their jobs, how 
many other employees in the group of Apollo have lost their jobs? 

50 

 
Mr  Bhadain:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  have  already  stated  that  there  are  4,332 
employees  and  3,923  jobs  have  been  safeguarded.    The  mathematic  shows  that  it  is  409 
employees who had their contract terminated.   With regard to Courts,  I believe 188 had their 
contracts terminated, but 720 jobs have been safeguarded in Courts. Apollo is still running as it 
has been running. There has not been any termination of contracts except for a few members of 
top management, I believe.  

Mr Ameer Meea: I am afraid to say that the hon. Minister is wrong for Apollo because it 

was reported in the press – ‘The Star’ of Sunday 01 November - et je cite – 

“ Cette semaine cinq employés ont été licenciés on economic grounds … » 

Et c’est aussi rapporté que la secrétaire et un chauffeur ont été mis à la porte. C’est aussi 
rapporté par les employés : « C’est injuste envers ces deux petits employés qui n’ont rien à faire 
avec la crise du BAI . Certains, au gouvernement, ne réalisent pas comment ils sont en train de 
ruiner les familles”. Ma question à l’honorable ministre : pourquoi ces petits employés ont été 
licenciés sur economic grounds ? 

Mr Bhadain: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am informed that the contract of six employees 
had been terminated in management which I have mentioned before. Now, with regard with what 
‘The Star’ or any other newspaper is publishing, I cannot go by the information which is in the 
press. I can only go by information which is given to me officially.  

The Deputy Speaker: No comments, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhadain: The other thing I would mention is that the special administrator who is 
handling this particular assignment is the one who is dealing with this matter. I don’t think that 
there are any sort of piecemeal terminations of contracts. I, personally, would not believe what 
has been published in that particular newspaper. 

Mr Uteem: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the hon. Minister did not answer to part (b) of the 
question which was about the quantum of compensation paid to these people who lost their job. 
Even if he does not know the quantum, at least, does he know the rate that was paid to them? 
And also if he has the information as to what is the cost to Government to look after them under 

 

51 

the Workfare Programme because these people have been admitted to the Workfare Programme 
and are being paid out of public funds.  

Mr Bhadain:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it is not correct to say that they are being paid out 
of public funds because the compensation which has been paid to these employees comes from 
the  fund  which  is  managed  by  the  special  administrator  as  part  of  the  overall  administration 
under section 110 of the Insurance Act. Now, there were representations made by Trade Unions 
representatives to the effect that a special effort should be made for people to be paid more than 
the two weeks which is provided for in law.  And there are, I believe, certain cases which have 
been looked into and three weeks have been paid in certain cases. The Workfare Programme is 
there and we all know how the Workfare Programme works.  The compensation is coming out 
from the special administrator. There is no involvement of public funds. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea, last supplementary! 

Mr Ameer Meea: The hon. Minister did not want to give the list company-wise, how 
many employees lost their job, but it is very sad to hear that more than 400 employees of the 
group  have  lost  their  job  since  April  2015.  Apart  from  Courts,  there  are  also  companies  like 
Boatyard Bewing, Publico Ltée, Yukondale, Le Voyageur Travel Tours – all companies which 
were operating within the group. There have been 101 employees for the companies I have just 
mentioned who lost their job. May I ask the hon. Minister, in the Insurance Company BAI itself 
and Bramer Bank how many employees did lose their job? 

Mr  Bhadain: Well,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  have  stated  that  the  whole  group  BAI, 
Bramer and all the companies which fall under that sort of spider web structure which was built 
by BAI, the total figure is 4,332 and 3,923 jobs have been safeguarded. Now, the hon. Member is 
focusing on 409 jobs which have been terminated. But it is a question of how you want to look at 
it! 3,923 have been safeguarded in a huge Ponzi Scheme where if all the effort, time and energy 
had not been put into that, these 3,923 jobs would not have been safeguarded. I believe it is a 
major achievement, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

STATE LAND - BENEFICIARIES 

(No.  B/966)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in regard to 

 

52 

State  land,  he  will  state  the  names  of  the  beneficiaries  of  new  leases  therefor  granted  since 
January 2015 to date, indicating in each case, the - 

(a) 

(b) 

terms and conditions of the lease, and  

purpose of the lease. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun):  Mr 
Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  no  new  leases,  as  such,  have  been  granted  during  the  period  of  January 
2015 to date. As a matter of fact, only cases of renewal or transfer of leases have been dealt with, 
and cases where lands leased out have not been developed as required by the lease conditions, 
action has been taken for resumption of possession of these plots of land. 

After consultation with the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development, the Ministry 
of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms and the Attorney General’s 
Office, my Ministry has, with Government approval, established a new Policy Framework and 
procedures to govern the allocation of State lands to ensure transparency and accountability in 
the process. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I deemed it relevant here to inform the House that, according to 
records in my Ministry, there are two cases of lease where action had already been initiated and 
decisions already taken well before 01 January 2015.  However, the clearances became due for 
issue after 01 January 2015.  These two cases concern Le Chaland Hotel at La Cambuse and the 
Vrihat Vaishnav Sabha in Rivière du Rempart.  In a third case, upon the request of the Ministry 
of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific  Research,  a  lease  was 
granted in February 2015 to the World Hindi Secretariat over a plot of land in Phoenix. 

Mr Uteem: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am very surprised to hear this from the hon. Vice-
Prime Minister because he, himself, in this very House, stated that he has regularised a lot of 
squatters.  So,  I  would  have  thought  that  some  amount  of  State  land  has  been  leased  to  these 
beneficiaries. 

Coming to my specific question, in the Budget Speech, it was announced, and I quote - 

“Government is making it mandatory for the names of beneficiaries of new leases of State 
lands to be published in the Government Gazette giving details of the lands leased and 
proposed usage.” 

 

53 

Is  Government  going  ahead  with  the  proposal  made  in  the  Budget  Speech  of  the  hon. 

Minister Finance and Economic Development? 

Mr Soodhun: In fact, as I mentioned in my answer, there has been renewal of the lease.  
It is also true to say that for the poor people, I have already given to more than thousands of 
people.  But, according to what the hon. Member has asked with regard to the lease, according to 
my information, this concerns the industries or whatever.  But, for people who have less than 10 
perches,  we  have  already  given  the  lease  to  nearly  more  than  thousands  and,  in  fact,  we  are 
coming very soon to the issue of 483 persons concerned with the ex-CHA since 1960. So, we are 
just  taking  into  consideration  all  the  leases  which  have  been  at  a  deadlock;  nearly  more  than 
2,000.  This is an ongoing programme. For this purpose, if my hon. friend wants to have a list, I 
can  circulate  it;  I  can  table  it.  There  is  no  problem.    But  with  regard  to  new  lease  for  any 
construction  of  hotels  or  any  industrial  lease,  we  have  not  yet  given.  It  is  only  La  Cambuse, 
which lied for seven years, after which we have been able to release the land. 

Mr Uteem: The hon. Minister did not answer the question as to whether the names and 
purpose  would  be  published  in  the  Government  Gazette,  as  was  stated  in  the  Budget  Speech. 
Another promise made in the Budget Speech is that there would be a Digital State Land Register 
which will be compiled and made public and which will provide comprehensive data on State 
lands already leased as well as unallocated State lands that may be developed for commercial, 
industrial and other uses. So, may I know from the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, first, whether he 
still intends to Gazette all the beneficial owners of these State lands and second, what happened 
to this Digital State Land Register? 

Mr Soodhun: In fact, as I mentioned, we are coming with a policy framework, which we 
have approved last Friday, and which will be normally published in the Government Gazette, and 
it will be official.  All applications will be in line and it will be transparent. We are not going to 
do as it was done formerly. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

NATIONAL PROPERTY FUND LIMITED - ASSETS & LIABILITIES 

(No.  B/967)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms, 

 

54 

Minister  of  Technology,  Communication  and  Innovation  whether,  in  regard  to  the  National 
Property Fund Limited, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to 
- 

(a) 

(b) 

the assets and liabilities thereof as at to date, and  

when it will issue debentures to the policy holders of the Super Cash Back Gold 
Scheme and the investors in the Bramer Property Fund. 

Mr Bhadain: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the National Property Fund Limited is a company 
incorporated under the Companies Act and, in accordance with section 210 (1) of the said Act, 
the National Property Fund Limited has to submit its audited financial statements to the Registrar 
of Companies not later than six months after the Balance Sheet date. The hon. Member can have 
access  to  the  information  requested  with  the  Registrar  of  Companies  at  the  time  the  National 
Property Fund Limited will file its accounts. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with respect to part (b) of the question, I refer the hon. Member 
to  the  reply  I  made  to  PQ  B/624  of  06  October  2015.  I  am  also  informed  by  the  National 
Property Fund Limited that debentures for the repayment of the first tranche of Rs3.1 billion will 
be issued and paid prior to 30 June 2016. 

Mr  Uteem:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  had  a  very  specific  question,  which  was  when 
would the debentures be issued by the  National  Property  Fund and the answer  I  got is that it 
would be before 31 July 2016. 

So,  do  we  have  any  more  precision?    Because  may  I  remind  the  hon.  Minister  that  he, 
himself, in this House, several months ago, said that National Property Fund Limited is going to 
very shortly issue those debentures. 

Mr Bhadain: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, even though I do agree with my learned friend 
that I said that the debentures will be issued by NPFL shortly, I am informed by NPFL that the 
repayment date is not 31 July, it is 30 June 2016, and they will be issued prior to that date. Now, 
it  would  not  make  any  difference  whether  the  debentures  are  issued  tomorrow  or  on  29  June 
2016 because they would be redeemable on 30 June 2016, in any case. 

Mr Uteem: Actually, it does make a difference because the hon. Minister went on TV 
and stated that, once these debentures have been issued to policyholders, they would be able to 

 

55 

go, pledge it, raise finance. So, now, I take it that there is no plan for the Government, through 
the National Property Fund, to give to all these policyholders any debentures until 30 June 2016. 

Mr Bhadain: As I stated, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, they are redeemable on 30 June 2016.  
We  were  on  the  same  TV  programme.  Probably,  the  hon.  Member  did  not  understand  that 
properly.  However,  with  regard  to  the  possibility  of  people  cashing  in  on  their  debentures  by 
pledging it and contracting a loan, that would be possible, but it is after 30 June 2016. 

Dr. Sorefan: Mr  Deputy  Speaker, Sir,  especially  for the old-aged people, the time for 
debentures  is  too  long.    When  issuing  debentures,  will  the  hon.  Minister  consider  making  an 
allowance for the old-aged people who need debentures to be shortened, so that they  can use 
their money?  Because they are very in need of their money to survive. 

Mr Bhadain: Mr Deputy  Speaker, Sir,  I totally  agree  with the hon. Member.   In fact, 
there have been several representations which have been made at the level of my Ministry to that 
effect  and  the  matter  has  also  been  discussed  in  Cabinet,  and  it  has  been  agreed  that  we  are 
looking into the possibility of repaying everything to people who are 75 years old and over. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Recently, there was an issue that companies were not allowed to claim 

their debentures. Can the hon. Minister éclairer nos lanternes par rapport à ça ? 

Mr  Bhadain:    Absolutely.  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  there  were  55  companies  in  Super 
Cash Back Gold and the decision which was taken by Government was that those companies 
would not be repaid because they don’t fulfil the eligibility criteria which was put forward for 
repayment purposes. Now, it just happens that in those 55 companies, there are other insurance 
companies which have actually contracted these insurance policies with BAI.  It does not make 
sense.  How  can  an  insurance  company  have  an  insurance  policy  with  whatever  insurance 
company and now when this turns out to be a huge fraud that Government is going to step in 
with all the efforts and energy which is being put into it to recover money, to go and repay these 
insurance companies! That wouldn’t make sense at all. I am also informed that they will have 
that amount which they have invested as a tax loss which can be brought forward. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Uteem, last supplementary! 

Mr  Uteem:  Since  it  is  the  last  question,  I  would  refer  to  the  answer  which  the  hon. 
Minister gave to me.  He told me to go and look at the answer to PQ B/624.  In PQ B/624, the 

 

56 

hon. Minister stated that – that was in October 2015 - there were 1,554 policyholders who had 
invested less than Rs500,000 in the Super Cash Back Gold scheme, who had not been repaid. So, 
may  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  whether  he  has  updated  figures  as  to  how  many 
policyholders there are now who have not yet been repaid and would he confirm the real reason 
as to why these policyholders are not being repaid and the real reason why the debentures are not 
being issued, it is simply because as at to date the National Property Fund Limited does not have 
the necessary cash and assets to meet these commitments? 

Mr  Bhadain:    Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  will  reckon  the  figure  of  1,524  which  was 
mentioned, was not only for people who had invested Rs500,000 or less. It was the total amount; 
Rs500,000 plus also.  Now, I checked yesterday and I was informed by NPFL that out of 12,001 
policies - if I remember correctly - of people who had invested less than Rs500,000; there are 
only 86 persons, out of 12,000, who have not been repaid and that is because these people have 
not  come  forward  for  those  repayments.    This  is  in  terms  of  people  investing  less  than 
Rs500,000.  For Rs500,000 or more, the figure has greatly reduced and it is now 764.  So, if we 
are to add up 764 with 86, that would be about 850, odd. So, 1,554 had been reduced to 850 
since I last answered that question. 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, assets are always there.  Explained assets, not unexplained ones! 

The Deputy Speaker:  Next question, hon. Uteem! 

MAURITIAN DIASPORA SCHEME – APPLICATIONS 

(No. B/968) Mr R. Uteem (First Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis Central) 
asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the Mauritian 
Diaspora Scheme, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Board of Investment, 
information  as  to  the  number  of  applications  received  thereunder,  indicating  in  each  case  the 
outcome thereof. 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  Investment  Promotion  Mauritian 
Diaspora Scheme Regulations were published in October 2015 to give effect to the budgetary 
measures for the setting up of the Mauritian Diaspora Scheme.  

 

57 

As  provided  for  in  the  regulations,  the  Board  of  Investment  has  set  up  a  Mauritian 
Diaspora Technical Committee for the implementation of the scheme. The Technical Committee 
is currently working on the eligibility criteria for registration under the scheme which is expected 
to be finalised by early  December 2015.   I wish to inform the House that the scheme will be 
launched officially in January 2016.  

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  am  also  informed  by  the  Board  of  Investment  that,  in  the 
meantime, it has already received 16 applications and these will be examined by the Technical 
Committee once the eligibility criteria have been approved. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem:  Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. I am happy with the answer given by the 
hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development that it is only as from January next year 
that  we  will  start  considering  applications.  But  how  would  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development reconcile that on the one hand the BOI and the Ministry of Finance and 
Economic Development are inviting the Mauritian Diaspora to come back to Mauritius and, at 
the same time, the hon. Minister of Health and Quality of Life is telling Mauritians to go and 
work  in  Africa;  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  is  telling  Mauritians  to  go  and  work  in  Saudi 
Arabia and Emirates; how would he reconcile the fact that we are, on one hand, asking diaspora 
to come back and, on the other hand, we are telling Mauritians to go and work abroad? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  It might look like a contradiction.  It is not! We have an excess 

number of doctors. What do we do with them?   

(Interruptions) 

We have excess number of pilots.  What do we do with them? We have an excess number of 
teachers.  So, in Mauritius, we have shortage in certain sectors where we need people to come 
in… 

(Interruptions) 

…and there are sectors in the economy where we have too many which have been trained. In 
fact, in our Budget, a scheme whereby those whose degrees don’t match with what the market 
requires, in those  cases, we have launched a programme for the retraining of 3,000  graduates 
whose  degrees  do  not  match  local  conditions.  So,  it  is  complex.  The  sentence  of  the  hon. 

 

58 

Member can give the impression that there is contradiction. There is none! On one side, we have 
an excess of certain professionals, on the other side, we have shortage and we are dealing with 
both. 

Mr Uteem: Do I take it then that under this Mauritian Diaspora Scheme, there would be 
designated  sectors  where  there  are  actual  shortages,  where  we  would  invite  the  Mauritian 
Diaspora to come and work, will there be guidelines as to which sectors we need Mauritians to 
come back and in which sectors we don’t want our Mauritians back? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  There will be naturally a set of criteria shortlisting the priority 
sectors. But there is one issue also; we want our people to come back. So, at the end of the day, 
we  are  not  excluding  any  Mauritian  who  has  settled  abroad  and  wants  to  return  to  his 
Motherland. So, all applications will be considered, but priority will be given naturally for those 
who are qualified in the sectors we need.  I am looking at the criteria which are here.  We give on 
100 points, 20 points go for those who have a Doctorate for instance; 5% for those who have 
Diploma and Vocational Certificate; in the case of experience, someone who has got more than 
15 years, has 40 points; one who has less than 5 years, 5 points. It is clear that those criteria will 
come up to a maximum and the maximum is that out of 100, anyone to be eligible should have at 
least 60%. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: Merci, M. le président.  Donc, par rapport à la logique de l’honorable 
ministre, les pilotes et les médecins ne seront pas les bienvenues.  Therefore, can I ask the hon. 
Minister  for  the  16  applications  that  he  received,  may  we  know  what  are  their  respective 
professions? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Mostly professionals! This is why I have given it.  Yes, they are 
mostly professionals. I need to reply to the other question of the hon. Member who says that we 
are  not  inviting  those  professionals  where  we  have  an  excess  of  employment.  I  want  to  put 
emphasis on one thing;  we want our children to come back.  The concept which has, in fact, 
inspired this decision was that we want Mauritians who have settled abroad to come back and to 
share their experience in the country. This is basically the priority. Now, we come at the second 
level to those whom we need absolutely and those who are less required, but then will fall on the 
third category on consultants. And I need to tell the House one thing, we can’t expect a growth 

 

59 

rate that will allow us to move out of the middle income trap without opening the market.  So, 
we are moving in a period of our history where we’ll be opening our market for professionals, 
non-Mauritians, living abroad, but whom we need, who will be allowed to come in to work and 
participate in the growth and success.  This is inevitable.  It will be impossible to move towards 
high growth without opening the economy. We have opened up the sky.  The sky is now more 
open with the coming in of at least six new air companies. So, this forms part of the strategy; we 
should not exclude just on the basis of dogmas because we feel that it is wrong. We are opening 
up and we will open still more the economy in the years ahead. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the hon. Minister has given us a very long answer 
to the question put by hon. Ameer Meea.  Could I come back to that question?  The question is 
very simple: how many  professionals?  We know the answer is 16. Could we have details of 
what professions are concerned? Give us figures. The question he put was very simple and it was 
a beautiful attempt on the part of the hon. Minister to drown the fish. Could be, please, give us 
the answer? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Unless the hon. Member did not listen to what I am saying or 

my English is not as good as his, but I beg… 

The Deputy  Speaker: Let the hon. Minister reply! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  …the  hon.  Member  to  understand  what  I  am  saying.  The 

majority of those 16 are professionals. If you want the exact number… 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy  Speaker: Sorry! Hon. Mohamed, you asked the question, let the Minister 

reply! 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:…but now you are provoking me, I won’t reply to you. Don’t 

provoke man! 

Out of the 16, there are 13 professionals and 3 are self-employed. Among the 16, there 
are 14 with more than 10 years’ experience and 2 with less than 10 years’ experience. Among the 

 

60 

16 who have applied, 11 come from UK. So, we have among the education, 4 have CFA, 4  have 
CA and one has LLB Law. Do you want more information? 

(Interruptions) 

I am just saying!  Well, take an appointment with me, I’ll give it to you. 

The Deputy  Speaker: Hon. Sesungkur! 

EXPORTS – REVENUE 

(No. B/969) Mr D. Sesungkur (First Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) asked 
the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to export trade for the 
years 2014 and 2015 respectively, he will state in each case – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

the total export revenue thereof; 

the current account deficit thereof; 

if  the  worsening  of  the  current  account  deficit  was  due  to  a  fall  in  the  export 
revenue, and 

(d) 

the steps taken to rebalance the economy. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Mr Deputy Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, total 
export  of  goods  and  services  amounted  to  Rs192.9  billion  in  2014.  According  to  the  latest 
Balance of Payments data published by the Bank of Mauritius, exports of goods and services for 
the first semester of 2015 are estimated at Rs97.5 billion. 

Regarding part (b) of the question, in 2014 the current account deficit stood at 5.5% of 
GDP. The projected deficit for 2015 is 4.8% of  GDP. This includes an  upward adjustment in 
tourism revenue due to inclusion of new data sources. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, 2015 would turn out to be a much better year than the previous years 

in terms of external account deficit of the country. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  am  tabling  the  series  of  measures  we  are  taking  to  further 
improve the current account of the balance of payments as well as the trend with regard to the 
current account deficit for period 2011-2015. 

61 

 
Mr Sesungkur: Mr Deputy Speaker, I am thankful to the hon. Minister who is doing a 
tremendous effort to reignite our economy and to re-engineer our economy and give a boost up 
to export. Will the hon. Minister agree with me that we have to do a special effort with regard to 
certain  sectors  which  can  create  employment  for  the  low  and  semi-skilled  like  EPZ,  light 
engineering,  etc,  like  we  did  in  the  1980s?  So,  is  he  contemplating  certain  measures  to  give 
incentive to foreign investors in those sectors? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  we  are  engineering  a  second  economic 
miracle which will not leave a lot of space for others. What we are doing is that we are creating 
new subsectors of the economy that will generate a lot more growth. We spoke of the famous 
pyramidal  structure  made  of  three  subsectors,  mainly  the  ocean  economy/blue  economy,  the 
marine hub and then Africa and, on top of this, I agree with the hon. Member that we have to 
diversify the base also in terms of training. The challenge we have now is not so much demand 
for employment, it is demand for specific jobs and this is where my colleague, the Minister of 
Education is working on a huge programme for the training of professionals and for the Chambre 
de Métiers, that is, training of people at the level of construction and others which can contribute 
in the development process. But, I am satisfied that we are on the right path. 

Mr Uteem: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, wouldn’t the hon. Minister of Finance agree that, in 
fact, the only reason there has been an improvement in our current account deficit is because 
there has been an appreciation of the rupee which increases our export earnings and also there 
has  been  a  dramatic  drop  in  the  price  of  petroleum  products  on  the  world  market?  But  if  we 
remove these two external factors, in fact, the situation would have been worse if we had relied 
only on the domestic indicia? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  There  is  truth  to  it.  The  improvement  in  the  current  account 
deficit in 2014 and this year also is partly due to the fact that there is a deflation worldwide at the 
level of commodities. Whether it be petroleum products or others, we are, in fact, in a period 
which is quite exceptional. Rate of inflation this year will be less than 1.5% calendar year basis, 
which means, therefore, that we are already living a period of deflationary forces where prices 
are going down. There is no doubt, therefore, that the bill for importation of petroleum products 
has helped us a lot. Number two, has the appreciation of the rupee helped in the process? I would 
tend to have doubts… 

 

62 

(Interruptions) 

Yes! Appreciation of the dollar. The depreciation of the rupee has not helped. In fact, I feel that, 
basically, the improvement in the current account deficit, is number one, the deflationary forces 
which are playing worldwide, and number two, demand also in some sectors has gone down – all 
combined. 

Now, can we say that this improvement in the current account is something permanent. 
No! Unless we take measures. This is why I am circulating, today, a list of measures which will 
help to ensure that, in the long-term the current account deficit is improved. We were only five 
years back with a current deficit of 13.2% of GDP, that is impossible to manage in the long-term. 
So, we are trying to bring it down to a level which is managable, which should be between 3% to 
4%. This is the objective. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Sesungkur, next question! 

CWA – WATER SUPPLY – APPLICATIONS 

(No. B/970) Mr D. Sesungkur (First Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) asked 
the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  whether,  in  regard  to  water 
supply,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Central  Water  Authority, 
information as to the number of applications received for connection to the network thereof as at 
31 December 2014 which have remained unattended as at to date, indicating – 

(a) 

(b) 

the fee charged when the applications were submitted, and 

if measures will be taken to expedite the processing of the pending applications 
therefor. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr.  I. 
Collendavelloo): Mr Deputy Speaker, I am informed by the Central Water Authority that, as at 
31 December 2014, there were 444 applications still pending for the following reasons – 

(i) 

(ii) 

the payment of the new supply fee had not yet been made;  

the applicant had to carry out the offsite works to connect to the network; 

(iii) 

no network or service main was available in the vicinity; 

 
(iv) 

63 

outstanding wayleaves had not  yet been obtained from the Local Authorities or 
from the Road Development Authority. 

A  processing  fee  of  Rs500  is  paid  at  the  time  of  application  for  domestic  supply  and 

Rs1,000 for non-domestic supply.  

As regards part (b), I am informed by the Central Water Authority that it is following up 

with the relevant authorities on a case to case basis to obtain way leaves. 

Mr Sesungkur: Mr Deputy Speaker, I would like to thank the hon. Vice-Prime Minister. 
He is doing a marvellous job to put some order at the Central Water Authority. Is the hon. Vice-
Prime  Minister  aware  that  connection  charges  at  times  are  quite  exorbitant  and  when  we  talk 
about very poor families who cannot afford those charges, can he consider special measures and 
see to it that in 2015 families are not deprived of such a necessity?  

Mr Collendavelloo: Well, I can only answer generally. A lot of effort is being made and 
new measures are going to be announced in order to alleviate the hardship felt by the deprived of 
this  country.  But,  I  would  not  be  able  to  answer  specifically  to  that  question  with  regard  to 
connection charges. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Quirin! 

AUGUSTE VOLLAIRE STADIUM - FOOTBALL COMPETITIONS 

(No. B/971) Mr F. Quirin (Fourth Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) asked 
the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the Auguste Vollaire Stadium, he will, for 
the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Mauritius  Sports  Council,  information  as  to  if  it  is 
presently not available for the holding of football competitions thereat and, if so, indicate the 
reasons therefor.  

(Withdrawn) 

WORLD CHAMPIONSHIP OF BOXE FRANÇAISE - MS L. B. & MS S. S. C. - 

FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE 

(No. B/972) Mr F. Quirin (Fourth Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) asked 
the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to Ms L. B. and Ms S. S. C., he will state the 

 

64 

reasons why his Ministry did not extend any financial assistance thereto for their participation in 
the final World Championship of Boxe Française to be held in Paris, in December 2015. 

(Withdrawn) 

LOCAL AUTHORITIES - SPORTS COMPLEXES & FOOTBALL GROUNDS - 

FACILITIES 

(No. B/973) Mr F. Quirin (Fourth Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) asked 
the  Minister  of  Local  Government  whether,  in  regard  to  the  sports  complexes  and  football 
grounds managed by the local authorities, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the 
local authorities, information as to if the utilisation thereof by local clubs and by individuals is 
free of charge and, if not, why not. 

Dr. Husnoo: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am informed that the use of sports complexes and 
football grounds managed by the District Councils of Flacq, Moka, Pamplemousses and Rivière 
du  Rempart  are  free  of  charge  whereas  a  nominal  fee  is  being  charged  by  the  other  local 
authorities for use of these facilities. 

With your permission, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the relevant information is being tabled 

in the Assembly. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Quirin! 

Mr Quirin: M. le président, je ne sais pas si j’ai bien compris la réponse du ministre. 
Dans sa première partie, il affirme que ce n’est pas payant et par la suite les collectivités locales 
en question réclament un nominal fee, c’est bien ça, pour l’utilisation ? 

Dr.  Husnoo:  No,  there  are  four  District  Councils:  Flacq,  Moka,  Pamplemousses  and 
Rivière  du  Rempart  where  they  are  free  whereas  you  have  the  other  eight  District  Councils 
where you have to pay. It varies. 

Mr Quirin: Mais qu’en est-il, M. le président, des municipalités ? 

Dr. Husnoo: You have to pay naturally. 

Mr Quirin: M. le président, le fait de faire payer dans certaines collectivités, n’est-ce pas 
une  contradiction  avec  le  rôle  de  facilitateur  que  devraient  jouer  les  collectivités  locales  en 
faveur de la jeunesse des quartiers, en faveur des clubs qui, je peux affirmer, M. le président, 

 

65 

nombreux sont ceux qui se trouvent dans les poches de pauvreté, dans les quartiers défavorisés ? 
N’est-ce  pas  là  aller  à  l’encontre  de  cette  politique  de  faciliter,  de  donner  les  moyens  à  la 
jeunesse  des  quartiers  qui  sont  sans  moyen,  sans  soutien  financier,  sans  sponsor,  qui  ne 
bénéficient pas de fonds du CSR ? Pourquoi ne pas permettre à ces clubs de jouer sans payer ? 

Dr.  Husnoo:  As  I  just  mentioned  at  the  Municipal  Councils  and  the  other  District 
Councils, the fee charged is much less. It is a nominal fee that they have to charge just for the 
maintenance. But, it is a nominal fee and is not as expensive as a private club or whatever. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  M.  le  président,  si  j’ai  bien  compris  l’honorable  ministre,  pour  les 
sports  complexes  and  football  grounds  qui  sont  gérés  par  les  municipalités  maintenant  c’est 
payable? Parce qu’autant que je sache, jusqu’à décembre 2014, les football grounds étaient free 
of charge à Port Louis ! 

Dr. Husnoo: As I said, I have got a long list here of the different District Councils and 
Municipal Councils. A lot of these facilities are free. I am going to circulate it. It depends on 
many factors. It depends, firstly, on whether the person lives in that particular local council or 
outside. It depends on whether the club is registered with the council or not registered. It…  

Can I finish, please?  

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Let  me  finish!    The  hon.  Member  has  asked  his  question,  I  have  given  him  time  to  ask  his 
question… 

The Deputy Speaker: No! Silence! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Dr. Husnoo: I have given him time to ask his question, let me finish! 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Minister! Order! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

Hon. Ameer Meea! Please, sit down!  

Can you, please, sit down!  

66 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Dr. Husnoo, can you, please, sit down? 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Ameer Meea, can you allow the hon. Minister to answer? You have asked a question, will 
you listen to the answer? 

(Interruptions) 

Dr. Husnoo: I am not talking rubbish. I am just telling you the factors that are taken into 
consideration to charge the fee! I am not talking rubbish like you do sometimes! So, don’t blame 
me! 

(Interruptions) 

I am telling you the factors that are taken into consideration. Whether you want to listen or not, I 
don’t care! 

Stop it! I am not talking about all these! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Order! Hon. Minister, please sit down! Hon. Ameer Meea, if you 

won’t listen to the answer… 

(Interruptions) 

Has the hon. Minister answered his question? 

(Interruptions) 

Dr.  Husnoo:  I  was  going  to  mention  there  are  different  factors  that  are  taken  into 
consideration when they decide on the fee. As I mentioned, whether it is an inhabitant or non-
inhabitant, registered or not registered, whether it is day or night for that matter because at night 

 

67 

you have to pay for the electricity, so, they charge a bit more or whether it is a student or non-
student. There are so many factors. That is why I said I am going to circulate it, then, the hon. 
Member can have a look at it.  

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

(Interruptions) 

COMMISSION FOR CONCILIATION AND MEDIATION - CHAIRPERSON - 

APPOINTMENT 

(No. B/974) Mr R. Bhagwan (First Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) asked 
the Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and training  whether, in regard to the 
appointment of Mr I. S. as Chairperson of the Commission for Conciliation and Mediation, he 
will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commission, information as to –  

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

the date of appointment thereof; 

the terms and conditions of contract thereof, and  

who was acting as Chairperson prior to his appointment and since when. 

Mr  Callichurn:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  in  accordance  with  section  83  (3)  of  the 
Employment  Relations  Act  2008,  Mr  Iswarduth  Seetohul  has  been  appointed  President  of  the 
Commission for Conciliation and Mediation for a period of three years on contract. He assumed 
duty on 30 October 2015. 

As regards part (b) of the question, I am tabling the information sought for. 

Regarding part (c) of the question, prior to the appointment of Mr Seetohul, the Vice-
President  of  the  Commission  was  called  upon  to  act  as  President  from  March  2015  until  the 
appointment of Mr Seetohul.  

Mr Bhagwan: Can I know from the hon. Minister whether there has been any adverse 

report against the vice-President, the one who has been doing the actingship?  

Mr Callichurn: No. 

Mr Bhagwan: Can I know from the hon. Minister whether there is any specific reason 

why this person, who was doing the actingship, has not been appointed? 

 
Mr Callichurn: Well, it is an appointment made by the Minister and I chose Mr Seetohul 

68 

to be the President. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  whether  this  appointment  is  a  political 

appointment? 

Mr Callichurn: Certainly not! 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan, you did ask the question! Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the hon. Minister has just stated that he appointed 

Mr I. S. May I know from the hon. Minister - 

(i) 

(ii) 

whether there was any appel de candidature, and  

this  Mr  I.  S.,  how  many  years  of  experience  does  he  have  in  relation  to 
conciliation  and  mediation?  How  many  times  he  has  appeared  before  the 
Commission for Conciliation and Mediation? How many labour cases he has done 
in his life which will justify his appointment on this very important Commission 
for Conciliation and Mediation? 

Mr Callichurn: Well, section 87 (3) of the Employment Relations Act 2008 empowers 
me, as a Minister who is responsible for the subject matter of labour and employment, to assign a 
Chairperson for the Commission. 

As regards the experience, I can tell the hon. Member that Mr Seetohul is a Barrister, he 
has been a judicial officer for eight years and he is the right person in the right place, I should 
say. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mohamed! 

Mr  Mohamed:  Just  a  very  simple  question  to  my  good  friend,  the  hon.  Minister  of 
Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and  Training.  The  person  who  was  in  the  second 
position, after Professor Thorul left, was Acting Chairperson. She has all the experience. As I am 
sure the hon. Minister would agree, she is qualified. She has been chairing a lot of mediation 
issues at the Commission for Conciliation and Mediation. She has clearly got more experience in 
labour matters and mediation matters than the person he has nominated. So, why… 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mohamed! 

 

Mr Mohamed: So, why is it… 

69 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

This is my question! 

The  Deputy  Speaker:  Hon.  Mohamed,  please  don’t  give  an  opinion;  go  to  your 

question!  

Mr  Mohamed:  Why  is  it,  therefore,  that  someone  with  experience,  a  young  lady,  a 
professional, was put aside and someone else with no experience compared to that young lady 
was preferred? Why? 

Mr Callichurn: Can  I tell the hon. Member something? At the Commission, we need 
someone who is independent, but recently there has been a strong lobby for the vice-Chairperson 
to accede to the Presidency of the Commission, which is a very bad thing for the Commission 
because we need someone independent at the head of the Commission. 

Mr Ganoo: Just to enlighten the House, can the hon. Minister tell us whether, in the past, 
when Mr Torul or when the vice-Chairman was recruited, the same procedures were adopted?  
Was there any advertisement in the past? 

Mr  Callichurn:  No,  they  were  actually  appointed  by  the  former  Labour  Minister,  my 

good friend, hon. Mohamed, on the same conditions. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan, last supplementary! 

Silence! 

Order!  

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Mohamed, please!   I will not have to ask you every time to stop passing on comments.  
Allow the hon. Member to talk. 

70 

 
Mr Bhagwan: Can the hon. Minister confirm to the House and the nation whether that 
person, Mr I. S., is the same person who was acting as Magistrate or a Legal Officer and who 
signed a warrant when he was on leave to arrest the DPP? Is he the same person? 

Mr Callichurn: I am not aware of this particular issue, but I can tell the hon. Member 
something.  A Magistrate is on duty 24/7, seven days a week, even if he is on leave. I am not 
aware of the statement that the hon. Member just made. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan, next question, please! 

(Interruptions) 

MINISTRY OF FINANCIAL SERVICES, GOOD GOVERNANCE AND 

INSTITUTIONAL REFORMS, MINISTER OF TECHNOLOGY, COMMUNICATION 

AND INNOVATION - EMPLOYEES - CONTRACT 

(No. B/975) Mr R. Bhagwan (First Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) asked 
the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms,  Minister  of 
Technology,  Communication  and  Innovation  whether,  in  regard  to  the  persons  employed  on 
contract at his Ministry since December 2014 to date, he will state in each case the – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

names thereof;  

qualifications held;  

post occupied;  

terms and conditions of contract thereof, and  

parastatal  bodies  or  State  Owned  Companies  on  which  they  represent  his 
Ministry, indicating since when and the remunerations received. 

Mr  Bhadain:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  information  sought  by  the  hon.  Member  is 

being compiled and will be placed in the Library in due course. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Next question, hon. Rutnah! 

SUBRAMANIEN BHARATI EYES HOSPITAL - AVASTIN TREATMENT 

(No. B/976) Mr S. Rutnah (Third Member for Piton & Rivière du Rempart) asked 
the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the Avastin treatment, he will 

 

71 

state  the  number  of  patients  who  have  permanently  lost  their  eyesight  following  treatment 
therewith at the Subramanien Bharati Eyes Hospital in the recent past, indicating in each case, 
the name of the doctor who had administered same thereto. 

Mr Gayan:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the House is aware that PQ No. B/90, which dealt 
with the Avastin injection, was replied to by the former Minister of Health and Quality of Life. 
The House may also wish to note that, on Friday 24 April 2015, I made a statement in the House 
regarding the incident which arose as a result of injections of Avastin at the Subramanien Bharati 
Eyes Hospital at Moka and a copy of the enquiry report was tabled. 

With  regard  to  the  other  part,  I  am  also  informed,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  that  four 
patients have lost partial eyesight. I also wish to inform the House that the four injections were 
done according to the existing protocols. 

Mr Rutnah: Given the report of Dr. Isabelle in April, which identified serious lacunas, 
insofar  as,  amongst  others,  hygiene  and  sterilisation  were  concerned  at  the  time,  can  the  hon. 
Minister inform the House whether the Medical Council has seized the matter to investigate into 
the alleged professional conduct of those who were involved in the treatment? 

Mr Gayan: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, as far as I recollect, the report of the Committee did 
not identify any failure on the part of the doctors in giving the proper treatment, but there were 
certain recommendations that were made in regard to improving the conditions under which the 
Avastin was being prepared and this is being looked into. 

Insofar  as 

the 

Mr  Rutnah: 

the 
recommendations was for the procurement of a laminar flowchart to prepare Avastin in a sterile 
environment. Can the hon. Minister confirm whether his Ministry is using its best endeavours to 
acquire one of them in the public interest? 

recommendations  were  concerned,  one  of 

Mr Gayan:  It is already in progress. 

YVES CANTIN COMMUNITY HOSPITAL - PROJECTS EARMARKED 

(No.  B/977)  Mr  E.  Jhuboo  (Third  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River)  asked  the 
Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Yves  Cantin  Community 
Hospital, he will state – 

(a) 

if it is in fact a dispensary, a mediclinic or a hospital, and  

72 

the projects earmarked for implementation thereat, if any. 

 
(b) 

Mr Gayan: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I wish to inform the House that Dr. Yves Cantin 
Community Hospital situated at Black River, as its name suggests, is a Community Hospital. It 
operates  on  a  24-hour  basis  and  provides  basic  primary  health  care  services.  It  also  has 
laboratory facilities, X-ray services and a standby ambulance service. 

With  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  Yves  Cantin 
Community  Hospital  and  the  five  Community  Health  Centres  in  its  catchment  area  provide 
general consultations, maternal and child health services and family planning services as well as 
a range of other health services such as blood collection for analysis and dressings for wounds 
and injuries. 

My  Ministry  is  aware  of  the  transport  constraints  in  the  region  of  Black  River  and  is 
considering  the  introduction  of  an  outreached  service  to  facilitate  access  to  healthcare  for  the 
people  residing  in  the  area,  specifically  for  blood  collection  and  home  nursing  in  the  first 
instance. 

My Ministry will constantly monitor the health needs of the people in the locality and 

will provide further outreached health services as and when required. 

Furthermore,  infrastructural  works  are  being  carried  out  to  improve  the  services  being 

provided to the public and to patients in particular. 

Mr  Jhuboo:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  it  is  a  catchment  area  of  nearly  20,000  people, 
covering a region from Cascavelle up to Chamarel and to Le Morne. Doesn’t the hon. Minister 
think that it is high time that Yves Cantin Community Hospital becomes a full-fledged hospital? 

Mr Gayan:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, this is an issue which has been raised on several 
occasions, but for a regional hospital to be fully operational, it needs a catchment area of about 
250,000 people. Obviously, Black River does not satisfy that criterion, but I am informed that the 
services are being provided. There are ambulance services and, in case of special urgency, it is 
Victoria Hospital that is easily accessible from the area. In the south as well, we have Souillac 
Hospital.  It was supposed to be a regional hospital, but again we have a population criterion 
which is not met. 

73 

 
Mr Jhuboo: Je remercie le ministre pour sa réponse. À l’origine de la création d’Yves 
Cantin  Community  Hospital,  des  patients  ont  été  admis.  Des  chambres  étaient  mises  à  la 
disposition des patients suite à de lourdes opérations et, depuis neuf ans, plus aucun patient n’est 
admis en convalescence. Le ministre peut-il reconsidérer la position sur le concept d’admission? 

Mr Gayan: Je crois que ces services sont disponibles dans les hôpitaux à Rose Belle et à 
Candos. Je crois que ce n’est pas nécessaire, mais si jamais la nécessité se fait sentir, on verra ce 
qu’on pourra faire. 

Mr Ganoo: May I request the hon. Minister to see to it that the ambulance services are 
made  more  efficient  in  view  of  the  several  complaints  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  area  make 
concerning  that  particular  service?    For  example,  there  is  no  Labour  Ward  at  Yves  Cantin 
Community  Hospital.    From  time  to  time,  we  do  receive  complaints  regarding  the  ambulance 
services. 

Mr  Gayan:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  am  aware  of  the  complaints  that  are  made 
regarding ambulance services and I will certainly look into that.  I may also inform the House 
that we are seriously considering putting GPS in all the ambulances, so that we can monitor their 
movements. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Last supplementary, hon. Jhuboo! 

Mr Jhuboo: Merci, M. le président. Toujours dans le registre la santé sur la côte Ouest, 
le ministre peut-il informer la Chambre s’il a reçu une proposition d’un partenariat PPP pour la 
construction d’un hôpital privé sur la côte Ouest? 

Mr Gayan: We get lots of proposals.  If the hon. Member wants to come with a specific 

request, I can look into that.  But we get lots of requests every day. 

MINISTRY OF YOUTH & SPORTS - NPS BUILDING - RENT 

(No. B/978)  Mr S. Tarolah (Third Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) asked 
the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the office space rented by his Ministry at 
the NPS Building, at Rose Hill, he will state the – 

(a) 

(b) 

monthly rental fee thereof;  

purposes therefor, and  

 
(c) 

activities being carried out thereat. 

74 

(Withdrawn) 

MONT CHOISY - TARISA RESORT HOTEL - PUBLIC ROAD 

(No. B/979)  Mr K. Ramano (Third Member for Belle Rose & Quatre Bornes) asked 
the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in regard to Mon Choisy, he 
will state when decision was taken for the public road in front of the Tarisa Resort Hotel thereat 
to be deviated, indicating if – 

(a) 

(b) 

all the procedures therefor were followed, and 

consideration will be given for the reinstatement of the previous alignment of the 
said public road. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun):  Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir, regarding part (a) of the question, I am informed that in March 2010, LVN 
Tourism Enterprises Ltd. (Tarisa Resort Hotel) made an application to the Road Development 
Authority for the deviation of part of the Pointe aux Piments - Mon Choisy coast road running 
along the public beach, arguing that it posed a safety hazard for the clients of the hotel. 

Subsequently,  on  08  October  2010,  the  Ministry  of  Public  Infrastructure,  National 

 
Development Unit, Land Transport and Shipping sought and obtained Cabinet approval to - 

• 

• 

Firstly, divert and deproclaim part of the Pointe aux Piments – Mon Choisy coast 
road (B38), and  
Secondly, proclaim a new access road which will be constructed to link the Pointe 
aux Piments – Mon Choisy coast road (B38) to the Mon Choisy – Cap 
Malheureux Road (B13). 

 
As  a  result  of  that  decision,  part  of  the  Pointe  aux  Piments  –  Mon  Choisy  coast  road 
(B38) was deproclaimed as per Government Notice No. 37 of 2013 and the new road alignment 
to link Mon Choisy – Cap Malheureux Road (B13) was proclaimed as per Part II of the Schedule 
of the same Government Notice. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the new section of the road came into operation on 27 February 

2013. 

75 

 
 
As for part (b) of the question, I wish to inform the House that after the matter has been 
considered by a Ministerial Committee involving the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land 
Transport, the Attorney General and myself along with senior Government officials. It has been 
found and decided that, to allow the public enjoyment of the beach and to restore car parking 
facilities for the general public, the deproclaimed part of the Pointe aux Piments – Mon Choisy 
road (B38) would be re-instated, depending on the determination of the Court case.  

Mr Ramano: M. le président, est-ce que je peux savoir du ministre, qui c’est, valeur du 

jour, qui a l’administration de cette partie de la route qui a été deproclaimed? 

Mr Soodhun: Sorry? 

Mr  Ramano:  Qui  c’est  qui  a  l’administration  de  cette  partie  de  la  route  qui  a  été 

deproclaimed parce qu’il existe une barrière, valeur du jour, entre la plage et l’hôtel ? 

Mr  Soodhun:  As  I  just  mentioned,  the  hotel  received  permission  from  the  authority 

concerned; it is under approval and also Cabinet’s decision. 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  know  this  supplementary  does  not  fall  under 
your  purview,  but  as  we  are  talking  about  road  deviation,  can  you  transmit  it  to  the  Minister 
concerned. The Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport is here.  When you deviate 
from the north to go to the south, there is a traffic light and this traffic light is for a very short 
time, it is for about 50 seconds and this is causing traffic problems.  It is very dangerous. Can the 
Minister concerned do the needful to increase the timespan of that light so that we can have a 
good turning?  

Mr Soodhun: I agree with the hon. Member; I am going to talk to my colleague. 

Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Vice-Prime Minister give us the names of the Directors of this 
hotel and can he confirm to the House whether it is the first time that such thing happens in this 
country and whether the person concerned is a major Labour agent of Constituency No. 5? 

Mr Soodhun: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, as there is a Court case, I don’t want to comment 

on this. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Oree, next question! 

(Interruptions) 

 
WORLD CHAMPIONSHIP OF BOXE FRANÇAISE - ATHLETES – FINANCIAL 

76 

SUPPORT 

(No.  B/980)  Mr    G.  Lepoigneur  (Fifth  Member  for  Beau Bassin  & Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the World Championship of Boxe 
Française to be held in Paris, in December 2015, he will state why his Ministry is not providing 
any  financial  support  to  the  two  Mauritian  athletes  who  have  been  qualified  to  participate 
therein. 

(Withdrawn) 

MADAGASCAR - INDIAN OCEAN CUP CHAMPIONSHIP ZONE 7 OF VOLLEYBALL 

– SELECTED CLUBS 

 (No. B/981) Mr P. Armance (First Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the  Minister  of  Youth  and  Sports  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Indian  Ocean  Cup  Championship 
Zone  7  of  Volleyball  held  at  Madagascar  from  12  to  21  November  2015,  he  will  state  if  his 
Ministry has received any request from the four selected clubs therefor for any grant thereto and, 
if so, indicate the outcome thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

SC EXAMINATIONS 2015 – EXAMINATION PAPERS 

(No.  B/982)  Mr  G.  Oree  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  North  &  Montagne 
Longue)  asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 
Scientific Research whether, in regard to the Cambridge School Certificate Examinations 2015, 
she will state if she is aware that the examination papers thereof for Mathematics, Accounts and 
Economics were scheduled on the same day, 05 November 2015 and, if so, indicate if measures 
will be taken to avoid any such recurrence in the future. 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  am  informed  by  the  Mauritius 
Examinations  Syndicate  (MES)  that  the  examination  papers  for  the  Cambridge  School 
Certificate examinations were scheduled on 05 November 2015 as follows – 

 

 

77 

Examination Papers 

Mathematics Syllabus A 

Mathematics Syllabus D 

Principles of Accounts (Multiple Choice Paper) 

Economics (Multiple Choice Paper) 

 

1A 

1B 

2 

3 

Time 

08.00-10.00 

08.00-10.30 

11.00-12.00 

13.00-13.45 

There was a break of 30 minutes and one hour between the papers.  

I am further informed that, at the time the provisional time table was received, the MES 
did  make  representations  to  the  Cambridge  International  Examinations  (CIE)  regarding  the 
duration and the number of papers scheduled on that specific examination day. A proposal was 
also made by the MES for a time table deviation and for the Mathematics Papers Syllabus A and 
Syllabus D, to be rescheduled on the morning of 30 October 2015 or on 03 November 2015. 
However, the proposal was not retained by the CIE.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the time tables for SC and HSC examinations are prepared by 
the CIE taking into consideration the time zone where the examination papers are administered 
in the various countries and the potential threats to the security of the question papers. It is worth 
noting that according to the CIE handbook, it is only when the total duration of the papers taken 
in  one  session  exceeds  3  hours  and  45  minutes  that  a  time  table  deviation  can  be  envisaged. 
Thus,  being  required  to  sit  for  3  or  more  different  subject  papers  on  the  same  day  is  not 
considered as an acceptable reason for time table deviation by the CIE.  

However,  I  am  informed  that  in  the  CIE  provisional  time  table  for  2016  SC 
Examinations,  the  3  papers  of  Mathematics,  Principle  of  Accounts  and  Economics  are  not 
scheduled on the same day.  

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Lesjongard! 

CEB - SARAKO PROJECT - INQUIRY 

(No. B/985) Mr G. Lesjongard (Second Member for Savanne & Black River) asked 
the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to the Sarako 

 

78 

Project for the generation of electricity, he will state if his Ministry has carried out an inquiry 
thereinto and, if so, indicate the outcome thereof. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo): Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, following my reply to PQ No. B/129 on 03 March 
2015,  a  technical  committee  was  set  up  to  carry  out  an  assessment  of  the  Sarako  PV  Farm, 
including compliance to the land lease agreement and the EIA licence. 

  The  Committee  included  officers  from  my  Ministry,  the  Ministries  of  Environment, 
Agro-Industry,  Housing  and  Lands,  Public  Infrastructure,  the  Central  Electricity  Board,  the 
Water Resources Unit and the District Council. 

In its report dated August 2015, the Committee found that – 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

from February to December 2014, the plant produced 20.4 GWh of electricity, 
equivalent to 97.7% of the expected energy export; 

only 60% of the 80 acres of  land was being utilised. This is being looked into by 
the Ministry of Housing and Lands;  

 the promoter had not complied with some conditions of the EIA licence,  namely 
-   

•  submission of quarterly monitoring reports;  

•  building sound proof structures for the standby generator;  

•  construction of wastewater treatment plant on site, and  

• 

tree and grass planting.  

These  non-compliance  issues  are  being  monitored  by  the  Ministry  of  Environment, 
Sustainable Development and Disaster and Beach Management as well as the Ministry of Health 
and Quality of Life.  

Mr Lesjongard: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, can I know from the hon. Vice-Prime Minister 
whether the Committee looked into as to why when the project required some 30 arpents of land, 
some 90 arpents of land were allocated to the promoter of that project?  

79 

 
Mr Collendavelloo: That was not within the terms of reference of the Committee. What 
we know is that the total site extent was 337,669 metre square but only 60%, that is, 202,745 
metre square was used. The remaining land is just waste. 

Mr Hurreeram: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, can the hon. Vice-Prime Minister inform the 

House what amount has been paid to Sarako since it is in operation? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Can the hon. Member be more precise? What amount has been paid 

to Sarako? 

Mr Hurreeram: What amount of fees? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Oh, I see. Well, there is a contractual financial support of Rs37 m. 
per year which is being paid to CEB - the Government has granted that support to CEB to meet 
the differential in price. There is a differential between the marginal cost and the purchase price 
of  Rs6.60  which  is  the  price  which  CEB  pays  and  there  is  an  additional  Rs37  m.  which 
Government has to pay to CEB. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Lesjongard, a last supplementary! 

Mr  Lesjongard:  Thank  you,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  Since  the  hon.  Minister  has 
confirmed that the excess of land that has been allocated for that project is not being utilised and 
might not be utilised in the future, will he inform the House whether Government will retrieve 
that excess of land from Sarako? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Thank you for that supplementary. The matter has been referred to 
the Minister of Housing and Lands to see what actions should be taken in the light of the fact that 
the rest of the land has not been used. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Members, the Table has been advised that PQ Nos. B/987, 

B/988 and B/989 have been withdrawn. Time is over! 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10 (2) 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun):  Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir, I move that all the business on today’s Order Paper be exempted from the 
provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

 
The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 

80 

Collendavelloo) rose and seconded.  

Question put and agreed to. 

The Deputy Speaker: I break for tea for 30 minutes. 

At 3.58 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 4.43 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

PUBLIC BILL 

Second Reading 

THE ASSET RECOVERY (AMENDMENT)  

BILL (NO. XXXI OF 2015) 

Order read for resuming adjourned debate on the Second Reading of the Asset Recovery 

(Amendment) Bill (No. XXXI of 2015). 

Question again proposed. 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger): Let me start by reminding the House 
that, in the recent past, both in the UK and here, in Mauritius, the organisations that used to be 
responsible for assets recovery proved unsatisfactory both in the UK and here, in Mauritius.  

In  the  UK,  it  was  the  Assets  Recovery  Agency,  here  it  was  the  Assets  Recovery 
Commissioner and both did not give satisfaction to the people in charge of both countries. In the 
UK, the Assets Recovery Agency created in 2003 became part of the Serious Organised Crime 
Agency in 2008 then, a department in the new National Crime Agency in 2013 and, later on, in 
the case of the UK, I will come back to that in detail.  

Here, the responsibility of the Assets Recovery Commissioner was passed on to the DPP. 
Let me make it clear that we were dead against and we expressed our disagreement forcefully 
and publicly that the DPP should take over this responsibility for assets recovery from criminals 
and others. Let’s take, for example, ‘Le Mauricien’. I think it was quoted by the hon. Minister for 
Financial Affairs. ‘Week-End’ du 22 Septembre 2013 -  

“Bérenger : le rôle du DPP ‘dangereusement dénaturé’" 

 

81 

We  put  our  point  of  view,  as  I  said,  forcefully  and  publicly  forward  that  the  DPP’s 
responsibility  is  one  of  the  most  important  institutions  in  our  Constitution  and,  rightly  so,  a 
stand-alone institution in our Constitution. And I repeat, one of the most important institutions in 
our Constitution as in the UK and other countries. 

Our opinion has not changed, but we do not make it a personal affair. To us, it is a question 
of principle; it is a question of institutions.  I did criticise the DPP, for his performance as DPP, 
on several occasions.  But that is another matter. I don’t want to mix issues.  We were clear from 
day one that this is not the proper thing to do, to give to the DPP - who has one of the most 
important stand-alone jobs in the Constitution - that responsibility of carrying out enquiries, of 
seizing  assets.  Inevitably  he  would  have  been  involved  in  controversies.  Our  opinion  has  not 
changed,  but  I  think  all  of  us  should  be  strong  enough  to  separate  personal  dislike  for  an 
individual from the issue of principles and institutions.  

Therefore, we express total disagreement, forcefully and publicly, when here in Mauritius, 
under the previous Government, the responsibility for assets recovery from criminals and others 
was given to the DPP. But equally we have expressed our opposition in the recent past that it 
should pass on from the DPP to the FIU. Because to us, again, if we give that responsibility to 
the FIU… 

(Interruptions) 

It would be like that and I am tempted to say that with the hon. Minister around, others might 
make  this  mistake  also.    Again,  giving  that  responsibility,  taking  it  away  from  the  DPP  and 
giving it to the FIU, would denature the FIU.  Not as dangereusement from my point of view, 
but it would be tantamount to denaturé the FIU, Madam Speaker. 

The FIU, I must remind everybody, was set up a couple of years back already. It was set up 
after the report, the setting up in 1989 and the recommendations of the Financial Action Task 
Force on Money Laundering. That was set up in 1989 by the G7. These days it is housed in the 
OECD building.  I think it is one with the OECD and the G7, now G20 organisation. One of its 
major recommendations - it did not fall from heaven - was that there should be a stand-alone 
dedicated  Financial  Intelligence  Unit,  in  every  country,  to  receive  and  disseminate  suspicious 
transaction reports. And it is still like that in countries that go along with the recommendations of 
the Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering. And there is a reason to that.  

 

82 

In Government in 2000-2005, we created those institutions.  We set up. We know what we 
are  talking  about.  The  idea  is  to  have  a  dedicated  stand-alone  intelligence  body  to  collect 
information and disseminate the information to ICAC, to the Financial Services Commission and 
so on. The point is that it is not without reason that the Financial Action Task Force on Money 
Laundering insisted that there should be the stand-alone dedicated body to collect information 
and  disseminate  information  to  the  institutions  concerned  with  taking  action.  Because  it  is  a 
question  of  perception,  a  question  of  trust,  of  confidence  for  the  banks  and  other  financial 
institutions. For operators in general to have confidence, to have trust in the FIU, it must be a 
dedicated, purely intelligence  gathering  and dissemination body.  If  we  denature the  FIU, it is 
going to lose the confidence, the trust of these operators and we will go back.  

I must remind the House that at the end of 2013 - he is not present - the hon. Ag. Prime 
Minister who was Minister of Finance, under the previous Government, came with that proposal 
of moving from the DPP to the FIU. I put forward the arguments which I am putting forward 
now, he dropped the idea.  I am not sure whether it was because he was convinced - if he was 
here, he might enlighten us, it is not too late - by my brilliant arguments.  I tend to suspect that 
the relationship between the then Prime Minister and the then DPP carried more weight than my 
brilliant  arguments.    But  never  mind,  he  dropped  the  idea.  He  had  come  forward.  He  had 
proposed that the FIU takes over and he has nothing to say on that. He is not even present as Ag. 
Prime Minister. 

The  FIU  as  it  exists  -  the  Director,  the  key  person  is  appointed  by  the  President  of  the 
Republic, on the recommendation of the Prime Minister, after consultation with the Leader of the 
Opposition.  In practice, it is the Minister who chooses, who proposes to the Prime Minister. And 
in  the  case  of  the  present  Director  -  I  won’t  get  personal  -  when  I  was  consulted,  I  objected 
because  even  as  a  stand-alone,  intelligence  gathering  and  dissemination  body,  we  need 
somebody as Director of the FIU mature, with a lot of experience and with visible independence 
from  the  Minister  responsible  for  the  financial  sector.  I  have  nothing  personally  against  the 
person who was proposed, a very young person. I won’t be asking, I won’t say what his main 
qualification, I believe, was. The hon. Minister knows more than me what his real qualification 
was.  So, I objected. I objected, and as usual the Rt. hon. Prime Minister probably had agreed 
even before I had the opportunity to react. This is what happened in the case of ICAC after the 
last General Elections.  The honourable Prime Minister consulted me, in writing as usual, and 

 

83 

went ahead without me having time to react and in that case it makes no difference. I objected on 
a question of qualification, as Director of the FIU what the law provides, vast experience and so 
on.  I objected. I won’t go into details, but this is to show that the FIU, although a very important 
stand-alone intelligence body, the qualifications of the Director are not at all the qualifications, 
the experience that we will have to expect from somebody responsible for asset recovery, which 
is something completely different. 

I am going to show that when the hon. Minister says that we are following the British 
model, that we are following the British way, in that case, he is factually wrong. I gave a press 
conference on Saturday and I made it a point de ne pas choisir des mots blessants.  I have no 
reason to be against the FIU, except that I am fundamentally convinced that it is bad for the FIU, 
for the country. But it is factually wrong to say that we are going the British way, that we are 
following  the  British  model.  What  is,  today,  the  British  model  as  compared  to  what  is  being 
proposed? Le contraire! What is, today, the British model? And this is what we say we should 
do. I’ll end on that later on. This is what we say. We should learn from that British model, then 
make it even better with time. But it is factually wrong to say that, when we propose that the FIU 
takes over asset recovery, we are following the British way. This is factually wrong! 

What is, today, the set-up in the UK? They have called it UK FBI. You have a massive 
crime  organisation  called  the  National  Crime  Agency.  Very  powerful,  with  a  lot  of  different 
departments!  I  won’t  go  into  the  pure  crime  departments.  It  is  a  huge  organisation!  Very 
powerful, the National Crime Agency, as I said, set up as from 2013; quite recent. It has at its 
head a Director General who is  - the law provides - a very high ranking Police Officer or an 
individual  of  equivalent  experience,  seniority  and  relevant  experience.  He  is  the  key  man  up 
there. You have a number of departments under him and one is the Economic Crime Division. 
They call it Economic Crime Command. I would rather say Economic Crime Division. That’s 
under the Director General. 

Under the control of the Economic Crime Division, there are two different departments, 
and the Economic Crime Division has a Director who reports directly to the Director General of 
the  National  Crime  Agency.  Therefore,  this  Economic  Crime  Division  has  two  different 
departments: a Civil Recovery and Tax Department and a separate department, which is the UK 
FIU - two different departments. And as provided for, as I said earlier on, in the Financial Action 

 

84 

Task Force on Money Laundering, the UK FIU is purely intelligence gathering, dissemination. 
Therefore,  when  we  are  saying  that  we  are  following  the  British  model,  we  are  wrong.  It  is 
wrong! They have not given to the FIU other responsibilities dealing with asset recovery. 

I repeat you have a big organisation qui englobe tout cela, the National Crime Agency, 
with a powerful Director General, most senior personality with massive experience and so on, 
and  one  of  the  departments  is  the  Economic  Crime  Division,  with  its  own  Director  reporting 
direct to the Director General of the National Crime Division - with two different departments. 
The FIU in the UK has remained purely intelligence gathering and dissemination, and it should 
stay like that in Mauritius. There are things that we should never learn from the UK, but in that 
case, let us learn from the UK, from their experience. 

My point is that it is factually wrong to say that we are following the British model. We 
are not! We, on the other hand, are proposing to do exactly that. Well, not exactly! It will have to 
be adapted to Mauritius. I will come to that in a few minutes. Before I say exactly in detail what 
we  propose  at  this  stage,  if  we  decide  to  go  ahead  with  the  FIU,  taking  over  those 
responsibilities,  first,  there  is  this  question:  nous  dénaturons  la  FIU,  but  also  the  level  of 
qualification of the person who is in charge. It is not the same thing at all! Somebody qualified to 
be  at  the  head  of  the  FIU  does  not  need  the  same  qualifications,  the  same  experience  as 
somebody who will be responsible for asset recovery.  And the staff also! The staff of the NIU is 
not at all trained… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: The FIU! 

Mr Bérenger: Again, the recent past remains in my mind. 

Therefore, the staff also of the FIU is not at all the same staff that we need, same level, same 
experience and so on, as what we do need for asset recovery. 

If we do go ahead and put that responsibility on the FIU’s shoulders, what is going to 
happen to the staff that is dealing with the asset recovery at the DPP’s Office? You have top 
legal minds that will not be prepared to serve under the present Director or any other Director of 
that level, of experience, of maturity. So, we are going to be in serious trouble. If that staff which 
has been at the DPP’s Office for a number of years, has been responsible for asset recovery is 

 

85 

transferred, what is the Organigram? We are told nothing in this law. Absolutely nothing! How is 
this going to co-exist? How many of the top guys or ladies at the DPP’s Office will accept to be 
transferred to the FIU, as it is organised? So, I say we should not go ahead. 

Before I propose and say what we say, let me point out two things that disturb me and 
that  would  need  clarification  in  the  amendment.  In  section  4,  the  words  “Director  of  Public 
Prosecutions”  are  replaced  by  the  word  “FIU”.  I  am  very  uneasy  with  that.  We  are  taking 
somebody, the DPP is one job – diminutif  –, one institution, we are  giving that responsibility 
which the DPP has under the law now and giving it not to the Director of the FIU but to the FIU.  
I am very uneasy with that, especially so that under section 7 - in this case that relates to money - 
how the money is to be spent, the money obtained through asset recovery, in that case, it says we 
delete the words “Enforcement Authority” - which is the DPP’s Office - and we replace them by 
the words “Director of FIU”.  

So, I am very uneasy with this idea of we remove the DPP but we replace him, not by the 
Director of the FIU, by the FIU! What is it? Is it the Director? Is it the Board of the FIU? I am 
uneasy with those two things. 

The real point is, as I said, it is factually wrong to say that we are following the British 
model, the British way. And, I repeat, we think that this is what we should do. Just as in the UK, 
they have set up this National Crime Agency, as in the UK, we should move full steam ahead 
with  the  setting  up  of  the  Financial  Crime  Commission  that  has  been  promised.  It  is  in  the 
Government  Programme.  The  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  has  mentioned  it  several  times.  In  my 
mind,  the  best  way  forward  is  going  the  English  way  and  creating  as  soon  as  possible  the 
Financial Crime Commission with the FIU and the Assets Recovery Department as two different 
bodies  under  this  Financial  Crime  Commission,  with  the  FIU  keeping  its  role  solely  for 
intelligence gathering and dissemination. That is the British lesson. That is the British way.  

If we do that, is it worth it? If we do that! And I think we are not in disagreement when I 
listened to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister! Then what is the use? And, we will damage the FIU? 
What  is  the  use  of  doing  tout  ce  remue-ménage if  we  agree  on  fundamentals,  that  is,  on  the 
setting up of the Financial Crime Commission with very senior officials in charge, as in the case 
of the National Crime Agency in the UK? So, we insist as an Opposition.  You have a majority, 
but we are going to damage the FIU; we are going to cause a remue-ménage temporaire.  What 

 

86 

is exactly going to happen to the staff of the DPP’s Office responsible for assets recovery? We 
say,  instead  of  that,  we  have  –  my  English  is  a  bit  weak  -  endured  the  DPP  exercising  those 
responsibilities for a number of years, we can endure some time more. 

(Interruptions) 

I must say I suppose my English is really not good for making people laugh!  

(Interruptions) 

So,  my  plea  is:  let’s  move  forward  full  steam  ahead  with  the  Financial  Crime 

Commission, with two… 

(Interruptions) 

There is no reason why it should prendre le temps. You are taking time! It does not mean that 
everything you do is wrong! Nearly everything, but not everything! It should not necessarily, if 
we take inspiration from the UK, and the hon. Minister spends most of his time there! So, I am 
sure he is fully informed and he is fully equipped to advise and move forward full steam ahead.  

Then under that setup, I forgot to say that in the UK setup, this National Crime – that is 
why I said avec des nuances à la Mauricienne – in the National Crime Agency – this monster 
that they have set up there, the UK FBI, the Director-General can, like the DPP, apply for Court 
action for asset recovery. It is quite extraordinary! The DPP, Her Majesty’s Prosecutions Service 
has  the  same  powers  as  our  DPP  here  under  the  Constitution.  They  don’t  have  a  written 
Constitution? But in that case the Director-General of the National Crime Agency, like the DPP, 
can apply to Court action. I am not saying we should follow that part. I propose that we go ahead 
with the Financial Crime Commission with the two separate departments; the FIU remaining as it 
is, purely intelligence gathering and dissemination and the DPP - in fact it is in the Constitution - 
to continue to institute asset recovery action before the Courts but no longer having investigation 
powers  as  at  now.  We  have  to  leave  it  to  the  DPP,  it  is  in  the  Constitution  and  there  is  no 
proposal to amend heureusement that part of the Constitution. 

So, to me, it would be the Mauritian setup going the UK way, the British way, taking 
lessons from the British. En passant, I wonder whether the hon. Minister is not aware of it or the 
Vice-Prime  Minister,  hon.  Collendavelloo,  or  the  Ag.  Prime  Minister,  hon.  X.L.  Duval.    En 
passant there is one thing; before the law was amended in 2012 to hand over to the DPP, before 

 

87 

that  took  place  until  2011  and  so  on,  it  is  only  a  Judge’s  order  that  allowed  for  the  body 
concerned to go and look at bank accounts and to look for information. Judge’s order! But in 
2012 when they handed over to the DPP, an amendment was brought and instead of the judge’s 
order, it is the body concerned - if you will allow me - it is the Enforcement Authority. We had 
in the law a good protection even for business, it inspires confidence, it was only on a judge’s 
order that the body concerned could go and look at bank accounts and financial transactions. 

In 2012, this power was given to the  enforcing  agency.  In that case, it was the DPP’s 
Office. But now we don’t revert. Why Government has not taken this opportunity, especially as 
we know nearly everything which the previous Prime Minister did, they have to do the opposite? 
But, in this case, we should do the opposite! It was only judge’s orders. In 2012, it was changed 
to the authority. I am quite surprised that we have not gone back onto that.  

So, this is my submission, Madam Speaker, if we do agree on fundamentals that there 
needs to be a Financial Crime Commission that plays the role of the National Crime Agency in 
UK, the role that the National Crime Agency plays in the UK, I don’t think - as I said, as soon as 
possible we must take that responsibility for asset recovery away from the DPP. We have always 
been of that opinion and more than ever! But, honestly, tout ce remue-ménage handing it over to 
the FIU, the problems of staffing that will arise, we will be around to see whether I am right or 
wrong if Government decides to go along. I think we should hold on, we should work full steam 
to  get  this  Financial  Crime  Commission  ready.  We  should  keep  the  FIU  as  advised  by  the 
Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering, one of its key recommendations; keep it as a 
stand-alone information gathering and dissemination body. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Vice-Prime Minister Collendavelloo! 

 

(5.16 p.m.) 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  for  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):    Let  me,  first  of  all,  say  that  there  are  two  nuances  which  emerge  from  the 
speech  of  the  Leader  of  the  Opposition.    The  first  nuance  is  what  we  can  call  an  issue  as  to 
whether this Bill will be a sort of bridge or a sort of transition to whatever will come forward in 

 

88 

the future, the National Crime Commission or all the institutions that have been announced.  We 
shall await the speech of the Minister on summing-up and not before, in order to know what is 
going to be our respective stand.  That is the first nuance.   

The second nuance is our stand with regard to what is after all the only point before you 

and that is what is in the Explanatory Memorandum - 

 ‘The main object of this Bill is to amend the Asset Recovery Act to provide that 
the Enforcement Authority shall, instead of the Director of Public Prosecutions, 
be the Financial Intelligence Unit (…)’ 

That  is  where  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  has  found  certain  faults  with  the  Financial 
Intelligence Unit assuming the role of the Enforcement Authority. 

That leads me to the second nuance which needs to be addressed. The hon. Leader of the 
Opposition says that the MMM, at that time, was dead against the powers of the DPP. That is 
true at a certain point in time, but it is good that, for the record, we try and see what was being 
said  at  the  time.    Hon.  Uteem  -  that  was  when  the  first  2011  Bill  was  passed.  It  is  very 
comforting  that  agency  that  would  be  responsible  to  issue  confiscation  orders  and  civil 
forfeitures is no less than the Director of Public Prosecutions. This is commendable because, in 
the past, enforcement agencies have failed, not through lack of wanting, but for other reasons. 
Let us see. That is what we have on record.  

Then  there  was  an  amendment  in  2012,  our  very  good  friend,  at  least,  my  very  good 

friend, hon. Baloomoody took the floor and had this to say – 

“I now come to the office of the DPP. I am happy to hear that there is our office 
operating  now  at  the  DPP  and  that  they  have  recruited  professionals  and  more 
professionals would be recruited. This Bill, of course, deals with those who have 
enriched themselves tremendously by doing illegal activities, but the DPP’s office 
also looks about freezing orders, etc.”  

At  that  time,  there  was  unanimity  that  the  DPP  would  have  been  the  ideal  person  to  be  the 
Enforcement Authority. We were wrong. We were all wrong. For whatever reason, we saw with 
the passage of time that this had become a dangerous tool and as time went by, the MMM started 
rightly  so  shifting  position  until  in  2014,  there  was  a  press  conference.  I  remember  that  very 

 

89 

clearly where the MMM took a radical position and said we cannot agree to the DPP holding this 
position. That is where we have reached and as we progress, everybody has now rallied to what 
was the original position of the MMM, the original 2014 position. There is no harm in changing 
views. At that time, everybody thought that the Director of the Public Prosecutions being given 
its constitutional aura would have done a tremendous job.   

Well, we are not here to personalise things. We are not here to look at what has happened 
in  the  past.  We  are  now  to  look  at  the  Bill.  The  FIU  is  going  to  take  up  the  job  of  the 
Enforcement Authority. The Leader of the Opposition is legitimate in asking the question as to 
whether this is not going to faire désordre. I don’t believe it to be so. There is a Government 
policy. That Government policy is through the Minister who decides. Of course, the Opposition 
has got its opinion as to the length of time of the transition. We do not believe that we could 
carry on with this process even for whatever period of time. The FIU appeared to be the most 
appropriate body.  Let us not forget that the  FIU is headed by  a Director who, because of the 
special character of the institution, is appointed by the President on the recommendation of the 
Prime  Minister  made  in  consultation  with  the  Leader  of  the  Opposition.    He  administers  and 
manages the FIU.  

I do not agree that we should make any procès d’intention on the present Director of the 
FIU or on its predecessor for that matter. We all have our opinions of people. The Government 
has trusted the present Director of the FIU and, up to now, there is no reason which could lead 
any reasonable man to come to any conclusion other than the Minister is right to confine to him 
these serious powers of the Enforcement Authority under the Act. This is a body which, let us 
not  forget,  is  responsible  for  receiving,  requesting,  analysing  and  disseminating  to  the 
investigatory and supervisory authorities disclosures of information. This is the job of the FIU. 
Therefore, pending whatever happens and, in the light of what has happened in the past, now was 
the right time to appoint the FIU to be the Enforcement Authority.  Let me also quote section 
10(2)  of  the  FIAMLA:  “The  FIU  is  bound  to  collect,  process,  analyse  and  interpret  all 
information disclosed to it and obtained by it under the relevant enactments; inform, advise and 
co-operate with the Enforcement Authority and the investigatory an supervisory authorities, etc.”  

90 

 
But the FIU has also an international role. It is within the Edmond Group and it gives a 
particular cloud to the Head of our FIU because under the Edmond International Committee, the 
heads are FIU are considered to be a particular breed of persons and they exchange information. 

On the other hand, what is the difficulty with the DPP?  Under section 72, the DPPs 
powers are to institute and undertake criminal proceedings before Courts of law. Those are his 
powers. It is in the exercise of these very specific powers that is not subject to the direction or 
control  of  any  other  authority.  As  soon  as  it  leaves  these  powers,  then  it  becomes  under  the 
subject and control and it becomes accountable to one and all. This is why it was interesting to 
hear what the hon. Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms 
had to say about the annual report which the Attorney General is supposed to place on the Table 
of the Assembly, containing the reports of the DPP.  

At  the  end  of  the  day,  the  point  is  that  the  DPP  could  not  carry  on  with  a  sort  of 
incestuous role between investigating, at least instituting proceedings and doing what he has to 
do under the Asset Recovery Act. The DPP is a lawyer.  In the field of assets recovery, he has no 
special skills. Hon. Baloomoody was right when he said in 2012 - 

“It is clear it is a very tricky and specialised domain we are talking about. I am sure that 
the  DPP  will  have  the  opportunity  to  have  appropriate  special  staff  to  carry  on  this 
objective.” 

In  other  words,  the  DPP  was  unequipped  and  this  has  just  been  said  if  we  read  Raymond 
D’Unienville - No. 71. This is exactly what everybody says - the DPP took on a hat which was 
much larger than his head. The problem is that  he thought the hat fitted his head. Hence, the 
result  was  that  we  had  a  big  head  in  a  small  hat  or  the  other  way  round.  And  that  is  the 
institutional make up that was wrong from the start in 2011 and we all were wrong. There is no 
harm in being wrong, but what is important is that we learn to correct what has been done when 
what has been done is erroneous. 

I just come to say in answer to the hon. Leader of the Opposition, the FIU is precisely the 
stand-alone  body  which  can  be  charged  to  be  the  enforcement  authority  under  the  Asset 
Recovery  Act.  Let us not depart from the four  corners of this Bill because in a few days our 
debate will be enlarged when we will discuss the other matter relating to the seizure of property, 

 

91 

unexplained wealth orders. We are not dealing with this now. Now, we are dealing only with a 
change of functions and explaining to the people why we should change these functions.  

Finally, Madam Speaker, when I analyse the speech of the hon. Leader of the Opposition, 
there is not much that separates him from the Minister. It is exactly the same thing, with little 
nuance to justify, at least making a new proposal for that Bill. Insofar as I am concerned, I fully 
agree  with  the  Bill  and  I  will  join  the  chorus  of  all  our  friends  on  this  side  of  the  House  to 
commend the Bill to the House. 

 

Thank you. 

(5.30 pm.) 

Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  and  Port  Louis  East): 
Thank you, Madam Speaker. It was quite interesting to hear the hon. Vice- Prime Minister who 
just intervened before me because he puts in the perspective of history. I have heard of a few 
things that I, myself, was not aware of, as to what the position of the MMM was at one point, as 
to  how  it  changed  and  how  he  says  that  they  were  all  wrong.  I  do  not  know  what  really 
happened, but what I do know and what I am sure of, Madam Speaker, is that there are, for sure, 
Members  of  the  MMM  who  would  not  share  his  view.  I  am  also  sure  that  there  are  other 
Members who were privy to all conversations and deliberations within the MMM at the time, 
who would not necessarily share his view.  

Then again, we are in this august Assembly here, we will listen to one another’s views, 
we will have various opinions and at the end of the day what is our role? Our role is to ensure 
that  for  the  sake  of  posterity,  at  least,  that  Hansard  will  speak  later  on  and  will  say  what  we 
expressed our views, what was our intent, what was our aim, and finally, we just hope that the 
final vote in this august Assembly will be in the name of the nation and will be for the good of 
the State. It is not sufficient for us to come and make speeches and say that this is what we want 
to do because it would necessitate that we analyse what are behind those words. Because at one 
point in time, I do recall the Asset Recovery Bill of 2011, when it was debated in this august 
Assembly and, yes, there was consensus - if I am not to say unanimity - in the august Assembly 
even on the side of the MSM if I am not mistaken. Hon. Pravind Jugnauth himself was totally in 
agreement that this is a matter of assets recovery that should ideally  fit with the office of the 
Director of Public Prosecutions. 

92 

 
I have not heard hon. Pravind Jugnauth, at any stage after that, say that he was wrong. I 
have  not  heard  the  Leader  of  the  MSM  state  that  he  was  wrong  in  his  appreciation  when  he 
discussed this matter  and debated this matter in this august Assembly.  It is the first time that 
someone has stood up - the hon. Vice-Prime Minister - and said in this august Assembly that he 
was wrong and I commend him for his courage if he has said that they were wrong. What he is 
also saying is that hon. Pravind Jugnauth was wrong in his appreciation, what he is saying is that 
everyone who decided on this particular issue.  What he precisely means is that the MSM and the 
MMM, according to him, were wrong to support the view that they should be with the Office of 
the DPP. I hope that when we hear other people to intervene on the part of the MSM that they 
will  also  support  his  view  because  it  seems  that  there  is  no  consensus  between  Members  and 
political  parties  in  Government  as  to  what  is  the  real  reason  that  they  want  to  push  this  Bill 
forward.  But  what  I  do  see,  and  one  constant  element,  is  this  allergy  towards  the  Director  of 
Public Prosecutions. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, we are not doing the procès of the DPP. This Bill is 
very restrictive. I would kindly request you to come to the amendment. The Asset Recovery Act 
is there, but, please restrain yourself, come to the amendment that is in question. 

Mr Mohamed: Madam Speaker, I note with interest the word you have just used. You 
are saying that we are not doing the procès of the DPP. I don’t know what you meant exactly by 
“we”. 

Do you mean Government or us? I don’t know! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, please don’t argue. I am asking  you to come - this 
Bill has a purpose, the Explanatory Memorandum is clear on this - precisely to the amendment. 
The hon. Leader of the Opposition has made his speech, he has come precisely to the Bill. The 
hon. Minister also has come precisely to the Bill. I have given you a leeway, but please come to 
the amendment. 

Mr Mohamed: What I am doing here is talking about powers that are now vested with 
the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions that are being removed from the Office. We 

 

93 

have heard the hon. Minister’s speech where he has said that, in his opinion, the Asset Recovery 
Division, under the aegis of the Director of Public Prosecutions, has not done a good job. It is not 
I that is bringing the Director of Public Prosecutions’ Office into this debate. It is in Hansard, it 
is the hon. Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms, himself, 
who has opened the door by saying that, according to him, a measly Rs9 m. has been recovered, 
if I am to refer to his speech. So, if I am going to go directly to the debate and the amendments, it 
is precisely that, Madam Speaker. It is not I who has decided to open the door, as I said. The 
door was opened wide by the hon. Minister stating in a manner which, in my humble view, was 
critical, criticising the Office of the Asset Recovery which is, as we speak today, under the aegis 
of the Director of Public Prosecutions’ Office. 

Madam Speaker: This is acceptable. 

 Mr Mohamed: So, when I look at what was said - and that’s why I come back to it -, 
was it critical, was it in any way criticising that particular Division? Yes, it was! It was, in my 
view, either an allergic reaction, but for me it was a wrong opinion, which I don’t agree with. 
Some would say it was also rubbish. I don’t say it is ‘rubbish’, because I believe it would be 
unparliamentary. So that’s why I don’t use that word. 

(Interruptions) 

I have not interrupted the hon. Member! Let me say… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

Mr Mohamed: I have not interrupted anyone. Why should anyone interrupt me? It seems 
as though they are very edgy and fidgety. Now, my point is as follows.  The hon. Minister says, 
in his intervention, and I quote - 

“This is what the Asset Recovery Unit has done.”  

He talks about -  

“Yes,  Madam  Speaker.  So,  just  by  looking  at  the  figures,  only  Rs9  m.  have  been 
recovered in those three years. Que R 9 millions!” 

 

94 

He goes to the effort of even translating, which is nice. He underlines the fact that there has been 
only Rs9 m. At no time does the hon. Minister talk about assets that have been frozen. At no time 
does the hon. Minister talk about balances held on restriction and restraining account. At no time 
does the hon. Minister… 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Minister Bhadain! Please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for calling him to order. At no time does he 
talk about the balance held in, as I said, the restraining and restriction account of over Rs71 m. 
At no time does he talk about money credited at the Bank of Mauritius and the balance held at 
the Bank of Mauritius of over Rs68 m. At no time does the hon. Minister of Financial Services, 
Good Governance and Institutional Reforms talk about the foreign currency saved at the State 
Bank of Mauritius.  At no time does he talk about every single property that has been seized and 
the amount that it represents; over Rs280 m.! The hon. Minister does not talk about that.  And 
my  question  is:  why  is  it  that  he  does  not  talk  about  it?  He  could  easily  have  said,  in  his 
intervention, that this is what the work that the Asset Recovery Unit has done, this is how much 
has been seized, this is how much has been frozen, this is the quantum and, yes, it has not been 
recovered as  yet, but it is pending. But he chose not to even say that,  he chose to keep quiet 
about that.  And my question is: why is it that he did not qualify his remark, when talking about 
the Rs9 m., why did he not go further than translating it from English to French and say that 
there was also that? Why this deliberate silence on his part? Why? Precisely because the hon. 
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms,  and  it  seems  as 
though that it is the policy of Government, has only one thing in mind: remove it at all cost from 
the  Office  of  the  Director  of  Public  Prosecutions,  remove  it  at  all  cost  from  that  Office  and 
ensure that it is put under the control of the Executive. That is only that and nothing else!  What 
is really amazing, Madam Speaker, is the following.  What is amazing, the hon. Minister said 
that it is unacceptable, according to his intervention, that the people operating under the aegis of 
the Director of Public Prosecution’s Office should be enforcing and prosecuting, investigating 
and enforcing - this is what he said - because he believed that this was something which is to be 
judge and party. He said in his address to this august Assembly, and I quote - 

 

95 

“Madam  Speaker,  acting  as  both  judge  and  party  goes  against  the  basic  principle  of 
natural justice of ‘Nemo judex in causa sua’ - no one should be a judge in his own cause.” 

That is an interesting remark that he makes.  But what is interesting is what is proposed 
under  this  particular  piece  of  legislation  is  exactly  the  same,  if  not  worse,  because  this 
organisation  will  be  under  the  control  of  the  Executive.  This  organisation  will  be  under  the 
control  of  politically  appointed  people,  this  organisation  will  be  under  a  master  and  slave 
relationship, and the master, everyone knows who will it be and we all know who the slave will 
be. I know who has the whip in his hand and who will have to jump when he cracks the whip. 

(Interruptions) 

Not the hon. Chief Whip! He will lose his whip in the process, or maybe he will lend one to the 
new master. But this is the whole difference. What I am trying to explain here is that, imagine, a 
new organisation that is being put forward and really supported by this Government, the policy 
of this entire Government, no exception, and they say that we are going to have this new body 
now and, according to it, it is replacing the investigative agency and replacing them by the words 
“Asset Recovery Investigation Division” under section 5 of the principal Act which is amended. 

So,  under  the  Financial  Intelligence  Unit,  we  will  have  what  we  call  Asset  Recovery 
Investigation Division. Under that new body, with the new powers, removed from the Director of 
Public Prosecutions, we will have it now given to this Financial Intelligence Unit, and they will 
have this Asset Recovery Investigation Division. So, they will be doing the investigations. This 
is what it means. They will be doing the investigations and they will be doing the recovery. They 
will be doing the confiscation; they will be doing the enforcement. We are talking about civil 
recovery.  We  are  talking  about  non-conviction  based  recovery,  we  are  talking  about  a  new 
organisation  that  not  only  will  be  able  to  investigate,  Madam  Speaker,  but  will  also  have  the 
power of taking. 

So,  where  and  how  does  one  reconcile  the  two?  The  hon.  Minister  says  it  would  be 
conflictual, it would be wrong according to natural justice to be judge and party and that is what 
is his driving motto, his force to tell him we should remove it from the Office of the Director of 
Public Prosecutions, and he is supported in that view by the hon. Vice-Prime Minister. But what 
both of them do not say is how come the same is being put forward under this new amendment - 
the  same.  And  why  do  I  say  it  is  worse  is  because  in  this  particular  instance,  those  shall  be 

 

96 

people who are politically appointed. That is the difference.  And why do I say that is because, in 
my mind, the hon. Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms 
and Government as a whole and the hon. Vice-Prime Minister who has intervened just before 
me, has only one thing in mind and nothing else: to get rid of the Director of Public Prosecutions 
from this particular position and to have it in their arms as though they are going to be holding 
their new babe in arms and carrying it close to their chests, because they want to have a control 
on it. Control is all what it is about and nothing else! 

Controlling is all what it is about, not administering in the name of the people, but controlling; 
this is what it is all about. And then, the excuse of the cowards will be: ‘Why didn’t you do it?’  
The excuse of those with no vision will be: ‘Why didn't the former Prime Minister do it?’  Their 
excuse will just be that; laying the blame  at the feet of the previous Government and the sad 
thing is they forget that hon. Pravind Jugnauth also formed part, at some stage, of that former 
Government. So, please, it is easy to come and say that each and every time. 

What I want to do… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order, please!  Order! 

Mr Mohamed:  Madam Speaker, I am not surprised that I will be interrupted because it is 

only when it hurts, that interruptions will happen.  They run away from the truth. 

Madam Speaker:  Order, please!  

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Order!  Everybody will have the time and the opportunity to intervene if they want to.   

Don’t intervene now!  

Hon. Jhugroo, please!  Hon. Jhugroo! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

97 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Jhugroo, are you ignoring my comments? Please, allow the hon. Member to continue with 
his speech! 

Mr Mohamed:  I thank you, Madam Speaker, for helping me out and continuing. I really 

appreciate that, Madam Speaker. 

(Interruptions) 

I don’t know why the truth annoys people! 

(Interruptions) 

I knew they had allergy to other things, but I never thought it was the truth as well. 

(Interruptions) 

How about another element?  Some people say: “Get to the point!” But I have the impression 
that  the  point  I  am  holding  to  them  is  hurting  because  it  is  quite  sharp,  because  there  is 
something else which surprises me: consistency and competence.   

Cabinet decision of 27 February 2015, paragraph 7 of that Cabinet decision states that –  

“The  Enforcement  Authority  under  the  Asset  Recovery  Act  will  be  under  the  Financial 
Intelligence Unit pending the setting up of the Financial Crime Commission.”  

Cabinet  decision  of  03  April  2015,  paragraph  2  –  “reviews  the  communication  of  Cabinet 
decision du 27 février 2015.”   

So, we are not talking about one week afterwards.  Everyone who has been Minister will 
recall that when there is a Cabinet decision, one week afterwards we go through the Minutes and 
if we are agreeable with the Minutes or if we are not agreeable, on the spot, we make corrections 
to those Minutes.  So, the Minutes of 27 February 2015, at paragraph 7, states that –  

“The  Enforcement  Authority  under  the  Asset  Recovery  Act  will  be  the  Financial 
Intelligence Unit pending the setting up of the Financial Crime Commission.”   

Here, we do not have anything in the Minutes changed in March.  Nothing! Not even in the first 
week of March, not in the second week of March, not in the third week of March, not in the 
fourth week of March, only lo and behold on 03 April 2015 as though le sommeil has broken.  At 

 

98 

paragraph 2 of that decision, review the communication of the Cabinet decision du 27 février and 
it reads as follows, I quote – 

“Cabinet has taken note that its decision taken on Friday 27 February 2015 has not been 
accurately reproduced in the Communiqué issued by the Government Information Service 
on that same day. Cabinet, in fact, agreed to the following – 

(d)  the  Enforcement  Authority  under  the  Asset  Recovery  Act  to  be  the  Financial 
Intelligence Unit pending the setting up of the Financial Crime Commission, in order 
– My God! - to allow officers of the Office of the DPP to focus on their prosecutorial 
duties and other duties within the Attorney General’s Office.” 

What is not good in there and this is where I believe it shows - I talked about competence – how 
come if this is what was the real idea of Government; how come if this was the real objective of 
Government; si ça c’était l’objectif vrai de ce gouvernement, Madame la présidente, comment se 
fait-il qu’il a fallu attendre plus d’un mois pour que ce gouvernement découvre que ce qui avait 
été décidé le 27 février 2015, n’était en fait pas la bonne décision et aussi que ce qui avait été 
écrit  in  the  Minutes  of  Proceedings,  dans  le  procès-verbal,  n’était  exactement  pas  correct?  
Comment  est-ce  qu’on  peut  expliquer  alors  qu’il  a  fallu  attendre  un  mois,  quatre  semaines  – 
should I count the number of days and do the mathematics – for this Government to realise that it 
had missed the point that there was wrong communication?  One month!  If this is the case, this 
means this Government was caught napping for one month.   

Some people are wondering what I said, maybe I should translate the word ‘napping’. 

(Interruptions) 

Il dormait!  

That’s what happened! 

There we go! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

Madam Speaker:  Order! 

99 

Mr Mohamed:  I shall sit down in the meantime. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order, please! Order! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Jhugroo, please!  We started with the debate in a very civilised manner.  The hon. Leader of 
the Opposition had intervened, everybody was quiet.  The hon. Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of 
Energy and Public Utilities had intervened, everybody was quiet.  Now, allow the hon. Member 
to intervene! You will have the opportunity to make your point, I have said! 

Mr Mohamed:  Allow me once again to thank you, Madam Speaker! 

(Interruptions) 

To be honest with you, Madam Speaker, I love seeing the hon. Vice-Prime Minister smiling.  It 
reminds me of the  good days when he used to  smile at me, but then again.   I miss his smile 
actually! 

Or maybe he is laughing and not smiling at me.  Still, I like watching his smile.  Now… 

(Interruptions) 

Not hon. Gayan’s, by the way!  

So, I was saying something…. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The hon. Minister said something else and I am trying to see, this is the whole issue of the 
debate.  I mean, we don’t have to necessarily agree with one another.  I am just indicating places 
where we are not in agreement and why I am not in agreement, but not simply because I don’t 
agree  for  the  sake  of  it.    But  there  are  certain  issues  I  am  trying  to  point  out  and  I  invite, 
therefore, Government, the hon. Minister, in particular, to look into it; and what is it? Let’s talk 
about something else! 

 

100 

The hon. Minister said something that really took me aback and I think it was insulting to 
many  constituency  representatives.  I  think  it  was  insulting  to  the  20  or  so  constituencies  of 
Mauritius.  I do not know where the hon. Minister got his figures, but at least speaking in the 
name of my constituency No. 3, I do not appreciate and do not take it happily even in the name 
of being constructive that he is going to just whip out things out of his hat; just to say what the 
hon. Vice-Prime Minister was saying, talking about the hat that fits the head.  In this particular 
case, it was trying to pull a rabbit out of the hat.  So, I believe that the hon. Minister of Good 
Governance has not got magical ability.  He should stick to what he is doing.  He is very good at 
it!   

(Interruptions) 

What I am trying to say here is something very simple and I don’t think the hon. Minister should 
really get angry here.  

(Interruptions) 

I  am  trying  to  be  very  collaborative.    He  is  getting  in  a  hurry.    This  is  the  whole  suspense, 
creating the suspense for him to go on and on.  Madam, maybe I should… 

Madam Speaker:  But allow the hon. Member to say when he wants to say it! 

(Interruptions) 

He is intervening! 

Order, please! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Mohamed:  Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  is  so 
impatient to hear me and it touches me in ways you can’t imagine, to see his impatience to hear 
my words. So, let me just say something else to him.  It shocks me and I do not appreciate it 
when  the  hon.  Minister  of  Good  Governance  came  forward  and  said  that  in  certain 
constituencies,  let’s  say,  there  are  2,000  drug  users.  He  said  there  are  2,000  drug  users  per 
constituency multiplied by 20; 40,000 drug users consuming drugs.  So, he will say - well, I was 
only trying to use an example. But then again please, in the name of respect for people living in 

 

101 

the various constituencies and, here, I stand up for my constituency and the other constituencies 
of  this  nation,  we  do  not  appreciate  such  examples.  Those  examples  are  not  based  on  les 
véritables figures. 

(Interruptions) 

It is insulting for my Constituency – let us take an example, 2,000 people who are drug users 
from Plaine Verte and Roche Bois. It is insulting to Constituencies of Port Louis to believe that 
there are 2,000 drugs users in Vallée Pitot or in Constituency No. 1 or Constituency No. 4. This 
is  for  me  insulting  as  an  example  which  I  shall  ask  and  humbly  request  the  hon.  Minister  of 
Good Governance to come up, please, in summing-up with another example based on real facts 
and figures. Figures that he could have obtained from his colleague, the Minister of Health and 
Quality of Life, who has been busy trying his best to sort out the problem of Methadone, who has 
been busy having an arm wrestling techniques or sessions with les ONGs concerning drug abuse. 
Get  the  figures  from  those  non-Governmental  Organisations,  get  the  figures  about  drug  users 
from the Ministry of Health and Quality of life, but, please, let us not use examples and pull 
figures out of our hat because that is an insult to those people living in those Constituencies. His 
comparison does not even stand the logic. It is not even logical. What he means, therefore, is 
that: ‘Let’s say: Okay, 2,000 people’. We don’t need to have any prosecution, we don’t need to 
wait for any conviction, we don’t need the Court to pronounce itself; maybe someone has a right 
to appeal against a judgment, we don’t need all that. 

According to the hon. Minister and this Government, there is no need to go to the process 
of deciding whether someone is innocent until proven guilty beyond reasonable doubt. There is 
no need. Already, he is going to pull out his calculator. I don’t know from what hat he is going to 
pull that one and start calculating. 2,000! I don’t know where he got that one from… 

(Interruptions) 

Multiplied by 20, 40,000. So, if he believes that his new organisation – because allow me to call 
it that –  under his control, will be allowed to do better than the Office of the DPP, this means 
that the Office of the DPP, what I understand, was wrong to wait for convictions, was wrong to 
wait for appeal process, was wrong to wait for judgments and then act, what he believes, is that 
you should have a Gestapo Organisation that goes around acting without any judgment. This is 
basically the only way that he can be believed that he will perform better. That’s the only way. 

102 

 
So,  Madam  Speaker,  as  I  said,  this  example  that  he  gave  is  not  realistic.  The  Asset 
Recovery is, indeed, a long process. It is not a political process. It is not a process that can be 
carried out by people who do not have and hold office as protected under the Constitution. It 
should not be allowed to be carried out by political appointees and, for sure, it should never be 
allowed to be carried out by an organisation which is under the control of the Executive. Never! 

When I expressed my views, instead of coming up later on and say: “Well, this is why I 
don’t  agree  with  you  because  this  is  what  we  believe  is  right,  instead  we  are  going  to  have 
farcical  suggestion”.  Put  it  under  the  Opposition!  We  would  refuse  it.  We  refuse  to  touch 
anything they have touched even with the barge pole. 

So,  as  far  as  I  am  concerned,  under  Section  17  of  the  Asset  Recovery  Act,  today, 
confiscation is conviction based, Madam Speaker. We need to wait for the Police enquiry and 
then the trial and appeal if ever there is any by the accused. Money seized on the locus of drug 
dealers are produced in Court as exhibits. Drug dealers hide behind those complex structures. 
The  Asset  Recovery  Unit,  Madam  Speaker,  has  recovered  far  more  than  the  Drug  Assets 
Forfeiture Office. That is a fact. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  do  not  understand  why  is  it  that  the  hon.  Minister  goes  and  uses  a 
statement of the Director of  Public Prosecutions in order to say: “Well, this is what he said!” 
And he goes on to say: “Even the DPP did not object against us doing what we are doing.” The 
statement of the DPP was in relation to the Cabinet decision to bring the Office of the DPP under 
the  Attorney-General’s  Office.  The  argument  has  been  that  the  DPP  was  objecting  as  he  was 
supposedly clinging to the Asset Recovery Unit. This is what was said by Government that the 
Office  of  the  DPP  was  clinging  on  to  the  Asset  Recovery  Unit.  To  narrow  down  the  issues, 
Madam Speaker, the DPP clearly did not wish to challenge the policy decision because it is not 
his  role  to  simply  question  a  policy  decision,  but  that  does  not  mean  that  you  have  a  carte 
blanche,  you  can  do  whatever  you  want,  as  far  as  policy  decision  goes.  I  object  to  a  policy 
decision not only in the name of a simple opinion. I object to a policy decision that removes an 
office  from  the  Office  of  the  Director  of  Public  Prosecutions  with  all  the  constitutional 
safeguards and places it in the hands of political appointees. 

There is another issue which the hon. Minister left. He did not even speak about it and I 
ask myself, he has  all the files. He  said that it’s only this morning that he  got the  report. He 

 

103 

talked about the law and he said: “Well, you now, the Attorney-General, according to law, has to 
table the reports.” I was shocked, I mean I have the reports. Why didn’t he get it then? Only in 
the morning! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, it is a Minister that has just asked me: “But why couldn’t you give me your 
copy?” A Minister could not even find the report! 

(Interruptions) 

It  has  been  tabled.  Therefore,  Madam  Speaker,  why  is  it  that  the  hon.  Minister  of  Good 
Governance  could  not  even  find  a  report  that  was  tabled?  It  is  not  right  for  a  honourable 
Minister, it is unfair on the Chair, it is unfair on the National Assembly, it is unfair to have made 
such a comment because maybe, he did not realise it, Madam Speaker, he was in the process! 
Maybe, he did not realise it, that was not his aim, but he did point several things as a blame to 
this august Assembly in the process. If a document has been tabled, he cannot, therefore, say: “It 
is only this morning that I got it and I did not know it was here.” He gave the impression that the 
Office of the DPP did nothing to send it to the Office of the Attorney-General when I have it. For 
sure,  there  is  no  doubt,  it  cannot  be  contested  that  those  two  reports  of  2013  and  2014  were, 
indeed, sent, in accordance with the law, to the Office of the Attorney-General. It is the Office of 
the Attorney-General that tabled it in accordance with the law. I am very happy here to see the 
hon. Attorney-General who is a good friend of mine… 

(Interruptions) 

Acquiesces. Because what he is doing by nodding, he is acquiescing, he is saying yes, he agrees 
with what I am saying, that, indeed, it was given according to law, it was tabled according to 
law,  it  was  tabled  according  to  the  provisions  of  the  law  and  if  these  acquiescings,  the  hon. 
Minister  of  Good  Governance  said  something  which  is  not  true,  said  something  that  was  not 
correct or maybe he was not informed appropriately. It is not his fault. I stand by him on that. It 
was never his intention to say anything that was not right. But, therefore, where does this wrong 
information come from? How come, it has managed to come out of his mouth? Someone sitting 
back there should have advised him not to, someone ever since last week should have corrected 
it. I hope he will correct himself in his summing-up. If he fails to correct himself in his summing-

 

104 

up, then he will be pointing a finger to the hon. Attorney-General and the other finger will be 
pointed  to  you,  Madam  Speaker.  I  don’t  know  how  he  does  it,  how  would  he  do  that,  the 
direction and angle it will take… 

(Interruptions) 

But then, again, I don’t understand why is it that he did not say exactly what the case was. But I 
recognise, Madam Speaker, the good faith of the hon. Attorney-General.  I recognise his good 
faith. Maybe, what I should advise him to do is to just correct the information that was received 
by the hon. Minister of Good Governance, that it was not fair to come and give the impression 
que ce n’était pas déposé in line with the law, as provided for by the law. 

Another element, allow me, I have learnt the Republic of Mauritius has obligations under 
the UN Convention against Corruption. The Republic of Mauritius has such an obligation. This 
is  fact  and  we  do  not  debate  about  those  facts.  It  is  true.  Mauritius  submitted  itself  to  a  peer 
review mechanism before the Eastern and Southern Africa Money Laundering Group, a regional 
body of the FATF. This was all the consultations that happened prior to the Asset Recovery Bill 
being presented in 2011 and 2012, the Amendment. 

The  hon.  Minister  did  not  say  that.  He  gave  the  impression  that  when  the  former 
Government came to this august Assembly, when hon. Pravind Jugnauth, whom I am sad is not 
here, he would acquiesce as well because history and Hansard speak for themselves. When they 
came to this august Assembly and they brought this whole asset recovery law, that there was no 
consultation. In fact, there was prior consultation.  It is in September 2009, a technical assistance 
mission from the IMF came to Mauritius at the request of the Office of the Attorney General to 
advise  Government  on  the  soundness  and  stability  of  the  Mauritian  financial  sector.  It  is 
important to know! It is important to know that there were consultations prior to proposing the 
asset recovery legislation in 2011! Consultations where the mission assessed the legal structure 
of Mauritian law and recommended, Madam Speaker, that Mauritius should strengthen its legal 
framework and put in place comprehensive mechanisms to give effect to the recovery of crime. 

It shows, therefore, Madam Speaker, that Government in those days did not decide on its 
own,  but  asked  experts.  I  am  sure  the  new  hon.  Deputy  Prime  Minister  will  also  acquiesce 
because  this  is  precisely  what  happened.  It  did  not  happen  out  of  the  whims  of  people.  It 
happened because there were consultations with proper organisations.  

 

105 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Minister Bhadain, please! I have asked you several times not to 

interrupt! You will have the opportunity to do so at summing- up. Please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed: I will repeat what I said earlier on. 

Madam Speaker: Please, don’t! 

Mr  Mohamed:    The  IMF  mission  -  I  see  that  the  hon.  Chief  Whip  is  following  me. 
Thank you very much - was careful in pointing, Madam Speaker, the advantage of setting up a 
single unified body in charge with the recovery  of proceeds of crimes. They were not talking 
about multiple organisations, they were talking about a single organisation. This is what the IMF 
mission, with experts, proposed to the Republic of Mauritius. The mission recommended, allow 
me to quote - 

“(…) such unit could form part of the current prosecution office (…)” 

And, furthermore, I quote –  

“The future Asset Recovery Unit should be a Unit that is and is seen to be independent 
and free from the perception or an actual interference by political interests, the Executive 
or any other body.” 

The IMF that has got no political axe to grind, the IMF that has got no self-interest to 
protect, came up with the report and recommended, this is what happened, ensure that it can go 
under  the  current  Prosecution  Office  and  also  went  on  to  say  that  this  future  asset  recovery 
office, we should ensure that there is not even a perception of or actual interference. Two issues: 
la perception et interférence physique actuelle by political interest, the Executive or any other 
body. 

What is this Government proposing? Exactly what the IMF condemns, Madam Speaker! I 
do  not  speak  simply  because  I  want  to  say  I  am  not  agreeable  with  what  is  proposed  by 
Government. I am basing myself, Madam Speaker, on what was proposed by the IMF. The IMF, 
in that report, said that whatever the hon. Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and 
Institutional  Reforms  is  doing  would  actually  create  a  perception  of  or  actual  interference  by 

 

106 

political interest, the Executive and any other body. This is what the IMF says. And, now, the 
hon. Minister and Members of Government who maybe are not aware of that part, that is why I 
thought I was duty-bound to bring this to the cognizance of everyone, that it is important that we 
take this view into account.  

We can find arguments against the IMF, at the same time, we can basically say we are 
proud that the IMF or the World Bank is close to Mauritius or advising us and it is a pity that the 
hon.  Minister  of  Finance  is  not  here  when  we  are  talking  about  the  IMF!  But,  subsequently, 
Madam Speaker, after this report and the recommendations where the IMF says: ‘Don’t do what 
the hon. Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms is doing.  
This is not right’. Subsequently, the Asset Recovery Act was prepared by the Attorney General’s 
Office  and  with  the  assistance  of  consultants  from  the  IMF.  It  included  experts,  Miss  Lorna 
Harris, an experienced officer of the Serious Fraud Office in the United Kingdom, former Head 
of the Asset Recovery Civil Side in Scotland and Gianluca Esposito, Senior Legal Officer of the 
IMF, two experts. They helped to prepare the Asset Recovery Act. 

It  is  noteworthy  here  that,  on  one  hand,  we  have  had  consultations  by  the  previous 
Government, not with political appointees or political friends. We did not leave it amongst our 
own hands as though we knew everything and then on détenait le monopole de la connaissance. 
Loin de là, Madame la présidente ! La différence, Madame la présidente, c’est que quand nous, 
on  était  au  gouvernement  -  comme  on  peut  établir  par  les  faits    historiques  -  il  y  a  eu 
consultations.  But there has been no consultation whatsoever in this particular time between the 
Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions and the Asset Recovery Unit for the transferring of 
same to the FIU! 

Can  we  imagine  that  we  are  going  to  move,  with  such  a  drastic  change,  from  a 
constitutionally  appointed  institution,  the  Office  of  the  Director  of  Public  Prosecutions,  to  a 
political appointment situation condemned by the IMF! But, there has been no consultation at all 
between the Office of the DPP prior to transferring the Asset Recovery Unit to the FIU! They 
already know they are going to transfer. They are already eyeing people who will be appointed. 
They  are  already  eyeing  jobs  for  the  boys!  They  are  already  eyeing  who,  the  political  people 
close to power, will be appointed. But there has been no consultation with the Office of the DPP. 
In lieu and instead of that, there has been an hon. Minister of Good Governance going to Saint 

 

107 

Petersburg  et  qui  a  fait  le  procès  du  Directeur  des  Poursuites  Publiques  sur  la  scène 
internationale.  That  is  maybe  their  version  of  consultation,  going  on  international  scene and 
speaking not very nicely - if I am to be very diplomatic about it - of an institution that is that of 
the Director of Public Prosecutions. 

Madam Speaker, as I said, my aim is what? To ensure that there is an informed debate. I 
am not here inventing any of the  facts. There were  consultations with the  IMF. The  IMF has 
brought in reports. The IMF says there should be no perception or political interference. So, what 
I am asking each and every Member of Government is that we may not agree on policies, we 
may  not  agree  on  political  agenda,  we  may  not  be  of  the  same  political  party,  we  may  be 
adversaries, but we are not enemies! What I am saying here is that in the name of this Republic, 
let us, for a minute, say that, now, all Members of Parliament, every single backbencher, every 
single Minister who dares be different, every single Minister who has the courage to stand up 
and say let us be different, let us try to dare to say “no” and let us reflect again in the name of the 
Republic. For a minute, let us say that, now, each and every one of you, Madam Speaker, aware 
of what the IMF has said, let us analyse this proposed legislation objectively. The IMF has said 
“no”.  

I do not say that  I am totally  right in what  I say, those are my views.  But, what  I  am 
asking Government to do is to, at least, be open in its perception of things.  If this is what the 
IMF has said, if this is what two experts of the IMF have said, if this is what the Office of the 
Attorney General was aware of at the time of preparation of the legislation in 2011, why cast it 
aside and in the name of what?  In the name of whom are we casting such expert opinions aside?  
We  may  have  different  views,  but  there  is  one  thing  that  should  unite  us,  at  least,  something 
independent to us, which is the IMF report. 

So, in my humble view, Madam Speaker, I believe that I have exposed the lacunas in the 
legislation.    As  I  have  always  said  and  I  say  again,  the  number  of  votes  matter  not  in  this 
particular  august  Assembly.    It  is  posterity.  It  is  history.  I  would  expect  Government  not  to 
proceed with this legislation, not because I say so, but because there is a report of the IMF that 
tells us to be careful. Not because I am right - I am not important in the equation - but what is 
important  is  what  damage  we  could  be  doing,  without  realising  it,  in  the  name  of  a  piece  of 
legislation. 

108 

 
So,  I hope that the Government would have the courage to review their position. As I 
have  said  recently  about  other  pieces  of  legislation,  I  am  for  consensus  in  situations  of  such 
important pieces of legislation. I am of the view that, if we act in the name of country, we can 
have consensus and that is why I repeat myself. I invite Government to review its position, not 
because  I say so,  I repeat that, but because there is maybe a better way out and a better way 
forward. 

Thank you very much. 

(6.18 p.m.) 

The Minister of Health and Quality of Life (Mr A. Gayan): Madam Speaker, I hope 
that what we have just heard from hon. Mohamed is not related to recent events. But let me say 
… 

Wait!  Do not worry! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please, do not make provocative remarks! 

Please, on both side of the House! 

Order, I say! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

On both sides of the House, I appeal to you, not to make provocative remarks! 

Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, we have just heard a very robust defence of the position of 
the DPP. I entirely agree that the Constitution of Mauritius entrenches the duties and the rights of 
the DPP. I will, for the sake of completeness, refer to section 72 of the Constitution, which reads 
as follows – 

“There shall be a Director of Public Prosecutions whose office shall be a public office 
and who shall be appointed by the Judicial and Legal Service Commission. No person 

109 

 
shall  be  qualified  to  hold  or  act  in  the  office  of  the  DPP  unless  he  is  qualified  for 
appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court”. 

 And then, it goes on at section 3 – 

“The DPP is not subject to the control of any person or authority.” 

So, in fact, we need to have an independent DPP. It would be interesting to note that, at some 
stage, about 12 or 13 years ago, when the hon. Leader of the Opposition was the Prime Minister 
in this country, had something else in mind with regard to the powers of the DPP. Things were 
happening then, and if I am pushed, I will give to the House what was being discussed in 2003 
with regard to the powers of the DPP. Fortunately, it did not go through and it was a Constitution 
(Amendment) Bill in 2003, which provided for – 

• 
• 

consultations between the Attorney General and the DPP, and 
the issue of directions and guidelines by the Attorney General to the DPP. 

That was in 2003. This Bill did not go through. But it is good for history that we recognise that, 
at various stages in the history of Mauritius, we have had serious debates about the powers of the 
DPP. But let me leave this aside and come … 

(Interruptions) 

This is a Bill which I have in my hand and I decide what I am going to table and what I am going 
to do. 

Lâche? 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please, hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Order, please! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition,  please,  do  not  use  words  which  would  be  offensive  to  any 
Member of the Assembly! 

 

110 

(Interruptions) 

I appeal to the other side as well to do so!  We need to be calm to be able to go through the 
debates on this Bill. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger: The hon. Minister comes up saying that there is a Bill that is going to this 
and that without telling us whether the Bill was circulated or whether it was agreed in Cabinet.  
What is this?  Lay a copy!  At least, we will know! 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, please give him the time to intervene, 

then we will see!  

Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, I beg leave to table a copy of the Bill. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  try  to  understand  what  was  the  thrust  of  the  intervention  of  hon. 
Mohamed.  What I could understand was that Government, in fact, through this Bill, is trying to 
get a politically appointed body to do something which the DPP was doing, and the DPP holds a 
post which is constitutionally protected. 

When the Asset Recovery Bill was introduced in April 2011, the then Attorney General... 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please, do not interrupt the hon. Minister! 

(Interruptions) 

Allow  him  to  proceed  with  his  speech!    If  you  continue  to  interrupt,  how  will  he  make  his 
speech? 

Mr Gayan: The then Attorney General said the following – 

“I should also add that the Bill was finalised by my office with the invaluable assistance 
of  Sir  Victor  Glover  (…).  The  views  and  comments  of  the  DPP,  as  Enforcement 
Authority under the Bill, were also obtained and taken on board.” 

Now, let us see how this particular Bill has damaged the office of the DPP. It is all right to say 
that we are taking away from the DPP something that was given to the DPP.  But the DPP should 

 

111 

never,  never  have  accepted  this  particular  office  of  Asset  Recovery  because  the  office  of  the 
DPP, which is so entrenched, must be independent. 

Madam Speaker, I am just saying that the office… 

(Interruptions) 

We listen very carefully … 

 (Interruptions) 

 (Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed, when you were speaking, the hon. Minister 

listened to you.  So, please allow him to proceed! 

Mr Gayan: When the DPP’s views were taken on board when The Asset Recovery Bill 
was introduced to the House, that was a mistake, and it is a constitutional mistake. Because then 
the DPP was allowing himself to be brought into an area which the Constitution was denying 
him. 

Mr  Mohamed:  Madam  Speaker,  on  a  point  of  order!    We  have  all  been  very,  very 
careful; the hon. Minister of Good Governance, the hon. Vice-Prime Minister and everyone who 
intervened. Now we are saying that the DPP made a constitutional mistake.  That goes against 
Standing Orders and that should not be allowed. The Standing Orders do not allow us to come 
and say that the DPP made a constitutional mistake. The Standing Orders say that you do not do 
that. 

Madam Speaker: Look, the most important point is the transfer of responsibilities from 

the DPP’s office to the ARID, the FIU. Please, restrict yourself to making comments on this. 

Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, the previous speaker was allowed to travel wide and I think 

it is open to me to address some of the concerns that were raised. 

The main argument was that the DPP is so important that we should not touch the office of the 
DPP with regard to this Bill. Now, if in fact that is the case, the DPP should have given his views 
at the time that his views were sought, that this is not the responsibility of the DPP’s Office. The 
Office of the DPP is purely within section 72 of the Constitution and this is all that matters. But 
when the views of the DPP were sought and then the Bill became law and the DPP accepted to 

 

112 

be the Enforcement Authority and to have his Officers to be engaged in Asset Recovery, as a 
result of investigation, then that was a departure from constitutional practice. Because as long as 
you  have  the  DPP  acting  under  section  72  of  the  Constitution,  the  DPP  does  not  owe  any 
explanation or any account to anybody. But when he decided to be part of the asset recovery 
then, he is under an obligation to report to the Attorney General and the Attorney General has to 
file a report in the House and this is the report that was referred to by hon. Shakeel Mohamed 
and this damages the constitutional standing of the DPP. 

I think it is very important that we bear that in mind. If at all we are jealous of the powers 
of the DPP, we want the DPP to be sacrosanct, then this is the best way to proceed which must 
give to the DPP the constitutional independence that he needs and that we all need because if we 
confer other powers on the DPP, then the DPP becomes accountable to authorities which are not 
covered in the Constitution. It is no wonder, Madam Speaker, that when the decision was taken 
by Government with regard to the transfer of Asset Recovery Unit to the FIU, the DPP issued a 
communiqué, the communiqué dated 02 March 2015 and I will be tabling this communiqué for 
the purposes of my intervention and I read and I quote from the communiqué –  

“Le bureau du Directeur des Poursuites Publiques a émis un communiqué le 02 mars 
2015  pour  mettre  le  ‘i’  sur  le  point  de  son  passage  sous  la  direction  de  l’Attorney 
General  et  non  conçernant  le  transfert  de  l’Asset  Recovery  au  Financial  Intelligence 
Unit ». 

The communiqué reads as follows – 

“The Office of the DPP has never expressed any reservation with the decision of Cabinet 
to  transfer  the  Asset  Recovery  Unit  to  the  Financial  Intelligence  Unit.  This  is  an 
administrative decision which is within the powers of the Government to change by way 
of legislation”. 

I beg leave to file the communiqué. 

Madam Speaker, I think it is also good because some remarks were made … 

(Interruptions) 

… by hon. Shakeel Mohamed with regard to the IMF when it came with experts, lots of very 
experienced people to prepare this Bill. It will surprise everyone that this Bill was presented in 

 

113 

2011 and then had to be amended. The Bill was introduced in the House on 05 April 2011, it was 
prepared with a lot of expertise from IMF, from all the stakeholders and on 30 October 2012, 
there was an amendment made to the Bill. So, I start to wonder what sort of expertise came. Why 
didn’t they address the issues that were addressed in 2012 and what is also significant is that in 
2012 there is a retrospective aspect of the legislation, to ten years giving additional powers from 
conviction  based  to  non  conviction  based  recovery.  When  we  speak  about  all  these  things, 
Madam Speaker, about history and all this, I can quote at length from what hon. Uteem and hon. 
Baloomoody said on this Bill. They were all agreeable with the powers that were given to the 
DPP and, today, the hon. Leader of the Opposition says, no, he has always been against it.  

The hon. Leader of the Opposition did not intervene on any of these Bills. He did not! So, 
we do not have the benefit of his views on this in 2011, 2012 until 2014. But what is significant 
is that we should not dilute the constitutional standing of the DPP and what these Bills have done 
is  to  dilute  those  very  powers  and,  in  fact,  by  this  Bill,  we  are  restoring  to  the  DPP  the 
constitutional importance that he or she must have in the system that we have.  

The  mere  fact  of  having  to  give  account  to  the  Attorney  General  is  a  dilution  of  the 
powers  of  the  DPP.  Once  we  agree  that  if  we  really  need  to  have  this  constitutional  position 
respected,  then  we  must  do  exactly  what  this  Bill  is  trying  to  do.  We  need  to  have  a  system 
because all that this Bill is trying to do is to remove from the DPP and to send it to the FIU. This 
is all that it does and there are valid reasons why this should be the case and whatever theatrics 
may be gone through by anybody, the basic fundamental remains that there has been a dilution of 
the  powers  of  the  DPP  as  a  result  of  these  Bills  and  what  is  being  restored  today  is  the 
constitutional independence and the constitutional integrity of the DPP. This is exactly what this 
Bill is doing and I think it is important that we make the point because it is so very easy to say 
that political appointees are going to decide but in this case, the DPP agreed to descend in an 
arena  where  he  should  never  have  been,  and  I  am  surprised  that,  as  a  constitutional  lawyer 
himself, the DPP did not realise the risks that he was taking when he agreed to being part of what 
the  Executive  is  doing  because  when  we  look  at  the  powers  of  the  DPP,  it’s  prosecution, 
discontinuance and not civil recovery, not non conviction based recovery, this is not his power. 
Unfortunately, this has happened and this is what we are redressing.  

114 

 
I want to limit myself, Madam Speaker, according to your ruling to the Bill that is before 
us. I don’t want to travel outside but this is a Bill which is fully in agreement with Government’s 
wishes and I will certainly vote for the Bill.  

Thank you very much. 

(6.34 p.m.) 

Mrs D. Selvon (Second Member for GRNW and Port Louis West): Madam Speaker, 
j’annonce  d’emblée  que  je  voterai  pour  the  Asset  Recovery  (Amendment)  Bill  présenté  par 
l’honorable Bhadain, ministre des Services financiers, de la Bonne Gouvernance et des Réformes 
institutionnelles. Tout le monde dans cette Chambre et en dehors aura sans doute compris que 
mon opposition initiale et ma décision de m’abstenir étaient motivées par l’absence de débats 
élargis au sein de la majorité gouvernementale et au niveau des institutions et du pays en général 
sur toute législation dont celle qui est aujourd’hui devant cette Chambre, qui concerne le droit 
fondamental et constitutionnel de propriété des mauriciens.  

J’avais annoncé mon désir de m’abstenir. J’ai hésité sur le transfert de l’Asset Recovery 
Unit  du  DPP  Office.  Je  suis  maintenant  satisfaite  du  transfert  vers  la  Financial  Services  Unit 
annoncé par le ministre dans les conditions qu’il a annoncées dans un discours rassurant qu’il a 
prononcé au début de la deuxième lecture du projet de loi qui est devant nous. Ce discours me 
rassure du fait que le ministre a écouté mes critiques et celles des autres et il est venu de l’avant 
en  entamant  des  consultations  suffisamment  élargies.  The  Asset  Recovery  Bill  confie  à  la 
Financial Intelligence Unit une lourde tâche. Je souhaite que les petits entrepreneurs honnêtes de 
ce pays seront protégés contre des abus et dénonciations fausses et malicieuses ou accusations 
injustes et politiquement motivées sous n’importe quel gouvernement. 

Je remercie l’honorable Bhadain pour avoir écouté mes suggestions et celles de nombreux 
ministres et parlementaires ainsi que celles venant du Bar Council et de l’opinion publique en 
général. Ainsi le ministre a dit en deuxième lecture de ce projet de loi qui est aujourd’hui devant 
nous, que je cite - 

“The Recovery Order under the Civil Asset Recovery Act can only be obtained 
after  a  Judge  is  satisfied  on  the  balance  of  probabilities  that  the  property 
concerned is proceeds of crime, an instrumentality or terrorist property.” 

 

115 

Je crois que les juges à Maurice ont les qualités, l’expérience, l’intégrité et le training nécessaire 
pour appliquer d’une manière rigoureuse, le principe légal par rapport à la loi que nous sommes 
appelés à voter aujourd’hui. 

Overall,  Madam  Speaker,  this  Bill  inspires  me  with  the  following  conclusion  and 
reflection. I trust the Judiciary to declare null and void without fear or favour in an equal and fair 
way any provision of this law or of any other law related or not to this one when the judges will 
be required to do so it by virtue of their conscience and professional duties and responsibilities.  

We  should  trust  our  Judiciary  as  a  rempart  contre  les  possibles  abus  par  les  autres 
pouvoirs constitutionnels car il est un fait que tous ces pouvoirs doivent rester indépendants et se 
contrôler les uns les autres dans le jeu constitutionnel des ‘checks and balances’. Enfin, je tiens 
aussi  à  faire  remarquer  au  ministre  qu’il  devrait  corriger  et  compléter  son  affirmation  à  cette 
Chambre  durant  la  deuxième  lecture  du  présent  projet  de  loi  que  l’Asset  Recovery  Unit  n’a 
récupéré que R 9 millions de valeurs immobilières depuis 2012 en précisant cette fois que l’Asset 
Recovery  Unit  a  également  obtenu  des  ordres  de  saisie  de  la  Cour  Suprême  pour  le  gel  de 
diverses sommes d’argent représentant un montant total de plus de R 294 millions. Le ministre se 
doit d’être perçu par l’opinion publique comme étant juste et équitable dans ses critiques contre 
les autres pouvoirs constitutionnels. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the hon. Members for their attention. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ramful! 

(6.39 p.m.) 

Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien): Madam Speaker, 
the  objective  of  this  Bill,  as  it  is  mentioned  in  the  Explanatory  Note,  is  to  amend  the  Asset 
Recovery Act to provide that the Enforcement Authority shall, instead of the DPP, be the FIU 
(Financial Intelligence Unit). This is the sole objective of this Act and this is what we are called 
upon  to  debate  today  and,  therefore,  Madam  Speaker,  I  will  restrict  myself  to  what  this  Act 
purports to do.  

This  Act  purports  to  remove  the  powers  and  functions  of  the  DPP  which  is  a 
Constitutional  post,  a  creature  of  the  Constitution  and  transferring  those  powers  to  the  FIU 

 

116 

whose Director - it has been said by the hon. Leader of the Opposition and the previous orators - 
is  under  the  Act  appointed  by  the  President  on  the  recommendation  of  the  Prime  Minister  in 
consultation with the Leader of the Opposition.  

It is good also to note that when the Asset Recovery Bill 2011 went through Parliament, 
we had Members of the PMSD and Members of the MSM who all voted for the Bill. All the 
provisions were debated, including the powers that were given to the DPP.  Except for the hon. 
Leader of the Opposition who, in a press conference, has expressed certain reservations about the 
DPP, the post of the DPP, the powers given to the DPP, all of them have voted for the Bill. It is 
quite  strange  and  surprising  that  today  they  have  come  up  with  this  amendment  and  I  have 
listened to all the previous persons who have intervened, hon. Members who have intervened, 
and  no  one  has  provided  any  justification  for  coming  up  with  this  amendment:  removing  the 
powers and functions of the DPP.  

The FIU, Madam Speaker, is an information gathering agency. It is, under the Act, the 
central agency in Mauritius responsible for receiving, requesting, analysing and disseminating to 
investigatory  and  supervisory  authorities  disclosures  of  financial  information  concerning 
proceeds of crime. The FIU, as it is now empowered, does not have any investigatory powers 
like, for example, the ICAC or the Police. What it does is that it gathers information from other 
institutions  like  banks,  etc.,  analyses  these  information  and  passes  them  on  to  investigatory 
bodies for investigation and gathering of evidence.  

It is important to note that the intelligence that is gathered by the FIU has no evidential 
value  at  all.  It  is  after  that  the  investigatory  bodies  have  started  the  investigation,  they  have 
worked upon those intelligence and information and once the investigation is over, when they 
have enough evidence to proceed any further with the matter it is then that they decide - upon the 
advice of the DPP - to carry out further with waived confiscation proceedings.  

Now, there are two issues here that we have to bear in mind. Firstly, the investigatory 
authorities are separate from the information gathering agency, that is, you have the FIU and you 
have  the  investigatory  authorities,  ICAC,  the  Police,  etc..  They  are  all  separate.  These 
investigatory authorities have their own autonomy in deciding whether the information provided 
is of relevance or not. They have their autonomy as regards the carriage of proceedings, that is, 
the investigation or prosecution. The second issue is that in all these, as the law stands or as the 

 

117 

law was at the time that the ICAC had the power to freeze assets, the DPP remained the final 
authority  to  decide  whether  confiscation  proceedings  or  civil  recovery  procedure  should  be 
started or whether someone should be prosecuted or not. Now, this was in line with what the 
framers  of  our  Constitution,  who  were  great  visionaries,  at  that  time,  decided  and  they  had 
always wanted to have  a prosecution service which is strong, which enjoys public confidence 
and which is independent. We should not also forget that confiscation powers or civil recovery 
proceedings are far-reaching powers and we should be very cautious that these powers do not fall 
in the wrong hands. This is why, presumably, under the Asset Recovery Act 2011 it was decided 
that the DPP should hold those powers.  

Now, what is the effect of these amendments? The effect of these amendments, Madam 
Speaker,  is  that  we  are  transferring  these  far-reaching  powers  from  an  independent  Body,  a 
creature of the Constitution to a Body whose Director is appointed by the Government of the 
day. The FIU will no more be an intelligence gathering unit. It will be an agency with powers to 
gather intelligence and itself doing the investigation and itself deciding to bring proceedings for 
confiscation. I hope that hon. Members on both sides of the House realise what would be the 
consequence. Now, what is the solution? Let’s say, the hon. Leader of the Opposition is right that 
maybe the DPP should not be at the same time investigating as well as deciding whether or not to 
institute proceedings for confiscation.  

The proposition would be that, as it was previously under the PoCA and under the ICAC 
whereby the ICAC had the power to freeze assets - and the Drugs Commissioner as well - but the 
final decision rests with the DPP to decide whether to institute those confiscation proceedings or 
not. This would be the solution. 

I  will  end  by  quoting,  Madam  Speaker,  from  what  Professor  De  Smith,  the  then 

constitutional consultant said.  He said - 

“The constitutional status of the DPP stemmed from "the need to safeguard the stream of 
criminal justice from being polluted by the inflow of noxious political contamination (…)” 

And by removing the powers of the DPP, at least as far as the decision to institute proceedings is 
concerned, we are doing the contrary. So, this is what I had to say. 

Thank you.  

 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Rutnah! 

(6.49 p.m.) 

118 

Mr S. Rutnah (Third Member for Piton and Rivière du Rempart):  Thank you, Madam 
Speaker.  Madam  Speaker,  this  amendment  comes  to  this  House  with  a  view  to  actually 
modernise  our  justice  system,  our  investigatory  system  and  the  way  the  prosecutions  are 
conducted in this country insofar as financial crimes are concerned.  

I heard a little bit of the observations made by my good friend, hon. Ramful and it seems 
that he is giving a perception that this Government is trying to take over powers of the Director 
of Public Prosecutions and giving it elsewhere. In fact, this is not the case. What we are doing is 
that we are harmonising the system.  I am not going to be very long, I endorse everything that 
has been said by hon. Bhadain in his opening speech, by hon. Collendavelloo who spoke earlier 
on and by hon. Gayan. But what I am going to address for a very few minutes is the power to 
prosecute.   

The Director of Public Prosecutions has the power to prosecute under  section 72 of our 
Constitution. His power is to initiate prosecutions or where he deems it reasonable to discontinue 
prosecutions or to take over prosecutions. He, by virtue of section 72 of the Constitution, cannot 
investigate and cannot seize property. However, when the Asset Recovery Act was first passed in 
2011,  thereafter  amended  in  2012,  the  Director  of  Public  Prosecutions  then  within  a  certain 
context was given the power to, actually, seize property, if those properties have been acquired 
by virtue of proceeds of crime and only if it has been proved in a Court of law post-conviction 
that the DPP was to actually proceed with what we call a confiscation proceedings. 

Now,  at  the  time  it  was  also  felt  widely  within  the  country  that  this  House  was  giving 
excess powers to the Director of Public Prosecutions. Now, what we are doing is harmonising it 
in  line  with  Mackay  report  which  came  in  1996.  Mackay  Report  said  that  the  Prosecutions 
should only deal with matters to prosecute, that is, they should only have a prosecutorial power, 
not  an  investigatory  power.  And  this  is  what  this  Government  is  doing  by  virtue  of  this 
amendment,  is  to  remove  that  power  of  investigation  and  seizure  from  the  Director  of  Public 
Prosecutions, give it to a specialised unit within the Financial Intelligence Unit. Now, is there a 
problem with that?  

 

119 

The  man  in  charge  of  the  Office  of  the  Director  of  Public  Prosecutions,  himself  -  I 
remember, last year, sometimes in April in a communiqué - said that there is no problem as far as 
he is concerned that this power be given to the FIU because he, himself says that the FIU has got 
a specialised team of lawyers, investigators who can deal with it and these are powers that should 
be given to an investigatory Body rather than a prosecutorial Body. So, I don’t see where is the 
problem,  where  is  the  criticism.  And  in  the  light  of  what  the  DPP,  himself,  said  in  that 
communiqué, this Government rests its case and I do not propose to go any further.  

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Ganoo! 

(6.53 p.m.) 

Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River): Madam Speaker, thank you 
for giving me an opportunity to intervene on this important Bill. We are nearly at the end of our 
debates; I would like also to say few words and try to be as brief as possible. 

Madam  Speaker,  what  we  are  doing  today  is,  in  fact,  debating  a  very  important  matter. 
C’est un peu triste, à un certain moment les débats étaient gâchés, Madame la présidente.  But 
generally, what is important for us today is to try to find the right solution to this problem which 
has faced many other countries also. I do not want to repeat what has been said before me, but 
suffice it to remember, Madam Speaker, that the crusade against drug traffickers, corruption, and 
fraudsters started a long time ago in our country. And this crusade was accompanied, of course, 
by the necessity to find a solution to hit at the corrupt people whether they be public officials, 
politicians or drug barons, to hit them where they are most vulnerable, that is, at their pockets. 

So, as some friends have said before me, it started all with the Dangerous Drugs Act in the 
early 2000 when this very House legislated, and somebody was just reminding us about section 
62  of  the  Prevention  of  Corruption  Act  which  talked  about  the  restraint  and  forfeiture  of 
proceedings  of  corruption  and  money  laundering  and  we  remember  that  the  Prevention  of 
Corruption Act was passed in 2002.   

But,  well  before  that,  a  few  years  before,  came  before  this  very  House  the  Dangerous 
Drugs Act, and the question of seizure of assets/property was also included in that legislation.  
Then  came  the  Asset  Recovery  Act  of  2011,  as  amended  in  2012,  which  was  another  step 

 

120 

forward  in  our  desire  to  modernise  our  legal  weaponry  in  order  to  render  the  fight  against 
corruption, the recovery of assets more effective. 

As hon. Shakeel Mohamed has reminded us, Madam Speaker, in fact, it was as a result of 
different missions that came to our country some years back that shortcomings in our existing 
legal structure were highlighted. We submitted ourselves at one time to a peer review mechanism 
before a regional body of the Financial Action Task Force, in order to build up a more coherent 
system to fight global money laundering and financing of terrorism. That mission, which came to 
our country, consulted the State Law Office and other stakeholders, and we detected that there 
were many shortcomings in our legal structure. For example, the confiscation of property was 
restricted to offences under the Dangerous Drugs Act only and the  FIAMLA legislation, civil 
recovery was not existent in our law, instrumentalities and property derived from offence could 
not be forfeited and there were a few other loopholes. Therefore, Madam Speaker, we decided, at 
that time, the stakeholders and the experts who came, to devise the Asset Recovery Act, and the 
Bill was presented before this House, was adopted unanimously in 2011.  In 2012, substantial 
amendments  were  made  to  the  2000  Act  to  enable  the  State  to  recover  assets  which  are  the 
proceeds or instrumentalities of crime, Madam Speaker. 

Therefore, our law, indeed, provided for a comprehensive asset recovery framework and 
established  the  Enforcement  Authority  who  would  be  the  DPP  together  with  an  investigation 
agency led by the Chief Investigation Officer. The Act, therefore, became into operation. 

Today, as we have been told, as we are all aware, the Bill before this House purports to 
amend this legislation and to provide that the FIU will be replacing the DPP as the Enforcement 
Authority and will take over the functions and powers which were conferred upon the DPP by 
merging, in fact, the Asset Recovery Unit (ARU) with the FIU as the ARID. 

So, the Financial Intelligence Unit, as we know, Madam Speaker, was set up under the 
FIAMLA legislation. Many hon. Members before me have spelt out already what is the mission 
of  the  FIU:  to  receive,  to  request,  to  analyse,  to  disseminate  to  other  investigating  authorities 
disclosures of financial information. 

So, the issue which we have to thrash out today, Madam Speaker, is to know whether the 
proposed change in this Bill is in the best interest of our country, of the fight against financial 
crime and whether the change Government is proposing to make will ensure the success of our 

 

121 

endeavours to curb serious and organised crime and whether, in fact, we are endowing ourselves 
with a better structure in terms of independence, operational functioning management and so on 
and so forth. So, this is the question today, Madam Speaker. 

I  would  agree  with  hon.  Shakeel  Mohamed.  I  have  also  a  copy  of  this  IMF  Technical 
Mission  which  was  referred  to  by  him.  It  is  true  and  I  must  point  this  out,  that,  at  the  very 
beginning, this report highlighted the fact, Madam Speaker, that the Unit the country needed, and 
I quote – 

“(…)  should  form  part  of  the  current  Prosecution  Office  and  that  the  future  Asset 
Recovery  Unit  should  be  a  Unit  that  is  seen  to  be  independent  and  free  from  the 
perception or actual interference by political interests, their Executive or any other body.” 

This Mission did, in fact, emphasised, stressed, highlighted this consideration. 

Now, time has gone, we are now in 2015. This debate started in 2009. The debates have 
evolved with regard to asset recovery in our country, Madam Speaker. We are now in a position 
today, to assess, to evaluate the situation.  Many different opinions have been expressed in this 
House today, contradictory opinions as regards the measure of success achieved on that score, 
whether,  in  fact,  le  bilan  est  positif  in  terms  of  asset  recovery,  in  terms  of  the  law  that  was 
introduced in 2011 and, subsequently, amended in 2010. 

I heard the hon. Minister insisting that we are emulating the British model. A different 
opinion has been expressed by the hon. Leader of the Opposition strongly denying this averment. 
My point today, Madam Speaker, is: what is the debate today? Of Course, we have to borrow, 
we have to emulate from successful experiences in other countries, but the point today is that we 
should focus on what type of ideal legal structure, what is the most appropriate legal framework, 
what is the best mechanism which should be put in place to give effect  to our desire to fight 
against corruption and to allow the recovery of assets belonging to corrupted people. 

So, we have, when we want to do this, to take into account our specific local context. We 
can borrow from the British experience, but we should bear in mind the specific local context of 
Mauritius. For example, we do not have the same volume, the same  critical mass in terms of 
number of cases, the amount of illicit flows involved, the amount of money laundered in this 
country. We are not in the same complex situation as the UK. 

122 

 
The idea of bringing in the FIU is an important decision. This Act purports, as I just said, 
to devolve the powers of the DPP upon the FIU. We all know FIUs are agencies that receive 
reports of suspicious transactions from financial institutions and other entities, analyse them, and 
disseminate them, an intelligence gathering institution to local law enforcement agencies and to 
foreign FIUs also to fight money laundering. This is the mission of the FIU, as it is spelt out in 
our  law  and  as  it  is  the  case  for  the  other  FIUs  in  the  world.  But,  it  is  equally  true,  Madam 
Speaker,  that  a  FIU’s  function  and  the  modalities  of  its  operation  have  to  be  based  on  the 
individual  country’s  own  crime  fighting  policy  objectives,  on  the  country’s  resources  and 
priorities, that is, the particular features of the legal and the administrative system of the country. 

In fact, Madam Speaker, there are different types of FIUs in the different countries of the 
world. The FIU, which is first, of an administrative type, second, which is of a law enforcement 
type, third, which is of a judicial, prosecutorial type and, fourth, an FIU which is of a mixed and 
hybrid character. The administrative type usually, like we have in our country, acts as a buffer 
and acts an interface between the financial sectors and the law enforcement sector. 

Madam  Speaker,  our  present  type  of  FIU  which  is  an  administrative  type  is  being 
converted today by this legislation, is being transformed today into a law enforcement FIU with 
powers  to  freeze  transactions,  to  seize  assets  and,  I  think  the  Minister  did  mention  a  few 
countries  where  the  FIU  is  called  upon  to  carry  out  the  seizure  and  to  effect  confiscation  of 
stolen  assets  and  illicit  wealth.  He  mentioned  the  Channel  Islands,  Jersey  and  even  in  the 
Seychelles Republic, the FIU in this country, falls also into this category. 

But it would be pertinent, Madam Speaker, to  stress that this is a big role that we are 
giving to the FIU. And when the FIU is also responsible for enforcement or investigation, this is 
a completely different matter, Madam Speaker. We must be very careful about endowing the FIU 
and vesting the FIU with these powers and responsibilities. Principally, because the FIU must do 
its utmost to protect confidentiality and the autonomy of the financial system, because we must 
always keep in mind that in focusing on enforcement and investigation, the Authority may not 
give  due  consideration  to  confidentiality  which  is  the  essence,  which  is  the  special  nature  of 
financial transactions. This is why I would make this comment just to remind us of the special 
role, the mission of the FIU and the danger that can arise when we invest the FIU with those 
types of powers that we are doing today. 

123 

 
Madam Speaker, I would also comment on the role of the DPP. It has been argued by 
hon. Minister Gayan and I think by the hon. Leader of the Opposition also that under section 72 
of  the  Constitution  the  power  of  the  DPP  is  limited  only  to  instituting  criminal  proceedings, 
taking over criminal proceedings or discontinuing criminal proceedings. And that was argued in 
view of the contents of section 72 of our Constitution. That was the reason why the DPP should 
not  be  given  any  additional  responsibility  unless  the  Constitution  is  amended.  Therefore,  the 
argument goes like that: it was wrong and ill-advised for Parliament to have legislated and to 
have  given  statutory  powers  upon  the  DPP  to  act  as  an  enforcement  authority  in  view  of  the 
independence of the Office. 

As I said earlier, Madam Speaker, it was following the advice of the experts of the IMF 
mission  in  2009  in  devising  the  Asset  Recovery  Act  that,  according  to  me,  finally  the  then 
Government decided to adopt this integrated approach to recover proceeds of crime, that is, the 
DPP  with  his  Office  taking  over  enforcement  powers  for  the  recovery  of  assets  and,  in  fact, 
becoming the enforcement authority. But I would like to venture an opinion on the designation of 
the  DPP  as  the  enforcement  authority  and  whether,  Madam  Speaker,  it  follows  that  such 
designation  was  incompatible  with  the  powers  vested  in  the  DPP  under  section  72  of  the 
Constitution. 

According  to  me,  Madam  Speaker,  this  opinion,  to  me,  does  not  hold  water.  I  do  not 
agree with this opinion. According to me, Parliament is free to vest new responsibilities in the 
DPP, provided that the nature of the responsibility does not conflict with section 72 and does not 
undermine  the  independence  of  the  DPP.  The  recovery  of  proceeds  and  instrumentalities  of 
crime is a vital tool in the fight against crime and, therefore, complementary and incidental to the 
functions of the DPP under section 72.  

Parliament had, in the past, Madam Speaker, conferred additional responsibilities to the 
DPP under section 45 of the Dangerous Drugs Act, now repealed after the operation of the Asset 
Recovery Act. This law empowered the DPP upon a referral from the Commissioner of Drugs to 
make  an  application  to  the  Supreme  Court  for  a  forfeiture  order  against  a  convicted  person’s 
property.  Also,  as  we  just  saw  earlier  under  section  62  of  the  Prevention  of  Corruption  Act, 
Parliament had vested powers in the DPP to apply for a freezing order before the Supreme Court 

 

124 

against  property  of  persons  charged  or  about  to  be  charged  with  a  corruption  or  money 
laundering offence. 

I  will  also,  Madam  Speaker,  remind  the  House  that  we  have  other  legislations  in  our 
statute  book.  The  Certificate  of  Character  Act  which  is  now  the  Certificate  of  Morality  Act 
which  was  enacted  and  which  provided  that  the  DPP  should  issue  certificate  of  character  to 
members of the public. In fact, I was just looking at this particular piece of legislation. The law 
provides that it is for the DPP to sign certificates of morality and, in this very law, the Attorney 
General makes regulation, the law provides that the Attorney General can make regulations in 
the context of the Certificate of Character Act.  

I hold no brief for the DPP, Madam Speaker. We are just debating about principles, but 
what is true also is that when criticism has been made against the DPP’s Office with regard to 
asset  recovery,  we  must  understand  also  that  asset  recovery  is  a  long  process  with  a  right  of 
appeal to the person against whom the conviction order has been made. In fact under section 17 
of the Asset Recovery Act, confiscation is conviction based and we need to wait for the Police 
enquiry and then the trial and appeal by the accused. Money seized on the locus of drug dealers 
is produced also in Court as exhibit.  

Therefore, Madam Speaker, in other countries also where the role of the DPP is similar to 
ours, where there is even a written Constitution or a Bill of Rights, Parliament has invested the 
Office  of  the  DPP  with  the  responsibility  of  an  Asset  Recovery  Unit.  In  other  countries  like 
South  Africa  and  Australia,  Parliament  has  adopted  the  approach  that  the  conviction  of  a 
criminal is not the end of the process and the recovery of the proceeds of the crime is the next 
essential step in the fight against crime. 

Therefore, the logic is since recovery of proceeds of crime is the next logical step in the 
prosecutorial  process,  it  stands  to  reason  that  the  DPP  may  be  the  appropriate  authority  to 
recover the proceeds of crime. Even in the United Kingdom, Madam Speaker, the DPP is not 
involved  at  all  in  recovering  proceeds  of  crime  although  the  main  responsibility  lies  with  the 
Serious Organised Crime Agency as a specialist body as it used to be. But under the Proceeds of 
the  Crime  Act  of  2002,  the  DPP  has  the  authority  to  instigate  civil  recovery  proceedings  and 
prosecutors are permitted to conduct cash recovery proceedings in the UK. 

125 

 
So, the conclusion, Madam Speaker, for me, is if we have to find the right balance, the 
right solution, it should be, according to me, that since under the DDA and the PoCA, the power 
had  been  given  to  the  DPP  to  carry  out  recovery  of  proceeds  despite  the  fact  that  the 
investigation  was  carried  out  by  the  Drug  Assets  Forfeiture  Office  and  the  ICAC,  under  both 
these  laws,  Madam  Speaker,  the  DPP  was  resorted  to  at  the  last  stage  of  the  process  for  the 
recovery, I submit that this distinction must be made between the investigation per se and the 
recovery process.  

Investigation is carried out by the Police officers posted at the investigative agency and 
these officers may well continue with their duties under the new law, but we should leave the 
process of the recovery to the DPP. The DPP’s office is a constitutional post, Madam Speaker. 
The FIU Director is appointed under the recommendation of the Prime Minister and as no trained 
legal step. Madam Speaker, I repeat, the investigation should be carried out by officers of the 
FIU  and  the  recovery  process  should  be  left  in  the  hands  of  the  DPP’s  officers.  If  we  ask 
ourselves a question, who, according to the new amendment which is being proposed today, will 
appear  before  Supreme  Court  and  apply  for  the  different  orders,  the  restrained  orders,  the 
restriction orders, the confiscation orders? Nothing has been said by the hon. Minister. I hope he 
does enlighten the House about who will take over this process of recovery of assets before the 
courts of law and the different motions will be made by whom? Is it the case that the FIU will 
retain the services of private lawyers? There seems to be some confusion about this particular 
point. 

Therefore,  Madam  Speaker,  I  would  have  thought  that  since  restraining  and  the  other 
temporary  orders  are  important  orders  which  are  provided  for  by  the  Assets  Recovery  Act,  I 
would submit that these orders must be handled with caution. These functions should stay with 
the DPP and the DPP’s office, but the investigation part of the whole process can be left to the 
officers of the FIU.  

Having  said  that,  Madam  Speaker,  I  will  conclude  by  saying  that  whatever  legal 
framework and structures we adopt, the overwhelming factor is to ensure that our Enforcement 
Authority succeeds in confiscating the proceeds of crime and this will depend on whether we can 
develop a robust prosecutorial structure to respond powerfully to organised criminals and corrupt 
individuals.  

126 

 
Our  enforcement  authority,  I  humbly  submit,  Madam  Speaker,  must  be  manned  with 
trained financial officers, investigators with adequate investigative powers. This personnel must 
be with unimpeachable skills and experience and should be recruited especially in the case of 
civil forfeiture enforcement process. This is perhaps what we are lacking. The synergy between 
the prosecutors and the investigators must be encouraged. The training of our investigators must 
be an ongoing and permanent process, a permanent feature for the development of their skills. 
Workshops, seminars must provide our investigation with the latest techniques and skills, that is, 
what I am talking about is: capacity building for the effectiveness for future mechanism in our 
fight against crime remains, therefore, a priority. 

This is why, Madam Speaker, when we hear everybody expressing their opinion in this 
House today, in fact, there is more than bring us together that divide us. I am sure with an open 
mind,  the  hon.  Minister,  in  his  closing  speech,  when  he  sums  up  the  debate,  will  be  able  to 
enlighten the House. He will also be able to come up with proposals which can enable us to find 
a consensus about the right agency mechanism that we should devise, in order, to the help the 
country in his crusade against corruption. 

I have done, thank you, Madam Speaker. 

 

(7.21 p.m.) 

The Attorney General (Mr R. Yerrigadoo):  Madam Speaker, the purpose of this Bill is 
to amend.  My learned friends as they are have stated before me, very simply the Asset Recovery 
Act  provides  that  investigative  and  enforcement  powers  vested  in  the  DPP  shall  instead  be 
transferred over to the FIU.  

The Government has, time and again, Madam Speaker, stated that it will tirelessly and 
relentlessly fight against fraud, corruption and financial crime. To this effect, Government vision 
is as stated in the Government Programme - the setting up of a Financial Crime Commission, 
which will regroup and oversee the activities of the Independent Commission against Corruption, 
the  Financial  Intelligence  Unit  and  the  Enforcement  Department  of  the  Financial  Services 
Commission. It is that vision to create a single entity that we lead and coordinate the fight against 
financial crime. This amendment today is, therefore, a temporary measure, Madam Speaker.  

127 

 
The Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions is a constitutional one and the powers 
of the DPP are, as my hon. friend has stated, in terms, of section 72 of the Constitution, more 
particularly paragraph 3 –  

“ (a)  

to institute and undertake (…) ; 

  (b)  

to take over and continue (…) ; or 

  (c)  

to discontinue (…) criminal proceedings.” 

For too long now, the DPP has been burdened with the additional duty of having to deal with the 
recovery of assets at our proceeds of crime. What this Bill will achieve, therefore, is that it will 
free the Director of the Public Prosecutions of its additional burdens so that he may focus on its 
core function, which is the prosecution of criminal offences. 

I would like to respond to what hon. Mohamed said. There is no two Cabinet decisions, 
there is only one Cabinet decision, that of February 2015, which related to the restructuring of 
my office, the AGO. The Cabinet decided, inter alia, and I quote – 

“That  the  Enforcement  Authority  under  the  Asset  Recovery  Act  to  be  the 
Financial  Intelligence  Unit  pending  the  setting  up  of  a  Financial  Crime 
Commission  in  order  to  allow  the  officers  of  the  ODPP  to  focus  on  their 
prosecutorial duties and other duties within the AGO.” 

As  the  House  would  be  aware,  after  Cabinet,  there  is  a  Cabinet  communiqué  and  when  my 
attention  was  drawn  that  the  Cabinet  communiqué  of  that  Cabinet  sitting  did  not  accurately 
reflect tous les tenants et aboutissants of that decision, I was the one who proposed that it be 
reflected correctly. 

So,  Madam  Speaker,  my  learned  friend,  hon.  Gayan,  has  already  communicated  a 
communiqué and tabled it, dated 02 March issued by the DPP in which the DPP has no qualms 
about  this  fact  of  the  transfer.  I  cannot  but  highlight,  Madam  Speaker,  that  the  former  Prime 
Minister, himself, agreed to dispense the Office of the DPP from doing asset recovery work. In a 
PNQ  dated  07  July  2014,  he  stated  that  the  Asset  Recovery  Unit  would  be  part  of  a  Serious 
Fraud Office, therefore, clearly indicating that the policy was to remove asset recovery from the 
functions of the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions, and may I quote – 

128 

 
 “We are envisaging an agency that will consist of distinct Divisions which will 
each  be  headed  by  a  Director,  and  all  the  Directors  will  report  to  the  Director 
General who will be the Chief Executive Officer of the agency.  

The Independent Commission against Corruption will be one of the Divisions of 
the agency which will be supervised, in other words, by the Director General and 
its Board. 

In addition to being responsible for the investigation and prosecution of serious 
and complex crime, the agency will also be the Enforcement Authority under the 
Asset  Recovery  Act  and  a  competent  authority  under  the  Mutual  Assistance  in 
Criminal and Related Matters Act. 

The overhauling of the law will also cater for measures such as illicit enrichment 
to address the issues of corruption and money laundering both in the public and 
private sectors”. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  Mouvement  Militant  Mauricien  was  also  in  favour  in  removing  Asset 
Recovery Unit from the office of the DPP.  

The edition of ‘Le Mauricien’ of 30 September 2013 summed the MMM position on the 

Office of the DPP discharging asset recovery duties.  Madam Speaker, allow me to quote.  

And I quote – 

« Le leader du MMM a expliqué que l’article 72 de la Constitution donne au DPP, qui est 
un  des  postes  les  plus  importants  du  pays,  un  rôle  spécifique :  décider  qui  doit  être 
poursuivi ou pas. Cet article, dit-il, protège le DPP en garantissant son indépendance, le 
protège  contre  les  critiques  et  les  pressions.  Il  a  déploré  que  sans  amender  la 
Constitution, des nouvelles responsabilités aient été confiées au DPP. Les responsabilités 
qui revenaient auparavant à l’Assets Recovery Commissioner lui ont été confiées. Il lui 
revient donc de récupérer l’argent et les biens des grands criminels. « Cette décision est, 
à notre avis, non seulement anticonstitutionnelle et mais est aussi mauvaise parce qu’elle 
entraîne le DPP dans toutes sortes de polémiques sur des sujets qui peuvent donner lieu à 
des  questions  parlementaires  et  des  Private  Notice  Questions.  Il  est  vrai  que  la 

129 

 
Constitution  n’a  pu  être  amendée  parce  que  le  gouvernement  ne  dispose  pas  d’une 
majorité de trois-quarts ». 

Continuing on from that article - 

« Paul Bérenger estime qu’une chose rare s’est produite en 2011 : tout le monde a fait 
fausse route sur cette question. « Le DPP qui connaît la valeur de ses fonctions n’a pas 
objecté,  l’Attorney  General,  principal  conseiller  du  gouvernement,  n’a  pas  attiré  son 
attention  concernant  ce  viol  de  la  Constitution.  L’Opposition  a  également  fait  fausse 
route bien que son erreur de jugement découle du fait qu’elle avait été informée que le 
gouvernement  britannique  avait 
le  poste  Assets  Recovery 
Commissionner  et  était  sous  l’impression  que  cette  responsabilité  avait  été  confiée  au 
DPP.  Or,  les  autorités  britanniques  avaient  en  vérité  confié  cette  responsabilité  à  la 
Serious Organised Crime Agency qui est un organisme indépendant. Le Bar Council et la 
Law Society n’ont pas tiré la sonnette d’alarme et les journalistes commentateurs n’ont 
rien vu non plus. Ce n’est pas une raison pour ne pas protester parce que c’est grave », 
affirme Paul Bérenger. End of quote. 

lui  aussi  dissout 

As many of my learned friends have drawn the attention of this House on the different parcours 
of the Asset Recovery, I thought it fit to quote same.  

On another issue, Madam Speaker, I wish to point out that my Office has indeed dully 
tabled in the National Assembly the Annual Reports of the Enforcement Authority for the years 
2013 and 2014 respectively. My learned friends, what he meant when he was speaking - and I 
am sure he would clarify that bit - was, I had just communicated to him before he were to take 
the floor those two reports and I am sure, in all good faith, all the Members shall appreciate.  

So, Madam Speaker, moving the powers of the recovery of assets derived from criminal 
activities  from  the  DPP  to  the  Financial  Intelligence  Unit  for  me  is  a  logical  one.  As  events, 
earlier  this  year,  have  demonstrated,  white  collar  crimes  are  sometimes  very  intricate  and 
technical in nature. They more often than not required an investigative mind rather than a legal 
mind. The Financial Intelligence Unit, with highly trained technicians and investigators, is a Unit 
specialised in the fight against such crime and let me reiterate all our confidence in the FIU.  

 
Madam Speaker, I commend this Bill. This is but one step in the series of actions that this 

130 

Government is taking to crack down fraud, corruption and financial crime. I thank you. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Uteem! 

(7.29 p.m.) 

Mr R. Uteem (First Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis Central): Madam 
Speaker, the object of this Bill is a very simple one. We have an Enforcement Authority set up 
under the Asset Recovery Act. That Enforcement Authority is currently under the Office of the 
Director of Public Prosecutions and it is proposed to move it to the Financial Intelligence Unit.  

Many Members of this House were not here in 2011 and 2012 when the Asset Recovery 
Act was voted and amended. I think that in order for hon. Members to be able to exercise their 
voting rights today, their judgement today, it is important to, just briefly, remind the House what 
that Asset Recovery Unit does. In fact, it does three things: first, it traces properties which are 
proceeds of crime. So, it investigates.  When it investigates, it goes and asks questions. It can ask 
questions from banks and it can also get an order from the Court to monitor movements of funds. 
Because  crime  is  international,  this  Asset  Recovery  Unit  is  the  lynchpin  with  international 
agencies for collection of information, for recovery of proceeds of crime.  

The  first  role  is  to investigate,  to  trace  assets  and  the  second  role  is  to  recover  assets.  
There  are  two  ways  in  which  the  Asset  Recovery  Unit  does  this:  either  conviction-based 
recovery or civil assets recovery. For conviction-based recovery, as the name speaks, you will 
have  to  wait  for  a  criminal  conviction  to  be  secured  then,  you  go  and  trace  the  assets  of  the 
criminal and recover them. For civil assets recovery, you don’t need to wait for any conviction.  
In fact, the case may be discontinued against the accused party and you can go after his assets if 
you  have,  on  the  balance  of  probability,  sufficient  proof  to  determine  that  those  assets  are 
proceeds of crime. 

The law gives the power to this Enforcement Authority to ask the Court for a provisional 
order of seizure. This provisional order of seizure is called restraining order under the criminal-
based assets recovery and it is called a restriction order under the Civil Law. This is where the 
confusion lies, when the hon. Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional 
Reforms was talking about the amount recovered; he did not mention at all, all the assets that 

 

131 

have  been  subject  to  restraining  orders  or  restriction  orders  which  are,  as  I  said,  a  temporary 
measure before you go for the final order. The final order which is called a confiscation order or 
a recovery order comes after you have completed the enquiry. Either there has been a conviction 
or there is sufficient element to go before the Court to get the final order.  

The third role of this Asset Recovery Unit is to distribute the proceeds. After you have 
enquired, after you have seized, you distribute to the victims. But, unfortunately, since 2014 - 
and that has never been the subject of any debate before this House - there has been a Finance 
and Audit (Recovered Assets Fund) Regulations which now provides, as a matter of law, that 
after deducting  any amount authorised by the Enforcement Authority, under section 72 of the 
Asset  Recovery  Act,  this  Enforcement  Authority  must  transfer  at  least  80%  of  the  money  or 
proceeds credited to the asset recovery fund. They need to transfer 80% of the fund recovered to 
the consolidated fund.  

Unlike  the  original  idea  which  was  to  take  the  money  and  distribute  it  to  victims,  the 
DPP, the Asset Recovery Unit, the Enforcement Authority no longer have this power because 
80% of the money recovered goes to the Consolidation Fund.  

I think it was important to set that in perspective, because we are talking about an agency, 
a creature of statutes which has enormous power to quote what hon. Pravind Jugnauth said when 
he  intervened  on  the  amendment  to  the  Asset  Recovery  Act  in  2012.    We  have  “enormous 
powers”  given  to  this  authority.  Once  you  have  given  so  much  power  to  an  authority,  it  is 
important that you ensure that this authority will not abuse its power. It is very important that 
you ensure that this authority would be able to prosecute, to ask recovery orders without fear or 
favour. But at the same time, you also need to ensure that this authority will not be subject to 
political interference, to be reluctant to go and ask Court for confiscation orders, for recovery 
orders.  That  is  what  we  had  in  mind  when  we  did  not  object  to  the  role  being  given  to  the 
Director  of  Public  Prosecutions.  Why?  Because  the  Director  of  Public  Prosecutions  was  a 
constitutional creature, whose independence was guaranteed by the Constitution, who could not 
have been removed except under the procedure laid down in the Constitution, which is very long 
and very difficult to do. So, it is because of this Constitutional independence that Members of 
this  House  felt  comforted,  including  myself,  to  give  these  new  powers  in  the  hands  of  the 
Director of Public Prosecutions. 

 

132 

Unfortunately, Madam Speaker, as the years went by and we started seeing the DPP in 
action, we soon realised that there was one element under this Enforcement Authority which was 
incompatible with the constitutional role of the DPP and that was the investigatory role.  As I 
said, the first step of this Authority is to go, ask questions and collect information. 

The danger of controversy came to our knowledge when the DPP actually wrote to a bank 
and  asked  bank  account  information  about  a  suspect  and  he  did  that  without  going  through  a 
Judge’s Order. He had the power to do that, to write to the bank and ask for sensitive private 
information about the bank details of this suspect without going through the Judge’s Order.  That 
is when - and it is never trop tard pour changer - the MMM took the bull by the horn and came 
out clean and said that we made a mistake, we cannot allow the DPP to investigate proceeds of 
crime  because  he  would  come  into  a  controversy,  and  the  DPP  is  supposed  to  be  above  all 
controversies because he has to be constitutionally independent when he exercises his duties to 
prosecute. 

As the hon. Leader of the Opposition rightly pointed out, we are a bit sad and troubled by 
the fact that when this law is being amended, we are not giving back the security, the protection 
of a Judge’s Order before this Enforcement Authority can go and ask details about your privacy 
to  a  bank,  to  a  financial  institution.  So,  we  still  think  that  this  is  a  fundamental  flaw  in  the 
legislation that has to be corrected because you need to have the protection of the judge before 
you can go and query bank account details of any suspect. So, that is so much for why we voted 
in favour of the DPP. 

There was another reason also, Madam Speaker, why we voted in favour of the DPP and 
that  was  because  -  as  was  rightly  reminded  to  us  by  hon.  Shakeel  Mohamed  -  before  the 
Government  came  forward  with  this  Bill,  there  was  a  consensus.    The  Members  of  the 
Oppositions  were  invited  to  meet  representatives  of  the  IMF  and  we  had  discussions,  we  had 
debates, where we even commented on draft proposals which were later on incorporated in the 
final Bill. 

At that point, under the Dangerous Drugs Act, we had a Commissioner called the Drug 
Assets  Forfeiture  Commissioner,  and  the  Drug  Assets  Commissioner  had  failed  in  his  duties 
because he had recovered only Rs112,000 of proceeds of crime. That Drug Commissioner was 
doing the investigation and then asking the DPP to lodge the case. 

 

133 

It was the same thing under the Economic Crime Office. The Economic Crime Office did 
the investigation and the DPP filed the case. Under FIAMLA, again, same thing, ICAC, before 
they ask for a final order of seizure, they have to go through the DPP. So, at that point, it was 
logical that it is the DPP who should have these powers. 

But, now, should this be changed? On this side of the House, we agree that we need to 
remove this Enforcement Agency  from the DPP. However, we don’t agree that this has to be 
done  for  the  reason  that  the  hon.  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 
Institutional  Reforms  stated.  In  his  intervention,  he  seems  to  suggest  that  the  Enforcement 
Authority had not done its job properly, had not recovered sufficient money. 

Before me, other Members had intervened to point out that it was wrong when the hon. 
Minister mentioned that the accounts were never laid down in the Assembly, because the very 
first  thing  I  did  the  next  day  after  the  hon.  Minister  intervened  in  Parliament,  is  to  call  the 
Librarian of Parliament to find out whether or not the accounts had been laid down.  He told me 
the  accounts  for  2013  were  laid  before  the  National  Assembly  on  25  March  2014  and  the 
accounts for 2014 were laid on 31 March 2015 by the Attorney General because the DPP sent it 
to the Attorney General’s Office. 

So, it would have been very simple for the hon. Minister. I know he is very busy, but he 
has so many advisers, who I know work till very late at night.  It would have been so easy for 
one  of  the  advisers  simply  to  call  and  check  for  the  information.    That  would  have  probably 
prevented  the  Asset  Recovery  Unit  from  having  to  issue  the  communiqué  de  presse  on  19 
November 2015 where the Asset Recovery Unit mentioned that it has, in fact, been able to secure 
orders,  freezing  Rs294  m.  of  money  plus  56  lopins  de  terre,  119  appartements-maisons,  et 
plusieurs biens, comprenant des voitures, motocyclettes, bateaux, pleasure crafts et des actions 
de compagnies. 

We  know  that  this  is  the  case  because  when  we  were  in  the  Opposition  we  asked 
questions to the Government about assets recovery and we received answers.  After the Whitedot 
scandal,  after the Sunkai scandal,  we know that  the Asset Recovery had gone and seized and 
frozen many accounts. We know that the Asset Recovery Unit had sold yachts, had sold cars and 
had returned cheques to victims of Sunkai and Whitedot. So, I think it is very unfair that the hon. 
Minister had to attack the Asset Recovery Unit unjustly. 

 

134 

But what is more of a concern to me is that the hon. Minister seems to suggest that it is an 
important  role  of  this  Asset  Recovery  to  recover  proceeds.    So,  there  would  be  a  monetary 
amount recovered and that is very dangerous. That is very dangerous because civil recovery, for 
example, should only be used in exceptional circumstances. The general rule always is that you 
have to go to Court, get a conviction, once the drug trafficker has been sentenced, then go and 
trace  his  property  and  seize  his  property.  But,  as  I  mentioned,  you  can  also  go  for  an  asset 
recovery when there is no conviction. 

The  DPP,  in  his  Annual  Report  2013,  stated  that  civil  asset  recovery  will  only  be 
considered  when  no  prosecution  is  envisaged,  where  a  conviction  is  not  pronounced  or  a 
confiscation order cannot be applied for. So, we had this safeguard that the Asset Recovery Unit 
will not go under the civil recovery until it has exhausted the criminal confiscation procedure. 

If we transfer this power to the FIU, we will no longer have that  guarantee. We don’t 
know what would be the policy of the FIU.  If I heard the learned Minister correctly, it would 
seem that there would be pressure on that Recovery Agency to collect money because there is a 
lot of dirty money, there is a lot of corruption money, there is a lot of proceeds of crime floating 
around the island. This is something which I hope, the hon. Minister, in summing-up, will give 
us the comfort as to how to ensure that civil recovery is only done exceptionally and the general 
rule is still that we need to go through the Court process, get a conviction, then trace the assets.   

So, this brings us to the crux of the matter today, Madam Speaker, if we agree that the 

power has to be removed from the DPP, should it be given to the Financial Intelligence Unit. 

The  Financial  Intelligence  Unit  was  set  up  under  the  Financial  Intelligence  and  Anti-
Money  Laundering  Act  and  people  forget,  but  before  this  legislation  was  passed,  there  was  a 
Select  Committee  on  Fraud  and  Corruption  which  the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  hon.  Ivan 
Collendavelloo  chaired  and  it  is  that  Select  Committee  which  came  up  with  the  proposal  of 
segregating the enforcement authority from the intelligence collection role. Because previously 
under the Economic Crime Office, they were doing both the investigation themselves and they 
were doing the prosecutions themselves.  And we saw how dangerous that could be if we give 
too much power to the same authority. That is why the Select Committee recommended that we 
take  away  the  enforcement  role  from  the  intelligence  gathering  role.  This  is  why  I  am 
particularly  troubled  when  I  hear  the  same  Vice-Prime  Minister,  hon.  Ivan  Collendavelloo, 

 

135 

today, giving the power to investigate, giving the power to ask for recovery of asset to the very 
same agency which collects information. So, we are going back to ECO.  We are going back to, 
precisely, what in 2002 with FIAMLA, the former Government of MMM/MSM tried to unwind.  
We wanted to keep these two separate.  

Now, this FIU which is collecting information, gathering intelligence will also be the one 
investigating, which I think is fundamentally flawed.  The Select Committee worked hard.  There 
were different types of proposals and this is what we chose and it is very discomforting that the 
Government  of  the  day  is  going  back  on  this  today.  And  maybe  I  will  just  quote  what,  for 
example, during the debate on the Financial Intelligence and Anti-Money Laundering Bill, the 
intervention of, for example, hon. Sushil Khushiram, who said, I quote – 

“I do not need to go on again on the reason why we had to get rid of ECO, but clearly we 
had to distinguish between investigation and intelligence activity.” 

So,  it  is  very  important  to  keep  the  Financial  Intelligence  Unit  separate.  It  performs  a  very 
important  role  of  information  gathering.  This  role  should  be  distinguished  from  enforcement 
authority which would go and recover assets. 

Madam Speaker, when I mentioned that we did not object to the authority going under 
the DPP initially, the reason was that it was very important that this enforcement authority is not 
only independent, but also be seen to be independent. It has to be seen to be clear and free from 
all  political  interference.  Why?  Because  in  the  wrong  hands,  giving  so  much  power  to  this 
authority, can lead to abuse, can be used as a political tool to harass opponents, but also can be 
used as a political tool to reward supporters and help those who want to become star witnesses 
who have done the crime, but does not want to do the time.  

Make no mistake, Madam Speaker, the Director of the Financial  Intelligence Unit is a 
political  appointee.  Section  9  of  the  Financial  Intelligence  and  Anti-Money  Laundering  Act 
provides that the Director of the FIU will be appointed by the President on the recommendation 
of the Prime Minister made in consultation with the Leader of the Opposition. And we all know 
what  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  understands  by  consultation.  For  him,  consultation  means 
notification. He is not interested in consulting, in exchanging views; he only notifies the hon. 
Leader of the Opposition. 

136 

 
During  the  PNQ  session  on  24  February  2015,  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition 
questioned the Rt. hon. Prime Minister about the appointment of the Director of ICAC as he had 
been appointed even before the hon. Leader of the Opposition had time to inform the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister whether he was agreeable to the appointment or not. And that is what the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister answered, and I quote – 

“We  all  know  consultation  means  consultation!  We  had  already  made  up  our  mind. 
Whatever would be the comments of the hon. Leader of the Opposition, Mr Aujayeb was 
going to be appointed!” 

So, what guarantee do we have that this Prime Minister or another Prime Minister will not do the 
same thing with the Director of FIU? He will say that, you know, consultation or no consultation, 
whatever the Leader of the Opposition wants, we had decided that Mr ‘X’ will be appointed as 
Director of FIU. And once Mr ‘X’ is appointed as Director of the FIU, where will his allegiance 
lie? How can we get rid of the perception that this Director would be a political appointee? 

Madam Speaker, in answer to a PQ on 31 March 2015, on precisely the qualification of 
the  current  Director  of  the  FIU  which  I  asked  the  hon.  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good 
Governance,  Institutional  Reforms,  the  hon.  Minister  started  by  quoting  section  9  (2)  of 
FIAMLA which provides for the Director of FIU to be, and I quote – 

“A person of high repute with substantial experience in the financial services industry or 
law enforcement and experience in management and accounting.” 

A person of high repute with substantial experience!  And then the hon. Minister went on and 
stated - 

“The House may wish to note that from February 2012 to December 2014, Mr Ollivry 
has worked as a Forensic Researcher in Anti-Money Laundering, Financial Services and 
Human  Rights.  The  first  two  areas  of  practice  during  these  2  years  are  of  particular 
relevance for the purposes of section 9(2) of the FIAMLA.” 

Two years’ experience! Two years’ experience as a trainee in forensic research, when the law 
requires a person of high repute with substantial experience in the financial services industry!  

So, today, we have a person whom the hon. Leader of the Opposition stated he did not 
agree to the appointment. Not because he has anything against the gentleman, and I don’t have 

 

137 

anything either against the gentleman, but because simply based on his qualification, he does not 
have substantial experience in financial services industry and law enforcement to be able to wear 
this big hat which the hon. Vice-Prime Minister mentioned. It is a big hat to wear that of asset 
recovery. And we are giving that to a Director who is not even qualified as a barrister; who can’t 
even go to Court and ask for an order; who can’t even vet an affidavit. How can this person who 
is not a qualified barrister, tomorrow be able to go and carry out the function of investigating 
authority, the function of being able to seize properties? This is why we do not agree, on this 
side, that the FIU should be given this role.  

Now, this gentleman is also under the supervision of a Board.  

Previously,  the  Board  was  called  Revewing  Committee.  The  Reviewing  Committee  was  very 
important. This is what the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, when he was Prime 
Minister  in  2002  when  the  FIAMLA  Bill  was  introduced,  had  to  say  about  the  Review 
Committee – 

“The  Review  Committee  given  its  composition  and  its  role  in  screening 
allegation/information  will  no  doubt  constitute  a  major  safeguard  against 
investigation  departing  from  unfounded  allegation  or  against  refusal 
to 
investigate. This will address the issue of malicious and baseless allegation.” 

This Review Committee which is now a Board of the FIU has a very critical role to ensure that 
there is no investigation based on unfounded allegation. Very important role! But, today, do hon. 
Members of this House, does the public know who are the Members of this new Board that has 
been constituted after the elections. Do they know that the Chairman is related to a Minister of 
this Government by marriage, very close relationship? Do they know that one of the Members 
was presented at a Press Conference as someone who had adhered to the MSM party last year? 
Do they know that the Third Member shared the Chambers of one of the Senior Ministers of this 
Government ? Now, how do you want… 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, of course! We are talking about perception. 

Madam Speaker: Please, address the Chair! 

Mr Uteem: The perception is, today, that the Board… 

 

138 

(Interruptions) 

The Leader of the Opposition did not agree… 

did not agree… 

did not agree… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please, don’t interrupt! 

Please, don’t interrupt! 

No cross-talking, please! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

No cross-talking! Hon. Uteem, please, proceed! 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, there is no better way for me to rest my case than what has 
just  happened  a  few  seconds  ago  in  that  House.  This  is  the  extent  of  the  closeness  of  the 
relationship between the Members of this House and the people who have been appointed on the 
Board  of  the  FIU.  These  are  the  Members  of  the  Board  who  are  supposed  to  ensure  that  the 
Director would not go astray. 

How can we… 

But this is the point! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No cross-talking please! 

Mr Uteem: This is the point! We are not against shifting the Enforcement Authority from 
the DPP. We are all in favour of it, but, certainly not to give it to an agency whose role is not to 
enquire, but also has the perception of political appointment. 

 

139 

(Interruptions) 

It  is  political  appointment.  And  they  don’t  even  hide  this  fact.  The  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister 
answering to a question in this House, didn’t he say himself: “ I am Minister, who am I going to 
appoint in the CEB, in Wastewater Authority, in CWA, if not people who have the same vision 
as I have.” 

We  had  a  question  put  in  this  House  where  we  have  challenged  the  closeness  of 

appointment. So, how can we… 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Members, didn’t I say that there should be no cross-talking from 

(Interruptions) 

a sitting position? 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, this is why… 

This is precisely why… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

And hon. Members should understand something… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah, please! 

Mr Uteem: What they are doing today… 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Uteem: Precisely, if tomorrow there is a change in Government… 

(Interruptions) 

If tomorrow there is a change in Government, what would happen? 

(Interruptions) 

What would happen? 

 

140 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Can we have some order in the House, please? 

(Interruptions) 

I want to have order in the House so that the hon. Member can proceed with his speech. 

Hon. Jhugroo, please! 

Hon. Jhugroo! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker,  I reiterate our position. We are not against removing the 
Enforcement Authority from the DPP. We are all for. We made a mistake in 2012, we are all for. 
We don’t agree to put such an important enforcement authority in the hands of institutions which 
are  politically  appointed  and  politically  controlled.  And  more  importantly,  there  is  a  Cabinet 
decision as has been referred to. The Cabinet decision says that the Enforcement Authority under 
the Asset Recovery Act… 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Uteem: The Enforcement Authority under the Asset Recovery Act to be the Financial 
Intelligence Unit pending the setting-up of the Financial Crime Commission in order to allow 
officers of the DPP’s Office to  focus on their prosecutorial duties  and other duties within the 
AGO. So, what we  are  doing today, based on the Cabinet decision of  27 February 2015, is a 
temporary measure until this Financial Crime Commission is set up. So, why go through all this 
trouble?    What  is  the  urgency?  Why  put  this  Enforcement  Agency  now  under  the  hands  of 
political  appointees?  What  is  there  to  hide?  What  is  the  motive?  There  is  one  thing  very 
important:  what  will  happen  if  members  of  the  staff,  the  current  staff  of  the  Enforcement 
Authority  refuse  today  to  move  to  the  FIU?  What  will  happen  to  all  the  investigations?  Start 
again? 

(Interruptions) 

 

Start again? What will happen? 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah! 

141 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Uteem: So, you are going to the length… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Did I ask you to make comments? 

Mr Uteem: This House is going to the length. They are going to the length of taking the 
risk  of  disruption  in  investigation.  They  are  taking  the  risk  of  going  through  disruption  in 
information  only  for  a  temporary  time  until  the  Financial  Crime  Commission  is  set  up.  The 
position of this side of the House, Madam Speaker, is: wait for the Financial Crime Commission 
to be set up and urgently set up; as soon as possible come up quickly before this House. Let’s 
debate  on  a  Financial  Crime  Commission.  Let’s  have  a  consensus  in  this  House  about  the 
Financial  Crime  Commission,  then  we  transfer  the  Enforcement  Agency  under  this  Financial 
Crime Commission. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhadain! 

(8.04 p.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance,  Institutional  Reforms, 
Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation (Mr S. Bhadain): Madam Speaker, 
let  me  first  start  by  thanking  the  Members  on  both  sides  of  the  House  for  their  views  and, 
especially, the hon. Leader of the Opposition for his constructive proposals. In fact, he was the 
first one to criticise why the Asset Recovery Unit was placed under the DPP’s Office back in 
2013 and had been ringing those alarm bells. 

Now, before I address the issues which have been rightly pointed out by the hon. Leader 
of the Opposition on the UK model, on why the FIU and also in terms of the issues regarding 
why Asset Recovery Agencies have failed in the UK and also in Mauritius,  I would first and 
foremost address some of the issues raised by hon. Uteem. 

142 

 
Firstly, let me remind the House that the Asset Recovery Act which dates back to 2011, 
was, in fact, proclaimed in February 2012 and then a few months later – and this is the part that I 
believe everybody has missed – in November 2012, major substantial amendments were brought 
to the Asset Recovery Act. 

If we go back to the speech of the then Attorney General, he would have us believed that 
this was because the DPP – in the experience that he had gathered between February 2012 and 
November 2012 – had found out that, in fact, the system does not work. 

This  addresses  all  the  issues  regarding  the  IMF  Report  which  was  mentioned  by  hon. 
Shakeel  Mohamed  as  well  because  it  appears  that  there  were  so  many  consultants  who  had 
looked at the structure, looked at the methodologies, the processes to come up with this Act in 
2011.  But then, when the law was proclaimed, only a few months after that, major amendments 
were  proposed.  And,  in  all  the  speeches  that  I  have  heard  today,  I  have  not  heard  anybody 
mention three things: firstly, in November 2012, the law was made retroactive for 10 years! 

(Interruptions) 

This retroactivity was not there when the first Act came into force. So, in six or seven months, 
the  DPP  had  decided  that  he  needed  then  to  come  back  to  this  House,  through  this  proposed 
Amendment of Asset Recovery Act of November 2012, and give him the powers to go back 10 
years and everybody agreed! 

Everybody agreed! The second thing… 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhadain: … which was very important, was the reversal of the burden of proof. It 
was then decided, after six or seven months of experience which the DPP had obtained, that the 
burden of proof was no longer on the enforcement authority to go and prove a case to recover 
assets. The burden now shifted on the person who had those assets. 

And they agreed! 

(Interruptions) 

 

143 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Minister  Gayan,  you  had  the  opportunity  to  intervene.  Now, 

please, allow the hon. Minister to do his summing up! 

Yes, please proceed, hon. Minister! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhadain: The third and most important amendment which was brought in November 
2012, Madam Speaker, was to say that, now, all applications before a Court of law was to be 
construed  as  being  civil  proceedings  and  the  standard  of  proof  was  going  to  be  balance  of 
probabilities! And, … 

(Interruptions) 

…amazingly, everybody agreed! However, because hon. Uteem has gone so lengthily in terms of 
why  things  are  happening,  what  might  happen  hypothetically  in  terms  of  political  tools  being 
used,  interferences,  and  he  went  in  terms  of  conducting  a  personal  attack  on  Mr  Ollivry,  as 
Director of  FIU, let me remind the House what he said when all these happened! 

(Interruptions) 

The first thing he said, which I find amazing, Madam Speaker, is, and I quote - 

“This  is  to  my  knowledge,  the  first  time  that  we  are  introducing  the  notion  of  illicit 
enrichment or unexplained wealth (…)” 

Unexplained wealth, Madam Speaker!  

“(…)  where  it  is  established  that  a  person  did  not  have  a  legitimate  source  of  income 
sufficient to justify his interest in the property, my first reaction, Mr Speaker, Sir, is why 
limit this illicit enrichment, unexplained wealth, to only a civil proceeding to recover the 
asset? Why not criminalise it?” 

(Interruptions) 

He was saying that you must send people to jail!  

(Interruptions) 

Instead of having the civil… 

 

144 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem, please! 

Mr Bhadain: Let me finish! But this is what was said! 

“Why not criminalise it?” 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

If we just extend what hon. Uteem had proposed at that time, what would that mean, Madam 
Speaker?  That  would  mean  that  when  a  person  had  such  assets  and  on  the  balance  of 
probabilities it was proved, then you should send that person to jail! Lock him up! 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem, please don’t interrupt him! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhadain: And he goes on to say that this is what the United Nations had proposed in 
the Convention! But, these are the people who were basically saying that you should not have 
unexplained wealth orders in Mauritius! Civil orders are no good! Presumption of innocence! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Uteem: The hon. Minister is saying something… 

 (Interruptions) 

On a point of order … 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

You have got a point of order? What is your point of order? 

 (Interruptions) 

Mr Uteem: The hon. Minister is imputing motives which he cannot hold. He is imputing 
motives inasmuch as he is saying that previously I had said something in this House about my 
stand and, now, I have changed my position. He is saying that I have changed my position. This 
is  not  correct.  I  still  stand  by  whatever  I  said.  I  am  still  in  favour  of  sending  all  corrupt 
politicians, including Ministers and public officers who can’t justify their wealth in jail! 

 

145 

 (Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: This is not a point of order. This is a point of personal explanation! 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, I will… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

I will certainly remind the hon. Member… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem, would you continue to interrupt? 

(Interruptions) 

On both sides of the House, I have said! But, please do not reply! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, I will certainly remind my hon. friend, when we come to 
the Good Governance Integrity Reporting Bill, of what he has said today. So, that was said about 
criminalising it. Then, more importantly, regarding the burden of proof, hon. Uteem’s view at 
that time was: ‘reversal of burden is not prohibited as long as it is a proportionate response to the 
social problem being addressed!’ 

(Interruptions) 

So, if it is in response to the social problem, then you should basically reverse the burden and 
this is what happened in 2012! And then he goes on to say –  

“Before the European Court of Human Rights, there was an issue about the Italian mafia, 
and  it  was  shown  that  it  was  necessary  to  impose  this  reversal  of  burden  in  order  to 
preserve the greater good and to fight against the mafia.” 

This is how the law changed and basically the DPP got even more powers.  Not only his 
powers, under section 72 of the Constitution, to initiate proceedings before a Court of law to take 
over proceedings, to prosecute cases and the powers which were vested into him as per the Asset 
Recovery Act which was proclaimed in February 2012. But then, as from November 2012, he 

 

146 

could go back in time 10 years and he did not have to prove anything. The other chap had the 
burden to prove.  

We  are  talking  about  presumption  of  innocence.  So  much  has  been  said  about 
presumption  of  innocence,  but,  in  2012,  where  was  presumption  of  innocence  then?  In  2012, 
where  was  the  right  to  silence  and  everything  which  is  being  talked  about  now?  So  much 
hypocrisy, Madam Speaker! So much hypocrisy!  

When we come…. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Uteem: Is “hypocrisy” a parliamentary word?  

Madam Speaker: Hypocrisy is not an unparliamentary word!  

(Interruptions) 

Please, proceed! 

Mr Bhadain: Now, with regard to the issue which has been raised because … 

(Interruptions) 

… Mr Ollivry’s name has been mentioned, he has been referred to by name by hon. Uteem and 
the Leader of the Opposition, in fact, in a more discrete manner, referred to his point about the 
experience that… 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon.  Uteem,  please!  No  comment  from  a  sitting  position!  You  have  just  intervened.  No 
comment from a sitting position! 

Mr Bhadain: I very much respect the approach of the hon. Leader of the Opposition who 
basically made his point by saying that in his opinion, he believes that the person who has been 
appointed Director of FIU did not have sufficient experience. But, then, my friend, hon. Uteem, 
went on to mention him by name and started talking about his qualifications. So, for that, Madam 

 

147 

Speaker,  the  response  is  as  follows.  I  am  going  to  quote  from  a  letter  from  the  European 
Commission which is addressed to Mr Ollivry as Director of the Financial Intelligence Unit, on 
27 March 2015. It goes on to say –  

“Dear Mr Ollivry,  Invitation for Collaboration on Anti-Money  Laundering/ Combating 
the Financing of Terrorism EU Funded Project.” 

It goes on to say –  

“Following  the  29th  ESSAAMLG  Task  Force  of  Senior  Officials’  Meeting  in  Arusha, 
Tanzania, where we have been able to identify your remarkable operational expertise in 
the area of AML/CFT, we would like to include you on our roster of experts.” 

And this is the letter from the European Commission. It goes on to say –  

(Interruptions) 

“The AML/CFT Project in the Greater Horn of Africa is a European Commission funded 
project  and  being  implemented  by  Civi  Pol  Conseil  which  is  an  agency  of  the  French 
Ministry  of  Interior.  Please  find  attached  the  project  fact  sheet  for  further  information 
about  the  project  and  we  do  hope  that  you  will  accept  our  invitation  for  future 
collaboration.” 

Now, this is the person who is being termed as a young chap with no experience and who 
does  not  know  what  he  is  doing.    But,  on  top  of  that,  I  will  also  inform  the  House  that  Mr 
Guillaume Ollivry - because a lot of confusion is being made with Mr Thierry Ollivry, who is his 
elder brother - studied at University of Canterbury in the UK and he has an LLB honours from 
the  University  of  Canterbury.  He  was  actually  amongst  the  best  students  in  that  university  in 
accordance with the grades and everything he obtained. 

However,  the  point  raised  by  my  friend,  hon.  Uteem,  is  pertinent,  in  terms  of  his 
experience,  because  the  law,  the  FIAMLA,  actually  refers  to  substantial  experience  when  it 
comes to the post of Director of the FIU.  I can reassure my friend that we wrote to the Solicitor 
General, to the Attorney General’s Office, enclosing the CV of Mr Ollivry and his qualifications. 
We asked the Solicitor General; the instructions were to give us a legal opinion on the basis of 
what the law dictates as qualification and experience, whether in the light of that definition, Mr 
Ollivry has the substantial experience which is required for that particular post.  

148 

 
After that, matters were taken to Cabinet and this is when Cabinet decided to go ahead, 
and then, of course, the law was followed. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister recommended to H.E., 
The  President  for  the  nomination  after  consulting  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition,  which  I 
understand did not agree to that. This is how it happened. This is the most transparent process, 
which I believe can be exercised by Government. So, I do hope that no reference is made to Mr 
Ollivry in the future. 

When it comes to the relevant pertinent issues which have been raised by the hon. Leader 
of the Opposition, I must say again that I very much value what he has said today, in terms of 
how  the  structure  works  in  the  UK,  the  research  which  has  been  conducted  to  explain  to  the 
House why, in his opinion, we should move towards a National Crime Agency model, which is 
going to be the Financial Crime Commission in a Mauritian context. But he did say something 
which I do not agree with. He said that I was factually wronged when I informed the House last 
time that we were going to follow the British model.  

So, when we look at the British model, Madam Speaker, the National Crime Intelligence 
Service,  which was the  UK  FIU  at that time, was established in April 1992 and, on 01 April 
2006, it was merged with the newly created Serious Organised Crime Agency, and there was a 
reason for that.  It was  all the attacks that happened in  London on 07 July. And what the UK 
Government  decided  was  that  the  Intelligence  Service,  the  NCIS  had  to  move  into  another 
organisation, which was also looking at terrorism financing and other issues relating to organised 
crime. So, the UK FIU (NCIS) was brought into the Serious Organised Crime Agency (SOCA).  

Then, when the Asset Recovery Agency, which was operational in February 2003, had 
failed to meet its targets for the confiscation of criminal offenses - I will come to that in a minute 
because  this  was  another  point  raised  by  hon.  Uteem,  saying  that,  in  trying  to  recover  these 
assets, we are putting pressure, which can impact the lives of citizens and so on. But the same 
problem happened in the UK because the Asset Recovery Unit was not working as it should - it 
was not under the DPP over there - and failed to meet targets. In January 2007, it merged with 
the Serious Organised Crime Agency. When that merger happened, the UK FIU, which was the 
NCIS  and  which  was  already  under  SOCA,  then  accommodated  the  Asset  Recovery  Agency, 
which also was housed in the SOCA. That is why I was certainly not factually wrong when I said 

 

149 

that  the  British  model  accommodated  the  UK  FIU  and  the  Asset  Recovery  Agency  under  the 
Serious Organised Crime Agency. 

However,  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  also  is  not  wrong  when  he  says  that  the 
model today is the National Crime Agency. That happened in 2013.  In 2013, the National Crime 
Agency was set up, and I do agree with him that it is a monster organisation which has got all the 
National  Drug  Squads  and  all  the  antiterrorist  bodies.  It  houses  the  UK  FIU  as  part  of  the 
Economic Crime Command and the Asset Recovery Agency and so many other departments. All 
the Directors of all these different units or departments actually sit on that Board, which is the 
National Crime Agency Board. That is the UK model today. 

When I said to this House that we are following the British model, Madam Speaker,  I 
explained that the NICS and the Asset Recovery Unit in the UK had merged into SOCA, and this 
is what we are doing today here in Mauritius. We are taking the Asset Recovery Unit, which is 
under the DPP’s Office, and we are putting it together with the FIU in a similar manner as to 
how SOCA was created and operated in the UK. 

Now, what do we plan to do next? Because what we are doing today, Madam Speaker, is 
not something in isolation. This Government has a vision, not only in terms of the economy, in 
terms of so many of the things that we are looking ahead, not only for the mandate of five years. 
We are looking at how to clean this country, with all the dirt which has been hanging in this 
country  for the last ten  years. We cannot do that overnight! We cannot  do that by looking  at 
cases like Betamax, Dufry and what not and everything that we have seen, Swiss Bank accounts, 
Air Mauritius Cargo and so on and so forth. We also have to put in place frameworks, structures 
and legislation. 

So, the amendments which are being brought to the Asset Recovery Act is correcting an 
anomaly, and I will explain that in a minute, in terms of the role of the DPP and why this had 
been placed under the DPP. So, that anomaly is being created and it is moving to the FIU, which 
is very similar to what happened in the UK back in 2007 and 2008. 

Now, we are also, as part of the Ministry of Institutional Reforms, looking at the whole 
issue of fraud in Mauritius because this is an issue which has never been addressed. In fact, there 
is  not  even  a  legal  definition  of  fraud  in  Mauritius.  If  we  ask  somebody  to  define  fraud,  he 
cannot. You will have to go to the Oxford dictionary meaning. In our Criminal Code, we have so 

 

150 

many things about embezzlement, swindling, larceny and what not, but no definition of fraud. 
We are going to create an Anti-Fraud Unit as well, which is going to deal with fraud and all the 
Ponzi schemes and everything that we have seen happening in this beautiful country. 

When all of that is done - the Declaration of Assets Act is also being amended, - Madam 
Speaker, then we will be ready to be able to create the Financial Crime Commission, and this 
will come in due course. What will be this Financial Crime Commission? Of course, it is going 
to include organisations like ICAC, which deals with corruption. We will have the newly formed 
Anti-Fraud  Unit,  which  is  going  to  deal  with  fraud.  We  will  have  the  FIU,  which  is  the 
intelligence service. We will have the Asset Recovery Agency, which recovers the assets, and 
probably we will also have the enforcement department of the FSC to deal with issues which can 
arise,  in  terms  of  white-collar  crime  on  stock  exchange,  in  terms  of  the  Securities  Act,  the 
Financial Services Act and so on and so forth. 

The Financial Crime Commission will be an apex body - we said it before -, an umbrella 
organisation. Who will sit on that Board? All the directors of all these agencies! What will this 
create? It is going to create the synergy which has been missing in our system to address white-
collar  crime  in  general.  You  would  have  your  intelligence  service  getting  the  report, 
disseminating the report, the Asset Recovery Unit doing what it has to do to recover the assets; 
the ICAC which is investigating getting in terms of corrupt cases to prosecute people, and also 
you will have the whole aspect of combating money laundering as well. This is where we are 
heading. 

The  question  is:  “Could  we  do  today  what  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  had 
requested,  could  we  create  the  FCC  today?”  And  the  simple  answer  is:  “No,  we  can’t  do  it 
today.” Why can’t we? 

(Interruptions) 

We will certainly do it as soon as possible. 

(Interruptions) 

But  as  soon  as  possible  will  mean  -  and  I  will  explain  -  amending  so  many  legislations,  the 
Prevention  of  Corruption  Act,  the  Financial  Intelligence  Anti-Money  Laundering  Act,  the 
Financial  Services  Act,  the  Asset  Recovery  Act,  so  many  of  our  legislations  which  will  have 

 

151 

ramification  in  terms  of  creating  this  new  umbrella  organisation.  Once  we  have  this  in  place, 
then that’s it. Then we are fully equipped in our country to combat crime. The same goes about 
the Integrity  Reporting Service Agency and the Board which is dealing with unexplained wealth 
orders, there is no reason in the world why that also would not be part of that Financial Crime 
Commission which will oversee the whole aspects and that was the missing part of the jigsaw in 
our arsenal to fight white-collar crime and it fits in.  

So, today, we are starting this process with the Asset Recovery Act, we are starting this 
process, we are taking the Asset Recovery Unit from the DPP as Enforcement Officer as he was 
and we are placing it under the FIU. But I think now everybody will have a full picture of what is 
the  overall  vision  and  where  we  are  heading  and  why  this  is  going  to  be  beneficial  for  our 
country going forward.  

Now, Madam Speaker, in terms of what has been said about the DPP, so many examples 
have  been  given  by  hon.  Mohamed  and  also  my  friend,  hon.  Uteem.  Let’s  really  understand 
certain real issues, Madam Speaker. The lawyer in the DPP’s Office who was responsible for the 
Asset Recovery Unit, he was also a Director on the Board of Sicom Financial Services and he 
also  went  to  Court  to  prosecute  cases.    So,  how  can  you  have  so  many  hats?  How  can  you 
basically be a member of the DPP’s Office – in fact, I think he was the  Senior Assistant DPP -  I 
don’t  know  what  the  title  was  but  that  particular  person  heading  the  Asset  Recovery  Unit 
because  it  needs  to  have  what  is  known  as  a  Chief  Investigating  Officer;  there  was  a  Chief 
Investigating Officer and then there is a lawyer. What would happen, for instance, if he, sitting as 
a Director on the Board of Sicom Financial Services, a case comes around where the assets are 
actually  held  by  Sicom.  What  does  he  do?  Can  he  actually  go  and  ask  for  a  restrained  order 
against  the  company  where  he  himself  is  the  Director?  This  is  the  kind  of  abuse  which  was 
happening. When we talk about the DPP - hon. Mohamed mentioned allergy, there is no allergy, 
there are real-life examples of what is happening on a daily basis!  And so much is being said 
about  political  interference,  political  nominees,  political  tools  and  I  don’t  know  how  many 
adjectives are being used with the word political, but Mr Ajit Boolell is the brother of Dr. Arvin 
Boolell. That is the truth! 

Madam Speaker: Please, please, please!  Minister, please proceed! 

(Interruptions) 

 

152 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Jhugroo, don’t interrupt!  Hon. Uteem also, please don’t interrupt! Hon. Uteem, I have just 
said please don’t interrupt! 

Mr Bhadain: I very much believe, Madam Speaker, that if we are to make progress in 
Mauritius, we have to basically address issues as they are because these are real-life examples. 
This is what happens. Hon. Mohamed mentioned that in St Petersburg, I had referred to the DPP 
in my speech before the United Nations Convention. Now, it would be good for the House to 
know that, in fact, a similar case happened in Jamaica and in Jamaica what happened was the 
DPP  was  being  investigated  for  corruption  and  he  ran  to  Court  to  ask  for  an  order  for  the 
investigation to be stopped for that institution which is similar to ICAC, not to investigate him 
and the offence for which the DPP in Jamaica was being investigated was, in fact, conflict of 
interest and the case over there was heard the same day as the case was heard over here, the 10 of 
November.  

Now,  what  was  explained  to  the  United  Nations  Convention,  that,  as  a  Small  Island 
Developing State, there are certain similarities which occur in other SIDS countries which also 
happens in Mauritius and we have certain specificities in terms of SIDS countries. Everytime we 
talk about copying legislations from the UK, from Australia, from Canada, from so many other 
countries. But would these legislations serve our purpose over here?  Would it really address the 
needs of our society in Mauritius?  And this is why when we are looking at today, taking the 
Asset Recovery Unit from the DPP with all the anomalies and the constitutional issues which 
have been raised over the years and we are placing it under the FIU, I ask the question, we can’t 
have the FCC now, we know, it can’t happen straightaway, where do you put it? You put it with 
ICAC?  Because the law on  ICAC was changed, when  ICAC had powers to track properties, 
could issue monitoring orders, forfeiture orders and what not to create the Asset Recovery Unit 
and all these sections of the PoCA were repealed to create the Asset Recovery Agency under this 
Act and then powers were given to the DPP for retroactivity and burden of proof and what not.  
And now when we are basically going forward with the FCC which is going to be there, where 
do we put it. The only place you can realistically decide to accommodate the asset recovery as 
the hon. Deputy Prime Minister, hon. Xavier-Luc  Duval had stated back then. When he said the 
FIU  would  have  been  an  appropriate  place  where  the  asset  recovery  could  be.  This  was 

 

153 

mentioned  by  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  today  and  then  the  hon.  Leader  of  the 
Opposition  stated  that  probably  it  was  not  because  of  his  brillant  arguments  that  this  did  not 
happen, but it was probably because the Rt. hon. Prime Minister of the day chose otherwise. But 
the proposal of the Deputy Prime Minister, hon. Xavier-Luc Duval was well thought of. Why? 
Because when we look at the abuse which happened with the DPP being the enforcement officer, 
the case which was referred to when he decided to go and look into the bank accounts through 
this new power. In fact, that was another power which was introduced in November 2012, giving 
him the power to go and look into bank accounts without a judge’s order, customer information 
in financial institutions, he could go and have a look at it without asking a judge for an order 
before doing so, no safeguards. 

(Interruptions) 

I will explain why. This is exactly why hon. Duval was right because the FIU already 
have  this  power!  Because  the  FIU  is  the  only  institution  in  Mauritius  which  can  go  and  ask 
information  about  bank  accounts  without  a  judge’s  order  as  the  Financial  Intelligence  Anti-
Money  Laundering  Act  is.    When  you  are  taking  the  power  which  is  there  under  the  Asset 
Recovery Act and placing it with the FIU, you are not creating any additional powers. You are, 
in fact, giving the same powers to the FIU which it already has; the FSC does not have that; the 
ICAC does not have that; the DPP does not have that, but the FIU does. This is the reason why 
we have decided that the FIU is the appropriate institution where the Asset Recovery Agency can 
operate from. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah, he can defend himself! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, we have also been told that the Asset Recovery Agency 
does asset tracing.  We know what is asset tracing. Asset tracing is basically to go and find out 
the trail in terms of where assets are hidden with a purpose to recover that. What do you need to 
be  able  to  trace  assets?    You  need  information!    And  which  is  the  organisation  in  Mauritius 
which  is  there  to  get  all  the  information  from  the  banks  and  STR’s  which  are  raised  –  the 
Intelligence  Unit,  the  FIU.  So,  doesn’t  it  make  sense  to  have  the  Intelligence  Unit  which  is 

 

154 

getting all the information to pass it on to the Asset Recovery Unit which has then to trace those 
assets with a view to recover them? So much has been said - hon. Uteem is still having some 
apprehension but let me reassure him on one thing.  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhadain: Let me explain! Hon. Ganoo has rightly explained to this House that you 
have different types of FIU’s;  you have administrative FIU’s;  you have law enforcement type 
FIU’s,  and  you  have  hybrid  type  FIU’s.  Different  models  operate  in  different  countries 
depending on the needs of society. Why should we keep copying? When are we going to start 
leading?  This  Government  is  about  creating  a  vision  and  we  have  been  duly  elected  by  the 
people. We have been given a mandate and we intend to basically go and do what we have told 
the people we are going to do, clean up this country. Now, we must be able to do it in the way 
that we want to do it and not in the way that other people in Mauritius want it to be done.  

When we are placing people in institutions, so much is being said: political tool. Now, I 
put  the  question  to  the  House:  how  can  this  be  used  as  a  political  tool  when  everything  is 
affidavit-based and evidence-based before a judge in the Supreme Court? I would want to know 
how this can be used as a political tool because whatever you do, you will have to end up before 
the Judiciary and it is only the Judiciary which can decide whether to grant an order or not grant 
an order to seize an asset. So, how can you use that as a political tool, unless you are politically 
controlling the Judiciary?  

(Interruptions) 

Is that possible? So, all this nonsense, toute cette démagogie sur outils politiques, it has to stop. 
Let  us  be  professional,  let  us  be  realistic,  and  let  us  be  honest.  According  to  law,  I  put  the 
question to my learned friend, hon. Uteem, who is a barrister at law: can we actually use that as a 
political tool or can he use it tomorrow as a political tool, if ever he comes into Government, 
against any other opponent? It can’t, even if you wish to do so, you can’t. So, what is this whole 
debate about political tool? You have to go to court. The judge decides.  

Yes. Absolutely!  

(Interruptions) 

 

Bank accounts… 

155 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem, you will continue to interrupt him! 

Mr Bhadain: Bank accounts: Madam Speaker, the FIU already is the only organisation 
in Mauritius which can have access to any bank account without going to court, that’s already 
there in the Financial Intelligence and Anti-Money Laundering Act. When the Asset Recovery 
Agency is housed in the FIU, there is no special or extra power which is being given in terms of 
bank accounts. It is already there. 

Madam Speaker: Please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhadain: Well, fair enough! Fair enough! I mean, I am very much appreciate when 
the hon. Leader of the Opposition is saying the purpose changes, that’s true because now we are 
also recovering assets, but who will decide to act on that bank information? Is it the Executive? It 
is the Judiciary. It is the judge. So, where is the potential for abuse, where is the potential for 
using this as a political tool? Whether Mr Ollivry is there or his brother is there or anybody else 
is there, it is the judge who will decide. So, this nonsense has to stop.  

Now, the other thing, Madam Speaker, a lot has been said about the fact that I mentioned 
that the Asset Recovery Agency had recovered only Rs9 m., but that is a fact. After passing that 
law, well proclaimed in February 2012, giving all these powers in November 2012, and when I 
mentioned retroactivity of 10 years, reversal of burden of proof and the standard of proof being 
balance of probabilities, I forgot to mention that customer information also was included in there 
to  allow  the  DPP  to  go  and  look  at  all  the  bank  accounts.  You  know  how  dangerous  this  is, 
Madam Speaker, because it mentions the bank accounts, it mentions a financial institution. He 
can  look,  get  access  to  customer  information  in  financial  institution  and  if  you  look  at  the 
Financial  Services  Development  Act  2001  which  was  then  replaced  by  the  Financial  Services 
Act  2007,  financial  institution  includes  a  management  company.  You  are  talking  about 
confidentiality  in  the  offshore  sector  in  Mauritius,  the  DPP  can  go  -  and  not  normal  bank 
accounts,  domestic  bank  accounts  of  Mauritians  -  and  look  at  all  GBL1  and  GBL2,  basically 
putting in jeopardy the whole offshore sector in Mauritius, the global business sector, because 

 

156 

when  somebody  sends  his  money  to  Mauritius,  it  is  on  the  basis  that  that  ultimate  beneficial 
owner who is sitting there has a reassurance that our confidentiality provisions in our law prevent 
anybody  from  going  and  looking  into  his  global  business  company  account.  My  friend,  hon. 
Uteem, knows that better than anybody else. He has been practising in that field of law. The DPP 
could and the DPP did look at account in one particular case and he did it for a personal reason.  

 (Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No! Please!  

Mr Bhadain: And, this is the kind of abuse… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Minister! 

Mr Bhadain: And the hon. Leader of the Opposition… 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Minister, please,  you cannot impute motives! I would ask  you 

not to impute motives! 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, I am not imputing motives because it is a fact. The reason 
why I say that, is because the person who rang the alarm bells and for whom I have very much 
respect is the hon. Leader of the Opposition back in 2013. He was the only one who had the guts 
to come out and say: ‘Look, we were all wrong and we made a mistake. We cannot give the DPP 
that kind of power and what he is doing with that power is he is abusing that power.’ 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  Now,  hon.  Minister,  you  cannot  talk  on  the  conduct  of  the  DPP. 

Please, refrain from talking on the conduct of the DPP. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, I certainly can’t talk about the conduct of the DPP, but I 

will say it again, I will congratulate the hon. Leader of the Opposition for having… 

Now, Madam Speaker, if we look at… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

Madam Speaker: Order! Order, please! 

157 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, if we could just envisage one scenario, I am not saying 
that  has  happened,  but  I  am  saying  you  could  have  a  situation,  the  law  would  allow  for  a 
situation where the DPP as enforcement officer of the Asset Recovery Unit could go and check 
the  bank  accounts  that  he  wishes  to  check,  on  the  one  hand.  After  having  ascertained  this 
information, he could then use his powers under section 72 to charge a person, because he is the 
one  who  charges  people  by  putting  formal  charges  and  sending  cases  to  court,  prosecute 
somebody. Once he has done that, he can then use his powers again under the Asset Recovery 
Act to issue restraint orders. After having done that, he then send his guy to court to prosecute 
the case under section 72 and when he obtains a conviction with his powers under section 72, he 
could then go and confiscate these assets. This is how lethal that combination of powers is. The 
FIU  has  no  power  to  prosecute,  Madam  Speaker.  It  is  not  the  same  as  merging  that  with  the 
DPP’s Office. When we look at the whole structure, the communiqué of the DPP true it is to his 
credit, I must say, he issued a communiqué earlier this year to say that he had no objection. Now, 
he has no objection that the Government proposes to take the Asset Recovery Agency and put it 
under the FIU. That is not something which is objectionable in his mind. However, when I came 
to  this  House  to  say  and  just  to  clarify  -  yes,  the  communiqué  reads  that  the  Office  of  the 
Director of Public Prosecutions has never expressed any reservation with the decision of Cabinet 
to transfer the Asset Recovery Unit to the Financial Intelligence Unit. This is an administrative 
decision which is within the powers of the Government to change by way of legislation and this 
is the response to what you know.  I can understand my hon. friend Shakeel Mohamed after the 
recent events, but what he had said does not even make sense because the DPP, himself, does not 
have a problem with it and he is mentioning Cabinet’s decision.  

Now, the hon. Attorney General has been my lawyer and he has explained to this House 
how I was given the document when I came for my speech the other day and I referred to the 
documents  by  saying  that  the  Attorney  General’s  Office  had  not  previously  tabled  these 
documents before this House. It is a mistake. I hold my hands up and I say that I was misled by 
people who had told me that this was so and my friend, the hon. Attorney General, has already 
explained it. 

(Interruptions) 

 

158 

But then, I mentioned that Rs9 m. had been recovered by the Asset Recovery Unit since 2012, 
and that’s a fact, Madam Speaker. It is only Rs9 m. which has been recovered. Everything else 
which has been said, and I will explain it to the House, that Rs294 m. are subject to freezing 
orders.  When you read it in French, some people in Mauritius might be confused thinking that 
this money has been seized because it says - 

“L’Asset Recovery Unit a aussi, avec la permission de la cour, effectué la saisie de 56 
lopins de terre, 119 appartements (…). » 

And then, it goes on to say - 

 « (…) diverses sommes d’argent représentant environ R294 millions.”. 

But it is not saisie as such, like we say in creole, ‘inn saisi’.  We are talking about freezing 
orders.  These  assets  have  been  frozen.  The  question,  Madam  Speaker,  would  be:  frozen  until 
when?  Because when we look at that Rs294 m. which has been frozen, most of which is in the 
case of Sunkai and White Dot.  They were back accounts where money had been kept and it was 
only a five minutes’ job to go to Court and ask for this account to be frozen.   

Now,  when  those  funds  have  been  frozen,  what  happens  next?    When  will  they  be 
recovered like the Rs9  m. that  I mentioned? When?  It is when the Police  finishes its enquiry 
which has not happened yet. It will be when the file is sent to the DPP’s office. Then, they will 
take their time to decide under which offence to prosecute and they might not prosecute. What 
happens if you don’t prosecute?  You return the money! You return the Rs294 m.! Now, if he 
decides to prosecute, then it goes before the Intermediate Court of Mauritius and trial will take 
whatever:  three,  four  or  five  years.  And  after  trial,  probably  there  is  going  to  be  an  appeal 
process which is going to kick in and that might go all the way to the Privy Council. This is the 
flaw with the system. This is why assets are not recovered.  And I said before this House, only 
Rs9 m. has been recovered by the Asset Recovery Unit between 2012 to 2014. I am now going to 
say something else! Only Rs6 m. has gone into the Consolidated Fund.  Since the creation of the 
Asset Recovery Unit, only Rs6 m. has gone into the Consolidated Fund.  Now, this is exactly 
what happened in the UK.   

I am going to quote from ‘The Guardian’ newspaper, the heading –  

“60 million Assets Recovery Agency to be scrapped”  

 

And it goes on to say – 

159 

“The body would be merged with the Serious Organised Crime Agency, SOCA, in April 
2008”  

And it goes on to explain how basically that particular agency has not been able to deliver as per 
the expectations.  In fact, it has cost more than what it had recovered. 

In those two articles, BBC News said exactly the same thing –  

“An agency set up to seize criminal assets has cost taxpayers around £60 m. despite only 
recovering just over £8 m. from lawbreakers since 2003”.  

£8 m. recovered, £60 m. spent! That’s in the UK.  Over here, Rs6 m. into the Consolidated Fund!  
That’s why the Criminal Recovery System does not even work and that is why we need civil 
orders; that is why we need unexplained wealth orders. And this is coming next week, Madam 
Speaker! 

Now, I am going to refer to the report which was published by Grant Shapps, MP, House 
of Commons, London; report into the Underperformance of the Assets Recovery Agency.  It is 
fantastic  reading,  I  must  say,  but  I  am  going  to  quote  only  one  paragraph  which  probably 
everybody will now understand why I stated Rs9 m. and not the Rs290 m. freezing orders which 
were obtained. I quote – 

“The  Government  makes  much  about  the  number  of  cases  under  investigation  and  the 
fact  that  £68.45  m.  worth  of  assets  are  subject  to  freezing  orders.  Freezing  orders  are 
certainly a useful tool – but what the Government has failed to address is the ability to 
actually recover these frozen assets. Applying for a freezing order is one thing – selling 
off the proceeds of crime for the benefit of the public is quite another.” 

And what they have done is they have collected only Rs9 m. and they have put only Rs6 

m. into the Consolidated Accounts.  I have not misled anybody and I stand by what I said.   

(Interruptions) 

Now, that’s a very interesting question! What happened to the Rs3 m. - Rs9 m. less Rs6 

m.?  These were apparently used - if I go by the annual reports - to pay expenses. 

(Interruptions) 

 

160 

I would probably leave that to the hon. Attorney General to enlighten people as to what the 

Rs3 m. was used for. 

(Interruptions) 

That’s the truth, absolute truth! These are facts. 

 (Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, in terms of the other issues which have been raised, I do understand the 
hon. Leader of the opposition had raised an issue in terms of the FIU being mentioned in one 
particular section and the Director of the FIU being mentioned in the other section. If we go to 
the IGCA, the Interpretation of General Clauses Act, it does not make any difference whether it 
is the FIU or the Director of the FIU.  So, we are not going to come up with any amendments on 
this particular issue, although it was a good point which was raised.  

(Interruptions) 

I am just going through my notes very quickly.  Again, I would very much agree with the Vice-
Prime Minister, hon. Collendavelloo, when he explained about those two nuances and it is true, 
this is a bridge.  Hon. Uteem mentioned a temporary measure, I agree.  It is a temporary measure 
until we can have this proper structure with the Financial Crime Commission and even the Good 
Governance Integrity Reporting Bill and what we are coming up with in terms of the Integrity 
Reporting Agency and the Board.  It will also fit into the Financial Crime Commission which 
will be a one-stop shop for the fight against white-collar crimes in Mauritius. 

The last point, probably, Madam Speaker, was in terms of reassuring the House, as hon. 
Ganoo had mentioned, that similar structures exist in other countries as well.  In my speech, I 
mentioned Cyprus, MOKAS, for instance in Cyprus; how both the Asset recovery Agency and 
the FIU operate. I mentioned Channel Islands in Jersey.  That’s exactly the same structure there 
and in the Seychelles also.  As I stated, in the UK also, this was the structure until the National 
Crime Agency came into play in 2013.   

Madam Speaker, let me finish by saying this. When we have been elected by the people in 
Mauritius, it was on the basis of two things. If I have to recap everything, it is : nettoyé le pays et 
venir avec un deuxième miracle économique.  When we decided to create a Ministry for Good 
Governance, it was also decided to link institutional reforms into that because we needed to look 

 

161 

at structure.  Nettoyé, c’est bien, Madam Speaker, mais ne pas salir c’est mieux.  What we are 
doing today is we are putting the structure pour ne pas salir so that the system will work. For the 
last 10 years, we all know what has happened in this country. If you take a youngster of 25 years 
today,  he  has  only  known  the  last  10  years.  So,  he  was  15,  probably,  when  Mr  Navin 
Ramgoolam became the Prime Minister of Mauritius and basically now he is 25 years old and he 
is going to, probably, look at his future in terms of finding a job, buying a house, getting married, 
having  a  descent  career  and  that  person  does  not  even  have  an  opportunity  to  succeed  in  life 
because the system which is operating is preventing him to do that. And we are a small country, 
as I explained to the United Nations.  We are a SIDS country.  We have got 1.2 million people.  
We have got 720 square miles of land and, at the end of the day laws which are applicable in 
bigger, much bigger countries might not suit our purpose.  

So, we have sat down with the experts, with everybody and we have tried to see, for the 
first time probably, what are the needs of Mauritian society and where do we need to go, how far 
we need to go to address those needs of society.  And what are those needs of society?  That’s 
the rule of law.  The rule of law is basically what society needs for society to function and when 
we have looked at those reforms, we have said that we need to correct certain anomalies and 
then, we have to come up with a new system. Today, we are correcting the anomaly, Madam 
Speaker.  Next week, we are coming with a new system and that’s the start of it. 

With this, Madam Speaker, I commend this Bill to the House. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Bill read a second time and committed. 

COMMITTEE STAGE 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

THE ASSET RECOVERY (AMENDMENT) BILL 

(NO. XXXI OF 2015) 

Clauses 1 to 4 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 5 (Section 5 of principal Act amended) 

The Chairperson: Amendment! 

 
Mr Bhadain: No amendment. 

162 

The Chairperson: No? The amendment that you have circulated? 

Mr Bhadain: No, there is no amendment, Madam Speaker.  

The  Chairperson:  You  had  circulated  an  amendment,  hon.  Minister.  Are  you 

withdrawing this amendment? 

Mr Bhadain:  I believe  it has been circulated by the State Law Office, but there is no 

amendment, Madam Speaker. I do apologise for that. 

The  Chairperson:  Would  you  wish  to  take  cognizance  of  the  amendment  that  was 

circulated? 

Mr Bhadain: Yes, Madam Speaker.  There is certainly no amendment, Madam Speaker. 

Thank you. 

The Chairperson: Okay! 

Clause 5 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clauses 6 to 12 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

The title and enacting clause were agreed to. 

The Asset Recovery (Amendment) Bill (No. XXXI of 2015) was considered and agreed to. 

On the Assembly resuming with Madam Speaker in the Chair, Madam Speaker reported 

accordingly. 

Third Reading 

On motion made and seconded, the Asset Recovery (Amendment) Bill (No. XXXI of 2015) 

was read the third time and passed. 

ADJOURNMENT 

The Ag. Prime  Minister: Madam Speaker,  I beg to move that this Assembly do now 

adjourn to Wednesday 02 December 2015 at 11.30 a.m. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

 
Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned. 

163 

At 9.00 p.m., the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Wednesday 02 December 2015 

at 11.30 a.m. 

WRITTEN ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

POLICE DES JEUX – ARRESTS 

(No. B/946) Mr A. Ameer Meea (Second Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port 
Louis East) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Brigade des Jeux, he will, 
for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to – 

(a) 

(b) 

the number of – 
Police Officers attached thereto, and 
(i) 
arrests effected by officers thereof over the past two years, and 
(ii) 
if additional measures will be taken to address the illegal betting issue. 

Reply:  I  refer  the  hon.  Member  to  replies  made  to  Parliamentary  Questions  B/59  and  

B/156 as regards part (a) (i) of the question. 

As  regards  part  (a)  (ii),  I  am  advised  that,  since  2013  to  date,  36  arrests  have  been 
effected and 25 cases have been established by officers of the Brigade des Jeux, more commonly 
known as the Police des Jeux. 

With  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  wish  to  reassure  the  House,  here,  that  this 
Government is committed to eradicate the scourge of illegal betting. For this purpose, a series of 
measures have been/are being initiated. 

The  regulatory  and  institutional  framework  is  being  strengthened  to  discourage  illegal 
betting.  For  instance,  the  Gambling  Regulatory  Authority  Act  has  been  amended,  under  the 
Finance  Miscellaneous  (Provisions)  Act  2015,  to  increase  the  penalties,  including  fines  and 
imprisonment terms, in respect of illegal betting. 

Concerted and co-ordinated actions are being taken by officers of the Mauritius Revenue 
Authority,  Gambling  Regulatory  Authority  and  ‘Police  des  Jeux’  for  more  effective  tracking 
down of offenders. 

The Inspectorate and Investigation Division of the Gambling Regulatory Authority and 
the Police des Jeux are being reinforced both in terms of numbers and capacity. One of the main 

 

164 

duties of the two Commissioners of the Commission of Enquiry on Horseracing in Mauritius, 
Messrs.  Ben  Gunn  and  Paul  Scotney,  whose  services,  have  been  enlisted,  will  be  to  provide 
training to these officers to detect and deal with illegal betting. 

The Gambling Regulatory Authority is initiating discussion with stakeholders for putting 
in place a responsible gambling programme, which will include a component on educating the 
society on the drawbacks and risks of having recourse to illegal betting. 

In addition, the following additional measures are being taken to address illegal betting – 

Close  monitoring  of  all  persons  who  have  in  the  past  been  involved  in  illegal 
betting; 

Regular check on Bookmakers is being carried out; 

Involvement of the Cybercrime  Unit, for cyber  patrol, with a view to detecting 
illegal betting through online services; 

Sensitisation of law abiding citizens and encouraging them to reveal to and share 
information of and on suspicious gambling activities with the Police through the 
Police Hotline 148, and 

 Introduction of a reward system for informers for providing genuine information 
on illegal betting to the Police des Jeux. 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

(v) 

 

PONT LARDIER - WATER TREATMENT PLANT - CONSTRUCTION 

(No. B/986) Mr K. Tarolah (Third Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) asked 
the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to the project 
for  the  construction  of  a  water  treatment  plant  at  Pont  Lardier,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the 
House, obtain from the Central Water Authority, information as to the – 

(a) name of the consultant appointed therefor, and  
(b) budget earmarked therefor. 
Reply: I am informed by the Central Water Authority that an Expression of Interest for 
the  consultancy  services  contract  for  feasibility  study,  design,  and  supervision  of  works  was 
launched in July 2015. The evaluation exercise is on-going at the Central Water Authority and 
the shortlisted consultants will shortly be invited to submit their proposals. 

165 

 
I  am  further  informed  by  the  CWA  that  the  consultant  is  expected  to  be  appointed  by 
March  2016.  The  construction  works  are  scheduled  to  start  in  June  2017  and  completed  by 
December 2018. 

As regard part (b) of the question, I am informed that an amount of Rs458 m. has been 
earmarked for the construction of the Pont Lardier water treatment plant including the cost of 
consultancy services. 

GENDER EQUALITY 

(No. B/987) Mrs D. Selvon (Second Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the Minister of Gender Equality, Child Development and Family Welfare whether, in regard to 
the status of women in Mauritius, she will state the initiatives and remedial measures taken by 
her  Ministry  to  address  the  issues  in  relation  thereto,  following  her  statement  before  United 
Nations Commission, on 17 March 2015, and following the Report thereof in which it is reported 
that despite the political will to reduce gender gaps, critical issues such as physical and sexual 
abuse, high poverty and unemployment rates, under-representation of women in Parliament and 
patriarchal attitudes remain. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

PUBLIC SERVICE - GENDER EQUALITY 

(No. B/988) Mrs D. Selvon (Second Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the Minister of Gender Equality, Child Development and Family Welfare whether, in regard to 
gender discrimination against women in the public service and in other sectors of the economy in 
terms  of  recruitment,  promotions,  scholarships,  overseas  missions  and  appointments,  she  will 
state if her Ministry has collected or will collect data in respect thereof and table copy thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

GRNW – KOVIL – DEVOTEES - SAFETY 

(No. B/989) Mrs D. Selvon (Second Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked the 
Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the kovil overlooking 
the Grand River North West, located close to the junction between the Royal Road and the road 
leading to Pointe aux Sables, he will state if consideration will be given for the carrying out of an 
assessment of possible threats to the safety of the devotees attending thereat, especially in the 

 

166 

course  of  the  holding  of  ceremonies  involving  large  crowds,  indicating  if  assistance  will  be 
granted to the Managing Committee thereof in terms of expert advice in relation thereto or in any 
other form as appropriate in the circumstance. 

(Withdrawn) 

LIQUOR & ALCOHOLIC PRODUCTS – ‘ON AND OFF’ LICENCE  

(No. B/991) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) asked 
the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the retailers of liquor 
and  of  alcoholic  beverages,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Mauritius 
Revenue Authority, information as to the number thereof holding On and Off licences therefor, 
indicating the number of such licences which have been issued on a yearly basis since 2010 to 
date. 

Reply:  I  am  informed  by  the  Mauritius  Revenue  Authority  that  there  is  currently  983 

holders of “On and Off” licence for retail sale of liquor and alcoholic products. 

Regarding  the  number  of  “On  and  Off”  licence  for  retail  sale  of    liquor  and  alcoholic 
products licence issued on a yearly basis since 2010 to date, I am informed that 13 new licences 
were issued in 2010 and no new licences were issued for the period 2011 to date. 

 

INTERNET - FILTERING SOFTWARE  

(No. B/992) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) asked 
the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms,  Minister  of 
Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the internet, he will state if he 
will consider the advisability of better regulating access to the pornographic contents thereon, 
especially  to  protect  our  children  from  being  exposed  thereto,  in  the  light  of  the  increasing 
number of households connected thereto. 

Reply: Blocking and filtering technologies are far more effective and far more flexible 
than any law.  The tools are designed to be easy to use for parents who may not be as computer 
savvy as their children.  In that respect, the Authority will provide a list of freely downloadable 
filtering software (for both desktop computers and mobile devices) available on its website as 
well as instructions for their installations and usage.  This measure will be made known to the 
public  through  appropriate  sensitisation  campaigns  and  will  allow  parents  to  enable  parental 
blocks on the computers/mobile devices of their children.  The Ministry is also looking into the 

 

167 

possibility for ISPs to provide assistance to those parents who would not be able to enable the 
blocks, whereby the parents would send a formal request to the ISPs to do so on their behalf. 

The Ministry has also embarked on an ICT awareness campaign in collaboration with the 
Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation, and sensitisation of the public on safer use of the Internet 
would be a regular feature in that programme. 

 

POVERTY - MARSHALL PLAN  

(No. B/993) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) asked 
the Minister of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment whether, in regard to poverty, he 
will state if he will consider establishing an interdepartmental committee to deal therewith in a 
more holistic results-oriented and cost-effective manner and, if so, when. 

Reply: Since my assumption of office  as Minister of Social  Integration  and Economic 
Empowerment,  regular  consultative  meetings  have  been  held  together  with  my  colleague 
Ministers  and  with  other  Ministries,  non-governmental  organisations  and  the  private  sector  to 
address poverty in an integrated, holistic and sustainable manner. This is vital with a view to 
enlisting  their  full  collaboration  and  creating  more  synergy  given  that  poverty  is  multi-
dimensional, multi-faceted and cannot be eradicated overnight.  

Such meetings and consultations, which are on-going, will be formalised following the 

adoption of the Marshall Plan by Government.  

Moreover,  the  National  Poverty  Observatory  will  act  as  a  permanent,  consultative  and 
diversified  platform  to,  inter  alia,  bring  together  all  stakeholders  engaged  in  the  fight  against 
poverty  to  address  poverty  issues,  monitor  and  evaluate  poverty  alleviation  programmes  and 
monitor the implementation of the recommendations of the Marshall Plan. 

CUREPIPE  CASINO - RENOVATION WORKS 

 

(No. B/994) Mr S. Mohamed (First Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port Louis 
East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
Casino at Curepipe, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Casinos de Maurice, 
information  as  to  if  quotations  were  received  for  drywall  partition,  doors  and  other  related 
renovation works to be carried out thereat and, if so, indicate –  
 
(a) the name of the selected subcontractors therefor, and  

 
(b) which firm submitted the report on the quotations, evaluation and recommendations 

168 

for the award of the contract therefor. 

Reply: As the House is aware, casinos have been making losses over a number of years. 
In an endeavour to reduce losses, SIC Management Services Ltd has embarked on a number of 
cost-cutting  measures.  It  is  in  this  context  that  the  SIC  Management  Services  Ltd  decided  to 
move from a rented building in Curepipe to the unutilised space available at Curepipe casino. 
Consequently,  there  was  a  need  to  carry  out  certain  renovation  works  to  make  the  unutilised 
spaces in the premises of the Curepipe Casino suitable for offices. 

I am informed by the SIC Management Services Ltd that quotations were received from 
Nandanee Fit Out & Interiors Ltd and P. Mungur and Son Ltd for drywall partitioning, doors and 
other related renovation works at the Curepipe Casino.  

With regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed that the contract was awarded in 

July 2015 to P. Mungur and Son Ltd, the lowest bidder.  

Concerning  part  (b)  of  the  question,  Wong  So  &  Associates  Ltd  which  has  been 
providing  its  services  to  the  SIC  Group  since  2005,  evaluated  the  proposals  and  made 
recommendation for the award of the contract.  

MBC PROGRAMMES - MINISTER OF FINANCIAL SERVICES, GOOD 

GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL REFORMS, MINISTER OF TECHNOLOGY, 

COMMUNICATION AND INNOVATION - PARTICIPATION 

(No. B/996) Mr S. Mohamed (First Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port Louis 
East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms, 
Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the programmes 
of the Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation in which he participated, he will, for the benefit of the 
House,  obtain  from  the  Corporation,  information  as  to  the  cost  incurred  for  the  production 
thereof. 

Reply: The Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation (MBC) has informed that with regard to 
the production of the relevant programmes, which were all in-house, no extra production cost has 
been incurred. A LED screen was rented for a total amount of Rs191,666 which was covered by 
advertising revenue collected of Rs265,950 leaving the MBC with a surplus of Rs74,284. 

169 

 
Hon. Reza Uteem also participated in creating that surplus for the MBC. 
The MBC has also informed that the newly introduced monthly debates are attracting a 

substantial audience and will be used as a model going forward in the future. 

 

MONT ROCHES - ST MARTIN ROAD - WIDENING 

(No. B/997) Mr A. Aliphon (Third Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) asked 
the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the road known as 
St  Martin  running  through  Mont  Roches,  he  will  state  if  consideration  will  be  given  for  the 
widening thereof to avert risks of accident thereat.  

Reply: I am informed by the Road Development Authority that the St Martin Road is a 
classified B road, known as B101.  It starts from Canot and ends at Hugnin Road.  It has two 
sharp bends which may cause problems of road safety. 

I am further informed that the road runs partly through urban and non-urban areas.   It 

caters for two-way traffic, but difficulties arise when two heavy vehicles cross each other. 

Moreover, the road passes through the urban area of Mont Roches over the last 1.3 km 
with footpath on one side of the road only.  For the remaining 2.8 km, the road is bordered by 
sugar cane fields and grasslands with no provision of footpath.  Furthermore, the boundary walls 
of the St Martin cemetery and a church are also found along that road.  

I am informed that there have been five fatal accidents during the period 2007 to 2014.  
As it is an accident prone area, the RDA carried out a survey in November 2014 to look into the 
possibility of the widening of St Martin Road and the construction of footpath on the side of the 
cemetery.   These works can only be accommodated up to the urban area over a length of 2.8 km.  
The project will entail land acquisition of approximately 8500 m2.    

The widening of St Martin Road will facilitate traffic flow and enhance road safety. 

Pending the implementation of the project, the RDA and the TMRSU will effect a site 

visit and consider the following short term measures - 

•  speed calming measures such as speed cameras;  

 

170 

•  signalised and unsignalised pedestrian crossing;  

•  proper road markings and traffic signs; 

•  provide a visibility splay at the junction of the St Martin Road and the cemetery. 

 
 

 

