No. 02 of 2015 

 

 

1 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

TUESDAY 10 FEBRUARY 2015 

 

 

2 

CONTENTS 

 

 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

PAPERS LAID 

QUESTIONS (Oral) 

MOTIONS 

ADJOURNMENT 

QUESTIONS (Written) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, 

KCMG, QC  

Hon. Charles Gaëtan Xavier-Luc Duval, 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 

GCSK  

Communications 

Hon. Showkutally Soodhun 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public 

Utilities 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo 

Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 
Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Minister of Social Integration and Economic 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Empowerment 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 

Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and 

Sinatambou 

International Trade 

Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon. Mrs Marie-Aurore Marie-Joyce 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister of Gender Equality, Child Development and 

Perraud 

Family Welfare 

Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain 

Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and 

Institutional Reforms 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 

 

4 

Institutions 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 

Shipping and Outer Islands 

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, 

Minister of Environment, Sustainable Development and 

QPM 

Disaster and Beach Management  

Hon. Marie Roland Alain Wong Yen             Minister of Civil Service and Administrative  

Cheong, MSK 

 

 

 

       Reforms 

Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn                   Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, 

Employment and Training 

 

 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

 
Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

           Clerk Assistant 

 

 Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

 

Navin 

(Temporary  

Gopall, 
Mr 
Transfer to RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Badal, Mr Ramesh 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 02 of 2015 

 

                                       Sitting of 10 February 2015 

 

The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

   

 

  The National Anthem was played 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

NATIONAL ASSEMBLY - LUNCH ROOM - ACCESS  

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Members,  I  have  an  announcement  to  make  regarding 

access to the Lunch Room during the sittings of the National Assembly.  

I  refer  hon.  Members  to  the  announcement  made  by  my  predecessor,  on  06 
November  2007,  wherein  a  number  of  decisions  were  taken  with  a  view  to  reinforcing 
security within the precincts of the National Assembly. 

I have to inform hon. Members that I wish to maintain the same arrangements. 
Therefore, I wish to draw attention to the fact that access to the Lunch Room is and 

will be restricted as follows - 

•  Morning Tea         -  Hon. Members only 
•  Lunch and Dinner -  Hon. Members 
       
 
 
                                  - 

  -  
  - 

 
 

 
 

Special VVIP Guests (within my discretion) 
Parliamentary Counsel and representatives 
 Officers of the National Assembly and other officers on 
specific official duty. 
in  addition 

the  abovementioned,  members  of  

to 

•  Tea Break  

  -  
          the Press accredited with the National  Assembly. 

 
Hon.  Members,  I  rely  on  the  cooperation  of  one  and  all  for  the  strict  compliance 

 
     

 

with the above. 

Thank you. 

 

 

 

 

 

8 

PAPERS LAID 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table - 

A. 

 

Prime Minister’s Office – 

The  Reports  of  the  Director  of  Audit  on  the  Financial  Statements  of  the 
National Human Rights Commission for the year ended 30 June 2009 and for 
the period ended 31 December 2010. (In Original) 
 

B.   Ministry of Finance and Economic Development 

 
(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

(f) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(Amendment  of  Schedule)  Regulations  2015 

The  Income  Tax  (Amendment  of  Schedule)  Regulations  2015 
(Government Notice No.3 of 2015). 
 
The  Freeport 
(Government Notice No.4 of 2015). 
 
The  Value  Added  Tax  (Amendment  of  Schedule)  Regulations  2015 
(Government Notice No.5 of 2015). 
 
The Digest of International Travel and Tourism Statistics 2013.  
(In Original) 
 
The  Digest  of  External  Merchandise  Trade  Statistics  for  the  year 
2013. 
 (In Original) 
 
Loan  Agreement  on  Economic  and  Technical  Cooperation  between 
the Government of the Republic of Mauritius and the Government of 
the People’s Republic of China.  (In Original) 
 

C.  Ministry of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and 

Scientific Research – 

9 

 

The Annual Report 2012 of the Rabindranath Tagore Institute. (In Original) 

D.  Ministry of  Local Government  – 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(a)  The Beau Bassin/Rose Hill (Markets) (Amendment) Regulations 2014 

(Government Notice No.7 of 2015). 
 

(b)  The Barkly Fair (Amendment) Regulations 2014 (Government Notice  

No. 8 of 2015). 
 

(c)  The  Da  Patten  Fair  (Amendment)  Regulations  2014  (Government 

Notice No. 9 of 2015) 
 
 

(d)  The  Plaisance  Fair  (Amendment)  Regulations  2014  (Government 

Notice  
No. 10 of 2015). 
 

(e)  The Chebel Fair (Amendment) Regulations 2014 (Government Notice  

No.11 of 2015). 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

E.  Ministry of Arts and Culture – 

 

The Annual Report of the Mauritius Marathi Cultural Centre Trust for period   
July 2008 – June 2009 and July 2009 – December 2010. (In Original) 
 

F.  Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection  – 
 

The Rodrigues Consumer Protection (Control of Price of Taxable and Non-
Taxable Goods) (Amendment) Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 6 
of 2015). 

 

 

 

 

10 

ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

DR. NAVINCHANDRA RAMGOOLAM - FORMER PRIME MINISTER - 

PROVISIONAL CHARGES 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Rt. 
Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National 
Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  Dr.  Navinchandra  Ramgoolam,  GCSK,  FRCP, 
former Prime Minister, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of 
Police, information as to -  

(a) the provisional charges lodged against him;  

(b) if an objection to departure has been lodged against him, and  

(c) if he has been interrogated in relation to the -  

(i) Roches Noires bungalow case of July 2011;  
(ii) death of Mr A.K.R. in Police custody at the Rivière du Rempart Police Station, 

and  

(iii) case regarding the audio recording at Rivière du Rempart in December 2014.  
The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  in  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I  am 
informed by the Commissioner of Police that on Saturday 07 February 2015, the following 
charges were lodged against Dr. Navinchandra Ramgoolam, former Prime Minister - 

(i) 
(ii) 

“Conspiracy”, and 
“Money Laundering”. 

The enquiry is still in progress. 
Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  by  the 
Commissioner of Police that Police filed a “Prohibition Order” against Dr. Ramgoolam on 07 
February 2015, together with the Provisional Charges, to which the Bail and Remand Court 
acceded. 

Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  part  (c)  (i)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  by  the 
Commissioner  of  Police  that  Police  sought  to  interview  Dr.  Navinchandra  Ramgoolam  on 
Saturday 07 February 2015, at the Central CID, Line Barracks, in connection with the theft at 
Roches  Noires  bungalow  and  after  being  cautioned,  he  declined  to  give  his  statement  and 
informed that he would do so at a later stage. 

 

11 

Madam Speaker, in regard to part (c) (ii), as far as the case of the death of Mr A. K. R. 
in  Police  custody  at  Rivière  du  Rempart  Police  Station  is  concerned,  in  light  of  fresh 
information obtained on the case, a new enquiry is in progress, and so far Dr. Ramgoolam has 
not been interrogated. 

Madam Speaker, regarding part (c) (iii) of the question, relating to the audio recording 
at Rivière du Rempart in December 2014, I am informed that the enquiry into the case is in 
progress and Dr. Ramgoolam would be interrogated in due course. 

Mr Bérenger:  The Rt. hon. Prime Minister has informed us that… 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, I am sorry, I think I missed one page.   

Dr.  Navinchandra  Ramgoolam  appeared  before  the  Bail  and  Remand  Court  on  the 
same  day  and  was  granted  bail  subject  to  the  condition  that  he  furnishes  a  surety  of 
Rs200,000 and enters into a recognizance of Rs1 m. under each charge.  He was released on 
parole  by  the  Court  pending  his  attendance  at  Rivière  du  Rempart  and  Upper  Plaines 
Wilhems  District  Courts  respectively  on  09 February  2015  to  do  the  needful  in  relation  to 
surety and recognizance. 

On 09 February 2015, he appeared before the District Courts of Upper Plaines Wilhems 

and Rivière du Rempart and furnished the required sureties. 

I wish to point out that according to information obtained from the Commissioner of 
Police, in the course of the enquiry, searches carried out at the residences of the former Prime 
Minister at Desforges Street, Port Louis and Riverwalk, Floreal, have led to the securing of a 
substantial sum of money.  

Mr Bérenger:  Madam Speaker, we heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister saying that there 
are two provisional charges.  In the case of the one relating to money laundering, if the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister has gone through the provisional charge before the Court concerned, has 
it been brought to his attention that the provisional charge amongst other things reads thus, I 
quote - 

“(…)  was  found  in  possession  of  over  Rs4  m.  composed  of  Mauritian  rupees  and 
foreign  currencies  and  another  huge  amount  of  around  Rs200  m.,  suspected  to  be 
proceeds of corruption and bribe found in two safes seized by the Central CID which 
have to be forced opened, as access therewith is not available”. 

 

12 

Has the Rt. hon. Prime Minister tried to find out how can, in a provisional charge, be said that 
the two safes have not yet been opened, and yet there is a huge amount of Rs200 m. in those 
two safes yet to be opened? 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, we must not forget that this is just a provisional 
charge. The enquiry is still on.  The counting is not over and it was supposed to continue 
today  but,  unfortunately,  the  former  Prime  Minister  has  fallen  ill.    I  think  I  am  not  in  a 
position to answer to many supplementary questions because being given that he has not yet 
given his defence statement, being given that all the money has not yet been counted; I think 
any new information that may go out may cause a lot of prejudice to the enquiry. 

Mr Bérenger:  The Rt. hon. Prime Minister will have understood my point. Is it serious 
to put in a provisional charge that the safes have not yet been opened and yet the Police, the 
CID  knows  that  there  is  a  huge  amount  of  more  than  Rs200  m.,  concerning  safes  not  yet 
opened, according to themselves? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I suppose the Police has acted under information received.  

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, therefore, the first mention was of Rs200 m. Then I 
heard - because now you can’t say I didn’t say that – the Sergeant - not Sergeant-in-Chief – 
now in charge of the Press Office saying that he had talked to Police Officer Jangi and he had 
been told “li paret ki ena plis ki R 200 millions”.  En direct!  Then that figure was – by the 
same Police Officer, now Press Officer – said to be between Rs450 m. to Rs500 m.  That was 
yesterday  and today it has climbed up, according to the same Police  Officer, to Rs800 m. 
when, in fact, they have already started counting the money.  

The  Prime  Minister:    Well,  I  suppose  it  is  all  estimates,  but  I  can’t  answer  for  the 

Press Officer. 

Mr Bérenger:  Is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister saying that? Is he satisfied with the way 
Police is handling this case? If that is the trial by the Press, what is? Is the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister  satisfied  with  the  performance  of  that  new  Sergeant,  freshly  appointed  Press 
Officer?  He thinks he is a pop star.  I don’t know if the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has watched 
him, making jokes!  Since when does the Police whilst a prosecution is on, the enquiries are 
on, behave in that manner through the Press and the MBC?  Is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
satisfied with the way the Police is conducting the whole thing and whether, in the end, they 
are not going to mess up their own case? 

 

13 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  I  am  not  concerned  with  comments.    I  am  satisfied  the 
Police is handling the enquiry properly and it is only when the formal charge will be brought 
that we will know what is the exact amount. 

Mr Bérenger:  The amount is one thing, but the way the Police is conducting, I am 
surprised that a lawyer and Prime Minister is satisfied with the way the Police is behaving 
concerning the Press and the MBC, but chacun a son opinion, Madam Speaker.  I have seen 
that,  at  a  point  in  time,  apart  from  the  Police,  ICAC  surfaced.    Is  it  at  the  request  of 
Government or the Police that ICAC has stepped in? 

The Prime Minister: Well, from the information that I have, it was at the request of 

Police. 

Mr Bérenger:  Well, I am not suggesting that Rt. hon. Prime Minister should interfere 
in  the  details  of  the  enquiry,  but  does  he  not  agree  with  me  that,  at  this  stage,  the  Police 
should carry out its enquiry and ICAC should not be brought in? There is going to be a big 
polémique around ICAC; the one-man ICAC that we have, the way he was appointed; there is 
going to be a debate about that and it is now a one-man only, ICAC, and lawyers are lawyers.  
I can see on the horizon whatever happens they are going to challenge, the composition of 
ICAC, the legality of ICAC if ICAC steps in.  Will not the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree with 
me  –  I  will  deal  with  ICAC  later  on  –  that  ICAC  should  be  kept  out  of  even  the  money 
laundering aspect of the case? 

The  Prime  Minister:    Well,  if  that  is  so,  Counsels  for  the  former  Prime  Minister 
should have objected.  In fact, the hon. Attorney General was there at the invitation of the 
Police, there was objection and he went away. 

Mr Bérenger:  As far as the interdiction to leave the country is concerned, I think I 
heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister saying that it is only on the 7th when provisional charges 
were  put,  that  an  interdiction  to  leave  the  country  was  lodged  against  the  former  Prime 
Minister.  Is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister aware that, in fact, when the Bail and Remand Court 
granted bail to the former Prime Minister, it bluntly put it that she did not agree with that 
argument that he might leave the country, because - I quote the ruling of the Magistrate – 

“Had he wanted to escape justice, he had ample time to do so prior to his arrest.” 

 

14 

Does that explain why in a case like that, ample time was left to the suspect at this stage for 
him  to  leave  the  country  if  he  so  chooses  and  it  is  only  on  the  7th  that  an  Interdiction  to 
Departure was placed? 

The Prime Minister: Well, the Police thought it right at that time and this was the 

normal procedure. 

Mr Bérenger: Now that there is an interdiction - I am sure the hon. Prime Minister is 
aware  that  the  Court  is  to  step  in  -  if  the  accused  has  been  informed  that  there  is  an 
interdiction, then that interdiction, if he has been informed, lapses after 72 hours, unless the 
Police goes to the Court and obtains an order this time - not from the Police, but from the 
Court  -  to  interdict  him from  leaving  the  country.  Has  this  already  been  done?  Is  it  being 
done? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I have no information about that. 

Mr Bérenger: If I can move to the last part of my question. Concerning the Roches 
Noires bungalow affair, I think I heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister say that the former Prime 
Minister has not to date given a statement. He has said he will later on give a statement. Have 
all the other aspects of that inquiry into the Roches Noires bungalow affair been completed? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  the  inquiry  has  not  yet  been  completed,  because  the 
former Prime Minister has not given his statement so far. Once his statement is given, then 
the Police will consider whether other statements have to be recorded. 

Mr Bérenger: Concerning the other case, the death of Mr A.K.R. in Police custody at 
Rivière du Rempart Police station in July 2011, I heard the hon. Prime Minister say that a 
new inquiry has started and is in progress. It has been repeatedly reported in the press that 
one suspect of this aggression – supposedly aggression, theft and so on - is in detention. Is 
that the case? Is he formally under detention or is he being kept at the Special Mobile Force 
for whatever purpose? 

The Prime Minister: In which case is that? 

Mr Bérenger: It is in the case of the death in Rivière du Rempart Police station of Mr 
A.K.R. It has been repeatedly reported that there is a suspect being held by Police in relation 
to that case. Is it so? 

 

15 

The Prime Minister: No. I have not read that. Nobody has told me that and I think 
this is a very wrong impression that the hon. Leader of the Opposition has got. I am not aware 
of anything of that sort. 

Mr Bérenger: It is not an impression. That has appeared repeatedly in the press and 
there  has  been  no  Police  communiqué  to  advise  the  public  that  no  one  is  in  detention  in 
relation  to  that  case.  Therefore,  it  is  not  just  my  impression.  It  has  been  reported  and  not 
denied by the Police. They talked a lot about other things but, in that case, I suppose they 
could have clarified the situation. The new inquiry is still in progress, Madam Speaker. Has 
any link been established, at this stage, between the Roches Noires bungalow affair and the 
death of Mr A.K.R. in Rivière du Rempart Police Station? 

The Prime Minister: I cannot answer to this question. The inquiry is still on. 

Mr  Bérenger:  The  last  part  of  my  question,  Madam  Speaker,  regards  the  audio 
recording – the bande sonore – at the Rivière du Rempart meeting in December 2010. Can I 
ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister what explains the fact that there have been several arrests - 
the most important thing apart from life, the most important thing in life is freedom - and 
every day there were articles in the press, statements by the Police, so and so is going to be 
called, so and so is going to be arrested, it went on and then suddenly it disappeared. It is off 
the radar screen completely.  Has the Rt. hon. Prime Minister – because as I said people have 
been arrested? Why this inquiry is supposedly proceeding in that way? 

The Prime Minister: Well, it is not the first time that somebody is arrested in a case. 
The  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  should  know  that.  The  Office  of  the  DPP  made  an 
application dated 19 December 2014 for a production order directing the following service 
providers V-mail LLC Facebook Inc. and Google ILC to disclose the user ID who posted the 
link  on  the  web.  The  Judge’s  Order  was  obtained  on  the  same  date  and  forwarded  to  the 
Police. I must add also, in the meantime, the Police officers who were engaged in this case 
were very busy with the other cases and that is why this inquiry has been a bit delayed. 

Mr  Uteem:  Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Prime  Minister  mentioned  that  one  of  the 
charges against the former Prime Minister is one of money laundering. In view of the fact 
that  a  huge  amount  of  money  is  involved  in  foreign  currency,  is  the  hon.  Prime  Minister 
aware  whether  the  hon.  Attorney  General  has  made  any  request  for  any  foreign  State  for 
assistance under the Mutual Assistance in Criminal and Related Matters for this case? 

 

16 

The Prime Minister: No, I am not aware of any. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Mohamed. 

Mr  Mohamed:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.    Could  I  ask  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister, since before the 10th of December of 2014, we have all in Mauritius heard the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister before then, gave information that, at some stage, he was aware of the 
intricacies of the case of Roches Noires in relation to the death of the person referred to in 
question (c) (iii), whether since he seemed to be aware and made statements to that effect, 
when does he intend to give a statement to the Police to share that important information, 
because we need justice to be done and if he does not intend to do so, maybe he could tell us 
how he could communicate that information to the Police and when he would do it? 

The Prime Minister: This information was being circulated, it reached me and it has 

reached also the Police. So, I don’t have to inform the Police. 

Mr Ganoo: May I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, in view of the substantial amount 
of money which has been found on the premises of the former Prime Minister and in view of 
the fact that all parties in this House are agreeable that a legal framework be set up to control 
the finances of political parties, doesn’t the Prime Minister think that it is urgent to uphold 
the dignity of the political class in this country after what has just happened to come up with 
a legislation, either setting up a Select Committee or come up with a legislation once for all 
for the financial control of political parties? 

The Prime Minister: This is irrelevant to the PNQ. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, did you ask the floor? No! That’s alright.  Hon. 

Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr Bérenger: Well, I’ll pick up from where hon. Ganoo left. My last question will 
relate to now that the country is - I think we can all agree on that - en état de choc, being 
given  that  in  the  Electoral  Programme  of  the  present  Government,  it  was  stated  that  there 
would be a new Declaration of Assets Act that will be made public and it was stated also that 
a  law  –  new  law  –  would  come  forward  to  control,  to  make  transparent,  les  finances  des 
partis et des campagnes électorales. This has been picked up in the Government Programme, 
but I note that it is no longer said in the Government Programme that these declarations of 
assets will be made public. There has been a change between the programme éléctoral  and 

 

17 

the programme gouvernemental – le discours-programme. Will the hon. Prime Minister see 
to  it,  being  given  where  we  are,  that  the  two  things  are  done  as  soon  as  possible  -  a  new 
Declaration of Assets Act, foolproof, as he said in his electoral program, to be made public? 
A new Declaration of Assets Act - this is what his programme spoke about - and also that will 
enlighten what took place in 2000-2005; things will be activated so that a law to regulate, to 
control, make transparent les financements des partis et des campagnes éléctorales, will be 
before the House as soon as possible. 

The Prime Minister: Well, this Government means to implement all its promises. 

Madam  Speaker:  One  last  question,  we  have  got  three  more  minutes.  The  last 
question is usually for the hon. Leader of the Opposition. Does he have any other questions? 

Mr Bérenger: No. 

Madam  Speaker:  Okay!  Hon.  Members,  the  Table  has  been  advised  that 
Parliamentary Question Nos. B/3 and B/4 have been withdrawn. The Table has been further 
advised  that  the  following  Parliamentary  Questions  which  have  been  addressed  to  the  Rt, 
hon. Prime Minister will now be replied as follows - B/6 in regard to the report of the Truth 
and Justice Commission will now be replied by the hon. Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of 
Tourism  and  External  Communications;  B/10  in  regard  to  the  Maurice  Ile  Durable 
Commission  will  now  be  replied  by  the  hon.  Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable 
Development and Disaster and Beach Management;  

 in  relation  to  the  Jin  Fei  Project  at  Riche  Terre  will  now  be  replied  by  the  hon. 

Minister of Finance and Economic Development.  

I also wish to inform hon. Members that the Table has been advised that the following 
Parliamentary Questions will be replied by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister at the end of Prime 
Minister’s  Question  Time,  time  permitting.  PQ  No.  B/18  in  regard  to  the  Canal  Anglais 
behind the Military Road, Cité Martial, addressed to the hon. Minister of Public Infrastructure 
and Land Transport; B/34 in regard to the E-Judiciary project addressed to the hon. Minister 
of Finance and Economic Development; B/37 in regard to works being carried out at Canal 
Dayot, GRNW, addressed to the hon. Minister of Public infrastructure and Land Transport; 
B/41  in  regard  to  works  being  carried  out  at  Sable  Noir,  GRNW,  addressed  to  the  hon. 
Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport. 

 

18 

Questions addressed to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister! Hon. Ameer Meea! 

MASTER M. T. I. J. – DEATH - INQUIRY 

(No. B/1) Mr A. Ameer Meea (Second Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port 
Louis East) asked the Rt. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the death of late master M. 
T. I. J. whose dead body was found on or about 10 December 2014, he will, for the benefit of 
the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to where matters stand in 
relation to the inquiry carried out thereinto. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that,  on  10  December  2014,  after  having  received  information  on  a  dead  body  at  Beaux 
Songes, Police officers of Bambous Police Station and officers from different units within the 
Police  went  on  the  site.    The  dead  body  was  thereafter  conveyed  to  mortuary  at  Candos 
Hospital for autopsy. 

 

On the same day, the corpse was identified as that of M.T.I.J.  

Autopsy carried out revealed the cause of death as being “incised wounds of neck”.  
 
The case was thereafter referred to the Major Crime Investigation Team for enquiry.  As at 06 
February 2015, some eight persons have been interviewed and some items have been secured 
for examination purposes.  The investigation is still being pursued by the Police. 

Once the investigation is completed, the Police will refer the case file to the Director 

 
of Public Prosecutions for advice. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Speaker, can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether in 
this case despite there have been eight persons who have been interviewed any person has 
been arrested pursuant to the case? 

The Prime Minister: No, I don’t think anybody has been arrested. They have all been 

interviewed and after interview they have been allowed to go. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Speaker, can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister if he can 
request  the  Commissioner  of  Police  to  convey  to  the  family  of  the  deceased  person  any 
progress of the enquiry so that they are reassured that the enquiry is being done because up to 
now the Police has not communicated any information to the deceased person’s family. 

 

19 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  the  members  of  the  family  should  try  to  get  the 

information from the Commissioner of Police. 

MINISTRIES - ADVISERS/PRESS ATTACHÉS – APPOINTMENT 

(No. B/2) Mr P. Jhugroo  (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  Advisers/Press  Attachés 
employed on a contract basis and attached to each Ministry, since July 2005 to date, he will 
give a list thereof, indicating in each case –  

(a) their qualifications; 

(b) their areas of responsibility; 

(c) their salaries and any other allowances drawn; 

(d) their terms and conditions of appointment, and  

(e) the make and model of Government car put at their disposal. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, the information sought by the hon. Member is 
being compiled and will be placed in the Library of the National Assembly as soon as the 
exercise is completed. 

Nevertheless,  I  can  already  confirm  that  the  number  of  Advisers  employed  by  the 
Government  will  be  far  smaller  in  comparison  to  the  number  employed  by  the  previous 
Government. For example, in my own office, prior to the last general elections, there were 21 
Advisers in post, compared to only two who are so far in employment. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Mohamed:  Can  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  confirm  whether  the  number  of 
advisers - which is good news that there will be less and we welcome that - would there be 
less advisers at the Ministry of Finance as opposed to the previous Ministry of Finance? 

The Prime  Minister:  We will have to have some patience; in due course, we will 

know. 

(Interruptions) 

 

20 

Mr Bhagwan: I take up from what the Rt. hon. Prime Minister stated. He has stated 
that there will be less advisers. Can I ask him whether he will give instructions and there will 
be a new policy for Government to request the press attachés who have been appointed not to 
engage actively in political activities during office hours because they are paid from public 
funds? Would the Prime Minister issue new directives to that effect?  

The Prime Minister: Directives have been issued that they should do their job. 

Mr Bérenger: Since the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has said “only two” therefore, it is 
easy for him to give the names of these two privileged gentlemen or gentlewomen who have 
been appointed advisers since the last elections? 

The Prime Minister: I do not have the names with me… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Bhagwan, last question! 

Mr Bhagwan: Will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister at least also request the press attachés 
to do their jobs with regard to public relations which is the work that they are supposed to do 
and not to accompany Ministers in their private visits in constituencies and also at the time 
they are receiving members of the public because this is when and where they are engaged in 
political activities? 

The Prime Minister: I have not received such information. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea next question! 

RIVIÈRE DU REMPART POLICE STATION - MR A.K.R. – DEATH  

(No.  B/3)  Mr  P.  Jhugroo  (Second  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  late  Mr  A.  K.  R.,  who 
passed away while in Police custody, on or about 30 July 2011, at the Rivière du Rempart 
Police Station, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, 
information as to if the inquiry thereof has been reopened and, if so, indicate where matters 
stand. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

21 

ROCHES NOIRES – BUNGALOW – THEFT  

(No.  B/4)  Mr  P.  Jhugroo  (Second  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the case of the theft which 
occurred on or about 03 July 2011 in a bungalow reportedly belonging to a Very Important 
Person, at Roches Noires, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner 
of Police, information as to if the inquiry thereof has been reopened and, if so, indicate where 
matters stand. 

(Withdrawn) 

SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS – MEASURES 

 (No. B/5) Mr A. Ameer Meea (Second Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port 
Louis East) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister 
for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to new types of synthetic 
drugs on the market, including Wazabi, Black Mamba, he will, for the benefit of the House, 
obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to the quantity thereof, estimated to 
have  been  introduced  in  Mauritius,  indicating  the  measures  taken  or  that  will  be  taken  to 
prevent the proliferation thereof. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that  during  the  year  2013,  criminal  intelligence  revealed  that  new  types  of  Synthetic 
Cannabinoids  made  of  new  psychoactive  substances  have  entered  Mauritius.  Wazabi  and 
Black Mamba are the street names of two of those Synthetic Cannabinoids.   

Since  October  2013,  these  ‘Synthetic  Cannabinoids  and  their  derivatives’  are 

considered as dangerous drugs according to the First Schedule to the Dangerous Drugs Act. 

I  am  further  informed  by  the  Commissioner  of  Police  that  30  cases  of  sale  or 
 
consumption  of  this  new  type  of  drug  have  thus  been  established  by  the  Anti-Drug  and 
Smuggling  Unit.  In  all  these  cases,  enquiry  is  still  in  progress  and  examination  by  the 
Forensic Science Laboratory is still being carried out to determine, inter-alia, the quantity of 
the synthetic drug secured so far. 

 

22 

Madam  Speaker,  it  is  indeed  of  paramount  importance  that  our  citizens  are  shielded 
from the consumption of not only the Wazabi or Black Mamba, but from any other incumbent 
or potential illicit drugs. 

A  series  of  measures  are  being  adopted  by  the  Police  to  prevent  illegal  drug 

 
proliferation which include, inter alia, the following - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

the  setting  of  an  intelligence  cell  which  enables  the  pro-active  targeting  of 
local and foreign drug dealers and their network; 
drug  mapping  where  drug  transactions,  drug  traffickers,  pedlars  and  addicts 
are located; 
aerial patrols, undercover operations, intensive surveillance, raid and searches, 
and 
drug 
collaboration with NATReSA and other NGO’s. 

reduction  programmes 

campaign 

comprising 

sensitisation 

in 

Moreover, Police is working in close partnership with the Mauritius Revenue Authority 
and the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life to tighten security so as to prevent entry of 
drugs at the Port and airport. 

Madam Speaker, my Government has a zero tolerance policy against the drug scourge. 
I  have  taken  a  commitment  in  the  Government  Programme  to  set  up  a  Commission  of 
Enquiry  on  Drug  Trafficking  and  my  Government  shall  pursue  a  relentless  fight  against 
traffickers,  while  ensuring  that  the  seaport  and  airport  are  equipped  with  state-of-the-art 
equipment and technology to counter any attempt to introduce drugs in Mauritius. 

Mr  Bérenger:    Since  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  has  made  reference  to  the 
Commission of Enquiry to be set up, have the terms of reference been prepared or finalised or 
will they be discussed with the people concerned, the police, the NGOs and so on? 

The  Prime  Minister:    Yes,  there  is  a  committee  working  on  it  and  there  will  be 

consultations. 

Madam Speaker:  Yes, hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  In view of the ever changing scene of 
drugs in Mauritius and abroad like in this case of Synthetic Cannabinoids drugs, can the hon. 
Prime Minister consider the fact of creating a Drug Observatory like it is the case in many 

 

23 

countries  abroad,  so  as  to  keep  aware  parents,  educators  and  all  those  concerned  with  the 
prevention of drugs and to take precautions concerning new drugs entering the country? 

The Prime Minister:  We will take this into consideration. 

 (Interruptions) 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:    One  last  question!    Madam  Speaker,  we  have  only  three 
Rehabilitation  Centres  for  drug  addicts  around  the  island.  My  question  is  whether 
consideration will be given to increase the number of Rehabilitation Centres under the aegis 
of the Ministry of Health because actually the number is too low and also they do not have 
the human resource and the necessary logistics to combat this fléau? 

The Prime Minister:  I hope the Minister concerned will look into it. 

TRUTH & JUSTICE COMMISSION REPORT - IMPLEMENTATION 

 

(No. B/6) Mr G. Lesjongard (Second Member for Savanne & Black River)  asked 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and 
National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Truth and Justice Commission, he will 
state  whether  the  main  recommendations  contained  in  its  Report  have  already  been 
implemented and, if not, why not. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

NATIONAL ASSEMBLY - PROCEEDINGS - LIVE BROADCAST 

(No. B/7) Mr R. Bhagwan (First Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) asked 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and 
National Development Unit whether, in regard to the live broadcasting of the proceedings of 
the  National  Assembly  through  television,  radios  and  web  tv,  he  will  state  if  Government 
intends to – 

(a) set up a Select Committee to look thereinto, or  
(b) study the draft report of the previous Select Committee on live broadcasting of the 
proceedings  of  the  House  of  the  Fifth  National  Assembly  and  implement  its 
recommendations. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, as the House may be aware, a Select Committee 
of the National Assembly was appointed in April 2011, under the chair of hon. Nandcoomar 

 

24 

Bodha,  to  consider  the  live  broadcasting  of  the  proceedings  of  the  House  and  matters 
ancillary thereto. 

 
I  am  informed  that  11  meetings  of  the  Select  Committee  were  held  between  April 
2011 and January 2012 and I understand that the Committee has completed its assignment 
and a draft report already exists. 

 
In  the  circumstances  and  in  view  of  Government’s  determination  to  reinforce 
democracy in this country, it is proposed to set up a new Select Committee of the House to 
consider the draft report and to propose firm recommendations to the House. 

Mr Bhagwan:  Can I ask the hon. Prime Minister what, according to him, will be the 
time  frame  that  the  Select  Committee  will  be  set  up  and  whether  he  will  give  urgent 
consideration to set up the Select Committee, as soon as possible, in order to prevent further 
abuse from the MBC/TV? 

The Prime Minister:  Well, Madam Speaker, it is our habit to act quickly. 
Mr Bhagwan:  Pending the setting up of the Select Committee, can I make a request to 
the Prime Minister to see to it that now that we are starting debates at the National Assembly, 
firm directives should be given to the MBC/TV - we have all been victims of one person at 
the MBC/TV - not to have the Opposition becoming muet every Tuesday? 

The Prime Minister:  Well, instructions have already been given to the MBC that they 

should be objective in whatever they do. 

Mr  Mohamed:    Would  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  consider  the  possibility  of  not 
holding a new Select Committee since there was broad consensus at the time that the Select 
Committee sat down and did its work?  All parties in Parliament were represented under the 
able chairmanship of hon. Bodha – as he was then Minister of Government – and we were 
also  honoured  with  the  presence  of  hon.  Obeegadoo,  hon.  Baloomoody,  hon.  Ganoo,  hon. 
Bhagwan and many other Members from all sides of the House.  Having said so, there has 
been broad consensus and  I am also, Madam Speaker, happy to see that the hon. Minister 
Bodha  is  nodding  and  acquiescing  that  there  was  consensus.    If  that  is  the  case,  why  go 
through a Select Committee again?   If we really mean business, and I would like to see it 
happen, that we go faster than the previous Government has done.   

In the past …. 

 

25 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Mohamed, you made your point.  Do not make a statement, 

please!  You made your point! 

Mr Mohamed:  Can we go faster than going for a Select Committee and wasting time 

… 

Madam Speaker:  Please, allow the hon. Prime Minister to reply. 

The Prime Minister:  Well, we should not go as fast as to knock ourselves down.  We 

are in Government and we will do what we consider is right. 

Madam Speaker:  Last question, hon. Ganoo! 

Mr Ganoo:  I am picking up on the same question of hon. Mohamed.  Has the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister given thought to the possibility of coming up with a motion and asking this 
House  to  adopt,  by  way  of  resolution,  the  draft  report  which  has  been  produced  by  the 
previous Select Committee? 

The Prime Minister:  We will come with the final report. 

 

RELIGIOUS & SOCIO-CULTURAL FUNCTIONS – POLITICAL SPEECHES 

(No. B/8) Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National Development Unit whether, following Government’s decision not to take the floor 
during  socio-cultural  functions,  he  will  state  if  consideration  will  be  given  for  the 
introduction of legislation, as is the case in Singapore. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  in  my  New  Year  address  to  the  Nation,  I 
indicated  that  relations  between  Government  and  socio-cultural  organisations  would 
henceforth  focus  on  our  partnership  to  address  problems  within  our  society,  including  the 
erosion  of  values.  Obviously,  we  shall  actively  continue  promoting  together  our  rich  and 
diverse religious, cultural and linguistic heritage. 

The use and misuse by the former regime, of religious and socio-cultural platforms 
that  had  been  converted  into  political  platforms  have  been  prejudicial  to  national  unity. 

 

26 

Hence, I decided to act, and the decision I announced in my New Year Speech is not only a 
Government decision, but a political one as well. 

The issue of bringing legislation to give effect to this decision does not arise. I expect 

politicians on all sides to be responsible enough to adopt this line of conduct. 

Mr Bérenger: Of course, we agree fully that specially on religious occasions former 
Members  of  Parliament  and  former  Ministers  and  so  on  used  to  make  cheap  political 
speeches. We all agree this is out of place, but can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister where 
does he draw the line? Because we must not write off the history of our country, the richness 
of  our  cultural  heritage  and  so  on.    I  understand  only  a  few  days  ago,  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister  attended  a  dinner  on  the  occasion  of  the  Fête  du  Printemps.  Well,  it  is  a  great 
occasion, and supposedly on the basis of what he has decided he makes no speeches. Where 
do we stop? I mean, next thing, we will stop making speeches on the occasion of the abolition 
of slavery of 02 November. I think this has not been really thought through. I don’t think it is 
making speeches on such occasions that is wrong, it is making the wrong speeches on those 
occasions. So, can I appeal to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to rethink it. When we are dealing 
with the history of Mauritius, the richness of our cultural diversity and so on, I don’t think it 
is progress for the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and others to make decent, proper speeches on 
such occasions. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  unfortunately,  insofar  as  socio-cultural  societies  are 
concerned,  we  know  what  use  has  been  made  of  them  in  the  past  and  in  most  cases  the 
politicians don’t stick to the subject matter, they slip away and they do the most heinous type 
of politics on these platforms.  

Mr Jhuboo: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for 
his answer. Madame la présidente, un sujet aussi delicat que la politique et le religieux mérite 
qu’on s’y attarde un petit peu plus. Est-ce que le Premier ministre, à la lueur de ce qu’il a 
déclaré, à la lueur de ce que le discours-programme fait mention, c’est-à-dire de consulter la 
nation sur les sujets d’importance comme le rôle du religieux et de l’état, n’envisage pas un 
référendum pour élucider toutes ces questions ? 

The  Prime Minister: Anyway, I don’t find it necessary. 

Madam Speaker: Last question on this issue! 

 

27 

Mr Bhagwan: The Rt. hon. Prime Minister has given an indication of the new policy 
of  Government  to  the  nation,  which  I  agree.  Can  I  make  a  request  to  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister to give directives to the MBC/TV? We have the politicians who are debarred from 
making speeches, which is a good thing, but at least the MBC/TV should not give voices to 
the presidents of the socio-cultural centres or persons who go on TV and make speeches and 
which are covered live by the MBC/TV. It would defeat the purpose. On one hand, you have 
the politicians and, on the other hand, the representatives of socio-cultural centres who make 
political speeches live on the MBC/TV. 

The  Prime Minister: Well, it is for the MBC/TV to act on the merit of each case. 

SSR INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT - MRS N. S. –  

VIP LOUNGE FACILITIES   

(No. B/9)  Mr M. Hurreeram  (First Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to access to the VIP Lounge, 
he will state if Mrs N. S. was granted such facilities and, if so, indicate -  
(a) the number thereof, since July 2005 to December 2014, and  
(b) if any official request was made therefor and, if so, in which capacity. 
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, I am 
informed by the Airport Terminal Operations Ltd that Mrs N. S. was granted access to the 
VIP Lounge at the Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam International Airport on 71 occasions … 

(Interruptions) 

Namely,  35  departures  and  36  arrivals.    I  find  it  strange  how  is  it  35  departures,  but  36 
arrivals between 21 September 2008 and 26 November 2014. 

In regard to part (b) of the question, no official request was made for such facilities in 
favour of Mrs  N. S. at the level of Home Affairs Division of the Prime  Minister's Office, 
which is responsible for processing of applications and grant of access to the VIP Lounge.  
However, such requests in respect of Mrs N. S. were made by the Private Office of the former 
Prime Minister directly to the Airports of Mauritius Ltd. or Airport Terminal Operations Ltd.  
These requests were not made through the normal channel.  Thus, there is no information in 

 

28 

which capacity Mrs N. S. benefitted from such facilities, but the public knows how and why 
she was granted such facilities. 

Mr Hurreeram: Can we know whether the close relatives of Mrs N. S. were granted 

the same facilities at the VIP Lounge? 

The Prime Minister: Well, if she was accompanied by her relatives, I am sure they 

must all have been granted. I don’t have a list of facilities granted to families. 

Madam Speaker: No question! The Table has been advised that the following PQs 

addressed to the hon. Prime Minister have been withdrawn: Nos. B/12, B/13 and B/14.  

 

HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION - JURISDICTION 

(No. B/11) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Human  Rights 
Commission, he will state if Government intends to review - 

(a) the jurisdiction thereof, and 
(b) increase the number of staff thereof. 
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, the National Human Rights Commission was 
created  in  April  2001  under  the  Protection  of  Human  Rights  Act  1998.    The  Act  was 
amended in 2012 to create a Human Rights Division; a Police Complaints Division; and a 
National Preventive Mechanism Division.  These Divisions operate under the Protection of 
Human Rights Act; the Police Complaints Act; and the National Preventive Mechanism Act, 
respectively.    The  main  purpose  of  the  amendments  was  to  broaden  the  mandate  and 
functions of the National Human Rights Commission in line with international best practices.
 
However,  as  mentioned  in  the  Government  Programme  2015-2019,  an  independent 
Police  Complaints  Commission  presided  by  a  former  Judge  of  the  Supreme  Court  will  be 
created to further consolidate the fundamental rights of our citizens.   

As regards part (b) of the question, I am advised that the Commission is taking the 
necessary  measures  to  increase  its  technical  staff  while  the  staffing  of  the  new  Police 
Complaints Commission will be looked into after its establishment. 

Mr  Baloomoody:  Can  I  ask  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  whether  he  has  taken 
cognizance of the report of the Human Rights Commission 2013, where the President, now, 
the  Chairman,  suggests  that  we  should  include  new  human  rights,  that  is,  the  Economic 

 

29 

Rights, the abolition de la peine de mort Rights, le droit des travailleurs du sexe, le droit de 
la communauté LGBT, whether Government intends to consider the suggestions, at least, of 
the Human Rights Commissioner? 

 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, we are trying to do our best to appoint all the 
members of the Commission because I know for quite a long time there was only the Head 
who  was  there  and  even  his  contract  has  expired,  but  still  he  was  continuing.  We  mean 
business and we are going to do everything so that this Commission can do meaningful work. 

POLICE FORCE – PROMOTIONS 

(No. B/12) Mr S. Mohamed (First Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port Louis 
East)  asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Mauritius Police Force, 
he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police information and 
table a list as to the number of – 

(a) Permutations; 
(b) Demotions, and 
(c) Promotions thereat, since 10 December 2014 to date, indicating, in each case, the 

reasons therefor. 

(Withdrawn) 

VACOAS POLICE STATION – TOURISM AUTHORITY VEHICLE  – 

REPORTED CASE 

(No. B/13) Mr S. Mohamed (First Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port Louis 
East)  asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House, 
obtain  from  the    Commissioner  of  Police,  information  as  to  if  a  case  was  reported  at  the 
Vacoas Police Station on 09 January 2015 in regard to a vehicle bearing registration number 
6271 Oct 08 owned by the Tourism Authority and, if so, indicate who was driving the vehicle 
and in which capacity, and 

(b) 

the outcome of inquiry carried out thereinto. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

30 

PARASTATAL BODIES - VACANCIES 

(No. B/14) Mr S. Mohamed (First Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port Louis 
East)  asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to parastatal bodies and other 
institutions where the State is a majority shareholder he will state the vacancies thereof that 
will – 

(a) be advertised, and 
(b) not be advertised, indicating the reasons therefor. 

(Withdrawn) 

Madam Speaker: Time is over!  

Hon. Members, the Table has been advised that Parliamentary Question Nos. B/19 in 
regard to the renegotiation of the Avoidance of Double Taxation Treaty; B/44 in regard to 
introduction of subject teaching at primary level addressed to the hon. Minister of Education 
and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Science Research; B/47 in regard to SICOM 
Tower addressed to the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development will now be 
replied  by  the  hon.  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 
Reforms.  PQ No. B/31 in regard to the project for the construction of a dam at Rivière des 
Anguilles  addressed  to  the  hon.  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  will 
now be replied by the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities.  

Hon. Ameer Meea, next question! 

MOTORCYCLES - MODIFIED SILENCERS  

(No. B/17) Mr A. Ameer Meea (Second Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port 
Louis East) asked the Minister of Environment, Sustainable Development and Disaster and 
Beach  Authority  whether,  in  regard  to  motorcycles  with  modified  silencers  emitting  loud 
noises on being run, he will state if he is aware of the increasing number thereof and, if so, 
indicate the measures that will be taken in relation thereto. 

 Mr Dayal: Madam Speaker, I am fully aware of this nuisance caused by increasing 

number of motorcycles with modified silencers. 

I wish to inform the House that Section 83 (3) of the Road Traffic (Construction and 

Use of Vehicles) Regulations 2010 provides that – 

“No person shall -  

 

31 

(a) fit on the exhaust pipe of a motor vehicle any extension or other device likely to 

cause excessive or unusual noise; or 

(b) alter the silencer in such a way that the noise caused by the escape of the exhaust 

gases is made greater by the alteration.” 

The same legislation also provides that any person who contravenes Section 83 (3) of 

the Act shall commit an offence and may be liable to a fine not exceeding Rs10,000.  

To address the ongoing problem, the Police de l’Environnement carries regular checks 
and establishes contraventions against riders. For the years 2013 and 2014, a total of 1220 
and for the month of January 2015, 78 contraventions have been established.  

With a view to curbing down this offence drastically, the following measures will be 

implemented – 
(i) 

an opération “Coup de poing” will be undertaken by the six teams of Police 
de l’Environnement throughout the island for a period of two weeks; 

(ii)  an  awareness  campaign  will  be  undertaken  to  sensitise  the  public  on  the 

provisions of the law and associated fines; 

(iii)  training  will  be  given  to  the  regular  Police  on  the  enforcement  of  the 
provisions of this piece of legislation to enable the whole Police force to take 
firm actions against contraveners in the future; 
the strength of the Police de l’Environnement will be also increased, and 

(iv) 
(v)  provision for stiffer penalties including seizure of motorcycles will be also 

looked into. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Madam  Speaker,  I,  myself,  have  raised  this  issue  in  this  House 

since 2012 and up to now there has not been any drastic change in this issue. 

(Interruptions) 

And  also,  I  think  this  House  will  agree  with  me  that  this  issue  is  a  terrible  nuisance  and 
discomfort for all persons around the island, but especially in densely populated regions.  

So, therefore, I welcome all these measures that the hon. Minister just announced, but 
can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  that  whether  he  -  as  he  likes  to  say  -  as  Raj  Dayal,  would 
personally monitor these operations on the field and also be there so as to bring results and 
whether he needs to wear his simili cuir jacket to do these operations with the Commissioner 
of Police? 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Ameer  Meea,  refrain  from  making  comments!  Ask  your 

(Interruptions) 

question!  

 

Ask your question! 

32 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Dayal: Madam Speaker, this Government is committed to take firm action where 
it is required and this is at the leadership level and at all levels. As a responsible Minister, I 
can give you the guarantee if we are going … 

Excuse me, Sir. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker,  the  point  is  very  clear;  we  are  going  to  see  to  it  that  all  actions 

proactive, active, reactive will be taken in time. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 
Mr  Baloomoody:  Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Minister  has  just  mentioned  that  there 

would be an opération coup de poing regarding this issue. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 
Mr Baloomoody: Regarding this issue, there would be an opération coup de poing, 
the hon. Minister has just mentioned. Can I ask the hon. Minister to ensure that this operation 
takes  place  at  night  because  we  know  all  those  who  have  modified  their  motorcycles  do 
venture in illegal rallies at night and this is where most disturbances are being caused? 

Mr Dayal: The officers of the Police de l’Environnement work on a 24-hour basis by 

day and by night and your suggestion is taken on board. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed! 
Mr Mohamed: Thank you, Madam Speaker. May I ask the hon. Minister how many 
equipment  exactly  for  monitoring  noise  emitted  by  motorcycles  does  the  Police  de 
l’Environnement have; if he could give us the exact figure? 

Mr Dayal: I need notice of this question, but just to tell you that the equipment that 

we have; they are functioning as per our requirements. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea! Last question! 
Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  According  to  a  previous  reply  in 
2013, it has been stated in this House that there has been  a Technical Committee that has 
been  set  up  at  the  Ministry  of  Environment  so  as  to  look  in  this  matter  and  also  that  this 
Technical Committee found that there were two problems; one with the sound level meters 
and secondly, with modification to the law, that is, the law should have been amended. So, 

 

33 

can  I  ask the hon. Minister what has happened  to this Technical Committee and  what has 
been its finding? 

Mr Dayal: I need notice of this question, Madam Speaker. 
Madam Speaker: Okay! Next question! This has been sufficiently debated. PQ No. 

B/19, please! Hon. Uteem! 
 

MAURITIUS/INDIA - AVOIDANCE OF DOUBLE TAXATION TREATY  
(No.  B/19)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the 
renegotiation of the Avoidance of Double Taxation Treaty between Mauritius and India, he 
will state where matters stand. 

The Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms 
(Mr S. Bhadain): Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that, discussions on the India 
Double  Taxation  Avoidance  Treaty  have  been  ongoing  for  a  number  of  years  to  address 
concerns raised on the operations of the current tax treaty.  

I understand that in May 2014, Mauritius had proposed the setting-up of special cells 
both in Mauritius and in India to fast track the renegotiation of the DTA.  As a follow-up, the 
then Secretary to Cabinet led a delegation to India for the renegotiation.  

Madam Speaker, the DTA is an instrument of critical importance for both Mauritius 
and India and has meaningfully served the interest of both countries. We will shortly resume 
the renegotiation process in a spirit of fairness, equity and transparency and in line with all 
principles of good governance, whilst also taking into consideration the long-term economic 
interests of both countries.  

We will create the appropriate conducive environment for the further development of 

Mauritius as an International Financial Services Centre.    

The  renegotiation  of  the  DTA  with  India  is  now,  Madam  Speaker,  being  seen  as  an 

opportunity rather than a threat.   

The  forthcoming  visit  of  His  Excellency  the  Prime  Minister  of  India  will  certainly 

facilitate this process. 

Mr Uteem:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Is the hon. Minister aware that in a written 
reply to Rajya Sabha in India, the hon. Minister of Finance, Arun Jaitley stated that India has 
made  certain  proposals  for  the  revision  of  DTC  to  end  round-tripping  and  other  aspects.  

 

34 

Mauritius is yet to agree to such revision.  It would appear from the Indian side that the ball is 
on our camp.  May I know from the hon. Minister what he is doing to hit back the ball? 

Mr Bhadain:  Absolutely, Madam Speaker, we are aware of the proposals and there is 
a committee both at the level of my Ministry and the level of the Ministry of Finance which is 
currently looking into the matter.  

Mr  Uteem:    May  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  whether  any  meeting  of  the  joint 
working committee comprising of officers of Mauritius and India has been scheduled and if 
so, when? 

Mr  Bhadain:    This  is  precisely  what  the  committee  is  looking  into  at  the  present 

moment, Madam Speaker. 

Mr Uteem:  May I take it that, as at today, the hon. Minister is not in a position to tell 
us when he is going to have a new meeting and is he aware that time is running out?  Only 
last  week  the  Foreign  Investment  Promotion  Board  of  India  refused  treaty  to  23  FDI 
proposals  including  FDI  proposals  from  Mauritius  companies?  So,  whereas  we  are  sitting 
here, India is taking action and denying treaty provisions to our FDIs.   

Mr  Bhadain:    The  committee  is  actively  working,  Madam  Speaker,  and  we  will 

certainly inform the House of any progress in due course. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Uteem!  

PORT LOUIS SOUTH & PORT LOUIS CENTRAL - STATE LANDS -  ILLEGAL 

OCCUPATION 

(No.  B/20)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in regard 
to the State lands in Constituency No. 2, Port Louis South and Port Louis Central, he will 
state if any illegal occupation thereof has been reported and, if so, indicate – 

(a) 

the number thereof, and  

(b) 

state, in each case, the measures Government proposes to take in  

relation thereto. 

 

35 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun): 
Madam  Speaker,  there  are  181  squatters  who  have  been  identified  by  my  Ministry  in 
Constituency No. 2, Port-Louis South and Port Louis Central as follows –  

Tranquebar 

Vallée Pitot  

 

 

-  

-  

Vallé Pitot near Eid Gah- 

Citadel 

 

 

- 

82 

29 

67 

  3 

As regards part (b) of the question - 

(i) squatters in the region of Tranquebar will soon be relocated to Pointe aux Sables 
where  a  housing  project  has  been  implemented  together  with  the  necessary 
infrastructure facilities; 

(ii) for the squatters in the region of Vallée Pitot, upon my request, a survey and the 
registration  of  these  squatters  are  currently  being  carried  out.    It  is  proposed  to 
regularise those squatters in ‘in situ’ provided that safety and the eligibility criteria of 
my Ministry for the allocation of a building site lease. 

(iii) regarding those squatters in Vallée Pitot near Eid Gah, lying within and alongside 
the  proposed  alignment  of  the  Ring  Road  project,  a  committee  comprising  of  the 
Ministry of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport, the Ministry of Social Integration 
and Economic Empowerment and my Ministry have tasked to look for other suitable 
sites in the region of Port Louis and Pointe aux Sables for relocation of these squatters, 
and   

(iv)  as  far  as  the  three  cases  of  Citadel,  the  survey  of  the  State  land  has  been 
completed and the case of each squatter will be dealt with on a case to case basis.  

Mr  Uteem:    Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.    I  heard  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister 
mention  that  there  were  only  82  cases  of  illegal  squatters  in  Tranquebar.    The  number  is 
actually far greater than this.  The 82 cases concern only those who had been identified for 
relocation in Pointe aux Sables.  May I know from the hon. Vice-Prime Minister whether he 
will  carry  out  a  full  survey  and  identify  the  exact  number  of  squatters  in  Tranquebar  and 
come up with solutions with regard to those above these 82? 

 

36 

Mr  Soodhun:    Madam  Speaker,  I  have  already  mentioned  that  according  to  the 
information  that  I  have,  in  Tranquebar,  we  have  82  cases  that  have  been  registered  in  my 
Ministry.    Anyway,  I  am  going  to  ask  my  officers  to  consider  the  suggestion  of  the  hon. 
Member and definitely we are going to have a solution. 

Mr  Uteem:    Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  The  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  refers  to  a 
number of squatters in the Vallée Pitot Eid Gah area.  Is the hon. Vice-Prime Minister aware 
that there is a problem of landslide and that the officers from Japan Corporation has already 
issued warning that at any time some of these houses may be in a way crumbled down.   In 
the light of the observations made by the Japanese expert, will the hon. Vice-Prime Minister 
give an indication what Government intends to do for those people whose houses are at risk? 

Mr Soodhun:  According to the information that  I have, we have already started an 
enquiry and with the collaboration of my colleagues, Minister of Environment, Minister of 
Social Integration and Minister of Public Infrastructure. We have already set up a committee 
with  the  Japanese  experts  to  look  into  the  case  of  Vallée  Pitot  and  Chitrakoot.    We  have 
already set up a committee and very soon we are coming to a conclusion and we will have a 
solution. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question! 

Mr Uteem:  Thank  you, Madam Speaker.  The hon. Vice-Prime Minister mentioned 
that some of the houses in Vallée Pitot may be affected by the Ring Road track.  Is that still 
the case?  Is the Government still going ahead with the Ring Road across Vallée Pitot? 

Mr Soodhun:  According to my information, yes. 

 

PORT LOUIS - HAWKERS  

(No.  B/21)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to hawkers operating in 
Port Louis, he will state the – 

(a) number thereof, and  
(b) measures that will be taken to regulate the situation thereof. 

 

37 

Dr. Husnoo:  Madam Speaker, as soon as I took office one of my priorities was to look 
into the issues of hawkers in Port Louis and to come up with appropriate measures to address 
this problem.   

In this context,  I started consultation process with all major stakeholders namely the 
Market  Traders  Association,  the  Street  Vendors  Association  and  the  Central  Market 
Association with a view to obtaining the ideas and suggestions for a long-term, sustainable 
and workable solution to this issue taking into consideration the following factors – 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

the legitimate aspirations of those hawkers to continue their trade so as to earn a 
decent living to support their families; 
 the qualm of the shop owners and the market traders who have time and again 
made representations to the effect that hawkers were operating at their doorstep 
and competing against them, and 
the judgement delivered by the Supreme Court in August 2012 ordering the City 
Council  of  Port  Louis  and  the  police  authorities  to  take  necessary  measures  to 
refrain hawking activities within 500 metres radius of the Central Market.  

However the Front Commun des Commerçants de l’île Maurice which was invited 

did not respond positively.   

I am informed that surveys were conducted by the City Council of Port Louis in the 
years  2009  and  2012  which  revealed  that  around  1200  hawkers  were  operating  along  the 
various roads in the city. 

I am further informed that two sites have already been identified at ex-CWA building, 
Decaen  Street  and  the  Immigration  Square  for  the  relocation  of  the  1200  hawkers.    I 
personally visited these two sites to assess their suitability in terms of the size, accessibility 
and availability of basic amenities.  I am given to understand that according to a study carried 
out  by  the  City  Council  of  Port  Louis  in  June  2013,  the  site  at  Decaen  Street  can 
accommodate about 606 hawkers whereas the one at Immigration Square, 357 hawkers. But I 
am trying to see if we can accommodate more hawkers on these sites.   

However, it is noted that major refurbishment works would have to be carried out at 
the ex-CWA building to make it functional and basic amenities such as covered stalls, toilet 
and parking facilities would have to be provided on these sites.  

 

38 

Madam Speaker, the House may wish to note that these works will entail substantial 
investments and will take time for implementation in view of the procurement procedures.  
We believe that with the concerted efforts of all the parties, namely the City Council of Port 
Louis,  the  Street  Vendors  Association  and  other  stakeholders,  this  project  can  be 
implemented in about a year. 

Mr Uteem: The hon. Minister mentioned that the building will take one year, may I 
know from the hon. Minister what action will be taken, if any, with regard to these hawkers 
now operating in Port Louis during that one year? 

Dr. Husnoo: Madam Speaker, as you know, this problem has been going on for ten 
years or more. I have been here only for two months. I have started working on this project, 
Madam Speaker. It is going to take a bit of time if we are going to have a durable solution to 
this problem. I don’t pretend I can solve this problem in a few months’ time. It is going to 
take its time, but we are working on it to find a durable solution, Madam Speaker. 

Mr Bérenger: The hon. Minister said that he visited two sites and he mentioned only 
two sites. I am given to understand that, in fact, he visited three sites with the Lord Maire of 
Port  Louis and others. So, what has happened to the third site that was  visited and that is 
supposed to be included amongst the sites available? Secondly, the former Minister made a 
statement that the former Minister of Finance that made Rs171 m. available for that project. 
Is this still available? 

Dr. Husnoo: Yes, Madam Speaker. In fact, when I did the site visit, I walked from La 
Gare du Sud to La Gare du Nord. But, it was not just these two sites, there were a lot of sites 
on the way. A lot of roads were included. I did not mention each and every road specifically. 
So,  we  visited  quite  a  number  of  sites.  That’s  No.  1.  Secondly,  you  are  right,  there  were 
Rs117 m. earmarked for the project, but, as I mentioned, we are working on these sites and 
that’s  going  to  take  a  bit  of  investment.  The  money  is  here,  we  are  going  to  invest  it  to 
provide these new facilities to hawkers. 

Mr Mohamed: The hon. Minister clarifies something. If the money is there provided 
for by the previous Government, if the sites are there provided for the previous Government, 
he  is  not  telling  the  House,  I  hope,  that  the  procurement  process  and  the  preparation  and 
implemention  of  the  previous  Government’s  project  to  come  with  the  solution  will  take  a 
year! I am sure that he can find ways and means of being more reasonable with the time that 

 

39 

it would take to implement the project because this goes against the very policy of the hon. 
Prime Minister, they are going fast, because it is extremely slow. 

Dr. Husnoo: Madam Speaker, this problem has been there for ages. Nobody has been 
in a rush to provide the solution for the last ten years. Now they want me to provide solutions 
very quickly. 

(Interrutptions) 

In  no  way!  I  am  working  on  it.  These  sites  have  been  identified.  We  are  planning  a  new 
project, better project than what was envisaged previously. That’s why we are working…. 

Mr  Uteem:  Madam  Speaker,  just  after  assuming  office,  the  hon.  Minister  made  a 
statement to the effect that duty-free vehicle would be given to marchands ambulants. Can I 
ask the hon. Minister how this measure will be applied and what is the time frame for the 
application of such measure? 

Madam Speaker: Excuse me! I don’t think this question can be accepted, because the 
question is in regard to hawkers, the number thereof and the measure that will be taken to 
regulate the situation. Next question, hon. Lesjongard! 

 

 

SAVANNE & BLACK RIVER - EDC HOUSES - ASBESTOS 

(No.  B/22  )  Mr  G.  Lesjongard  (Second  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in regard to the EDC 
houses in which asbestos is present, in Constituency No. 14, Savanne and Black River, he 
will state – 

(a) 

the number thereof that – 

(i) 

(ii) 

have been pulled down, and 

are still in place, and 

(b) 

the remedial actions that have been in respect thereof. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun):  Madam 
Speaker,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that,  in  Constituency  No.  14,  there  are  8  Cité  EDC, 
namely Bel Ombre, Case Noyale, La Ferme, L’Embrazure, La Mivoie, Petit Bien, Surinam 

 

40 

and Tamarin, comprising 479 housing units. Asbestos panels and corrugated iron sheets were 
used for their  construction.  The inhabitants of these housing  estates  are all owners of the 
housing units.  

With regard to parts a (i) and (ii) of the question, I wish to inform that out of the 479 

housing units -  

(i)  96 have been pulled down by their owners and have been reconstructed in concrete; 

(ii) owners of 330 housing units have carried out an extension to their existing housing 

units using concrete materials;  

(iii)45 housing units are in their original state without   any  extension.  They  are  being 

properly maintained by their owners and are in good physical conditions, and 

(iv) eight housing units are in deplorable conditions, out of which four units are occupied 

and four units are unoccupied. 

Madam  Speaker,  as  for  part  (b)  of  the  question,  the  inhabitants  of  these  housing 
estates  have  been  informed  of  the  schemes  available  for  the  upgrading  or  the 
reconstruction of their housing units. Any house owner who either wishes to upgrade or 
reconstruct his housing unit may take advantage thereof. The facilities include - 

assistance for the removal and carting away of  asbestos wastes; 
grant, on a priority of consideration basis,  for the   casting of roof slabs or for 
the  purchase  of  building  materials 
the  National  Housing 
 
subsidised loan facilities from the Mauritius Housing Corporation Ltd., and 
assistance from the National Empowerment   Foundation  for  the  construction 
of a housing unit. 

Development Company Ltd.; 

through 

(i) 
(ii) 

(iii) 
(iv) 

 

Madam Speaker, the sensitisation campaign on how to maintain the housing units and 
on facilities available for construction is an ongoing exercise undertaken by the officers of 
both the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life and my Ministry.  I shall personally effect a 
site visit to assess the situation de visu.  Besides, I shall immediately request the dedicated 
Committee at the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life to assess the situation in those EDC 

 

41 

Housing Estates and to provide an update as well as indicate whether there is any immediate 
intervention which is required. 

I can assure all my hon. Colleagues of No. 14 that we are going to effect a visit with 
all the hon. Members and with my officers with different Ministries.  After our visit, if there 
is any action to be taken, you rest assured that I’ll do it. 

Mr Lesjongard: Madam Speaker, I welcome the proposal of the hon. Minister and 
wish  to  reassure  him  that  my  colleagues  and  myself  will  be  part  of  the  visit  whenever  he 
carries  the  visit  in  Constituency  No.  14.  My  immediate  concern,  Madam  Speaker,  is  with 
regard to the extensions being carried to those houses. The Minister is aware and he stated in 
his answer that those houses belong to cités in that constituency and to poor families and very 
often  they  carry  out  extension  works.  Is  he  aware  that  whenever  those  families  carry  out 
extension works to those housing units, they are exposed to asbestos? 

Mr Soodhun: I just mentioned that wherever there is an extension, they contact my 
Ministry which will do the needful with the Ministry of Health to assist people so that, at 
least, we can take the necessary precautions with the asbestos products. This is being done 
and this is going to continue to be. 

Mr Mohamed: I thank the hon. Vice-Prime Minister for his answers. One question 
that  I  would  like  to  put  is  that  there  is  a  report  that  I  have  come  across  which  is  on  the 
Internet, and I believe it was à un moment commandité at the time when hon. Lesjongard was 
himself Minister of Housing and Lands, that talks about the responsibility of Government in 
all sorts of removal of asbestos and the financial responsibility and liability of Government in 
such removal which all Governments have not taken up to now. Could he consider, therefore, 
the possibility of not only assisting in a passive manner but, financially being responsible, as 
that report said one should be for helping people in carting away asbestos from those houses 
and also, not to forget - since I am on my feet - if you would allow me, Madam Speaker, that 
Constituency No. 13, the Cité Batimarais…. 

Madam Speaker: I am sorry, hon. Member! 

Mr Mohamed: …is also concerned… 

Madam Speaker: The question relates to Constituency No.14, let us stick to that. 

Mr Soodhun: Madam Speaker, I have already answered that we are already giving 
assistance and, if needed, yes. But,  I have mentioned that my colleague from the Ministry of 

 

42 

Social Integration and Economic Empowerment and I are going to work closely so that where 
it is needed we are not going to refuse. It is not only just to bring the television to assist. We 
are going to help these people. 

 (Interruptions) 

This is not our way just to go for publicity…. 

There are five years for election, it is not tomorrow. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Ganoo: This is an issue which has been raised several times in this House.  The 
hon. Vice-Prime Minister himself when he was Member of the Opposition asked a question, 
which I have in my hands. The solution to this problem is that, true it is that a few of these 
houses have been pulled down and rebuild by the owners, Some are in fair conditions, as the 
hon. Vice-Prime Minister just said himself but, the fact is that there are still many houses, not 
only in Constituency No. 14, but in other parts of the country which are still made of asbestos 
and in which our citizens are still living. We all know that this is a health hazard. 

Madam Speaker: Question, please!  

Mr Ganoo: In view of the fact that these houses constitute a health hazard, in view of 
the fact that the Truth and Justice Commission itself decreed that many housing estates have 
been constructed with asbestos, “a toxic substance which is damaging to health and that these 
houses should be pulled down”, and in view of the fact that the hon. Vice-Prime Minister 
himself, when he was a backbencher, asked a question if Government proposes to pull down 
these houses and build new ones free of charge - this was the question that was put to the 
previous  Housing  Minister  of  the  past  Government  very  often  -  can  the  hon.  Vice-Prime 
Minister come up with a special scheme for these old couples because most of them are old 
people and they are still living in these asbestos houses? True it is, there are many schemes 
that have been made available, but can the hon. Minister come up with a specific scheme to 
enable the people who are still living in asbestos houses… 

Madam Speaker: You have made your point, hon. Ganoo! 

Mr Ganoo: … to pull down these houses once for all so that Mauritius can be free of 

asbestos houses? 

 

43 

Mr Soodhun: Madam Speaker, as I mentioned, I am going to visit these houses and I 
am going to set up a Committee. Then, we are going to take this into consideration. I have 
already mentioned that we are going to give priority to all these houses. The hon. Member 
can rest assured together with all the hon. Members that we are going to sit down and put our 
heads together, be it Government or the Opposition, and come to a solution. 

Madam  Speaker:  The  Table  has  been  advised  that  the  following  Parliamentary 

Questions have been withdrawn….  

Yes? Okay, one last question! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Lesjongard: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since Government raised the issue of a 
plan Marshall - I think it was during the celebration of the 1st of February - can Government 
give a guarantee to the House that they will include construction or reconstruction of such 
houses in that plan Marshall? 

Mr Soodhun: Madam Speaker, I just mentioned that we have set up a Committee and 
the hon. Member is aware, as I have already mentioned, we are going to see to it that we are 
in a position to see what the situation is exactly and I have already set up an enquiry. After 
the enquiry, I will be able to know what decision we can take. But, the hon. Member can rest 
assured that this is not going to be neglected. 

Madam  Speaker:  The  Table  has  been  advised  that  the  following  Parliamentary 
Questions have been withdrawn: Nos. B/6, B/44, B/47. Hon. Members as a matter of courtesy 
I wish to inform you that the afternoon session will be chaired by the hon. Deputy Speaker as 
I am leaving on overseas mission. I now suspend the sitting for one and a half hour. 

At 1.00 p.m. the sitting was suspended.  

On resuming at 2.32 p.m. with the Deputy Speaker in the Chair. 

JET SKI & SEA KART – LICENCES  

(No. B/23) Mr G. Lesjongard (Second Member for Savanne & Black River) asked 
the Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External Communications whether, in 
regard to the licences issued by the Tourism Authority for the operation of Jet Ski and Sea 
Kart around the island, he will state if his Ministry is envisaging the cancellation thereof. 

 

44 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am informed by the Tourism 
Authority that it has received five applications for the operation of jet ski for the period July 
2013 to December 2014. Thereafter, the Tourism Authority issued five Letters of Intent as 
follows - 

•  Sports Craft Enterprises on 25 July 2013, at Black River; 
•  Blue Shell Co. Ltd. on 23 July 2013, at Pointe aux Piments; 
•  North West Fun Ltd. on 23 July 2013, at Trou aux Biches; 
•  Watercraft Enterprises Co. Ltd. on 31 July 2013, at Pointe Jérôme, and 
•  Cap Nord Ltd. on 02 December 2014, at Cap Malheureux. 

I am also informed that the Tourism Authority has issued Tourist Enterprise Licences 

and Pleasure Craft Licences to the following three companies - 

•  Blue Shell Co. Ltd., which started operations on 27 December 2013 
•  North West Fun Ltd., which started operations on 30 December 2013  
•  Sports Craft Enterprises, which started operations on 12 May 2014 

The conduct of jet ski activities were subject to conditions imposed by the Tourism 
Authority and clearance from the Ministry of Fisheries. The licences of Blue Shell Co. Ltd 
and North West Fun Ltd were suspended on 30 December 2014 for non-compliance with the 
main conditions imposed by the Ministry of Fisheries. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  I  am  further  informed  that  the  Ministry  of  Ocean  Economy, 
Marine Resources, Fisheries, Shipping and Outer Islands has on 30 January 2015 advised that 
with a view to reinforcing conservation of the marine eco system, it will not entertain any 
application for jet ski in Mauritius waters. The Tourism Authority has been requested to take 
note for compliance. 

In regard to sea kart, I am informed by the Tourism Authority that six Letters of Intent 
were issued for the period February 2014 to January 2015, including one which was issued 
nine  days  before  the  General  Elections.    Subsequently,  five  were  cancelled  due  to  non-
compliance with the conditions and withdrawal of applications.  One Letter of Intent is still 
valid up to December 2015. 

The  Tourism  Authority  has  issued  a  pleasure  craft  licence  to  Fun  Adventure  Ltd. 

which is valid until April 2015. 

 

45 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the Ministry of Fisheries has advised that the operation of 

Sea Kart can only be carried out outside the lagoon and excluding – 

Identified potential aqua culture sites; 

(i) 
(ii)  Marine protected areas; 
(iii)  Diving sites, and 
(iv)  Dolphin watching sites. 
The  conduct  of  this  activity  is,  therefore,  being  closely  monitored  and  a  decision 
thereon  will  be  taken  by  the  Tourism  Authority  at  the  appropriate  time  in  the  light  of  the 
advice of the Ministry of Fisheries. 

Mr Lesjongard: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, if we refer to the last part of my question, it 
deals with cancelling of those licences. I have heard the Deputy Prime Minister saying that 
objection has come from the Ministry of Fisheries. Do we understand that there is no clearcut 
policy from Government with regard to the use of jet ski and sea karts. 

The Deputy Prime Minister: There is certainly a clear-cut policy with regard to jet 
ski. The Ministry of Fisheries has advised that it is no longer in favour of operation of jet ski 
in Mauritian waters. That is clear. Now the first two licences were suspended because they 
have violated the conditions imposed by the Ministry of Fisheries which had inspected them 
before  the  general  elections,  in  fact,  but  they  were  suspended  after  the  election.  There 
remains a third operator which is in Black River which has not been suspended because they 
have not got any adverse report, so far. However, in view of the advice given and the opinion 
of the Ministry of Fisheries concerning operation of water ski, that file has been sent to the 
State Law Office for advice or for further action. In any case, it comes up for renewal in May. 
I must say that, as a matter of substance and also in form, I am against what has happened. 
Substance,  I  believe that the jet skis  are not appropriate  for the environment conditions in 
Mauritius.  In  form  in  that  these  licences  were  issued,  they  were  issued  in  total  secrecy, 
without any transparency at all. 

Mr Lesjongard: From the reply of the Deputy Prime Minister, I understand that he is 
dead against the use of jet skis in our lagoons. Then, do I understand that Government will 
shortly take a decision to ban the use of jet ski? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: The hon. Member should not put words in my mouth. I 
said that it is being reviewed in the light of the letter from the Ministry of Fisheries and once 

 

46 

the review happens and with the help of the State Law Office, we will take a decision as to 
whether or not to renew the licence at Black River. 

Mr Bérenger: At least, in the past, there was a policy when hon. Bodha was Minister, 
there was consensus, jet skis were banned. Take a decision. Why do we have to wait for a 
negative  comment  from  the  Ministry  of  Fisheries,  Tourism  Authority,  those  who  will  be 
appointed, revoked, replaced? Why not take a policy decision? Why not going back to the 
policy decision that was taken and ban it? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Ban it for future licences, of course, but the existing 
licence,  you  will  understand,  that  it is  different,  in  that the  licence  has  been  given,  with  a 
question  mark  as  to  how  the  licence  was  given.  We  should  not  also  do  something  that  is 
illegal. It must be done following legal advice from the State Law Office and that is how we 
operate. 

Mr Lesjongard: Can the Deputy Prime Minister confirm to the House, because from 
what he stated, no prior consultation was carried out with Ministries concerned, for example, 
the Ministry of Fisheries before the licences were issued? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: No, no, it is not what  I said.  I said that the licences 
were issued, in utmost secrecy. In fact, even a few days before the licences were issued, a 
parliamentary question was asked to the Minister. He did not mention at all that the letters of 
intent  had  already  been  issued  six  months  before.  So,  the  whole  thing  was  shrouded  in 
secrecy. Therefore, there was no transparency and no chance for anybody else to make an 
application for these licences. 

 

 

DOLPHIN & WHALE WATCHING - MEASURES 

(No. B/24) Mr G. Lesjongard (Second Member for Savanne & Black River) asked 
the Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External Communications whether, in 
regard to the activity of dolphin and whale watching, together with swimming with dolphins, 
he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Tourism Authority, information as to 
whether – 

(a) 

it is conducted in a responsible and sustainable manner, and 

 

(b) 

47 

whether he is aware of the dangerous and chaotic situation prevailing during 
the holding thereof and, if so, will he state the measures proposed to be taken 
in relation thereto. 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Mr Deputy Speaker, with regard to parts (a) and (b) of 
the  question,  I  am  informed  that  the  Tourism  Authority  (Dolphin  and  Whale  Watching) 
Regulations 2012 were promulgated in November 2012 with a view to – 

(i) 

ensuring  that  swimming  with  dolphins  and  whale  watching  activities  are 
carried out in a responsible, orderly, safe and sustainable manner; 
(ii) 
disturbance to cetaceans is minimized, and 
(iii) 
the safety and security of  swimmers and  protection of cetaceans are ensured. 
The  regulations  provide,  inter-alia,  that  the    activity  is  conducted  during  specified 
to  prevent 
hours,  pleasure  crafts  keep  a  reasonable  distance  from 
casualties/incidents  by  propellers,  an  insurance  cover  as  well  as  services  of    life-savers, 
medical first aid kit and an oxygen kit are available at all times.  

the  cetaceans 

I am, however, informed that these regulations have met with much resistance from 
operators on the ground that they were costly to implement and are therefore not being fully 
complied with.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I have placed the notion of quality in service delivery at the 
forefront of my agenda.  I will, therefore, review the whole situation in the very near future 
and take measures as appropriate, in particular training of skippers, the observance of safety 
and security norms and well-being of the dolphins.  Meanwhile, I have directed the Tourism 
Authority to make an assessment of the situation before deciding on the way forward. 

Mr Lesjongard: I thank the Deputy Prime Minister for his reply. True it is that this 
activity attracts a lot of tourists, but he will agree that the way it is being carried out right now 
is in a very irresponsible and unsustainable manner. What we need to do is to supervise that 
activity. 

The Deputy Speaker: Please put the question! 

 Mr Lesjongard:  May I know what measures… 

The Deputy Speaker: Please put the question!  

 

48 

Mr Lesjongard: Yes, let me come to my question. You should give me some time to 

come to my question. 

(Interruptions) 

Je comprends que ce n’est pas grave. Excusez-moi, M. le président ! 

Mr Lesjongard: What measures he is envisaging to take so that, in the meantime, 

these activities are carried out in a responsible and sustainable manner? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: On this point, we have no issue, we are on the same 
wavelength. The activity should be encouraged because it is popular with tourists and also 
takes care of the livelihood of a number of people on that west coast. It should be carried on, 
but it should also be carried on in a way that it does not ruin our reputation with tourists, it 
does  not  endanger  the  dolphins  and  also  it  does  not  endanger  the  tourists  who  may  be 
swimming  or  whatever  with  the  dolphins.  So,  this  whole  thing  has  got  to  be  taken  into 
account.  It has taken a lot of time, there is a lot of resistance, but at some point in time, we 
will  have  to  insist  that  everything  happens  according  to  the  rules  and  regulations  and 
according to what international practice recommends. 

Mr Ganoo: If I heard the hon. Deputy Prime Minister properly, Mr Deputy Speaker, 
Sir, I understand that he intends to conduct a review exercise of the whole situation, including 
probably the legislation also. May I ask the hon. Deputy Prime Minister whether in view of 
the review exercise that he proposes to conduct, he will kindly have proper consultations with 
the different associations of pleasure craft owners so that a consensus might be eventually 
reached? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: I, in fact, saw in a file that my predecessor had a lot of 
discussions with a lot of people, but could not reach consensus. So, hopefully, we can reach 
consensus, but at the end of the day, we will have to do what we have to do. 

Mr Bérenger: Sir, I take it that the regulations referred to must have been prepared 
by  the  Ministry  of  Tourism  and  the  Tourism  Authority.  Can  I  know  who  has  the 
responsibility to supervise the application thereof and if it is the Coast Guard then we have a 
real problem. I know that the hon. Deputy Prime Minister himself criticised the Coast Guard 
some  time  back,  about  a  year  ago.  Rightly  so!  So,    if  it  is,  if  I  am  right,  we  have  a  big 
problem  and  can  I  insist,  therefore,  that  the  Coast  Guard  -  I  think  it  is  under  the  Prime 
Minister’s  control  -  that  we  must  put  our  heads  together?  Otherwise  the  supervision  will 
remain as it is, that is, dead!  

 

49 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it is the same issue that we 
have all over Mauritius, in fact, the implementation of laws and regulations are sometimes 
haphazard, but I agree that we must ensure that once we have the regulations that they are, in 
fact, enforced and that is the issue. The enforcement of the regulations is the main issue. 

EBENE LINK ROAD & VANDERMEERSCH STREET - CONGESTION 

(No.  B/25)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  road 
congestion along Ebene link road to Vandermeersch Round about and Vandermeersch Street, 
Rose Hill towards Beau Bassin, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Road 
Development Authority, information as to if urgent measures will be taken under the Road 
Decongestion Programme to alleviate the hardship of road users thereat.  

Mr Bodha: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the Government is fully aware of the hardship of 
road  users  plying  on  the  Ebène  Link  Road  particularly  between  the  roundabout  on  Julius 
Nyerere  Avenue    and  that  of  Vandermeersch  Street  and  along  the  Vandermeersch  Street 
itself. In the past various surveys have been carried out by the Road Development Authority 
and the Traffic Management and Road Safety Unit and several options have been proposed. 

However,  the  best  option  remains  the  construction  of  the  A1-M1  road  and  bridge 
between Coromandel and Sorèze and as a connection to Port Louis to the completed Ring 
Road under the proposed Road Decongestion Programme. This will provide great relief to the 
traffic along Vandermeersch Street and its interchange with Ebène and Réduit.  

However, in the meantime, the following mitigating measures are being considered –  

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

A  third  lane  will  be  created  from  the  roundabout  at  Ebène  Link  Road  with 
Vandermeersch Street to this junction with Malartic Street; 
Provision  of  a  dedicated  right  turning  lane  from  Vandermeersch  Street  and 
Malartic Street; 
Prohibition  of  vehicular  traffic  from  Sivananda  Avenue  and  Malartic  Street 
into Vandermeersch Street; 
Traffic lights at the junction of Vandermeersch  and Malartic Streets will be 
put off and the following junctions will be controlled by the Police –  
(a) Junction of Larché Street and Malartic Street; 
(b) Junction of R. Rouchecouste Street and Charles de Gaulle Street  

 

50 

(v) 

(c) Junction of Port Louis/St Jean Road and Malartic Street. 
Traffic  from  Royal  Road,  Rose  Hill  and  proposing  to  join  Vandermeersch 
Street will have the option of doing so through Reverend Lebrun Street. 
Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  these  measures  will  be  made  operational  during 

morning and afternoon peak hours only. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  May  I  ask  the  Minister  whether  he  had  a  fresh  look  since  he  has 
mentioned this question having a third lane along Vandermeersch Street from the roundabout 
of the CEB. I think the whole population of that area will strongly object to that because we 
have, I would say, the most popular Promenade Armand which  people have been using for 
years. Once a Minister came there and we said we would have a grève de la faim there. So, I 
am sure the whole population of Rose Hill will strongly object to that, if he could review. 
Also,  among  the  measures  proposed  by  the  Minister  here  I  reiterate  the  issue  of  having  a 
bypass,  a  small  bridge  behind  the  QEC.  There  have  been  surveys  and  site  visits  but, 
unfortunately, that area was not on the list of the decongestion programme. Can the Minister 
have a fresh look with his Officers to have this bypass behind the Ebène SSS to go near the 
Reverend Lebrun Street? 

Mr  Bodha:  There  are  two  observations,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  First  of  all,  as 
regards  the  third  lane,  I  have,  in  fact,  raised  this  point  and  I  have  been  told  that  the 
encroachment  is  going  to  be  only  on  one  metre.  So,  I  do  not  think  that the  whole  area  as 
regards … 

Okay, let us see what can be done then.  

(Interruptions)  

Second, as regards the bridge, it is not a small bridge, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. I have 
been told that, in fact, it is a major bridge. Anyway, in the light of what hon. Bhagwan has 
said, I am going to review the situation and I would be very grateful to him if he has any 
other  suggestions  and  proposals  because  at  the  end  of  the  day  what  we  want  is  a  better 
fluidity of the traffic.  

Mr Bhagwan: Pending the proposal mentioned by the Minister, can I make a request 
to him? The measure proposed about putting Police Officers here and there has been on paper 
for years, but on the field, in fact, there is congestion the whole day. One day we will have a 
problem when somebody is sick and needs to go to hospital. Can the Minister, at least, liaise 

 

51 

with the Commissioner of Police to see that there are regular Police Officers because once we 
were having Police Officers only when a Deputy Prime Minister was residing there? Can I 
make a request to the Minister to have Police Officers posted at the different junctions nearly 
the whole day? 

Mr Bodha: I will do what can be done, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

Mr Lesjongard: Will the Minister agree that the roundabout at the junction between 

Vandermeersch and the Ebène Link Road is of no use? 

Mr Bodha: Well, that is a technical question. I think we may ask the TMRSU to see 

whether this can be done. 

Mr Uteem: I heard the hon. Minister mentioning again the bridge which is going to 
link A1M1 which had been referred to by the previous Government. May I know from the 
hon.  Minister  whether  there  is  a  time  frame,  procurement  procedures  have  already  been 
followed, where is the status and when can we expect the opening of that bridge and road? 

Mr Bodha: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in fact, we are now seeing what are the priorities 
of the decongestion programme and we are going to have  consultations with the Minister of 
Finance and we will have a set of priorities. It is going to be one of the priorities. 

Mr Bhagwan: Sir, in the main planning of the Ebène Cybercity and the whole region, 
questions  were  asked  here  previously  and  mention  was  made,  and  I  know  that  there  was 
sufficient land reserved for the construction of a new bus terminal being given that the Place 
Margeot had been built  over the  years  for the  eastern region. Can  I make a request to the 
Minister to have a fresh look of having a new bus stand project be implemented which will 
help to solve part of the problem? 

Mr Bodha: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I will look into the matter. 

ALBION VILLAGE - CITE MARCEL CABON– SEWERAGE 

(No.  B/26)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities  whether, in regard to 
the acute sewerage problem at Cité Marcel Cabon Albion Village, he will –  

(a) state if urgent consideration will be given for the compulsorily acquisition of land 

for the installation of a leaching plant thereat, and  

 

52 

 (b)  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Waste  Water  Management 
Authority, information as to if consideration will be given for regular pumping of 
individual sewers to alleviate the hardship of the inhabitants. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  from  available  records,  the  President  of  Albion 
Village Council, as far back as January 2013, made representations through the hon. Member 
regarding  this  unacceptable  and  parlous  state  of  affairs.  Yesterday,  I  visited  the  site  in 
company of two officials of the Authority. Indeed, there is an acute waste water issue in that 
area.  

The House will wish to note that in 2013, the Authority identified a plot of land for 
the placement of a common septic tank. Designs were also put up. The matter unfortunately 
rested there. I have now requested the Authority to revisit the matter urgently. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, I have asked the Authority to effect at least a 

one-off pumping. I understand that this cannot be done on a regular basis. 

Mr Bhagwan: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir,  I raised that issue on many occasions here 
that there was a plot of land identified and it was the responsibility of the Minister of Housing 
to  identify  the  owner  and  have  a  compulsory  acquisition.  Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Vice-Prime 
Minister to, at least, make a request to the Minister to, at least, speed up …. 

Mr Collendavelloo: Of course! 

Mr Bhagwan: Hon. Vice-Prime Minister, I have not yet finished! 

Mr Collendavelloo: Sorry! 

Mr  Bhagwan:  With  due  respect,  can  I  make  a  request  to  the  hon.  Vice-Prime 
Minister to ask the Minister of Housing to expedite matters if they have identified the owner 
of the land and if it is okay, then to proceed accordingly? 

Mr Collendavelloo: The question is longer than the answer!  

(Interruptions) 

The plot of land is identified, but those were the days of indolence when nothing was being 
done! Now things are being done; I have talked to my hon. colleague… 

 

53 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Collendavelloo:  We will follow up and the cost is Rs8.95 m…  

                                                     (Interruptions) 

Mr Bhagwan:  We will definitely follow up here and come and see to it whether the 

reply of the hon. Vice-Prime Minister has been initiated.   

The Vice-Prime Minister has informed us of one off. If the Wastewater Management 
Authority does not have funds - I still remember that there was a case which was made with 
the National Empowerment Foundation where it was agreed that the NEF, being given that 
people  of  that  housing  estate  are  of  very  low  income,  they  can’t  even  afford  to  pay  this 
private lorry, I’ll say once per day, at least regularly, every fortnight or every month to have 
this cesspit emptied. 

Mr  Collendavelloo:    Well,  what  I  have  been  given  to  understand  is  that  regular 
pumping on a regular basis would not be practicable and would not be feasible.  However, I 
have seen the site, it is impossible as it is just near a school, the health hazards are extreme 
and  we  are  going  to  do  this  pumping.  The  problem  is  that  houses  have  been  built,  I 
understand,  on  the  place  where  the  water  table  is  very  high.  So,  this  is  why  in  the  rainy 
season  and  since  we  have  been  in  office,  rain  has  not  stopped  falling.    In  Albion  it  is 
extremely high, but now we can do the one off pumping and we will see how to monitor the 
situation.  

The Deputy Speaker:  Next question, hon. Uteem! 

STC - MOGAS & GAS OIL – MONEY COLLECTED  

(No.  B/27)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Industry,  Commerce  and  Consumer  Protection  whether,  in 
regard  to  Mogas  and  Gasoil,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  State 
Trading Corporation, information as to the amount collected, in terms of – 

(a) excise duty;  
(b) Maurice Ile Durable levy; 
(c) contribution to Road Development Authority;  
(d) contribution to Rodrigues transportation and storage;  
(e) contribution to the Build Mauritius Fund;  

 

54 

(g) contribution to subsidy on Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG);  
(g) flour and rice, and  
(h) Value Added Tax for 2014 and estimated for 2015, indicating if Government will 
consider reviewing the various components of the price structure thereof to bring 
down their prices. 

Mr Gungah: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am informed by the State Trading Corporation 
that,  with  regard  to  Mogas  and  Gas  Oil,  the  amount  collected  in  respect  of  the  various 
components are as follows – 

 

S/N 

 

Payable to 

Product 

(a) 

Excise Duty 

 

(b)  Maurice 

Ile 

Durable Levy 

Mauritius 
Revenue 
Authority 

Mauritius 
Revenue 
Authority 

Mogas 

Gas Oil 

Mogas 

Gas Oil 

 

(c) 

 

(d) 

 

Contribution 
the RDA 

to 

Road 
Development 
Authority 

Mogas 

Gas Oil 

to 

Contribution 
Rodrigues 
Transportation and 
Storage 

Rodrigues 
Subsidy Fund 

Mogas 

Gas Oil 

2014 
Rs M 

2015 

(Estimated) 

Rs M 

1,896 

738 

1,966 

886 

53 

67 

325 

391 

9 

11 

55 

81 

337 

470 

29 

43 

(e) 

Contribution 

to  Ministry 

of  Mogas 

176 

728 

55 

Build  Mauritius 
Fund 

Finance 

Gas Oil 

224 

1,075 

Mogas 

Gas Oil 

Mogas 

Gas Oil 

263 

336 

1,107 

1,147 

273 

403 

1,171 

1,462 

 

 

(f) 

 

Subsidy  on  Rice, 
Flour and LPG 

Trading 

State 
Corporation 

(g)  VAT 

Mauritius 
Revenue 
Authority 

 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, as regards the last part of the question, I propose to consult my 
colleague,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  on  the  possibility  of 
reviewing the price structure for Mogas and Gas Oil. 

Mr Uteem:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, only six days before the announcement of the 
new price structure, the hon. Minister gave an interview to the press and it is important to 
have announced a substantial fall in the price of Gas Oil and Mogas, and I quote – 

“La decision de faire baisser les prix, fait ressortir le ministre, sera prise afin 
que  la  population  mauricienne  se  rende  compte  tout  de  suite  que  l’Alliance 
qu’elle  a  portée  au  pouvoir,  tient  à  respecter  son  engagement  pris  pendant  la 
campagne electorale pour rendre la vie des mauriciens moins pénible. » 

May I know from the hon. Minister, why is it that only one month after coming into power 
they are getting back to what was one of their central themes in their electoral campaign? 

Mr Gungah:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in January 2015, the price structure for Mogas 
and  Gas  Oil  was  reviewed  to  increase,  first,  the  contribution  to  the  Build  Mauritius  Fund 
from  R1  to  Rs4  and  the  contribution  to  the  Rodrigues  Transportation  and  Storage  from  5 
cents to 16 cents. 

We are all aware that the country needs immediate measures to face the water problem 
and,  as  a  responsible  Government  and  as  announced  in  the  Government  Programme,  the 
water supply problem is our priority and huge amounts have to be invested to solve the water 

 

56 

distribution problem.  That is why the contribution to Build Mauritius Fund was increased 
from R1 to Rs4 to have the necessary funds. 

The Deputy Speaker: Last question, hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem:  The hon. Minister has announced that just on this item of Build Mauritius 
Fund,  we  are  going  to  pay  Rs1.2  billion  from  users  abroad.    May  I  know  from  the  hon. 
Minister why is it that only those who are road users who buy oil and gas oil, have to fork out 
for  national  problems  as  opposed  to  the  general  budget  that  is  done  every  year  under  the 
supervision of this Parliament?  Why are we creating this huge fund which will not be under 
the scrunity of Parliament? 

Mr Gungah:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the country is highly indebted and if we start 
taking  debts  again,  we  will  be  facing  a  situation  which  will  be  very  difficult  for  the 
forthcoming  generation.  So, the best decision was to increase the Build  Mauritius Fund to 
solve the water problem.  

Mr Bérenger:  I heard the figures, but I did not take them down.  The contribution to 
subsidy on three things: LPG gas, flour and rice.  We have been given the amount of funds 
collected.  Can we have on these three items – 

• 

• 

• 

LPG subsidy;  

Flour subsidy, and 

Ration rice subsidy  

the sum actually spent in 2014?  We have the sum collected, how much was spent on these 
three items of subsidy? 

Mr Gungah: I don’t have the information, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

The Deputy Speaker: This is the last supplementary question on this. 

Mr Uteem: The hon. Minister announced again that a substantial amount of money 
will go to the MID Fund (Mauritius Ile Durable Fund). May I know from the hon. Minister 
why are we still paying for the MID Fund when the Government has already abolished the 
Office of MID Commission? 

 

57 

Mr Gungah:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the MID does not fall under my responsibility 
and  it  will  be  presumptuous  on  my  behalf  to  decide  whether  the  subsidies  should  be 
discontinued or continued. 

QUARTIER SOLITUDE, PLAINE MAGNIEN – INHABITANTS - 

RELOCATION 

(No.  B/28)  Mr  D.  Ramful  (Third  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien) 
asked  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications 
whether  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Airports  of  Mauritius  Ltd., 
information as to the implementation of any project for the relocation of the inhabitants of 
Quartier Solitude, Plaine Magnien and, if so, will he state where matters stand. 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I thank the hon. Member for 
this question. In fact, my attention had already been drawn to the issue by the hon. T. Henry, 
hon. M. Jhugroo and hon. B. Hurreeram.  

I am informed by the Officer in Charge of the Airports of Mauritius Co. Ltd that the 
Solitude village at Plaine Magnien is located on the approach path of aircraft serving the Sir 
Seewoosagur Ramgoolam International Airport. This represents a hazard to both the safety of 
aircraft operations and to the health of the inhabitants of the said locality.  

AML commissioned a survey and a valuation exercise in 2008 in view of acquiring 
the properties of Solitude to create an operational safety buffer zone around the airport and to 
relocate  the  inhabitants.  The  survey  was  carried  out  by  Alan  Tinkler  &  Ramlackhan 
Company  with  a  view  to  acquire  the  properties  of  solitude  to  create  an  operational  safety 
buffer zone around the airport. This exercise revealed that 26 households were concerned and 
out of which 17 have the title deeds and 9 did not possess title deeds or lease agreements.  

In August 2009, the then Government had set up a Ministerial Committee to look into 
the  question  of  relocation  of  the  inhabitants  of  Solitude  Village  in  Plaine  Magnien.  The 
Committee had a first meeting on 27 August 2009 and took cognizance of the situation. The 
Committee  recommended  amongst  others  for  the  relocation  of  illegal  occupants  by 
Government and for IML to acquire the land from property owners concerned.  

I am informed by AML that it is still waiting to proceed with the acquisition of the 
said land once the case of illegal occupancy of the portions of land have been resolved by the 
relevant authorities.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I have spoken with my colleague, the Vice-Prime Minister, 
Minister of Housing and Lands who is agreeable, in principle, to the relocation of the nine 

 

58 

squatters.  I  have  requested  IML  to  update  the  evaluation  exercise  with  a  view  to 
compensating the land owners concerned once the squatters have moved.  

Mr Ramful: I am thankful to the hon. Deputy Prime Minister for his answer on this 
question, but may  I also invite him to the fact that to look into the matter and if he could 
expedite  matters  given  that  I  have  in  my  possession  a  letter  from  the  District  Council  of 
Grand Port to the effect that the residence and land owners of that particular area are being 
denied their right to effect constructions on their respective properties and may I table this 
letter? 

It  is  a  letter  dated  05  May  2014  from  the  Acting  Chief  Executive  of  the  District 

council. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I agree with the hon. Member 
and with all the other hon. Members from that Constituency that these families whether they 
be  squatters  or  land  owners  are  living  in  a  difficult  situation  and  I  will  do  my  utmost  to 
expedite matters.  
 

CAMP CAROL - STATE LAND - LEASE 

 (No.  B/29)  Mr  D.  Ramful  (Third  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien) 
asked  the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  whether,  in  regard  to 
Government decision to allow leaseholders of State land having a housing unit to purchase 
their respective plots of land, he will state where matters stand in regard to the leaseholders of 
State land at Camp Carol, Kenya in Constituency No. 12, Mahebourg and Plaine Magnien. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun): Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir, following the amendment of the State Land Act in 2013 to allow for the 
sale  of  State  land  on  which  stands  a  residential  unit  at  a  nominal  price  of  Rs2000.,  on  04 
February  2014,  an  advertisement  was  made  by  my  Ministry  inviting  applications  for  the 
purchase of State land by building site lessees. Some 120 applications were received from the 
lessees of Camp Carol,  Kenya  for  the purchase  of their respective plot  of land.  It is to be 
pointed out that in cases where the residential sites are more than 10 perches in extent, these 
plots cannot be sold and would remain on lease. 

 
Given the haphazard development by the lessees in the locality whereby the boundary 
limits  have  not  been  respected,  my  Ministry  is  presently  carrying  out  a  fresh  survey  to 

 

59 

determine the exact extent of State land being occupied by each lessee. The ongoing survey 
exercise is expected to be completed in four months’ time. 

 
If the plot of the State land leased is found to be of an extent of 10 perches or less, a 
survey  will  be  drawn  up  in  respect  of  each  plot.  The  building  site  lessee  will  then  be 
requested to contact a Notary to complete procedures for the purchase of the State land. In 
case of plots exceeding 10 perches, a new lease agreement will be granted to the lessees. 

Mr Jhugroo: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, being given that the former Government has 
spent more than 10 years with this problem, can I ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister if he can 
settle this matter as early as possible? 

Mr Soodhun: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir,  I  would just inform the Chief  Whip of the 

Government that in four months’ time the survey exercise would be completed. 

BANGLADESHI WORKERS - PERMITS 

(No.  B/30)  Mr  M.  Gobin  (First  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  &  Souillac) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and  Training  whether,  in 
regard to the  granting/renewal of permit for the  recruitment of  Bangladeshi workers, since 
July 2005 to date, he will state if he will consider the advisability of setting up a fact-finding 
committee or a full-fledged Police inquiry to be carried out thereinto. 

Mr  Callichurn:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  grant  of  Recruitment  License  is 
governed under the Recruitment of Workers Act, 1993 by the Licensing Authority, namely, 
the  Permanent  Secretary  of  my  Ministry.  In  accordance  with  the  same  legislation,  appeals 
against the decision not to grant recruitment licence are referred to for consideration by the 
Minister.  

I  am also aware that the Director of Audit has, in his report for the  year ended 31 
December 2013, pointed out some shortcomings in the manner applications and appeals for 
the grant of Recruitment licence have been processed. According to a report, amongst others, 
consolidated  returns  which  were  to  be  submitted  within  a  prescribed  timeframe  were  not 
being forwarded by agencies. Moreover, some agencies were operating despite the expiry of 
their licences and appeals made after the prescribed delay of ten days have been entertained 
and granted.  

In some cases recruitment licence had been issued on appeal despite objection from 

the Prime Minister’s Office. 

 

60 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in view of the shortcomings highlighted by the Director of 
Audit,  I have instructed  my Permanent Secretary to carry out  an in-depth enquiry into the 
matter.  If such enquiry discloses any irregularities or malpractices, I will then decide as to 
whether it would be appropriate for the setting up of a Fact-Finding Committee or to order a 
full-fledged Police enquiry. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  am  also  proposing  the  setting  up  of  a  High-Level 
Committee under the aegis of my Ministry to look into issues relating to the employment of 
foreign workers in general, including the review of the existing regulations, the streamlining 
of procedures, as well as the proper operation of recruitment agencies in line with the new 
policy orientation of this Government as announced in its Programme 2015-2019. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Gobin! 

Mr Gobin: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, may I know from the hon. Minister what is the 
expected  time  frame  for  this  in-depth  enquiry  being  conducted  at  the  level  of  Permanent 
Secretary from the hon. Minister, please? 

Mr Callichurn: Well, I cannot say for now.  It will take the time it will take. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Jhugroo: Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  Can I ask the hon. Minister how 

many Bangladeshi workers have been recruited since July 2005 up to now? 

 (Interruptions) 

Mr Callichurn: I don’t have the figures actually, in 2005 up to now, I can tell for 

2014, the figure is around 21,252. 

Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Minister confirm whether the Consulate for Bangladesh 
was the father of the former Minister and one of the recruiting agents there was the brother-
in-law of the former Minister? 

 Mr Callichurn: For which period is the hon. Member referring to? 

(Interruptions)  

Unfortunately, I do not have the information at hand. I need notice of the question. 

 

61 

 

RIVIÈRE DES ANGUILLES - DAM - CONSTRUCTION  

(No.  B/31)  Mr  B.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard 
to the project for the construction of a dam at Rivière des Anguilles, he will state if - 

(a) a tender exercise thereof was launched and, if so, when, and  
(b) the financing thereof has been secured until its completion. 
The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo): Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, as regards part (a), the Central Procurement Board 
is now evaluating certain expressions of interest for Consultancy for the design, review and 
construction supervision of the Rivière des Anguilles Dam. I have to inform the House that 
this  project  dates  back  to  at  least  September  2012  when  the  Agence  Française  de 
Développement agreed to fund the project in an amount of 62.5 million Euros. Because of 
inordinate delays on the Mauritian side, the AFD cancelled the loan agreement.  

The financing will have to be reviewed probably from Government side, we shall see 

where to get the money. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Jahangeer! 

Mr Jahangeer: Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. Can the hon. Minister confirm if 
the consulting engineers involved in Bagatelle Dam will be barred from participating in this 
project? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Sorry, I did not hear the last part. If the consulting engineers of 

the Bagatelle Dam will be… 

Mr Jahangeer: Will be barred? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  Well,  they  have  been  barred.  Coyne  and  Bellier  were  the 
consultants for Bagatelle Dam.  They made a mess of it all and the result is that now we have 
perhaps to sustain arbitration proceedings. Coyne and Bellier also obtained the consultancy 
for  the  Rivière  des  Anguilles  Dam.    At  least  one  good  decision  was  taken  to  cancel  them 
immediately and they are now, I understand, barred from applying for consultancy. I hope the 
Central Procurement Board will follow this consistently. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

 

62 

Mr Bérenger: Can I ask the hon. Minister what was the amount, the finance offered 
by l’Agence Française de Développement and the conditions - I take it was a loan - and what 
is, at this stage, the revised estimated cost to come of that dam? 

Mr Collendavelloo: The initial estimated project cost was Rs4.5 billion. Now, it has 
got to be updated, of course, because this amount is the initial one. We will update this in the 
light of what the new consultants will have to say. We hope that we can start the project by 
March 2017 to end in December 2020.  

To  be  more  direct  to  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition’s  question,  it  was  a  loan 
amount of Rs62.5 m. from the Agence Française de Développement. The duration was to be 
November 2012 to 31 March 2018 with the date of first disbursement being 07 January 2013. 
This deadline not having been respected, the loan agreement was cancelled.  

(Interruptions) 

No.  62.5  million  Euros.  The  cost  Rs4.5  billion  and  the  loan  was  in  Euros,  62.5 

million. 

Mr Ganoo: The hon. Minister mentioned the Consultants with regard to the project.  

Can he give the names of the consultants? 

Mr Collendavelloo: No. I am afraid not. It is with the Central Procurement Board. 

There is a shortlist. They are now going to identify the Consultant. 

Mr Ganoo: The hon. Minister talked about the inordinate delays which hindered the 

progress of this project. Can he elaborate on what he means by inordinate delays? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Well, I enquired into this.  The official version which was given 
to me was because of the Coyne and Bellier problem with Bagatelle Dam, they terminated the 
agreement with the Consultants and that led to these delays.  I am not too sure I follow this 
official explanation very well, let us take it for what it is worth now, but the fact is that there 
were inordinate delays. 

RODRIGUES - CYCLONE BANSI  

(No. B/32) Mr J. Leopold (Second Member for Rodrigues) asked the Minister of 
Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management  whether,  in 
regard to the aftermath of cyclone Bansi in Rodrigues, he will state - 

 

(a) 

63 

if  consideration  will  be  given  for  the  setting  up  of  a  Rodrigues  Emergency 
Rehabilitation  Programme,  in  partnership  with  the  Rodrigues  Regional 
Assembly, for the implementation and emergency projects for the construction 
and rehabilitation of - 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii)  masonry;  
(iv) 
(v) 

retaining walls, and  
retention  basins,  as  a  matter  of  urgency  and,  if  so,  when  and,  if  not, 
why not, and 

bridges;  
drains;  

(b) any other remedial measures envisaged for any other affected sectors. 

Mr Dayal: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, after the removal of all cyclone Bansi warnings 
over Rodrigues on Saturday 17 January 2015, I led a Task Force to Rodrigues comprising 
representatives of the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Centre, the Special 
Mobile  Force  and  the  Central  Electricity  Board.  On  Sunday,  18  January  2015.    The  main 
objective of the Task Force was to take stock of the impacts of Cyclone Bansi in Rodrigues 
and  to  ensure  that  prompt  action  is  taken  by  the  concerned  authorities  regarding 
reconstruction  works.  This  exercise  was  carried  out  jointly  with  representatives  of  the 
Disaster Committee of Rodrigues. 

 Fortunately,  except  for  the  electricity  network  and  agriculture,  Rodrigues  did  not 
suffer considerable damages in terms of infrastructure and buildings, and no casualties were 
reported.  At  the  time  of  the  visit,  around  80%  of  the  electricity  network  had  already  been 
restored.  With the support of the Task Force, the whole network was restored after a few 
days.    In  the  circumstances,  the  need  for  the  setting  up  of  a  Rodrigues  Rehabilitation 
Emergency Programme is not felt. However, during the visit of the Task Force, certain works 
were  identified  for  disaster  risk  reduction  and  mitigation.    These  include  the  gradual 
replacement  of  the  ‘Radiers’  located  along  the  coastal  roads  by  bridges,  construction  or 
rehabilitation  of  drains  along  existing  roads  as  appropriate  and  the  construction  of  a  flood 
wall.  The  Public  Infrastructure  Division  of  the  Rodrigues  Regional  Assembly  has  been 
advised to look into the execution of these works.  The Ministry of Public Infrastructure and 
Land Transport has agreed to provide technical assistance whenever required.   

 

64 

With regard to part (b)  of the question, coastal erosion was noted between Anse des 
Anglais to Grand’ Baie.  My Ministry will shortly arrange to send experts from the Japanese 
International Cooperation Agency presently working at my Ministry and a team of officers to 
carry out a technical assessment and to advise the Rodrigues Regional Assembly on remedial 
measures.  Thank you. 

Mr Leopold:  I would like to ask the hon. Minister whether he is aware that there are 

no armed vehicles in Rodrigues which can be used during adverse seasons? 

Mr Dayal:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, this was observed and remedial actions will be 
taken once we make the necessary arrangements for housing the appropriate infrastructure. 
So, armed vehicles will be provided to hospitals and also to certain emergency services. 

 

MAURITIUS/RODRIGUES – MV MAURITIUS PRIDE 

(No.  B/33)  Mr  J.  Leopold  (Second  Member  for  Rodrigues)  asked  the  Minister  of 
Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, Shipping and Outer Islands whether, in regard 
to the Mauritius/Rodrigues route, he will state where matters stand as to the operation and to 
the proposed replacement of the MV Mauritius Pride.    

Mr Koonjoo:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with regard to the first part of the question the 
MV  Mauritius  Pride,  a  25-year  old  vessel,  stopped  all  operations  in  February  2014  for 
technical reasons. 

According to information received  from the Mauritius Shipping Corporation Ltd, the 
vessel had already undergone dry docking and thorough repair works in 2013 at a total cost of 
some  Rs70  m.  and,  in  2014,  an  additional  Rs100  m.  of  new  repairs  to  maintain  its 
seaworthiness as well as its compliance with the mandatory Conventions of the International 
Maritime Organisation. 

The Mauritius Shipping Corporation Ltd. sold the ship in September 2014 for the sum 
of USD 1,080,000, (i.e. some Rs30 m). The House may wish to note that the purchase price 
of the vessel was around Rs200 m.   

 

65 

In  order  to  fulfil  the  transport  requirements  of  the  Rodrigues  People,  Mauritius 
Trochetia  has  stopped  its  services  to  Reunion  and  Tamatave  and  is  currently  focusing  its 
services only to Rodrigues and Agalega to ensure that there is no disruption of service.   

Operations  of  Mauritius  Trochetia  to  Reunion  and  Tamatave  are  expected  to  resume 

with the arrival of a new container vessel.   

As regards the proposed replacement of MV Mauritius Pride, the previous Government 
took the decision to replace the vessel by a container vessel of 350 to 500 container capacity 
as a back-up for Mauritius Trochetia.  In this perspective, following an expression of interest, 
an international shipbroker, Howe Robinson, has been appointed to advise and recommend 
on  the  purchase  of  second  hand  container  vessel  as  a  back-up  for  Mauritius  Trochetia.    I 
understand that the ship broker has, since 27 November 2014, already submitted its proposal 
to  the  Central  Procurement  Board  for  consideration.  The  Central  Procurement  Board  has 
shortlisted a number of vessels, but given the specificities and the operational constraint of 
the port of Port Mathurin, none of these shortlisted vessels meet all the criteria and technical 
requirements  to  guarantee  a  safe  and  risk  free  berthing  at  Port  Mathurin.    In  this  regard, 
further  investigation  and  diligence  is  being  carried  out  to  find  out  whether  some  of  the 
shortlisted vessels could still berth at Port Mathurin with a minimum acceptable level of risk.   

Subject  to  the  above  outlined  limitations  and  the  timely  approval  of  the  Central 
Procurement Board and the availability of funds, the replacement vessel could be finalised 
around April 2015.  

Mr Leopold:  Given the fact that the Mauritius Trochetia is the only vessel which is 
serving Rodrigues to make the liaison within the islands of Rodrigues and Mauritius and the 
Mauritius Trochetia is going to dry dock for maintenance, can I ask the hon. Minister what 
are the dispositions he has taken so as to ensure liaison between the two islands and whether 
the hon. Minister is contemplating lowering the airfare so as to allow people to move freely 
from Mauritius to Rodrigues? 

Mr Koonjoo:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, as far as the airfare is concerned, I am unable 
to answer this question but, so far, the replacement of Trochetia if in case something happens, 
we are taking precautions and in case we get the money from the Ministry of Finance we are 
thinking of either to buy a new vessel or to charter a vessel.  We are looking forward to it; 
arrangements have been made in case anything happens to charter a vessel. 

 

66 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  what  procedures  have  been  used  before 

selling Mauritius Pride and who purchased it? 

Mr  Koonjoo:  The  Mauritius  Pride  was  sold  in  September  2014  to  RJ  Maritime 
Consultancy Limited for USD 1,080,000, as I said, plus an additional of approximately USD 
72,000 for its remaining bunker on board, that is, a total of approximately Rs36 m. net of any 
brokerage commission. 

Mr  Bérenger:    Clearly  there  is  danger  being  given  that  we  are  relying  on  only  one 
vessel, Le Trochetia, which is not a new vessel.  I heard the hon. Minister say that in case - he 
seems to have thought about it - Le Trochetia is not available, runs into trouble, he will have 
to  charter  a  vessel.    Can  I  know  whether  the  advance  work  has  been  done,  that  a  list  of 
possible  chartered  vessels  that  can  be  chartered  has  been  identified?      Because  the  hon. 
Minister,  himself,  pointed  out  that  Port  Mathurin  is  a  difficult  harbour,  not  any  chartered 
vessel will be able to come in and out.  Do we have a list of possible chartered vessels? 

Mr Koonjoo:  We are looking upon that, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  But, I can guarantee 
the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  that  everything  will  be  done  so  as  no  problem  arises 
between now and 15th of April. 

The Deputy Speaker: Next question!  

 
 

DOMAIN NAME “MU” - REGISTRATION 

(No. B/35) Mr M. Gobin (First Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) asked 
the Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the domain 
name “mu”, he will state – 

(a) the name of the person/entity in whose name the domain is registered, indicating in 

the case of a corporate body the name of the -  
(i) directors;  
(ii) shareholders, and  
(iii) beneficial owners thereof, and  

(b)  the  measures  Government  proposes  to  take  with  a  view  to  securing  the  domain 

name “mu” in the name of the State, indicating the time frame thereof. 

 

67 

Mr  P. Jugnauth:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the Dot Mu (.mu), which is the country 
code Top Level Domain for Mauritius, is registered in the name of Internet Direct Ltd.  In 
relation  to  part  (a)  (i)  of  the  question,  the  present  Directors  of  the  said  company  are  Mr 
Prefumo Jean Pierre Guito and Mr Subbiah Subramaniam. 

In  relation  to  part  (a)  (ii)  of  the  question,  the  shareholders  are  Mr  Kwok  Kem  Yen 
Kwok Vee Kong also known as Yann Kwok and Ms Kwok Kem Yen Ah Chook Yolande, 
each holding 95% and 5% shares respectively out of stated capital of Rs50,000, as evidenced 
from records obtained from the Registrar of Companies. 

With regard to part (a) (iii) of the question, it would appear that the beneficial owner is 
Yann Kwok as he has been the relevant party who has continuously approached the previous 
Government in respect of renting or selling of the gov.mu second level domain.  According to 
records  and  Notes  of  Meetings  available  at  my  Ministry,  he  has  had  several  rounds  of 
discussion  and  negotiation  with  Mr  Gunputh  Rao  Rama,  the  then  Senior  Adviser  of  the 
previous Prime Minister. These negotiations have revolved between an amount of Rs25 m. 
claimed by Mr Yann Kwok in October 2013 and Rs864,217,926 claimed by him in October 
2014. For the .govmu domain while for the claim made for .mu in 2005 was to the tune of – 
this is what I am informed - USD20 m. 

So,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  as  regards  part  (b)  of  the  question,  according  to 
international best practices as recommended by Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and 
Numbers,  what  is  called  commonly  as  ICANN  which  is,  in  fact,  the  international  body 
responsible for internet domain names a Multi-Stakeholders Forum for Internet Governance 
should  be  set  up  in  Mauritius. 
  This  Multi-Stakeholders  Forum  would  comprise 
representatives of the local internet community, including amongst others, the private sector 
and academia. 

In this context, my Ministry has engaged discussions with the different stakeholders to 

form this forum so that we can promptly act. 

My Ministry has also applied to join the Government Advisory Committee of ICANN 
which will allow Mauritius to voice out the danger of one man holding the Dot Mu Domain.   

The  establishment  of  the  Forum  will  enable  the  local  internet  community  to  take  an 
active participatory role in the policy formulation for the administration of the .mu domain 

 

68 

and internet domain names in Mauritius, with a view to securing the .mu country code Top 
Level Domain. 

In fact, the purpose of the re-delegation is to secure this .mu administration in the name 
of the Multi-Stakeholders Forum and not in the name of the State as per the guidelines of 
ICAC. 

I  am  informed  that  the  process  of  re-delegation  is  long  haul  and  has  to  have  the 
participation  of  the  internet  community  at  large  and  a  case  be  made  to  ICANN  for  re-
delegation.  Further, the Forum should be ready in terms of technology and resources to be 
able to actually take over in case re-delegation is approved - which explains the long haul 
nature of the process. 

My Ministry is also liaising with IT consultants on the way forward. 

Mr  Gobin:    Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  when  the  hon.  Minister  mentioned  claims  for 
certain  payments,  may  I  know  from  him  whether  these  payments  have  been  made  or  they 
have been put on hold? 

Mr  P.  Jugnauth:    Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  those  who  are  responsible  for  that 
company,  Internet  Direct  Ltd,  there  have  been  negotiations  with  them.    These  were  the 
figures that were proposed to Government, but I understand that there has been no conclusion 
of any sort of amicable settlement.  Therefore, no payment has been made. 

Mr  Bérenger:    May  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  the  date,  the  year  on  which  the 
domain name “mu” was registered in the name of the – I won’t try to repeat the owners, but 
the  company  we  are  talking  about?    Has  an  inquiry  been  carried  out  to  find  out  whether 
anybody  was  responsible  for  not  an  individual  company,  but  for  Mauritius  to  register  that 
domain  name,  directly  or  through  any  State  entity?    Has  somebody  somewhere  failed  to 
assume his responsibility? 

Mr  P.  Jugnauth:    Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  do  not  have  the  exact  date,  but  I  am 
informed that it was registered by Mr Kwok.  I can find out the exact date and provide it to 
the House.   

With regard to if there has been any irresponsibility from anybody in Government at 

any time, well, that also I would have to find out in order to provide the House with this. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

69 

Mr Uteem:  Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  Can I know from the hon. Minister 
whether there is any formal agreement between the Government and this company, and if this 
is the case, whether he is prepared to table a copy of that agreement? 

Mr  P.  Jugnauth:    Well,  I  must  say,  it  has  been  difficult  for  me  to  find  out  all  the 
information about this process.  I am still looking into it, but, as at now, from what I know, I 
have been informed that there has been no agreement as such.  But I can tell the House that I 
am looking into the matter and trying to get more information.  Of course, what I have said 
today, if there is any rectification to be made, I will definitely come to the House for that. 

CHEBEL & BARKLY – HOUSES - CONSTRUCTION 

(No. B/36) Mr R. Bhagwan (First Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) asked 
the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
construction of houses at Chebel and Barkly, Beau Bassin, he will state – 

(a) the number thereof as at todate under construction, giving details of the - 

(i) commencement date thereof, and  
(ii) expected date of completion thereof  

(b) if proper drainage and amenities thereof have been provided therefor and  
(c) the criteria that will be used for the allocation thereof. 
The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun):  Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir, at the very outset, I must point out that there is no house construction 
site in Barkly as such.  I am sure that my colleague is aware. I am informed that, as a matter 
of  fact,  the  National  Housing  Development  Company  Ltd.  is  presently  embarked  on  the 
construction of 93 housing units in Chebel under three different work contracts as follows - 

(i) 

(ii) 

The construction of 73 housing units over a plot of land of an extent of 5A38P 
in Chebel, near Barkly. The works started in May 2014 and are expected to be 
completed in October 2015.  

The construction of eight housing units on a vacant plot of land of an extent of 
37 perches within Firinga Two NHDC housing estate. These works started in 
April 2014 and are expected to be completed in March 2015. 

(iii)  The construction of six housing units on a vacant plot of land of an extent of 
35  perches  within  Firinga  Two  NHDC  housing  estate  and  six  additional 

 

70 

housing units on a plot of land of an extent of 41 perches within Firinga Four 
NHDC housing estate.  These works started in October 2014 and are expected 
to be completed in August 2015.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, as regards part (b) of the question, I have to inform the House 
that,  in  all  housing  projects,  provision  is  being  made  in  the  relevant  contracts  for  basic 
infrastructure  such  as  road,  footpath,  drains,  individual  water  and  electricity  supply  and 
appropriate waste water disposal.  

I shall impress on the NHDC the need to ensure that contractors strictly respect their 

contractual obligations. 

With  regard  to  part  (c)  of  the  question  pertaining  to  criteria  for  allocation,  I  am 

informed that - 

(i) 

(ii) 

applicants should not be owner of a house or of a residential plot of land, and 

their  monthly  household  income  should  be  between  Rs6,200  and  Rs10,000 
and applicants should have been registered in the Social Register of Mauritius 
with  the  Ministry  of  Social  Security,  National  Solidarity  and  Reform 
Institutions. 

Mr Bhagwan: In fact, there are two sites, the Firinga is at Chebel and the first site is 
at Maingard and Barkly. Where the site is situated it is a low range – terrains marginaux que 
l’industrie sucrière a donné au gouvernement. Can I impress upon the Minister, for the first 
site at Barkly Maingard, that he requests the NHDC to revisit the site because it is found in a 
very low region and is a flood prone area and  also to have this survey being  effected and 
make sure that these new houses may not be found in flood prone regions? 

Mr Soodhun: Yes. Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am going to take the suggestion of hon. 

Bhagwan into consideration. 

LA NICOLIERE RESERVOIR – POTABLE WATER 

(No. B/38) Mr K. Teeluckdharry (Second Member for Pamplemousses & Triolet) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to 
the La Nicolière Reservoir, he will state if any recent test has been carried out to ascertain 
that potable water thereof is free from cyanotoxins and cyanobacteria known as blue-green 

 

71 

algae and, if so, the outcome thereof, indicating if the water supply thereof as at to date is 
safe for consumption. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo): I am informed by the Central Water Authority that the quality of raw water 
at La Nicolière reservoir is being regularly monitored. So far, although the presence of algae 
in the raw water has been detected, no toxic-green algae have been found in the course of any 
of the groups test at the CWA laboratory.  

Constant monitoring is being effected. Raw water is treated and is therefore safe for 
consumption save that usual precautions such as boiling of water should be followed. The La 
Nicolière treatment plant will be upgraded. For that purpose, Consultants have already been 
shortlisted. 
 

WORKERS (FOREIGN) – WORK PERMIT 

(No. B/39) Mr K. Teeluckdharry (Second Member for Pamplemousses & Triolet) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and  Training  whether,  in 
regard to foreign workers, he will state - 

(a) the number thereof from;  

(i) India;  
(ii) China;  
(iii) Bangladesh;  
 (iv) South Africa, and 
(v) other countries who are under contract of employment, indicating if 

Government proposes to renew their work permits, and 

(b) if Government intends to -  

(i) impose a security bond on foreigners seeking work permit in Mauritius, and/or  
(ii) review the ratio thereof to that of local workers with a view to reducing local 

unemployment. 

Mr  Callichurn:    Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  according  to  the  record  available  at  my 
Ministry, there are currently around 38,843 foreign workers in Mauritius among whom 7,815 
Indians,  3,114  Chinese,  21,252  Bangladeshi,  112  South  Africans  and  6,550  from  other 
countries. 

It has been the policy of the Ministry of Labour, Industrial Relations and Employment 
to  allow  companies  to  have  recourse  to  foreign  labour  when  the  skills  required  are  not 

 

72 

available locally.  In this regard, there are guidelines in accordance with section 4(1) of the 
Non-Citizens (Employment Restriction) Act, 1993 for applications for work permits. 

The renewal of work permits is presently being considered on a case to case basis so 

as not to cause prejudice to companies which already have projects or orders in hand. 

However, as I indicated earlier to my reply to PQ B/30, in line with the Government 
Programme 2015-2019 to the effect that the recruitment of foreign workers will be limited to 
scarcity areas and the work permit regulations will be reviewed, I am reiterating my proposal 
for the setting up of a high level committee under the aegis of my Ministry to look into the 
issues relating to employment of foreign workers in general, including the review of existing 
regulations, the streamlining of procedures, the need for a security bond or deposit, the ratio 
of foreign workers to local workers as well as the proper operation of recruitment agencies. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mohamed! 
Mr  Mohamed:  May  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  as  regards  security  bonds  and  his 
intention  to  review  it,  is  he  aware  that  it  was  reviewed  in  actual  fact  by  the  previous 
Government under the Directors of  the then Vice-Prime Minister and Minister of Finance 
who thought that it would be business-friendly to do away with the bonds? 

Mr Callichurn: I am aware, but we are planning to review the whole system. 
Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Minister inform the House whether his Ministry has got 

any control with regard to the recruiting agents from India, China and Bangladesh? 

Mr Callichurn: From China we do, from India as well we do, but unfortunately not 

from Bangladesh. 

Mr Uteem: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, may I know from hon. Minister whether on an 
on-going  basis  there  is  anyone  in  his  Ministry  who  monitors  the  employment  contract  of 
these workers because  we have a lot of workers who seem to be working in Bakeries and 
other things as opposed to their place of work for which their permit had been allocated? 

Mr Callichurn: Unfortunately, I don’t have the information at hand. I need notice of 

the question. 

Mr Mohamed: With regard to the same issue and as the question puts it reviewing 
the ratio and with a view of reducing local unemployment and now since I see that there is a 
new portfolio to that Ministry which is very good news that specifically of training which is 
an excellent and welcome news, would the hon. Minister consider - since now he holds the 
portfolio for training - to enlist, since I gather the MITD (The Mauritius Institute for Training 
and  Development)  as  well  as  the  Human  Resource  Development  Council  is  now,  I  hope, 

 

73 

under his portfolio, since he is - if I am not mistaken now, as I said good news - the Minister 
of Training? 

Mr  Callichurn:  Yes  indeed.  But  we  have  not  come  to  a  decision  regarding  the 
institution being transferred to my Ministry. We are still working on it and we should come 
with a solution shortly. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Last question! We’ve spent a lot of time on this question. I 

would rather move to the next question! 

Mr  Ganoo: With regard to reviewing the ratio of local workers in order to reduce 
local unemployment, may I ask the hon. Minister when this exercise would be carried out and 
if he could pay a special attention to the building and construction sector where, in fact, the 
employment of foreign workers is impacting heavily on the employment of our local masons? 
And may I also, in the same breath, appeal to him to have a look at a recent report which was 
commissioned  by  the  building  and  construction  companies  written  by  Mr  Pierre  Dinan  in 
which the latter highlighted the very extremely urgent situation of our local workforce in this 
particular sector? 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Ganoo,  you  cannot introduce new matters  which have 

not been said before. Thank you. 

Mr Ganoo: I think it is directly relevant to part (ii) of the question; the question of 
local workers with a view to reducing unemployment. I was drawing the Minister’s attention 
to the Construction Sector, Mr Deputy Speaker. 

Mr Callichurn: I take good note of the hon. Member’s point and I shall eventually 

when working on the paper take into consideration your proposition.  

 
 

RIVIERE DU REMPART & PAMPLEMOUSSES  DISTRICT COURTS & POLICE 

STATION - RENT 

(No.  B/40)  Mr  K.  Teeluckdharry  (Second  Member  for  Pamplemousses  & 
Triolet) asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to 
the premises rented by  Government for housing the District Courts of Rivière du Rempart 
and Pamplemousses and the Pamplemousses Police Station, he will state - 

(a) the terms and conditions thereof, indicating the amount of rent paid therefor on a 

monthly basis, and  

(b) if Government proposes to - 

 

74 

(i) construct new buildings or  
(ii) restore the existing ones. 

Mr  Bodha:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  With  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I  am 
informed by the Master and Registrar that both the Pamplemousses and Rivière du Rempart 
District  Courts  are  located  in  the  same  rented  building  situated  in  Pamplemousses.    The 
details regarding the terms and conditions are as follows - 

(i) 

(ii) 

The  lease  agreement  started  on  16  October  2013  and  will  end  up  on  31 
October 2018. 
The monthly rent payable is Rs400,000 exclusive of VAT escalating annually 
at  the  same  rate  as  the  Consumer  Price  Index  established  by  the  Central 
Statistical Office or 5% per annum whichever is the higher.  

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  with  regard  to  part  (b)  (i)  and  (ii)  of  the  question, 
Government has in the 2015-2019 programme provided for the review and upgrading of all 
District Courts premises to ensure better services to all stakeholders.  

As regards Pamplemousses Police Station, I am informed by the Police Department 
that  it  is  housed  in  a  rented  building  owned  by  Mrs  Sohawon  Bibi  Azizah.    It  is  of 
approximately 2917 square feet and is situated at Royal Road Pamplemousses.  

The Lease Agreement has been renewed for a period of two years with effect from 01 
February 2014, at a monthly rental of Rs37,500, as recommended by the Valuation and Real 
Estate Consultancy Services, Valuation Department.  

As regards the construction of new buildings for Pamplemousses Police Station and 
restoration of existing ones,  I  am also informed that provision has been made in the 2014 
Budget for the construction of a new Police Station at Pamplemousses.  In that connection, a 
portion of land of the extent of 0A 45 P has been acquired by the Government and vested 
with the Prime Minister’s Office.  Preliminary design of the new Police Station is in progress 
at the Architecture Section of my Ministry and is expected to be completed by mid-March 
2015. 

Mr Teeluckdharry: This answers my question. I have no further question. 

Mr Ganoo: Can I ask the hon. Minister if any tender exercise was carried out before 

these premises were rented and if he can give the name of the owner? 

 

75 

Mr  Bodha:  From  the  information  provided  to  me,  in  July  2013,  the  Judiciary 
launched public advertisement inviting prospective owners to submit a building for rent to 
house both the District Courts, but only one, Mascarene Court submitted an offer. 

Mr  Baloomoody:  I  understand  my  question  will  be  answered  by  the  hon.  Prime 

Minister and it will come as Written Question now. 

STATE LANDS - BENEFICIARIES 

(No.  B/42)  Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis  East)  asked  the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  whether,  in 
regard to State lands, he will state if consideration will be given for an in depth inquiry to be 
carried out to establish - 

(a) 
(b) 

the beneficiaries thereof for the last 40 years, and  
the number thereof that are still being used to generate income. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun): Mr 
Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  regarding  part  (a)  of  the  question,  hon.  Members  would  surely 
understand that compilation of such a list would be quite a time consuming exercise, as we 
are considering a forty year period. The more so that… 

(Interruptions) 

‘Coffre la pas encore ouvert.’ 

The more so that during such a long period there have been numerous cases of transfers and 
also sale of State lands to lessees. However, the information is being compiled and, at the 
earliest  possible  -  before  five  years  -  it  will  be  placed  in  the  Library  of  the  National 
Assembly. 

The Deputy Speaker: Last question! 

Mr Mohamed: I thank the hon. Minister for his answer. I see and I totally agree that 
40 years is indeed a long time, but since the new Government has been talking and making a 
lot  of  do  about  the  importance  of  transparency  which  I  totally  applaud,  the  importance  of 
being clear and open which I totally applaud, therefore, as far as the 40 years is concerned, I 
only wanted to find a roundup figure.  But because transparency is important, would the hon. 
Minister  therefore  consider  putting  up  a  special  team  in  order  -  in  the  name  of  that 

 

76 

transparency  that  you  rightly  hold  up  to  uphold  -  to  work  on  this  before  the  year  is  over 
because for this Government, this transparency is indeed important? 

Mr Soodhun: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am sure the hon. Member is aware since I 

have been appointed as Minister and you have seen the transparency starting, you know.  

(Interruptions) 

So,  I  can  assure  the  hon.  Member  this  is  for  the  first  time  that  at  the  Ministry  of 
Housing and Lands, we are going to appoint a full-time lawyer and we have already set up a 
committee since the following day I have been appointed as Minister. I am sure I am coming 
in this august Assembly to give the long list which concerns - you know - 40 years, but not 40 
years, recently we can start from 10 years. I think it would be enough to understand. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Time is over! 

MOTIONS 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10 (2) 

The Prime Minister: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I beg to move that all the business on 
today's Order Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun) rose 

and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

 (4.02  p.m.) 

PRESIDENT'S ADDRESS - MOTION OF THANKS 

Mrs  D.  Selvon  (Second  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West):  Mr  Deputy 

 
Speaker, Sir, I beg to move the motion standing in my name on the Order Paper, namely - 

"That an Address be presented to the President of the Republic of Mauritius in the 
following terms - 

"We, the Members of the Mauritius National Assembly, here assembled, beg leave to 
offer our thanks to the President of the Republic of Mauritius for the Speech which he 

 

77 

has addressed to us on the occasion of the Opening of the First Session of the Sixth 
National Assembly." 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I would like first of all to congratulate Madam Speaker for 
 
her nomination as Speaker of the National Assembly, particularly as the first woman Speaker 
of  this  august  Assembly.  I  am  happy  that  Parliamentary  representation  of  our  gender  will 
increase in the future as stated as follows in the Presidential Speech, on page 58 - 

 
“Our  electoral  system  will  be  reformed  to  introduce  a  dose  of  proportional 
representation in the National Assembly and guarantee better women representation.” 

The word ‘better’ is not devoid of meaning because in the current historical period, 
women have still not obtained their deserved place at all levels of the Government, of the 
State  generally  and  in  all  other  sectors  of  our  society.  In  this  context,  I  will  quote  Louis 
Aragon, one of the greatest modern French thinkers, who wrote, in 1963 - 

« L’avenir de l’homme, c’est la femme. Elle est la couleur de son âme. » 

 (Interruptions) 

I wish to thank sincerely the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and the Leader of the House, 
Sir Anerood Jugnauth, for having entrusted to me the presentation of the motion of thanks in 
response to the Presidential Address.  This is indeed a great honour bestowed upon me, as a 
member  of  the  National  Assembly  for  the  first  time,  and  on  the  occasion  of  my  Maiden 
Speech. 

The great Charles Darwin said, I quote - 

“It is not the strongest of the species that survive, nor the most intelligent, but the 
one most responsive to change.” 

This  Government  is  precisely  proposing  its  programme,  for  the  five  years  to  come, 

under the title ‘Achieving Meaningful Change.’ 

Mauritians are both very intelligent and responsive to meaningful change. They know 
that now is the time for real, positive and decisive change. And that is exactly why they voted 
this Government into office on the basis of the programme now contained in the Presidential 
Speech,  while  vigorously  rejecting  at  the  polls  the  former  Government’s  electoral 
programme. 

 

78 

Mr Deputy Speaker, je vais poursuivre mon discours en français pour qu’il soit mieux 
diffusé  et  compris  par  la  population,  du  fait  que  nos  médias  sont  pour  la  plupart 
francophones. 

Tout  d’abord,  à  la  faveur  de  ce  ‘Maiden  Speech’,  je  parlerai,  le  devoir  du  député 
l’exige, de ma circonscription de Grande Rivière Nord Ouest/Port Louis Ouest, mais dans le 
contexte du discours-programme. C’est une honte pour la République de Maurice qu’une des 
régions  de  sa  capitale  ait  été  aussi  négligée  par  les  autorités  pendant  les  quelques  dix 
dernières années. Le discours-programme présente, dans ce contexte, une lueur d’espoir pour 
ma circonscription. 

Je suis fière d’avoir été choisie pour la représenter et c’est aussi une des régions les plus 
défavorisées du pays. Je vais défendre farouchement, et en toute indépendance, les intérêts de 
mes  mandants.  Je  suis  bouleversée  par  la  situation  scandaleuse,  concernant  l’eau,  le  grave 
manque de logements décents, les bidonvilles d’une atroce misère, comme à Balloram Lane, 
Pailles, et ailleurs, l’exclusion socio-économique, le manque d’infrastructures sportives, un 
grave problème de drogue, l’inégalité et la  grande pauvreté qui  y règnent - des problèmes 
d’une  ampleur  phénoménale.  Je  me  crois  autorisée  d’invoquer  l’esprit  du  discours-
programme pour plaider pour un ‘meaningful change’dans ma circonscription. 

Et pour me ranger aussi aux côtés de mes mandants dans leur méfiance face au projet 
de CT Power qui, dans l’état actuel des choses, manque de transparence et leur fait craindre 
pour  leur  santé.  Ils  sont  aussi  -  et  je  les  soutiens  -  révoltés  par  une  odeur  nauséabonde 
provenant de la station de traitement d’eau usée qui envahit la raison, rendant misérable la vie 
des résidents, exigeant une solution radicale quel qu’en soit le coût. Nos pêcheurs sont très 
affectés par la destruction des récifs par la population et les effets néfastes des travaux dans le 
port,  ce  qui  affecte  tragiquement  leur  gagne-pain  et  interpelle  les  autorités  surtout  dans  la 
région de Bain des Dames. 

L’ancien  gouvernement  et  l’ancienne  administration  municipale  qu’il  contrôlait  ont 
laissé perdurer un grave manque de drains surtout dans les quartiers et morcellements habités, 
de  La  Butte  à  Richelieu,  ainsi  qu’une  absence  de  diverses  autres  mesures  contre  les 
inondations, une saleté répugnante qui affectent les rues, les cours d’eaux et l’environnement 
en général. Il y existe aussi un manque d’infrastructures sportives dans des régions comme 
Camp  Benoît,  Pointe  aux  Sables  et  ailleurs.  Et  quand  il  en  existe  comme  à  Vallijee,  les 
terrains sont peu ou pas entretenus ou irrigués et restent fermés pendant des mois alors que, 

 

79 

par exemple, l’irrigation goutte-à-goutte est une solution pour garder les terrains de foot verts 
pendant toute l’année. Enfin, il faut créer dans la capitale des routes piétonnières embellies et 
touristiques comme en Europe ou aux États-Unis, pour concilier les intérêts des commerçants 
qui ont pignon sur rue avec ceux des marchands ambulants, dont beaucoup viennent de ma 
circonscription, pour que tout ce monde-là, qui contribue à l’économie interne du pays, puisse 
opérer et prospérer. 

M. le président, de l’inégalité, je citerai un philosophe français célèbre, André Comte-

Spoville, qui a écrit en 2004, dans son ‘Guide Républicain’- 

« L’égalité des chances, c’est le droit de ne pas dépendre exclusivement de la chance, ni 
de la malchance. C’est le droit égal, pour chacun, de faire ses preuves, d’exploiter ses 
talents, de surmonter, au moins partiellement, ses faiblesses. C’est le droit de réussir, 
autant qu’on le peut et qu’on le mérite. C’est le droit de ne pas rester prisonnier de son 
origine,  de  son  milieu,  de  son  statut.  C’est  le  droit  d’être  libre,  en  se  donnant  les 
moyens  de  le  devenir.  C’est  protéger  l’avenir,  autant  que  faire  se  peut,  contre  les 
injustices du passé, et même du présent. » 

L’éducation  postsecondaire  et  la  formation  professionnelle  permettront  la  libération  de  la 
pauvreté, si l’égalité des chances les rend accessibles. Bien sûr! Venant d’une famille pauvre, 
je  peux  témoigner  que  je  suis  sortie  de  la  misère  grâce  à  l’éducation  et  à  la  formation 
professionnelle.  J’ai  eu  la  chance  d’accumuler  une  expérience  considérable  dans  les 
professions de marketing, d’enseignante, de travail avec les femmes et enfants victimes de 
violence familiale, et de me former professionnellement comme psychologue et avocate. Je 
me  suis  fait  élire  députée  pour  participer  à  ce  que  le  discours-programme  appelle  un 
‘meaningful change’ en proposant, entre autres choses, une fourniture d’eau adéquate tous les 
jours, un programme massif de construction de logements pour les plus démunis, l’éducation 
tertiaire étendue au plus grand nombre et la création d’un grand nombre d’emplois, par - entre 
autres choses - un nouveau miracle économique. 

Je me crois autorisée d’affirmer que l’éducation doit être réformée de manière à être 
adoptée  par  nos  compatriotes  les  plus  démunis  comme  l’outil  par  excellence  pour  leur 
libération de leur quotidien de misère et de souffrances. Ainsi, j’accueille favorablement le 
chapitre sur l’éducation dans le discours-programme. Et cet engagement à la page 6, où le 
nouveau gouvernement lie directement l’éducation à la libération de l’individu de la pauvreté, 
je cite - 

 

80 

“Government will set up a special financial assistance scheme to help students from 
modest  families  to  pursue  tertiary  education  and  thus  contribute  to  their  own 
economic and social advancement” 

Cependant, j’insisterai sur la base de mon expérience dans l’enseignement au Canada, 
que dans chaque classe dans toutes les écoles, on devrait placer un deuxième enseignant. Soit 
un Teacher Assistant, comme on l’appelle au Canada. Il faudrait recruter et former quelques 
milliers  de  Teacher  Assistants.  Cela  permettra  aux  enseignants  de  chaque  classe  de  leur 
déléguer  la  responsabilité  d’offrir  un  encadrement  supplémentaire  séparé  aux  élèves  jugés 
difficiles ou à problème, surtout en retard sur les autres enfants. Ce système permet de réduire 
les échecs, y compris dans les écoles ZEP. Il existe des diplômes professionnels de Teacher 
Assistant  délivrés  dans  les  grands  pays,  par  diverses  institutions  postsecondaires.  Ces 
quelques milliers de jobs peuvent être créés très vite. 

M. le président, petite fille encore, je fus formée politiquement par mon père ouvrier 
et militant qui me tenait la main pour m’emmener dans les années 70 aux meetings du MMM 
pour écouter ses plus grands ténors, y compris l’actuel Premier ministre et l’actuel Leader de 
l’opposition,  promettre  des  changements  profonds  et  transformateurs  de  notre  société,  un 
socialisme à visage humain. Militante précoce, je me suis déjà battue seule, et j’ai obtenu une 
victoire face à une grande propriété sucrière alors que j’étais collégienne, lorsque les grands 
patrons ont cédé à ma révolte contre la discrimination, et permis aux enfants des ouvriers et 
des  laboureurs  d’aller  à  l’école  et  au  collège  dans  les  autobus  de  la  propriété.  Ce  fut  un 
exemple de ‘meaningful change’ qui mit fin à une pratique discriminatoire, et qui a vu aussi 
l’éclosion de ma vocation de politicienne, inspirée par le désir que notre société soit fondée 
sur l’égalité des chances. 

M. le président, je vais essayer d’expliquer l’expression ‘meaningful change’, thème 

central du discours-programme. 

La République de Maurice a un besoin urgent d’une renaissance glorieuse après dix 
années  de  déclin  généralisé.  Jamais,  dans  notre  histoire  nationale,  n’avons-nous  souffert 
concernant nos meilleures valeurs morales, un déclin d’une ampleur aussi grande que durant 
cette sombre période, venant d’un des niveaux les plus élevés de l’appareil d’État. Puisque 
l’exemple vient d’en haut, ce déclin s’est aggravé et répandu pour menacer les fondements 
mêmes  de  la  République  en  détruisant  l’éthique  très  stricte  exigée  pour  la  bonne 
gouvernance. 

 

81 

Nous avons besoin d’un ‘meaningful change’ après tant d’abus de pouvoir, d’érosion 
de  nos  valeurs  démocratiques,  d’arrestations  fréquentes  et  arbitraires  de  journalistes,  de 
syndicalistes, d’opposants politiques, de protestataires et d’autres personnes exprimant leur 
désaccord avec le gouvernement du jour. On a fermé le parlement pendant presqu’une année 
par crainte d’une mise en minorité – ce qui, en droit, au Canada, a été comparé à un coup 
d’État contre la Constitution de Westminster. Des légistes ont rappelé que ce fut la raison qui 
valut au roi Charles 1er d’Angleterre d’avoir la tête tranchée par le parlement anglais en 1649. 
A  Maurice,  le  peuple  a  pacifiquement  décapité  l’ancien  régime  dans  un  grand  sursaut 
démocratique. 

Le ‘meaningful change’ est d’importance vitale pour la nation, parce que la norme, 
durant ces dernières années, a été un manque de transparence dans l’administration publique, 
allant  des  nominations,  recrutements  et  promotions  en  violation  de  la  démocratie,  à 
l’allocation sans appels d’offres de contrats de plusieurs milliards de roupies. 

Le  discours-programme  prescrit  un  ‘meaningful  change’  aussi  parce  que  des 
tendances sectaires et divisionnistes ont été encouragées de l’intérieur de l’appareil d’État, 
une pratique qui ne peut que fragiliser l’unité nationale. Aucun gouvernement n’a le droit de 
s’identifier avec un mouvement sectaire, quel qu’il soit, comme l’a fait l’ancien régime, et 
d’introduire  dans  l’appareil  d’État  des  gens  qui  prônent  publiquement  leur  foi  dans  le 
communalisme. 

Le discours-programme vise à ce que la nation tourne le dos aussi à des pratiques de 
dilapidation des fonds publics atteignant des proportions records, du jamais vu durant toute 
l’histoire du pays, de par leur ampleur. Cela concerne, entre autres, de nouvelles autoroutes 
qui  se  sont  effondrées  pour  avoir  été  mal  construites,  pourtant  à  coups  de  milliards  de 
roupies,  le  Bagatelle  Dam  dont  le  fond  ne  cesse  de  s’enfoncer  dans  la  terre,  et  des 
mégaprojets, véritables mirages ou éléphants blancs, comme le Dream Bridge au-dessus de 
Port  Louis  et  les  projets  de  Jin  Fei  et  de  Neotown,  dont  rien  que  les  préparatifs  et  les 
infrastructures  préliminaires  ont  coûté  encore  des  centaines  de  millions  de  roupies. 
‘Meaningful  change’  veut  dire  la  fin  de  ces  pratiques  scandaleuses  et  le  retour  d’un 
gouvernement  dont  le  Premier  ministre,  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  réalisa,  en  contraste,  des 
mégaprojets magnifiques et productifs comme le Caudan Waterfront, le Midlands Dam ou la 
Cybercité, méritant pleinement, au passage, le titre de Père de l’île Maurice moderne. 

 

82 

M. le président, le discours-programme veut créer une nouvelle île Maurice. Et c’est 
pourquoi il y a tant de nouvelles têtes dans cette auguste Assemblée Nationale, du côté de la 
majorité gouvernementale. Le peuple a voulu d’une nouvelle génération de politiciens dont je 
suis fière de faire partie. Notre tâche sera de guider la nation plus loin en avant en ce 21ème 
siècle. L’Alliance Lepep a forgé un judicieux mélange entre de nouvelles générations et des 
aînés de calibre, tel le Premier ministre, Sir Anerood Jugnauth. Et c’est de partout qu’est venu 
le cri de ralliement du peuple autour de cette alliance durant la campagne électorale, et qui se 
résumait  au  mot  ‘changement’,  reflété  aussi  dans  l’expression  ‘viré  Mam’.  Un  mot,  une 
expression, une volonté forte de changement que le discours-programme se devait de refléter. 

Le discours-programme est un agenda pour la renaissance de notre nation en termes 
de moralité, de chances égales pour tous, de méritocratie, d’unité nationale, de renaissance 
économique, de gouvernance transparente et de combat contre l’exclusion et la pauvreté. 

M. le président, le discours-programme propose un ‘meaningful change’ au niveau de 
l’organisation  et  du  financement  des  élections.  Un  autre  changement  a  déjà  commencé 
pendant la campagne électorale au No. 1 (Grande Rivière Nord-Ouest/Port Louis Ouest) qui 
s’est déroulé d’une manière civilisée. Ce qui est, je l’espère le prélude aux élections futures. 
Le respect mutuel a prévalu entre nous et nos adversaires de l’Alliance opposée. Si je dois 
remercier  avant tout  ceux qui m’ont élue, je me dois aussi de saluer mes adversaires dont 
deux ont retrouvé le chemin de cette auguste Assemblée. 

Certains trouveront difficile de croire que je n’ai pas une seule fois mentionné le nom 
de mes adversaires lors de mes meetings. Il est donc prouvé qu’on peut gagner une élection 
autrement. Et qu’il suffit à l’électeur de découvrir le potentiel, la personnalité et les autres 
qualités positives d’un candidat, ainsi que son programme et celui du parti qu’il représente, 
pour décider pour qui voter – non pas sa capacité de dénigrer l’adversaire. 

M. le président, le 10 décembre dernier, la victoire massive de l’Alliance Lepep aux 
élections  générales,  fut  un  signe  indéniable  d’un  ras-le-bol  populaire  face  à  la  manière  de 
gouverner de l’ancien gouvernement. Le secret d’une victoire d’une telle ampleur se trouve 
dans le projet de société présenté au peuple Mauricien par l’Alliance Lepep tout au long de la 
campagne électorale, aujourd’hui officialisé dans les 66 pages du discours présidentiel. 

M. le président, nous avons un programme magnifique pour gouverner durant les cinq 
prochaines années. C’est une chance unique offerte au présent gouvernement d’entrer dans 

 

83 

l’histoire à la manière des autres  gouvernements dirigés par Sir Anerood Jugnauth comme 
Premier ministre. Ils l’avaient alors fait en apportant un miracle économique sans précédent 
dans  l’histoire  nationale.  Et  un  partage  accru  du  gâteau  national  au  plus  grand  nombre  de 
Mauriciens, faisant reculer la misère et les angoisses qu’elle entraînait dans une majorité de 
familles jusqu’au début  des années 80.  Le chômage fut vaincu, les salaires s’améliorèrent, 
une  race  de  nouveaux  petits,  moyens  et  gros  entrepreneurs  fit  surface,  et  la  situation 
matérielle de tout le monde fit un grand bond en avant.  

La nouvelle majorité dirigée par Sir Anerood Jugnauth a promis au peuple mauricien 
un nouveau miracle économique et je ne doute pas qu’on pourra rééditer en tel exploit. Nous 
avons de quoi pour nous inquiéter de la baisse de l’euro, mais l’optimisme gagne du terrain 
aux États-Unis, la Chine et l’Inde continuent à investir massivement en Afrique, le continent 
d’à côté dont nous sommes partie intégrante. 

Le  nouveau  gouvernement  va  offrir  à  nos  PMEs,  quelques  R10  milliards  via  une 
nouvelle banque (page 40 du discours-programme), et aussi des avenues pour leur marketing 
sur ce continent. En Afrique, les classes moyennes ont dépassé la taille de celle de l’Inde. 
Elles sont avides de produits d’importation et ont de plus en plus des moyens d’acheter et 
aussi de faire du tourisme et du shopping duty-free chez nous. 

L’honorable ministre des Finances et du Développement économique a annoncé que 
les PMEs deviendront l’épine dorsale de notre économie. Elle joue déjà un grand rôle dans 
l’économie nationale comme l’ont souligné des économistes, dont un livre sorti récemment, 
racontant  l’histoire  de  l’entreprise  privée  depuis  les  origines  du  pays  sous  la  Compagnie 
Hollandaise des Indes, jusqu’à nos jours, ‘In Search of Excellence’ qui affirme qu’il y aurait à 
Maurice un total d’au moins 175 000 petits entrepreneurs. 

Un  total  de  92 000  d’entre  eux  était  officiellement  recensé  en  2007  par  le  Central 
Statistics  Office.  Il  faut  y  ajouter  20 000  très  petits  planteurs  de  cannes,  qui  vendent  leurs 
produits aux six grandes usines du pays appartenant au gros capital. Ce livre estime qu’il faut 
y ajouter encore les autres petits et moyens entrepreneurs comme d’autres petits agriculteurs, 
les  éleveurs  de  porc,  les  pêcheurs,  et  les  petits  commerçants  et  même  les  marchands 
ambulants qui ne vivent que de leurs activités commerciales. 

Les 92,400 petits opérateurs, parmi les 175 000 estimés par l’auteur, contribuaient à 
l’économie  mauricienne,  selon  le  CSO,  la  somme  de  43  milliards  de  roupies  en  2007. 

 

84 

Toujours en 2007, ces petits opérateurs ont investi 1 milliard de roupies, sans compter leurs 
confrères  agricoles  et  les  autres  petits  producteurs  et  commerçants.  C’est  parmi  ce  type 
d’entrepreneurs dont le nombre va jusqu’à près de 200 000 mauriciens qu’on trouvera ceux 
qui démocratiseront l’économie nationale. 

M. le président, très peu de mauriciens avaient réalisé jusqu’ici que des PMEs sont en 
position  d’entrer,  de  plain-pied, 
importantes 
d’exportations/réexportations  sur  notre  propre  continent,  l’Afrique,  lorsque  celle-ci  se 
réveillera,  comme  c’est  le  cas  actuellement.  L’Afrique  enregistre  des  taux  de  croissance 
économique record, qui nous rappellent le réveil des géants comme l’Inde ou la Chine. 

fois,  dans  des 

cette 

activités 

Il  y  a eu  durant les siècles passés, un ‘playing field’ totalement inégal  entre, d’une 
part, ce qu’on appelle le secteur privé ‘historique’ ou ‘le gros capital’ contrôlé par un tout 
petit groupe, et, d’autre part, le reste de nos entrepreneurs. 

Je ne jette pas la pierre sur ce secteur privé qui se considère ‘historique’ car il a bien 
travaillé et a créé beaucoup de richesses au fil des siècles. Mais l’émergence des petites et 
moyennes  entreprises  et  de  nouvelles  grandes  entreprises  dans  une  société  devenue 
démocratique apportera certainement une plus grande égalité de chances, où le gouvernement 
précédent a échoué, c’est-à-dire une véritable démocratisation de l’économie. 

M. le président, le discours-programme souligne que le pays sera  gouverné dans la 
transparence.  Car  ce  sera  un  gouvernement  avec  le  peuple  et  pour  le  peuple,  ce  qui  a  été 
accepté et largement salué et sanctionné par l’électorat. Cette identification obtenue entre le 
gouvernement  et  le  peuple  est  en  contraste  avec  le  rejet  par  l’électorat  du  pouvoir 
monarchique et autoritaire qui nous a précédés, et qui s’était juré de perdurer, tout au moins 
pendant  sept  ans  encore  -  le  peuple  mauricien  a  finalement  envoyé  ce  projet  dans  les 
oubliettes de l’histoire. 

Concernant  le  projet  de  diffuser  la  connaissance  de  l’histoire  nationale  comme 
proposé dans le discours-programme, à la page 20, par un musée de l’histoire et de la culture, 
c’est  une  belle  initiative.  Toutefois,  si  la  vraie  histoire  nationale  continue  à  ne  pas  être 
enseignée,  on  pourrait  voir  renaître  des  dinosaures  qui  risquent  de  contaminer  les  jeunes 
qu’ils  pourraient  inspirer  encore  avec  leurs  concepts  rétrogrades.  Ces  dinosaures  tentent 
encore d’effacer le miracle économique des années 80 de la mémoire nationale. Nous avons 
aujourd’hui  une  nouvelle  génération  de  politiciens  qui,  au  gouvernement  et  aussi  dans 

 

85 

l’opposition, et je dirais le Leader de l’Opposition lui-même, voudrait que la nation jette un 
regard  neuf  sur  notre  histoire.  Nous  voulons  faire  reculer  encore  plus,  bien  des  maux, 
préjugés et malaises qui perdurent depuis l’indépendance, entretenus par une déformation de 
l’histoire nationale à des fins politiciennes. L’histoire nationale doit être libérée des préjugés 
et  des  ethnocentrismes  qu’elle  a  charriés  dans  pratiquement  tous  les  livres  et  manuels 
prétendant  raconter  cette  riche  et  passionnante  histoire  mauricienne,  d’une  époque  à  une 
autre. 

Le  refus  d’enseigner  l’histoire  nationale  aux  mauriciens  depuis  leur  plus  tendre 
enfance dans les écoles et collèges continuera à faire un tort immense à l’unité nationale, ce 
qu’a d’ailleurs fait comprendre the Truth and Justice Commission dans un langage très clair. 
Il  existe  déjà  depuis  belle  lurette  une  nouvelle  tradition  académique  d’écrire  l’histoire 
nationale  sans  les  visières  de  l’ethnocentrisme  et  du  fanatisme  politique,  et  la  nouvelle 
génération de politiciens qui a émergé aux élections du 10 décembre doit bien le savoir, quels 
que soient les partis auxquels ils appartiennent. 

Je  conclus  sur  ce  sujet par  une  citation  du  premier  tome,  publié  en  1897,  d’un  des 
livres  préférés  de  deux  très  grands  tribuns,  les  frères  Bissoondoyal,  Basdeo  et  Sookdeo, 
‘Histoire de Maurice’ par Evenor Hitié, un ouvrage dont les copies du deuxième tome furent, 
dit-on, brûler par des membres de l’oligarchie économique de l’époque : Evenor Hitié a écrit : 
‘le premier livre d’une nation, c’est son histoire.’ 

M. le président, le discours-programme ne restera pas un vain mot si nous ne réalisons 
pas ce qu’il propose pour réduire et vaincre les inégalités, la discrimination et le manque de 
confiance  de  la  population  dans  l’impartialité  de  nombreuses  institutions,  dont  l’État  lui-
même. Ce programme propose à la page 4, ‘A transparent and merit-based recruitment and 
appointment policy to ensure meritocracy.’ Je cite, à la page 9 –  

« A  considerable  number  of  well-remunerated  seasonal  jobs  will  be  created  in  the 
cruise, shipping and hospitality sectors. The recruitment and training exercise will be 
carried out in an open and transparent way under the aegis of the Government.” 

Et à la page 30 –  

“Government firmly believes that in order to achieve results, the Police Force must 
attract and retain the best competencies. To promote transparency and meritocracy, 
an independent body will be set up to conduct examinations within the Police.” 

 

86 

On lit à la page 64 que le nouveau gouvernement vise a “making opportunities more 
equal for all our fellow countrymen.” Notons l’accent qui est mis, de manière répétitive, sur 
les notions d’égalité des chances et de transparence dans les nominations et les recrutements 
et aussi, à la page 55, dans l’octroi des contrats. Ce manque de confiance est la source de tous 
les malaises qui divisent la nation. La situation a empiré durant ces dernières années avec un 
népotisme  et  un  favoritisme  effrénés.  On  a  alloué  des  contrats,  des  terres  de  l’État,  des 
emplois et diverses autres faveurs à une clique dont les principaux membres font chaque jour 
la une de la presse à la faveur d’enquêtes ouvertes par le nouveau gouvernement. Le discours-
programme se propose de mettre fin à ces pratiques inacceptables qui ternissent l’image du 
pays à l’étranger. 

Les  nouvelles  générations  de  Mauriciens  croient  de  plus  en  plus  dans  les  notions 
d’égalité de chances et de transparence. Celles-ci constituent une revendication massivement 
soutenue  le  10  décembre  par  une  révolte  de  l’électorat  contre  ce  qui  a  été  une  violation 
systématique  de  ces  valeurs  pendant  presque  10  ans.  Presque  un  demi-siècle  après 
l’indépendance,  le  peuple  mauricien  cherche  toujours  à  vivre  dans  un  Etat  Mauricien  qui 
donnerait d’en haut, un exemple qui serait suivi par tout le reste des institutions publiques et 
les institutions privées, en termes d’égalité des chances et de transparence. 

M. le président, il n’y a pas que les perceptions d’inégalité au niveau de l’éducation, de 
l’emploi  et  de  l’allocation  des  contrats.  Toutes  les  composantes  de  la  population,  sans 
exception, doivent se sentir adéquatement représentées à tous les niveaux de l’appareil d’État. 
C’est d’ailleurs une des raisons de l’existence des sociétés socioculturelles et religieuses qui 
s’aventurent dans le champ de la politique. Si les perceptions d’inégalités de chances et de 
représentation persistent, notre société pourrait un jour être livrée à tous les extrémistes qui, 
croyez- moi, savent en profiter. 

Le  peuple  mauricien  avait  soif  d’un  changement  profond,  du  fait  que  de  nombreux 
maux et malaises rongent la société mauricienne depuis trop longtemps. À lire le discours-
programme, deux éléments importants en émergent. Premièrement, l’actuel gouvernement y 
exprime  son  intention  de  corriger  les  nombreux  écarts  du  précédent  régime,  tout  en 
déclenchant également un nouveau miracle économique. Deuxièmement, il promet de mettre 
fin à tout ce qui nous divise depuis l’indépendance, soit les soupçons et autres malaises, réels 
ou  perçus,  que  certains  utilisent  pour  dresser  les  unes  contre  les  autres,  les  diverses 
composantes de notre population arc-en-ciel. 

 

87 

Un gouvernement responsable, tout comme les principaux partis politiques qui alignent 
leurs  candidats  et  cabinets  ministériels  fantômes  ou  réels,  sur  la  base  d’une  telle 
représentativité  s’efforcent  de  donner  le  sentiment  à  chaque  composante  de  la  population 
qu’elle sera adéquatement représentée à tous les niveaux de l’État et de la société. Ainsi, le 
discours-programme vise à promouvoir l’égalité des chances, y compris dans le recrutement 
des policiers. 

Il  faut  mettre  fin  aux  hypocrisies  qui  nous  dictent  que  le  sentiment  d’inégalité  et 
d’exclusion, au niveau de la représentation politique et parlementaire, devrait être dissocié de 
l’exclusion  socio-économique.  L’honorable  ministre  des  Finances  et  du  Développement 
Economique  a  tiré  la  sonnette  d’alarme  sur  les  conséquences  qu’il  dit  ‘explosives’  de 
l’inégalité socio-économique, laquelle est source d’une pauvreté abjecte. Mais le sentiment 
de l’inégalité est aussi dans les esprits. Et le peuple a approuvé par son vote une Alliance 
Lepep qui a refusé, à juste titre, de mettre fin au système constitutionnel correctif qui rassure 
toutes  les  composantes  de  la  population  sur  le  plan  de  la  représentation  parlementaire  et 
gouvernementale. 

Ce système ne fut pas introduit pour accentuer le communalisme, mais, au contraire, 
pour en atténuer les effets dans le sillage des campagnes électorales où tous les front benches 
et listes de candidats sont, et seront pour longtemps encore constitués, pour, comme on le dit 
tout haut et même officiellement, « rassurer toutes les composantes de notre population arc-
en-  ciel ».  Et  c’est  absolument  faux  que  de  prétendre  le  contraire  ou  qu’il  n’y  aurait  plus 
d’arc-en-ciel, qui, en vérité, est une magnifique structure naturelle, à la fois unie et plurielle 
et qui est, à juste titre, comparé à la nation mauricienne, elle aussi unie autant que plurielle. 

M. le président, le pays  au monde, où la majorité comme les minorités sont les plus 
protégés, est le Canada. J’y ai travaillé pendant plusieurs années. Dans les entreprises, une 
hotline  est  affichée  pour  toute  personne  qui  se  sentirait  attaquée  dans  ses  droits  pour  des 
raisons de discrimination sur tous les plans, race, qualifications académiques, culture, religion 
couleur ou genre. Ce pays recense fièrement toutes les composantes de son bel arc-en-ciel 
multiethnique,  multi-religieux  et  multiracial.  Sans  ce  recensement,  il  est  impossible 
d’identifier légalement et continuellement  les composantes de la population, majorité comme 
minorité, pour mieux les protéger, tous, sans exception, contre toute forme de discrimination, 
surtout dans le recrutement et l’emploi dans les secteurs public comme privé. Et, sur le plan 
scientifique,  le  recensement  permet  de  mieux  comprendre  la  sociologie  du  pays  et  même 

 

88 

d’aider  aux  recherches  médicales  concernant  les  facteurs  génétiques  des  maladies  chez 
différentes  couches  de  la  population.  Ainsi  ces  recensements  revêtent  une  importance 
cruciale. 

Maurice  est  tout  aussi  multiethnique,  multiculturelle,  multi-religieuse  et  multiraciale 
que le Canada. Qui dit égalité des chances, dit aussi représentativité  à tous les niveaux. Une 
femme noire venant de Haïti a été chef d’État du Canada au nom de la reine d’Angleterre. Le 
fils  d’un  immigré  venu  de  Chine  y  a  été  gouverneur  de  la  province  d’Alberta.  D’autres 
ressortissants nés dans d’autres pays comme l’Inde y sont ministres et députés. 

L’honorable Premier ministre, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, a toujours affirmé qu’il adhère à 
un  principe  de  représentativité  équitable  pour  toutes  les  composantes  de  notre  arc-en-ciel, 
afin d’éviter au pays de glisser dans une situation de méfiances mutuelles explosives. Nous 
partageons tous aujourd’hui, de ce côté de la chambre, cette même vision d’une protection 
électorale  et  postélectorale  adéquate  de  toutes  les  composantes  de  la  population.  Une 
population  dont  feu  Sir  Kher  Jagatsingh,  un  grand  tribun  travailliste,  disait,  avec  raison, 
qu’elle n’est en fait composée que de minorités : « We are all minorities » avait-il un jour 
proclamé. 

M.  le  président,  il  y  a  aussi  l’écart  entre  les  riches  et  les  pauvres  qui  s’est  creusé 
davantage  durant  les  dix  dernières  années,  et  qui  avait  pourtant  reculé  durant  le  miracle 
économique des années 80, gravées dans l’histoire nationale comme ‘les années Jugnauth’. 
Les chiffres officiels publiés par l’ancien gouvernement via le Bureau des Statistiques, ont 
d’ailleurs  révélé  que  cet  écart  n’a  cessé  d’augmenter  ces  dernières  années.  Et  c’est  tout 
naturellement  que  le  premier  geste  du  nouveau  gouvernement  a  été  d’alléger  la  misère  de 
ceux qui sont tout au bas de l’échelle socio-économique, et qui ne dépendaient que d’une ou 
deux maigres pension pour leur survie dans une Ile Maurice qui ne peut même pas leur offrir 
un repas décent chaque jour de l’année. 

Un effort national considérable est nécessaire pour toute la nation pour assurer, comme 
le promettait Mao aux Chinois, un ‘bol de riz’ au minimum tous les jours à un milliard de 
compatriotes. Un miracle qu’il a réussi tout comme nous l’avons réussi dans les années 80. 
Le  gouvernement  et  les  entrepreneurs  grands,  moyens  et  petits,  doivent  tous  contribuer  à 
l’accomplissement d’un nouveau miracle économique. 

 

89 

M.  le  président,  je  résumerai  nos  taches  gouvernementales  prioritaires  du  discours-

programme comme suit – 

• 

Il nous faut  appliquer avec diligence les notions de démocratie, la liberté de la 
presse, de transparence, de méritocratie, d’égalité des chances, d’unité nationale 
embrassant  toutes  nos  populations  de  Maurice,  Rodrigues,  Agalega,  et  des 
Chagos. 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Il faut en finir avec ses relents de communalisme et de sectarisme dont les deux seules 
sources  sont  une  perception  d’inégalité  socio-économique  et  une  autre  de  sous-
représentation  à  tous  les  niveaux  de  l’État  comme  de  certaines  sections  du  secteur 
privé au niveau des recrutements et des promotions.  
Il faut en finir avec des contrats publics alloués sans transparence, pour en finir avec 
la corruption, qui, en vérité ruine ce pays. 
Il nous faut créer un  environnement urbain et  rural durable dans un environnement 
naturel qui menace de disparaître à jamais, et faire face aux changements climatiques. 
Il  nous  faut  une  meilleure  qualité  de  vie,  que  nous  donnera  aussi  une  renaissance 
économique nationale. 
Il nous faut la bonne gouvernance d’un secteur public et d’institutions paraétatiques à 
la dérive dans beaucoup de cas.  
Il nous faut une politique étrangère, qui préconise une action diplomatique au service 
des intérêts nationaux au plan du développement économique. Et aussi, last but not 
least,  une  politique  qui  vise  la  récupération  de  nos  îles  illégalement  occupées  de 
Tromelin et des Chagos. 

Un mot encore sur la liberté de la presse, surtout lorsque je considère le «balance of 
facts » entre cette liberté, parfois abuser, comme c’est le cas même en France, d’une part, et 
la tentation autoritaire qui s’est manifestée à Maurice ces dernières années, d’autre part.  

Je ne suis pas Charlie, mais je félicite le gouvernement pour avoir promis ceci à la 

page 57 du discours-programme concernant les membres de la presse – 

‘‘Journalists  and  media  reporters  in  the  exercise  of  their  functions  will  no 
longer  be  arrested  or  jailed  unless  there  is  strong  prima  facie  evidence  of  a 
conspiracy against them”. 

 

90 

Une  autre  des  grandes  décisions  pour  renforcer  les  libertés  démocratiques  et  la 
destruction promise de données biométriques des détenteurs de la nouvelle carte d’identité. Il 
a été démontré que ces données peuvent être piratées - et l’ancien Premier ministre s’était lui-
même abstenu de se procurer cette nouvelle carte et donc de soumettre ses propres données 
biométriques. On peut facilement imaginer ce qu’il pensait de sa propre décision -  

« Fais ce que je dis, mais ne fais pas ce que je fais. » 

Je vous remercie, M. le président, et je suis aussi reconnaissante envers la Chambre, 
Gouvernement comme Opposition pour l’attention réservée à mon premier discours prononcé 
à l’Assemblée nationale. Merci. 

Mr S. Rutnah rose and seconded. 

 

At 4.48 p.m. the sitting was suspended for half an hour. 

On resuming at 5.24 p.m. with the Deputy Speaker in the Chair. 

Dr  Z.  Joomaye  (Second  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  &  Souillac):  Mr 
Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  would  like  to  congratulate  hon.  Mrs  Selvon  for  her  speech.  On  27 
January  2015,  the  Government  Programme  was  read  by  the  President  of  the  Republic, 
honourable Kailash Purryag.  

This programme is, according to us, an almost complete shopping list, a déclaration 
de bonnes intentions en vrac. We obvioulsy do not have a big quarrel with this programme 
and basically it is the same programme that we shared when we were partners in the past. I 
wish to point out, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, a few measures which we fully support.  

(i) 

The  increase  in  pension  payment  and  social  aid  as  well  as  salary 
compensation.  
Introduction of a minimum wage. 

(ii) 
(iii)  Doing away with the CPE and giving full subsidy on the School Certificate 

(iv) 

 (v) 

and Higher School Certificate examinations. 
Setting up of a Utility Regulatory Authority. 

providing  alternative  attractive  location  to  the  marchands  ambulants  to 
continue their trade; 

(vi)  strengthening of the Gambling Regulatory Authority Act; 

 

91 

(vii)   destruction of the databank containing fingerprints and biometric photographs 

of the new National Identity Card project; 

(viii)   strengthening the powers of the Electoral Supervisory Commission; 

(ix)  

putting  an  end  to  the  abusiveness  and  arbitrariness  of  the  present  system  of 
provisional charges, especially in case of journalists; 

(x)   

establishment of an Embassy in Saudi Arabia. 

However,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  a  number  of  the  measures  announced  will 
their  forthcoming 

lettres  mortes  and  we  have  serious  doubts  on 

probably  stay 
implementation. 

To start with, the Electoral Reform  and the legislation on the financing  of political 
parties,  both  issues  were  included  in  our  Programme  2000-2005,  Government  of  the 
MSM/MMM. A report was produced on the same subject and two Select Committees were 
presided respectively by Ivan Collendavelloo and Emmanuel Leung Shing. 

The piece of legislation never managed to make its way to the Parliament for reasons 

that we all know. We only wish that history will not repeat itself in this case. 

Furthermore, a number of issues and considerations have not been mentioned at all. 

Nothing has been said about the CT Power project. The Medpoint case brille par son 
absence.  What  will  happen  to  the  Neotown  and  Jin  Fei  concessions?  Idem  for  the 
Commission of Inquiry on the Mauritius Turf Club! What about the abuse of Special Funds 
in  the  Budget?  L’existence  même  de  ces  fonds  a  toujours  été  décriée  par  le  ministre  des 
finances actuel. 

What is the future of the Development Bank of Mauritius and the Mauritius Post and 
Cooperative Bank? Regarding the l’Amicale Case, will there be an amendment of the Human 
Rights Act? Will the culprits of the State Trading Corporation and Air Mauritius, responsible 
for the loss of billions due to hedging, never be identified and made to answer? Will the last 
Electoral  Boundaries  Report  stay  in  a  drawer  in  the  Prime  Minister’s  Office?  There  is  no 
reference at all in the Government Programme to Tromelin. 

 

92 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we have also taken note of changes which have taken place 
between the Electoral Programme and the Government Programme. With respect to ICAC, I 
quote from the Electoral Programme – 

«Dans le chapitre ‘Combat contre la fraude et la corruption’, il est question d’une 
‘Financial  Crime  Commission’,  ‘apex  body’  qui  englobera  différentes  institutions 
existantes, à commencer par l’ICAC. » 

But in the Government Programme, it is clearly stated that the Financial Crime Commission 
will only oversee the operations of ICAC, instead of replacing them. 

Concerning the Police force, it was promised that Police officers will have the right to 
form a trade union. In the Government Programme, this has evolved to a right to syndicate, 
which to us does not have the same implications. 

There are points, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, upon which we totally disagree.  We note 
that Government expresses its concern about the lack of progress made to date to resolve the 
long-standing dispute over the Chagos Archipelago. 

However,  we  had  noted  earlier  that  on  09  January  2015,  Cabinet  had  expressed  its 
appreciation  of  the  previous  Government’s  action  to  bring  the  issue  in  front  of  the  United 
Nations Arbitral Tribunal of the Law of the Sea and was looking forward for its decision. 

Also, a lot has been said about our positioning on the African Continent. But it is very 
surprising  that  neither  the  Prime  Minister,  nor  the  President  and  not  even  a  Minister  was 
present on 15 January 2015 for the swearing in of the new President of Mozambique. Same 
for the OAU Summit of Addis Ababa on 30 January 2015.  

Concerning the amendment of the Local Government Act, we strongly believe that an 
amendment to the Act is not appropriate, but instead it should be replaced by a new piece of 
legislation which, according to us, should go along the one voted in 2003 by the MMM/MSM 
Government. 

We were also expecting that a firm commitment to facilitate the setting-up of private 
television  should  have  been  taken  and  not  just  a  permission  to  allow  private  television 
broadcast. 

 

93 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  we  have  serious  doubts  that  all  the  partners  of  this 
Government,  I  quote,  ‘believe  passionately  in  what  has  been  presented  and  referred  to  as 
Innovative Socialism in the programme.’  Especially because as we all know that one of the 
partners in this Government was a Member of the previous Government from 2005 to 2014. 

M. le président, pour le MMM, être dans une alliance est avant tout une question de 
programme quel que soit le partenaire. Nous avions voulu et nous voulons toujours faire de 
notre  île  un  pays  phare,  un  modèle  d’unité  dans  la  diversité.  Un  exemple  de  démocratie 
menant un combat sans merci contre la fraude et la corruption, en faveur d’un développement 
économique dans la justice sociale et le respect  de l’environnement. Notre vision est  celle 
d’un  socialisme  moderne,  réaliste  et  responsable,  avec  un  recentrage  sur  la  réduction  des 
inégalités.  Nous ne pouvons tolérer l’exploitation de l’homme par l’homme. Il faut éliminer 
du  subconscient  collectif  la  discrimination  entre  les  deux  sexes.  Le  travail  égal  mérite  un 
salaire égal. Il nous faut trouver un juste équilibre entre les droits des travailleurs, la sécurité 
de l’emploi et l’économie du marché. Les effets de la globalisation et du libéralisme doivent 
être  freinés  par  un  savant  dosage  de  patriotisme  économique.  Il  nous  faut  un  système  de 
démocratie  parlementaire  fonctionnelle  et  représentative.  Une  presse  libre  et  indépendante 
avec  des  journalistes  responsables  et  autorégulés,  qui  ne  peuvent  être  influencés  ni  par  le 
pouvoir du jour ni par les bailleurs de fonds; une politique énergétique et environnementale 
intelligente et le plus vert possible. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I would like to end and conclude with a quotation adapted 

from the Tryst with Destiny - 

“To the people of our country, whose representatives we are, we appeal to join us with 
faith  and  confidence  in  this  great  adventure  of  nation  building.  This  is  no  time  for 
petty and destructive criticism, no time for ill will or blaming others. We have to build 
this noble mansion where all our children may dwell.” 

It is from Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru on the eve of the Independence of India. 

I thank you for your attention, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  I have done. 

 (5.35 p.m) 

The Minister of Health and Quality of Life (Mr A. Gayan):  Mr Deputy Speaker, 
Sir, I would like to start with some good wishes to Madam Speaker and I wish if you could 

 

94 

convey to her my sincere congratulations on her election to chair our deliberations.  I would 
also like to congratulate you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, for the confident manner in which you 
are presiding our deliberations.  I also wish to congratulate for their maiden speeches, hon. 
Mrs Selvon and hon. Dr. Joomaye and I am sure that our House will be benefitting from their 
interventions in the future. 

I also wish to say that I am very grateful to the Leader of the House, the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister for having entrusted me with the responsibility of the Ministry of Health and Quality 
of Life.  I can assure the House that in this capacity I will do whatever is in my power to 
ensure that our people have the best available medical services possible. 

I would like to start by making some general remarks about the last election campaign.  
Just  imagine  for  a  minute  that  the  alliance  pour  la  Modernité  et  l’Unité  had  won  the  last 
elections.  Just imagine that the former Prime Minister who was the Leader of the House was 
again the Prime Minister today.  

On 27 January 2015, when his Excellency the President delivered his speech, we didn’t 
know then what we know now and what we know now is really shocking.  Shocking for all 
politicians, but even more shocking for a Labour Party that was gearing up to celebrate its 75 
years of existence.   

During the last election campaign, there were two alliances.  One alliance led by the 
former Prime Minister and the hon. Leader of the Opposition and the other one led by the 
present Prime Minister.  We had a good election campaign and we were very  fortunate in 
having an electorate that was sensitive to what we were saying; sensitive to our programme; 
sensitive to the quality of leadership that we are presenting to the people.  But on the other 
side, what did we have, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir?  We had arrogance. We had disdain which 
they displayed at every single stage for the people of our country.  For our alliance, they said 
we were a ‘camion saleté’.  It is good that we mention this for the sake of history because 
Hansard will stay for ever. And it is good that we recall these things because when we are 
sitting in this House, it is also good that the previous orator mentioned that we should have a 
debate which is fine and we should not get into a sort of acrimony. Fine! But history must 
record what went on with the last campaign and history will record also what was the main 
platform of the alliance that lost the elections.  

 

95 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  we  know  now  that  the  former  Prime  Minister  who  was 
arrested  on  07  February,  had  in  his  house  and  in  his  possession  large  amounts  of  money.  
There are only two possibilities.  One, it is his money or it is the money of the Labour Party.  
If it is the money of the Labour Party, then how come it was in his house, how come it was in 
dollars and how come it was not in the party’s account. I know that there will be heads being 
shaken on the other side, but I wish to say that I am within the Government Programme. I am 
going to, for the sake of clarity and for the sake of sticking to the speech of the President, 
refer to the introduction part, paragraph 8 – 

 “Government  is  committed  to  conducting  business  on  the  principles  of  discipline, 
transparency, accountability and exemplary governance.” 

Exemplary governance must come from the head of Government and when the head of 
a  Government  who  treated  this  alliance,  to  which  we  belong,  as  an  alliance  of  ‘camion 
saleté’,  I think they deserve to be told what they  really  are and this nation needs to know 
what  they  are  and  what  they  got  people  to  believe  in  something  that  did  not  exist.    They 
wanted  une  alliance  de  modernité  et  de  l’unité.    They  wanted  a  Second  Republic,  a 
modernité. Of  course, it may  be modern for some to have millions and millions of rupees 
stacked in safes, but fortunately for our country and fortunately for history, we know that the 
people of Mauritius rejected that alliance.  At the time they did not know that the previous 
Government was a Government of looters and plunderers.  This is exactly what they were 
doing when they were in power.  Other hon. Ministers will be speaking about the state of the 
roads,  all  the  wastes  that  the  people  of  Mauritius  are  paying  for  and  will  pay  for,  for  the 
generations  to  come  and  this  is  why  this  kind  of  Government  was  rejected.    And  it  was 
  There  was  a  talk,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  about  ‘la 
rejected  overwhelmingly. 
démocratisation de l’économie’.  I wonder what it was.   

(Interruptions) 

Was  it  this  politique  de  petits  copains-copines,  de  grands  coquins,  jouisseurs?    Was  that 
‘démocratisation de l’économie?’  And then, the coffre-fort which started with Rs4 m. The 
PNQ of the hon. Leader of Opposition, this morning, was about R4 m., Rs100 m., Rs200 m., 
Rs800 m., but never mind.  The question that the people need to know and this House also 
needs to know: are we dealing with the amount in the safes and in the briefcases as being the 
tip  of  the  iceberg  or  is  it  the  whole  amount  that  was  in  possession  of  the  former  Prime 
Minister?  If  the  former  Prime  Minister  were  to  be  advised  properly,  he  has  a  unique 

 

96 

opportunity to be a patriot. He can come clean and say to the people –“Yes, I messed up. But 
I am prepared to collaborate and to tell everything about the money I have, the source of that 
money  and  also  the  source  of  the  dollars.”  I  can  understand  Mauritians  contributing  to  a 
political party in rupees, but dollars, euros, sterling!  We have a serious problem! Travellers 
cheques! Travellers cheques, I think they were a thing of the past, but it seems that they are 
still around.  Anyway, what has happened and what the people know and what the people will 
come to know is already disgusting and shameful. 

I  wish  to  refer  to  what  hon.  Uteem  mentioned  this  morning  about  the  juridical 
cooperation between countries with regard to illicit gains and all these things. It is true that 
we have the legal means today to track all funds wherever they go. It is possible to do that. In 
order to avoid further shame on the former Prime Minister, I think it would be best for him to 
come clean and to own up to whatever he has done so that, at least, politics and politicians 
will regain a sense of dignity. 

We have nothing to be responsible on this side of the House, but I believe that we, as 
politicians, also owe a duty to the generations that will come after us, so that they know that 
when something went wrong, people owned up, people came clean and they did something 
that was honourable and patriotic for their country. I hope he does it! Otherwise, he will go 
down in history as somebody who has committed the worst crime against democracy in this 
country. He will go down in history as a person tainted and gullied after having occupied the 
highest political office in the land. I think it is important that we bear all this in mind. 

Although we do not want to go too long on this, I wish also to say that apart from the 
shocking  nature  of  the  revelations  that  are  coming  out,  we  need  to  do  away  with  the 
arrogance  of  politicians.  You  will  recall,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  how  we  were  treated.  Two 
main parties coming together, 40% of the electorate, 80% and a 60 zero became inevitable! 
We can’t do anything about it. What can you do? The people will vote for the 60 zero. 40 + 
40. They had a former Minister of Finance who is very good with his computer and he did all 
the simulations.  

But anyway, this is the kind of arrogance we were subjected to! What they forgot was 
that the largest party is the party of the people. This is the largest party! The people of our 
country are not stupid, they know what decisions to take when they have to do so.. 

You will recall, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, how people were treated not only as ‘camion 
saleté’, but also as ‘bourrique’. Some people were driving a Rolls Royce and had that classe, 

 

97 

but we did not know they had cash as well! Or was it la classe of the cash dollars – because 
as a Prime Minister he could not deal only in rupees, he needed to have other hard foreign 
currencies for his other activities. But never mind, the point is that if it is not the tip of the 
iceberg, fine! But if it is the tip of the iceberg,  then we have  a serious  problem. You will 
recall when we, in l’Alliance Lepep, said that we are going to increase the old age pension to 
Rs5,000, what was their reaction? You cannot pay, there is no money! And if only he had 
given the money in his safe, that would have been enough to pay the increase in the pension! 
Apart from all the insults that we were made to endure, we had a clear message which was 
accepted by the population and the message was to throw them out. 

I  started  off  by  saying,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  just  imagine  for  a  minute  that  on  10 
December  2014,  the  former  Prime  Minister  was  elected  with  a  majority  in  the  House,  we 
would  not  know  today  what  had  gone  on  over  so  many  years.    All  this  would  have  been 
covered up, there would have been no enquiry in any of the money laundering problems and 
for seven years, Mr Deputy Speaker, he would have been the President. Now we understand 
the terms of the alliance that was sealed between the hon. Leader of the Opposition and hon. 
Ganoo and the former Prime Minister. It is good that we remember the terms of the alliance. 
A President for seven years! Why seven years? Where is the logic? At a time when the whole 
world is reducing the mandate of political heads, we, in Mauritius, are going to Cape Verde 
to learn from their Constitution for a seven-year presidency, a President for seven years! Just 
imagine a President like Navin Ramgoolam for seven years! 

(Interruptions) 

He  would  have  been  President  for  seven  years,  he  would  be  presiding  the  Council  of 
Ministers, he would have under his direct control the Minister of Finance, Internal Affairs, 
Foreign  Affairs,  he  would  have  the  power  to  appoint  the  Commissioner  of  Police,  the 
Governor of the Bank of Mauritius and the Senior Chief Executives in the public service, he 
would have appointed the Chairperson and members of the Serious Fraud Office. What an 
irony, Mr Deputy Speaker! Serious Fraud Office under the control of the President, Navin 
Ramgoolam!  He  would  have  appointed  the  Director  of  Audit,  the  Director-General  of  the 
MBC  and  he  would  have  had  immunity,  absolute  power,  no  accountability  and  immunity. 
The hon. Leader of the Opposition was right when we showed that ‘vire mam’ clip, he was 
listing out all the scandals and he ended by saying ‘ena baisé là!’ 

(Interruptions) 

 

98 

Ena là! Well, no wonder there was an overwhelming victory for l’Alliance Lepep. 

I  have  now  the  duty,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  to  say  that  all  that  is  contained  in  the 
Speech of the President will be translated into measures, into laws and into action. No one 
should  have  any  doubt  about  the  commitment  of  this  Government  to  translate  into  reality 
everything that is contained in the President’s Speech. Whatever doubts anybody can have, 
please remove them, because this Government is committed to doing what is necessary for 
the  best  of  our  country  and  for  our  people.  The  commitment  which  we  have  to  set  the 
economy  right  after  the  misgovernance  and  the  corruption  of  the  previous  regime  is 
unshakable. We are committed to having a second socio-economic miracle, because that is 
what is going to propel our country forward. 

The  Government  Programme  2015-2019,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  is  based  on  social 
justice,  equality  and  solidarity,  as  we  need  to  pave  the  way  for  a  brighter  future  for  the 
present generation and for generations that are yet to come. The very title of the Government 
Programme  is  “Achieving  Meaningful  Change”.  We  will,  in  fact,  achieve  a  change  that  is 
meaningful for every single citizen of our country. 

I  have  already  mentioned  the  Rs5,000  increase  for  old  age  pension  and  for  basic 
invalidity  pension.  We  have  also  granted  a  uniform  salary  compensation  of  Rs600  to  all 
workers and employees. We are committed to ensuring that all those who are unemployed 
will  have  hope  of  having  a  job  in  the  nearest  possible  time  frame.  We  are  committed  to 
creating 15,000 jobs every year. 

In  the  Presidential  Address,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  health  is  one  of  the  key 
priorities.  Government  believes  that  good  health  contributes  to  the  long-term  sustainable 
development of people and the economy at large. For these reasons, health is being kept at 
the top of the five-year programme.  

The  priority  for  the  coming  years  as  far  as  my  Ministry  is  concerned  is  to  make 
significant investments so that the people have the best care possible and we have identified 
these areas. Providing a quality health service to the population at large is the number one 
priority  and  no  effort  will  be  spared  to  bring  health  services  to  the  doorstep  of  the 
community. We are also determined to ensure that patients and their relatives who attend any 
public  health  institution  are  given  appropriate  attention  in  a  conducive  and  health  friendly 
environment. 

 

99 

Lots  of  representations  have  been  made  regarding  l’accueil  which  patients  get  at 
hospitals and those who are particularly vulnerable are the elderly and those with disabilities. 
In  this  regard,  arrangements  are  being  made  for  the  setting  up  of  special  counters  in  all 
regional hospitals and, in particular, at the level of the Accident and Emergency departments 
and at the Pharmacy to  give due  consideration to these patients. Such facility will also be 
extended to Mediclinics and Area Health Centres. The senior citizens with disabilities will, 
henceforth, be seen on a fast track basis and will not have to wait long for their treatment. 

With a view to responding to these concerns, the Complaint Desks will be made fully 
functional  with  the  posting  of  a  permanent  Officer  to  receive  and  hear  patients  and  their 
relatives. There will be proper follow-up on each complaint and a feedback will be given to 
patients within a reasonable period of time. 

Since I have assumed office as Minister of Health and Quality of Life, I have received 
representations  as  well  regarding  waiting  time  for  surgery.  I  have  been  informed  that 
emergency surgeries are already being carried out at any time during the night whereas cold 
cases, that is, non-emergency cases, are carried out after normal working hours only when 
they are required. This implies that while we have patients on the waiting list for a long time, 
we also have operating theatres that are not being fully used. In order to address this concern, 
in  consultation  with  the  specialists,  my  Ministry  will  come  up  with  a  policy  to  carry  out 
routine surgeries in  extra sessions at night and  during weekends. The aim is to reduce the 
waiting list for any surgery to minimum levels. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the Subramania Bharati Eye Hospital was the only hospital 
providing eye surgeries for the past fifty years. The waiting list for cataract surgery has kept 
on increasing due to the high prevalence of diabetes and an ageing population. In order to 
address this issue of long waiting list and overcrowding at the hospital of Moka, my Ministry 
has decided to decentralise the ophthalmology services. 

A new Unit has been set up at Souillac Hospital and is operational since 08 January 
this year and cataract surgeries are being carried out there. Outpatient clinics are also being 
carried  out  to  facilitate  patients  residing  in  the  southern  region.  To  extend  high  quality 
services with vision problems and to meet growing demand for eye treatment, we are also 
proposing to put up another building at Moka. 

 

100 

With the prevalence of diabetes, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the number of amputations 
in the country has increased. The need is felt to have vascular surgery services in the country 
in order to improve the care for patients suffering from diabetic foot and other complications. 
Dr. Jeetoo Hospital has the required facilities and we intend to house a Vascular Surgery Unit 
there.  

Everybody knows that diabetes is a serious problem for Mauritians. Almost everyone 
knows someone in the family with diabetes. Diabetes affects a person’s life drastically. The 
emotional  and  social  burdens  are  compounded  by  an  acute  physical  distress  of 
hypoglycaemia  or  hyperglycaemia  and  by  the  chronic  physical  distress  of  diabetes-related 
complications. The burden is still heavier for those diabetic patients who cannot easily move 
to a public health institution for treatment. To meet this problem, my Ministry in consultation 
with  my  colleague  the  Minister  of  Social  Security,  National  Solidarity  and  Reform 
Institutions is finalising  the modalities for the provision of glucose metres to persons with 
diabetes who are receiving home care. This will, no doubt, go a long way to improving the 
control of their blood sugar and subsequently the quality of life. 

We all know that lots of Mauritians  get involved in road traffic accidents and as  a 
result of the accidents lots of them become disabled and are not cared for efficiently as proper 
rehabilitation  services  are  not  available.  They  are  treated  now  by  the  Physiotherapy 
Departments  in  all  regional  hospitals.  My  Ministry  will  explore  the  possibility  to  have 
recourse to the expertise from other countries for the setting up of full-fledged rehabilitation 
centres in all regions. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, our primary healthcare system has been so neglected that the 
pressure  at  regional  hospital  level  is  increasing  day  after  day.  To  ensure  that  primary 
healthcare becomes a linchpin of our national health system, a new Master Plan on Primary 
Healthcare  will  be  formulated  and  implemented.  This  will  be  in  line  with  the  WHO 
recommendation for the Primary Healthcare approach to be adopted to address the issues of 
the  rising  burden  of  chronic  diseases  and  the  scarcity  of  resources.  The  existing  services 
offered  at  primary  healthcare  will  be  reviewed  and  upgraded  to  attract  more  people  to  the 
Area Health Centres and Community Health Centres. Furthermore, all buildings housing the 
health facilities will be upgraded and equipped with modern facilities. 

As  a  short-term  measure,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  my  Ministry  is  embarking  on 
offering a 24-hour service to the community by having Mediclinics and Area Health Centres 

 

101 

opened every day of the week for 24 hours every day. All Mediclinics will be open 24 hours 
every day of the year. The practice today is that they close at 4 or 6 o’clock. But, people can 
get sick after 6 o’clock and they have to travel long distances, so we are taking this measure 
immediately. 

My Ministry is also providing domiciliary healthcare services to alleviate the burden 
of  patients  who  are  bedridden  or  who  have  physical  disabilities.  These  services  are  being 
provided by the Community Health Nursing Officers and these Officers visit the patients in 
their homes. We are also looking into having specialised nurses to treat diabetic patients and 
also psychiatric nurses. 

With  regard  to  new  projects,  the  statistics  show  that  the  numbers  of  cardiac  cases, 
cancer patients as well as eye-related patients are increasing everyday.  We are planning in 
the Ministry to reinforce preventive measures regarding these particular diseases.   

I wish to point out that in the year 2014, 671 cases were operated at the Cardiac Centre 
at Pamplemousses and the waiting list is still for about 200 patients and the waiting list keeps 
going  up  everyday.    The  waiting  list  is  there  because  we  also  have  inadequate  space  and 
because  of  the  limited  facilities  in  hospitals,  other  major  operations  are  carried  out  at  the 
centre.  So, we are proposing to set up a new Cardiac Surgery Theatre and the Trust Fund for 
Specialised Care will be called upon to look into this matter. 

As  regards  cancer,  I  have  already  announced  that  cancer  which  is  a  major  health 
concern in our  country,  will have to be dealt with on a fast track basis.  Government will 
convert  the  ex-Medpoint  Hospital  into  a  new  Cancer  Centre,  with  state-of-the-art  medical 
equipment and logistics.   

There is, in fact, the need to have a bunker to house all the radioactive equipment and 
materials.  Action has already been initiated calling for expressions of interest from the major 
suppliers  of  such  equipment.    We  are  going  to  adopt  a  fast  track  approach  to  realise  this 
project as soon as possible.   

A  PET/CT  scan  has  already  been  installed  at  the  Nuclear  Medicine  Department  at 
Jawaharlal Nehru Hospital to introduce hybrid imaging to improve better diagnosis of cancer.  
We propose to give to our cancer patients the best possible technology for their treatment.   

 

102 

We  are  also  looking  into  the  problem  of  non-communicable  diseases  and  the 
consequences of an ageing population in Mauritius are such that we need to address these 
problems  in  priority.    Apart  from  diabetes,  high  blood  pressure,  obesity,  cancer,  food 
hygiene,  sanitation,  we  also  have  one  problem  which  is  becoming  very  acute  and  that  is 
Alzheimer.   

The  National  Prevention  Programme  will  include  sensitation  on  Alzheimer  because 
with an increasing ageing population, Alzheimer attacks that category of people.  So, we need 
to have dedicated care and support for all those suffering from Alzheimer.  I am sure that 
anybody who knows somebody suffering from  Alzheimer realises the pain and anguish of all 
those  around  that  person.    So,  this  is  becoming  a  serious  problem  for  us  with  an  ageing 
population.  So, my Ministry will initiate action to provide services of Neuro-psychologists 
and other qualified staff to attend to patients suffering from Alzheimer.   

We are also looking into health information, education and communication activities.  
So, all these will be an ongoing strategy to communicate in order to meet the challenges of 
adopting healthy lifestyles, practising physical activities and preventing diseases.   

We also propose to initiate action for the setting up of a gymnasium in all Ministries 

and Government Departments as mentioned in the Government Manifesto. 

On  HIV/AIDS  and  Methadone,  I  wish  to  say  that  the  fight  against  HIV  and  AIDS 
remains high on our agenda.  Whilst on the one hand measures to prevent the spread of the 
disease  will  be  reinforced,  on  the  other  hand,  actions  will  be  initiated  to  provide  the 
appropriate and timely treatment to those affected and also to address the problem of stigma 
and discriminiation against HIV patients.  In this connection, a new HIV and AIDS Action 
Plan for 2015/2019 will be formulated.  The plan will be elaborated with all the stakeholders 
including the civil society. 

The Plan will also take into consideration the evolution of the epidemic in Mauritius 
and  the  response  to  the  disease  undertaken  so  far.    All  the  weaknesses  and  gaps  in  the 
previous Action Plans will be addressed and we are going to have a proper policy regarding 
all the people living with HIV and AIDS, affected ones and also the population at large. 

On  Methadone,  the  House  is  aware  that  the  Methadone  Substitution  Therapy 
Programme  was  introduced  in  Mauritius  as  a  harm  reduction  strategy  to  curb  down  HIV 

 

103 

infections. At the end of December 2014, there were 18 Methadone dispensing points to cater 
for a population of 5,000 methadone beneficiaries. 

This limited number of dispensing sites had resulted in a chaotic social situation.  The 
main problems were over-crowding and loitering as well as violence and other social ills.  I 
know this because in the Constituency which I represent, Mont Roches has suffered the most 
on  a  daily  basis.  800  to  900  persons  were  going  to  take  their  methadone  dose  at  Brown 
Sequard Hospital. So, we have addressed this problem.  We have addressed it in this way.  
We have embarked on a programme of decentralisation for dispensing of Methadone.  We 
started a pilot project in Beau Bassin and Rose Hill and after positive results, we are now 
extending the programme to the whole of Mauritius as from the 14th of this month, as from 
Saturday next.  And I am sure that this policy is going to be accepted by the population and is 
going to be helpful to everyone concerned.   

We are also embarking, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, on an e-Health System for Mauritius.  
Just to give you an example, the laboratory carries out over seven million tests every year. 
And all of these tests are put on paper. I think this cannot go on, we need to go for digital. 
This is why we are pressing ahead with the issue of e-Health. 

The same problem exists with regard to x-rays and these have to be stored in bulky files 
of patients and we have problems of space, so, we need to look into e-Health as a matter of 
priority. 

We will leave no stone unturned to implement a National e-Health Project as a priority 
and we will be getting the help of friendly countries for this purpose. Over the last years, Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir, there were media reports about essential drug shortages at hospitals and 
with shortages there was an inevitable impact on the delivery of health services.   

I am informed that there is no institutional memory at the Central Supplies Division as 
to when the last physical stock count was carried out. I am also informed that at the Central 
Supplies Division, there is medication of the value of Rs1 billion and there is no stock taking.  
So,  we  propose  to  carry  out  a  full  drug  quantification  exercise  and  we  need  to  have  an 
Electronic Management System. Well, I am sure everybody in the House will appreciate why 
this is so.   

(Interruptions) 

 

104 

I think it was just a strategy for people to get personal advantages from State assets.   

So, to address this concern, we are setting up a special committee to ensure timely 
purchase of quality medicines and elimination of wastage in all public health institutions.  I 
have also given instructions yesterday to have CCTVs installed in all the pharmacies in the 
hospitals and institutions because I hear lots of things about where these medications end up.   

With  regard  to  the  purchase  of  drugs,  we  are  reviewing  the  whole  gamut  of 
procurement  procedures.  So,  new  procurement  methods  based  on  e-procurement  will  be 
devised to improve the process of procuring medicines to make it more efficient and result-
oriented.  

Stringent  criteria  for  the  evaluation  of  bids  are  being  worked  out  to  ensure  that  the 
Ministry procures medicines of good quality, efficacy and safety, bearing in mind that value 
for money will be the guiding principle. 

Let me now, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, say something with regard to procurement, that 
I shall ensure that there is a level playing field with regard to all procurement for the hospitals 
and that includes everything. I believe that we need to provide an opportunity to everyone to 
be able to compete on a level playing field with regard to all procurement matters.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I wish to add that we also propose to bring a legislation to 
reform  the  Medical  and  Dental  Councils,  the  Nursing  Council  Act,  the  Pharmacy  Council 
Bill. With regard to the Pharmacy Council I wish to say a few things.  A Pharmacy Council 
Bill  will  be  introduced  in  the  House  to  provide  for  the  establishment  of  a  modern  and 
appropriate legislative framework for the large number of practicing pharmacists in both the 
public and private sectors. The Bill will address the registration of pharmacists both local and 
foreign as well as the preregistration of trainees. It will maintain discipline and uphold the 
professional standards for the pharmacists thereby ensuring safe and effective practices of the 
pharmacy profession and also develop a code of practice regarding compliance.  

My  Ministry  will  also  review  the  traditional  system  of  medicines  and  homeopathy 
constituting alternative forms of treatment. In this context, appropriate amendments will be 
brought to the Ayurvedic and Traditional Medicines Act. I wish also to say that since the few 
weeks  that  I  have  been  the  Minister  of  Health,  I  have  learnt  that  we  have  also  African 
Traditional Medicines, Chinese Traditional Medicines and all sorts of traditional medicines. 

 

105 

So, this is an area that will have to be explored, but we need to be very careful about how we 
proceed.  

We  are  coming  up,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  with  a  new  Bill  which  is  the  Health 
Professional Council Bill. This is a Bill which will provide for the establishment of a Council 
as  well  as  Courts  and  Appeals  Tribunal  for  certain  professions  which  are  allied  and 
complementary to the medical profession. For example, psychologists today do not have any 
regulatory  framework  in  Mauritius.  We  need  to  be  able  to  regulate  the  spas  or  all  the 
paramedical and all the other professions which are allied to the medical profession. 

This Bill which was approved by Cabinet last week, has been put on the website of 
my Ministry and we are proposing to give one month to anybody who is interested to make 
representations and comments and suggestions before we bring the Bill to the House. This is 
available on the website of the Ministry. We are also proposing to bring in a Private Health 
Institutions  Bill  which  will  cater  for  the  private  institutions.  No  health  service  will  be 
sustainable unless we have capacity building. So we are proposing to have a new school of 
nursing because the Central School of Nursing at Victoria Hospital is providing training to 
nursing students only to about 400 nurses and I think this is inadequate. So, we propose to 
open a new school of nursing and we will be training other nurses in the traditional training 
system,  but  also  to  cater  for  the  disabled,  for  the  elderly,  Alzheimer  patients,  psychiatric 
patients and also cancer patients because I get lots of letters regarding the accueil of nurses. I 
can  understand  that  people  who  are  in  the  terminal  stages  need  to  get  more  care  and 
compassion from nurses and doctors. So, we will have to look into that and ensure that, at 
least, they get all the comfort to accompany them in the last stages of their life. So, we are 
going to remodel the courses for nurses.  

We are also going to pay  special attention to continuous professional development. 
This is something which is very common in other professions.  In our legal profession, we all 
have to do CPD, I think the doctors are a bit hostile to this proposal, but they will have to 
come round because I think it helps in learning about the latest methods and technology. So, 
CPD will become one of the central platforms of my Ministry. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am confident that this Government, with the leadership of 
our Prime Minister, will be able to realise all these projects. I have just given a brief account 
of what I propose to do during the time I stay Minister of Health and I hope that we will be 
able to realise everything. It is, of course, natural that expectations of people are very high. 

 

106 

We will try to meet those expectations, but within the limits and constraints possible, we will 
ensure that our people get the best treatment and the best equipment for specialised care. I 
know  technology  costs  a  lot  of  money  especially  in  the  specialised  care,  but  we  are 
committed to having the best and we are going to get value for money.  We are going to go to 
the countries which have the best possible support system because far too often I hear that 
specialised equipment gets broken. They break down in the hospitals and people have to go to 
the clinics for treatment. This is something that will not be sustainable in the future. We will 
need  to  have  our  own  maintenance  team  to  look  at  all  the  sophisticated  equipment.  So,  I 
believe that we have chartered out a road map and I am sure that we will be able to complete 
the trajectory by the time we end this mandate.  

Thank you very much, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

The Deputy Speaker: Before we proceed, let me thank the hon. Minister for his well-
wishes and assure the hon. Minister that I will convey them to Madam Speaker as soon as I 
see her next. 

Mrs Boygah:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I move that the debate be now adjourned. 
Mr Abbas Mamode rose and seconded. 
Question put and agreed to. 
Debate adjourned accordingly. 

 
 
 

 

ADJOURNMENT 

The Prime Minister: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I beg to move that this Assembly do 

now adjourn to Friday 20 February 2015 at 3.00 p.m.  

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun) rose 

and seconded. 

The Deputy Speaker: The House stands adjourned. 

Question put and agreed to. 

MATTER RAISED 

SAVANNE & BLACK RIVER – DRAINS - UPGRADING  

 

107 

Mr  G.    Lesjongard  (Second  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River):  Mr  Deputy 
Speaker,  Sir,  I  wish  to  thank  you  for  granting  me  the  permission  to  raise  the  following 
specific matter at adjournment time. Specific matter which reads as follows: ‘the maintenance 
and/or constructions/upgrading of drains in the region of Le Morne, Baie du Cap, Bel Ombre 
and  other  areas  in  Constituency  No.  14  Savanne  and  Black  River  which  are  prone  to 
flooding’.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir,  I shall try to be brief and precise in my intervention. The 
House will recall, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that in 2002, the then MSM/MMM Government 
commissioned a study of the land drainage system of our island. The study was carried out by 
the consultancy firm GIBB (Mauritius) LTD. And in their final report, they did identify the 
flood prone areas and recommended measures to be taken to eliminate flooding problems in 
several  areas  in  the  country.  The  regions  that  I  have  highlighted  form  part  of  these  flood 
prone areas, that is: Le Morne, Baie Du Cap, Bel Ombre, La Gaulette, Case Noyale and other 
regions in Constituency No. 14.  

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  during  the  recent  heavy  rainfall,  my  two  colleagues  and 
myself, Members of Constituency No. 14, we visited the regions affected by the flooding and 
we took stock of the situation. Several families suffered because of the heavy rains. In certain 
areas  or  villages,  roads  had  to  be  closed  due  to  potential  risk  of  accidents.  As  such,  Mr 
Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  there  is  no  drainage  system,  that  is,  the  network  of  drains  that  are 
interlinked. There are drains, but no drainage system. That part of our island is drained by 
rivers and, in case of heavy rainfall, it is the rivers that drain the water naturally to the sea.  

We  are  all  aware  that  a  number  of  hotels  and  real  estate  projects  have  been 
implemented in that region and, you will agree, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that the natural flow 
rate of the rivers have been affected over the years and during the last decade there have not 
been many projects related to the construction of drains although the land drainage report had 
identified several projects in that Constituency.  

It is also known that during the last years, at the level of local authorities, they have 
not  been  allocated  the  necessary  funds  to  carry  out  the  necessary  maintenance  work  or 
implementation of drain works and it is for this reason, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am taking 
the time of the House to raise this issue as a matter of urgency.  

 

108 

I would, therefore, request the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to give due consideration to 
my request and allocate the necessary funds that are needful for the works to be carried out 
either at the level of local authorities or at the level of the NDU. 

I thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  

The Prime Minister: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, as Minister in charge of the National 
Development  Unit,  I  have  taken  note  of  the  issues  raised  by  the  hon.  Second  Member  for 
Savanne and Black River and wish to make the following statement. 

I am informed that the National Development Unit has already undertaken 15 drain 
projects since 2010 for a total cost of Rs70,687,365.58. They are in the regions of Chamouny, 
Bel Ombre, Flic en Flac, Cotteau Raffin, Chemin Grenier, Tamarin and Rivière des Galets.  

Furthermore,  the  upgrading  of  roads  and  drains  at  Avenue  Jacarandas,  Tamarin  is 
presently under construction. In this respect, the drain works have already been completed 
and the road works are  due to completion by end of May 2015. The cost of the project is 
Rs22,469,720.63.  

The  project  of  upgrading  and  enlargement  of  bridge  at  Pierrefonds  to  the  tune  of 

Rs3,934,371.38 has yet to be started.  

In  addition,  the  National  Development  Unit  during  Financial  Year  2014  also 
conveyed financial clearance to the tune of Rs10,527,400 to the Black River District Council 
and  Savanne  District  Council  for  various  drain  works  in  the  regions  of  Chemin  Grenier, 
Bambous, Beaux Songes, La Gaulette and Grande Rivière Noire. Well, whatever remains to 
be done will be looked into. 

At 6.30 p.m. the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Friday 20 February 2015 at 

3.00 p.m. 

WRITTEN ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

MAURICE ILE DURABLE COMMISSION - DISSOLUTION 

(No. B/10) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Maurice  Ile  Durable 
Commission, he will state if -  

 

109 

(a) the Commission is still in operation, and if not, the reasons therefor, indicating which 
authority will now be responsible to carry out the mandate of the former Commission;  

(b)  how our international commitments on Maurice Ile Durable will be met, and 
(c)  if the Maurice  Ile Durable Fund will continue to exist and, if so, in which  policy 

context. 

Reply  (Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and 
Beach Management): The MID Commission has been dissolved as from January this year. 
The  mandate  of  the  MID  Commission  which  was  to  coordinate  the  implementation  of 
sustainable development across key sectors of the economy has been fully integrated with the 
Ministry of Environment, Sustainable Development, Disaster and Beach Management and its 
implementation is being carried out by all relevant line Ministries. 

With  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  this  Government  will  continue  to  honour 
international  commitments  taken  in  the  context  of  Multilateral  Environmental  Agreements 
and  during  international  conferences  on  sustainable  development  through  all  relevant 
Ministries and Departments.  

With  regard  to  part  (c)  of  the  question,  the  MID  Fund  will  now  operate  under  the 
purview of my Ministry and appropriate amendments will be made to the relevant regulations 
in the forthcoming Budget.  The Fund will operate within the existing legal framework with 
the overall objective of promoting sustainable development at all levels. 

 

NATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION – L’AMICALE DE PORT LOUIS - 

INQUIRY   

(No. B/15) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the inquiry being carried out 
by the National Human  Rights Commission in relation to the case of  arson of the  gaming 
house, known as l’Amicale de Port Louis in May 1999, he will, for the benefit of the House, 
obtain from the Commission, information as to when the inquiry will be completed. 

Reply: I am informed by the Chairperson of the National Human Rights Commission 
that  the  inquiry  it  is  conducting  in  the  l’Amicale  de  Port  Louis  case  is  expected  to  be 
completed by mid-2015. 

 

110 

However, I wish to inform the House that the present inquiry by the National Human 
Rights Commission started on 14 July 2014 and was expected, as per provisions of Section 
4A(3) of the Protection of Human Rights Act, to be completed, as far as practicable, within 
six months from the receipt of the complaint, that is, by 10 January 2015. 

However,  as  the  search  for  the  existence  of  fresh  and  compelling  evidence  for  the 
purpose  of  determining  whether  a  reference  should  be  made  to  the  Supreme  Court  under 
Section 19A (4) of the Criminal Appeal Act, is a complex exercise, counsel of the applicants 
has been informed and has no objection to the extension in time. 

RICHE TERRE - JIN FEI PROJECT 

(No. B/16) Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the Rt. 
hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National Development Unit whether in regard to the recent visit of the Vice Minister of State 
Oceanic Administration of the People’s Republic of China, he will state if discussions were 
held regarding the Jin Fei Project at Riche Terre and, if so, the decision Government intends 
to take as a result thereof. 

Reply (Minister of Finance and Economic Development): I shall reply, at the same 
 
time, to PQ B/16 addressed to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and PQ B/46 addressed to me as 
they relate to the same subject. 

As  the  House  is  aware,  the  Jinfei  project  is  yet  another  failure  of  the  previous 
Government. Ever since the lease agreement was signed in 2009, there has been very little 
development so much so that the Riche Terre area which is a strategic location has turned 
into a ghost town. 

During the last electoral campaign, we took the commitment to revive this project and 
give it a new impulse. Ever since we assume office, we started intensive discussions with the 
promoters  as  well  as  the  Chinese  Authorities.  In  that  context,  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister 
took the opportunity of the visit of the Vice-Minister for State Administration of the People’s 
Republic of China in January to convey his disappointment regarding the execution of the 
Jinfei project. Furthermore, the Prime Minister emphasised on the failure of the promoters of 
Jinfei to execute the project according to the agreed schedule. 

Subsequently, a high-level delegation from the Chinese promoters of Jinfei, flew from 
China  to  Mauritius  on  23  January  2015  to  have  discussions  with  appropriate  authorities. 

 

111 

Several meetings were held where Government expressed its strong discontent on the state of 
affairs and I personally expressed Government intention of taking back the land. 

The following proposals were made to them during the discussions - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

to  set  up  a  joint  venture  company  where  Government  of  Mauritius  will  hold  80 
percent shares  and the  Mauritius Jinfei Economic Trade Cooperation  Zone  Ltd   20 
percent shares; 
the share of 20 percent allocated to the Chinese promoters of Jinfei represents their 
investment on onsite infrastructure amounting to some Rs 930 million and the 80% of 
Government shares represent the total area under the lease i.e 500 acres;  
the lease over the 211 hectares of land will thereafter be transferred to the new joint 
venture, and 

(iv)  Government reserves the right to acquire the business centre, the warehouse and an 
apartment building already developed by the Chinese promoters of Jinfei at a price to 
be agreed between the parties.  
The promoters of Jinfei left Mauritius on 05 February 2015 and we are now awaiting 

their response before deciding on the way forward. 

Regarding  part  (a)  of  PQ/B46,  I  am  informed  that  the  total  value  of  the  onsite 
infrastructural works undertaken by the promoters of Jinfei amounts to some Rs 930 m. for 
7.47 kms of roads together with electricity supplies, water, sewage and telecommunication. 
The contractors appointed by the Chinese promoters of Jinfei for the construction of these 
projects  are  Tianli  Construction  Company  Ltd,  Beijing  Zhuzong  Group  Company  Ltd  and 
Beijing Construction Engineering Group Mauritius. 

I am informed that the previous Government has invested some Rs500 m. in terms of 
direct  offsite  infrastructure  including  roads,  electricity,  water  and  sewerage.  However,  this 
amount excludes indirect potential investments estimated at Rs1 billion required to meet the 
water  needs  of  the  different  business  segments  in  the  event  that  Jinfei  attains  its  full 
development capacity. 

As  requested,  I  am  tabling  a  list  of  works  undertaken  together  with  the  names  of 

contractors appointed by Government to undertake these works. 

As regards part (b) of the question, the previous Government refused to compensate 
the small planters. It was only after strike and court case that the previous Government was 
compelled  to  pay  a  total  amount  of  Rs70  m.  as  compensation  to  227  planters  who  were 

 

112 

occupying plots of land in the Riche Terre/Terre Rouge land settlement area.  Furthermore, 
some 106 planters were leased land to the extent of 10 perches each for residential purposes 
and 34 planters were granted one (1) arpent each for vegetable plantation. 

Following the meeting I had with the small planters at Solitude on Saturday last, we 
agreed  to  set  up  a  committee  under  the  Chairmanship  of  the  Financial  Secretary  and 
comprising  relevant  Ministries  as  well  as  the  representatives  of  the  relevant  Cooperative 
Societies to look on how we may compensate the small planters for the very unfair treatment 
they had undergone. 

With  regard  to  part  (c)  of  the  question,  Government  signed  two  (2)  agreements  in 

September 2009, namely - 

(i) 

(ii) 

a  lease  agreement  where  211  hectares  of  State  land  were  leased  to 
Mauritius  Jinfei  Economic  Trade  and  Cooperation  Zone  Ltd  by  the 
Ministry of Housing and Lands for a period of 99 years for the purpose of 
developing an Economic Trade and Cooperation Zone at Riche Terre, and 
a  framework  agreement  that  sets  out  the  framework  of  cooperation 
between  Shanxi  Jinfei  Investment  Co.  Ltd  and  the  Government  of 
Mauritius as well as the obligations of the promoters to develop the zone 
within  a  specific  time  frame  in  two  phases,  i.e  Phase  1  from  September 
2009 to September 2012 and Phase 2 from September 2010 to December 
2016.  

A copy of the two agreements is being placed in the Library. The House may wish to 
note  that  the  agreement  was  signed  by  the  former  Minister  of  Finance  on  one  part  and  a 
private  party  on  the  other  side.  The  lease  was  in  no  way  a  Government  to  Government 
agreement. 

During the present discussions, the new Government is, however, taking care not to 
disturb the excellent diplomatic relations that exist between our two countries. In that context, 
I have been meeting the Chinese Ambassador in Mauritius on a regular basis to appraise him 
of all developments. 

MILITARY ROAD, CITÉ MARTIAL – CANAL ANGLAIS – REPAIRS  

(No. B/18) Mr A. Ameer Meea (Second Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port 
Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in 

 

113 

regard to the “Canal Anglais”, behind the Military Road, Cité Martial, he will state if he is 
aware  of  the  presence  of  cracks  thereinto  resulting  into  water  leakage  into  houses  during 
rainfall  and,  if  so,  will  he  state  if  consideration  will  be  given  for  the  urgent  repairs  and 
upgrading thereof. 

Reply (The Prime Minister): I am informed that as far back as 30 March 2013, the 
scouring  effect  during  the  flash  floods  damaged  the  concrete  bedding  of  “Canal  Anglais”.  
Apparently, the detritus stuck on the damaged concrete bedding caused water level to rise and 
overflow  the  embankments  thereby  flooding  the  house  of  one  inhabitant  at  Military  Road, 
Cité Martial. 

As  regards  the  presence  of  alleged  cracks  resulting  into  water  leakage  into  houses 
during recent rainfall, I have given instructions to the National Development Unit to cause a 
survey to be carried out and remedial actions, if warranted, to be taken. 

I  have  also  asked  the  Minister  of  Local  Government,  to  intervene  with  Local 

Authorities to ensure that they maintain canals and drains properly. 

 

E-JUDICIARY PROJECT – CONTRACT  

(No.  B/34)  Mr  M.  Gobin  (First  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  &  Souillac) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  whether,  in  regard  to  the  E-
Judiciary project, he will state – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

the directors; 
shareholders, and 
the beneficial owner thereof 

the  name  of  the  company  and/or  private  consultant  to  whom  the  contract 
thereof was awarded, indicating the names of – 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
if the contract thereof was awarded in compliance with the requirements of the 
Public Procurement Act and, if not, why not, and 
if  proper  monitoring  and  internal  audit  regarding  the  implementation  of  the 
project is being properly effected, especially in relation to liquidated damages 
clause and, if not, why not. 

 

114 

Reply (The Prime Minister): In regard to parts (a) (i) and (ii) of the question, I am 
informed  by  the  Master  and  Registrar  of  the  Supreme  Court  that  the  contract  for  the  E-
Judiciary Project was awarded to Mauritius Network Services Limited. 

The names of the Directors of the Board of Mauritius Network Services Limited are 

as follows – 

(i) 

Mr Mohammad OOZEER, Chairman; 

(ii)  Mr Bhanu Pratabsingh JADDOO, Vice Chairman; 

(iii)  Mrs Aruna Devi BUNWAREE-RAMSAHA, Director, and 

(iv)  Mr Vedprakash AUCKALOO, Director. 

The Mauritius Network Services Limited is owned by Maurinet which is composed of 

the following Companies – 

(i) 

Mauritius Chamber of Commerce and Industry – 35% of shareholding; 

(ii)  Mauritius Ports Authority – 22.5% of shareholding; 

(iii) 

State Investment Corporation Limited – 12.5% of shareholding; 

(iv)  Mauritius Telecom, Port Louis Fund and Cargo Handling Corporation – 10% 

of shareholding each. 

Insofar  as  part  (a)  (iii)  of  the  question  is  concerned,  the  Master  and  Registrar  has 

informed that the Judiciary is not in presence of such information. 

In regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed by the Master and Registrar of the 
Supreme Court that the contract for the E-Judiciary Project was awarded in compliance with 
the provisions of the Public Procurement Act, under the Procurement Guidelines of the donor 
agency, namely, Investment Climate Facility for Africa. 

Concerning part (c) of the question, the Master and Registrar of the Supreme Court 
has informed that proper monitoring of the E-Judiciary Project is being effected ever since its 
inception by a Steering Committee chaired by an hon. Judge of the Supreme Court and the 
Judiciary Project Management Team. 

Quarterly  reports  are  regularly  submitted  to  Investment  Climate  Facility  and  to  the 
Ministry of Finance and Economic Development.  In addition, an Investment Climate Facility 
team regularly visits Mauritius for the monitoring of the project. 

 

115 

The audit is being done at three levels – 

Firstly, at the level of the internal control of the Ministry of Finance and Economic 
Development; 

Secondly, at the level of the National Audit Office, and 

Thirdly, by the Audit team of the donor agency. 

In  October  2014,  an  acceptance  letter  was  delivered  by  the  Judiciary  to  Mauritius 
Network  Services  Limited  subject  to  the  condition  that  certain  changes  be  made  to  the 
system.  The Mauritius Network Services Limited is currently working on these changes. 

As far as the liquidated damages clause is concerned, I am informed by the Master 
and Registrar that the advisability or otherwise of applying the provisions of the latter clause 
will  be  considered  in  the  light  of  the  changes  to  be  brought  to  the  E-Judiciary  System,  as 
requested by the Judiciary from Mauritius Network Services Limited. 

 

CANAL DAYOT – FLASH FLOODS – CLEANING WORKS  

(No. B/37) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the work 
being carried out at Canal Dayot, Grand River North West, he will state where matters stand, 
indicating if there has been any consultation with the inhabitants in relation thereof. 

Reply (The Prime Minister):  I am informed that, following the flash floods of 30 
March  2013,  the  National  Development  Unit  undertook  the  following  under  Emergency 
Procurement – 

(i) 
(ii) 

cleaning works in April 2013, and 
construction of rock revetment at Canal Dayot, Grand River North West in 
November 2013. 

The works were completed on 15 August 2013 and 31 December 2013 respectively. 

Consultations were held with the inhabitants. 

SABLE NOIR – DRAINS 

(No. B/41) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to work 

 

116 

being carried out at Sable Noir, Grand River North West, he will state where matters stand, 
indicating if the inhabitants thereof have been consulted in relation thereto. 

Reply (The Prime Minister): I am informed that the construction of the outlet drains 
from Industrial Zone to sea outlet, Bell Village and the reconstruction of existing drain to a 
bigger  size  at  Sable  Noir  was  effected  by  National  Development  Unit  under  Emergency 
Procurement as from May 2013 and was completed on 30 May 2014. 

I  am  also  informed  that  to  further  ease  the  evacuation  of  flood  water,  a  new  box 
culvert with greater cross sectional area is presently under construction at Sable Noir and is 
scheduled for completion by the end of May 2015. 

In respect of both projects the inhabitants of the region were consulted. I am given to 
understand that it is upon the request of inhabitants and Force Vives of Sable Noir that the 
new box culvert is being constructed. 

 

MBC - FORMER DIRECTOR GENERAL - LUMP SUM 

(No. B/43) Mr S. Fowdar (Third Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or) asked 
the Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the former 
Director General of the Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation, he will, for the benefit of the 
House, obtain from the Corporation, information as to if he was paid a lump sum upon his 
resignation in December 2014 and, if so, will he state if the amount paid was in conformity 
with the terms and conditions of his contract and, if not, indicate the legal actions that are 
being taken in relation thereto. 

Reply: I am informed that the former Director General of the Mauritius Broadcasting 
Corporation, was paid a net amount of Rs4,574,660.78 (after deduction of Rs786,014.74 as 
PAYE) after his resignation on 11 December 2014. The payment had initially been effected 
on 11 December 2014 through direct debit. The State Bank of Mauritius was instructed to 
process the payment on 11 December 2014. 

However,  in  view  of  the  fact  that  the  former  Director  General  was  not  entitled  to 
payment  of  gratuity  and  of  passage  benefits,  he  was  requested  to  refund  an  amount  of 
Rs321,045.37.  

With regard to the second part of the question, I am informed that the former Director 

General was paid a sum of Rs4,253,615.47 as compensation.  

 

117 

The  compensation  paid  equivalent  to  eighteen  months’  salary  is  pursuant  to  clause 

x(e) of the contract of employment of the former Director General.  

Clause  x(e)  of  the  contract  of  the  former  Director  General  of  the  Mauritius 

Broadcasting Corporation, which was drawn on 25 June 2014, states, I quote - 

“Your  appointment may be determined by  you  at any time when  you  consider that 
you cannot, in good conscience, continue to serve as Director-General, in which case 
you will be paid eighteen months’ salary.”  
The term of the contract of the former Director General with regard to termination is 
currently  being  investigated  by  the  Ministry  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 
Institutional Reforms. Further action will be taken in the light of the findings. 

PRIMARY SCHOOLS - SUBJECT TEACHING 

 

(No.  B/44)  Mr  S.  Fowdar  (Third  Member  for  Grand’  Baie  &  Poudre  d’Or) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Science 
Research  whether  she  will  state  if  her  Ministry  is  considering  the  introduction  of  subject 
teaching at the primary level. 

(Withdrawn) 

STATE LANDS - LEASE  

(No. B/45) Mr S. Fowdar (Third Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or) asked 
the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in regard to the lease of 
State lands, he will - 

(a) state if his Ministry intends to come up with a more transparent set of procedures 

for the allocation thereof, and  

(b) table a list thereof from July 2005 to date, indicating in each case the - 

(i) name of the lessee;  
(ii) purpose thereof, and  
(iii) extent thereof. 

Reply: In regard to part (a) of the question, I wish to inform the House that I have set 
up a dedicated working group, which I am personally chairing, to examine in-depth the whole 
process  governing State  land allocation. The exercise has reached quite  an advanced stage 
already and, very shortly, a review of the Policy Framework would be made. I can inform 
hon. Members that the new system which will be put in place will very rigorously subscribe 

 

118 

to the principles of fairness, transparency and accountability so that we ward off once for all 
instances of arbitrariness and discrimination. 

Concerning  part  (b)  of  the  question,  the  information  is  being  compiled  and  will  be 

placed in the Library of the National Assembly in due course. 

JIN FEI PROJECT - INFRASTRUCTURAL WORKS 

(No. B/46) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked the  Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the Jin Fei 
Project, he will state -  

(a) the total value of infrastructural works undertaken thereat, indicating the names of 

the contractors involved as at to date;  

(b) the compensation paid to the planters following their relocation and,  
(c) if an agreement was signed between the Government and Jin Fei and/or any other 

party, indicating;  
(i)  the conditions of the lease of the land thereof, and  
(ii) (ii) if copy of the agreement thereof will be tabled. 

(Vide reply to P.Q No. B/16) 

EBENE - SICOM TOWER - LEASE AGREEMENT 

(No. B/47) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development    whether,  in  regard  to  SICOM 
Tower at Ebène, he will state if - 

(a) the original lease agreement between the Business Park of Mauritius Ltd. (BPML) 
and  Arushi  Development  Ltd.  had  been  revised  subsequently  to  enable 
commercial  development  thereat,  indicating  whether  the  decision  was  approved 
by the Board of Directors of the BPML; 

 (b) tenders were launched by SICOM for the purchase of property at Ebene and, if 

not, why not and, if so, give details of the - 

(i) list of bidders; 
 (ii) the name of the members of the tender evaluation panel;  
(iii) the bid evaluation reports thereof, and 

(c) there are fixed and floating charges in the property  currently known  as SICOM 

Tower in favour of any other party apart from SICOM Ltd. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

119 

 
 

 

CENTRAL PROCUREMENT BOARD - TECHNICAL COMMITTEE - 

COMPOSITION 

(No. B/48) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
Technical Committee of the Central Procurement Board, he will state the - 

(a) composition thereof, indicating the -  

(i) qualification;  
(ii) experience;  
(iii)salary and benefits;  
(iv) date of appointment and duration of contract of the members 

thereof, and 

(b) scope of work thereof, indicating if Government intends to review the composition 

and functioning thereof. 

Reply: I am informed that, in accordance with Section 11 of the Public Procurement 
Act, the Central Procurement Board sets up, as and when required, Technical Committees in 
order to discharge its responsibility for the award of major contracts in the public sector. 

  
With  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  the  Board  recruits 
engineers  from  various  fields  on  contract  basis  and  the  latter  are  also  called  upon  to  be 
members  of  Technical  Committees.  At  present,  the  following  engineers  are  serving  on 
Technical Committees - 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 

Mr Amitsingh Raja Rai, Civil Engineer 
Mr Mooneedranathsing Jeelall, Civil Engineer 
Mr Neerunjunsingh Ujoodha, Computer Engineer/IT System Administrator  
 

I am tabling the information requested in respect of qualifications, experience, salaries 

and other benefits of these engineers.  
 
Regarding Part  (b) of the question,  I  am informed that the  Technical Committee is 
mandated  to  carry  out  due  diligence  exercise  on  evaluation  reports  submitted  by  Bid 

 

120 

Evaluation  Committees.  Due  diligence  reports  along  with  the  respective  Bid  Evaluation 
Reports are submitted to the Board for decision making. 

 
Yes, Government is presently reconstituting the Central Procurement Board and once 
the  new  Board  will  be  in  place,  it  will  review  the  composition  and  functioning  of  its 
Technical Committees. 

 

TERRE ROUGE-VERDUN ROAD (M3)  – GEOTECHNICAL REPORT 

(No. B/49) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked the 
Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the Terre Rouge- 
Verdun Road (M3), he will state – 

 (a) the status thereof as at to date;  
(b) the content of the report of the Geotechnical expert of Mr P., indicating if a copy 

thereof will be tabled, and 

 (c) if there has been any change from the original design and, if so, why. 
Reply:  With regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed that the Terre Rouge-
Verdun Road (M3) is a dual carriageway which was opened to traffic in December 2013. On 
18 January 2015, cracks were observed on the fill area about 400m before Valton roundabout.  
A monitoring of the cracks revealed signs of a potential landslide and it was decided to close 
the section of road between Valton and Ripailles completely as from 21 January 2015.  

The advice of experts namely, the Expert Team of the Japan International Corporation 
Agency,  Dr.  E  Saldivar,  Geotechnical  Engineer  of  Geotechnical  Services  Limited 
(Mauritius),  whose  services  have  been  retained  by  the  RDA,  and  ARQ  (South  Africa), 
Consulting Engineer for Joint Venture Rehm Grinaker-COLAS, have been sought and they 
all  share  the  opinion  that  the  excessive  accumulation  of  water  to  a  high  level  in  the 
embankment, resulting from the recent torrential rainfalls, has triggered  the incident.  In-
depth investigations and tests will be conducted for the identification of the precise causes 
of the embankment failure and the appropriate remedial measures.   

With regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed that Mr Plotto was an expert 
appointed by the Consultant, Egis International Ltd to prepare the geotechnical study at the 
project design stage. When the first signs of instabilities were identified in 2010, Mr Plotto 
carried  out  a  visit  and  submitted  a  mission  report  on  06  July  2010  with  some 
recommendations relating to slope stabilisation.  Following new problems that cropped up 

 

121 

in the same region, Mr Plotto was called upon by the Consultant to field a second mission in 
December  2011.    He  made  further  recommendations  for  solving  slope  instabilities 
permanently  using  appropriate  and  more  expensive  technologies  which  included  nailing, 
piling,  shotcreting,  retaining  walls  and  sub-soil  drainage  to  minimise  risks  of  further 
landslides.   

I am tabling a copy of each of the reports. 

With regard to part (c) of the question, I am advised that there has been no change in 

the original design of the road.  

RING ROAD PHASE I - REPORTS 

(No. B/50) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked the 
Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Ring  Road 
Phase I, he will state where matters stand as to the reports and the recommendations of the 
various experts thereon, indicating the amount of money paid to them. 

Reply:    I  am  informed  that  the  Port  Louis  Ring  Road  project  was  conceived  to  be 
implemented in three phases under the Road Decongestion Programme.   The contract for the 
construction of Phase 1 was awarded to Joint Venture Rehm Grinaker-COLAS, following an 
international bidding exercise.  The RDA had recourse to Arab Consulting Engineering from 
Egypt for the supervision of the works.     

The  construction  works  for  Phase  1  started  in  January  2010  and  was  substantially 

completed in January 2013.  There was a defects liability period of 1 year. 

Before the expiry of the defects liability period, part of the Ring Road collapsed.  That 
part of the Ring Road was on a ‘Design and Build’ basis by Joint Venture Rehm Grinaker-
COLAS.  I am advised that the cause of the collapse is attributable to the fact that the sub-soil 
strata was too weak to support the fill and the reinforced earth structure.   

As per the provisions of the Contract, the Contractor is totally responsible for its design 

and construction.  

The  Contractor  has  consequently  appointed  Messrs  ARQ  (Pty)  Ltd  Consulting 
Engineers from South Africa to carry out the reconstruction design and the supervision on its 
behalf.  

 

122 

The  expert  recommendation  to  overcome  the  slip  which  occurred  consists  of 
reinforcing  the  soil  strata  below  using  support  piles  up  to  bedrock  and  inclined  tendons 
embedded therein prior to the actual construction of the reinforced earth wall itself. 

The final reconstruction design has been reviewed and approved by the Geotechnical 

Expert of the Consultant, Arab Consulting Engineers. 

The costs relating to the assignment of ARQ (Pty) Ltd Consulting Engineers are being 
borne by the Contractor directly whereas costs relating to the services of the Geotechnical 
Expert  of  Arab  Consulting  Engineers,  to  the  tune  of  USD  5170,  have  been  paid  from  the 
forfeited amount of the contractor’s performance bond. 

The services of an independent Geotechnical Expert from South Africa, has now been 
obtained  and  he  is  expected  to  be  in  Mauritius  on  15  February  2015.  He  will  advise  my 
Ministry, inter-alia, on the efficacy and technical soundness of the remedial works proposed 
by the contractor.  The cost of the assignment is around Rs1.6m. 

LIGHT RAIL PROJECT - FUNDS EARMARKED 

(No. B/51) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked the 
Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Light  Rail 
Project, which has now been shelved, he will state how the funds earmarked therefor by the 
Government of India will be allocated for other projects, if any. 

Reply:  The Mauritius Light Rapid Transit (MLRT) project was initiated as far back as 
2011,  through  a  Government  to  Government  Agreement  with  the  Singapore  Government, 
through the Singapore Cooperation Entreprise (SCE). The project was conceived on a Design 
and Construct model and was to be partly financed by way of a line of credit obtained from 
the Government of India and partly through loans. The total cost of the project would have 
amounted to some USD 830 million.  

In  view  of  the  huge  investment  required  and  the  need  to  attend  to  other  priority 
projects,  this  Government  has  decided  to  shelve  the  Light  Rapid  Transit  project  and  to 
explore alternative solutions with a view to improving and modernising the transport system. 

I am informed that The Ministry of Finance and Economic Development is currently 
working on the Public Sector Investment Programme (PSIP) and a priority list of projects will 
be  announced  in  the  forthcoming  budget.  Accordingly,  Members  of  the  House  will  be 

 

123 

informed  in  due  course  of  the  projects  which  will  be  funded  out  of  the  Line  of  Credit 
obtained from the Government of India. 

 

RIPAILLES – SINOHYDRO – WORKS COMPLETION 

(No.  B/52)  Dr.  R.  Sorefan  (Fourth  Member  for  La  Caverne  &  Phoenix)  asked 
Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  the  contract 
awarded to Sinohydro for the completion of works at Ripailles where landslide has occurred, 
he will state if works will continue to be carried out thereat in the light of the actual state of 
the M3 Road between Ripailles and Valton roundabouts. 

Reply:   I am informed that during the construction of the Terre Rouge-Verdun Link 
Road, landslide problems occurred in the cut section over 3km at Ripailles.  Following an 
international bidding exercise, Sinohydro Corporation Limited has been selected for the slope 
stabilisation works. 

As  the  House  is  aware,  an  embankment  failure  was  identified  in  the  segment  of  the 
Terre  Rouge-Verdun  Link  Road  at  about  1km  away  from  the  cut  section  where  the  slope 
stabilisation works are currently being carried out.  

With a view to identifying the cause/s of the embankment failure, it has been decided 
that in-depth geotechnical investigations and tests be carried out along the road segment in 
order  to  come  up  with  an  appropriate  design  for  durable  remedial  works  along  the  whole 
stretch of the road, wherever needed.   

I  have  been  accordingly  advised  that  it  would  be  more  appropriate  that  the  ongoing 
stabilisation  works  be  stopped  temporarily  pending  the  completion  of  the  geotechnical 
investigations and tests. 

DOCTORS – PRE-REGISTRATION TRAINING 

(No.  B/53)  Mr  P.  Jhugroo  (Second  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien) 
asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the Pre-Registration 
Training for new qualified doctors, he will – 

(a) give a list thereof awaiting training, indicating in each case, the date of registration, 

and  

 

124 

(b) state when they will be enlisted, indicating the number thereof that will be enlisted 

Reply:  With  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  the  list  requested  in  respect  of 
applications  from  newly  qualified  doctors  together  with  the  relevant  information  is  being 
placed in the Library. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, procedures are under way for the enlistment of 

63 Pre-Registration House Officers.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

