No. 36 of 2015 

 

1 

 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

 

FRIDAY 23 OCTOBER 2015 

 

 

 

 

2 

CONTENTS 

 

 
 

PAPERS LAID 

QUESTION (Oral) 

MOTIONS 

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 
KCMG, QC  
Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 
GCSK  
Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 
Communications 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo, GCSK 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 
Utilities 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 
Sinatambou 
Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 
Perraud 
Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 

Integration 

and  Economic 

of 
Minister 
Empowerment 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 
International Trade 
Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 
Family Welfare 
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance, 
Institutional  Reforms,  Minister 
Technology, 
Communication and Innovation 
Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 

of 

 

Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, 
QPM 
Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 
Cheong, MSK 
Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 

4 

Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 
Institutions 
Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands 
Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 
Disaster and Beach Management  
Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms 

Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and 
Training 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Gopall, Mr Navin (Temporary Transfer to 
RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 36 of 2015 

 

Sitting of 23 October 2015 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 3.00 p.m. 

 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7 

PAPERS LAID 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table - 

A.    Prime Minister’s Office – 

The  Annual  Report  and  Accounts  of  the  Lottery  Committee  for  the  year 
ended 31 December 2014. 

B.    Ministry of Tourism and External Communications  – 

The Annual Report 2014 of the Mauritius Ports Authority. 

C.    Ministry of Arts and Culture – 

The Consolidated Annual Reports of the Mauritius Telegu Cultural Centre 
Trust for the financial years July 2009 – December 2013. 

ORAL ANSWER TO QUESTION 

MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND QUALITY OF LIFE – MEDICAL 

PRACTITIONERS – RECRUITMENT 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger)  (by Private Notice)  asked the Rt. 
hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  recent  recruitment  of  60  medical 
practitioners as Medical and Health Officers at the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life and 
to the national stir caused by the exercise, he will – 

(a) 

state if – 

(i) 

(ii) 

his Office is in presence of complaints in relation thereto, and 

consideration will be given for the recruitment exercise to be cancelled 
and for a fresh one to be carried out by the Public Service Commission, 
and 

(b) 

for the benefit of the House, obtain from the – 

(i) 

Equal Opportunities Commission, information as to if it is in presence 
of complaints in relation thereto, and 

 

8 

(ii) 

Public Service Commission, information as to – 

(A) 

(B) 

if it is in presence of complaints in relation thereto, and 

the reasons why it had delegated its recruitment powers to the 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life for this exercise. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, in regard to part (a) (i) of the question, I have 
indeed  received  complaints  addressed  to  me  from  candidates  who  have  not  been  selected 
following the selection exercise in question. 

I  have  also  taken  note  of  complaints  which  have  been  addressed  to  the  Equal 
Opportunities Commission and the Independent Commission against Corruption and copied 
to the Prime Minister’s Office. 

Madam  Speaker,  in  regard  to  part  (a)  (ii)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  by  the 
Ministry  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  that  as  at  August  2015,  there  were  119  permanent 
vacancies  and  60  temporary  vacancies  for  the  post  of  Medical  and  Health  Officers/Senior 
Medical  and  Health  Officers  in  that  Ministry.    Temporary  vacancies  arose  as  a  result  of 
doctors proceeding on leave without pay for further studies.  The permanent vacancies were 
reported  to  the  Public  Service  Commission  on  05  March  2015.    The  vacancies  were 
advertised  by  the  Commission  on  07  April  2015  with  closing  date  27  April  2015.    I  am 
informed  that  interviews  will  be  conducted  by  the  Public  Service  Commission  during  the 
period November 2015 to January 2016. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to the recruitment of Medical and Health Officers/Senior 
Medical and Health Officers on a month-to-month basis, the Public Service Commission has 
delegated its powers since October 1997 to the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life, under 
section  89(2)  of  the  Constitution,  and  regulation  29  of  the  PSC  Regulations,  to  employ 
Medical and Health Officers/Senior Medical and Health Officers on a purely temporary and 
month-to-month  basis  so  as  to  palliate  shortages  of  staff  in  critical  areas  and  pending 
recruitment exercises being completed by the PSC. 

Several  conditions  are  attached  to  such  delegation  of  powers,  namely  that  the 
employment  is  made  against  vacancies  and  that  candidates  should  have  the  required 
qualifications as laid down in the Scheme of Service.  They should also not have retired in the 
interest of the Public Service or on medical grounds. 

 
I am informed that the interview exercise was carried out based on the conditions as 

9 

set out by the PSC under delegated powers, which include the following – 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

Medical practitioners may be employed only if vacancies exist in the grade of 
Medical and Health Officer/Senior Medical and Health Officer; 

The  candidates  should  possess  the  qualifications  laid  down  in  the  approved 
Scheme of Service; 

The employment is purely temporary, on a month-to-month basis, subject to 
termination at any time.  Remuneration is at the initial salary of the post, and 

Should  vacancies  be  advertised,  the  doctors  must  apply  if  they  wish  to  be 
considered for regular employment and will have to compete along with other 
applicants. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  there  are  precedents  in  that  a  first  selection 
exercise was carried out as far back as 1998 under such delegation.  Thereafter, several such 
selection exercises have been made as follows – 

Year 

2004 

2005 

2006 

2007 

2008 

2009 

2010 

2011 

 

: 

: 

: 

: 

: 

: 

: 

: 

Selected Candidates 

7 

63 

30 

133 

12 

173 

84 

69 

With  regard  to  the  present  selection  exercise,  the  post  of  Medical  and  Health 
Officers/Senior Medical and Health Officers on a month-to-month basis was advertised on 24 
June 2015 and closing date was 08 July 2015.  445 applications were received.  Interviews 

 

10 

were carried out at the level of the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life under delegated 
powers from 11 to 21 August 2015. 

Sixty  candidates  were  offered  employment  as  Medical  and  Health  Officer/Senior 
Medical and Health Officer on a month-to-month basis. They assumed duty on Monday 12 
October 2015. 

Madam Speaker, the House will agree that in any selection exercise, it is difficult to 

satisfy all candidates, the more so when there is a large number of eligible candidates. 

I also wish to inform the House that it has become a common practice for the PSC to 
delegate its powers for speedy filling of vacancies across the public service under specified 
conditions. 

Madam Speaker, in regard to part (b) (i), I am informed by the Equal Opportunities 
Commission that three complaints were received thereat last week.  These complaints have 
already  been  registered  on  the  database  of  the  Commission  as  per  its  complaints  handling 
system and will be considered at the level of the Commission as from next week. 

Madam Speaker, regarding part  (b) (ii) of the question,  I wish to highlight that the 
Public  Service  Commission  is  a  Constitutional  body  established  under  section  88  of  the 
Constitution with the power to appoint persons to hold or act in offices in the public service. 
The exercise of the powers of the PSC cannot be called into question by any Minister and I 
cannot exercise any control regarding appointment exercises carried out by the Public Service 
Commission. 

Regarding part (b) (ii) (A) of the question, I do not propose to reply to any further 
question in relation to the operation of the Public Service Commission save for the factual 
matters raised in this question. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  am  therefore  informing  the  House  that  the  Public  Service 

Commission has not received any complaint in relation to the recruitment exercise. 

Regarding part (b) (ii) (B), the Public Service Commission has delegated its powers, 
as it is empowered to do so, under section 89(2) of the Constitution. I cannot seek to question 
the  Public  Service  Commission  regarding  the  reasons  for  which  it  decided  to  delegate  its 
powers. 

11 

 
Madam  Speaker,  as  the  House  is  aware,  health  services  are  very  critical  and  it  is 
imperative  that  we  have  the  adequate  manpower  at  different  levels  to  provide  medical 
services round the clock. 

Moreover, as the Public Service Commission is currently looking into the matter, it 

would not be appropriate for me to substitute myself for the Commission. 

Mr Bérenger: Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he is fully aware that, 
on the basis of information widely available these days, it is widely felt that meritocracy has 
not prevailed in that exercise and that there has been ingérence politique throughout? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  I  am  not  aware  of  this  thing,  whether  it  is  a  fact  as 
rumours go round, but we know people are never satisfied even when the Commission does 
its work. So, we expect people to grumble - those who are not recruited.  

Mr Bérenger: The PSC has delegated its powers in that case as in others. Can I know 
from the Prime Minister, being given this hue and cry that has arisen, whether he has tried to 
find out - the Board that has exercised those delegated powers - what criteria have been used? 
Because it is clear that it is neither experience nor qualification that has prevailed. Just to take 
one example, half of those recruited have been registered with the Medical Council over the 
past year whereas a lot of others had years and years of work experience and have not been 
recruited.  So,  can  I  ask  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  whether  he  has  tried  to  find  out  what 
criteria have been used by the Board that has exercised those delegated powers of the PSC? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I have been told that the same criteria which would have 

been used by the PSC have been used. 

Mr Bérenger: Has the Rt. hon. Prime Minister tried to find out whether the Board 
that had exercised those delegated powers was constituted as it should have with top officers 
from the Ministry concerned and not much more junior officers, as I am given to understand 
took place in that case? 

The Prime Minister: The panel consisted of the –  

Chairperson  

 Dr. Mrs M. B. M. Timol, Director, Health Services who was 
acting as Director-General, Health Services from 03 August to 
28 August 2015  

 

Member 

12 

Mr  S.  K.  Sobee,  Assistant  Permanent  Secretary,  who  was 
acting  as  Deputy  Permanent  Secretary  from  19  June  to  23 
August 2015  

Member  

Mr Z. Bhugelloo, Manager Human Resources 

Mr Bérenger: Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister if he has taken the trouble to 
check whether this composition is in order? I am given to understand that in the past it was 
the most senior officer of the Ministry that chaired with other Medical Officers, whereas in 
this case it is not a top Senior Medical Officer and two civil servants. Has he tried to find out 
whether this is normal? 

The Prime Minister: Well, at first sight, when I look at the names, it seems they are 

qualified people capable of doing the job for which they were assigned. 

Mr Bérenger: I asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister the reasons why the powers were 
delegated  and  he  told  me  that  this  is  a  current  practice  going  back  a  long  time.  In  this 
particular case, it has been widely reported in the Press - I would wish to clear the point - that 
supposedly the PSC delegated its powers because there is a case before the Supreme Court. 
Another  Medical  Officer  in  the  former  recruitment  exercise  has  challenged  in  Court  and, 
therefore, because of that, the PSC has delegated its powers. Is that a fact?  

The Prime Minister: Well, I don’t know whether it is a fact. But I cannot see why, 
because there is a case in Court, the PSC is paralysed and cannot keep on proceeding with its 
duties. I don’t see why it should be like that! 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

Dr.  Joomaye:  Can  I  know  from  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  whether,  among  the 
candidates  whose  services  have  not  been  retained,  there  were  some  who  had  postgraduate 
degrees, that is, they were already qualified specialists and they were applying for the post of 
Medical Health Officer? 

The Prime Minister: I do not know; I cannot answer this question. 

Mr Bhagwan: Can I know from the Prime Minister whether he has been made aware 
and whether he could enquire as well if whether interviews were carried out in a rush manner 
– in a  cuit vider  manner, as we say  -  even  at night,  calling candidates to come  at the last 
minute, and that caused a lot of frustration and even doubts in the mind of the public? 

The Prime Minister: I am not aware of this and I have not inquired into it. 

 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

13 

Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  Is  the  hon.  Prime  Minister  aware  if  this 
panel which carried out the interview took into consideration any reserved list that had been 
prepared by the PSC following interview exercise for recruitment of doctors in the past? 

The Prime Minister: I cannot answer this; I do not know. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed: Thank  you, Madam Speaker. Since the hon. Prime Minister is now 
aware - after having a first sight, now that he has a second sight - that there is a lot of people 
who were on a waiting list prepared by the PSC and those people have not been taken into 
account for the recruitment exercise, now that he is aware that people have made complaints 
at the Equal Opportunities Commission, now that he is aware that the Board that was set up is 
not in the normal process as far as the composition is concerned… 

(Interruptions) 

…  now  that  he  is  aware  that  there  are  clearly  some  zones  d’ombre  -  serious  -  following 
certain Press reports of this morning, does he not consider that it would be in the interest of 
justice that he puts a halt to this whole exercise of recruitment and that there is an enquiry 
that is carried out in order to render justice to all those people who have been waiting for 
years as opposed to people who for a few months only have come in, in the interest of justice 
now that he is aware? 

The Prime Minister: The PSC is continuing with its exercise of recruitment. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Not from a sitting position, please! Allow the hon. Prime Minister 

to reply then the hon. Member will have time to ask questions! 

The Prime Minister: Well, if these people are qualified, they are on a waiting list, I 

am sure they will get their chance to be recruited by the PSC!  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo! 

Mr Ganoo: Madam Speaker, some time back the hon. Prime Minister, in this very 
House,  said  that  he  had  no  objection  that  the  list  of  these  new  recruits  as  public  officers 
should be published officially by the PSC or by the Ministry concerned. Does the hon. Prime 

 

14 

Minister  have  any  objection  that,  in  this  case  also,  the  names  of  those  who  have  been 
recruited be published officially? 

The Prime Minister: Well, insofar as I am concerned personally, I have no objection 
that once people who are selected will be recruited that the names will be made public. What 
is wrong with it? 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  Can  the  hon.  Prime  Minister  confirm 
whether the same exercise had been carried out in the past years and this year it had been 
chaired  by  someone  very  professional,  Dr.  Mrs  Timol,  who  is  a  consultant,  I  think,  in 
Psychiatry and also has the same exercise not been carried out in 2012, 2013 and 2014? 

The Prime Minister:  Well,  I have already  answered this in my answer. For  years, 
this has been going on and it has become a practice for PSC to delegate its powers and make 
such appointment, of course, on a temporary basis. 

Mr Bérenger:  I have just heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister say  - and it is a good 
thing - that he has no objection as far as he is concerned - and he is the Prime Minister, we 
are all aware - for the complete list of those 60 who have been recruited to be made public. I 
am sure he doesn’t have any objection for the date on which they were registered with the 
Medical Council to be also attached to that piece of information. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  as  far  as  I  am  concerned,  I  have  no  objection  that  the 
names  be  published  because  all  the  names  are  already  well  known  in  the  public.  It  was 
published, I hear, in the papers. 

Mr Bérenger: My last question.  As  you are aware,  I asked whether consideration 
will be given for the recruitment exercise to be cancelled and for a fresh one to be carried out 
by the Public Service Commission. It is the prerogative of the Prime Minister to cancel that 
exercise and have a fresh exercise? Is he prepared to exercise his prerogative in that case? 

The Prime Minister: I do not see any need to do that. 

MOTIONS 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10 (2) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that all the business on today’s 

Order Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

 
The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

15 

Question put and agreed to. 

(3.25 p.m.) 

SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE LIVE BROADCASTING OF THE 

PROCEEDINGS OF THE HOUSE - REPORT 

The  Prime  Minister:    Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  the  Motion  standing  in  my 

name and which reads as follows - 

“This Assembly resolves that the Report of the Select Committee on the Live 
Broadcasting of the Proceedings of the House and Matters Ancillary Thereto which 
was laid on the Table of the National Assembly on Tuesday 29 September 2015 be 
approved.” 

Madam Speaker, it is with a deep sense of pride and satisfaction that I rise today to 
move this historic Motion in this august Assembly. Madam Speaker, the presentation of this 
Motion today is the next logical step in our attempt to bring Parliament nearer to the people 
and  broaden  our  democratic  space.    We  have,  after  all,  made  a  pledge  to  the  nation  to 
strengthen and modernise our parliamentary democracy. 

This Motion, Madam Speaker, marks the final and decisive step in the fulfilment of 
our  pledge  to  open  up  Parliament  to  the  public  and  give  them  free  and  full  access  to  the 
debates and other activities in Parliament which affect their lives.   

As you are all aware, the relationship between Parliament and the people is an issue of 
growing importance everywhere, and it is now generally agreed that there is only one way 
forward for democracies: and that is to work for greater openness and transparency.  

In  fact,  many  modern  democracies  have  already  introduced  live  telecast  of 
Parliamentary proceedings. It is a matter of regret that in a society as lively and politically 
literate as Mauritius, we are lagging behind in this respect.  

And the reason is that the former Government never showed any  genuine desire to 
pursue the project in spite of the fact that there  was a  general consensus in favour of live 
broadcasting.  The  matter  was  periodically  raised  in  this  House  by  way  of  Parliamentary 
Questions, but each time it was met by empty promises, with the result that the project never 
materialised.  

16 

 
Madam Speaker, the House will recall that, on 28 April 2015, I presented the Motion 
for the appointment of a Select Committee of the Assembly to consider the live broadcasting 
of 
thereto  and  make  such 
recommendations as it deems fit. 

the  House  and  matters  ancillary 

the  proceedings  of 

The Motion was approved and the Select Committee was subsequently constituted on 

05 May 2015.   

The Committee held its first meeting on 07 May 2015 and hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 
was elected as Chairperson.  The Committee has completed its assignment and submitted its 
Report on Tuesday 29 September 2015.  I understand that a copy of the Report has already 
been provided to each and every hon. Member.   

I  would  like  to  exPress  my  gratitude  and  thankfulness  to  the  Chairperson  and 
Members  of  the  Select  Committee  for  the  excellent  piece  of  work  and  the  celerity  and 
diligence with which the Committee has discharged its mandate.  

The House may recall that while presenting the Motion in April last for the setting up 
of  the  Select  Committee,  I  highlighted  the  fact  that  the  introduction  of  live  broadcasting 
raises certain important questions and issues. Those same issues and concerns have already 
been underlined by some hon. Members who intervened during the debate.   

I  am  glad  to  note  that  the  Select  Committee  has  examined  all  those  issues  and 
apprehensions  in  the  light  of  the  experiences  in  live  broadcasting  in  foreign  legislatures, 
including the United Kingdom, India, Canada, Trinidad & Tobago, New Zealand, Portugal 
and the European Parliament, amongst others.  The Select Committee also exchanged views 
with stakeholders and sought expert advice before framing its recommendations.  

After carefully assessing the pros and cons of live broadcasting, the Committee has 
concluded that the advantages thereof far outweigh its disadvantages and recommended that 
the  National  Assembly  should  proceed  to  introduce  live  broadcasting  of  its  proceedings. 
Moreover, the Committee has proposed a model that suits the local context. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to briefly mention the following salient features of the 

Report of the Select Committee - 

(i) 

Responsibility for Broadcast, Production and Editing  

The  Select  Committee  has  recommended  that  the  Mauritius  National  Assembly 
should  itself  be  entrusted  with  the  responsibility  for  ensuring  that  the  proceedings  of  the 

 

17 

House is captured and distributed live through proper implemented platforms and, eventually, 
to archive same for later use.  The Committee accordingly recommends the setting up of an 
in-house  Production  Unit,  fully  controlled  and  staffed  by  the  legislature,  in  order  to  take 
ownership  of  the  feeds  that  are  produced  and  for  the  copyright  thereof  to  be  fully  vested 
therein.    Moreover,  no  editing  should  take  place.    However,  the  coverage  should  strictly 
adhere to the Rules of Coverage to be prescribed by the Standing Broadcasting Committee. 

(ii) 

Regulatory, Procedural and Legal Aspects 

The Select Committee has recommended that in case an hon. Member or any other 
person feels aggrieved by anything said or done in the course of the proceedings of the House 
which  is  broadcast,  the  hon.  Member  or  person  ought  to  be  given  the  right  to  make  an 
application for redress or right of reply, as the case may be, in a manner as may be prescribed 
within the least delay and which would be placed on the parliamentary record.  

The  broadcasting  agencies  should  be  required  to  report  the  rebuttal  if  they  have 
reported the incident. Sanctions should be imposed for not abiding by the Guidelines for Use 
of  Signal,  as  prescribed,  which  may  include,  amongst  others,  cancellation  of  license  to 
broadcast.  Moreover,  an  amendment  should  be  brought  to  section  24  of  the  Information, 
Communication and Technologies Act to provide for the Mauritius National Assembly to be 
exempted  from  the  requirement  to  be  issued  with  a  licence  to  be  able  to  broadcast  or 
streamline the proceedings of the House.          

The Third main feature of the Report is: Rules of Coverage and Guidelines for use of 

signals. 

In order to uphold the dignity of Parliament as a working body and, at the same time, 
ensure a full, fair, balanced and accurate account of the proceedings of the House, the Select 
Committee has elaborated the Rules of Coverage containing specific guidelines for picture 
direction, treatment of disorder, privilege and right of reply and sanctions for breach of the 
rules.   

The  Committee  has  also  proposed  draft  guidelines  indicating  the  circumstances  in 

which extracts from the signals may or may not be used. 

I now come to the Fourth point which is:  Monitoring  

Madam Speaker, the Report has recommended that Standing Order 69 of the Standing 
Orders and Rules of the National Assembly be amended to provide for the setting up of a 

 

18 

Sessional  Select  Committee,  to  be  known  as  the  “Broadcasting  Committee”,  whose  main 
function will be to - 

(i) 

(ii) 

monitor the live broadcasting of the proceedings of the House;  

prescribe such additional rules and guidelines as may be necessary, and 

(iii) 

look into all matters incidental thereto. 

Furthermore, in most legislatures, breach of rules and conditions may be treated  as 
contempt  and  this  has  been  dealt  with  through  the  exercise  of  the  Speaker’s  power  to 
withdraw the privilege of being able to broadcast. The Select Committee is of the view that 
this  may  be  included  in  the  Standing  Orders/National  Assembly  (Powers,  Privileges  and 
Immunities) Act as being a further example of contempt. 

The  Standing  Broadcasting  Committee  will  have  the  power  to  decide  that  the 
Production Unit will provide the signal to the public service broadcaster, that is, the Mauritius 
Broadcasting  Corporation  and  any  other  broadcaster,  if  any,  and  the  private  radios  or  any 
other television or radio, on such conditions as it may prescribe, on application. 

Finally  I  come  to  the  recommendations  on  the:  Administrative  and  Technical 

Arrangements and Broadcasting of Signals 

The Select Committee has also made appropriate recommendations in regard to the 
administrative  and  technical  arrangements  that  will  have  to  be  made  in  terms  of  staff  and 
equipment for the successful implementation of the project.  In so far as broadcasting of the 
signals is concerned, the Committee is of the view that it would not be cost effective to have 
a dedicated Parliamentary Channel and has consequently recommended that a collaborative 
approach  be  engaged  between  Parliament  and  the  MBC  for  a  dedicated  channel  to  be 
provided to the National Assembly on the days on which Parliament sits.  A collaborative 
approach  should  also  be  engaged  with  the  private  radios  for  live  broadcasting  for  such 
proceedings  as  Private  Notice  Questions,  Prime  Minister’s  Question  Time,  Parliamentary 
Questions  and  other  major  events.    In  order  to  bring  Parliament  nearer  to  the  people,  the 
Committee also recommends that all avenues of transmission of information be explored and 
used, including webcasting and podcasting of the images of parliamentary proceedings. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  framework  for  live  broadcasting  proposed  by  the  Select 
Committee has not only been benchmarked against the best international practices, but it also 
takes  into  account  our  local  context  and  realities.    I  would  again  like  to  thank  and 
congratulate the Select Committee for the excellent job.  I believe we can now proceed in the 

 

19 

direction indicated by the Committee.  Of course, one can always raise  other issues, but  I 
think it is time to walk the talk.  We cannot go on discussing endlessly.   

We have to start somewhere.  Any upcoming issues may be addressed as we go along. 

Madam Speaker, Government has pledged to govern for the people, with the people 
and  conduct  business  on  the  principles  of  discipline,  transparency,  accountability  and 
exemplary governance.   

This Motion today bears testimony to our deep respect for the rights of the citizens to 
watch Parliament in action, live and direct, and form their own opinion, without any media 
interference.  And this will be yet another meaningful change that we have promised to the 
nation. 

With these words, Madam Speaker, I commend the Motion to the House. 

 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Mr Bérenger: Right at the outset, I would wish to congratulate the Select Committee 
that has produced this report and made those recommendations, starting with the Chairperson 
of  the  Select  Committee  and  all  the  Members  of  the  Select  Committee  who  have  done  a 
marvellous job.  So, congratulations. It is a fact that the report was unanimous. It is not often 
that we have unanimité either in Select Committees or here in the House. Therefore, I would 
wish  to  doubly  congratulate  the  Select  Committee.  I  wish  also  to  place  on  record  my 
appreciation of the fact that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has lost no time in coming forward 
with a Motion, as it was apt to have this august Assembly adopt the report  and get going with 
its implementation.  Therefore I can exPress the hope - hopefully - that the implementation 
will go as fast as the bringing of the Motion for approval of the report. There is no reason to 
waste time, as the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has said.  Let’s get going, and then, whatever there 
is to be corrected, completed and to be amended will be done as we will go along. But I don’t 
think  there  is  a  lot  to  be  corrected,  amended,  and  so  on,  because  my  third  reason  for 
satisfaction is that –  

(i) 

(ii) 

the Select Committee has done a great job;  

unanimité, and  

(iii) 

a very complete report 

 

20 

Except on one point, on which I shall labour later on, that is, the setting up of the Sessional 
Broadcasting Select Committee. On that, we will have rather to complete the work that the 
Select Committee has started. 

Having said that, I would wish to stop on what is said in the report and was picked up 
by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, that is, at page 16, where the Select Committee recommends, 
I quote -  

“6.11.2. After extensive consideration, Your Committee is of the view that it would 
not be cost effective to have a dedicated parliamentary channel in view of 
the number of hours of parliamentary proceedings. 

6.11.3. Accordingly, Your Committee recommends that a collaborative approach be 
engaged between Parliament and the Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation 
(…).” 

Mauvais goût. I have a bad taste in my mouth, but a collaborative approach is recommended - 

“(…) between Parliament and the Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation for 
a dedicated channel to be provided to the Mauritius National Assembly on 
the days Parliament sits.”  

Being given what the Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation has become these days, worse than 
ever, I would wish that we could cut all links with the Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation 
and get on with the work ourselves. But all things considered, I agree that it would not be cost 
effective, being given the number of hours that we work, even at Budget time. Therefore, I 
can go along with that recommendation, but I am not happy at all about having to try and 
work out a collaborative approach between Parliament and what the Mauritius Broadcasting 
Corporation has become those days. 

The big issue is the setting up of this key Select Committee of the National Assembly, 
the Broadcasting Committee, whose setting up is recommended at page 12, as the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister quoted - 

 “6.6.2.  Your  Committee  therefore  considered  that,  it  is  of  paramount  importance 
that Standing Order 69 of the Standing Orders and Rules of the National 
Assembly (1995) be amended to provide for the setting up of a Sessional 
Select Committee to be known as the “Broadcasting Committee”. (…) to 
monitor the live broadcasting of the proceedings of the House, prescribe 

 

21 

such rules and guidelines as may be necessary and to look into all matters 
incidental thereto (…).” 

This Committee - it’s clearly the case - is the key element for the success of what we are 
going to do, and on that score, let’s say that the Select Committee - out of due respect for this 
House,  because  we  will  be  amending  the  Standing  Orders  to  provide  for  that  -  has  not 
recommended the composition of that Sessional Select Committee called the “Broadcasting 
Committee” and, even more importantly, the Chairperson. Who is going to chair? To me, that 
is la clé du success.  Who is going to chair and what is going to be the membership of that 
Broadcasting Committee? C’est la clé du succès.  

I have discussed with people.  We have some time, because we will have to amend the 
Standing Orders, we will have to go through the procedures; there will be a motion to amend 
the Standing Orders. So, we have some time, but I think it is good to get the debate going. I 
have  done  as  much  thinking  as  I  could  on  that.  I  see  five  possibilities  as  far  as  the 
Chairperson  is  concerned.    Five  possibilities!  We  follow  the  example  of  the  PAC,  with 
somebody from the Opposition chairing. Okay, we are, for the time being, in the Opposition, 
but  even  that  being  the  case,  I  am  not  trop  enthousiaste  that  it  should  be  like  the  Public 
Accounts Committee. I say it is a possibility; if it is proposed, we will go along, of course, 
but I am not really enthousiaste.  

Second possibility, that thing that was proposed by the previous Government in the 
case  of  the  Independent  Commission  against  Corruption,  where,  as  we  know,  there  is  a 
Parliamentary Committee. I don’t go along with that, I must say. I am not happy at all that in 
that case - I quote from memory - the hon. Prime Minister appoints so many Members, the 
hon. Leader of the Opposition appoints so many Members, and they get rid of and replace as 
they  choose.  I  am  not  happy  with  that  solution  either  -  nothing  personal  coming  into 
consideration, of course - the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker. I don’t think it would be good 
to  burden  the  Speaker  with  that  responsibility  being  given  we  have  enough  reasons  for 
polémique  apart  from  that  one.  Maybe,  the  Deputy  Speaker!  I  am  quite  interested  by  the 
proposal that it be the Deputy Speaker. Then, there is a fifth - I can’t see any other -, that the 
Chairperson  would  be  appointed  by  the  hon.  Prime  Minister  after  consultation  -  real 
consultation; of course, we all agree that consultation is consultation - with the hon. Leader of 
the Opposition. Maybe, finally, out of those five possibilities, I would go for the last one but, 
as  I  said,  I  am  quite  happy  if  it  is  proposed  that  it  is  the  Deputy  Speaker  who  chairs  the 
Broadcasting Committee. I don’t think we will have a quarrel on the membership, because 

 

22 

there are plenty of Select Committees, plenty of precedents.  So, I don’t think we will have a 
problem. We have a problem with the Chairperson of that key committee, the Broadcasting 
Committee.  Once  we  sort  that,  I  am  sure  we  will  agree  easily  on  the  composition  of  that 
committee. 

Why I say that it is la clé du succès, because the idea is to monitor; things will go 
wrong,  there  will  be  members  of  the  public  that  will  complain  about  the  way  the  live 
broadcasting takes place, and it must be like that. Not only Members of Parliament, but even 
people  outside,  people  in  the  Press  will  come  forward,  will  offer  comments  and  this  key 
committee, the Broadcasting Committee, will monitor and will propose changes, including to 
the Standing Orders if there is need to propose changes to the Standing Orders.  

My fourth point would be - there is also the tricky issue, but I don’t think it is a big 
issue - the recruitment of the Director/Manager, because even if we have to collaborate with 
this thing called MBC for practical purposes, financial reasons, we must be our bosses, it’s 
Members of Parliament that must run this through the Broadcasting Committee. Therefore, 
we - I mean the House - will to recruit a Director/Manager, operators, and staff for a full-
fledged - from the MBC - independent Production Unit.  And, again, the question will arise: 
will  be  recruited  by  whom?  I  suppose  it  is  automatic  that  it  would  be  recruited  by  the 
Broadcasting Committee. I suppose, that key committee, the Broadcasting Committee, should 
be responsible for the recruitment of that Production Unit.  

There has been issue taken outside that we are protecting ourselves because we are 
putting restrictions - that is at the back, at page 22 - in case of disorder, which, of course, 
rarely happens here. So, it has been recommended at the back, at the end of the report, what 
should take place. It is not restrictive; we don’t want to frighten kids who happen to look at 
television at a given point in time, and it can be disorder from the public also; both from the 
public and hon. Members. But what I would wish the Press and everybody to keep in mind, 
we have to start somewhere, but if we are overprotective, if we act, I mean all, the House, if 
we overprotect ourselves in cases of disorders where certain restrictions have been proposed, 
of course, the Broadcasting Committee will monitor. And as I said, members of the public, 
members of the Press will say, “this is not fair”.  This is what has taken place. The Press is 
always present, so they will witness whatever disorder takes place. And if the live coverage 
does not do justice, without having all the juicy bits out in terms of vocabulary and otherwise, 
I  am  sure  the  public  will  protest,  the  Press  will protest.  The  Broadcasting  Committee  will 

 

23 

monitor, and if there is need to restrict the restrictions or to amend the restrictions, I am sure 
that we will all do it. 

I will conclude by saying that I find it very sad. I find it very, very sad that the MBC 
has become what it has become on the eve, now that we are taking a historical step to have 
live broadcasting. I find that very, very sad, because history will record that there has never 
been so much awful manipulation of what takes place here. 

(Interruptions) 

It is awful.  I don’t know how many of you take the trouble to look.  It is absolutely awful, 
shameful. 

And I find it very sad… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

I  find  it  very  sad  that  the  MBC  and  those  responsible  for  the  MBC  allowed  the  MBC  de 
tomber si bas at a point in time when we are taking a historical step to have genuine live 
broadcasting come into operation. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker! 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Mrs Perraud! 

(3.55 p.m.) 

The Minister of Gender Equality, Child Development and Family Welfare (Mrs A. 
Perraud):  Madam  Speaker,  I  feel  very  honoured  to  stand  in  this  House  today  to  add  my 
voice to a historic moment. Today, we are making history, and I want to take this opportunity 
to congratulate all hon. Members of this august Assembly.  

First  of  all,  allow  me  to  congratulate  my  colleague,  the  hon.  Minister  Nandcoomar 
Bodha,  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport,  for  the  remarkable  way  he 
chaired the Select Committee. I would also wish to congratulate the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, 
Sir Anerood Jugnauth, who, almost one year after the landslide victory of ‘Alliance Lepep’, is 
once  again  making  history  by  presenting  the  Motion  to  adopt  the  report  of  the  Select 
Committee. 

Madam Speaker, providence has it that, despite my young and burgeoning career as a 
Member of the National Assembly, I was destined to be part of the Select Committee that 

 

24 

would  work  on  an  issue  that  would  make  history;  broaden  and  enlarge  our  democratic 
landscape. I thank the House for the trust placed in me. 

The  broadcasting  of  the  proceedings  of  Parliament  has  been  the  subject  of  intense 
debate around the world, and our country is no exception to it. If we go back memory lane, 
we  can  find  that,  as  far  back  as  1926,  the  British  Broadcasting  Corporation  asked  for 
permission to broadcast Winston Churchill’s Budget Speech in the House of Commons. In 
the recent past, the House of Commons debated the subject repeatedly and extensively in the 
1960s and 1970s. Opinions were divided and, at a division of votes in the House of Commons 
on 24 November 1966 regarding a closed-circuit experiment in sound and vision, the Motion 
was defeated by 131 votes to 130.  A vote on the same subject in 1975 had a similar outcome 
with 275 votes to 263.  It was only on 21 November 1989 that they started the first television 
broadcast  from  the  House  of  Commons.    In  Mauritius,  likewise  the  debate  has  gathered 
momentum and is a live issue for many years now. Each time the MBC, which is the public 
service  broadcaster,  is  criticised  for  alleged  partiality,  the  issue  of  live  coverage  of 
parliamentary proceedings comes back like an incoming tide. 

Madam Speaker, despite all the reticence that may characterise the live broadcasting of 
parliamentary proceedings, we must all admit that the world has undergone and will continue 
to undergo major changes. The explosion of the Internet, its accessibility and the level of IT 
penetration has made information available at the click of a button. With this backdrop and 
notwithstanding the fact that parliamentary proceedings are preserved in the Hansard, related 
in the Press and other platforms, partially broadcast either on television or through the radio, 
there is need for this august Assembly and its Members to realise that we need to embrace the 
pace  of  change.  We  must  join  the  League  of  Nations  that  have  crossed  the  Rubicon  and 
allowed cameras inside the walls of the National Assemblies; to mention a few, UK, Canada, 
India.  If we want to be recognised as a truly modern and democratic society, it is our duty to 
use every means available to open up our National Assembly to the public. There is only one 
way we can use to go about this, and that is to work for greater openness and transparency.  

The basic idea of a live coverage of the parliamentary proceedings is to give the public 
free and full access to debates and other activities in Parliament. In working towards this, we 
show  that  we  respect  the  citizens’  right  to  see  for  themselves  what  is  going  on  inside 
Parliament. However, we must be ready to accept that this will not necessarily lead to a better 
understanding of or greater public interest in politics.  Confidence in politicians is not built 
solely  on  the  debates  in  the  National  Assembly.  It  depends  first  and  foremost  on  the 

 

25 

commitment of the individual parliamentarian. Live broadcasting will nevertheless certainly 
enable more people to watch and listen, allowing them to form their own opinions without 
media interference. 

In this context, this is an advantage. There will be no criticism of alleged partiality, no 
allegation of misreporting and similar issues. Hon. Members’ performance will be assessed 
by a wider audience.  Ministers’ mastery of their files and portfolios will be broadcast live 
and a public performance appraisal will take place. This being the case, I sincerely believe it 
will contribute significantly to lift and raise the level of debates and interventions. 

Madame la présidente, la diffusion des travaux parlementaires à la télévision apportera 
une meilleure compréhension de ce qui se passe au sein de l’hémicycle. La vie de tous les 
citoyens  est  régie  par  rapport  aux  lois  et  décisions  prises  par  le  gouvernement.  Les  plus 
petites décisions au plus importantes passent par le parlement et sont votées par les élus.  La 
diffusion des travaux parlementaires va créer un lien direct entre les citoyens et leurs élus.  Si 
aujourd’hui  les  travaux  parlementaires  sont  suivis  intégralement  par  une  centaine  de 
personnes, parlementaires, membres de la Presse, invités, membres du public et autres, avec 
la diffusion des travaux parlementaires à la télé, c’est 300,000 foyers, 300,000 familles qui 
auront  accès  aux  travaux  parlementaires.  C’est  ce  qu’on  appelle  la  démocratisation  de 
l’information ; donner l’accès à la démocratie suprême à un très large public. Ceci forcera, 
motivera,  on  l’espère,  le  public  à  s’intéresser  davantage  aux  travaux  parlementaires.  Nous 
souhaitons que le public puisse mieux comprendre les Standing Orders. 

Madame la présidente, souvent, nos mendants, ne comprenant pas les procédures, les 
Standing Orders, critiquent les secrétaires parlementaires privés (PPS) et les ministres, parce 
qu’ils ne posent pas de questions au Parlement. Or, avec l’introduction de la diffusion des 
travaux parlementaires, nos mendants sauront et comprendront quel est le rôle de chacun au 
sein  de  l’hémicycle.  Nous  aurons  un  public  averti.  Les  mendants  pourront  jauger  la 
performance et la qualité de leurs représentants et porte-parole au sein de l’hémicycle. 

Madame  la  présidente,  de  ce  fait,  les  parlementaires  seront  obligés  de  respecter  le 
décorum  en  tout  temps,  de  se  comporter  avec  respect,  élégance  et  professionalisme,  le 
professionalisme  d’un  parlementaire,  maîtrise  du  dossier,  connaissance  et  maîtrise  du 
Standing Orders et l’art oratoire. 

La  diffusion  des  travaux  parlementaires  à  la  télé  motivera  les  parlementaires  à 
s’améliorer. Mais, Madame la présidente, il  y a aussi le risque que certains parlementaires 

 

26 

fassent  le  show,  d’exagérer  dans  leurs  gestuelles  et  leurs  discours  dans  le  but  d’attirer  la 
caméra et d’attirer l’attention sur eux. 

Madame la présidente, aujourd’hui est une date historique. Ce gouvernement marque 
l’histoire avec l’introduction de ce projet de loi de la diffusion des travaux parlementaires à la 
télé. Je pense que… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker : Hon. Shakeel Mohamed ! 

Mrs  Perraud:…nous  aurions  pu  rendre  cette  date  doublement  historique  en 
introduisant  la  langue  Créole  au  Parlement.  Le  gouvernement  de  l’Alliance  Lepep,  pour 
Lepep  et  avec  Lepep,  ferait  honneur  au  peuple  mauricien  en  permettant  aux  Mauriciens 
lambda de pouvoir suivre et comprendre les travaux parlementaires dans une langue qui leur 
est accessible. 

Madame  la  présidente,  comme  je  l’ai  dit  plus  tôt  au  sein  de  cette  Chambre,  nous 
prenons des décisions importantes qui affectent la vie de tous les Mauriciens, et c’est normal 
que tous les Mauriciens puissent comprendre les décisions qui sont prises pour eux. 

En attendant que le Créole fasse son entrée au Parlement dans l’avantage de Lepep, 
permettez-moi, encore une fois, de dire que la date d’aujourd’hui est à marquer d’une pierre 
blanche, car elle est historique et que les Mauriciens accueillent favorablement la diffusion 
des travaux parlementaires à la télé, et je réitère mes félicitations au comité. 

Merci beaucoup pour votre attention. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

(4.06 p.m.) 

Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien): Madame la 
présidente,  ce  vendredi  23  octobre  est  un  jour  historique  pour  notre  pays  car  nous 
franchissons une étape importante pour notre démocratie. 

Je  tiens  à  féliciter  chaleureusement  notre  Premier  ministre  qui  a,  encore  une  fois, 

démontré qu’il est un homme de parole and that he means business. 

Madam Speaker, we are embarking on the project of live coverage and broadcasting 
and we feel very proud and happy to be called to vote for this motion. Il n’aura fallu que cinq 

 

27 

mois au Premier ministre pour proposer la constitution d’un Select Committee à cet effect, et 
ensuite promptement soumettre le rapport dudit comité à cette auguste Assemblée. 

Je tiens également à  féliciter et rendre hommage au président du Select Committee, 
mon ami, l’honorable ministre Nandcoomar  Bodha, ainsi qu’aux membres pour l’excellent 
travail  abbatu  en  si  peu  de  temps.  Mes  remerciements  vont  aussi  à  vous,  Madame  la 
présidente,  et  au  Clerk  et  le  personnel  de  l’Assemblée  pour  tous  les  conseils  avisés  et 
contribution à l’avancement de ce projet. 

La présente motion,  Madame la présidente, is yet another milestone in the continuum 
of  achievements  of  the  actual  Prime  Minister,  that  is,  the  reinforcement  of  democracy  in 
Mauritius, namely by reinstating by-elections, the compulsory holdings of general elections 
every five years, l’autonomie de Rodrigues, l’élévation de Maurice au statut de république - 
but not pour la deuxième république, Madam la présidente - et finalement la libéralisation des 
ondes qui a permis la création de radios privées. 

Today, Madam Speaker, we are once more writing history with a golden pen by the 
introduction  of  live  coverage.  Needless  say  that  this  would  never  be  possible  under  the 
previous  Government,  because  the  former  Prime  Minister  was  never  keen  to  make  this 
happen! Do you know why, Madam Speaker? For the past two mandates that I have been in 
this House, I can say, as a witness, that the former Prime Minister was rarely present in this 
House, as compared to you, hon. Prime Minister, the Leader of the House.  

(Interruptions) 

Je pense qu’il avait d’autres priorités, comme vous le savez déjà avec la série de scandales. 

Ayant  franchi  ce  pas  historique,  nous  devons  maintenant  réfléchir  à  la  possibilité 
d’introduire  -  tout  comme  l’honorable  Ministre  Perraud  -  la  langue  Créole  au  Parlement, 
Madam  la  présidente.  Cela  se  fait  couramment  dans  plusieurs  pays  que  les  parlementaires 
s’expriment dans leur langue maternelle ou dans une langue commune, à l’instar de l’Inde.  
Je fait un appel, donc, au Premier ministre de considérer l’opportunité de constituer un comité 
ministériel ou des parlementaires de haut niveau pour se pencher sur la question du Créole au 
Parlement.  L’exemple  est  bel  et  bien  présent aujourd’hui  avec  des  radios  privées,  où  les 
internautes sont à l’aise pour s’exprimer en Créole. 

La  retransmission  des  débats  parlementaires  en  direct  sera  une  occasion  pour  les 
mandants de chaque circonscription de constater la performance de leurs élus au Parlement. 
People like seeing their MPs intervening on their problems, be it local or international ones. 

 

28 

Dans le passé, les Mauriciens n’avaient pas les moyens d’avoir accès aux délibérations des 
travaux  parlementaires  car  seulement  une  partie  des  travaux  était  rapportée  dans  la  Presse 
écrite et parlée. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  world  today  is  a  global  village.  With  the  globalisation  of  the 
world,  Mauritius  cannot  lag  behind.  This  motion  will  make  our  country  take  a  bold  step 
forward and allow our democracy to become more modern and more transparent. 

Last  but  not  least,  Madam  Speaker,  I  firmly  believe  that  live  broadcasting  of  the 
sittings of the National Assembly will act simultaneously as a tool of democracy by bringing 
elected  Members  to  the  home  of  each  and  every  one  of  their  electors  and  also  act  as  a 
deterrent to the regrettable incidents that we have witnessed recently, avec pour toile de fond 
l’insatisfaction  déclarée  de  certains  de  mes  honorables  collègues  quant  à  la  qualité  des 
reportages de la MBC. We expect the MBC to use this opportunity pour remet zot mem lor 
rail  because,  on  our  part,  Madame  la  présidente,  ce  gouvernement  tiendra  toutes  les 
promesses faites durant la dernière campagne électorale par l’Alliance Lepep. 

With this assurance, Madame Speaker, I thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Minister Gayan! 

(4.13 p.m.) 

The Minister of Health and Quality of Life (Mr A. Gayan): Madam Speaker, today 
really marks a significant milestone in the life of this august Assembly, and this milestone 
would  not  have  been  possible  without  the  unshakeable  commitment  of  the  hon.  Prime 
Minister in consolidating the democratic system of our country.  

We are here debating this report of the Select Committee. The report deals with the 
live broadcasting of proceedings of this House. This House, Madam Speaker, is the mightiest 
symbol  of  democracy.  The  authority  of  this  august  Assembly  is  derived  from  the 
Constitution,  which  is  the  supreme  law  of  our  land.  In  fact,  section  1  of  the  Constitution 
provides  that  Mauritius  shall  be  a  sovereign  and  democratic  State.  Section  45  of  the 
Constitution  confers  upon  this  National  Assembly  the  power  to  make  laws  for  the  peace, 
order  and  good  governance  of  Mauritius.  This  National  Assembly  also  has  its  Standing 
Orders  which  are  borrowed  from  the  pure  traditions  of  Westminster,  the  mother  of 
parliaments. 

29 

 
By debating the report of the Select Committee on the live broadcasting of Parliament 
proceedings,  we  are,  in  fact,  putting  additional  flesh  on  the  democratic  state  which  our 
country  takes  pride  in  being.  We  are  leapfrogging  into  a  qualitative  improvement  of 
democracy and, as the Rt. hon. Prime Minister said, we are in the same league as the United 
Kingdom, Australia, France and India. This reform is long overdue and it is our responsibility 
as the first Members to benefit from live coverage, once this Select Committee is approved, 
to set the stage for those who will be sitting in the House in future. 

What we do today, Madam Speaker, will impact on what happens tomorrow. This is 
why we must live up to the expectations of the electorate and show to the people that we are 
being faithful to our mandate and that we are going to leave this country in a far better state 
than the state in which we took it over last year. This consolidation of democracy is a far cry 
from what had been intended for the country by those today who are sitting in Opposition.  

But,  before  I  proceed,  Madam  Speaker,  I  must  congratulate  my  good  friend,  hon. 
Minister Bodha, who chaired the work of the Select Committee. He steered the process in 
such a way that a consensus was reached very fast, and the broad principle which the Select 
Committee  adopted  was  to  cover  the  business  of  the  House  with  an  aim  to  make 
parliamentary debate more accessible to the public and to improve public understanding of 
this  parliamentary  process.    I  was  proud  to  be  a  member  of  that  Select  Committee  and 
together with all the members of the Select Committee, from both sides of the House, we 
were prepared to look at it dispassionately, objectively, and to do something worthwhile for 
the country. 

Your Select Committee, Madam Speaker, proceeded on a work that had already been 
done by a previous Select Committee which, by a happy coincidence, was also chaired by 
hon. Minister Bodha.  In fact, in the country at large and in this House, there has always been 
a very keen interest in uninterrupted live broadcasting of its proceedings. I believe that it is 
right  that  we  implement  the  principle  that  the  people  have  an  interest  in  what  their 
representatives  are  doing  in  Parliament.  This  goes  a  long  way  towards  consolidating  the 
principle of democratic Government. 

The Select Committee was preoccupied with the absolute necessity of preserving the 
dignity of the House, and all measures have been taken to ensure that any live broadcasting 
will  not  hinder  the  normal  workings  of  the  House.  The  fact  of  bringing  the  work  of 
Parliament in the living room of our citizens bridges the chasm between Parliament and the 

 

30 

people.  Already - and we heard a lot about what the hon. Leader of the Opposition says of 
the MBC - the MBC covers the proceedings of the House, but they are not live, and whatever 
qualms the hon. Leader of the Opposition may have on the MBC, the live coverage will be 
able to deal with that aspect of his qualms. We have invited the MBC exceptionally in the 
House to cover special events, but once this report is adopted and once it is implemented, we 
will  all  be  under  the  glare  of  TV  coverage.    The  MBC  will  simply  provide  a  medium  for 
coverage. 

The  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  spoke  about  the  advantages  of  live  broadcasting.  But 
while we are convinced that live broadcasting will be beneficial, we must also ensure that the 
House does not become too conservative and too formalistic. The presence of the camera will 
certainly get Members to conduct themselves in a parliamentary way, hopefully, but there is 
also the risk that Members will want to be on their best behaviour during the proceedings. 
This  is  fine,  because  this  House  is  not  a  place  of  entertainment.  This  is  the  forum  where 
serious decisions are taken in the interest of the country, and we must make sure that the cut 
and thrust of parliamentary life does not suffer as a result of the presence of cameras in the 
House. We must have that lively exchange between the Government and the Opposition. This 
is what makes Parliament what Parliament is. 

But I must also say that when we are looking at the live coverage of parliamentary 
proceedings, we must ensure that the coverage does not get into political satire or ridicule. 
That is, the dignity of the House and the dignity of the Members also have to be preserved 
when proceedings are covered by live coverage. The coverage of our proceedings must give a 
fair, balanced and accurate account and should be free from any subjective commentary. This 
is so because the dignity of the House has to be preserved at all times. 

There are, of course, disadvantages, as has been mentioned by previous orators. We 
can always play to the camera, play to the gallery, and we can divert on the issues that are 
being debated. We will certainly score political points. But, maybe, scoring political points 
with live coverage may not be a good idea at all because this may not go down well with the 
electorate, and the people are very smart. The people will recognise that conduct which is 
unbecoming of hon. Members will damage the aura and the dignity of the House. 

I am sure also that the quality of the debates with live coverage will improve. We will 
be assessed, whether we like it or not, on what we say and how we say, whatever it is that we 

 

31 

say. We must, and I say it in all humility, get used to making our interventions to the point 
and relevant to the matters under discussion. 

As we embark on this reform, Madam Speaker, we must be conscious of the need to 
sustain public interest in our proceedings. We assume that there will be public interest, but 
we  have  a  duty  to  sustain  that  public  interest  throughout  the  proceedings.  As  reasonable 
people,  we  can  always  disagree,  we  can  agree  to  disagree,  but  we  do  not  need  to  be 
disagreeable.  

As part of the report of this Select Committee, we have the parts that go towards the 
implementation of the live coverage. There will  be a Broadcasting Committee that will be 
looking  at  the  mechanics  and  operations  of  the  system  of  live  broadcasting.  This 
Broadcasting  Committee  will  be  under  the  control  of  the  House.  Of  course,  there  will  be 
certain matters that will have to be looked into. The details of what, in fact, will be done by 
the Broadcasting Committee are given at page 20 of the report of the Select Committee. But 
what  is  also  important,  Madam  Speaker,  with  live  coverage,  is  that  there  can  be  some 
dérapages.  

So,  it  is  important  that  shots  which  are  likely  to  embarrass  unsuspecting  Members 
should not be broadcast. For example, Members yawning or dozing unless they happen to be 
within the frame behind or beside the Member who has the floor, how disorderly scenes will 
be treated has also been addressed in the report of the Select Committee and when there is 
any disorder in the House, the shots will be on you, Madam Speaker. But I hope that we do 
not reach the stage like in the Lok Sabha where whenever there is disorder in the House, all 
those who are creating the disorder move to where the Speaker is sitting. The same should 
happen  in  cases  of  unparliamentary  behaviour.  An  unparliamentary  behaviour,  Madam 
Speaker, is intended to signify any conduct which amounts to challenging the authority of the 
Speaker or acting in defiance of the rulings of the Chairperson. I am sure that we would be 
careful in not defying the authority of the Chairperson because the Chairperson represents the 
symbol of authority in this House. 

There is another point I would like to raise.  It is with regard to persons who can be 
aggrieved  by  whatever  is  said  or  done  in  Parliament.  In  fact,  this  matter  was  discussed  at 
length  in  the  Select  Committee  and  we  had  a  very  serious  look  at  it  because  I  think  it  is 
important that whoever feels aggrieved by what a Member says in the House must have a 
redress, and that redress has to be effective. The redress that will have to be available to any 

 

32 

person who is aggrieved must be within a very slight delay. We must make sure that we do 
not adopt the practice of the written media. For example, we can have in the written media an 
article on the front page that is damaging and offensive. You send a right of reply, a mise au 
point.  That mise au point will never be in the same spot where the damaging article appeared 
originally. It gets lost in the middle of the pages in an inconspicuous corner. I think this is not 
how we, as a House, must treat any person who is vilified or who is offended by whatever 
takes place in the House.  Fairness is what matters. 

It is also important that we bear in mind that if there is a cause for grievance and if a 
remedy is available, and if the broadcasting agency does not provide the remedy, then there 
must be sanctions. And the sanctions will have to be decided by the Broadcasting Committee 
or by the House, but there must be sanctions. Because the effectiveness of the remedy and the 
compliance with the rules will depend on how everybody plays the game. We are embarking 
on a new venture. It is going to be something new for us, for the public, for the written media, 
for  everybody,  and  it  is  very  important  that  we  try,  as  far  as  possible,  to  strike  the  right 
balance between fairness and accuracy. I am sure that from the list of orators I have seen on 
this issue, there will be other things that will be said in the course of the debates on the report 
of the Select Committee. But I do not want to see a situation in the House where there will be 
no drama. There has to be some drama in the House because Parliament without drama is not 
good. There has to be… 

(Interruptions) 

There has to be some theatre. I can count on hon. Bhagwan to provide the drama at all times. 

(Interruptions) 

But I think it is good that we have a vibrant democracy, and with live coverage we will be 
able to have this particular vibrancy in our democracy. The live coverage will help in getting 
people to understand what happens in the House, and I am sure it is going to be something 
great  for  the  country.  As  I  said  at  the  beginning  of  my  intervention,  this  is  a  significant 
milestone, and I am sure that we are on the right path. 

I thank you for your attention, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for half an hour. 

At 4.29 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 5.05 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Mrs Jadoo-Jaunbocus. 

33 

Mrs R. Jadoo-Jaunbocus (Second Member for  Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, it is indeed a privilege to add my 
voice to all those who have spoken before me on this really historical event that is going to 
happen today. This Government, as rightly said by our Rt. hon. Prime Minister last Tuesday, 
in  response  to  PNQ  on  electoral  reform,  is  the  voice  that  echoes  throughout;  this  is  our 
responsibility and we assume it fully. 

Indeed,  l’Alliance  Lepep,  Madam  Speaker,  a  mis  la  barrière  très  haut,  et  nous 
assumons. Even though it was thought that we are going to put back down on this issue and 
keep the Select Committee Report on Live Broadcasting of the Proceedings of the House and 
ancillary matters thereto on the back burner, we have indeed just proved that this is not the 
case; quite the contrary. What we are about to do, Madam Speaker, is momentous.  We are 
about to open a window onto this House not only for the whole of Mauritius to see, but also 
for the whole world to behold. The behaviour and countenance of our parliamentarians will 
be  yet  another  way  in  which  the  outside  world  will  assess  Mauritius  nationally  and 
internationally. 

We are now being given a tool through live broadcasting on the TV, on the net, and it 
is a tool that we must know how to use. We must be able to use it well and not to abuse it.  
By abusing, I am sure everybody will recall the incident that happened in this very House, 
where matters which were broadcasted utterly shocked and shook the whole of Mauritius and 
indeed, through this incident, I have to pay tribute, Madam Speaker, to the calm and stoic 
manner in which you had dealt with that incident. This is why I stress that we are being given 
a tool that we must be able to use and not abuse. 

I  must  commend  the  Chairperson,  hon.  Nandcoomar  Bodha,  for  chairing  this 
Committee and, of course, all its Members, and no doubt the background, the experience and 
the wisdom of the Chair has led to a wide range of consensus to reach that report; a very 
thorough and analytical approach in the report. There is indeed, Madam Speaker, a felt need 
to  create  a  direct  link  between  citizens  and  the  media  and  to  narrow  the  gap  between  the 
people  and  their  elected  representatives  in  Parliament.  The  basic  idea  of  parliamentary 
broadcasting  is  that  the  public  will  be  given  full  and  free  access  to  the  debate  and  other 
activities in Parliament, so that they feel part of it. The people have a right to be informed and 

 

34 

they must be kept informed, and Parliament must be able to reach out to them. The question 
is: how willing are we to do this without interference? 

Let us look at the issue of democracy.  In any democracy, public institutions must be 
transparent  and  accountable  to  the  people;  two  characteristics  that  public  broadcast  of 
parliamentary proceedings can help foster with. There is the need to give greater visibility to 
parliamentarians in a manner which is unbiased, unaltered, unedited, and not a manner which 
is seeking to influence the mind, in any way, of the viewers, and especially influencing it to 
the tune of the broadcaster.  

When we look at the report and particularly at recommendation 6.6.4, it is clear why 
the Committee has made such a recommendation, that is, signals of the proceedings may be 
transmitted to private radios and other public broadcasters upon application. 

I  commend  the  Committee  for  that  because  this  is  very  important.    This,  in  fact, 
makes  balance  within  the  complex  relation  between  media  public  broadcasters  and  the 
Parliament.  Media  outlets  are  independent  institutions  that  are  used  to  exercising  editorial 
control  over  the  contents  of  their  broadcasts,  whereas,  us,  parliamentarians,  we  have  a 
legitimate interest in allowing broadcasters to inform the public about our work and a need 
that has to be respected. 

The backdrop to all this and the culmination of all that we are about to do are debates, 
in that we, parliamentarians, will now have to adapt ourselves to this new era of our history. 
Today, we mark history, but, tomorrow, if we do not abide by the rules and standards set by 
ourselves, as has been said by the other speaker so gracefully before me, we are going to be 
the sad victims of our own decision, because we can either be the villains or the heroes of this 
playing field. For us parliamentarians, if we want to be the heroes in this broadcast, we have 
to adopt a countenance, a manner and a behaviour digne des parliamentarians. 

Parliamentary broadcasting is our destiny, but we have to be mindful of standards that 
we set. Every little gesture, every little word, be it parliamentary or unparliamentary will be 
the gage by which our performance will be judged by our electors. I do hope and urge that we 
maintain our standard. Tomorrow, we will be seen by the world at large. We might even be 
subject matter of law students or other students of universities where they will come and see 
us, scrutinise us, assess our behaviour, and we have to tread very carefully and aspire to an 
affinity never seen before. The issue of what is ‘parliamentary’ and what is ‘unparliamentary’ 
has become very much the flavour of parliamentary matters lately. So, I have to address my 

 

35 

mind to this, Madam Speaker. The question that often arises is what words, what behaviour, 
what  aspects  of  event  in  Parliament  are  deemed  “unparliamentary”,  and  we  must  always 
remember it is the Speaker of the House, the Leader of the House, who will determine what is 
“unparliamentary”. The Standing Order is very clear. 

Now, when we look at the draft rules of coverage of proceedings of the House, which 
are found at section 3 sub section 2, dealing with the issue of ‘Treatment of Disorder’ within 
the  Parliament,  it  prescribes  that    in  cases  of  unparliamentary  behaviour,  the  Director  or 
Manager should normally focus on the occupant of the Chair, and it goes on. What I already 
foresee - and with much humility I suggest it - is that we might have a slight issue. Before a 
motion  comes  as  to  whether  the  Speaker  of  the  House  determines  that  this  particular 
behaviour or this particular gesture is unparliamentary with live broadcasting, the broadcaster 
will have to determine whether to focus the camera on the Speaker or on the person who is 
actually addressing at that time and behaving in what a few minutes later will be determined, 
will be ruled to be unparliamentary. Afterwards, the Speaker will rule.  What happens is, at 
the end of the day, the broadcaster will, in a way, usurp the role of the Speaker, in a manner 
of speaking, of course, by deciding where to put the camera. So, what I humbly suggest – it 
might be taken or might not be taken into consideration - is that we have a few minutes gap; 
we have a few minutes delay as we have with live broadcast, as has been imposed by the IBA 
on radios, so that by the time that this is fed through live we will already have determined 
through  the  Speaker  of  the  House  what  behaviour  is  or  is  not  unparliamentary.  Then,  the 
broadcaster will have clear directions through the ruling where to focus his camera. In that 
way the broadcaster will comply with section 3 sub section 2 of the recommendation and not 
fall foul of it. 

On the issue of broadcasting of signals, we have to acknowledge that the Committee 
has reached to what we call a juste prix. As conceded by the Leader of the Opposition and as 
set out in the report indeed, to have a dedicated parliamentary channel as our Parliament sits 
on certain days will not be cost effective. Therefore, to have such a channel provided by way 
of  a  collaborative  approach  between  Parliament  and  the  MBC  and  for  providing  us,  the 
Mauritius  National  Assembly,  with  a  dedicated  channel  on  these  days  that  Parliament  sits 
does strike the right chord. 

However,  we  must  pause  here  to  reassure  the  existing  media  outlets  which  are 
growing.  We  do  want  to  foster  these  media  outlets,  and  these  dedicated  parliamentary 
channels  should  not  be  perceived  as  a  threat  to  them.  That  is,  the  MBC  is  not  going  to 

 

36 

completely - and I am sure this will reassure the hon. Leader of the Opposition - usurp the 
role that media outlets and the media in general has. 

In fact, similar views were debated upon and reached in October 2006 at the Geneva 
Conference on Broadcasting of Parliamentary Business through dedicated TV Channels and 
Public Broadcasting Systems, as this was organised jointly by the  IPU, the ASGP and the 
EBU. 

That  is  why  the  collaborative  approach  I  see  is  extended  and  at  section  6.11.5  the 
committee has recommended for engagement with private radios and live broadcasts for such 
proceedings  as  the  PNQ,  the  Prime  Minister’s  Question  Time,  the  PQs  addressed  to  other 
Ministers, other than the hon. Prime Minister and other major events. 

Of course, as I had said earlier, this has to be done with special authorisation, but what 

I urge humbly is - 

(i) 

(ii) 

that we ensure whenever such broadcasts are made they cover the whole of the 
events, that is we do not pick and choose as we do have the highlight of the 
day, the football highlights. We only see the footballers scoring the goals and 
we do not see the prelude to it. What I mean is that when such broadcasts are 
being  made,  they  should  be  made  in  the  entirety,  that  is,  the  questions,  the 
answers,  the  counter  questions,  the  supplementary  questions  and  all  the 
replies, and not just pick and choose certain highlights so that this will portray 
the parliamentarian either in a positive or a negative way and the very evil that 
the parliamentary channel is aimed at counteracting. The whole world has to 
see the full picture. 

I know hon. Mrs Perraud and hon. Gayan have talked about the possibility of 
Creole language. That is another debate in itself.  But what I would humbly 
ask this House to address its mind to is to define parameters for live and direct 
translation of debates because it is often the case that radios always have been 
broadcasting extracts and now, if we are going to enable them to broadcast big 
chunks, we have to ensure that when there are editorial comments and when 
there  are  translations,  especially  in  Creole,  as  would  often  be,  simultaneous 
translation, that we set the parameters and clear guidelines how we do that. 

We must determine that, first of all, we will allow translation or not in Creole. 
And if we are, how it is done, in what manner it is done, so that a particular 

 

37 

meaning  is  not  ascribed  and  exactly  what  is  being  said  is  done,  that  is,  a 
faithful translation. And we must be able to set parameters and framework to 
control that. I use the word “control” in a positive manner, Madam Speaker. 

One more aspect: Mauritius, Madam Speaker, is a diverse and multicultural society 
and has so strived and has been able to maintain that stability and our well-balanced strata. 
Despite attempts by certain, I will say pouvoirs occultes to destabilise this harmony, we have 
so far maintained it. The incident of late has been an example of it. We are about to take a 
major leap forward and, whilst doing so, we must ensure even more safeguards. 

Here, Madam Speaker, I make a very humble - as a junior Member of this House - 
appeal as to whether it won’t be wise for us to provide for - as the Criminal Procedure Act 
provides - certain in-camera sessions where certain very sensitive issues relating to national 
security or sensitive matters dealing with minors or even other matters dealing with national 
or social harmony. There are provisions for the Courts sometimes to deal not in public but in- 
camera, and maybe we can take a leaf and certainly we may consider having such in-camera 
sittings. Of course, if we even consider that, it will have to be very extreme circumstances 
and  it  will  be  applied  only  after  consensus  is  reached  amongst  parliamentarians  and,  of 
course, it will be after a motion has come and has been debated and scrutinised by this House. 

Today  or  in  the  days  to  come,  Madam  Speaker,  we  will  be  opening  the  doors  of 
Parliament  to  TV  and  to  the  web.  For  us,  in  Mauritius,  it  is  a  huge  step,  a  quantum  leap 
forward, and it is one of the promises set out in our political manifesto of l’Alliance Lepep. 
Under  the  leadership  of  our  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  we  are  now 
moving a step forward in our democracy to join countries such as India, UK, Canada, and 
many other African countries. 

Through  the  net,  the  web,  our  Parliament  would  be  heard  and  will  be  seen  by  the 
whole world. We, therefore, need to keep the international standard. Once this process has 
started, we will have to continuously adapt and improve - adapt to a fast changing technology 
and a fast moving media. So as not to lag behind, we must be able to continuously share our 
experience with and take from the experience of other Parliaments that have this aspect, that 
is,  live  broadcasting  to  the  media.  For  instance,  we  should  foster  exchanges  with  other 
existing  parliamentary  channels  and  we  must  be  able  to  encourage  the  participation  in 
multinational  seminars  where  experiences  are  exchanged  with  other  Parliaments.  We  must 
also  be  able  maybe  to  see  whether  we  can  develop  a  website  function  that  would  allow 

 

38 

Parliaments  to  interchange  and  compare  their  respective  broadcasting  rules,  because  at  the 
end of the day it is those broadcasting rules and the Broadcasting Committee that would be 
the  ones  that  will  be  the  watchdog,  if  we  say,  of  this  Parliament  and  that  will  guard  this 
Parliament from the whole world. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mrs Boygah! 

(5.20 p.m.) 

Mrs D. Boygah (Second Member for Vieux Grand Port & Rose Belle): Madam 
Speaker, this House is called upon, on this historic day, to adopt after debate, a motion of the 
Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  to  henceforth  allow  the  live  broadcasting, 
throughout  the  Republic  of  Mauritius,  of  our  parliamentary  proceedings.  This  is  indeed  a 
huge step in the consolidation of democracy in our country, Madam Speaker. All credit goes 
to  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  a  living  legend,  a  man  of  honour, 
courage and wisdom, to whom this population will eternally be indebted to. 

Many, Madam Speaker, not so long back, lamented that our country is sliding towards 

dictatorship. Lately - unfortunately, the hon. Leader of the Opposition is not here… 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mrs Boygah, please come straight to the Report. 

Mrs Boygah: Lately, the hon. Leader of the Opposition even went further to accuse 
this  Government  of  having  recourse  to  a  complot  to  supPress  the  voice  of  the  skeletal 
Opposition. The Opposition parties in and outside, Madam Speaker, this House are thereby 
proved completely out of tune, wrong all the way. Henceforth, the population will judge them 
live and direct. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to put on record my appreciation for the excellent job 
accomplished by the Select Committee under the chairmanship of hon. Nandcoomar Bodha. 
His  report  has  been  unanimously  acclaimed.  This  is  not  an  easy  feat.  In  the  past,  such 
committees have witnessed the Opposition leaving the committee halfway or even, at times, 
refusing bluntly to participate at the eleventh hour. Congratulations to you, dear colleague! 

Madame  la  présidente,  en  ce  jour  solennel,  je  m’étais  promis  de  ne  pas  faire  des 
remarques embarrassantes à l’encontre de l’opposition, mais en tant que femme, je ne peux 
passer sous silence le comportement indigne du Leader de l’opposition à votre égard. 

 

39 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mrs Boygah, I am sorry, we are discussing the report of the 

Select Committee, please, come to the point. 

Mrs  Boygah:  Do  you  know  why  I  am  saying  this,  Madam  Speaker?  It  is  because 
when all these works of broadcasting live and direct will be directed to the entire population, 
all these should be eliminated. 

Madam  Speaker,  there  are  some  apprehensions  regarding  the  telecast  though.  How 
about  the  immunity  that  characterises  our  parliamentary  actions  and  speeches  within  the 
House, now that these will be telecast beyond Parliament? The hon. Members should be free 
to  speak  within  the  existing  parameters.    Madam  Speaker  is  the  sole  garde-fou  of  any 
‘dérapage’. This immunity should be preserved, at all cost. The question is: how to conciliate 
this immunity with the provisions of law regarding defamation? 

In my opinion, Madam Speaker, the recourse to initials, as it is now the practice, will 
be proved insufficient. Hopefully, a juste milieu will be found, but, in all cases, the freedom 
of speech in this House should not be restricted or tampered on. 

Members  have  a  tendency  to  speak  in  a  sitting  position,  Madam  Speaker.    Should 
such statements made in a sitting position also be broadcast?  The Broadcasting Committee is 
called upon to address such issues. 

This Committee will, I am made to understand, include hon. Members of both sides of 
the House. Hopefully, the team chosen to conduct this broadcast will comprise of a bunch of 
professionals in their respective fields. We must end up with the manipulation of images we 
have witnessed during the last nine years of Labour, Madam Speaker. 

Swear words, foul language are been uttered by accomplished hon. Members of this 
House.  These  will  reach  an  audience  comprising  of  children  and  women  among  others. 
Hopefully, hon. Members of this august Assembly will henceforth mind their language. As 
far  as  I  am  concerned,  I  will  personally  stand  as  a  shield  against  all  those  misbehaving 
towards women, Madam Speaker.  

All said, Madam Speaker, this Motion is a landmark in our history.  It is, in fact, a 
major achievement of this Government. This is yet another promise fulfilled. Parole donnée, 
parole sacrée! This is Sir Anerood Jugnauth’s Government, Madame la president; it cannot 
be  otherwise!  Through  the  forthcoming  telecast  of  parliamentary  sessions,  Mauritius  will 
make a major leap forward in terms of democracy. 

40 

 
 Madam  Speaker,  I  am  sure  that  many  women  will  shake  off  their  timidity  and 
apprehension and will join politics with the upcoming telecast. This exposure of Parliament 
will, undoubtedly, revive their interest because politics in itself is noble; it handles a unique 
opportunity to men and women alike to serve our Motherland. I thereby make a strong appeal 
to  the  folk  women  to  follow  the  debates  in  Parliament,  to  take  inspiration  from  the  great 
leaders like Sir Anerood Jugnauth, and the way a lady like Madam Speaker is conducting this 
Assembly should, indeed, be a source of inspiration to all women. What to say about hon. 
Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun, who holds the future of our children, via a much awaited education 
reform, in her hands.  Hopefully, with the live telecast, more women will come up in the open 
and participate actively in helping to shape the future of Mauritius by joining politics. This 
Government has a very profound respect for women, Madam Speaker. 

Madam  Speaker,  this  telecast  will  be  a  golden  opportunity  for  the  constituents  to 
judge the performance of their elected representatives. The population will thus be in a better 
position  to  make  their  choice  for  the  next  elections.  Public  will  also  come  to  know  how 
Parliament operates. Many out there will now be in a position to measure the load of work we 
put in as Members of Parliament.  

Politics  in  Mauritius  is  unique,  Madam  Speaker.    We  have  to  conciliate  our  time 
between fulfilling our duties towards Parliament and our demanding electorate. Expectations 
are high, but we will live up to the challenge, Madam Speaker. Mauritius is firmly embarked 
in realising the much-awaited second miracle économique. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Sir 
Anerood Jugnauth and the hon. Minister of Finance, Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo, have called upon 
the  whole  population  to  help  to  the  shaping  of  tomorrow’s  Mauritius.  The  telecast  will 
hopefully inspire positively towards a nation prise de conscience and to have a more active 
participation of the citizens and stakeholders. 

Madam Speaker, recent political gathering organised by the Opposition parties have 

not drawn many people. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Mrs Boygah, you can’t talk generally about politics.  I have 
told  you  that  we  are  discussing  the  report  of  the  Select  Committee.  So,  your  intervention 
should be confined to the context of the report. 

Mrs Boygah: It is, Madam Speaker.  I hope that this telecast will not be misused to 
make ‘politicaillerie’, that is, une politique basse et mesquine, as they will now have access 
to the whole nation live and direct.  The temptation will be great but, hopefully, they will 

 

41 

refrain from taking undue advantage of this public exposure.  I appeal to hon. Members of 
this august Assembly to make good use of this opportunity.  Rien n’empêchera le TGV de 
‘l’Alliance Lepep’, sous la conduite de Sir Anerood Jugnauth de nous mener vers l’Eldorado 
promis, Madam Speaker. 

May God continue to shower its blessings on our beloved Motherland! 

Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

(5.30 p.m.) 

Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port  Louis  East): 
Madam Speaker, I have had the opportunity of listening to quite a few interventions in this 
august  Assembly  over  the  years  on  this  particular  issue  of  broadcast  of  parliamentary 
proceedings. I recall, at one point in time, many years back now - for some it will be only 
recently, but I considered it to be many, many years back, in 2009; hon. Bodha would still 
remember that - there was a Motion that was put on the Order Paper of this august Assembly, 
if I am not mistaken, on 21 November 2009, and that Motion was in the name of the then 
Prime Minister, precisely to create and to set up the Select Committee in order to come up 
with proper directives and guidelines as to how to televise, to broadcast by various means, the 
proceedings here, in this Parliament.   

I also recall many questions that occurred here, in this Assembly, put by various hon. 
Members.  I remember hon. Bhagwan many a time came up with questions to try to push the 
former Prime Minister into agreeing to set up this committee.  I remember questions also on 
the part of the MSM, be it in substantive or subsidiary questions. I remember that myself, as 
backbencher, had come up with many questions, asking that we indeed go ahead for public 
broadcast.   

So, to try to rub off what happened in the past and try to say that history with regard to 
parliamentary  broadcasting  started  only  in  2015  would  be  totally  incorrect,  because  this  is 
basically the imPression I have ever since I have been listening to everyone: ... 

(Interruptions) 

…that, as far as Parliamentary broadcast is concerned, it only started in 2015! And if we are 
to  say  that,  Madam  Speaker,  we  are  saying  that  hon.  Bodha  who  chaired  the  first  Select 
Committee  on  parliamentary  proceedings  to  be  broadcasted,  that  they  never  existed.  Of 
course, we all do remember the excellent work of hon. Bodha, as he was then Minister; and 

 

42 

not  only  Minister,  let  me  point  that  out.    Even  when  he  was  no  longer  Minister,  he  was 
chosen to continue chairing that Select Committee. Let me put it clearly on record today that 
he did it in a marvellous manner, and I would like to congratulate him on that. 

(Interruptions) 

I was but a little Member there, following his chairmanship, and I must say that he directed 
proceedings in a marvellous way, in a masterfully way.   

We were helped in this first Select Committee. As I say again, that did not start in 
2015. We were helped by the Members of the National Assembly, the staff, the Clerk, the 
Office of the Clerk. They were all there to help, because they had done a lot of reading, a lot 
of work had  gone into  preparing the  ground work, into preparing what exactly  would that 
report be about. Not only is this, in 2015, the first time that there has been consensus from all 
Members of Parliament, all political parties concerned, that we should, indeed, have public 
broadcast for our work. 

We should invite, in other words, members of the public into this august Assembly for 
them to look into this House and see what exactly we are up to or what are we not up to. 
There was also a consensus in the first Select Committee and even in that report that was 
written  because,  indeed,  there  was  a  report  that  was  written,  there  was  consensus  there  as 
well.  That  report,  together  with  this  report,  allows  me  to  say  that:  why  has  today’s  report 
gone faster? Because the Chairman of that Committee has experience in the matter.  Not only 
does he have experience in the field of l’audiovisuel; we all know his career! Not only has he 
had a first bite at the cherry when he was chairing the first Select Committee, but he has had a 
second  bite  at  the  cherry  by  chairing  the  second  Select  Committee.  So,  yes,  true,  there  is 
consensus! But where I hesitate, Madam Speaker - and allow me to say, yes, I agree that we 
should go forward and yes, it is always the words of those that could have no explanation to 
certain interrogations. They come up and say, ‘we have to start somewhere’. I tend to agree, 
we  have  to  start  somewhere.  The  only  thing  is  that  I  had  expected  us  to  start  better, 
differently. And one of the reasons why we should have parliamentary proceedings televised, 
broadcasted, is precisely because we are all subject - when I say all of us, I also mean the 
Chair, I also mean the Speaker - to a filtration process. 

Whatever  happens  here,  -  forget  about  Hansard  -  whatever  is  reported  about  the 
workings in Parliament, we go through an appreciation process or filtration process. Call it as 
you may! Sometimes you have members of the Press who would write what they believe to 

 

43 

be important.  They would write what they believe to be newsworthy and they would write 
about  it.  Sometimes  you  have  members  of  the  Press  who  believe  that  something  is  not 
newsworthy and would not write about it. Sometimes you have the Mauritius Broadcasting 
Corporation that believes that - at the time when we had the former Government - everything 
that  the  Opposition  said  is  not  important.  That  was  true!  What  is  funny  about  this  whole 
thing, I have the advantage, I have not been in this august Assembly for many years as others, 
but, at least, for the few years that I have been here, it has given me the opportunity, Madam 
Speaker, to see that whenever you have one party in power, the Opposition always complains 
about  the  Mauritius  Broadcasting  Corporation  and  then  whenever  you  have  another  party 
who is in the Opposition, they complain about it, they say: “when we come to power, we will 
ensure it does not happen.” But what happens is exactly the same! 

(Interruptions) 

Now, I am not laying the blame at any party’s feet. I am saying that every single political 
party that has been in power, every single one of us, at each and every time in history, we 
have had to face serious demons and those demons – I am not talking about the demons in the 
Ministry of Arts and Culture.   I will leave them to him; his demons, let him deal with them! I 
know you have read something more interesting… 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Mohamed,  please  refrain  from  making  comments  on  your 

colleagues. Please! 

Mr  Mohamed:  But  that  was  done  in  a  very  friendly  way,  Madam  Speaker,  I  can 
assure you, and we feel sorry for him. But what I am saying here is, we have all had to face 
our  demons  with  regard  to  broadcasting  and  the  ability  or  lack  of  ability  of  the  Mauritius 
Broadcasting Corporation in doing what is a fair job. We all had to face it. 

True it is now that this hot potato is in the hands of the Government of the day. How 
do they deal with it? In my humble view, Madam Speaker, the very fact of coming up with 
this Motion is also confirmation and admission on the part of the Government of the day that 
the Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation est un échec lamentable. That is the fact! 

I am happy to say that, because I am comforted in the words of the hon. Vice-Prime 
Minister, hon. Collendavelloo, who, during a Press conference, had the guts to say clearly: 
“Yes, at the MBC, things are not going right.” And he had the courage to admit it, that even 
when, today, the Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation is here in this august Assembly, trying, 
supposedly, to be fair in their coverage, hon. Collendavelloo clearly stated he believes that 

 

44 

they are not doing a good job. Will what we are doing today sort out matters? Will this report 
of the Select Committee really sort out matters if we approve it? Will what has been provided 
for by the Members of that Committee, in any way, if implemented, will that sort it out? I am 
afraid  that  I  have  no  confidence  whatsoever  in  the  Mauritius  Broadcasting  Corporation.  I 
never did; before 2015 also. In fact, I never did. 

So,  I  remember  that  myself,  as  former  Minister  of  Labour,  I  decided  to  ask  my 
Permanent  Secretary  in  those  days  to  report  a  matter  against  the  MBC,  Dan  Callikhan 
precisely. And I am happy to see that the new Minister of Labour is following, which is good. 
And I am happy we are on the same page. The thing is, not only are we on the same page, we 
read the same books, we are both lawyers and we both happen to be Ministers.  So, the good 
part is that I do not change my tune because I happen to be on the other side of the House. I 
am constant. I have always stated that the Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation is not fair in 
its coverage and it is time that things do change. But I do not believe that simply because we 
are doing something historical and, nowadays, it seems as though there are lots of historical 
things happening. Each and every time I hear a Press conference, this is a historical day, a 
historical  move!  Very  good!  Let’s  talk  about  history.  History  has  shown  us  that  when  we 
come up with good intentions, very often they end up being simply intentions. They have to 
be transcribed into actual acts. What do we do about it? If we are to say that the Mauritius 
Broadcasting Corporation is going to be l’organisme that will take the signal, the feed and 
broadcast it out there, even if we are to say that there is going to be a committee in charge of 
the rules of coverage, even if we are going to have a Director that is going to be recruited, 
and for that matter if we are to believe that he is going to be someone who is going to be fair 
and impartial, I still have a problem because I do not believe that it is in the near future that 
we will find that in the DNA of the Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation, that they will be 
able to be fair! It is impossible for them to understand the concept of fairness. What do we 
need, therefore, to ensure that they understand the concept? 

We need a purge; a purge in the mechanisms of appointment of people.  We need a 
purge  in  the  people  who  are  there;  we  need  a  purge  in  the  manner  that  people  relate  to 
Government.  It  is  impossible,  therefore,  that  if  they  are  to  be  chosen  as  the  ones  to  be  in 
charge  of  the  broadcasting,  they  would  be  the  one  showing  it.  I  would  not  be  surprised, 
Madam Speaker, that they would have the introduction of that programme with Press cuttings 
that would suit the Government of the day. I would not be surprised that they would have, as 
an introduction,  beautiful pictures lambasting the Opposition that was once upon of a time 

 

45 

the Government of yesterday, simply because it is in their DNA to please the Government of 
the day, because they cannot operate otherwise than to be subservient to the Government of 
the day.  They have done it in the past, they are doing it today, they will do it tomorrow! 
They are experienced and excellent at it! True! So, what do we do? 

(Interruptions) 

What do we do about it? And here, let me give you an example. Just now, I listened to hon. 
Minister Gayan with a lot of interest. I listened to him, and one of the things that he said, 
Madam Speaker, struck me.  It struck me and it almost woke me up. He said, and I quote –  

“We  can  agree  to  disagree.  We  can  agree  to  disagree  between  Government  and 
Opposition, but that does not mean that we need to be disagreeable with one another.” 

What he means by that is qu’on doit être désagréable! And I remember for that matter - and 
here what would the rules of coverage say? - it was mentioned in this report of the Select 
Committee how désagreable hon. Gayan was on 01 April 2015! We are talking  about the 
rules of coverage… 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, please sit down. You are talking about the rules of 

coverage, but please don’t make comments on your colleagues! 

Mr Mohamed: Madam, I am not making comments, I am here referring to Hansard! 
Not comments! I am referring to 01 April 2015, when hon. Minister Gayan says “qu’on ne 
doit pas être désagréable”, here, from a standing position, speaking - thank God, in Hansard.  
How would the rules of coverage deal with an hon. Minister standing in this House, saying 
that  he  is  shocked  that  someone  who  is  a  non-Hindu  at  the  helm  of  the  Labour  Party  in 
Parliament!  

How does the rule of coverage deal with that particular instance? Here, what is said in 
the  draft,  as  far  as  the  rules  of  coverage  go,  do  not  mention  it!  They  do  not  cover  that 
eventuality, that you could have hon. Members of Parliament standing up and making rash, 
dangerous comments of a nature that would shock the majority of a country, of a nature that 
would shake the very basis of unity and national unity of this country, that would shock the 
youth of today and the leaders of tomorrow!  

In other countries you have had people who have been removed from office or they 
have refused to even leur donner l’investiture; Nadine Morano recemment sur un programme 
télévisé en France, where Nicolas Sarkozy, the former President of the Republic of France, 

 

46 

decided that he could not tolerate such comments from Nadine Morano that are of a lesser 
nature  in  gravity  than  the  comments  of  hon.  Gayan!    So,  how  do  we  deal  with  such  a 
comment on the part of a hon. Member? How do we deal with it? That’s the question!  I am 
of the view that, yes, any hon. Member who makes such a comment should live or die by his 
comments.  And  that  is  what  brings  me  to  the  fact  that  I  am  sure,  even  though  it  was  a 
comment made on 01 April 2015, it was not a boutade made on April Fools’ Day. Let us, 
maybe, say - that would be his justification - it was le 1er avril 2015 and it was a boutade on 
01 April, on April Fools’ Day! 

 (Interruptions) 

Perhaps! But then again, maybe he has chosen the wrong part, maybe he should be a stand-up 
comedian! Because for more than once he is making so many boutades that maybe, he would 
be excellent on the coverage that will be provided as from next year!  

Now, to  get to something more serious,  I  am sure the hon. Prime Minister himself 
believes  that  if  you  have  been  funny  once,  you  start  being  funny  twice,  it  is  no  longer  a 
coincidence. You have a serious problem, Sir! And, maybe, the hon. Prime Minister will try 
to – I tried to remind him of certain facts and if he wants justification to take action that he 
should, I am trying to remind him… 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Mohamed,  come  back  to  the  rules  of  coverage!  You  are 
talking about rules of coverage, please don’t open the debate! Come back to your rules of 
coverage! 

Mr Mohamed: Obviously, I have to close the chapter on this sad day, which is 01 
April.  Not every day is April Fools’ Day!  Let us be serious!  What do the rules of coverage 
say? The rules of coverage say that we have to be very careful with regard to the way the 
camera is going to take the take of the Member - it shall not show the whole close up. It shall 
not show someone who is yawning. It shall not show someone who is provoking. It shall not 
show someone who sleeps. It shall not show someone who is startled when he wakes up. It 
shall not show all of that. But then again, in this august Assembly, we have members of the 
Press.  I  would  like  to  place  on  record  that  the  members  of  the  Press  have  been  doing  un 
travail formidable for many years without TV being here. At least, they have been the vehicle 
to communicate to the people outside what exactly are we doing in this august Assembly. 
They have been helping us. They are the ones who can see exactly who provokes. They are 
the ones who see who are the ones who believe in April Fools’ Day. They are the ones… 

 

47 

(Interruptions) 

They are the ones who see and listen to who is the one who insults. They are the ones who 
know exactly what was said. 

A lot of things may be said from sitting positions that are not noted in Hansard, but 
the archives of a newspaper have exactly what is said from sitting positions and by whom. 
They very often would go to their columns, their papers, black on white, they would write 
what is going on in the august Assembly. Now, if they, Madam Speaker, can tell the public 
out there who has been nasty, who has been unparliamentary, who has used insulting words, 
why is it, therefore, if there is no filtration process, there is a live and direct communication 
from  them  to  see  what  is  going  on,  do  we  have  to  be  so  restrictive  as  far  as  the  rules  of 
coverage go when it comes to l’audiovisuel? Why? 

They  can  see  and  they  can  communicate  what  they  have  seen,  but  we  should, 
therefore, be shy when it comes to people seeing what we do and what we don’t do and what 
we overdo! Why? Why are we so afraid to let the people of this country see exactly what 
happens? Why are we so afraid or shy to be more diplomatic, to let the people of the country 
know  those  are  the  provocative  words  that  are  spoken  here,  those  are  the  Members  of 
Parliament who do not put questions but give information? Why do we not let them know 
exactly what is happening? 

(Interruptions) 

I do not understand the shyness! Maybe later on you would say, well, in other democracies, 
in England, France, Canada, New Zealand, Australia and India, this is what is going on. But, 
allow me - I have read a report, Madam Speaker… 

No, actually! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

No! Those are words of people who don’t understand what exactly I am referring to. 
But here, I am referring to a document that has been published by the IPU. Every Member 
who has been in committees and going to the IPU in Geneva, à la Maison des Parlements 
would understand the importance of les ouvrages of the Inter-Parliamentary Union. In that 
report, it talks about precisely a conference that took place in 2006 on the need to broadcast 
and how to help the European Broadcasting Commission, how parliaments in Europe could 

 

48 

help parliaments in Africa. I have come across a very important chapter in that report that 
talks about control or no control and the role of the camera.  

 “This is a major issue. Westminster operates under very tight rules of control over 
what the cameras show  and the core  feed provided to all broadcasters.  The camera 
may only film the person speaking or cut away to the reaction of somebody named by 
that speaker; wide shots are allowed for editing purposes. We recently tried - he says - 
a  much  looser  arrangement  in  the  House  of  Lords,  allowing  the  director  to  use  a 
normal range of shots. We tried to get away from what I thought of as being a photo 
booth style of coverage, where you see a face in a box. There were no problems, and 
the same, more relaxed rules have now been tried out in the House of Commons. This 
raises some very interesting issues about protests and bad behaviour. My view on this 
is quite conservative. The new rules of coverage do not allow the cameras to show 
protests in the public galleries, in the belief that were they allowed to do this, there 
would be no end of protests.” 

So,  in  other  words,  it  shows  that  even  in  the  United  Kingdom,  the  House  of 
Commons, the House of Lords, things are evolving by the British Broadcasting Corporation. 
The way that they are showing the coverage, the camera shots, the takes, they are changing.  
And we are doing it in 2015. I do not believe that we should be shy.  Yes, if we say that we 
are going to bring members of the public into this House for the simple reason - and there is 
consensus on that - that they should know what is going on here, what exactly is our job, how 
many laws are voted.  What exactly is the importance of laws?  What do those laws mean?  
How  does  it  interact  with  their  daily  life?    How  could  they  write  to  the  Members  of 
Parliament of their constituency and tell them to intervene on such issues of importance to 
their lives?  This would create a symbiosis between members of the public, the electorate and 
us, Members of Parliament.  But if we are shy in our approach, we will not succeed!  If we 
are shy in our approach, on va museler la démocratie.  If we are shy in our approach, then we 
will be really changing the rules of the game because already members of the Press can hear 
and can report, and not only can hear, they see what we do, as I have explained. 

Now, it takes me to one issue also which was not covered by the Select Committee 
report.  In France, for instance, we have programmes - not only live coverage, because here 
we are limiting ourselves to that aspect - on parliamentary channel, where we have people 
who are called as experts to listen to excerpts of what is pronounced, what is said, what is 
explained in debates, and we have people who come and analyse and comment as political 

 

49 

gurus. We have Members of Parliament who are interviewed – because this is what we have 
to end up with; we must have a channel that belongs to Parliament, to this National Assembly 
- they go down to the street, meet the people, the inhabitants of villages and towns and ask 
them exactly what they  believe is going on, what they suggest should go on, what are the 
issues which should be asked, what are the questions that have never been answered, what are 
the questions that they have failed to understand, and what are the questions that should be 
put.  So, those are issues that we should really move towards.  And, yes, as we say, when we 
are  not  sure  exactly  and  when  we  are  shy,  we  always  say,  ‘well,  let  us  start  somewhere.’  
How about I propose something else?  Let us start where we can legitimately say we have the 
ability to start.   

In my humble view, we are a democracy that is aged and mature enough for us to start 
further ahead.  We are together:  Opposition and Government.  We form part of this mature 
democracy that entitles us to believe, and believe we must, that we can start further ahead 
because we have got that maturity.  So, I hope that we can start the coverage and broadcast 
very  soon.    I  hope  that  the  cameras  will  not  be  shy  and  will  not  be  limited  by  rules  of 
coverage.  I hope that the rules of coverage will not be une atteinte à la démocratie for the 
people out there to see what is going on because if we are going to limit the rules of coverage, 
we will be doing a great harm to our democracy.   

I would like, en passant, to thank Members of this august Assembly, not during our 
session,  but  from  the  times  of  the  70s  to  the  times  when  even  the  hon.  Prime  Minister, 
himself, was in the Opposition, to the 80s when he was Prime Minister, to the times of hon. 
Bhagwan, to the times of the Members of the MMM and the Labour Party, the MSM and the 
PMSD, who, each and every time, have always asked that we should have public coverage, 
public access to the works of this Parliament.   

Now, we have all read from the same page; we are all on the same page.  For once, it 
is quite a pleasurable moment that we do not have to fight one another on this particular issue 
and  that  we  can  look  forward.    Maybe,  we  can  also  proceed  by  avoiding  making  certain 
comments  in  order  to  score  political  points.    I  can  only  but  say  that,  well,  we  are  all 
politicians,  forgive  us,  Madam  Speaker,  if  we  are  going  astray  and  if  we,  for  once,  take 
advantage of the doors that are opened by  others, let us say that today  was better than 01 
April Fool’s day. 

Thank you very much. 

 
(5.58 p.m.) 

50 

Mr S. Rutnah (Third Member for Piton & Rivière du Rempart): Madam Speaker, 
Mauritius by virtue of section 1 of the Constitution, is a Sovereign Democratic State, and I 
heard very intently what hon. S. Mohamed said all about democracy. 

Today, we, this Government, this Prime Minister, sous his leadership - and I am proud 
to say this because he is my colistier - we are reinforcing all the principles of democracy, just 
like  when  he  was  Prime  Minister  earlier,  in  the  year  2004,  when  he  introduced  live  radio 
coverage and gave way for private radios to be set up in Mauritius. This is democracy. This is 
freedom of exPression in action and democracy in action. 

My hon. friend Mohamed is right to say what he said earlier on, that intention should 
be transcribed into action. But, at the same time, it came from his own mouth that, in 2009, 
the  former  Prime  Minister  was  the  one  who  for  the  first  time  introduced  to  this  House  a 
Select Committee on Live Broadcasting. But then, what happened to that Select Committee? 
Even after what was done, how much hard work hon. Bodha made to that Select Committee, 
that  intention  was  never  transcribed  into  reality!  Who  transcribes  it  into  reality  today  in 
Mauritius? This Prime Minister and this Government! We are the achievers; we are not only 
the dreamers. We are a Government of the people, for the people, by the people, and this is 
the  Select  Committee  report  that  is  going  to  bring  democracy  live  in  action  in  every 
household of this country. 

Madam  Speaker,  there  have  been  successive  governments  in  this  country  that  have 
used  the  MBC.  I  agree  with  my  hon.  friend  Mohamed  that  successive  governments  have 
failed in their duty to bring back the olden glories of what the MBC was at the time when it 
was set up. But we should also go back to history - very recent history. What was going on in 
our country whenever the Opposition was trying to do something, whether in Parliament or 
outside Parliament? How coverage was being broadcasted on the national TV? There were 
and there have always been manipulation by the MBC. But what did we hear? This, I know, 
is not the forum to talk about MBC, but given the fact that my hon. friend Mohamed was 
given the latitude of talking about MBC, let me say this: that no one has seriously, other than 
what hon. Bhadain, who said the other day in this House that he is going to bring back into 
MBC  some  kind  of  reform  that  is  going  to  reflect  reality  of  what  happens  in  day-to-day 
broadcasting business. 

51 

 
Madam  Speaker,  it  is  important  to  note  today  that  this  Government  set  up  this 
milestone  piece  of  Select  Committee  to  bring,  as  I  said  earlier  on,  the  Parliament  to  the 
people Mauritius on their screen. And what are they going to see? What are the people going 
to  watch?  Are  they  going  to  watch  partisan  politics  or  are  they  going  to  watch  coverage 
which is going to be impartial?  Here, I commend what is being said in the recommendation 
at page 13 of 36 of the report on Select Committee, it says – 

“Since your Committee is recommending the setting up of an in-house production unit 
(...)”  

Not MBC Production Unit! 

“(...) Your Committee is further recommending that a director/manager of broadcast 
be  recruited  together  with  such  member  of  operators  and  other  staff  as  may  be 
required for the effective and efficient ...” 

The operative words are- 

“(....) the effective and efficient operation and management of the production unit”. 

Now,  it  is  very  important  because  this  is  something  that  is  going  to  revamp  and 
reinforce democracy in our country. It is my suggestion that whenever the Director, as set up 
here,  would  execute  his  duty,  he  should  seek,  in  collaboration  with  the  supervisor  of  the 
broadcasting unit, to give a balanced, fair and accurate account of proceeding with the aim of 
informing viewers about the work of the House.  In carrying out this task, the Director should 
have regard to the dignity of the House and to its function as a working body rather than a 
place of entertainment. 

Now I come to the comments made by hon. Mohamed about hon. Gayan earlier on. I 
am not going to do politics about it, but he was given the latitude of making remarks. Now, 
April  Fools’  Day  has  nothing  to  do  with  debates  in  this  Assembly.  Here,  we  debate  very 
serious issues that concern the people of Mauritius, our nation, our people who live in towns, 
in  villages,  those  who  are  poor,  rich,  poor  and  destitute,  rich  and  very  rich.  That  is  the 
business  that  we  do;  very,  very  important  decision-making  process  of  the  country  and  its 
future is carried out here. So, it would be wrong to say and to make remarks that are going to 
affect the very dignity and sanctity of this House, and doing so the sanctity and dignity of 
democracy will be put at stake. This should never be allowed again once live broadcasting 
will come into action as from early next year or mid-year, I anticipate.  This entertainment 
business, this provocation business that goes on into the House should stop once for all.  We 

 

52 

all hon. Members who sit in the House and we should act honourably so that the people of 
our country will see what we do in the House. 

Madam Speaker, I also will speak a little bit on the privilege and the right of reply. 
This  is  again  milestone  and  very  important,  vital  aspect  of  strengthening  democracy.  We, 
sometimes, as Members of Parliament, under the cloak of privilege, we tend to say lots of 
things, make allegations, but the man who is outside of this Parliament roaming around the 
streets of Port  Louis or  Rivière du Rempart, where  I  come from, cannot say anything.  He 
would even perhaps be victimised by the Press, a lot of things would be said about him, but 
he would have no right to reply; no one will hear him, but at least, now, when we will have 
live broadcasting, the man outside whose integrity has been attacked would have a right to 
reply, and this is again democracy in action. The right to reply, and Madam Speaker, you will 
be entrusted with the duty of ruling upon whether the reply of that man from outside carries 
any  weight,  so  that  that  reply  would  find  its  place  in  Hansard  and  to  put  things  right  in 
perspective. However, Parliament, since its inception, has always been a place where freedom 
of  expression  is  absolute  and  whatever  reply  would  be  given  to  the  House  by  someone 
outside,  I  suggest  that  the  Committee  should  consider  very  carefully  that,  that  right,  that 
privilege under which we work in Parliament, will not be infringed. That we should be given 
the latitude, we should be given the opportunity to come and express ourselves fearlessly and 
robustly here, like my friend hon. Bhagwan said earlier on, when there were comments made 
that ‘ mo pas pu vine faire gounga ici’, and he is right. 

Whenever we have a matter of public interest, whenever we have a matter of national 
interest, whenever we have a matter of interest of our people, we should be given the right 
without any condition to come and express ourselves here, debate the issues that need to be 
debated without any fear and prejudice and without any fear of any prosecution. 

Madam Speaker, now I will move to what kind of coverage do we want. Do we really 
want the people outside to have a perception that we are going to control what is going to be 
broadcasted? Are we going to be called control freaks? We don’t want that. What we have to 
do is to look from outside our jurisdiction how the business of broadcasting is carried out.  

For  example,  we  are  all  used  to  the  political  democracy  that  exists  in  the  United 
Kingdom, France, Australia and Canada. There are certain matters to preserve the dignity of 
the House that should never be broadcasted in public interest. For example, in England, in the 
House of Commons, David Blunkett who was the Home Secretary was being guided, because 

 

53 

of his blindness, with a dog all the time in the Assembly and it was the norm that his dog 
should never be filmed and broadcasted, and that with a sign of respect. In 1987, one Labour 
Member of Parliament in the House of Commons hurled papers at a Minister and then he held 
the Mace trying to throw it on the floor of the House of Commons. That kind of action and 
the kind of action that we see sometimes should not be broadcasted, simply because we have 
to set the example of respect in the House. 

Madam Speaker, I am not going to be long - I have been told not to be long. Before I 
end, I wish to congratulate hon. Bodha and his entire team who have worked hard in order to 
produce this report today, over which we are debating, and I also congratulate the hon. Prime 
Minister for the initiatives that he took today to rewrite history not only insofar as democracy 
is concerned, but to set example in Africa. 

On this note, thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mrs Sewocksingh! 

(6.13 p.m.) 

Mrs  M.  Sewocksingh  (Third  Member  for  Curepipe  &  Midlands):  Madam 
Speaker, I feel privileged to address this august Assembly on a motion that has an objective.  
Indeed, we are living in a new era, the era of technology and communication and within a 
click you can reach the world nowadays. 

Today, we are not only discussing about live broadcasting of the proceedings of the 
House,  but  we  are  talking  about  transparency,  good  governance,  enhancement  and 
consolidation  of  democracy,  the  very  principles  that  this  Government  adheres  to  and  for 
which  the  people  of  Mauritius,  in  their  wisdom,  voted  for  us.    That’s  why  we  are  here, 
Madam Speaker. 

It is but legitimate, Madam Speaker, that the very same people who have put us here 
have the opportunity to see how we are faring in this august Assembly. They will have the 
possibility  to  assess  by  themselves  the  performance  of  the  Members  of  the  National 
Assembly of both sides of the House. 

The people will witness live how matters are conducted here.  We, parliamentarians, 
we are here to work for the welfare of the nation; we are here for important matters of the 
country and, as hon. Rutnah just said, we are not here for entertainment. People expect a lot 
from us. But, Madam Speaker, it is sad to note that some Members of Parliament resort to 

 

54 

languages and sometimes even actions that are offensive, abusive and disrespectful. I strongly 
hope that with this motion we shall no longer assist such things. 

This is also a unique opportunity for our constituents and the public at large to see and 
know how their problems are being addressed in Parliament.  As a result, the public will be 
more interested with parliamentary proceedings and will be more interested into politics.  

Madam Speaker, many masks with fall, many myths will be debunked.  In the past, 

many people boasted themselves as democrats, but no one dared to bring such a motion.  

The  motion  we  are  debating  today  shows  our  commitment  to  the  freedom  of 
information. This very Government, under the able leadership of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, 
Sir Anerood Jugnauth, along with the Deputy Prime Minister, Xavier-Luc Duval, the Vice-
Prime Minister, Ivan Collendavelloo, have proven once more their commitment towards the 
people of Mauritius. 

A live broadcast, Madam Speaker, is a step towards what this Government intends to 
make of the paysage audiovisuel de Maurice. Nous voulons et nous avons la volonté de faire 
de ce paysage un modèle pour la région. Ce gouvernement, Madame la présidente, a fait un 
pas qu’aucun autre n’a fait depuis l’existence même de la station de la télévision nationale. 

We  do  not  just  claim  to  be  transparent,  but  our  actions  speak  for  themselves.    We 
want the whole population to see, without hindrance, that we are working for them and for 
their  benefit.  Live  broadcasting  of  the  sittings  will  increase  the  accountability  we  have 
towards those who sent us here. 

Whatever  has  happened  has  happened  in  the  past,  Madam  Speaker,  but  as  hon. 
Mohamed just mentioned, this report went on fast and it went on very fast and better. I also 
heard the hon. Member of Parliament, hon. Mohamed, complaining against the MBC. I hope 
that he still remembers that there were many complaints against the MBC when the Labour 
Party  was  governing  the  country.  And  this  reminds  me,  Madam  Speaker,  how  could  the 
previous  Government  allow  live  broadcasts  of  the  National  Assembly  when  sittings  were 
suspended for ‘coze cozé’. We cannot forget these moments; the ‘coze cozé’ moments. 

No, thank you. I don’t want it. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order!  Please! 

 

55 

Mrs Sewocksingh: I wish to take this opportunity, Madam Speaker, to congratulate 
all  Members  of  this  polished  Select  Committee  under  the  chairmanship  of  the  charismatic 
Minister, hon. Bodha, who has done an outstanding work. And on this note, Madam Speaker, 
I  wish  to  make  an  appeal  that  our  mother  tongue,  Creole,  which  is  our  pride,  be  widely 
spoken here, as our nation is very much keen to introduce this in this National Assembly. 

Madam Speaker, as other democratic countries, let’s make history too. It is time to 

move ahead and let’s go live.  

Thank you very much. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rughoobur! 

(6.20 p.m.) 

Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or): Thank you, 
Madam  Speaker,  for  giving  me  the  opportunity  to  address  this  House  on  this  important 
motion  by  the  hon.  Prime  Minister  on  live  broadcasting  of  the  proceedings  of  the  House. 
Allow me also to congratulate hon. Bodha and all the hon. Members of the Select Committee 
along with the Office of the Clerk and all her staff for the time and effort spared in ensuring 
that the report is before this House in the earliest possible delay. 

Madam Speaker, today is indeed a historic moment for our country, certainly because 
of the decision of this Government to bring the proceedings of this House to the people, but 
also  because  of  the  unanimity  on  an  issue  that  hon.  Members  on  both  sides  of  the  House 
agree  should  be  above  party  politics.  This  is  an  opportunity  that  I  will  not  miss,  Madam 
Speaker, to send a strong signal to every Member of this august Assembly that on matters of 
public interest and the interest of our nation, we are capable of relying on maturity instead of 
majority to move forward together. 

Madam Speaker, before dwelling further on the contents of the motion in front of this 
House, allow me to say a few words on this yet another laudable initiative of our Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister. I have the strong belief, Madam Speaker, that men of vision have at least 
three things in common -  

1.  they will go the extra mile in order not to fail on commitments;  
2.  optimising on existing resources is for them a never-ending process, and 
3.  these men and their government will always look in the same direction as the 

nation at large. 

 

56 

Madam Speaker, our Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, is a man of vision, a man 
whose achievements will go down in the history of our country as a reference to one and all 
on outstanding leadership. 

Madam Speaker, coming back to the motion in front of this House, there are at least 

three issues that we will need to address after going through the report -  

1.  the objectives that have been defined and whether the report fulfils them 

accordingly; 

2.  the implementation phase speaks about technicalities of application, resources, 

rules, etc., and  

3.  the methods of evaluation to ensure that gradually changes are brought in order to 

improve on effectiveness of live broadcasting of the proceedings of our 
Parliament. 

Coming to objectives, Madam Speaker, I have not seen much on the objectives of the 
decision to go for live broadcasting in the report but anybody can guess that the following 
forms the very basis of what this Government is aiming at through this report. 

Madam Speaker, I have identified three major objectives -  

First, consolidate democracy through better accountability. The live broadcasting of 
the proceedings will allow the population to have better access to the proceedings of 
this  House.  Let  the  population  at  large  be  reassured  that  this  Government  means 
business  and  that  we  will  leave  no  stone  unturned  in  our  endeavour  to  make  our 
Mauritius a country with a system of Government by the people, for the people. 
Second  objective,  Madam  Speaker,  plurality,  transparency  and  fairness  in  the 
reporting of the proceedings of this House. The intention on both side of the House, I 
am sure, is to ensure that we put in place a system of reporting that protects the rights 
and  privileges  of  each  and  every  Member  individually,  but  also  as  a  member  of  a 
party or to a specific group. The report has gone far in addressing this specific issue, 
but, as in other Parliaments around the world, we will have to go through a test phase 
and improve on the model gradually. 
Third  objective,  I  believe,  Madam  Speaker,  is  better  responsibility.  We  have  seen 
during the last few weeks that the conduct of a few hon. Members in this House, have 
been  far  from  meeting  the  standard  expected  from  a  hon.  Member.  However,  my 
appeal to one and all in this House on this historic day is a wake-up call for better 

57 

 
responsibility  and  respect  towards  our  National  Assembly,  which  is  an  institution 
where many, among the existing hon. Members, have spent almost a lifetime fighting 
for the interests of the citizens of this country. 
Coming  to  implementation,  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  not  going  to  dwell  on  the 
technicalities  of  the  implementation  process,  as  this  should  be  left  to  the  professionals  to 
ensure that the proceedings of this House reach the maximum amount of our citizens much in 
line with the objectives I have elaborated earlier. However, I am sure that we can rely on the 
collaboration and assistance of friendly countries like India, UK and many other examples 
listed  in  the  report,  in  view  of  gradually  improving  on  the  quality  of  the  live  broadcast 
envisaged. 

Madam Speaker, the implementation phase always consists of four major components 
that,  if  not  well  addressed,  will  not  allow  any  project  to  meet  the  objectives  defined.  I, 
therefore, believe these four components will have to be addressed with the importance they 
deserve. The HR component first, and I request that every effort is spared to ensure that we 
have the best team in place. Second are the processes in any project that will require strict 
monitoring in order to protect the rights and interests of all stakeholders.  We are speaking 
here, today, about us, parliamentarians, but we have also other stakeholders like journalists 
outside, the people outside. Third is to ensure that while implementation, the people outside 
are  satisfied  that  they  have  access  to  information  they  consider  fair  and  transparent,  and 
finally, an appropriate budget to implement everything. 

On  evaluation  and  monitoring,  Madam  Speaker,  the  report  addresses  the  issue  of 
implementation  extensively,  but  we  also  need  to  put  in  place  a  system  of  evaluation  and 
monitoring  post  implementation.  This  will  enable  the  broadcasting  authority  to  uncover 
shortcomings that I believe can only be identified along the implementation process. We have 
been  identifying  shortcomings  today.    I  have  listened  to  a  few  hon.  Members  earlier  who 
have been identifying some of the shortcomings in the report, but I believe, as it has been the 
case  in  other  Parliaments,  we  will  have  to  move  on  gradually  and  then  work  on  the 
shortcomings  and  improve  gradually.    There  have  been  welcoming  critics  from  different 
quarters that the project has been drafted and will eventually be voted and implemented by 
only the elected hon. Members of the National Assembly and that professionals in the field of 
communication outside have not been given the chance to share their views. 

Madam Speaker, it is my firm belief that, as far as the project meets the three objectives 
mentioned earlier, that is, accountability, transparency and responsibility, there is no reason 

 

58 

for anybody to have reservations on the intention of this Government to meet the aspiration 
of one and all on an effective live broadcasting of the proceedings of our Parliament. 

Madam  Speaker,  let  the  unanimity  in  this  House  for  the  live  broadcast  of  the 
proceedings of our Parliament be a wake-up call to the youth of our country. I want them to 
be better involved in the political, social and economic affairs of our country. 

There  are,  Madam  Speaker,  very  few  options  that  we  are  left  with  to  convince  our 

youth today to believe in their potential, and the country needs them. 

Let this historic initiative today be among those few important options we are left with 
to inspire and reinstate the confidence they desperately require today in we, politicians, after 
the “classy type” model they have been exposed to during the recent years. 

It is my humble view that the quality of debates in this House on numerous issues of 
importance  will  inspire  an  increasing  number  of  our  youth  to  participate  and  get  involved 
directly or indirectly in the proper management of the affairs of our country. Madam Speaker, 
I have in mind where we, people on this side of the House, found ourselves 12 months earlier.  

To  conclude,  therefore,  I  find  no  better  words  than  those  of  Dale  Carnegie  to 

summarise what we are about to accomplish within a year, and I quote - 

“Most  of  the  important  things  in  the  world  have  been  accomplished  by  people 
who have kept on trying when there seemed to be no hope at all.” 

Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

(6.29 p.m.) 

Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix): Thank you, Madam 
Speaker. From the outset, I would like to thank the Chairperson and Members and previous 
Members of the Select Committee on Live Broadcasting and to bring the report with the hard 
work  of  hon.  Bodha  as  Chairperson  and  with  all  Members  that  were  present  in  the  Select 
Committee. 

It  took  only  about  11  meetings  and,  on  the  day  we  elected  hon.  Nando  Bodha  as 
Chairperson, we set a timeframe.  Probably, it is not in the record, but we did talk and we 
said: “five or six months”. We succeeded in doing it in five months. And let it be, why not 
implement  the  live  broadcasting  in  a  timeframe  very  soon  -  I  said  it  on  the  radio:  “six 

 

59 

months”  -  but  let  it  be  within  one  year  or  probably  earlier  and  that  would  be  a  great  step 
forward.  We  mean  business.  I  am  sure  we  will  succeed  because  we  have  la  volonté  de  le 
faire.  

Madam Speaker, I would like also to thank the Clerk and her staff and all those who 
took part, namely the members of the MBC, the three private radios, SLO, and there were 
other people who came to give us a helping hand where we did understand certain issues that 
were made clear to us.  Here, Madam Speaker, in the Select Committee, the experience that I 
got  was  that  all  Members,  we  were  like  a  family.  There  was  no  Opposition  side,  no 
Government side.  We were all friends at that time when we were discussing. 

Hon. Bodha made sure, as Chairperson, that we were doing the business as friends.  

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Well, we know what kind of business we are talking here! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, I will not dwell in the content and recommendations of the report.  
We have all, I hope, read it.  So, Madam Speaker, I will just make a few general comments to 
show  the  objective  behind  live  broadcasting.    Madam  Speaker,  live  broadcasting  or 
parliamentary proceedings can bring about mixed reactions, and I hope it will tame some of 
the bellicose hon. Members into behaving themselves.   

I hope also that it won’t motivate Members to go on the rampage with added vigour. 
We do have some Members, and I hope they wont’t take advantage because the camera will 
be on them and members of the public will see what is going on. 

Madam Speaker, live parliamentary proceedings will also show off the true interest of 
MPs towards their constituents who send them to Parliament. No MP, now, will play truant 
and ruin his/her re-election prospect. If they do so, truancy or bellicose. 

Madam  Speaker,  Government  Ministers  too  will  not  have  the  luxury  of  evading 

giving answers to questions raised by Opposition MPs having to do with people’s welfare. 

Madam Speaker, with live broadcasting, MPs will not be in the land of noddy. Those 

who doze off will have to be very careful. 

60 

 
Madam  Speaker,  unparliamentary  language  will  be  an  impossibility.  In  the  same 
breath, when MPs will behave themselves in this House - with due respect, Madam Speaker - 
the role of the Speaker may become monotonous, and I hope, the Speaker - with due respect 
again, Madam Speaker - won’t nod or doze off in long debates. 

Madam Speaker, implementation of this report will definitely make this Parliament, 
within  these  walls,  a  wider  Parliament.  With  wider  audience,  these  walls  around  us  will 
become virtual. People at home will become the public gallery. The gallery that we see today, 
the  people  around  Mauritius  will  become  the  gallery  of  this  Parliament.  Parliamentary 
proceedings,  like  I  said,  will  be  in  the  majority  of  homes  and  will,  via  internet,  be 
international. 

Madam Speaker, after giving some general objectives, many Members have talked on 
the good part of this report. There are just a few criticisms that have been brought, probably, 
by misundertanding of the report. I’ll leave it to the Chairperson of the Select Committee. I 
am sure he will dwell in replying to those who have not understood, especially, on the MBC 
part. 

 Well, like I said, we have put a time frame for the implementation of the report and I 
am sure we are going to succeed. What next? There will be minor amendments coming with 
experience. Nothing is perfect! In 10 years, it won’t be perfect. In UK, it is not perfect. We 
have criticisms. In Mauritius, we are born with live broadcasting. So, what next? 

Madam  Speaker,  after  having  implemented  live  broadcasting  of  the  proceedings  of 
this  House,  we  will  have  to  consider  live  broadcasting  of  Committees,  namely  Select 
Committees, Public Accounts Committee and others. 

I will elaborate a bit on the Public Accounts Committee because we heard a lot of 
criticisms.  I will refer the Public Accounts Committee as PAC. PAC  conducts hearings  in 
camera. This is a tradtiion that started before Independence. It applies to all Select Committes 
of the National Assembly. This is a great surprise from an accountability perpective. It is true 
that  certain  accounts  of  Government  might  need  examining  in  camera.  It  is  also  true  that 
PAC, eventually, makes its report public and that the Chairperson of PAC is a Member of the 
Opposition. However, one would expect, in a democracy, that closed meetings would be rare 
and concern only certain forms of expenditure, especially those on national defence. 

Examining  all  accounts  behind  closed  doors  will  not  promote  good  governance. 
Doing  so  will  reduce  public  nature  of  this  account  and  will  not  promote  transparency. 

 

61 

However, the criticisms by the Director of Audit are more worrying. They suggest that PAC 
is not assertive and effective as it should be. 

Open  committees  will  provide  Members  with  a  lot  of  opportunities.  Increased 
transparency can help to build trust in Government. Presently, worldwide, only 50% have live 
public broadcasting. Probably, Mauritius, today, has shifted the 50% that was not live and 
was making the 50% that was live above 50%. So, probably, history will talk that Mauritius 
shifts the balance towards live broadcasting. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  process  of  moving  from  a  closed  Parliament  to  one  that  is 
opened to the media and the public will involve a learning experience for all participants. So, 
will it be for all Members of this Parliament! 

To sum up, Madam Speaker, live broadcasting of parliamentary proceedings allows 
citizens to witness what is being enacted in their names. It provides an opportunity for the 
constituents to appraise the conduct of their elected representatives and receive diversity of 
viewpoints  on  State  issues  that  affect  their  daily  life.  Open  broadcasting  also  sustains 
citizenship and civil society is one of the core objectives of public service broadcasting. 

Madam Speaker, today, I am proud to form part and vote for this Motion to promote 
further our democracy through live broadcasting of the parliamentary proceedings.  Long live 
Mauritius and democracy through live broadcasting! 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mrs Monty! 

(6.42 p.m.) 

Mrs M. C. Monty (Third Member for Port Louis North & Montagne Longue): 
Madam Speaker, please allow me, first of all, to congratulate the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for 
such  a  motion  and  also  the  President  and  Members  of  the  Select  Committee  on  live 
broadcdasting for the research work conducted, for the considerable work done and for all the 
recommendations  towards  this  great  step  we  are  about  to  take  in  the  history  of  our 
democracy. 

Madam  Speaker,  it  cannot  be  denied  that  live  broadcasting  is  a  most  laudable 
initiative to allow our private works done for the public to be viewed to the extent of being 
assessed and commented. We should not forget that we are public figures, and as such, we 
must be prepared to be also the talk of the public and of the country. But, Madam Speaker, 

 

62 

we are all courageous and dedicated representatives of the people imbued with realism, we do 
not  operate  in  secret,  and  we  are  capable  of  bearing  all  the  costs  that  this  new  step  to  be 
broadcasted live will incur.  

Cependant,  Madame  la  présidente,  l’extension  de  notre  espace  démocratique  et  le 
grand pas que nous sommes appelés à faire marquera un tournant important de notre histoire. 
Même  s’il  est  vrai,  Madame  la  présidente,  que  nous  sommes  les  grands  bénéficiaires  des 
avancées technologiques et que l’information quelle que soit sa source est transmise à une 
vitesse vertigineuse à un public de plus en plus avide de connaissances, de nouvelles et de 
progrès, la question demeure : dans quelle mesure servirons-nous mieux la population en lui 
offrant in toto ce qui se discute, se vit à l’intérieur de l’hémicycle, appelé Chambre ? Je me 
réfère au paragraphe 6.11.6 du rapport disant le besoin de reconnecter avec le public. Mais, 
Madame  la  présidente,  la  question  est :  étions-nous  déconnectés pour  avoir  à  nous 
reconnecter ?  

Madam Speaker, we have always been connected with the public. We only need to be 
more connected with the public at large in the sense that we have to bridge the gap that may 
exist  between  our  people  and  the  procedures  involved  in  the  work  being  done  by  us, 
representatives  in  Parliament.  But  then,  another  question  remains:  shall  we  not  be  too 
invasive? Besides, listening to parliamentarians may be very boring if you are not an actor in 
the scene. A passive listener may easily get bored.  

Madame  la  présidente,  même  si  ce  projet  répond  aux  besoins  du  moment,  aux 
tendances modernes à vouloir rejoindre le peuple là où il est, et à lui apporter l’information 
qu’il est en droit de recevoir, il est aussi important, en regardant ce qui se passe autour de 
nous, de nous poser certaines questions. Notre public est-il assez mûr pour recevoir comme il 
se doit les affaires d’État ? Est-il en mesure d’écouter pour s’informer sans déformer? 

Madam Speaker, many questions come to my mind. Has broadcasting improved the 
quality of work of legislators worldwide? How far will broadcasting render our culture more 
democratic? Will parliamentarians use this as a platform to pave their way and launch their 
future electoral campaigns? Shall we be tempted to show off so as to become stars of the TV? 
How often will our elderly and housewives understand the language of Shakespeare unless 
Creole is introduced or translation envisaged? Besides, Madam Speaker, have we thought of 
how to fill the gap during parliamentary recess? Our people will be used in the long run to 

 

63 

follow parliamentary works, and this gap could perhaps be filled by interviews, talk shows 
and follow-ups or field work and more.  

The impact, Madam Speaker, can be positive or negative. It might change the way we 
behave  in  a  good  or  bad  way.  Sera-t-on  porté  par  le  besoin  de  paraître ?  Ce  changement  
poussera-t-il certains à cultiver l’art du paraître? Will the fact that they are being watched 
make  parliamentarians  more  concerned  about  what  they  are  saying?  Une  chose  est  sûre, 
Madame la présidente, la caméra pousserait nos parlementaires à mieux se contenir dans des 
moments de dépassement et à ne pas s’invectiver mutuellement, et aussi ne pas aller jusqu’à 
choisir  les  plus  belles  fleurs,  voire  même  les  fleurs  les  plus  colorées  de  notre  jardin 
linguistique et culturel pour les lancer à qui ne veut pas l’entendre. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  refer  to  paragraph  6.1.11  of  the  report.    The  Committee  rightly 
evoked the discomfort that may be caused by too much lighting and the intrusion of cameras 
during the whole sitting. Indeed, Madam Speaker, in a certain way, parliamentarians should 
not feel invaded by cameras to the point of being disturbed. Parliamentarians are not actors in 
the true sense of the word, though we may try to become future ones. 

(Interruptions) 

They are here to work and work for the advancement of the country and, by extension, for the 
people.  

Is the constant presence of cameras a proof to the people that we are working more 
seriously as representatives of the people? In a way, the camera does not allow us to yawn 
freely, though we are not here for that, to doze off sometimes, as it may happen. Car pour 
être  parlementaire,  Madame,  nous  n’en  sommes  pas  moins  humains.  Des  commentaires 
comme:  ‘ti  avoye  li  dans  parlement  pour  alle  dormi  vont  fuser  de  tous  côtés!’  Nos 
compatriotes  ne  peuvent  se  plaindre  cependant,  Madame  la  présidente,  d’avoir  été  privés 
d’info ou d’information du Parlement. Autrement, nul ne peut nier que le public mauricien 
est  spécialement  porté  pour  la  chose  politique,  et  désormais  il  sera  bien  servi,  gavé 
d’informations jusqu’à en être repu, si on peut s’exprimer ainsi. 

Going  live,  Madam  Speaker,  will  be  providing  a  free  ticket  to  the  viewer  to  go  to 
places  in  which  debates  take  place  and  which  were  hitherto  closed  to  him,  allowing  him 
thereby to be a passive participant in parliamentary debates, to do his own debates outside. 
Madam Speaker, there  will be our names and our discussions à l’autel des jugements, des 
commentaires  et  des  sanctions  gratuites.  We  should  bear  in  mind  that  people  with 

 

64 

intelligence will speak ideas, people with average mind will speak events, but people with 
short  mind  will  talk  about  gossips.  Madam  Speaker,  if  we  think  of  three  Ps  as  Politics, 
Parliament  and  Public  affairs,  this  can  also  easily  turn  into  Parlement,  Potins,  Palabres. 
Madam  Speaker,  there  are  two  sides  to  every  coin  and,  as  responsible  people,  we  should 
analyse them while wishing it does not turn out to be too negative.  

Ceci  étant  dit,  Madame  la  présidente,  nous  ne  pouvons,  en  tant  que  gouvernement 
responsable, visionnaire, ayant le souci de la transparence, choisir de marcher à reculons et 
refuser  d’emboîter  le  pas  au  progrès,  mais,  au  contraire,  rejoindre  les  plus  grandes 
démocraties du monde dans leur démarche d’utiliser les moyens de transmission pour rendre 
au public les travaux de la Chambre, quels qu’en soient les désavantages. Enfin, tout députés 
que nous sommes, souhaitons que nous ne soyons pas dépités par cet engagement de ce jour. 

And,  to  conclude,  Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  quote  Confucius  who  said:  “when  it 
appears your goals are unreachable, don’t adjust your goals, but the action steps.”  So, we are, 
Madam Speaker. And, on these words, I will wish to leave the floor and thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leopold! 

(6.52 p.m.) 

Mr J. Leopold (Second Member for Rodrigues): Thank you, Madam Speaker for 
giving me the chance to participate in this debate of such a historical moment. At the very 
outset, I would like, on behalf of my constituency which we represent, both hon. Francois and 
I, in this House, say that we fully support this motion, and we thank the hon. Prime Minister 
for bringing this motion into this House. We also thank, on behalf of the people of Rodrigues, 
the Select Committee which has done a fantastic work.  

Madam  Speaker,  this  is  a  very  nice  reform.  With  the  evolution  of  modern  society, 
Mauritius needs to keep pace with evolution and that is why this reform on live broadcasting 
of parliamentary proceedings is important.  

With technology, as you might know, Madam Speaker, the way in which we interact 
is changing. Ten to 15 years ago, when we were referring to Blackberry, we were thinking of 
just a fruit, but nowadays, when we are talking about Blackberry, it is a smart phone where 
we can interact, watch TV and where politicians can interact with the people they represent 
here. That’s why this reform is such an important one. 

65 

 
Madam Speaker, this reform is vital to tackling the public perception that politics has 
become a value free competition for office. I have always believed that politics is worthwhile. 
This  is  not  nowadays  a  popular  view.  Important  issues  are,  we  are  told,  above  politics  by 
implication and expectation of the province of the low road. No more damaging charge can 
be made than to say someone is playing politics with an issue. Because of the implication and 
expectation, politics is a game played for personal gain and entertainment. That’s what many 
people  think.  But  politics  is  one  of  the  ways  any  democracy  works  out  solution  to  its 
problem.  Politics  is  a  way  to  manage  substantial  disagreements  within  a  society  or  a 
community and to bring about real change for the better. We all do politics here to express 
our  shared  values,  our  beliefs  and  our  policy  priorities.  Politics  is  about public  goods,  not 
private  interests.  We  see  that  among  the  public,  there  is  that  deficit  of  trust  in  regard  to 
politics.  Despite this fact, our democracy depends on that trust. 

In Mauritius, Madam Speaker, we are lucky that the election is conducted fairly, and 
that produces legitimate governments. There is no problem with that. Therefore, the issue of 
trust rests on the operation of the government, that is, the ability to pass laws even where 
there is constraint or disadvantage of some members of the community.  

Parliament, Madam Speaker, is one of the components of our democratic institution, 
but  that  is  being  undermined  by  how  it  is  portrayed  and  perceived.  Therefore,  Madam 
Speaker, with the event of live broadcasting of parliamentary proceedings, electors and the 
public will see all the processes of Government and see that decisions are being made on their 
merits.  Electors  and  the  public  as  a  whole  will  be  able  to  see  the  principles  of  integrity, 
transparency  and  accountability,  and  those  principles  are  equally  important  to  the  historic 
values of the people whom I represent here and my party, to which I belong - the OPR party. 
Those values are fairness and equality because they safeguard our movements against vested 
interest, self-interest and unfair advantage. 

Madam  Speaker,  as  a  newly  elected  Member,  new  to  this  august  House,  I  have 
observed that parliamentary behaviour is fuelling wider cynicism about politics. Parliament is 
becoming too confrontational thereby it should be a forum of genuine debate. I hope that live 
broadcasting of parliamentary proceedings will commit all Members in this House in having 
the duty to restore community confidence in our national Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, because this is a historical moment,  I do not want to go long. To 
conclude, as  I wanted to participate in such moments,  I strongly believe, Madam Speaker, 

 

66 

that  such  procedural  step  of  making  parliamentary  proceedings  go  live,  is  in  line  with  the 
concept  of  a  modern  Parliament  in  a  modern  Republic.  This  will  show  more  people  the 
contribution of Parliament to democracy – 

• 

• 
• 
• 

• 

by being more inclusive in the composition and manner of working, especially 
in relation to women, to minority and to marginal communities; 
by being more effective public communicators; 
by opening more of our work to the media; 
to experiment new ways of engaging with the public, including civil society, 
enabling them to contribute to the legislative process, and 
to  recover  public  confidence 
unforeseeable codes of conduct.  

integrity  of  Parliament 

through 

in 

the 

Those examples, Madam Speaker, will show that in Parliament we are working hard. 

To end up, Madam Speaker, I hope that provision is made so that Rodriguan audience 
also enjoy the luxury of live broadcast in Parliament. As you know, Madam Speaker, we have 
only four channels on TV in Rodrigues, and I am sure that provision is made for an extra 
channel  to  allow  all  people  living  in  Rodrigues  to  follow  live  broadcast  of  parliamentary 
proceedings.  

With these words, Madam Speaker, I thank you for your attention. 

(7.00 p.m.) 

Mr  T.  Benydin  (First  Member  for  La  Caverne  &  Phoenix):  Madam  Speaker, 
permit  me,  in  the  first  instance,  to  congratulate  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Sir  Anerood 
Jugnauth,  to  come  with  this  motion  and  to  show  also  my  appreciation  to  hon.  Bodha,  the 
Chairperson, and all the Members of the Committee, including the Secretariat of the National 
Assembly,  who  served  on  this  Committee  and  came  forward  with  a  series  of  valuable 
recommendations. 

Madam Speaker, this motion comes at a time when citizens, particularly the  young 
people, are surfing daily on the  Internet and other communication systems so that they be 
able to search updated and relevant information and data that will help them to enrich their 
knowledge, empower them to better understand current issues and challenges lying ahead in 
this digital world.  

67 

 
Live  broadcasting  would  also  be  beneficial  to  all  components  of  the  civil  society, 
including  NGOs  and  trade  unions.  This  will  help  these  organisations  to  take  stands  and 
positions on issues of national interest. 

Madam Speaker, this report, which contains a number of important recommendations, 
constitutes  in  itself  a  major  breakthrough  in  modern  communication  and  information 
technology and will definitely reinforce Parliament-citizens relationship so long awaited.  

Madam Speaker, the broad consensus reached at the level of the Select Committee is 
most welcome and should be acclaimed as a step forward in political pluralism, which has 
proved that it can reconcile conflicting interests and expectations through democratic means, 
social dialogue and compromise. 

Madam  Speaker,  it  is  a  fact  and  an  indisputable  one  that  in  our  modern  society, 
Parliaments in many countries are undergoing consequential changes to adapt to the changes 
of our new society. As such, live broadcasting will help MPs to engage more effectively with 
the public. It will also provide us with opportunities to be more visible and transparent in our 
deliberations, particularly with regard to a number of issues related to legislation, debates and 
resolutions geared at improving citizens’ well-being.  

Madam  Speaker,  recognising  that  democracy  is  a  universal  value  and  its  essential 
ingredients should be shared with the citizens, it is very much encouraging to note that the 
new  communication  system  of  live  broadcasting  will  further  reinforce  and  consolidate 
democratic  practices;  unleash  innovative  measures  to  promote  good  governance,  bring 
Parliament  closer  to  the  people  and  to  respond  to  Government’s  noble  endeavour  to  bring 
meaningful change.  

Madam Speaker, live broadcasting will bring into the homes of thousands of citizens 
instant, fresh and updated information on parliamentary proceedings. Members of Parliament 
will have better opportunities to promote themselves to the nation and to allow citizens, at the 
same time, to better understand the responsibilities of Members of Parliament, particularly 
with regard to grievances and representations made.  

Madam Speaker, while recognising the proactive role of the Press and its invaluable 
role to the public, so far we have had to rely entirely on Press reports and opinions exPressed 
by the media, be it written or oral. Live broadcasting, therefore, will indeed revolutionise the 
communication system in that it will enable more people to watch and listen, allowing them 

 

68 

to  assess  and  form  their  own  opinions  without  outside  interference  or  bias  concepts  on 
interventions and subjects raised by their representatives at the National Assembly.  

Madam  Speaker,  it  is  hoped  that  live  broadcasting  will  spearhead  a  new  culture  of 
respect  and  behaviour  among  Members  of  Parliament  from  all  political  parties.  Live 
broadcast will boost quality, usher courtesy in the components of speeches, statements and 
will,  therefore,  add  decorum  to  the  House.  While  we  will  have  to  groom  our  attire,  body 
language,  etc.,  due  care  has  to  be  taken  while  addressing  the  Assembly.  As  MPs,  we  will 
have to bear in mind the adage, I quote –  

“Be sure brain is in gear before engaging mouth”. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  right  to  information  and  proper  communication  is  considered 
today  by  most  citizens  as  being  a  social  and  fundamental  human  right  in  order  to  enable 
citizens to exercise significance influence on their elected representatives. That is why they 
will appreciate and feel satisfied when they are first, fully informed about what their MPs are 
doing and proposing, particularly with regard to commitments and promises made, how to 
improve  quality  of  life  and  make  people  happier.  In  some  countries,  namely  the  Hungary 
National  Assembly  where  communication  arrangements  have  been  reviewed,  the  tendency 
has  been  to  adopt  a  comprehensive  information  and  education  strategy  under  a  single 
communication  unit  or  department.  This  strategy  includes  various  kinds  of  medium 
broadcasting,  namely  the  internet  publications,  information  centres  and  educational 
initiatives. A multiple and coordinated means of dissemination is helpful in that the public 
can assess information of their own choice or availability.  

Live broadcasting is definitely an advantage for Mauritian citizens. If today, in many 
Parliaments, countries can broadcast or webcast plenary sessions to the public, we consider 
that Mauritius can also follow this trend and make full use of the new ICT techniques and 
methodology to make a holistic contribution to parliamentary proceedings. Madam Speaker, I 
welcome  the  recommendation  made  by  the  Select  Committee  that  a  dedicated  channel  be 
provided by the MBC to the Mauritius National Assembly on the days Parliament sits as well 
as the recommendation made to the effect that webcasting should become a core part of an 
integrated, interactive Parliament information system. I know that when you are outside time 
belongs to you, when you are inside you belong to time. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Benydin, address the Chair please! 

Mr Benydin: Yes Madam Speaker.  

 

69 

(Interruptions) 

I am still inside, thank you. This new medium of communication will also arouse the interest 
of the young people in representative politics. Live broadcasting, therefore, will respond to 
the  demand  for  better  and  enhance  public  services  offered  with  quality,  efficiency  and 
accountability, thus giving the public free and full access to debates and other deliberations of 
the National Assembly.  

To end, Madam Speaker, the motion of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, we are confident, 

will pave the way to make Mauritius an intelligent and smart country.  

I thank you. 

(7.10 p.m.) 

The Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms 
and Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation (Mr S. Bhadain): Madam 
Speaker, this is indeed a great day for Mauritius. I am sure that the live broadcasting of the 
proceedings of the House is certainly going to consolidate democracy in our country. I would 
like to first and foremost congratulate the Members of the Committee for the hard work that 
has been put in it and also the Chairperson, hon. Bodha, who has dedicated himself to make 
this a reality but, more importantly, I would like to congratulate the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
for bringing this motion to this House and making the live broadcasting of proceedings of the 
House a reality.  

information  and 

transparency  are 

Madam  Speaker,  freedom  of 

inseparable 
components of a vibrant democracy and contribute towards consolidating public confidence 
in  our  parliamentary  system.  In  our  manifesto,  we  pledged  for  enhanced  transparency  and 
accountability in all spheres of public life and to promote a society where integrity is at the 
forefront. Since the start of our mandate, we have not left any stone unturned to translate this 
vision into a more just and equitable society, into concrete action. The actions which have 
been taken so far, speaks volumes. In the sphere of good governance, we have already set the 
tone  and  the  actions  that  will  follow  will  demonstrate  the  extent  of  our  commitment  to 
maintain the required level of governance in our country, be it in the public or private sector. 
We are walking the walk, Madam Speaker.  

In an increasingly wired world, the importance of transparency in public proceedings 
is  crucial.  The  relevance  and  importance  of  transparency  in  parliamentary  proceedings  is 
more  than  ever  a  sine  qua  non  condition  towards  building  confidence  in  our  institutions.  

 

70 

Talking about institutions, Madam Speaker, I would like to first and foremost agree with the 
hon. Member Mohamed who has been explaining to the House his thoughts about how the 
MBC operated in the past and is still operating. I do agree with him that it is in the DNA of 
people who are working at the MBC to be subservient to the government of the day.  I do 
agree  with  him  that  MBC  needs  to  change,  and  this  is  what  we  have  embarked  ourselves 
upon to achieve. For the very first time, we have advertised for positions of Director General 
and other positions at the MBC, be it Deputy Director General, Director of News, Sales and 
Advertising, Human Resources and even a Head of Oriental Section.  

Now, we want to get a new management team in place, which is going to fulfil our 
vision of taking the MBC into a different sphere, a different dimension, a different level of 
operation, which is going to be more professional, which is going to be impartial and which is 
also going to make our country proud of having such a broadcasting corporation. This is what 
this  Government  is  endeavouring  to  do.  Now,  as  Minister  for  ICT  and  having  the 
responsibility  of  the  MBC  in  my  portfolio,  I  can  assure  the  House  that  everything  will  be 
done so that the live broadcasting of proceedings of this House becomes a success through 
the MBC, with the new management team which is going to be in place.  

I also certainly agree with hon. Mohamed when he says that a culture has developed 
over a period of time, through successive governments, where people who are working at the 
MBC believe that they have to have some kind of proximity with the Minister, they need to 
have  some  kind  of  proximity  with  people  who  are  in  power.  Why?  Because  that  would 
probably give them a better chance of being promoted, getting increments and so on and so 
forth. It is a culture which has developed over time, and this is the culture that we want to 
change. This is the culture that we believe now must go away and be replaced by this new 
sense of professionalism that we are bringing into all institutions, and when it comes to the 
live broadcasting of proceedings of this House, this is a fantastic opportunity for the MBC 
pour redorer leur blason, as we say.  

The problem, Madam Speaker, it is not good only to say that people who are working 
at the MBC are not doing their jobs properly and are being subservient. The problem is also 
in the law, because when you look at the MBC Act, you will see that the Minister appoints 
people who are sitting on the Board, and if you read the law, then, basically, the Minister can 
give directives to the Board, and the Board shall comply with those directives. That’s why 
this whole debate about the word ‘manipuler’, which has been used before. In fact, it is in the 
law; the Minister can give directives to the Board, and they shall comply.  

 

71 

So, coming back to the Select Committee Report and the restrictions which have been 
described - I am not going to go through each and every one of them in detail, and I won’t be 
too long, Madam Speaker - I agree again with hon. Mohamed that there is no need for these 
restrictions, because at the end of the day - he described it as why do we have to be shy -  I 
am saying we should have full transparency. Let everything be broadcasted, let everything be 
shown as it is, so that the people can judge for themselves as to what is good, what is bad, 
what is right, what is wrong and also for people to be able to see that their elected ones are 
behaving in a particular manner and then, they can make an informed decision as to whether 
they  want  to  vote  for  that  person  again  or  not.  This  is  democracy!  This  is  how  it  should 
operate.  

The other issue, which I have heard hon. Members mention, is whether the debates 
should or should not be in Creole. I would basically say this, Madam Speaker: I very much 
believe  that  the  standard  of  English  in  Mauritius  is  going  down  and  I  believe  that  in  our 
institutions,  especially  when  we  talk  about  Parliament  and  our  Court  system,  we  should 
maintain the standards, and certainly, I do not believe that proceedings should be conducted 
in Creole.  

Now, Madam Speaker, I am not going to be very long, but I would just want to finish 
by saying this: I would like to pay deep tribute to the visionary leadership of Sir Anerood 
Jugnauth, a man of word, of righteousness, a shrewd decision-maker with a strong sense of 
purpose, conviction and sincerity and who will always be remembered for having created a 
greater  edifice  of  our  democracy  for  the  betterment  of  our  nation.  Madam  Speaker,  many 
people ask me where do I derive the level of energy that I show every day when I go to work. 
I will tell this House today that every single morning when I look at myself in the mirror and 
I  am  putting  on  my  tie,  the  very  thought  of  being  a  Minister  in  the  Government  of  Sir 
Anerood Jugnauth gives me tremendous energy to do everything that I do. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo!  

(7.18 p.m.) 

Mr  A.  Ganoo  (First  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River):  Thank  you,  Madam 

Speaker. I intended to be long … 

 

72 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! Order, please! 

Mr Ganoo: … but I have been apprised of certain circumstances, Madam Speaker, 
and I will shorten my speech in order to allow the other orators after me to contribute to this 
debate today. I understand that Government wishes to end the debates tonight and the issue 
be not postponed for the next sitting. So, I will be very brief and come to the point.  

Madam Speaker, what we are talking today is about, in fact, enhancing democracy, 
consolidating parliamentary democracy and, of course, there are ancillary issues to that main 
theme. That is, the dignity of the House, the decorum of the House, giving better access to the 
population  with  regard  to  what  happens  in  this  House,  the  question  of  conduct  of  hon. 
Members,  the  issue  of  reprimanding  hon.  Members  for  their  bad  conduct,  for  their 
misbehaviour in this House.  All these are issues linked to the debates today. I, myself, as you 
know, Madam Speaker, have been here since 1982 when the hon. Prime Minister was elected 
Prime Minister for the first time. I see a few of these old faces like hon. Koonjoo and hon. 
Gayan who have been with me since 1982 in this very House.  

I  have  been  Speaker  of  the  House.  Just  like  you,  I  did  suspend  the  sitting  because 
there was so much disorder in the House. I have also been a backbencher, a Minister, and I 
have been one day kicked in this very House when I wanted to intervene and pacify the two 
sides of the House who were fighting with each other. That was in 1993 when Sir Anerood 
Jugnauth was Prime Minister. The Speaker had to suspend the sitting of the House, and there 
was so much disorder in the House that he had to go by the other door instead of this door. 
Hon.  Members  who  were  there  at  this  time  would  remember  there  was  so  much 
pandemonium in this House on that night. 

Madam Speaker, what we are doing today is, in fact, a big leap forward. In our history 
of parliamentary democracy, I think we must celebrate this day today, and it is a good thing 
also there is unanimity in this House. It is a measure which is long overdue, as somebody has 
said  before  me.  Other  African  States  have  long  before  us  introduced  live  television 
broadcasting. True it is that there was a first Select Committee, which was set up in 2009, 
which addressed the issue. Unfortunately, we know the reasons why this Committee did not 
function. At one time, it came to a standstill after the political landscape had changed with the 
split of the Labour and MSM Government, and the second Committee was set up by the hon. 
Prime  Minister  in  April  of  this  year,  a  few  months  ago.  I  am  sure  hon.  Bodha  had  the 

 

73 

advantage  of  the  input  of  the  last  works  carried  out  by  the  last  Committee,  and  within  a 
relatively short span of time, the report was produced, has been tabled, and today, the hon. 
Prime Minister is coming with this motion.  

We must, of course, as everybody has done before me, congratulate the hon. Prime 
Minister for the celerity with which he came with this motion, congratulate the hon. Members 
of the Select Committee and the Chairperson, hon. Bodha, for the  excellent work done.   I 
have no doubt - because I was a Member of the first Select Committee which was appointed 
by the then Labour Government, hon. Bodha was the Chairperson, as we just heard - that he 
deserves our unreserved congratulations because he has been the driving force and he is the 
one who has stewarded the works of the past and the second Select Committee. I think we all 
have to applaud him.  

Madam Speaker, I will not go into all what has been said before me: the advantages of 
adopting live broadcasting. They are multiple, as they have been elaborated and spelt out in 
the  report  itself,  but  Madam  Speaker,  in  a  nutshell,  parliamentary  channels  constitute  an 
important ingredient in enhancing democracy and fulfilling the full exercise of the right of the 
citizens  by  providing  a  greater  public  awareness,  a  greater  appreciation  of  the  work  of 
Parliament by involving the public in the parliamentary debates, hence making the politicians 
also more accountable, as has been said before me, thus developing a fresher, a new attitude 
and perception of the works of Parliament in the eyes of the people. But this process, as we 
know, Madam Speaker, started years and years ago. Somebody said it before me; in the UK, 
the  debates  about  live  television  broadcast  started  in  the  1920s,  then  Australia  and  New 
Zealand,  I  think,  became  the  pioneers  in  broadcasting  the  proceedings  of  their  House  of 
Representatives  in  the  1940s.  But,  be  that  as  it  may,  Madam  Speaker,  the  advantages  of 
adopting live broadcasting, as I said, are extraordinary.  

But there are also reasons why, according to me - and I’ll come to that - we are doing a 
good thing today, a historical decision which is being taken by this House today when we 
shall  vote  the  motion.  In  fact,  one  of  the  major  problems  faced  by  many  countries  where 
parliamentary democracy is developing is a lack of public knowledge and awareness of the 
functions of Parliament and the mode of operation. And this is one way to remedy to this 
situation. This lack of awareness, Madam Speaker, is said to be accompanied by a general 
public  opinion  that  Parliament  is,  in  fact,  an  opaque  institution,  devoid  of  transparency, 
devoid  of  accountability  and,  with  the  live  broadcasting,  I  am  sure,  this  goes  a  long  way 

 

74 

towards  dissipating  this  confusion,  this  perception  that  Parliament  is  opaque  and  works  in 
opacity and is devoid of transparency. 

More  importantly  to  me,  Madam  Speaker,  live  Parliament  broadcasting  is  essential 
because it provides a channel between the public and the politicians, because very often our 
work  here  reaches  the  public  after  interpretation  by  journalists  and  Press  people  who  are 
present  in  this  House.  What  I  mean  to  say,  Madam  Speaker,  is  that,  in  fact,  online 
broadcasting will enable the people of our country to watch and listen to us and will allow the 
people to form their own opinions without media interference. Because what happens very 
often is that a journalist reacts subjectively to what happens to this House.  Le traitement de 
l’information  est  quelque  chose  de  très  subjectif  and  each  journalist  decides  which 
information to give priority to, which questions he thinks you should highlight and enhance 
whereas once live broadcasting takes place, Madam Speaker, it will be unadulterated… 

(Interruptions) 

… broadcasting of the proceedings. Unpolluted, if I may say so! So, this is according to me, 
why  I  agree,  I  fully  endorse  what  is  taking  place  today  in  the  House.  I  fully  support  the 
motion. 

Madam Speaker, I will come very quickly now to the point I wish to make about the 
production, the edition, the Rules of Coverage, which is an important part of the report, of 
course,  from  what  I  understand,  and  I  am  sure  the  hon.  Minister  Bodha,  when  he  will 
intervene, will clarify the issue.  So, what this report is proposing, Madam Speaker?  Firstly, 
that  there  will  be  this  production  unit,  which  will  be  fully  controlled  and  staffed  by  our 
legislature, and it is this production unit, and not the MBC, which will own the feeds and 
which will have full  copyright on the proceedings of this House. This is one!  And what  I 
understand also from 6.2.6, and this is perhaps what hon. Mohamed confused me when I was 
listening to him.  From what I can read … 

…in paragraph 6.2.6 – “no editing should take place”. I am quoting – 

(Interruptions) 

“(…)since  the  broad  principle  to  televise  is  to  cover  the  business  of  the  House  and 
being given that the aim is to make parliamentary debate more accessible to the public 
and to improve public understanding of the democratic process, no editing should take 
place. However, the coverage should strictly adhere to the Rules of Coverage (…)” 

75 

 
Therefore,  the  MBC  will  come  at  a  later  stage,  from  what  I  understand,  Madam 
Speaker. And this is why I think this issue should be clarified, that is, whether the debate has 
been going on in many countries when they adopted live broadcasting, whether there should 
be editing or not editing.  From what I can see, there will be no editing, but there must be 
adherence to the Rules of Coverage.  

Now, concerning this Broadcasting Committee, Madam Speaker, I agree with the hon. 
Leader of the Opposition.  Everything will depend on the structure that we are setting up, the 
personnel, the human resources on the Committee when that will be set up, and I have no 
doubt that Government will agree that this Committee will be pluralistic, composing of all 
political  components;  all  political  parties  represented  in  the  House  will  form  part  in  this 
Committee.  The recruitment of this Production Director or Manager or Broadcast Manager 
also  must  be  done  in  all  transparency.  He  will  be  recruited,  I  don’t  know,  by  the  Public 
Service  Commission  or  by  another  Service  Commission,  but  all  this  will  be  done  in 
transparency to buttress the confidence of everybody in the whole process. 

I will just remind the House, Madam Speaker, that in France, for example, in the Upper 
House where, of course, there is live broadcasting, there is a free and independent channel 
and,  in  fact,  it  is  a  duly  accredited  journalist  who  is  at  the  head  and  who,  because  of  his 
competence, his past experience, of the respect he commends, has been the guarantee of the 
channel’s independence.  So, this is why, according to me, it all depends on the people we 
choose on the independent nature of this Broadcast Committee which will be set up in order 
that all the process will be given the legitimacy it deserves. 

Now,  on  the  question  of  editing  again,  Madam  Speaker,  we  are  retransmitting  the 
public deliberations, I understand, with no commentary. In other systems, the proceedings are 
provided with comments, with journalistic added value, in order to decode the proceedings 
and  to  explain  the  underlying  political  issues.  And  this,  of  course,  is  different  from  just 
broadcasting the streaming of the debates. Therefore, the question which I would like to ask 
the hon. Minister is whether, in fact, we should not have given thought to the possibility of 
retransmitting the public deliberations with some commentaries. Because that will help the 
listeners,  the  population  to  decode  the  proceedings,  to  understand  fully  the  political  issues 
and the procedure that is taking place in the deliberations in the House. 

On the question of editing again, Madam Speaker, the basic rule is that the camera 
focuses on whoever is speaking. Therefore, the camera operator is not to focus on the events 

 

76 

that are not directly related to the proceedings, such as a demonstration or disturbance being 
caused by other Members, because all this will be taking place without the direction of the 
Speaker. So, that is why all this should be excluded and the camera should be focusing only 
on the Member who is taking the floor. 

But  it  is  also,  as  somebody  said  before  me,  Madam  Speaker,  very  boring  to  watch 
somebody speaking for a long time. So, it is important to cut away, to show people who are 
around listening. I don’t think we should be as restrictive as the rules are, Madam Speaker. 
This is one criticism that I have to make against the rules. I think they are a bit restrictive. I 
think - somebody said it before me; it was hon. Shakeel Mohamed - if we are interested in 
preserving  the  dignity  of  the  House  ourselves,  we  should  act  in  a  dignified  manner.  So, 
whoever does not act in a dignified manner will pay the political price that he has to pay and 
this, on the contrary, I think, live broadcasting without too much restriction, over restriction, 
too much conformism, will help MPs to act in a dignified manner. 

Madam Speaker, I come to the question of the breach of the rules and the conditions. I 
would like to comment on this issue because, again, according to me, there might be some 
confusion on this issue. There is a suggestion I wish to make, Madam Speaker. This is what I 
can read from the report. That is, in case there is contempt, the Speaker can act under the 
Standing Orders or the law, National Assembly (Powers, Privileges and Immunities) Act in 
order to repair whatever wrong has been committed. I am referring to paragraph 6.6.3 – 

“Your  Committee  further  noted  that  in  most  legislatures,  breach  of  rules  and 
conditions  may  be  treated  as  contempt  and  that  it  has  been  dealt  with  through  the 
exercise of the Speaker’s power to withdraw the privilege of being able to broadcast. 
Your  Committee  is  of  the  view  that  this  may  be  included  in  the  Standing 
Orders/National Assembly (Powers, Privileges and Immunities) Act as being a further 
example of contempt.” 

That is, in case there is a breach of rule, therefore, there is another new type of contempt that 
will be added to our law and, therefore, this is the solution which has been proposed by the 
Select Committee. But one thing I wish to say, Madam Speaker, is that when we look at the 
Act which has been mentioned, the National Assembly (Powers, Privileges and Immunities) 
Act, this is what I can read in section 7 – 

77 

 
“No  prosecution  for  an  offence  under  this  Act  shall  be  instituted  except  by  the 
Director of Public Prosecutions and in accordance with the procedure laid down in 
that behalf in the Standing Orders of the Assembly.” 

Therefore, we have to comply with the procedures laid down in our Standing Orders 
in  order  to  sanction  whoever  has  been  guilty  or  has  committed  any  act  of  contempt.  We 
know,  in  our  Standing  Orders,  Madam  Speaker,  how  tedious  and  cumbersome  is  the 
procedure when a matter of contempt is raised. There is a long procedure in section 74. If it is 
a  Member  who  is  complaining,  the  Member  has  to  undergo  a  cumbersome  and  tedious 
procedure, raise the matter before Madam Speaker, who decides whether there is urgency, 
appoints another day for his/her decision, he considers whether there has been any contempt 
and then he refers the matter to the DPP for appropriate action and so on and so forth. We are 
talking of defamation, slander which has taken place when a Member has said whatever he 
has said, he has defamed and this has been broadcast immediately, Madam Speaker, and now 
“the victim” will have to come through somebody in this House because it is only a Member 
who  can  raise  the  issue  before  you,  Madam  Speaker  and  then  he  will  engage  in  this  long 
tedious repetition. I think this should be relooked and revisited, Madam Speaker, because I 
think  the  hon.  Minister  should  consult  the  SLO  and  see  whether  we  can  think  of  other 
remedies  in  order  to  deal  with  situations  of  contempt  because  if  we  go  by  what  has  been 
proposed in the Select Committee’s Report, that that will take a long time and justice will not 
be restored expeditiously, with celerity, as it should have been done in such a case. 

So,  this  is  why  I  will  appeal  to  the  hon.  Minister  to  revisit  that  aspect,  Madam 

Speaker. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

Mr Ganoo: There is a justification why when broadcasting live proceedings, Madam 
Speaker, the Committee decided not to focus on whatever is happening in terms of disorder, 
in terms of unruly behaviour inside the House. 

In 2002, for example, in Ottawa, Madam Speaker - and I will end on this - there was a 
Member, he was very unhappy because he was piloting a Private Member’s Bill and this Bill 
was not receiving the support that the Member expected his Bill to receive. Therefore, what 
did he do? He took the mace and he attempted to take the mace out of the House, Madam 
Speaker.  Of  course,  the  camera  did  not  focus  on  this  incident;  the  camera  recognised  the 

 

78 

Speaker and this episode was picked up on radios. The protesting Member of Parliament, of 
course, left the House, Madam Speaker. The reason for doing that is as follows - this is what 
a senior Member of Parliament said:  

“It was not because we were not allowed to show the incident. We can show 
any  footage  provided  to  us  by  House  of  Commons  Broadcasting.  House  of 
Commons  Broadcasting,  however,  does  not  show  these  kinds  of  incidents. 
Their instructions are to broadcast individual Members only when they have 
been  recognized  by  the  Speaker  of  the  House  or  as  a  group  when  they  are 
voting. At other times, the camera is aimed at the Speaker’s chair (…) the shot 
is  always  on  the  Speaker  even  if  he/she  is  not  speaking  or  ruling  from  the 
chair.”  

‘Cameras  are  told  to  ignore  “deliberate  misconduct  designed  to  secure 
television coverage.’  

To end, Madam Speaker,… 

(Interruptions) 

I  will  reiterate  what  my  friend  hon.  Dr.  Sorefan  just  said  about  the  PAC.  I  have  been  a 
Chairman of the PAC for a few years. The proposal has been made to the Prime Minister. I 
will not go into all the reforms that the PAC should undergo, but I think that we must amend 
the Standing Orders of this House to allow the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) to organise 
its sittings in public, as it is done in the UK. I think this will be a long way forward in terms 
of watchdog. The citizens of this country, the NGOs, the Press people can come and watch 
the PAC in its deliberations when they are querying.  

Hon. Xavier-Luc Duval and hon. Cuttaree, at the time, were my predecessors. They 
all came up with this suggestion and there has been unanimity among all parties. I think we 
should  do  that  in  terms  of  transparency,  in  terms  of  good  governance.  Coupled  with  the 
motion of live broadcasting that we are voting today, Madam Speaker, the opening up of the 
PAC to the public would tantamount to again enhancing democracy. I am sure that what I am 
proposing,  what  our  predecessors  had  proposed  and  what  the  Chairman  of  the  PAC  has 
proposed also will not fall on deaf ears now that we have Sir Anerood  Jugnauth as Prime 
Minister, and Government, during its campaign, has hammered so much on good governance. 
The  symbol  of  good  governance  would  mean  making  the  Public  Accounts  Committee 
hearings public so that everybody can come and watch what is going on inside the PAC. 

 
With these words, Madam Speaker, I congratulate the hon. Minister again and I wish 

79 

good luck to this project of live broadcasting in our country. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Minister Bodha! 

(7. 47 p.m.) 

The Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport (Mr N. Bodha): I am 
not going to be long. Madam Speaker,  I  have sat in the reporters’  gallery  overlooking the 
proceedings of the House. I have also sat in front of the hon. Prime Minister briefing him as a 
Press  attaché.  I  was  also  at  the  head  of  the  MBC  under  the  guidelines  of  the  hon.  Prime 
Minister, and I was a Minister in the first MSM/MMM Government where the private radios 
were given a licence. Today, I have been very honoured to have been given the trust to chair 
the Select Committee.  

I would like to pay an extraordinary tribute to Sir Anerood Jugnauth… 

(Interruptions) 

All through those years, he has been a man who has been favourable for the dissemination of 
true information. There are two landmark decisions which have to be taken in his career; I 
believe we are going to do it during this mandate. They will be the Freedom of Information 
Act, which we have promised in our mandate, and the arrival of a private TV network by the 
end  of  the  mandate.  We  know  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth  is  a  man  of  his  words.  He  has  this 
vision, the clarity, and I am convinced that all of us will have another extraordinary debate on 
these two new chapters. 

Madam Speaker, a day is long in politics, but every minute in Parliament is making 
history.  I  always  say  that  anything  can  happen  in  Parliament.  This  is  a  place  which  is 
amazing.  It  can  flare  up  any  time.  You  can  have  a  walkout.  You  can  have  extraordinary 
exchanges. 

(Interruptions) 

Yes! And this is a place where history is written and we make and unmake laws. This is what 
we  call  the  sovereignty  of  Parliament.  I  am  also  happy  about  one  thing  that  watching  the 
debates at home, which will close this gap between the people and Parliament, will help the 
people of Mauritius to better understand what was the intention of the legislator when the law 
or the Bill was passed because often this is what we want to know. What was the intention of 

 

80 

the Government, of the Prime Minister, of the Leader of the House in bringing such and such 
legislation? We are going to bring some very important legislation in the weeks and the years 
to come. 

Madam  Speaker,  let  me,  first  of  all,  congratulate  all  the  Members  of  the  Select 
Committees of 2009 and 2015. They have done a remarkable job. We all worked as a team. 
We were really taken up by the challenge and we wanted to succeed. We wanted to come up 
with  a  report  which  would  be  comprehensive,  which  would  reflect  the  consensus  in  the 
House and in the country, and a report which could be implemented. That was very important 
for us; it had to be implemented. Madam Speaker, Your Committee did 11 sittings of one 
hour.  I  think  we  did  something  remarkable,  but  let  me  put  on  record  the  extraordinary 
contribution  of  Mrs  Lotun,  the  Clerk,  and  Mrs  Ramsahye-Rakha  who  is  the  acting  PICT 
Manager… 

(Interruptions) 

…because week after week they summed up the whole debates and we came with the right 
issues; that is how we could move faster. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to clear a few issues which have been raised, first of all, 
about the role of each institution. The in-house production unit would be an independent in-
house production unit, as proposed in the report, under  your responsibility  and under  your 
authority. It will be totally independent and it provides the signal, that is, the end result which 
could be either a video signal or a sound signal. This video signal is sent to the MCML for 
diffusion and the MCML will send this signal to the MBC for broadcast. So, the MBC is only 
a broadcaster providing a channel, that is, it is a channel provider. That is very important to 
know, that is, the whole production unit and uninterrupted signal comes from Parliament. The 
sound signal will be sent to the private radios. They will have an interrupted flow. We have 
come to… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Uninterrupted. 

Mr Bodha: Uninterrupted flow. We have come to the agreement with the MBC that, 

because of what has been said… 

we will have one channel which will be dedicated when Parliament sits.  

(Interruptions) 

 

81 

We  have  come  to  an  agreement  with  the  radios  –  we  had  each  of  them  –  that  the  Private 
Notice  Question  between  11.30  a.m.  and  12.00  and  the  Prime  Minister’s  Question  time 
between 12.00 to 12.30 will be broadcasted live.  They have agreed to this. While the MBC, 
on the Parliamentary channel, will have a total continuous flow, we have the radios after the 
PNQ and the Prime Minister’s Question time, that will have the flow of the PQS which end 
up at about ten past four.  They will have an edited version of the PQs on radio.  Then, the 
rules of use of signal apply, that is, the reporting should be true, effective and the reporting 
has  to  reflect  what  happened  in  the  House.    The  MBC  will  give  us  this  channel  for  the 
uninterrupted broadcast. Now, if the MBC wants to include in its news bulletin at 7.30 p.m. 
one or two majors elements of what has happened, it can have it in an edited form, but again 
it will have to respect the rules of the use of signal.  So, I wanted this to be very clear. 

As  regards  the  recruitment  of  the  in-house  production  unit,  we  will  have  to  decide 
whether it is going to be done by the Public Service Commission.  There was one issue which 
was raised by the hon. Leader of the Opposition about this monitoring committee which will 
meet as regularly as possible to monitor and supervise the live broadcasting of parliamentary 
proceedings.  He proposed that we have the five possibilities, that is, the PAC’s model where 
it goes to somebody from the Opposition; the ICAC Parliamentary Committee where some 
Members are nominated by the Prime Minister and some by the Leader of the Opposition.  
He also proposed that it could be the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker, and he proposed the last 
one, that the Chairperson be nominated by the Prime Minister in consultation with the Leader 
of  the  Opposition.    Maybe  that  could  be  the  right  way  forward.    We  will  leave  it  to  the 
wisdom of the Prime Minister.   

Madam Speaker, a lot has been said about the rules of coverage, about the sanctity of 
the  decorum  of  the  House  and  whether  we  should  be  very  restrictive,  conservative  or  we 
should have a true reflection of what happens in Parliament. There has been a long debate 
about this. In most Parliaments, priority has been given to respect the authority of the House 
so that the cameras which are on at that point in time, - we will have five cameras - one of the 
cameras will always be on the Speaker sitting and that shot will be always there so that the 
General  Manager  can  have  recourse  to  that  shot  at  any  time.  The  four  other  cameras  are 
automated. They are not manipulated by camera people, they are automated. So, in fact, it is 
the General Manager who will decide which shot to go on air. If we give him some latitude, it 
will be to his judgment.  

82 

 
Now, let’s say we have  disorder in the House. He will have four cameras showing 
disorder in the House and one camera showing the Speaker sitting in front of the House. So, 
he will decide. That’s why we said that instead of letting him decide on which side of the 
House to show, which disorder to show, which MPs to show, we have gone by what is done 
elsewhere, that the camera should be on the Speaker when there is any disorder in the House. 
But the sound bites are always there. Everybody will listen to what is being said. Now, I think 
that  this  is  the  first  stage.  We  can  see  with  some  experience  that  we  can  give  him  some 
latitude so that he gives us a proper rendering of the proceedings of the House. 

The  second  issue  I  wanted  to  address  was  the  uninterrupted  flow  of  the  live 
broadcasting. In Britain - hon. Ganoo mentioned this - and in France, we have a number of 
programmes linked with the debates after the debates to enlighten the nation at large.  I was 
speaking to my colleague, hon. Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun.  Let us say after the Bill on the 
Nine-Year  Schooling,  which  is  a  very  important  Bill  –  because  in  Parliament  you  cannot 
decide and say everything – she can come and have a dedicated programme on that channel.  
We have provided for this.  We have also provided for a small studio and that could be a 
second  stage  where  eventually  we  can  have  a  number  of  programmes  maybe  on  Select 
Committees, on a certain number of complex legislations that we are going to pass.  I would 
like to say one word about what has been said by Jean-Pierre Elkabbach.  I think hon. Ganoo 
mentioned  this.    He  mentioned  that  one  important  thing  is  the  independence  of  this 
production unit.  He was one of the most brilliant journalists and he was the Chairperson of 
France  2  and  France  3,  a  very  famous  broadcaster.    He  said  that  we  have  to  secure  the 
independence of this production unit.  He also said something which I like. He said that we 
have to narrow the gap between the people and their institutions, and Parliament is one of the 
most important institutions in our democracy.  He said that when we have edited versions, we 
have all the problems that we have been facing.   

We  are  never  happy  with  an  edited  version  of  parliamentary  proceedings  because 
Government  wants  to  have  its  way  and  Opposition  wants  to  have  its  say.    So,  to  give  the 
balance in an edited version is very difficult. But, I think, Madam Speaker, that we have set 
the stage for something remarkable. This is a great day in the life of our Parliament. We have 
come  a  long  way  and  I  am  sure,  I  am  very  much  convinced  that  the  project  will  be 
implemented in about six to eight months. Of course, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister will show 
us the way. 

83 

 
I  am  convinced  that  we  will  be  able  very  soon  to  have  live  broadcasting.  I  am 
convinced that nous sommes une démocratie de proximité. I will not be surprised if the day 
after Parliament you meet people in the streets and they relate to you from what they have 
heard you say, from what they have heard you do, and this will help us to come closer to our 
people. Because when it comes to democracy, be it in the Panchayat in India or in ancient 
Greece, people have always wanted to know what their elected Members and representatives 
are doing. In this sacred House of Parliament, it is very important for them to know that they 
have sent us here and we are doing what we should in the best interest of our country. 

I would like to thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for bringing this motion and I would 
like to thank everybody, because at the end of the day in the House, there has always been a 
consensus, and I am convinced that in a few months we will all be very happy to see this 
happen. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

 (8.02 p.m.) 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, let me, firstly - like everyone in this 
House - congratulate my friend, hon. Bodha, and his team Members on the Committee for a 
great piece of work and, of course, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for bringing this motion very 
quickly, within a matter of weeks to Parliament.  

Needless  to  say,  Madam  Speaker,  tthat  I  am  fully  in  favour  of  televising  of  our 
proceedings in the House. We have unanimity - very rarely, but we have unanimity. I think 
nobody wants to take the risk of not being in favour of progress. So, let us all vote in favour, 
Madam  Speaker,  of  this  motion.  Let’s  try  however,  to  look  forward:  six  months,  eight 
months;  we  are  now  in  April  2016,  June  2016.  Five  cameras  are  looking  at  us,  Madam 
Speaker. What will happen? What has happened?  Because we are not reinventing the wheel 
here? Other people have travelled this path. 

(Interruptions) 

They  have  been  able  to  weather  this  change  in  their  proceedings.  Some  have  been 
more successful than others, Madam Speaker.  This is, maybe, what we should try to do. We 
should try to not only be modern like everybody else, but be successful in our modernity. Be 
able to be mature enough to espouse this new technology, and more technology is to come 
like Internet - I’ll talk about it perhaps shortly later. So, espouse this new technology and be 
responsible and democratic enough to make it work and not take the path of maybe some 

 

84 

other Parliaments which have had - not unfortunate - less happy experiences with televising 
of debates, Madam Speaker.  

So, I did some research: UK, Canada, India and Pakistan, for I had a little bit of time 
to look at that.  And so, as I mentioned, Madam Speaker, what are the experiences? In UK 
and  Canada,  Madam  Speaker,  case  studies  show  that  successive  Members  of  Parliament, 
successive  Houses  of  Parliament  there,  Members  have  not  tried  to  attract  undue  attention 
simply  because  the  camera  is  looking  at  them.  They  have  done  their  work,  maybe  the 
population  also,  not  as  politically  active  as  others,  but  anyway  cameras  haven’t  had  any 
undue effect on debates. There has been no deterioration of behaviour in Canada and UK and 
people have continued to act properly as they did before.  

But, in fact, it seems that Members have tended to be more careful in their behaviour, 
trying to impress their electorate. I think also the response of the electorate will be important. 
If there are tantrums in the House - confrontation, someone said before. I think hon. Sorefan - 
if there are confrontation tantrums in the House and the population disapproves, then very 
quickly  this  will  be  stopped  in  Parliament.  But  if,  on  the  other  hand,  Madam  Speaker, 
tantrums  in  the  House,  theatricals  in  the  House  are  applauded  by  the  population,  then  the 
opposite will happen to our debates. In fact, as they say, a population gets the Government it 
deserves.  In this case, the population will get the Parliament that it deserves, and that is my 
honest view of what will happen. I do also, therefore, hope and plead with the population that 
there  are  negative  responses  to  tantrums,  confrontations,  violence  or  whatever  else  can 
happen  in  the  House  and  that,  in  fact,  televising  the  debates,  because  we  have  a  mature 
population, will have a restraining effect on undue and negative behaviour in the House.  

So, Madam Speaker, in UK and Canada, fewer MPs have been thrown out.  We have 
for  example  last  week  I  think,  a  week  before.  So,  fewer  MPs  have  been  thrown  out  and 
speeches,  as  mentioned,  have  been  up  to  the  standards.  Also,  although,  Madam  Speaker, 
sound bites have become more important. This is also the issue. Sound bites may become the 
order of the day because then they are picked up in excerpts, etc, people may tend to be more 
appealing directly to the population. I hope that we don’t become superficial in our speeches. 
Hon.  Ganoo  before  me  was  very  technical.    How  that  will  go  down  to the  public,  I  don’t 
know. I hope that we do still have technical speeches in the House because it is necessary to 
go down to the virgule and the full stops, etc, in a Bill. So, I hope, Madam Speaker, that we 
don’t become superficial and some Members of the House continue to be very precise and 
analytical  in  the  way  that  they  deal  with  issues  although  I  suspect  that  may  not  be  very 

 

85 

popular in the public. I may not even be popular in this House as I could see the number of 
people who clap hands when the speech stops.  

So, let’s try, Madam Speaker, to maintain our standards. Now, in India and Pakistan, 
Madam Speaker, from the case study, in fact, there has been more disruptive behaviour. In 
some  countries,  even  bad  publicity  is  considered  as  being  good  publicity,  and  publicity  is 
publicity. If that is the attitude that is taken here, then we have a problem. So, let’s hope that 
bad publicity is not good publicity and no one will seek to get bad publicity just to catch the 
nation’s attention. In fact, Madam Speaker, there has been more disruptive behaviour in some 
Parliaments,  but  also  the  positive  effect,  for  instance,  in  Pakistan,  is  that  it  is  tended  to 
encourage participation by MPs. A lazy politician, Madam Speaker, not seen in Parliament is 
not good.  So, you have to speak, you have to participate, and that has been positive. And also 
in Pakistan, according to the case study, this outshouting of politicians and other Members 
has not been appreciated by the population, and that also has been toned down.  

Madam Speaker, one thing that I also need to talk about is the whole question of libel, 
defamation. As we know, what I say here in this House, I have immunity, every one of us has 
immunity according to the National Assembly (Privileges, Immunities and Powers) Act, and 
that is how it should be. I say something, you will bring me back to order, I will apologise 
hopefully and we all apologise, and it is over. But when it is live, it is already gone out.  What 
I have said here, a second later it is already in the population. Whatever libel I would have 
said, it is already too late. Later we will have a point of order and I will provide excuse or 
whatever it is or there will be a right of reply, but it would have been too late. So, I think 
Madam  Speaker,  with  due  respect,  you  will  have  to  be  more  stringent.    You  are  already, 
obviously... 

(Interruptions) 

I am not saying that you are not!  But I am saying that discipline will have to be tightened, we 
will  not  try  to  allow  people  to  be  libelled  and  for  defamation  even  though  it  might  be 
corrected  later.  So,  what  are  the  tools  that  are  going  to  be  at  your  disposal,  apart  from 
throwing  someone  out  for  a  day,  that  will  prevent  recurrent,  such  behaviour?  I  think  it  is 
going to be important to protect the decorum of the House and to protect the reputation of 
people that this does not happen and that there is discipline and this mindset that is prevalent, 
because we are going to be live and because whatever we have said will be too late and will 
not be able to be corrected in the minds of the people, especially if you are talking at peak 

 

86 

time  or  something  like  that.  So,  there  will  also  be,  Madam  Speaker,  maybe  a  change  in 
behaviour all over even in terms of how discipline is applied. So, stricter compliance with 
Standing Orders, Madam Speaker, I think is going to be very important in this House.  

Madam Speaker, let us also imagine tomorrow that we are in electoral year, the last 
Prime  Minister  closed  down  Parliament  for  the  year  because  he  didn’t  want  to  face 
Parliament in the electoral year, probably was the truth of the matter, even though there was 
no live broadcasting, that Parliament would be tumultuous and would be negative, maybe, for 
his campaign. In the end, it did not do him much good, but still that was the case. Imagine 
now that we have live Parliament and we are on the eve of an election.  How will Members 
react and how we will need to adapt to this? 

 So, Madam Speaker, the whole point I am making is this can be a great step forward 
if we all play the game as we should, if we all act as patriots, if we all act with discipline as a 
mature democracy and as Members of Parliament who have respect for our population. If not, 
it can go the other way, and this is why, Madam Speaker, we are all voting in favour of this 
Bill, but at the same time there will need to be an appeal for greater respect of our Standing 
Orders and for each other’s dignity.  

I will end on that, Madam Speaker, just to say that on the whole debate of Creole - I 
know the Rt. hon. Prime Minister does not agree, but not today or not tomorrow - Creole is in 
the schools, Creole is an examinable subject, Creole is a subject that we all understand.  It is a 
language that we all understand.  It is much easier than the Oxford English that many of us 
try to use here, very few of us speak in French. So, Madam Speaker, one day, we might see 
that happening and we will see how that brings us even closer to the population, but it is a 
great  day  for  our  democracy.    It  is  always  nice,  Madam  Speaker,  when  the  nation  moves 
forward,  takes  steps  that  open  new  ways  of  doing  things  and  makes  us  a  more  modern 
country. This is such a day, Madam Speaker, and again congratulations to all concerned and 
let’s look forward to April 2016! 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

(8.14 p.m.) 

Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière):  Madam 
Speaker, I would also like to add, as stated by the hon. Deputy Prime Minister, it is a great 
day  today  for  our  Parliament  and,  as  a  Member  of  the  Select  Committee,  I  would  like  to 

 

87 

congratulate the hon. Prime Minister for bringing a motion to this National Assembly within 
the least possible time after his arrival from mission, and we are today nearly concluding the 
debates on this very important motion, a historic motion, and in some months, I can say, the 
live  broadcasting  will  become  a  reality.  Allow  me  also,  as  a  Member  of  the  Select 
Committee, to congratulate my good friend, hon. Bodha, for the excellent chairmanship he 
has done. He was Chairperson of that previous Select Committee and he has been appointed 
unanimously as Chairperson, and today, we have a very good report, and I am sure the way 
forward has already been traced out. 

Madam Speaker, what we are doing est une grande avancée démocratique. I am here 
since 32 years; this is my eighth mandate.  One of the big moments of my parliamentarian life 
which will stay with me is this very day. For many, many years, I have been fighting as a 
backbencher  in  the  Opposition  with  the  Government  of  the  day  to  come  up  with  live 
broadcasting. Modern Mauritius could not stay behind. Our Parliament is moving, modern, 
we are now provided with iPads. Formerly, we were not provided with efficient and modern 
tools and today our reporters have modern equipment. So, we had to move with time, and 
also the reputation of our Parliament within other Parliaments of the world.  We are Member 
of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA); we are also in the IPU; we are in 
the SADC Parliamentary Forum and our Parliament could not have lagged behind.  This is 
why today when we will be approving in a few moments the motion - from what I see there is 
unanimity - it would be a big step forward for not only the country, but for our Parliament.  

Madam Speaker, in the Committee, we have addressed all the problems. We cannot 
forget  to  thank  the  Clerk,  the  staff,  the  technical  staff,  and  I  know  that  you  have  had  the 
opportunity,  yourself,  to  visit  other  Parliaments  in  India  and  UK,  to  see  how  things  are 
working, and I am sure that will help you and your staff to put in application what we have to 
do.  

Madam  Speaker,  there  have  been  lots  of  comments  on  behaviours  of  Members  of 
Parliament. It depends on the individuals.  When you feel you have to say something, when 
you feel you have to withdraw also, it depends on the individual and we have nothing to learn 
from  other  persons,  but  it  depends  on  us,  one  individual,  and  he/she  will  have  to  assume 
his/her responsibility for behaving in such a disorderly manner.  

Madam Speaker, as stated, today is a great day and there have been some qualms in 
certain sections of the Press as to why we are putting some restrictions. I think we had to start 
somewhere. Had we started going into details, trying to find solutions to queries, trying to 

 

88 

find  alternatives,  we  would  have  never  started.  I  think  it  is  a  right  step;  we  had  to  start 
somewhere, and I am sure that in the years to come, we will learn, we will progress and come 
up  with  new  suggestions,  take  new  suggestions  on  board  and  then  modernise  our  system 
further.  I will be very happy.  Now that we have the Press, we have to thank them; every 
Tuesday they are here. With the coming of the radios, the reporters of the radios sit here, even 
for long night sessions, and we have to thank them for their commitment and what they have 
been doing over the years to bring to the population what we are doing here. Our Mauritian 
population, I will say, is very much interested in political issues. Mauritians are interested in 
what the MPs are doing. Notre population est très exigeante auprès des élus; I know it by 
experience and bad luck to those who stay silent in Parliament. I agree for those who start for 
the first year. I myself when I started in 1983 - we are among the seniors here - for the first 
two years I was, I would say, trying to see how things were going. 

(Interruptions) 

Il y avait des ténors, but as years went on, I started progressing. I will appeal to my good 
friends on the other side not to be shy. They have come here to ask questions; people in their 
constituency will know what they are doing.  At Adjournment Time, they must not remain 
silent. People know there is an Adjournment Time; they must raise issues concerning their 
constituency. I see my good friend hon. Bhadain is not here. 

(Interruptions) 

No, but he is a good friend of mine. I know politics is politics, but I have lots of, I will say… 

‘Li ti raté vine dans MMM ça! Li ti raté vine dans MMM, laisse mo dire toi! To pa coné ça!’ 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

Mr Bhagwan: But today, we will judge the MBC. I see my friend, the cameraman. 
Why have we been fighting for having live debates, Madam Speaker, over the years? Why? It 
is  to  modernise  our  Parliament,  but  the  main  reason  is  because  of  the  behaviour  over  the 
years  of  the  management  of  the  MBC/TV.  We  have  been  witnessing  over  the  years  one 
Director General sitting here. I have been challenging him over the years, Madam Speaker.  
How can we accept that the Director General of the MBC/TV comes here every Tuesday with 
his scissors?  It is the case today, and we will judge the MBC through the reporting of very 

 

89 

important debates. We have news now at 6.00 p.m., 7.00 p.m., 7.30 p.m. and even at 11.00 
p.m.  We will see tomorrow how the MBC will cover this very important debate and give 
coverage  even  to  a  backbencher.  When  a  backbencher  in  one  of  the  rural  areas,  Madam 
Speaker, a new one, even in urban area, his constituents, his people will hear his voice - many 
of them have had the opportunity of delivering their speech today - you know what this is for 
the MP, himself or herself, even in the constituency, but the MBC has not been acting in such 
a manner where democracy prevails.  

So,  I  hope  that  today  with  the  speech  of  the  hon.  Minister  responsible  for  the 
MBC/TV - he is not responsible for the management, we agree, but for the personnel. So, I 
hope when tomorrow or even the day after we will see a reporting of the debate of what is 
happening today we will have, I would say, a transparent coverage; a coverage which is clair 
et net.   

Today, Madam Speaker, is a very important day in the history of this Parliament.  We 
have had big debates on Independence, on Republic, on radios coming, but this one is a very 
important  motion  of  the  Prime  Minister  which  will  bring  Mauritius  along  with  other 
countries, in Parliaments elsewhere, where we are now moving further with the live coverage 
of our deliberations.  

This is what I had to say, Madam Speaker.  Again, I thank the Rt. Prime Minister. I 
congratulate my good friend, hon. Bodha. We have had the opportunity of his experience as 
former Director General of the MBC TV, as past Chairperson of a Select Committee and I 
think that has helped a lot, and also all the civil servants, the radios and the personnel of the 
State Law Office.   

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker:  The Rt. hon. Prime Minister! 

(8.24 p.m.) 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the hon. Leader of the 
Opposition and all the hon. Members from both sides of the House who have contributed to 
the debate on this historic motion.  I am glad to see the enthusiasm and the general consensus 
around this project. This day will be remembered for long, as it is a defining moment in the 
history of our Parliament.  

90 

 
Madam Speaker, parliamentary business is at the core of public service mission. It is 
important, therefore, that people know and understand the kind of work their MPs do in the 
Assembly, and for this we need to use every means available to open up Parliament to the 
people. 

Madam Speaker, we have pledged to work resolutely towards entrenching democracy 
and  promoting  higher  norms  of  governance  in  public  affairs. 
  Transparency  and 
accountability are indeed the dominant characteristics of public institutions, and it is my firm 
belief  that  live  telecast  of  the  proceedings  of  the  National  Assembly  will  further  reinforce 
these characteristics and create greater openness. 

The  Select  Committee  has  proposed  the  ground  rules  and  the  framework  for  live 
telecast, so as to ensure a fair and balanced coverage and, above all, to preserve the dignity of 
the House as a working body.   I would like to thank the  Leader of the  Opposition for his 
suggestions regarding the chairpersonship of the Broadcasting Committee.  I am sure later on 
we can agree on an appropriate formula.  Insofar as Creole language is concerned, I am of 
opinion that it is not relevant to this debate. 

I  must  say  that  I  share  the  views  exPressed  earlier  by  a  few  hon.  Members  to  the 
effect that, with the advent of cameras inside this Chamber, hon. Members will become more 
concerned and careful about what they say or do in the Assembly.  Of course, we are going to 
have the rules, but I believe that if we are to preserve the dignity of the House, it falls on hon. 
Members to act in a dignified manner.   

I also hope that we will not see an over emphasis on short period of drama, ignoring 

worthwhile but not particularly exciting debates. 

Madam Speaker, as I said in my speech earlier, we are embarking on a new venture 
and  certain  new  issues  and  concerns  may  crop  up  as  we  go  along,  but  this  should  be  no 
reason to delay this laudable initiative any longer.   

The  Select  Committee  has  highlighted  that  the  advantages  of  live  broadcasting  far 
outweigh its disadvantages.  So, let us be bold in taking this historic step and move ahead to 
connect Parliament with the people. 

Thank you Madam Speaker.  

The motion was, on question put, agreed to. 

ADJOURNMENT 

 
The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  that  this  Assembly  do  now 

91 

adjourn to Tuesday 27 October 2015 at 11.30 a.m.  

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned.  

At 8.30 p.m. the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Tuesday 27 October 2015 

at 11.30 a.m. 

