 

1 

 

 

No. 06 of 2015 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

TUESDAY 03 MARCH 2015 

 

 

 

2 

CONTENTS 

 
 

 

PAPERS LAID  

QUESTIONS (Oral) 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER 

BILL (Public) 

MOTIONS 

ADJOURNMENT 

QUESTIONS (Written) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC)) 

Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 

KCMG, QC  

Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 

GCSK  

Communications 

Hon. Showkutally Soodhun 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 

Utilities 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo 

Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Minister 

of 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Integration 

and  Economic 

Empowerment 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 

Sinatambou 

International Trade 

Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 

Perraud 

Family Welfare 

Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain 

Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 

Institutional Reforms 

 

4 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 

Institutions 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 

Shipping and Outer Islands 

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, 

Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 

QPM 

Disaster and Beach Management  

Hon. Marie Roland Alain Wong Yen             Minister of Civil Service and Administrative  

Cheong, MSK 

 

 

 

       Reforms 

Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn                Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment 

and Training 

 
 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Hurreeram,  Hon.  Mahendranuth 
Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

 

 
Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

 

 Hansard Editor 

  Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

(Temporary  

Gopall,  Mr  Navin 
Transfer to RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra  

Badal, Mr Ramesh 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

   Debate No. 06 of 2015 

 

Sitting of 03 March 2015 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

7 

PAPERS LAID 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table - 

 

A. 

Prime Minister’s Office – 

 

 

Certificate of Urgency in respect of the Finance and Audit (Amendment) Bill  
(No. I of 2015). (In Original) 

 Ministry of Finance and Economic Development 

The Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement (Republic of Malta) Regulations 
2015 (Government Notice No.14 of 2015). 

C.  Ministry of  Local Government  – 

 

 

(a)  The Municipal Council of Quatre Bornes (Fees for Classified Trade) 
(Amendment) Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No.15 of 2015). 

 

(b)  The  District  Council  of  Pamplemousses  (Fees  for  Classified  Trade) 
(Amendment) Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No.16 of 2015). 

 

 

 

8 

ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

CEB - CT POWER PROJECT & ELECTRICITY SUPPLY 

The  Leader  of  the  Opposition  (Mr  P.  Bérenger)  (by  Private  Notice)  asked  the  Vice-
Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to electricity supply 
and the CT Power Project, he will state -  

(a) if Government is going ahead with the project and -  

(i) if so, indicate the - 

(A)   updated estimated cost and price of electricity, and  

(B) date on which the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development gave the 

green light therefor, and  

(ii) if not, indicate whether a tender for a 50/100 MW base load power plant will be 

issued;  

(b) if the report on Liquefied Natural Gas use will be made public, and  

(c) the measures being taken to remove obstacles in the grid to optimum use of renewable 

energy. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):  Madam Speaker, in August 2001, the Ministry of Energy and Public Utilities 
commissioned a study for the setting up of a 100 MW Coal Power Plant at Pointe Aux Caves.  
The original project was that CEB was to build and operate this power plant itself. 

In 2005, CT Power (Malaysia) Ltd. made a proposal to the Board of Investment for a 2 x 
55  MW  pulverized  coal  power  plant  to  be  implemented  by  its  subsidiary,  the  Mauritius  CT 
Power Ltd.  This was an unsolicited proposal. At that time, there was a committee called a “Fast 
Track  Committee”.  It  was  chaired  by  the  then  Prime  Minister.  The  Fast  Track  Committee 
approved the proposal.  In July 2006, the Board of Investment issued a Letter of Intent to the 
promoter.  Immediately thereafter, the Central Electricity Board, on 26 July 2006, decided that 
negotiations be held with the promoter. This eventually led to the signature of a Power Purchase 
Agreement on 23 December 2008.  On the same date, a Shareholders’ Agreement, a Coal Supply 

 

9 

Agreement and an Interconnection Facility Design and Build Agreement were concluded on the 
same date. No EIA licence had been obtained at the time these documents were signed.  

In  January  2011,  the  EIA  Committee  decided  not  to  recommend  the  issue  of  an  EIA 
licence.  The promoter appealed against this decision and the matter was taken up by the EIA 
Tribunal.  Finally, in January 2013, the Tribunal gave its ruling in favour of CT Power. 

In  January  2013,  the  Ministry  of  Environment  issued  the  EIA  licence  to  Mauritius  CT 
Power Ltd. with 31 conditions including the transportation of coal by sea route.  Condition 15 of 
the EIA licence required that the promoter should provide proof of its financial capabilities for 
the  duration  of  the  project  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development. 

On 23 June 2013, the Mauritius CT Power Ltd. submitted a revised project to satisfy the 

conditions of the EIA with the following changes - 

(i) 
(ii) 

the project value increased from USD192 m. to USD348m; 
the use of water treated at Montagne Jacquot treatment plant for cooling of the 
coal plant, and 

(iii)  debt Equity split 70/30 instead of 80/20. 

In  December  2013,  the  Central  Electricity  Board  signed  the  amended  Power  Purchase 
Agreement (PPA) to incorporate the requirements of the EIA with the promise that the effective 
date of the PPA is subject to the signing of the Implementation Agreement. 

In April 2014, the Central Electricity Board signed the following amended agreements –  

(i) 

(ii) 
(iii) 

the Coal Supply Agreement providing for the supply of coal by sea route and the 
construction of a jetty by the Central Electricity Board; 
the Shareholders’ Agreement, and 
the Land Sub lease Agreement. 

A Mauritius CT Power Ltd. delegation visited Mauritius in January 2015 and met me as 
well  as  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development.  They  requested  that  the 
Implementation Agreement be signed. 

The  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  asked  CT  Power  Ltd.  to  submit  a 
letter of comfort from its banks to confirm that it has the financial capacity to implement the 

 

10 

project, in accordance with the condition 15 of the EIA licence.  As at today, the promoter has 
not met this condition. 

On 06 February 2015, Government has decided that the company should state its source of 
funding, within a reasonable delay, failing which the project would not be implemented. Up to 
now,  no  letter  of  comfort  has  been  communicated.    Insofar  as  my  Ministry  is  concerned,  it 
intends to recommend to Cabinet that Government does not go ahead with the project. 

With  regard  to  part  (a)(i)  of  the  question,  the  updated  estimated  cost  of  the  project  is 
USD348 m. and the purchase price of electricity is Rs4.58 per kWh excluding coal transportation 
costs, estimated at 10cts per kWh and power transmission at 0.17cts.  The price will change on 
the basis of an indexation formula over 20 years. 

With regard to part (a)(i)(B), the House is referred to what I have stated above. There has 

been no green light. 

As regards part (ii) of the question, the CEB would require additional generation capacity 
of 50MW in 2017 and 2018 respectively.  The Central Electricity Board has taken the following 
decisions – 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

installation of 60MW fuel oil based engines at St Louis Power station, that is, 4 x 
15MW; 
extension of the agreement with Consolidated Energy Limited, Beau Champ to 
generate 22MW for a further period of three years, and 
invitation of Expressions of Interest for the generation of energy from renewable 
sources, including biomass and waste to energy. 

With  these  measures,  Madam  Speaker,  demand  will  be  met  within  the  short  term  until 
2018.  As regards the medium term, the World Bank is reviewing the capacity expansion plan 
based on updated economic conditions.  The report is being finalised and is expected to reach us 
by  the  end  of  March.    Based  on  the  recommendations  of  the  World  Bank,  a  decision  will  be 
taken on the base load requirement as from 2018. 

I have impressed and I assure the House that the Central Electricity Board will resort to a 
transparent  and  competitive  bidding  process,  contrary  to  past  practices  of  opaque  unsolicited 

 

11 

proposals,  with  clauses  of  confidentiality  preventing  disclosure  of  the  agreements,  and  also, 
preventing public debates on these matters. 

Now, I come to part (b) of the question, the Central Electricity Board did commission the 
Consultant Worley and Parsons, to carry out a study on the potential of using Liquefied Natural 
Gas for electricity generation in Mauritius.  The report submitted in July 2014, concluded that 
the upfront investment required in the Port to handle the Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) including 
regasification facility would be around Rs20 billion. 

There is no objection in making it public.  I am, in fact, tabling a copy on the Table of the 

Assembly right now. 

With  regard  to  the  last  part  of  the  question,  CEB  has  consistently  stressed  the  low 
absorption  capacity  of  renewable  energy  with  the  CEB’s  grid.  I  have  had  several  discussions 
with the Agence Française de Développement, the Syndicat des Energies Renouvelables and the 
International Renewable Energy Agency and I am confident in obtaining technical cooperation 
for the upgrading of the grid. I must also state that I have met Professor Joël de Rosnay who, in 
spite  of  the  dismay  he  felt  at  being  sidelined  by  the  previous  regime,  has  indicated  his 
willingness to provide this Government with his expertise. 

The  CEB  commissioned  a  study  financed  by  UNDP  and  the  World  Bank  to  assess  the 
extent of integration possible in the existing electricity grid.  The report received in October 2014 
recommended the following - 

(i) the existing grid can accommodate up to 70 MW;  
(ii) further upgrade is recommended to the existing Central Electricity Board power plants to 

enhance the integration up  to 110 MW, and 

(iii) the use of large battery storage to increase the penetration up to 150 MW. 

The ongoing renewable energy projects will cater for the 70 MW, or more, to increase the 
capacity to above 70 MW Central Electricity Board will implement the recommendations of the 
Consultant to increase the absorption of renewable energy technology.  The Central Electricity 
Board  will  shortly  issue  the  Expression  of  Interest  to  invite  proposals  from  promoters  for  the 
generation of electricity from renewable sources namely wind, sun, biomass and waste. 

12 

 
Mr  Bérenger:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  very  happy  to  have  heard  the  hon.  Vice-Prime 
Minister say that insofar as his Ministry is concerned, it intends to recommend to Cabinet that 
Government does not  go ahead with the project. Now, the suspense,  I take it, has lasted long 
enough. Can  I have some indication from the hon. Vice-Prime Minister that, now that all the 
checking and the cross-checking and so on have been done, that this will be brought to Cabinet 
within the shortest possible time? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Absolutely, within the shortest possible time. 

Mr Bérenger: While this is ongoing, on as we know, Madam Speaker, there have been 
very serious allegations of fraud and corruption, and trafic d’influence, right from the beginning 
with this CT Power Saga, but I have not heard any reference in the Vice-Prime Minister’s reply, 
whereas  his  colleague,  the  hon.  Minister  Bhadain  said  on  04  February  that  his  enquiries,  les 
projets  de  Neo  Town,  CT  Power  et  l’achat    d’Airbus  sont  aussi  dans  le  collimateur  du 
gouvernement.  Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  whether  he  has  liaised  with  Minister 
Bhadain and whether, indeed, a full enquiry on the corruption side of the CT Power Saga is on?  

Mr Collendavelloo: The CT Power is also in my collimateur, not only that of Minister 

Bhadain, and we are both using the same collimateur.  

(Interruptions) 

Yes, the hon. Leader of the Opposition did not hear me saying so, because his question did not 
invite that sort of answer, but now that he asked it, it is clear that at the level of my Ministry, in 
liason with the hon. Minister of Financial Services, we are looking into that aspect, but we want 
to stick to the facts and only at the facts at this crucial point in time. 

Mr Bérenger: I have heard the new figures, from what I have heard, the total cost for the 
project  if  the  decision  was  to  go  ahead,  has  gone  up  to  USD  348  million  and  the  price  of 
electricity is Rs4.58 per kWh, excluding coal transportation costs. Can we know with the coal 
transportation cost what it would amount to and within that project cost revised  of USD 348 
million,  as  we  know,  the  one  scandalous  part  of  the  whole  saga  was  that  the  CEB  would 
construct a jetty.  Before it was going to be constructed by the promoter, then it was decided that 
the CEB would construct the jetty without an EIA Certificate having been obtained.  Do we have 

 

13 

an estimate of how much, should the project go ahead, with the jetty part of that, because I think 
it went up to Rs750 m. to be paid for by the CEB? Where does the CEB stand now? 

Mr Collendavelloo: If the project had gone ahead, the hypothetical estimate cost of the 

jetty would have been Rs600 m. 

Mr Bérenger: It has been stated to stand at Rs750 m.; so, that is the first time I hear the 
cost of a part of a project moving backwards, but it is a good thing that it is a thing of the past, 
anyway. Madam Speaker, I better move to other parts of my question pending the Cabinet sitting 
in the very near future.   

As far as the new tender is concerned, I heard the hon. Vice-Prime Minister say, once the 
World Bank and so on, we have come with estimates of our power requirements in the  years 
ahead, then a tender would be issued in a transparent and competitive  bidding process. Can  I  
have  confirmation  that,  indeed,  it  would  be  an  international  and  local  tender,  open  to 
international operators, but also to local operators for  50 or 100 MW pending on the results of 
the  different  studies  ongoing  and  that,  indeed,  we  would  invite  any  proposal,  any  uptodate 
technology to be employed, that is, coal, gas, LNG, bagasse coal, heavy oil to keep it open at an 
international and local level, and go for the best solution?  

Mr  Collendavelloo:  As  far  as  coal  and  oil  are  concerned,  there  is  a  worldwide 
prohibition, I would say, on development of power plants fired by oil or coal. For instance, the 
Agence Française de Développement told us, in no incertain terms, that they would not finance 
any coal powered fire engine. The emphasis is on renewable energy and, however romantic that 
may be, it is actually something which can be realised very fast. All the people with whom I have 
talked favour joint ventures between the local private sector and international firms. There are 
certain variants; the emphasis will have to be made on that new type of energy. I will have to 
impress on the CEB that they need to have a culture change, that they need to accomadate their 
grid, they cannot just live in the same system that has been in existence since 1939. We will have 
to  review  our  legislation,  we  will  need  to  have  a  regulator,  which  I  know  the  Leader  of  the 
Opposition has made a point to stress time and time again. I fully share this point; I have this file 
on my desk at the moment. All this must be seen in a global concept. Therefore, joint ventures 
between local private sector, international firms, tenders worldwide, and we will have to make 
emphasis  also  on  waste  to  energy,  because  we  are  crumbling  under  our  municipal  waste,  our 

 

14 

leaching fields are getting more and more polluted when this can be used to supply energy. I am 
trying in a few words to say what I am going to say in my speech on Thursday. 

Mr Bérenger:  I don’t want to rush a decision, but does that mean that when the time 
comes for an international and local tender for 50 or 100 MW additional base load energy, that a 
pure state-of-the-art so-called technology, a full coal plant will be excluded in the tender? 

Mr  Collendavelloo: This is my thinking actually to exclude this  coal plant, even in the 
present state-of-the-art technology, unless it becomes inevitable for Mauritius to need to have 
access to coal for its power generation. 

Mr Bérenger: I am very uncomfortable, Madam Speaker, with the tone. There seems 
to be no urgency as far as the hon. Vice-Prime Minister is concerned, and where he says that a 
decision  will  be  taken  on  the  base  load  requirements  as  from  2018.  To  build  a  new  plant  is 
tomorrow!  It has to be tendered out, commissioned and so on, now, otherwise we don’t meet 
that. Is the hon. Vice-Prime Minister aware that the former Minister said that we would be in 
trouble not as from 2018 if CT Power does not go ahead, not as from 2018, but as from 2017? 
Therefore, will he agree with me that there is no room for complacency as far as base load is 
concerned even if we are as optimistic as he is on renewable energy in the years to come? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  Well,  I  have  the  answer  of  the  former  Minister  here.  I  have  got 
tremendous friendship for him, but it seems that he was of the view that without CT Power it was 
doomsday for Mauritius. I do not share this view although I should not be complacent; I should 
not be dramatic either. I do not think that there is room for drama; I think we can manage the 
situation if we go fast. And, of course, all these points will be taken on board. I have carefully 
and almost religiously read all the interventions of my predecessor and of the hon. Leader of the 
Opposition in order to make up my mind on these matters. I shall be pursuing discussions with 
all  concerned  and,  if  need  be,  if  the  hon.  Prime  Minister  so  accepts,  we  will  have  an  inter-
ministerial committee with invitations to Members of the other side of the House if they so wish 
to come and help us because this is a national issue on which there is no room for trying to obtain 
credit or personal advantage or whatever. 

Mr Bérenger: Zis la ki li pas ine courtiser ! 

(Interruptions) 

 

15 

Madam Speaker, I heard a positive reaction as far as LNG gas in the future is concerned 
but, again, I agree totally with the hon. Minister and I have been saying that for years, that we 
need desperately a regulator; the legislation was prepared by the 2000-2005 Government, ready, 
forgotten since then, and being judge and party has landed us in the trouble we are in. But we are 
aware that this report on  LNG  gas was commissioned, paid for by the  CEB; again judge  and 
party. Is the present Government satisfied that it is a genuine report, that it is not just reproducing 
what the CEB usually says, that Government can rely on that report to take strategic decisions 
and, in the meantime, have there been any discussions from LNG countries like Qatar, India and 
Mozambique nearer to us? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  There  have  been  no  discussions,  but  there  are  at  least  three 
promoters who have manifested an interest in LNG.  One is saying that the best LNG is from 
India, two others from Mozambique, Qatar does not seem to manifest big love for these persons. 

With  regard  to  the  report,  admittedly,  there  is  room  for  doubt  as  to  the  independence.  
This is why my predecessor had asked the World Bank to review this LNG report. I agree that 
this is what should have been done and we are awaiting the World Bank’s findings on that report. 
We are not taking that report as being the gospel. 

Mr Bérenger: The last part of my question, Madam Speaker, I take it from what I have 
heard that the policy decision of Government is to make optimum use of renewable energy in the 
days and years to come. Does the report received recently give any cost indication, how much it 
would cost to eliminate obstacles that exist, from what I understand, in the existing grid to allow 
for  maximum  use  of  renewable  energy?  Has  there  been  any  costing  thereof  and  on  storage, 
because  that  is  the  key  question,  the  renewable  energy,  Madam  Speaker,  as  we  all  know,  is 
intermittent, it depends on the wind, on the sun, cyclone and on whatever; it is intermittent and 
there is a lot of work being done on storage, but, again,  I heard the hon. Minister being very 
optimistic. Have we had discussions concretely with the people that are prepared now to offer a 
commercially viable method of storage of renewable energy? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  Well,  the  concrete  discussions  will  be  held  only  after  formal 
expressions  of  interest  have  been  received,  but  my  Ministry  and  myself,  we  have  held 
consultations, especially with IRENA and I have been surprised at the tremendous technological 
advances which have been made in the last year or so. I mean, this business about the clouds 

 

16 

stopping  the  sun  is  gone  a  long  time  ago.  In  Germany,  which  is  not  a  country  as  sunny  as 
Mauritius, they have got renewable solar photovoltaic for ages past. Now, storage, the batteries 
are  reduced,  in  Abu  Dhabi,  they  are  building  up  a  town  to  go  only  on  solar  energy  and  it  is 
fantastic  what  they  want  to  do.  We  just  go  on  the  Internet  and  we  see  what  technological 
advances are being made. Of course, it is going to cost money; of course, it is more than CT 
Power would have cost; more than the Rs348 m. if we want to do it for Mauritius. But Reunion 
has done it, Seychelles is doing it and they are well in advance of us. We shall learn from our 
friends  in  Reunion  and  Seychelles  and  we  shall  apply  and  adapt  with  the  help  of  the  private 
sector which is not going to be a State enterprise. The CEB will have to move out of what they 
were  doing  and  we  will  have  to  have  a  new  paradigm  shift  for  the  installation  of  reliable, 
renewable, safe and constant energy for Mauritius in the years to come. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: Madam Speaker, I think it is good news for the inhabitants of Albion and 
Pointe aux Sables region who have been living a nightmare since 2005. Can I make a request to 
the hon. Minister now that it seems that the Government would not go ahead with the project?  
Can the population be made aware of the extent of land which has been leased to that company 
and  that  in  the  course  of  future  activities  of  development  in  the  region  the  inhabitants  be 
consulted prior to any new project being commissioned on that portion of land? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  Yes,  it  is  92  arpents  which  was  leased  at  a  nominal  price  of,  I 
believe, Rs480,000 and then sublet to CT Power which was going to be at market rates. I am 
giving this answer from memory, the 92 arpents has just been given to me, but I believe the rest 
of the answer, if there is an error, I will correct it in due course. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: We are talking about renewable energy.  Can the hon. Minister, at least, 
request an audit be carried out on all the projects which have been submitted to the Ministry? 
There have been proposals from individuals, private sector and which, for reasons unknown, we 
all know what has been happening at that Ministry at a period of time; whether an audit can be 
carried out in all the projects which have been submitted, especially with wind power and solar 
power; there may be valuable projects which have been left aside for reasons which we all know. 

 

17 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  Well,  the  reasons  unknown  which  we  all  know,  we  are  going 
through, but what is going to happen is that we are going to make an invitation for all those who 
have submitted projects to come back and reactualiser these projects. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, you have a last question.  

Mr Bérenger: My last question, although I am very pleased with the answer obtained 
from the hon. Minister, through the hon. Minister, I would like to aim my question at the hon. 
Prime Minister.  Can we expect, as I said, especially with the strong recommendation of the hon. 
Minister directly concerned, that Cabinet will consider his recommendation to give up for good 
that CT Power project will really be as soon as possible?  And secondly, although I understand 
that hon. Minister Bhadain is very busy these days with other things, can I ask the hon. Minister 
since this is going to be a double-barrelled collimateur apparently, that the corruption side of it 
should not be forgotten or left behind and that we should be kept informed as we go along of the 
results of this double-barrelled collimateur at work? 

DECLARATION OF ASSETS LEGISLATION (NEW) - INTRODUCTION  

(No. B/102) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) asked 
the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  disclosure  of  assets  and  liabilities  on 
assuming and vacating office, he will state if consideration will be given for the introduction of a 
new piece of legislation to make it a mandatory requirement not only for Honourable Members 
but also for – 

(a)  high officials of Government;  

(b) advisers to Government, and 

(c)  chief  executives  of  parastatal  and  private  institutions  wherein  Government  is  a 
majority shareholder and, for same to  apply in  respect of assets and liabilities in 
Mauritius and abroad. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, as the House is aware, the Government Programme 
2015-2019 already provides for the introduction of a new Declaration of Assets Bill with a view 
to  curbing  fraud,  corruption,  malpractices  and  irregularities  in  all  aspects  of  public  life  and 
restoring our national values. 

 

18 

My Government will come up with such a Bill as soon as it is ready. 

Mr Ganoo:  Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to ensure that when the new law will be 
presented to the House, if his Ministry could see to it that the definition of the word ‘assets’ is 
widened so as to include other types of property. As we know that today, in our law, “assets” is 
defined  restrictively!    Therefore,  can  he  see  to  it  that  this  new  definition  of  “assets”  is 
incorporated into the new Bill?  

The Prime Minister:  We will give due consideration to that. 

Mr Uteem:  Can I also ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister when looking into this new Bill, to 
give consideration to the possibility of making those declarations of assets public because in the 
past we had a problem and it is filed with ICAC, whether it has to be laid before the Speaker or 
not? 

The Prime Minister:  Well, I don’t think it would be proper to make all the declarations, 
which have been issued, public.  It will depend whether the circumstances of any particular case 
warrants as making it public.   

Mr Baloomoody:  To carry on from the question of my friend, hon. Ganoo, apart from the 
definition of ‘assets’, can we enlarge the definition of the surrounding persons, the advisers - the 
MPs who will have to declare their assets -as well, not to limit it only to children and parents? 

The Prime Minister:   Well,  I don’t think we should include advisers.    I don’t see it is 

necessary. 

Mr Bérenger:  I did not catch the answer from the hon. Prime Minister as far as making 
public the declaration of assets of elected Members and so on. The law that we passed in the 
past, it was in the law that it would be made public, then supposedly there was a cafouillage 
between ICAC and the Speaker’s Office and so on.  On a question of principle, can we have it 
from the hon. Prime Minister that whatever shape the new piece of legislation on the declaration 
of assets of Members of Parliament is concerned, those declarations of assets will be made public 
as it was under the previous law?   

The  Prime  Minister:    As  far  as  Members  of  Parliament  are  concerned,  I  have  no 

objection. 

 

19 

Mr Ganoo:  I have a last question.  In fact, it was the hon. Prime Minister himself who in 
1987  when  he  was  then  Prime  Minister  in  this  House,  of  this  country,  that  a  Declaration  of 
Assets Act was brought before the Assembly whereby all Members of this House were under the 
obligation to make their assets public by laying a copy of the affidavit with the Clerk which was 
laid in the Library of the House so that anybody could have access to that affidavit.  The last 
Government in 2011 sneaked in a provision in the Local Government Act 2011 to do away with 
this necessity for MPs to make their declaration of assets public.  This is why we urge the Rt. 
hon.  Prime  Minister  to  come  back  to  the  initial  provisions  of  legislation  so  that  all  the  MPs 
should declare their assets publicly. 

The Prime Minister:  The Local Government Act is different.  The Bill we are bringing 
will  be  very  different  from  that  and  I  just  said,  insofar  as  hon.  Members  of  Parliament  are 
concerned, there is no problem.  

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Uteem! 

HIGHLANDS - SATELLITE CITY  

(No. B/103) Mr R. Uteem (First Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis Central) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues 
and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the project for the creation of a satellite 
city in Highlands, he will state where matters stand. 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that the project for the 
construction of a satellite city at Highlands was initiated by my Government in September 2004 
and was to be implemented in two phases of 1000 and 2000 arpents, respectively. 

My  vision  at  that  time  was  to  create  a  state-of-the-art  urban  development  pole  to 
accommodate a mix of business facilities which would have supported the new growth cluster 
around the Ebène Cybercity, Moka and St Pierre.  

I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that,  it  is  still  the  firm  intention  of  my  Government  to 

implement this project. 

I am informed that subsequently, following a tender exercise, a Transaction Adviser was 
appointed in February 2008, by the State Land Development Company Limited, for an Urban 
and Knowledge Development Project on the identified site at Highlands.  

 

20 

Several  road  shows  were  organised,  both  locally  and  internationally,  between  July  and 
November 2008, to promote the project. Another tender exercise was thereafter launched with 
the assistance of the Transaction Advisor, for the selection of a potential firm to implement the 
project.  

In 2009, the then Government decided to set up –  

(i) 

(ii) 

a Steering Committee under the aegis of the Prime Minister’s Office to oversee 
the selection process and negotiate with the shortlisted qualified applicants, and  

a Project Implementation Committee, under the aegis of the Ministry of Finance 
and Economic Development, to look into the policy issues related to the Project.  

However, in December 2010, after having organised all these road shows, paid Rs33.8 m. 
for  transaction  advisory  services  and  Rs4.7  m.  for  marketing  expenses  and  others,  the  then 
Government decided not to go ahead with the project.  

In  2013,  the  Government  announced  that  the  phase  1  of  a  new  integrated  project 
comprising a Knowledge, Medical and Innovation Hub covering an area of 218 arpents would be 
launched by the State Land Development Co. Ltd (SLDC) on the same site at Highlands.   

During  the  same  year,  the  SLDC,  following  an  open  tender  exercise  appointed  a 
consultant, for a contract sum of Rs4.2 m. for the design, construction and supervision of this 
new project.  

This Government does not intend to proceed further with the project as decided in 2013.  

We are for the project as it stood initially. 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, answering to PQ B/819, the then hon. Prime Minister of the 

previous Government stated that his office has reviewed the Highlands project and I quote – 

“The  findings  of 
promoter/developer, the Highlands project would have been a mega bonanza.” 

the  perspective  of 

the  private 

this  review  are 

that  from 

And he went on to cite the figure of Rs15.7 billion. So, may I know from the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister what measures will be taken to ensure that there is no repeat of that mega bonanza when 
the contract will be allocated, if it is allocated? 

The Prime Minister: We certainly won’t follow with the said past. 

 
Mr  Uteem:  Answering  to  the  same  PQ,  the  former  Prime  Minister  expressed  concern 

21 

about moving the administrative centre from Port Louis to Highlands because, I quote – 

“It  will  also  impact  negatively  on  the  psyche  of  the  inhabitants  and  residents  of  Port 
Louis, adversely affecting downwards the value of property and creating a socio-cultural 
vacuum  that  in  turn  will  bite  deeply  into  the  relevance  of  the  hitherto  sacrosanct 
memorial statues.” 

So, may I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister that going ahead with the Highlands Project 
will not have any negative socio-cultural impact on the inhabitants of Port Louis? 

The Prime Minister: Well, we will make sure that this won’t happen. 

Mr  Mohamed:  Could  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  apart  from  the  issue  of  the  socio-
cultural  impact  he  talked  about,  what  about  the  economic  impact  of  moving  the  Government 
business all over to Highlands? Would this not have a negative impact on the economic life of 
the capital city? 

The Prime Minister: I do not share this view. 

Mr Uteem: May I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister - because I was not party to the 
previous Government when he proposed to go ahead with the Highlands project - whether that 
project also included the moving of Parliament? 

The Prime Minister: Moving of? 

Mr Uteem: Parliament to Highlands? 

The Prime Minister: I must say that I do not know. 

ROAD ACCIDENTS (FATAL) - REPORTED CASES 

(No. B/105) Mr A. Ameer Meea (Second Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port 
Louis East) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to fatal road accidents, he will, for 
the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to the number 
of reported cases thereof, since January 2013 to date, on a yearly basis, indicating the additional 
measures, if any, taken to prevent the recurrence thereof. 

22 

 
The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  Commissioner  of  Police 
that the number of reported cases of fatal road accidents since January 2013 to date is as follows 
– 

PERIOD 

NUMBER OF CASES 

January to December 2013 

January to December 2014 

January to 26 February 2015 

Total 

119 

125 

17 

261 

I am also informed by the Commissioner of Police that a series of measures are being 
implemented  to  curb  road  accidents.    These  include  sensitisation  sessions  on  road  safety  and 
causes of road accidents, roll over simulator to stress on the importance of using seat belts, road 
block operations and installation of speed cameras around the island. 

The Government is deeply concerned by the alarming rate of road accidents, including 
fatal  ones  that  continue  to  happen  on  our  roads.    I  am  informed  by  the  Ministry  of  Public 
Infrastructure and Land Transport that a new Road Safety Strategy 2015-2020 will be developed 
that will address key areas such as speeding, drink driving and that will maximise the safety of 
vulnerable road users such as pedestrians, cyclists and particularly motorcyclists.  The aim is to 
reduce the number of persons killed and seriously injured by one third by the year 2020.  That 
Ministry  also  proposes  to  put  in  place  a  new  system  for  the  issue  of  driving  licence  to 
motorcyclists. 

Madam Speaker, the Government Programme 2015-2019 has mentioned that a fairer and 
more socially equitable system will replace the actual one in regard to the speed cameras, traffic 
monitoring and sanctions.  In this respect, Government has already taken a decision to abolish 
the penalty point system which includes the Driving Licence Counterpart and has come up with a 
new  sanctioning  mechanism  for  serious  road  traffic  offences.    The  Ministry  of  Public 
Infrastructure and  Land  Transport is currently working on the legislative amendments and the 
proposed measures will be ready for implementation within the shortest possible time. 

23 

 
Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Speaker, there is a complete lack of policing around ‘Cross 
Here’. We have witnessed there have been several accidents, including fatal accidents on ‘Cross 
Here’. Therefore, can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister what urgent actions does Police consider 
in order to protect pedestrians from those accidents? 

The Prime Minister: It is very difficult to have one officer posted at each ‘Cross Here’ 
all over the island. It is almost impossible. That is why there is this sensitisation process going 
on. People must be alert, whether pedestrians, drivers and everybody using the road. 

Mr Mohamed: Could the Rt. hon. Prime Minister consider the possibility of asking the 
Commissioner  of  Police  to  increase  the  number  of  vehicles  and  Police  Officers  patrolling  the 
Dual Carriage or the Highway, all the way from the South to the North, because very rarely do 
we really see on a constant basis or consistent basis, vehicles of the Police patrolling and even 
chasing cars, but what we do see are Police Officers stopping only motorbikes and motorcyclists 
on the Highway, and not cars as such? 

The Prime Minister: I will pass on this information to the Commissioner of Police. 

Mr Ameer Meea: On the issue of ‘Cross Here’, it is noted that in Europe, even in India, 
there are lights, les lumières clignotantes qui sont mises sur les passages cloutés. Therefore, can 
I  suggest  that  such  things  be  installed  here,  in  Mauritius,  especially  at  night,  so  that  those 
flashing lights can attract the attention of motorcycles approaching the ‘Cross Here’? 

The Prime Minister: That is I suppose to draw the attention of drivers that there is a 

‘cross here’ in front. Is it that? 

Well, we may consider that. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Uteem: Every year, in this House, we ask the same questions about the number of 
fatal accidents and the numbers are not going down. Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister if he 
can have a full-fledged study carried out to find out why there are fatal accidents? Is it because of 
the design of the road? Is it because of consumption of alcohol? Is it because of speedy? Because 
then, we will have real facts, data, on the real cause of the fatal accidents and then from then take 
on measures instead of just having ad hoc reactions like points permit or whatever. 

24 

 
The Prime Minister: Well, there may be so many reasons. In some cases, certain parts, 
of course, the design of the road is sometimes responsible. But, people should be aware of that 
and take more precaution on reaching such spots. We cannot get rid of all these roads and build 
new roads all over the place. This is almost impossible. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed!  

Mr  Mohamed:  Can  the  hon.  Prime  Minister  consider  revisiting  the  driving  tests 
completely so as to modernise them as to a standard that exists in Europe? That could itself be a 
possibility that those who are testing are themselves not tested enough as to their ability to test.  

The Prime Minister: Well, I do not know how far the hon. Member is right, but, this 

again, I will pass it on to the Commissioner of Police. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Baloomoody! 

POLICE ACT – AMENDMENT 

(No.  B/106)  Mr  V.  Baloomoody  (Third  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues 
and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Police  Act,  he  will  state  if  he  will 
consider the advisability of introducing amendments thereto to provide for Police Officers to be 
personally liable for acts done contrary to law and to the Police Standing Orders. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, no person is above the law and like any citizen of 
Mauritius,  a  Police  officer  who  commits  any  breach  of  the  law  of  the  country,  is  solely  and 
personally liable for prosecution under Criminal Law. 

However under Civil Law, in accordance with Article 1384 of the Code Civil Mauricien, 
any act or omission by a Police officer which is contrary to the law, will result in the State being 
vicariously liable as “Commettant” so long as the wrongdoing has been committed by the Police 
officer in the execution of his duties. 

 
As  regards  Standing  Orders,  these  are  made  by  the  Commissioner  of  Police  as  per 
Section 6 of the Police Act and they contain instructions and directives to be observed by Police 
officers  in  the  performance  of  their  duties.    Every  Police  officer  is  bound  to  comply  with 
Standing Orders or any administrative directions issued by the Commissioner of Police.  As a 
general rule, Standing Orders are intended to regulate the internal procedures of the Police Force, 

 

25 

and breaches thereof may give rise to disciplinary action being taken against Police officers.  A 
breach of Standing Orders would not, per se, give rise to civil liability. 

Nevertheless, there  exists the possibility of a breach of Standing  Orders leading to the 
State  being  liable  pursuant  to  Article  1384  of  the  Code  Civil,  to  the  extent  that  such  breach 
amounts to a wrongdoing by the Police officer which causes damage or prejudice to a person or a 
corporate entity and that the Police officer acted in the execution of his duties. 

Our  legal  framework  is  already  such  that  in  case  a  Police  officer  commits  a  “faute 
 
personnelle”, he is solely and personally liable, and the vicarious liability of the State will only 
be triggered where the Police officer has committed a “faute de service”.  The need to amend the 
law as mentioned by the hon. Member, therefore, does not arise. 

Mr Baloomoody: The hon. Prime Minister just mentioned that it is the Government who 
is sued as ‘Commettant’’, but the Police officer gets away scot-free. It is the taxpayers who pay 
the sum. Does he consider it proper for taxpayers to pay damages to people when Police officers 
are abusing their rights and authorities? 

The Prime Minister: I have just said when the Police officer is a liable personally, where 
there is vicarious liability, the State also is responsible. I do not see what we can do more than 
that. 

Mr Baloomoody: Can  I ask the hon. Prime Minister why should the Police officer  or 
public officers, in that  matter, be protected with the prescription of two  years? Does the hon. 
Prime Minister not consider it fit that each and every citizen of this country should be liable to 
the law if they breach the law and there should be no protection? Why should public officers, 
especially the Police, be protected for two years and we cannot prosecute the Police officer after 
two years? 

The Prime Minister: There must have been good reasons why this has been included in 

the law. 

Mr Baloomoody: Can’t we amend this law in order not to protect these public officers 

who are flouting the law?  

(Interruptions) 

 
The Prime Minister: I just learned from my colleague here that it used to be six months 

26 

before; it has been amended to two years. Does the hon. Member want it to be 20 years? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed: The hon. Prime Minister is totally right, Madam Speaker, when he says 
that once upon a time it was six months and it has moved to two years.  This whole idea of it 
having moved to two years shows that there was the need, in actual fact of increasing the time 
from six months to two years. Could the hon. Prime Minister, therefore, not consider and take it 
on advisement, whether  there is the possibility of increasing the two  years, let us say, to five 
years, because there are innocent victims who happen to not be able to enter an action within the 
time frame because of many reasons, sometimes medical or legal issues? Could he not consider 
that just to help those innocent victims that, once again, we could increase it or double it to four 
years - if he could take that on advisement, please? 

The Prime Minister: We will consider that. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ganoo! Hon. Ganoo, please get prepared for your 
question. I said, time permitting, the hon. Prime Minister will reply to Parliamentary Question 
No. B/122. 

BASSIN ROAD – FOOTBALL PITCH - CONSTRUCTION 

(No.  B/122)  Mr  A.  Ganoo  (First  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River)  asked  the 
Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the construction of a 
football pitch at Bassin Road, he will state the  -  

(a) contractual start and completion dates thereof, indicating if there is any delay in the 

completion thereof; 

(b) name of the contractor therefor, and  

(c) costs thereof. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, with your permission, I shall reply to PQ B/122. 

 
I  am  informed  by  the  NDU  that  the  contractual  start  and  completion  dates  for  the 
construction  of  a  football  pitch  at  Bassin  Road  are  12  September  2014  and  11  March  2015 
respectively. 

27 

 
 
However,  due  to  the  prevailing  bad  weather  in  November/December  2014  and  also 
because of end of year business closure, there has been a delay in completion thereof.  Works are 
now expected to be completed by end of April 2015.  Liquidated damages will be applied as per 
contractual obligation for any unaccounted delay. 

As regard to part (b) of the question, the contractor for the project is Super Builders Co. 

Ltd. 

With regard to part (c) of the question, the contract amounts to Rs7,994,167.50 (inclusive 

of VAT). 

Mr  Ganoo:  Was  there  any  bidding  process  before  this  tender  was  allotted  to  the 

contractor? 

The Prime Minister: I am not sure, but the situation at the NDU is, I must say, really 

rotten. The NDU is indebted to the tune of one and a half billion! 

(Interruptions) 

And the contractors who are there keep on getting new contracts without any tendering! It has 
been a real mess! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Does the hon. Member have a supplementary on this issue? Yes, hon. 

Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: On the basis of what the hon. Prime Minister just said, can I ask the 

hon. Prime Minister what action is being taken to remedy the situation at the NDU? 

The  Prime  Minister:  There  is  going  to  be  an  enquiry  first  and  then  we  will  consider 

what action will be taken. 

Mr  Ganoo:  Do  I  understand  the  hon.  Prime  Minister  to  say  that  in  this  case  the 

contractor will be made to pay liquidated damages? 

The Prime Minister: That is what I have been told. 

Madam  Speaker:    Hon.  Members,  the  Table  has  been  advised  that  Parliamentary 
Question  Nos.  B/109,  B/111,  B/127,  B/130,  B/131  and  B/132  have  been  withdrawn. 

 

28 

Parliamentary Question No. B/116 addressed to the hon. Minister of Financial Services, Good 
Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms  will  now  be  replied  by  the  hon.  Minister  of  Industry, 
Commerce and Consumer Protection. Parliamentary Question No. B/135 addressed to the hon. 
Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms will now be replied 
by the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities.  

Hon. Quirin! 

SPORTS MEDICAL UNIT - STAFF 

(No. B/108) Mr F. Quirin (Fourth Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) asked 
the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the Sports Medical Unit, he will, for the 
benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, a list of the athletes who have received treatment thereat, 
since January 2014 to date – 

(a) indicating if a sports medical doctor is attached thereto on a permanent basis and, if not, 

why not, and 

(b) give a list of the staff attached thereto, indicating their respective duties. 

Mr Sawmynaden:  Madam Speaker, the Sports Medical Unit of my Ministry has attended 
to  1,020  requests  for  treatment  of  athletes  since  January  2014  to  date.  I  am  circulating  a  list 
specifying the number of cases dealt with by the Sports Medical Unit sportswise as well as the 
number of medical coverages during that period 

 
As regard to the services of a Sports Medical Doctor at the Unit, I have to inform the 
House that since the departure of one Dr. D. on 20 July 2012 there is no Sports Medical Doctor 
attached to the Unit on a full-time basis. 

With a view to providing the required medical treatment to the athletes, my Ministry has 

 
enlisted the services of a Doctor on sessional basis. 

Madam Speaker, following my visit to the Sports Medical Unit on 30 December 2014 
and after consultation with my officers, a request has already been submitted to the Ministry of 
Health  and  Quality  of  Life  for  the  services  of  four  Medical/Sports  Medical  Doctors  and  a 
Nutritionist to be made available to my Ministry. 

29 

 
 
Furthermore, in the context of the preparation of pre-selected athletes for the forthcoming 
Indian  Ocean  Island  Games,  the  services  of  32  massage  therapists/physiotherapists,  two 
nutritionists and two psychologists have been enlisted on sessional basis since January this year. 

As regards part (b) of the question, I am circulating the list of staff posted at the Unit 

 
together with their respective job descriptions. 

Mr  Quirin:  Madame  la  présidente,  j’ai  moi-même  évoqué  dans  cette  Assemblée  à 
plusieurs  reprises  dans  le  passé  l’absence  d’un  médecin  spécialiste  du  sport,  et  là,  je  constate 
dans  la  réponse  du  ministre,  que  jusqu’à  présent,  il  n’y  a  pas  de  médecin  du  sport  basé  en 
permanence. Est-ce que le ministre ne compte-t-il pas, vu l’imminence des jeux des îles, trouver 
quelqu’un pour être basé en permanence ? Je comprends qu’il a trouvé un médecin, mais qui sera 
là  on  and  off,  si  je  comprends  bien  sa  réponse.  Je  pense  qu’il  serait  souhaitable,  Madame  la 
présidente,  de  trouver  un  spécialiste  du  sport  basé  en  permanence  qui  s’occupera  des  athlètes 
d’une façon régulière. 

Mr Sawmynaden:  Madam Speaker, as mentioned in my answer, following my visit on 30 
December, my Ministry has already queried with the Medical Council to have the list of doctors 
who are specialised in the sport sector. We have got the list and we are working on it and in 
collaboration  with  my  colleague,  the  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life,  we  are  looking 
forward to have, at least, one doctor to be on a full time basis at the Medical Unit to assist all our 
athletes participating in the Indian Ocean Games. 

Mr Quirin: Madame la présidente, par rapport aux équipements qui se trouvent au centre 
médico sportif, peut-on savoir quand  ces équipements ont été renouvelés pour la dernière fois ? 

Mr Sawmynaden:  Unfortunately, I don’t have this information with me, but I will table it 

so that the hon. Member can have a look at it. 

MBC – EMPLOYEES - SALARIES 

(No. B/109) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) asked 
the Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the employees 
of the Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation recruited during the period 2009 to date and drawing 
salaries of over Rs100,000, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Corporation, a 
list thereof, indicating the respective – 

30 

 

(a) post occupied;  

(b) date of recruitment;  

(c) qualifications, and 

(d) salaries and terms and conditions of employment. 

(Withdrawn) 

STATE LAND - LEASE 

(No. B/110) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) asked 
the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in regard to the plots of State 
land leased to individuals/companies and others, since July 2005 to date and which have been 
sold to foreigners, he will give a list thereof, indicating in each case the – 

(a) location thereof;  

(b) extent thereof;  

(c) lessors/purchasers thereof, and 

(d) total selling price thereof. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun): Madam 
Speaker,  hon.  Members  would  surely  understand  that  the  compilation  of  the  requested 
information is a time-consuming exercise.  

My Ministry is compiling the information and same will be placed in the Library of the 

National Assembly at the earliest possible. 

TRUTH AND JUSTICE COMMISSION - RECOMMENDATIONS 

(No. B/111) Mr G. Lesjongard (Second Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External Communications whether, in regard to 
the Truth and Justice Commission, he will state whether the main recommendations contained in 
the report thereof have been implemented and, if so, give details thereof and, if not, why not. 

(Withdrawn) 

WTO TRADE FACILITATION AGREEMENT - RATIFICATION 

 

31 

(No. B/112) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) asked 
the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade whether, in regard 
to the World Trade Organisation Trade Facilitation Agreement concluded in Bali from 03 to 06 
December 2013, he will state if Mauritius had intended to ratify same and, if so, indicate the 
measures that have been taken in relation thereto as at to date. 

Mr Sinatambou: Madam Speaker, insofar as Mauritius is concerned, I am informed that 
we  have  always  been  in  favour  of  a  Trade  Facilitation  Agreement  given  the  contribution  that 
such an agreement could bring to removing bottlenecks and impediments to trade on our export 
markets, particularly in the region. 

Insofar  as  the  World  Trade  Organisation  Trade  Facilitation  Agreement  is  concerned, 
Cabinet,  at  its  meeting  held  on  13  February  2015,  agreed  to  deposit  with  the  World  Trade 
Organisation the instrument of acceptance of the protocol amending the Marrakesh Agreement.  

The instrument of acceptance itself has been sent to our mission in Geneva on 27 February 
2015 and has been deposited with the Secretariat of the World Trade Organisation the very same 
day.  

The  agreement  will  enter  into  force  when  two-thirds  of  the  World  Trade  Organisation 

members have accepted the protocol. 

Madam Speaker: No supplementary? Next question, hon. Uteem! 

BANK ACCOUNTS OUTSIDE MAURITIUS - HOLDERS 

(No. B/113) Mr R. Uteem (First Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis Central) 
asked the Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms whether, 
in regard to the Mauritians holding bank accounts outside Mauritius, he will, for the benefit of 
the House, obtain from the Financial Intelligence Unit and the Financial Services Commission 
respectively, information as to whether they have initiated any inquiry in relation thereto. 

Mr Bhadain:  Madam Speaker, I am informed that currently there is no exchange control 
or any legislation in Mauritius that prevents a citizen from holding a bank account outside the 
country.  

Of course, the Financial Intelligence Unit and the Financial Services Commission enquire 

on holders of such bank accounts, only in cases of suspicious financial transactions. 

 

32 

Now,  Madam  Speaker,  the  question  of  the  hon.  Member  is  quite  broad  inasmuch  as  it 
refers to all Mauritians holding bank accounts outside Mauritius. Be that as it may, recently the 
media  has  made  mention  of  a  list  of  names  published  on  the  database  of  the  International 
Consortium  of  Investigative  Journalists  (ICIJ),  and  who  may  have  bank  accounts  outside 
Mauritius,  I  am  informed  that  the  Financial  Services  Commission  (FSC)  has  queried  the 
licensees and approved officers whose names appeared on the list. The inquiry is being pursued 
and the FSC shall take appropriate regulatory actions if and where necessary. 

The ICIJ database includes, amongst others, the names of entities that were not licensed by 

the FSC at that matter in time also. 

As  regards  the  Financial  Intelligence  Unit,  section  20  of  the  Financial  Intelligence  and 
Anti-Money  Laundering  Act  allows  the  FIU  to  exchange  information  on  the  basis  of  the 
reciprocity  and  mutual  agreement.  In  this  context,  the  FIU  is  a  member  of  Egmont  Group  of 
FIU’s  since  2003  and  exchanges  of  information  as  outlined  with  the  Group’s  principles  of 
exchange  of  information  are  being  conducted.  These  principles  are  in  place  to  secure  the 
integrity  of  the  analysis  which  is  carried  out  by  the  FIU  and  disclosing  the  status  of  same 
ongoing or otherwise, will be prejudicial to the work that they are doing. 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, earlier in February, a French whistleblower, a former HSBC 
employee downloaded Swiss leaks information on cable, setting out a list of people who have 
been  suspected  of  evading  taxes  and  regulatory  provisions  in  their  local  countries,    This  has 
given rise to – 

(i) 

(ii) 

in England, the British lawmakers announced they would open an inquiry on HSBC 
and the leaks, and also 

in India, India will investigate a new list containing names of Indians suspected to 
have parked  untaxed wealth in foreign banks, the Minister Arun Jaitley has said. 

So,  being  given  the  concern  which  has  been  raised  in  other  countries,  is  the  Government 
proposing to set up an inquiry or, at least, ask the Regulatory Authorities to set up an inquiry to 
see whether there are Mauritians involved in, at least, this HSBC leaked documents? 

Mr Bhadain:  Yes, Madam Speaker, as I have stated, the FSC is actually conducting this 
exercise  of  querying  all  the  licensees  in  relation  to.  Of  course,  if  there  are  any  issues  which 

 

33 

would come out of that exercise and the FSC is of the opinion that things have to be looked in 
greater depth, that will certainly be done because this Government is all about transparency and 
good governance. 

Mr Bhagwan:  Can the hon. Minister inform us who is actually heading the FIU, who has 

been appointed at the head of the FIU? 

Mr Bhadain:  The current Director of the FIU is Mr Guillaume Ollivry, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker:  Next Question, hon. Uteem! 

DBM – EMPLOYEES – TERMINATION OF CONTRACT  

(No.  B/114)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the 
Development  Bank  of  Mauritius  Ltd.,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  therefrom, 
information as to - 

(a) the number of staff members thereof whose employment have been terminated since 

2010 to date, indicating the aggregate compensation paid thereto, and  

(b) where matters stand regarding the proposed restructuration thereof. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, I am 
informed  that  in  the  context  of  the  restructuring  of  the  Development  Bank  of  Mauritius  Ltd, 
procedures were initiated by that Bank for a Voluntary Retirement Scheme in July 2011.  

I am informed that during the period November 2012 to September 2014, 74 staff have 

opted for the VRS at a total cost of Rs79 m.  

With regard to part (b) of the question, I wish to inform the House that various attempts 
in the past to restructure the DBM have failed, including a strategic partnership with two Indian 
financial institutions.  

The Government has reconstituted the Board of Directors of DBM which has the task of 

proposing a new restructuring plan. 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister of Finance just mentioned that, at least, 
74 people took the Voluntary Retirement Scheme and that was done in the context of the DBM 
being restructured. Now that the hon. Minister has just announced that we are not going to go 

 

34 

ahead with the strategic Partner, will the DBM consider reintegrating those people who had been 
misled into opting for voluntary retirement on the basis that the Bank was going to close down?  

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Well,  the  Bank  will  probably  close  down  but  the  strategic 
partner,  the  Bank  of  Maharashtra,  has  not  received  the  green  light  from  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
India for investing in the bank. So, the project of a strategic partner has been giving up in view of 
this.  

Mr Baloomoody: During his visit to Rodrigues, the hon. Minister of Finance mentioned 
that there will be a Bank of Petite et Moyenne Entreprise. Is it the Bank of DBM there which 
will  be  converted  into  a  Petite  et  Moyenne  Entreprise  because  the  hon.  Minister  did  not, 
unfortunately through his visit, met any of the staff of the DBM there and there is some concern 
about this? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Alright, agreed! Well, there has been a proposal at one time to 
convert the Bank of Development into an SME’s Bank, but after consultation with the Ministry 
of Finance and the officers there at the Ministry, we have come to the conclusion that we will 
need a special SME’s institution that is not a Bank to go ahead with the project of SME Bank. 
So, the Bank of Development will stay as such. The new Board will have to decide on its future 
and we are setting up, therefore, a financial institution that will be under the financial sector to 
cope with the project for the small scale sector. 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, answering to a PQ No. B/64, the then Minister of Finance, 
hon. X.L. Duval, stated that, as regards its banking operation, DBM is loss making and this year 
it is Rs2.3 billion worth of deposit that are due for repayment and this is one of the issues that is 
troubling the Development Bank of Mauritius. So, may I know from the hon. Minister whether 
the financial situation of DBM has improved and that it is now in a position to reimburse the 
deposits? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  I  don’t  know  of  any  financial  institution  under  my  Ministry 

which is working. So, the DBM has been losing a lot of money … 

(Interruptions) 

 

35 

… DBM is losing money and there are two issues there.  Firstly, we are paying some Rs390 m. 
of interest on loans. So, we have decided to reduce the loans of the DBM by the end of the year 
to 0, which implies, therefore, major reimbursement mainly to the National Pension Fund.  

So,  we  are  proposing  to  sell  non-strategic  assets  of  the  DBM  among  which  shares  in 
SICOM which might be bought over by the National Pension Fund for refunding most of the 
debt of the DBM, in which case as from 2016, I hope we will have a clean balance sheet at the 
DBM. 

Mr Ganoo: Can I ask the hon. Minister in case the DBM will be closed down, what will 

happen to the employees of the DBM? Can they be redeployed in the new SME bank?  

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: In the hypothesis that the Board decides on the closure of the 
bank, we have envisaged two possibilities: firstly, that there be redeployment of the staff in the 
Civil  Service  and  secondly,  naturally  the  SME  financial  institution  will  recruit  those  who  are 
eligible.  

SECONDARY SCHOOLS - DIGITAL TABLETS 

(No.  B/115)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Science 
Research whether, in regard to the distribution of digital tablets to students, she will state - 

(a) the number thereof returned as broken or defective;  

(b) if all the secondary schools have internet connections, and  

(c) where matters stand as to the distribution thereof to students this year. 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  out  of  24,111  Tablet 
PCs distributed last  year in 155 State and Private-aided Secondary Schools, 2,304 Tablet PCs 
have  been  reported  faulty  during  the  period  May  2014  to  November  2014  as  per  the  Service 
Level  Agreement  signed  between  my  Ministry  and  Mauritius  Telecom.    There  is  a  warranty 
period  of  two  years  on  all  Tablet  PCs  procured  and  users  encountering  problems  with  their 
Tablet PCs may call at the six after-sales outlets of the Mauritius Telecom around the Island. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, I wish to state at the very outset, that the device 
has been provided with digital resources on both online (on the internet) and offline (in the tablet 
PC  itself)  basis.  All  State  and  Private  Secondary  Schools  already  have  internet  connections. 

 

36 

However, there is no WIFI connectivity in secondary schools except, 2 model schools, that is, 
the Gaëtan Raynal State College and Mauritius College where WIFI connectivity is available in 
Form V classrooms.  

The provision of WIFI in all State and Private-aided Secondary schools is being catered 
into by the Ministry of Technology, Communication and Innovation. I am informed that as far 
back as in August 2014, a tender for upgrading the internet connectivity to at least 10 MB and 
the  provision  of  WIFI  connectivity  in  Form  IV  and  Form  V  classrooms  for  all  colleges  was 
launched by the then Ministry of Information and Communication Technology.  The evaluation 
of bids has been completed at the level of the Central Procurement Board, but, the contract has 
not  yet  been  awarded  since  two  bidders  have  made  applications  for  review  before  the 
Independent Review Panel.  This matter is being followed up by the Ministry of Technology, 
Communication and Innovation. The next meeting of the Independent Review Panel is scheduled 
on 13 March, 2015. 

As far as part (c) of the question is concerned, I am informed that in September 2014, a 
tender for procurement of 23,400 Tablets intended for Form IV students and educators of 2014 
was launched. The closing date was on 27 November 2014 and bids were opened on the same 
date. The bid evaluation exercise is currently under way at the level of the Central Procurement 
Board and it is expected that the distribution to students who are now in Form V and educators 
may start around July 2015. However, it is expected that by that time the issue of availability of 
WIFI in schools would be sorted out so that optimum use of Tablet PC would be made. 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, being given the number of tablets that had been returned 
after the distribution of last year, has the Bid Evaluation Committee or has the Ministry issued 
guidelines to ensure that there is no repeat and that appropriate software is on these tablets? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: In fact, the tablets that were repaired have been given back 
to the students after repair, but measures have been taken to ensure that proper specifications are 
given to get good tablets for the students. 

Mr Uteem: Does the tender extend also to the provision of education software to be used 

on these tablets or is it just limited to the supply of tablets? 

37 

 
Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun:  The tablet already contains software but lessons are now 
being  provided  by  the  M.I.E.  and,  in  fact,  the  M.I.E.  is  preparing  resource  material  for  these 
tablets. 

Mr Jhugroo: Madam Speaker, can the hon. Minister inform the House what was the cost 
for one Digital tablet and whether students were asked to pay any insurance and, if so, can we 
know what amount? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: The cost of the tablets for year 2014 was Rs134,349,018 and 
the students were made to pay a sum of Rs650 in order to ensure that in case of theft or major 
damage  to  the  PC,  the  PCs  would  be  replaced,  but  they  would  have  to  ensure  that  they  have 
proper evidence that major damage or theft has occurred. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: On the same point, I was going to ask in relation to this insurance.  We have 
had people especially in my Constituency who have come to me and said that: ‘you know, Rs650 
is a lot of money.’ So, this year, is the Government considering whether to exempt, at least, those 
who are at the lower rung of the social ladder from the payment of this sum of Rs650? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  Students  whose  parents  benefit  from  social  aid  do  not 

normally pay this amount. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr  Jhugroo:  The  hon.  Minister  replied  earlier,  I  think,  the  amount  paid  was  around 

Rs180 m. for… 

(Interruptions) 

Rs138 m. for 24,000 tablets. I think that it will cost around Rs750 for one tablet. How come we 
are  giving  free  of  charge  to  students,  one  tablet  that  cost  Rs750,  when  they  had  to  pay  for 
insurance of… 

Madam Speaker: Sit down, hon. Jhugroo! Allow the hon. Minister to reply. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

38 

Allow the hon. Minister to reply. Yes, hon. Minister. 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: It will cost much more than Rs700, around Rs5,000. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Rutnah! 

STC – PETROLEUM PRODUCTS - BETAMAX LTD.  

(No. B/116) Mr S. Rutnah (Third Member for Piton & Rivière du Rempart) asked 
the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms  whether,  in 
regard to the circumstances surrounding the allocation of the contract for the transportation of 
petroleum products by Betamax Ltd., he will state if Government is proposing to refer the case to 
the Police for inquiry and, if so, when. 

The  Minister  of  Industry,  Commerce  and  Consumer  Protection  (Mr  A.  Gungah): 
Madam  Speaker,  in  my  reply  to  PQ  No.  B/73  of  last  week,  I  informed  the  House  that  on  30 
January 2015, Government had decided to refer the case to the Police.  

I am advised by the Commissioner of Police that an enquiry has been instituted into the 

matter by the Central Criminal Investigation Division and that the enquiry is in progress. 

Mr Mohamed: On the same issue of Betamax Ltd., would the hon. Minister inform the 
House  when  will  the  arbitration  process  -  because  according  to  the  contract  that  linked  both 
parties, STC and Betamax Ltd., I am informed that there is a clause that talks of arbitration - start 
and could the hon. Minister give us a date because I am sure that all members of the public, the 
Mauritians at large, would like to know where the responsibility really lies? So, when would the 
arbitration process start? 

Mr Gungah: Madam Speaker, if the hon. Member can come with a substantive question, 

I can reply, because it does not relate to the question that has been put by hon. Rutnah! 

Mr Rutnah: In relation to the enquiry itself, can the hon. Minister confirm whether at 
today’s  date  the  Police  have  either  secured  documentary  evidence  and/or  uplifted  electronic 
evidence  from  the  State  Trading  Corporation  or  from  any  other  relevant  Ministries  concerned 
with this whole saga? 

Mr Gungah: Madam Speaker, as far as I am informed, statements are being taken from 

all the persons involved into the matter right now. 

 

39 

Mr  Uteem:  Madam  Speaker,  the  Betamax  saga,  as  my  hon.  friend  just  mentioned  it, 
started  with  an  Inter-ministerial  Committee  leading  to  a  recommendation  and  a  report  by  an 
independent accounting firm. So, may I know from the hon. Minister whether the Police will also 
enquire and take statements from sitting Members of this House who were in that Ministerial 
Committee who recommended the nation to pay this sum of money to Betamax? 

No, it’s hon. Xavier-Luc Duval! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Gungah: Madam Speaker, I think the Police Department knows how to proceed in 

the matter. 

Mr Mohamed: Could the hon. Minister, following his last answer where he says that the 
Police would know what to do, consider the possibility of he, himself, going to help the Police 
identify those now Ministers who were then also party to this supposed Betamax saga and, in 
fact, do his duty as a citizen to give their names and help that they go and give a statement? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Gungah: Madam Speaker, if need be, we will be doing it. But, it is for the Police to 

decide about that. 

 Madam Speaker: Hon. Members, I will suspend the sitting for one and a half hours for 

lunch. 

At 12.59 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 2.41 p.m. with Madam Speaker in Chair. 

Madam Speaker:  Yes, hon. Rutnah! 

TERTIARY EDUCATION COMMISSION (TEC) - EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR - 

APPOINTMENT 

(No. B/117) Mr S. Rutnah (Third Member for Piton & Rivière du Rempart) asked the 
Minister of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Science Research whether, 
in regard to the Executive Director of the Tertiary Education Commission, she will – 

 

40 

(a) for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commission, information as to his - 

(i)  terms  and  conditions  of  appointment,  including  the  salary,  allowances  and 

other benefits drawn;  

(ii) experience in quality assurance and regulatory framework, and  

(b)  state if the Delhi University, India, has set up a disciplinary committee against the latter 

and, if so, indicate if -  

(i)  the Commission had been informed thereof prior to his appointment;  

(ii) his  contract  has  been  renewed  and,  if  so,  indicate  the  terms  and  conditions 

thereof, and  

(iii)his replacement is being contemplated. 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun:  Madam, Speaker, with  your permission,  I wish to reply to 

PQ.  No. B/117 and PQ. No. B/144 together as they are both related. 

With  regard  to  PQ  No.  B/117  part  (a)(i),  I  am  informed  by  the  Tertiary  Education 
Commission (TEC) that following an advertisement in January 2013 and a selection exercise by 
TEC, Professor A. K.  Bakhshi, former Executive Director of TEC was offered appointment to 
the post of Executive Director on 18 July 2013 on a contract basis of one year which could be 
renewed for a second period of one year at the end of which it could be again renewed for a third 
and  final  year.    He  assumed  duty  on  14  October  2013.  After  the  one  year,  the  contract  was 
extended on a month-to-month basis with effect from 14 October 2014.  His appointment has 
been terminated on 28 February 2015.   

The terms and conditions of employment of the Executive Director include a monthly 
salary  of  Rs144,000,  a  special  allowance  of  Rs56,000  as  well  as  a  gratuity,  bonus,  rent 
allowance, luggage allowance and air tickets for himself and his spouse from and to India at the 
start and end of his contract. A copy of the Terms and Conditions is being tabled. 

With  regard  to  part  (a)  (ii)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  by  Tertiary  Education 
Commission that Prof. A. K. Bakhshi has been in the fields of academics and research and is a 
former  Vice  Chancellor  (Allahabad,  India).    He  has  also  been  Head  of  the  Department  of 

 

41 

Chemistry, Director of the Institute of Lifelong Learning (ILLL) and also Director of Centre for 
Professional Development in Higher Education (CPDHE) at the University of Delhi. 

As  regards  part  (b)  of  the  question,  according  to  TEC,  prior  to  the  contractual 
appointment of Prof. Bakhshi as Director on 14 October 2013, the Commission was not aware of 
any  disciplinary  committee  set  up  at  the  Delhi  University  of  India  against  him.    In  a 
correspondence dated 17 October 2013, the Head of Mission, Mauritius High Commission, New 
Delhi informed that according to a letter from the President of the Society for Values and Ethics 
in Education dated 09 October 2013, the Executive Council of Delhi University had apparently 
initiated disciplinary action against Prof. A. K. Bakhshi who despite being on leave from Delhi 
University  had  accepted  the  nomination  as  Executive  Director  of  TEC.    This  issue  was  also 
raised in the local media. 

According to record available at TEC, though there is a record in the minute sheet that a 
letter was issued to Prof. Bakshi on 21 October, 2013 to seek his explanation, no copy of the 
letter sent nor the reply thereto is available on the file given that the original copy was handed to 
the then Legal Officer of TEC and cannot be traced.  Further, according to records available in 
August  2013,  University  of  Delhi  had  asked  Prof.  A.  K.  Bakhshi  to  show  cause  as  to  why 
disciplinary action should not be initiated against him.  Notwithstanding this matter, in a letter 
dated 19 September 2013, the University of Delhi gave Professor  Bakshi approval to join the 
Tertiary Education Commission as Executive Director subject to his availability in the matter of 
show cause notice as and when required by the University. 

As for the part relating to the renewal of the contract, I am advised that the initial contract 
starting  on  14  October  2013  which  was  for  one  year  was  subsequently  renewed  by  the  TEC 
Board on a month-to-month basis as from 14 October 2014 on similar terms and conditions. 

With respect to PQ No. B/144, I wish to inform the House that, the employment of the 
Executive Director of TEC, on a month to month basis has been terminated with effect from 28 
February 2015; the post will be advertised shortly.  In the meantime, arrangements have been 
made  for  a  senior  officer  of  TEC  to  act  as  Officer-in-Charge  for  the  smooth  running  of  the 
organisation pending the appointment of a full-fledged Director. 

Mr  Rutnah:  Madam  Speaker,  firstly,  in  an  answer  to  a  question  of  my  friend,  hon. 

Uteem, last year, Minister Jeetah stated the following – 

42 

 
“I  suggested  that  we  appoint  the  person  subject  to  a  quarterly  review  -  the  person, 
reference made to Prof. Bakshi - to assess his preformance, but then we did not get into 
recruitment procedure, etc., but I am interested in the quarterly assessment performance.” 

Now that we know that his contract was being renewed on a monthly basis, is there on record of 
any quarterly basis assessment of this person? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  Madam  Speaker,  I  would  like  the  hon.  Member  to  let  me 

know which question he is referring to. Which Parliamentary Question is he referring to? 

Madam Speaker: He just mentioned. Can you repeat it? 

Mr  Rutnah:  For  the  benefit  of  the  House,  I  am  referring  to  PQ  B/962,  last  year,  a 

question put by my friend, hon. Uteem and it reads as follows – 

“May I know from the hon. Minister – he mentioned himself…. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah, can you just tell the hon. Minister whether the question 

was addressed to her or it was to the precedent Government? 

Mr Rutnah: It was last year. 

Madam Speaker: You got it. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Rutnah: I am referring to a question last year. I am trying to ascertain whether when 
the Minister gave the answer last year in relation to the question put by hon. Uteem, whether the 
quarterly  review  was  carried  out,  now  that  we  know  that  the  contract  of  this  gentleman  was 
renewed on a monthly basis. 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  I  will  look  into  the  matter.  I  do  not  have  the  information 

right now. 

Mr  Uteem:  Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Minister  just  mentioned  that  there  is  a  legal 
opinion. So, may  I know from the hon. Minister the name of the legal  adviser who  gave that 
opinion and whether any effort has been made to try to get back those documents from him? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: I have just answered to the hon. Member that I do not have 

that particular information. I will look into the matter and come back with the information. 

43 

 
Mr Rutnah: Can the hon. Minister confirm in the light of the answer she gave that the 
professor was, in fact, Head of Department of Chemistry with qualification in Science rather that 
in  legal  matters  and  what  criteria  were  put  to  recruit  someone  with  no  legal  background  in  a 
regulatory oriented job? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  Madam  Speaker,  I’ll  just  give  the  Scheme  of  Service. 
According to the Scheme of Service - I will just give you the advertisement and the profile of the 
ideal  candidate:  professional  with  a  standing  track  record,  well  versed  in  custodian  of  the 
academia,  fully  conversant  with  present  and  future  trends  in  the  fast  developing  tertiary 
education sector worldwide, experience in management and development of knowledge industry, 
top leadership qualities, capacity to deliver in line with Government policy, the provision of the 
TEC Act and the TEC corporate vision strategies and objectives.  

So, nowhere in the Scheme of Service or the advertisement, there was any mention or 

requirement for legal background for the post of Executive Director of TEC. 

Mr Rutnah: Does the hon. Minister now agree that this was actually a tailormade job 

specification to suit someone? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  Madam  Speaker,  I  have  no  information  showing  that  this 
was a tailormade scheme though I do agree that we have had a lot of problems with the former 
Director. 

Mr  Uteem:  Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Minister  just  mentioned  that  there  is  now  an 
Officer-in-Charge for TEC, may I know from the hon. Minister whether the TEC Board has been 
reconstituted or if not, when does she propose to reconstitute the Board? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: The Board is being  reconstituted and very  soon the  Board 

will be sitting. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Bhagwan! 

HEALTH TRACKS - DAUGUET & SIGNAL MOUNTAIN -  UPGRADING WORKS 

(No. B/118) Mr R. Bhagwan (First Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) asked 
the  Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management 
whether, in regard to the Dauguet and the Signal Mountain Health tracks, he will state, in each 
case – 

 
(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

44 

when it was opened to the public; 

if his Ministry is proposing to carry out upgrading works thereat and, if so, 
indicate when, and 

if consideration will be given for the installation of lightning and toilet facilities 
thereat. 

Mr Dayal: Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed that 
the Dauguet Health Track was opened to the public on 09 September 2001.  As far as Signal 
Mountain Health track is concerned, I am informed that joggers were already using the track well 
before the project was completed in August 2006. 

With  regard  to  parts  (b)  and  (c)  of  the  question,  following  concerns  raised  by  hon. 
Roubina Jadoo-Jaunboccus and hon. Rajesh Anand Bhagwan, site visits have been effected at 
Dauguet and Signal Mountain Health tracks and I was personally involved with it. It has been 
observed that maintenance works had not been undertaken for quite some time and there is a lack 
of lighting and toilet facilities. 

Madam Speaker, with a view to promoting a healthy lifestyle and enhancing quality of 
life, my Ministry would be adopting a holistic approach to all these issues and will implement a 
project  for  the  rehabilitation  of  the  health  tracks  and  for  the  provision  of  basic  amenities, 
including lighting and toilet facilities very soon. 

In  fact,  the  idea  is  to  convert  both  health  tracks  into  major  attractions.    This  initiative 
would encourage adults, youth, students, children and tourists to visit these sites and make use of 
the facilities. 

I would also wish to refer the hon. Member to my reply to Parliamentary Question B/86 

on the subject of lighting at the Signal Mountain.  

Mr Bhagwan: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the hon. Minister for his reply. Can 
he also explore the possibility of involving the inhabitants of both regions as far as the watch - 
initially there was a Dauguet watch and a Mountain Signal watch - for the people of the region is 
concerned and to oversee and have a look on the security aspect and other aspects concerning the 
amenity?  Can  he  consider  again  the  setting  up  of  these  two  committees  especially  with  the 
people of the region? 

45 

 
Mr Dayal: This is a very valid proposal and I will look into it because at my Ministry we 
are very much concerned with getting communities involved in all our projects. Therefore, this is 
already in the agenda and we will be looking into it. 

As far as security is concerned, we have already attended to this issue. 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, there have been previous Parliamentary Questions on these 
two sites. The hon. Minister at one point said that there is going to be basic amenities and, in the 
same answer, he says that he is going to make that into major attraction. I would like to know 
from the hon. Minister what is the budgeted amount for each project, when it will be started and 
when he expects this basic or major attraction to be completed? 

Mr  Dayal:  Madam  Speaker,  I  must  enlighten  the  House  that  basic  facilities  were  not 
catered  for  by  the  previous  Government.  C’est  l’élémentaire!  It  has  been  observed  that 
maintenance works had not been undertaken for quite some time and there is a lack of lighting 
and toilet facilities.  With a view to promoting a healthy lifestyle and enhancing quality of life, 
we are catering to that.  My Ministry will implement a project for the rehabilitation of the Health 
Tracks and for the provisions of basic amenities including lighting and the setting up of toilet 
facilities very soon.  In fact, the idea is to convert both health tracks into major attractions.  This 
initiative would encourage adults, youth, students, children and tourists to visit these sites and 
make use of the facilities.  We have the budget requirements, we don’t have exactly the amount, 
but we have the funds and we are going for the project on a priority basis. 

Mr Bhagwan: For the security of these joggers, can I make a request to the hon. Minister 
to have the  Police de l’Environnement do a permanent watch on these two sites, especially when 
people go there in the morning and in the afternoon? 

Mr Dayal: As a matter of fact, this has been attended to. But, the point that I want to 
highlight here is that no maintenance was done and we are seeking assistance from the Special 
Mobile Force to have special cleaning exercises. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: One last question on this issue! 

(Interruptions) 

Order, please! One last question on this issue! Hon. Mahomed! 

 
Mr  Mahomed:  Madam  Speaker,  may  we  have  an  idea  from  the  hon.  Minister  when 

46 

actually the work will start? 

Mr Dayal: The work has already started. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ameer Meea! 

(Interruptions) 

RICHE TERRE - FIRE STATION HEADQUARTERS & TRAINING CENTRE 

(No. B/119) Mr A. Ameer Meea  (Second Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port 
Louis East) asked the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the Mauritius Fire 
and Rescue Services, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to –  

(a) if the building presently housing the Port Louis Fire Station is in a derelict state, thus 
representing hazards and, if so, indicate if remedial measures will be taken for the 
restoration thereof, and  

(b)  where  matters  stand  as  to  the  proposed  construction  of  a  new  Fire  Station 
Headquarters and Training Centre at Riche Terre, indicating the expected start and 
completion dates thereof. 

Dr. Husnoo: Madam Speaker, I wish to thank the hon. Member for putting this question 
which illustrates the unprofessional manner in which the previous Government has been running 
the affairs of this country. 

In fact, Madam Speaker, the building housing the fire station has been deteriorating and 
has been left in a state of utter abandonment. The previous Government and the City Council of 
Port Louis were both aware of the state of the building and the threat and hazard that it represents 
to the occupants and the firefighters. However, nothing has been done. 

I  am  informed  that  according  to  a  Structural  Investigation  report  from  the  Ministry  of 
Public Infrastructure, Land Transport and Shipping dated as far back as December 2006 and a 
report  of  the  Occupational  Safety  and  Health  Unit  of  the  Ministry  of  Civil  Service  and 
Administrative Reforms dated October 2009, the building housing the Port Louis Fire Station is 
unsafe for its users and beyond economic repairs. 

47 

 
It is inadmissible that since 2006 no remedial action has been taken and the situation has 
been allowed to deteriorate. The City Council of Port Louis which is the owner of the building 
has also failed in its contractual duty to undertake the necessary repairs to the building which is 
being rented by the Mauritius Fire and Rescue Services, in spite of repeated requests. 

This Government, being a caring and responsible one, will not remain indifferent to this 
state of affairs. In fact, I am convening the Lord Mayor, the Chief Fire Officer of the Mauritius 
Fire and Rescue Services and other stakeholders to a meeting very soon to see how best we can 
address this problem. 

In  fact,  it  is  envisaged  to  prepare  a  comprehensive  plan  for  the  complete  renovation 
and/or reconstruction of the building which will include the commissioning of the consultancy 
services to address issues such as the nature and the extent of repairs required, the planning of 
works  without  disrupting  the  activities  of  the  fire  station,  the  structural  proposal  taking  into 
account the geological condition of the site and cost estimates. In parallel, we may also consider 
the acquisition of the land by the Government for this purpose. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed that a plot of land of the extent of 
16  arpents  and  30  perches  at  Riche  Terre  has  already  been  vested  in  my  Ministry  for  the 
construction of a fire station, the Head Office of the Mauritius Fire and Rescue Services and a 
training academy. Given the massive financial investments to the order of half a billion rupees to 
be made, it has been decided that these projects be implemented in the context of an integrated 
development  plan  for  the  Jin  Fei  site  and  also  in  the  context  of  any  future  harbour  and  port 
development. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  In  his  reply,  I  heard  the  hon.  Minister  stating  that  the  building  is 
beyond repairs and then he enumerated on the repairs that need to be done. Am I right that the 
building will be repaired and the Fire Services will stay there or are they being relocated? 

Dr.  Husnoo:  As  I  say,  according  to  the  report,  the  building  is  unsafe  and  beyond 
economic repairs but, we are going to look into it. We are going to have a committee to look into 
it and see whether we are going to repair the building – I think that it is a bit difficult – or to put a 
new building there. But, if we have to do that, we have to make sure that the Fire Services can 
still have a place around there so that it can cater for that duration when the work is being carried 

 

48 

out. So, we will have to make a place for them adjacent to it so that they can continue with the 
rescue services in Port Louis. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Speaker, this issue has been long on the cards and why I am 
insisting is that the hon. Minister himself says that according to a report it is clearly stated that 
the  building  is  beyond  repair!  Now,  he  will  make  another  committee  that  will  look  into  the 
repairs. When are we going to take a decision  whether to pull down the building and build a new 
one or  to move it out of Port Louis? 

(Interruptions) 

Dr. Husnoo: No, I have said the building is unsafe for its users and beyond economic 
repairs as it is. But, we have to be careful; we cannot just close the Fire Services here and leave 
Port Louis without protection. We can’t do that! We are going to repair the building. Nothing has 
been done, as you know, since 2006. We are going to look into it; we are going to, hopefully, put 
up a new building depending on what we find on the survey. But, at the same time, we have to 
cater for the protection of the City of Port Louis. So, we have to find where to accommodate the 
fire station during the repairs period. We cannot just leave Port Louis unprotected! 

Mr Mohamed: Madam Speaker, I have heard the hon. Minister say that there was a 
report in 2006, and if I am not mistaken, he was a Member of Parliament representing Port Louis 
in  2006  until  2007,  2008,  2009  and  2010.    He  did  not  do  anything  for  that  issue  or  put  any 
questions in Parliament on that issue when he was Member of Parliament and a backbencher, but 
now that he is a Minister, can he now give us a date and a timeline when will this new committee 
be meeting?  Who will be the members of that committee and when will they finish their work?  
When will he start implementation, since he said that nothing has been done?  How fast can he 
run? 

Dr. Husnoo:  I am glad that the hon. Member asks the question. Firstly, I was a Member of 
Parliament, but I was not the Minister of Local Government, nor was I a member of the Cabinet 
at that time. There you are. Thank you. That’s number one. 

Secondly, you were there for 10 years, as you said, and you have not done anything. Now, 
you are trying to blame me. That’s usual. It’s a usual thing. You have not done anything about it 
and you are trying to blame me now. 

 

49 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! Order, please! 

  (Interruptions) 

Order, please! 

Dr. Husnoo:  We are going to look into it. I promise you that, but give me time. I have 

been here for only two months. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Mohamed no questions from the Opposition! 

(Interruptions) 

Dr. Husnoo:  Give me time. We are going to look into it.  We are going to have a meeting. 

We are going to look into it and we are not going to sit as the last Government has done for the 
last five years. 

(Interruptions) 

No way! I am not like you!  What I promise, I am going to do. 

Madam Speaker: Next question!  Hon. Ameer Meea! 

SMF MUSEUM - RENOVATION 

(No. B/120)  Mr A. Ameer Meea (Second Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port 
Louis  East)  asked 
the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External 
Communications whether, in regard to the Museum of the Special Mobile Force, at Vacoas, he 
will state since when it has been closed to the public, indicating – 

(a) if consideration will be given for renovation works to be carried out thereat and, if so, 

give details thereof, and  

(b) when the re-opening thereof to the public is contemplated. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 

Collendavelloo): Madam Speaker, with your permission, I shall reply to this question.  

I  am informed by the Commissioner of Police that the SMF Museum was closed to the 
public in December 1997 on account of water leakages through the roof and the walls. It may be 
noted  that  since  2009,  the  site  has  been  put  at  the  disposal  of  the  Ministry  of  Tourism  and 

 

50 

External Communications and subsequently handed over to the Tourism Authority, which has 
carried out renovation works amounting to some Rs1.4 m. 

As regards parts (a) and (b) of the question, I understand that the Ministry of Tourism and 
External  Communications  is  in  presence  of  a  request  from  the  Prime  Minister’s  Office 
concerning the handing back of the site on account of the project for its transformation into a 
Regimental Museum. This request is under consideration. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Can I ask the hon. Minister whether this museum will be vested to the 

Ministry of Environment? 

Mr Collendavelloo: I understand we are going to put there all the old uniforms which used 
to be worn for centuries. It is going to be a historical musuem.  The hon. Member will note that 
this building used to house the Police Band, but then the inhabitants were not happy about the 
music reaching the houses and apparently the noise even went very far. So, it was closed down. 

Madam Speaker: Any other questions? Hon. Ganoo is not there for PQ No. B/121.  So, 

we will proceed with PQ No. B/123. 

MILITARY ROAD - STATE LAND - SQUATTERS 

(No. B/123) Mr S. Mohamed (First Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port Louis 
East) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in regard to the 
eighteen families squatting State lands at Route Militaire, Plaine Verte, since last year, he will 
state  where  matters  stand  regarding  the  arrangements  made  by  his  Ministry  for  each  of  these 
families to obtain a plot of land. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun):  Madam 
Speaker, 18 families were initially found squatting at Military Road along the Ring Road Phase 3 
alignment. In 2011, it was decided that they be relocated in the vicinity outside the limits of the 
Ring Road. Lease agreements were drawn in respect of 14 of these 18 families. The remaining 
four families have, unfortunately, not shown any interest in securing a lease agreement and they 
have not submitted relevant documents so far. 

The National Empowerment Foundation (NEF) was requested, in January 2012, to assist 
the squatters who qualify for support under the relevant scheme operated by the Foundation. In 
2014, the NEF informed that, because of the topography of the site, the cost of infrastructural 

 

51 

works on the site would be excessively high. The NEF, therefore, requested that an alternative 
site be identified for the relocation of the squatters. 

My  Ministry  has  identified  another  plot  of  State  land  near  the  Cité  Martial  market  fair, 
behind  “Islamic  Centre  for  Disabled  Children’’  for  the  relocation  exercise.  Planning-wise, the 
site  has  been  found  to  be  suitable  for  residential  development.  The  families  concerned  were 
informed about the new site and they are agreeable to be relocated there. 

I have personally met the families in my office on 29 January 2015 to explain to them the 

arrangements being made for their relocation. 

A  Coordination  Committee  with  all  relevant  stakeholders  has  been  set  up  under  my 
Chairmanship to monitor the implementation of the project. It has been found that a geotechnical 
investigation  of  the  site  should  be  carried  out  to  determine  whether  soil  conditions  are 
appropriate for the proposed residential project. In this connection, a request has already been 
made to the NEF. 

If the geotechnical investigation shows that the site is suitable, infrastructural works would 

start. Thereafter, individual leases would be drawn up for the beneficiaries. 

Mr Mohamed: Madam Speaker, at some time last year, I, myself, accompanied the former 
Minister of Housing and Lands with the NEF to identify a plot of land, maybe the hon. Minister 
would know exactly what I am talking about since I know he went to the spot, immediately next 
to the Islamic Centre for Disabled Children behind Canal Anglais that hold an area of land. Is 
this the same plot of land that we are talking about where some geotechnical tests have to be 
carried out? This is what I would like to know, first of all. 

Mr Soodhun: Exactly the same. 

Mr Mohamed: With your permission, Madam Speaker, can I ask the hon. Minister, since 
this is the same plot of land that I had identified to the officers of his Ministry, and once the 
geotechnical works  are  carried out and things  are fine and since it is immediately next to the 
building that has been put up by the Islamic Centre for Disabled Children, can the hon. Minister 
confirm  whether  the  infrastructural  costs  will  be  borne  by  Government  as  far  as  the  retaining 
wall is concerned, if it needs to be built? 

 

52 

Mr Soodhun: I don’t have this information with me, but I am going to communicate it to 

my hon. friend. 

AIR  MAURITIUS LTD/EMIRATES AIRLINE – OPEN SKY POLICY 

 (No. B/124) Mr S. Mohamed (First Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port Louis 
East)  asked  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications 
whether, in regard to the agreement signed between Air Mauritius Ltd. and Emirates Airline in 
relation to the open sky policy, he will state where matters stand. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo): Madam Speaker, I regret being unable to answer that question. Air Mauritius 
Ltd.  is  a  company  listed  on  the  Stock  Exchange  and  governed  by  the  Companies  Act  and  its 
Constitution.  I  would  not,  therefore,  be  in  a  position  to  disclose  information  relating  to  its 
commercial matters.  

I know, however, that Air Mauritius and Emirates signed a Memorandum of Agreement on 

16 December 2013. 

Mr Mohamed: I thank the hon. Minister for his answer. Now, my question, true it is, talks 
about  the  agreement  between  Air  Mauritius  and  Emirates.    But,  there  is  another  part  of  the 
question, which I believe does not at all concern Air Mauritius or Emirates, and, that is, precisely 
the policy of Government in relation to the open sky policy. Now, what is the stand, therefore, of 
Government?  I  am  not  interested  in  knowing  les  tenants  et  les  aboutissants  of  the  agreement 
between Air Mauritius and Emirates. But what is, therefore, the open sky policy of Government? 
Are we proceeding with it or are we halting it? 

Mr Collendavelloo:  If that is the question, I am sure the hon. Member could redraft his 
question on a next occasion. This is not the way that I have read it. I am very sorry. Perhaps, I 
cannot understand the ambit of the question which he asked. I read in regard to the agreement 
signed between the Air Mauritius and Emirates Airlines.  If my hon. friend would ask a question 
on the open sky policy and what is the open sky policy of Government, I am sure we would be 
most happy to oblige. 

Mr Mohamed: I can understand that the hon. Minister is not the substantive Minister, 
and  I  take  under  advisement  his  suggestion  to  redraft  the  question  but,  may  be,  I  could  just 

 

53 

simplify matters. I understand, once again, he is not the substantive Minister, but the question is 
very simple.  With regard to open sky, are we going to restrict it or are we not going to restrict it? 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Shakeel  Mohamed,  I  am  sorry!  Your  question  relates  to  an 
agreement signed between Air Mauritius and Emirates Airline in relation to the open sky policy. 
So, may be, you should come with another question. 

Mr  Uteem:  If  I  may  ask  the  hon.  Minister,  in  relation  to  this  agreement,  whether  the 
Government was party to the agreement and whether any commitment was given in the name of 
Government in this agreement with respect to competition, exclusivity, code sharing between Air 
Mauritius and any other airline? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  Can  I  rebound  in  the  same  way  that  I  answered  to  your  hon. 
colleague, to come with a substantive question on whether Government was a party and then he 
will, I am sure, give you all the details.  

Madam Speaker: Next question! 

MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND QUALITY OF LIFE - VACANCIES 

 (No. B/125) Mr S. Mohamed (First Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port Louis 
East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  whether,  in  regard  to  each  of  the 
parastatal  bodies  and/or  institutions  falling  under  the  aegis  of  his  Ministry,  he  will  state  the 
vacancies existing thereat since 11 December 2014 to date, that will be filled by - 

(a) way of advertisement calling for qualified candidates, and  

(b)  means  other  than  public  advertisement  which  call  for  qualified  candidates  to  be 

interviewed therefor.  

Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, there are three parastatal bodies that fall under the aegis of 
my  Ministry  and  they  are  the  Mauritius  Institute  of  Health,  the  National  Agency  for  the 
Treatment  and  Rehabilitation  of  Substance  Abusers,  commonly  known  as  NATReSA  and  the 
Trust Fund for Specialised Medical Care. There is one institution, the Mauritius Family Planning 
Association which is also under the Ministry.  

With regard to parts (a) and (b), the information requested is being compiled and will be 

placed in the Library. 

54 

 
Mr  Mohamed:  With  regard  to  all  those  places  that  have  been  referred  to  by  the  hon. 
Minister,  are  there  any  of  those  institutions  that  have  filled  vacancies  recently,  ever  since 
December 2014 and if the answer is, yes, which would those institutions be? 

Mr Gayan: Well, if the hon. Member wants a specific answer to a specific question, he 
must  come  with  a  specific  question;  but,  if  he  is  referring  to  something  which  happened  last 
week, I am afraid that he is out of order. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Minister, either you can reply, you say you have got the reply or 

you cannot reply and you say you don’t have the reply!  

Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, when I said the question is out of order, it is because there 

was another … 

Mr Mohamed: Is the hon. Minister taking a point of order? If he is going to take a point 

of order, can the hon. Minister do it in a proper way? 

(Interruptions) 

 

Mr Gayan: I can say that I am not going to reply to this because it is out of order. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! Hon. Minister, please sit down!  

Mr Gayan: I am sorry! 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.    Minister,  I  just  told  you,  either  you  have  the  reply  to  the  
supplementary question which has been asked by  the hon. Member or  you don’t have.  If  you 
don’t have the reply, you say you don’t have it now, you will come at a later stage with it. 

Mr Gayan: I do not have the answer! 

Mr  Mohamed:  Can  I  be  more  specific,    was  there  a  vacancy  at  the  Trust  Fund  for 
Specialised Medical Care recently and was it filled up by advertising or by other means? If the 
hon. Minister does not have the answer or does not want to give the answer, I will bow by the 
decision of the Chair. 

Mr Gayan: Well, my answer is the same, I don’t have the answer. 

Mr Mohamed:  Is the hon. Minister telling us that when he was saying just now what 
happened  last  week,  he  was  not  aware  what  he  was  talking  about  or  was  he  referring  to 

 

55 

something else, or is he saying now that he is not aware of what the answer is, simply because he 
does not want to give the answer? 

Mr Gayan: What is the question? I don’t know, it is a multiple question, come with one 

simple question! 

Mr  Mohamed:  The  simple  question  is:  was  there  a  vacancy  at  the  Trust  Fund  for 
Specialised Medical Care recently and has it been filled up? This is the same issue which the 
hon. Minister is refering to when he said last week. That is exactly what I am refering to and he 
is exactly aware of what I am refering to, but he does not want to answer and going round about, 
and refusing to answer. 

Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, if the the hon. Member is right that last week there was a 
question on the very same subject, then according to Standing Order  22,  paragraph 1 (b), it is 
out of order. 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Minister,  the  question  from  the  hon.  Member  is  clear.  If  you 

don’t want to answer, you say clearly that you don’t want to give a reply to this question. 

Mr Gayan: My answer, Madam Speaker, is that the answer was already provided last 

week. 

Mr Mohamed: That was not an issue that was canvassed at all.  The question is: was it 
by advertising or any other method was used? Simple! Since he seems now to, all of a sudden, 
remember what we are talking about. 

Mr  Gayan:  Well,  there  are  lots  of  methods  of  recruitment,  Madam  Speaker.  You  can 
have an open advertisement, there can be a head hunting or there may be other ways; but, in this 
particular case, there was a Cabinet decision and that Cabinet decision was implemented. 

Mr Mohamed: Why wasn’t the method that is so well spoken of by the hon. Minister of 
Finance, whom I congratulate for, that is, calling out pour un appel de candidature?  It is totally 
right, and I commend him for that. Why wasn’t that method used? 

Mr Gayan: Government is Government, Government decides. 

Mr Mohamed: Does the hon. Minister propose to, at least, pay attention to the excellent 
methods that are proposed by the hon. Minister of Finance, and the hon. Prime Minister, that of 

 

56 

calling  for  candidature  and  the  best  possible  candidates?  Does  he  propose  to  take  that  into 
account with regard to the other institutions he referred to? 

Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, there are various methods of recruitment and Government 
decides  on  the  method  of  recruitment  for  any  particular  post.  Government  is  not  tied  to  any 
specific way of advertising. There may be, for example, advertising. Lots of people talks about 
advertising, advertising in the local press, international press, in specialised journals. Where do 
we  advertise?  By  l’affiche?  What  to  do?  No,  this  is  why  I  say  Government  is  Government, 
Government decides in the best interest of the country who is best. 

Mr Mohamed: I totally understand the difficulties being faced by the hon. Minister in 
answering that question, and I am very compassionate. What I would like to know, therefore, 
Madam  Speaker,  is  the  following.    My  question  is  addressed  to  him,  now  if  he  wants  to  use 
Government as a paravent, fair enough. But, the question is: is there, in this Republic, any other 
candidate that could be better than the one he is trying to appoint, and hiding behind Government 
in order to make that appointment? 

Mr Gayan: Well, I am not aware of that. 

Madam Speaker: Last question on this issue, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Bhagwan:  The  hon.  Minister    has  just  stated  ‘Government’.  But,  can  the  hon. 
Minister inform the House, the country and the nation that, under his pressure, that Government 
approved that appointment of Executive Director of the Trust Fund for Specialised Care? 

Mr Gayan: No Government acts under pressure and certainly not a Government under 

Sir Anerood Jugnauth. 

FISHERMEN – REGISTRATION CARD 

(No. B/126) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked the Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, Shipping and Outer Islands 
whether, in regard to the fishermen, he will – 

(a) give a list thereof holding a Fisherman’s Registration Card, indicating the measures he 
proposes  to  take  against  holders  thereof  who  are  no  longer  involved  in  fishing 
activities;  

 
(b)  liaise  with  the  Beach  Authority  to  ensure  that  a  specific  and  adequate  space  is 

57 

earmarked for the regular maintenance of their boats, and  

(c) state if he proposes to recruit additional officers to combat illegal fishing at sea and to 

take other remedial measures in relation thereto. 

Mr Koonjoo: Madam Speaker, with your permission I am tabling a list of 2,070 fishers 

who hold a Fisherman’s Registration Card. 

The measures taken by my Ministry to trace out fishermen who are no longer involved in 

fishing activities are as follows - 

(i) 

The  activities  of  fishermen  are  being  constantly  monitored  by  Officers  of  the 
Fisheries Protection Service of my Ministry at the fish landing stations and during 
patrols  at  sea.  Whenever  a  fisherman  is  found  no  longer  involved  in  fishing 
activities  for  a  consecutive  period  of  six  months,  his  fisherman  card  is 
automatically cancelled.  

(ii)  All reported cases of alleged inactive fishermen are fully investigated and upon 
confirmation that the fisherman is not involved in fishing, his fishermen card is 
cancelled. 

(iii)  The  collaboration  of  the  Ministry  of  Social  Security,  National  Solidarity  and 
Reform  Institutions,  is  solicited  when  the  need  arises.  In  fact,  my  Ministry 
provides  to  the  Ministry  of  Social  Security,  National  Solidarity  and  Reform 
Institutions  a  detailed  list  of  registered  fishermen  and  requests  that  Ministry  to 
submit  information  on  any  case  of  contribution  to  the  National  Pension  Fund 
made  by  an  employer  other  than  my  Ministry  in  respect  of  any  registered 
fisherman.  On  obtaining  information  from  the  Ministry  of  Social  Security, 
National  Solidarity  and  Reform  Institutions,  any  doubtful  case 
is  fully 
investigated where there is a justifiable ground to do so.  

With regard to part (b) of the question, my Ministry has already agreed to the proposal of 
the  Beach  Authority  for  fishermen  to  use  some  beaches  for  repairs  of  boats.  Eight  sites  have 
already been agreed with the Beach Authority. We are informing the fishers, accordingly. 

 

58 

As regards part (c) of the question, my Ministry is in the process of recruiting additional 
Fisheries Protection Officers with a view to strengthening action to combat illegal fishing in our 
lagoon.  

Other remedial measures being implemented by this Ministry to  combat illegal fishing 

include the following - 

(a)  the strengthening of collaboration between the officers of my Ministry and the officers 

of the National Coast Guard so as to provide a 24-hour surveillance service at sea; 

(b)  increasing  the  number  of  flying  squad  from  5  to  8  units  and  equipping  them  with 
appropriate  facilities  so  that  they  can  intervene  promptly  in  order  to  deter  illegal 
fishing. 

I  would  also  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  my  Ministry  is  presently  preparing  a  new 
Fisheries and Aquaculture Bill and provision is being made under this new piece of legislation to 
better equip officers of the Fisheries Protection  Service so that they would be able to  combat 
illegal fishing more efficiently. Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Rughoobur! 
Mr Rughoobur: Madam Speaker, I would like to ask the hon. Minister if his Ministry is 
envisaging issuing registration cards to fishermen in the near future, because I know that as from 
2010 it is Government’s policy not to issue any further fisherman registration card.  I would like 
to know whether he is envisaging changing that policy and, at least, to replace those cards that 
have been taken back from those fishermen who have abandoned the profession? 

Mr Koonjoo: Yes, Madam Speaker, we are actually trying to review, because there is a 
huge  demand  from  the  fishermen  section.    Since  2010,  there  was  a  stop  put  for  issuing  new 
cards.  The problem is that we have got some people who are no more there and their cards are 
still there.  

The  second  thing  is  that  there  are  a  good  number  of  people,  almost  504,  if  I  am  not 
mistaken,  who  have  requested  for  new  cards.  We  are  studying  the  problem  and  maybe  in  the 
future we will see to it that new cards are issued.  There is also a demand by the fishermen in a 
committee which I met twice in the last couple of months. They are agreeable to the proposition 
that those who are not using or who are unable to use, their cards should be taken and given to 
other people. We are working upon that, Madam Speaker. 

 

59 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ramful! 
Mr Ramful: May I ask the hon. Minister what are the criteria that the Ministry look at 

when registering new applications? 

Mr  Koonjoo:  I  don’t  have  the  criteria  as  such,  but,  as  usual,  the  Ministry  has  been 

operating like that since many years and if there is anything new, we will have to look into that. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rughoobur! 
Mr  Rughoobur:  The  fishermen  are  nowadays  really  facing  big  difficulties  when  they 
have  to  maintain  their  boats.    So,  I  would  request  the  hon.  Minister  to  liaise  with  the  Beach 
Authority so that they can accelerate on procedures and find a place for them so that they can 
maintain their boats.  This is first.  

Secondly, if the hon. Minister can liaise with the National Coast Guard so that they be 
more  flexible  because  there  are  lots  of  contraventions  these  days.  They  don’t  have  a  place  to 
maintain their boats. So, I would request the hon. Minister to please look into that. 

Mr  Koonjoo:  Madam  Speaker,  I  just  replied  that  it  has  already  been  done.  There  are 
eight beaches which were identified with the Ministries concerned and we have agreed to allow 
these places where the fishermen can safely repair their boats or keep them there in bad season. 

Madam Speaker: Last question on this issue! 
Mr  Rughoobur:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  Just  a  last  question!  I  just  wanted  to 
clarify from the hon. Minister, you have got a batch of fishermen, there was a course running last 
year for off lagoon fishing and I am made to understand that for off lagoon fishing, you have got 
a special registration card for fishermen. I know that part of the course has been completed, but 
they need to do the practical. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rughoobur, please ask your question! 
Mr Rughoobur: I would just ask the hon. Minister to please look into this off lagoon 
fishing course that was conducted and if he could try to ensure that they complete their course at 
least, the practical part, and they get their card soon. Thank you. 

Mr Koonjoo: Madam Speaker, I will definitely do it. Thank you. 
Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Rughoobur! 

 

INDIAN OCEAN ISLAND GAMES – NATIONAL FOOTBALL TEAM  

 

60 

 (No. B/127) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Youth  and  Sports  whether,  in  regard  to  the  setting  up  of  the  Mauritius 
Football League and the recruitment of a new Directeur Technique National, he will state - 

(a)  if  his  Ministry  is  proposing  to  carry  out  a  survey  of  the  quality  and  adequacy  of 

infrastructure available in municipal and district council areas, indicating if - 

(i) consideration will be given for the upgrading thereof, and 

(ii)  his  Ministry  has  signed  any  agreement  with  the  local  authorities  for  the 

management and maintenance thereof, and 

(b)  the composition of the technical team in charge of preparing the Mauritius national 
football team for the forthcoming Indian Ocean Island Games to be held in August 
2015. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

NTC – BUSES – ACQUISITION & MAINTENANCE 

(No. B/128) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for  Grand’ Baie &  Poudre d’Or) 
asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the National 
Transport Corporation, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, in respect of the 
past five years, information as to - 

(a) the total amount of money -  

(i) invested in the acquisition of new buses, indicating the - 

(A) names of the respective suppliers thereof, and  

(B) sources and modes of financing thereof; 

(b) paid to private companies for the maintenance of buses, if any, indicating if facilities 

are available for in-house maintenance of the buses and, if not, why not, and 

(c) if copy of the audited reports in relation thereto will be tabled. 

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed that 

the National Transport Corporation has, for the last five years, purchased buses as follows - 

In March 2009, 8 minibuses for the sum of Rs12 m. 

 

61 

In 2010, 36 standard buses for around Rs94 m. and 10 minibuses for the sum of Rs26 m. 
In 2011, 63 buses for the sum of around Rs180 m. 
In 2013, 44 standard buses for around Rs117 m. and 27 minibuses for the sum of Rs69 m. 
In 2014, 2 semi-low floor buses for a sum of around Rs7 m. 
All  the  buses  were  acquired  from  ABC  Motors  except  for  the  last  two  semi-low  floor 
buses which are of the make Yutong from China, the other buses purchased from 2009 to 2014 
were of the make Nissan. 

As regards funding, all the purchases were effected out of lease and loans as follows - 
In 2009, a sum of Rs11.9 m. was leased from SBM. 
In 2010, loans of around Rs90 m. were obtained from SBI and Rs26 m. from Bank One. 
In  2011,  loans  of  around  Rs88  m.  and  Rs87  m.  were  obtained  from  SBI  and  SBM, 
respectively. 
In 2013, a loan of Rs195 m. was obtained from SBM.  And in 2014, the NTC purchased 
the two semi-low floor buses from its own funds. 
As regards part (b) of the question, Madam Speaker, I am further informed that all buses 
purchased from 2009 to 2014 are maintained by ABC Motors, in accordance with a maintenance 
contract agreement and an amount of around Rs93 m. has been disbursed for the last five years. 

(Interruptions) 

I am also informed that in-house facilities are available for the maintenance of buses 
and  a  total  sum  of  around  Rs895  m.  has  been  spent  over  a  period  of  five  years  for  the 
maintenance  of  the  remaining  329  buses,  giving  an  average  cost  of  maintenance  in-house  at 
around Rs2.7 m. per bus whereas the cost of maintenance - this is being outsourced - is around 
Rs489,000 per bus.  Outsourcing of maintenance of buses is, therefore, more cost effective than 
carried out in house. 

As regards part (c) of the question, I wish to inform the House, Madam Speaker, that the 
last audited report of 2012 has already been tabled here and it does not make any mention of the 
newly purchased buses.  I am informed that the 2013 report is still under preparation and will be 
tabled in due course. 

Mr Rughoobur:  Madam Speaker, as regards the maintenance of buses, the fact that huge 
fleet  is  today  being  outsourced  to  a  private  contractor,  I  just  wanted  to  know  from  the  hon. 
Minister if he has got garage facilities and other resources at the CNT and if there has been an 

 

62 

analysis made to ensure that whether in terms of cost effectiveness, the measures that has been 
taken to outsource is correct or else while the hon. Minister is outsourcing the fleet with private 
contractors, what the hon. Minister is doing with the existing resources that he has in-house? 

Mr Bodha:  Madam Speaker, I think the hon. Member got me wrong. It costs five times 
more to do the servicing in-house than outside. It is Rs2.7 m. per bus at the CNT and Rs489,000 
at the ABC Motors. It is five times more to do it in-house. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan:   Can the hon. Minister let us know what is the latest situation concerning 
the Blue Line buses?  We still remember the cases of fatal accidents.  What is the present status 
and how many are in service and where the actual Blue Line buses are being maintained?  

Mr Bodha:  The Blue Line buses, from what I have here, were run by buses which were 
bought in 2007.  So, they are buses which are being maintained at the garage of the CNT itself. 
In fact, we are going to see the possibility of renewing the fleet and to come with semi-low floor 
buses. 

Mr  Rughoobur:    Very  often  we  have  got  this  issue  of  non-publication  or  delay  in 
publication of financial accounts. Would the hon. Minister look into the possibility of the CNT, 
and  I  am  sure  in  other  cases  as  well,  that  there  are  quarterly  management  accounts  that  are 
prepared so that we can better assess the performance of these CNT or other organisations? 

Mr  Bodha:    Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Member  is  perfectly  right.  I  will  look  into  the 

matter.   

Mr  Jhugroo:    Madam  Speaker,  after  hearing  the  answer  from  the  hon.  Minister,  I 
understand maintenance per bus per year is around half a million rupees.  Can he explain to this 
House, what is the cost of doing the maintenance for a new bus in one year because we have got 
cars,  lorries  or  buses,  we  know  we  have  fuel  change,  oil  change,  fuel  filter  change,  oil  filter 
change, pay for servicing and brakes and this will cost Rs500,000 per year.  How does he explain 
this? 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Jhugroo, allow the hon. Minister to answer! 

Mr Bodha:  Madam Speaker, it is a very technical question, but I will try to answer.  From 
what I have been told the 188 Nissan and the 2 Yutong buses are maintained and serviced by the 

 

63 

local  ABC  Motors  company.    The  scope  of  maintenance  consists  servicing  at  every  5,000 
kilometres interval with the works involved mainly in the following items: change of engine oil, 
valve and then you have a second general servicing every 40,000 kilometres and then you have 
periodic  parts  replacement.    So,  the  average  of  the  Nissan  and  the  Yutong  buses  is  about 
Rs40,000 per month.   

Mr  Uteem:  Madam  Speaker,  in  this  House  we  have  had  the  opportunity  of  asking 
questions  about  the  Blue  Line  buses  and  other  buses.    Is  the  hon.  Minister  satisfied  with  the 
procurement process used by CNT for the acquisition and maintenance of these buses and if not, 
what he proposes to do? 

Mr Bodha:  Madam Speaker, the Government is not satisfied at all. We have had many 
questions in Parliament here about the procurement of buses and how it has been delayed.  They 
have been answered.  We had many questions, we had many replies; we have to look into the 
matter to see to it that we have the best buses at the best prices.  In fact, the Ministry of Finance 
at the last budget has put a subsidy of Rs1 m.  for each semi-low floor  buses and  I think this 
subsidy will still be there because we need to have a new public transport based on new buses 
and  the  CNT  has  to  show  the  way  as  regards  the  quality  of  service  and  the  quality  of 
management. 

Mr  Bhagwan:    Can  the  hon.  Minister  inform  the  House  who  is  the  Chairperson  of  the 

National Transport Corporation these days and whether a new Board is being reconstituted? 

Mr Bodha:  Presently, the Board is being chaired by the Senior Chief Executive of my 
Ministry and as regards the management, we have a team management, but we are going to come 
forward with a new management and a new Board very soon. 

Mr Jhugroo:  Can the hon. Minister explain to this House why the maintenance for buses 
is  five  times  more  than  what  is  being  paid  to  ABC  Motors?    Is  it  because  management  had 
bought pièces de rechanges for millions and millions of rupees which are not being used and 
lying down in the garage of CNT?  Is it true what I am telling in this House, Madam Speaker? 

Mr Bodha:  I think the hon. Member has enlightened the House properly.  I have been 
given  17  reasons  why  maintenance  should  not  be  done  at  the  CNT  and  10  reasons  why  they 

 

64 

should be done outside.  I am going to table all the reasons but I think I would say not the proper 
management of spare parts.  We have a number of other problems. 

 (Interruptions) 

We have to put the new rules and regulations and I think that the whole management system at 
the CNT has to be reviewed, Madam Speaker. 

Mr Mahomed: In fact, hon. Jhugroo has already asked the question that I wanted to ask. 
But  then,  can  we  know  more  specifically  from  the  hon.  Minister  –  I  know  he  mentioned  a 
committee and new management of the CNT - what will be done to address the issue in the long 
run? 

Mr Bodha:  The issue, Madam Speaker, is to address the whole issue of the fleet because 

today it is such a pity.  

(Interruptions) 

Because at one point in time, Madam Speaker, the CNT was seen as the pride of the nation.  We 
remember the 100 buses bought by Professor Sarathi.  It showed the way.  It had the standards as 
regards  work  conditions  and  quality  of  service  and  I  think  that  we  have  to  review  the  whole 
management, the whole fleet and come forward in such a manner that the backbone of the public 
transport will be the CNT. 

Mr  Mohamed:    Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Minister  has  spoken  of  huge  amounts  of 
money that they spent when it should not have been spent most probably on maintenance and I 
also heard hon. Jhugroo talked about his surprise and mine as well of the amount of money that 
has been spent on maintenance.  Now, yes, it is an issue of management having to be looked into 
again, but isn’t there the need? And here, my request to the hon. Minister is that he should look 
into the possibility of setting up a serious enquiry, once again, why not, by hon. Bhadain! By 
looking into the possibility that there may have been some wrong doing there. 

(Interruptions) 

He has got the strength to carry on and on and on. So let us give it to him. 

But he will go until three this time! 

(Interruptions) 

 
Madam Speaker: Okay, hon. Mohamed! 

65 

Mr Mohamed: So, maybe we could continue and have a proper enquiry to establish why 
the maintenance has cost so much. Who are the culpable parties? Who are the culprits? And if 
ever people have to be taken to task and matters reported to the Police, they should be reported to 
the Police in order to ensure that such issues do not happen again. 

Mr  Bodha:  The  hon.  Member  is  right,  Madam  Speaker.  I  think  this  is  what  the 
Government is doing, everywhere we have to do it. In fact, in 2009, Deloitte and Touche were 
requested to do a report and they did it in 2009. There was a restructure plan of the CNT which 
was approved by Government in 2013, but all the problems still remain. So, we have to have an 
indepth analysis of what is the situation at the CNT today, because from what I have heard, we 
have an overdraft.  

Mr Jhugroo: Madam Speaker, after questions asked by my friend, hon. Mohamed, will 
the hon. Minister - when sending this case to the Minister of Good Governance – take an indepth 
look with regard to the  purchase of spare parts, because millions and millions of rupees have 
been spent for so many years and after that refer this case to the Central CID? 

Mr Bodha: We will do that, Madam Speaker. 

Mr Mohamed: Madam Speaker, on a point of order! If I may be allowed, I speak under 
your correction, Madam Speaker. I think it is a very interesting and important question.  The fact 
that Mr Rughoobur here puts it - maybe he could clarify mon antenne and maybe I am wrong – I 
want to know if he is still heading Atics, if he is also in charge of another group and whether he 
is the CEO of Kalis Investment that has Kalis foundation included therein. So, here, it would be, 
in my humble opinion, I speak under your correction and forgive me if I am wrong to raise it. 
Since he is himself involved directly with the company that would be a competitor of Sarako 
plus he is involved in Kalis Investment that includes the foundation and CSR issues, it would be 
taking undue advantage of his position as a Member of Parliament hereby conflictual to put such 
a question. I am in the hands of the Chair. 

Madam  Speaker:  Yes.  Let  me  make  it  clear  to  any  hon.  Member  of  this  House  that, 
according to the Standing Orders, anybody who has an interest and comes with a question has to 

 

66 

declare his interest. So, if the hon. Member has an interest in this, he should, first of all, declare 
his interest. 

Mr Rughoobur: Madam Speaker, let me inform the House that immediately  after my 
election, I have resigned as shareholder, as Director of Kalis Investment and all the companies 
within the Kalis Investment, Atics as well. 

Madam Speaker: All right! Can the hon. Vice-Prime Minister and Minister of Energy 

reply? 

BAMBOUS - SOLAR PARK PROJECT   

(No.  B/129)  Mr  S.  Rughoobur  (Second  Member  for  Grand’Baie  &  Poudre  d’Or) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to the 
Solar Park Project in Bambous, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Central 
Electricity Board, information as to – 

(a) 

(b) 

the amount paid monthly to Sarako Ltd. for electricity generated and exported in 
the grid since the commissioning of the installations; 

if the Environment Impact Assessment Licence in respect thereof makes provision 
for  a  Corporate  Social  Responsibility  Fund  and  the  construction  of  a  tourist 
boutique  for  women  entrepreneurs  of  Bambous  and  of  the  vicinity  thereof  by 
Sarako Ltd. and, if so, indicate where matters stand, and 

(c) 

if copy of the agreement between Sarako Ltd. and the Central Electricity Board 
will be tabled. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities 

(Mr 
Collendavelloo): With regard to part (a), Madam Speaker, I am informed by the CEB that the 
monthly amount paid to Sarako PVP Co. Ltd. varies from Rs11 m. to Rs15 m., depending on the 
kilowatt hour supplied by the plant. A total amount of Rs154 m. inclusive of VAT has been paid 
over the period February 2014 to January 2015. I am tabling the details of the monthly payment, 
if I may. 

With regard to part (b), I am informed that no condition pertaining to Corporate Social 
Responsibility  Fund  and  the  construction  of  a  tourist  boutique  for  women  entrepreneurs  of 
Bambous  has  been  included  in  the  EIA  Licence  issued  on  19  August  2013.  However,  I  am 

 

67 

informed  that  the  EIA  Report  submitted  by  the  promoter  mentioned  several  socio-economic 
measures, including the setting up of a tourist shop and artisanal market place. I am not aware of 
any such projects as having been implemented by the promoter. 

As  regards  part  (c),  I  will  very  soon  table  a  copy  of  the  energy  supply  purchase 

agreement signed between Sarako and CEB. 

Because it is not with me. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Rughoobur:  I  just  wanted  to  know  from  the  Vice-Prime  Minister  what  are  the 
measures that are being taken, since he mentioned himself, that in the EIA Report the condition 
was that they had to, I think, construct a tourist shop and other amenities as well, what are the 
measures that will be taken so that the Ministry ensures that the contractor does go ahead with 
the construction of these tourist shops and other amenities? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  Well,  they  put  it  in  their  report,  but  it  was  not  included  in  the 
conditions of the EIA Licence. So, it was the Environment Committee that decided not to include 
it as a condition for giving an EIA Licence. 

Mr Bérenger: I am given to understand that Sarako, the plant, is not performing with 
maximum  efficiency.  Can  I  know  whether  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  has  looked  into  the 
problems causing that and what remedial action is being taken? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Well, I have had two conflicted answers to this question, and I am 
yet to ask my technical officer to investigate and I shall come with a statement to the House on 
this matter. 

Mr Rughoobur: In regard to the extent of land that was awarded to Sarako, I wanted to 
know from the hon. Vice-Prime Minister if the whole plot of land has been used or only a part of 
it and whether that part that is not currently being used, will the hon. Vice-Prime Minister inform 
the Minister of Housing  and Lands to proceed with taking it back? 

Mr Collendavelloo: The hon. Member is right. A large part of the land is not being used. 

My hon. colleague will take care of this very quickly. 

68 

 
Mr Bhagwan: Can I ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister to have the Technical Officers of 
his Ministry to have a site visit, together with those of the MPI and Agriculture, because much 
damage  has  been  done  in  the  area  where  all  these  solar  panels  have  been  fixed  in  an 
unprofessional manner, from what I have seen myself and also from what experts have told me? 
Can I make request to the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, at least, to have a full enquiry be done by 
technicians,  at  least,  to  see  that  there  is  no  harm  which  has  been  done,  not  only  to  the 
environment, but to the whole, sur les flancs de cette région? 

Mr Collendavelloo: In spite of the huge political differences which separate me from the 
promoters of Sarako,  I  have in all fairness to say that  I am not in possession of such reports. 
However, I shall again ask my technical officers to revisit the issue and to report to me. Up to 
now, I have not had that sort of information. 

Mr Bérenger: If you would allow me, since reference has been made to damage to the 
environment, now we are a tourism country. Earlier on, I heard the hon. Vice-Prime Minister say 
that we are going to go full scheme ahead if this is the expression with renewable energy. I do 
not know if the hon. Vice-Prime Minister has taken care to look from up there when planes are 
coming in and out of Mauritius, what a terrible eyesore this is and this is one. If we multiply this 
by  how  many  such  spots  without  due  care,  we  are  going  to  damage  our  tourism  product 
dangerously. So, can I ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, especially with forthcoming projects, to 
look at this aspect carefully? 

Mr Collendavelloo: That is a big question! Do we want to pollute our country with coal 
and oil? Do we want to have solar panels to save on oil imports? That is the huge debate. If we 
are  not  going  to  have  oil,  coal,  solar  panels,  wind  turbines  because  they  are  ugly,  we  are  not 
going to have electricity. So, admittedly, it is an eyesore, we need to balance all this, and that is 
what  the  Ministry  of  Environment  is  for.  They  have  to  look  at  the  impact  which  these  solar 
panels may have on the environment. 

If I may go further, we have buildings like the MCB Ltd. which are not eyesores through 
the use of solar photovoltaic; others are eyesores because they do not take the care of looking at 
the environment. 

69 

 
Mr Rughoobur: May I know from the Vice-Prime Minister what is the amount that has 
been  paid  out  of  the  MID  Fund  to  the  contractor  since  the  commissioning  and  before 
commissioning as well? 

Mr Collendavelloo: My hon. friend is very far from his question now. I am sure, if he 

comes with a substantive question I will give a reply, but I need notice of that. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed: Thank  you, Madam Speaker. The hon. Vice-Prime Minister has stated 
that the condition or what was promised in the report as far as those tourist boutiques for women 
entrepreneurs at Bambous form part of a report or commitment on the promoters’ part, but not as 
part  of  one  of  the  licencing  conditions.  Having  said  so,  even  if  this  is  the  case,  could  he  not 
consider that his Ministry would approach the promoters and insist that whatever commitment 
they may have taken, even though if it does not form part of the licensing conditions and permits, 
that  they  do  comply  with  their  commitments  and  do  go  ahead  with  what  they  promised  they 
themselves would do? 

Mr Collendavelloo: And then they will insist on getting the rest of the land which they 
are  not  using,  just  to  put  a  tourist  kiosk.  I  would  rather  let  my  colleague  of  the  Ministry  of 
Housing and Lands recover that extra plot of land which we need to, for instance, relocate the 
squatters  or  do  other  matters  there.  The  hon.  Members  of  Constituency  No.  14  will  note  that 
there is an acute squatter problem in the area. I must say that probably I made an error when I 
said that the conditions of the EIA report are not repeated in the EIA licence. As a matter of fact, 
they are not. But legally, are they bound by what they have in the EIA report is another issue. 

Madam Speaker: A last question on the issue, hon. Osman Mahomed! 

Mr  Mahomed:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  I  am  not  too  sure  whether  this  would 
warrant  a  more  substantive  question,  but  I  will  give  it  a  go  nonetheless.  This  is  the  biggest 
renewable energy project the country has experienced so far. Insofar as integration onto the grid 
is concerned, may  I have an indication from the hon. Vice-Prime Minister how is this faring, 
because this will be an important experience for us going forward in the domain of renewable 
energy? 

70 

 
Mr  Collendavelloo:  Of  course,  a  substantive  question  will  be  welcomed.  Offhand, 
according to CEB the grid is saturated. But the grid cannot be saturated, from what I hear and 
what I have read, the grid can be converted into a smart grid which would accommodate all these 
renewables. Apparently, with Sarako Ltd. they have saturated the grid. Sarako energy goes to La 
Chaumière substation which spreads this electricity in the area.  Apparently, it provides some 
50% of all the electricity required in the hotels. But, on a substantive question, I would be most 
delighted to assist. 

SSR INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT - NEW TERMINAL - CONTRACT 

(No. B/130) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked the 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External Communications whether, in regard to 
the  new  terminal  of  the  Sir  Seewoosagur  Ramgoolam  International  Airport,  he  will,  for  the 
benefit of the House, obtain from Airport Terminal Operations Ltd., information as to –  

(a) if it was a design and built project contract and, if so, indicate the time taken for the 

execution of the design thereof; 

(b) if galvanized metal frames were used; 

(c) the thickness of the metal roofing; 

(d) the type of curtain wall glass fixed; 

(e) amount of variations cost claimed and paid, and  

(f) table copy of the contract in relation thereto and, if not, why not.  

(Withdrawn) 

SSR INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT – CONSTRUCTION – AUDIT TRAIL 

(No. B/131) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked the 
Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms whether, in regard to 
the Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam International Airport, he will state if he will consider probing 
into  the  ACONEX  website,  with  the  permission  of  the  Officer-in-Charge  of  the  SSR 
International  Airport, for an audit trail  and follow-up of the documents  that had been  filed in 
relation to the construction thereof and table copy thereof so as to throw light on the opacity or 
transparency of the project. 

 

71 

(Withdrawn) 

 

SSR INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT - SECOND RUNWAY - CONTRACT 

(No. B/132) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked the 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External Communications whether, in regard to 
the construction of the second runway at the Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam International Airport, 
he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from Airport Terminal Operations Ltd., information 
as to the – 

(a) name of the contractor therefor; 

(b) cost of the project thereof, and  

(c) variation costs thereof, if any, indicating – 

 (i) if works have been executed as per the contract, and  

(ii) who certified the recommendations for payment. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Quirin! 

 (Withdrawn) 

NATIONAL SPORTS FEDERATIONS - SPORTS ACT - COMPLIANCE 

(No. B/133) Mr F. Quirin (Fourth Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) asked 
the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the National Sports Federations, he will 
state if all of them are complying with the Sports Act and, if not, he will, for the benefit of the 
House, obtain from each of them, information as to the reasons therefor. 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Madam  Speaker,  since  I  took  office  as  Minister  on  17  December 
2014,  I  am  having  consultations  with  all  stakeholders.    During  the  meetings  I  have  had  with 
National Sports Federations, most of them have expressed their inabilities to comply  with the 
provisions  of  the  Sports  Act,  particularly  Sections  11,  12,  13  and  14  of  the  Act  which  relate, 
among others, to required number of Regional Sports Committees and clubs. 

 
The Mauritius Olympic Committee and the Registrar of Associations have already been 
invited to submit their proposals to amend the Act.  The National Sports Federations will shortly 

 

72 

be invited to submit their proposals as well.  Once all the proposals are received, they will be 
examined at the level of my Ministry and a decision will be taken as to whether there is a need to 
amend the Act or otherwise. 

MAURITIUS GYMNASTICS FEDERATION – SUM ALLOTTED  

(No. B/134) Mr F. Quirin (Fourth Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) asked 
the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the Mauritius Gymnastics Federation, he 
will -  

(a) state the –  

(i) date of recognition thereof by his Ministry, and  

(ii) sum allocated thereto by his Ministry for financial year 2014, and  

(b) for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom –  

(i) information as to the names of the office bearers thereof, and  

(ii) a breakdown of the expenses incurred for financial year 2014. 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Madam  Speaker,  the  Mauritius  Gymnastics  Federation  had  a 
temporary recognition on 17 March 2014 and was fully recognised on 02 December 2014. For 
period ending 31 December 2014, an amount of Rs388,095 has been disbursed to the Federation.  

As regard to part (b) of the question, I am circulating the information. 

Mr Quirin: Madame la présidente, j’aimerais savoir du ministre quels sont les clubs qui 
sont affiliés à cette fédération et de préciser si ces mêmes clubs sont reconnus par son ministère 
tel que stipulé dans le Sports Act.  

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, I don’t have the names of all the clubs that are listed 
and which are affiliated with the Mauritius Gymnastics Federation but, definitely, I will give it to 
the House to be circulated to the hon. Member. 

Mr Quirin: Madame la présidente, l’honorable ministre est-il au courant que cette même 
fédération  de  gymnastique  a  tenu  son  assemblée  générale  le  28  février  dernier  au  centre  de 
Jeunesse de Flacq ?  

73 

 
Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, on Saturday the Federation made a request as usual 
to have its activity on that day and after that it conducted a meeting, whether it is an assemblée 
générale, I do not know because there has been no notice to my Ministry. 

Mr  Quirin:  Madame  la  présidente,  le    ministre  peut-il  demander  à  ces  officiers 
d’enquêter  et  de  voir  si  cette  même  assemblée  générale  s’est  tenue  selon  les  dispositions  du 
Sports Act ? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, as I mentioned before we do not know whether they 
have done une assemblée générale or not, because the last assemblée générale that they did was 
on 19 July 2014 and the term of office was for four years. So, we will definitely enquire into that 
and inform the House accordingly. 

Mr  Quirin:  Entre-temps,  Madame  la  présidente,  je  vais  déposer  sur  la  table  de 
l’Assemblée une copie de la convocation du secrétaire de la Fédération adressée aux clubs en 
vue  de  cette  assemblée  générale,  et  je  suppose  que  cela  pourra  aider  l’honorable  ministre  à 
enquêter pour voir si cette assemblée générale s’est tenu selon les dispositions du Sports Act.  

Dans  cette  même  voie,  Madame  la  présidente,  j’aimerais  que  l’honorable  ministre 
informe  la  Chambre  s’il  est  au  courant  que  des  chèques  avaient  été  tirés  à  l’ordre  de  l’actuel 
président  de  cette  fédération,  représentant  le  budget  pour  l’organisation  d’un  stage  qui  n’a 
finalement pas eu lieu.  

Mr Sawmynaden: Yes, actually I have been informed by my Ministry. I know that there 
are lots of fishy things going on as well in this Federation and we are definitely looking into the 
matter. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Bhagwan! 

(Interruptions) 

CT POWER PROJECT - PROMOTERS 

(No. B/135) Mr R. Bhagwan (First Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) asked 
the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms  whether,  in 
regard to the CT Power Project, he will state if he will initiate procedures for the conduct of a 
full forensic inquiry thereof in relation to the  -  

74 

 
(a) promoters thereof; 

(b) shareholding thereof; 

(c) amount of money transferred to Mauritius to date, and 

(d) name of the beneficiaries thereof. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo): With your permission, Madam, I will reply to this question myself since I can 
refer to what I have said earlier this morning in answer to the Private Notice Question. For the 
moment I am dealing with the contractual matters before I consider whether it should be referred 
to my colleague, the Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms. 

With  regard  to  the  promoters,  I  understand  that  the  promoters  are  CT  Holdings  Ltd., 
Malaysia  with  Mr  Soopramanien  Mariappan  holding  90%  of  the  shares  and  Mr  Steven  Chay 
Kwong holding 10% of the shares. CT Holdings Ltd. owns CT Power Holdings Ltd., which itself 
owns Mauritius CT Power Ltd. 

The shareholding of Mauritius CT Power Ltd., a Mauritian company is as follows - 

Company 

Class of Shares 

Percentage of Shares  

CT Power Holdings Ltd. 

Central  Electricity  Board 
Investment 
company  (a  subsidiary  company  of  the 
Central Electricity Board) 

CT Power Holdings Ltd. 

A 

B 

C 

58 % 

26% 

16% 

As  regard  to  the  26%  shares  of  the  Central  Electricity  Board  Investment  company,  this 
would be effective only after the execution of an Implementation Agreement between Mauritius 
CT Power Ltd and the Government and this has not been done. 

From  available  records  at  my  Ministry  and  at  the  Central  Electricity  Board,  there  is  no 

evidence of any amount of money having been transferred to Mauritius. 

 

75 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Can  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  whether  the  forthcoming  inquiry  - 
which he has informed us will be undertaken - will also cover the money received au vu et au su 
de  tout  le  monde,  in  canvassing  people  by  one  or  two  sociocultural  organisations;  one  is  Mr 
Dulthamun  and  others  in  the  whole  region  of  Albion,  distributing  money  and  also  equipment 
through their bureau phantom at Ébène?  Will the inquiry also include that aspect of distributing 
money? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Forthcoming inquiry is not the term that I have used. What I have said 
is  that  I  am  looking  at  the  moment  at  the  contractual  aspect  of  the  matter  before  considering 
whether to transfer the matter to my hon. colleague. I do not want to rush into it. I do not want to 
rush and accuse people of corruption left, right and centre without having, at least, some prima 
facie evidence. Of course, I know of all the facts to which the hon. Member is making allusion, 
but I need to be responsible before I act. 

Mr Bhagwan: Can, at least, the hon. Minister give the assurance to the House and also to 
the  population,  that  nobody  will  get  scot-free,  even  going  back  to  the  financing  of  electoral 
campaigns  back  from  2005  where  the  promoters  paid  for  the  posters  of  the  then  Alliance 
Sociale? I think one hon. Member knows exactly what I am saying. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan, refrain from making these comments! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhagwan: The hon. Minister has not replied to what I have stated. 

Mr Collendavelloo:  All these allegations will need to be investigated. I am not going to 
leave these matters. But I am not in charge of investigating acts of corruption. I want to remain 
within the four corners of my terms of reference and then I shall transfer to wherever they have 
to go. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Bhagwan! 

FIRE AND RESCUE SERVICES – LORRIES - PURCHASE 

(No. B/136) Mr R. Bhagwan (First Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) asked 
the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the Fire and Rescue Services, he will, 
for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, since 2008 to date, information as to the number 
of – 

76 

 

(a) lorries purchased, indicating -  

(i) the detailed costs thereof;  

(ii) the countries of origin thereof ; 

(iii) if all the lorries are operational and, if so, since when and, if not, why not, giving 

details thereof and the type of ladders fitted thereto, and 

(iv) if all the lorries fitted with high rise ladders are fully operational and, if not, why 
not, and  

(b) mobile pumps purchased, indicating - 

(i) the costs thereof, and  

(ii) if they are operational and, if so, since when and, if not, why not. 

Dr. Husnoo: Madam Speaker, the information requested by the hon. Member at part (a) of 

the question is being placed in the Library. 

With  regard  to  part  (a)  (iii)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  by  the  Mauritius  Fire  and 
Rescue Services that all five firefighting vehicles procured as at date are operational except the 
turntable ladder purchased in January 2013, which has been put off the run since 12 February 
2015 due to a fault in the jacking system control panel. Necessary arrangement is being made 
with  the  supplier  for  repairs.  There  are,  however,  some  legal  difficulties  in  this  issue  and  the 
matter is being looked into by the State Law office. 

As far as part (a)(iv) is concerned, I am informed that all lorries purchased and fitted with 

high rise ladder are operational except the turntable ladder. 

As regards part (b) of the question, my attention has been drawn to the fact that mobile 
pumps are also known as Water Tenders and the information has been placed in the Library, as 
indicated earlier. 

Mr Bhagwan:  I thank the hon. Minister for his reply. I will come to that particular lorry 
that  he  has  just  mentioned  and  which  has  not  been  used.  Can  the  hon.  Minister,  at  least,  ask 
specialised agencies of Government, which are doing a lot of inquiries, to go in-depth into the 
purchase of that particular lorry? Who recommended that lorry and whether the procedures for 

 

77 

purchase  were  being  followed?    What  was  the  cost  to  the  taxpayers  for  the  purchase  of  that 
lorry? 

Dr. Husnoo: As far as the cost is concerned, it is Rs35 m. In fact,  there is some legal 
problem in this and it has been referred to the State Law Office and, obviously, we are going to 
follow it up. 

Mr Bhagwan:  Can we have some idea as to what the legal problem that the hon. Minister 

is stating? 

Dr.  Husnoo:  Firstly,  it  is  the  problem  about  maintenance  cost.  Initially,  in  the  bid 
document, the maintenance cost was Rs400,000 per year. But, suddenly, last month or I think it 
was just about one month ago, the agent in Mauritius has increased it to Rs900,000. Although, in 
the bid document, the maintenance cost was Rs400,000 per year, now they say it is Rs900,000. It 
is just because of this. This is compounded by the fact that there has been some problem with the 
joystick. He said that if we don’t pay him at the new rate, he won’t repair the lorry. So, it is this 
problem that we have referred to the State Law Office. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, you have a question! 

Mr Jhugroo:  Can the hon. Minister confirm whether in year 2011, five lorries have been 
bought by Fire and Rescue Services, model mane, which could not be used during the flashflood 
of 30 March 2013 due to its wrong design and oversize? 

Dr. Husnoo: I am sorry; I won’t be able to answer this question. I need to get information 

on that. I will look into it. 

Mr Bhagwan: Madam Speaker, I have one last question. Can the hon.  Minister, at least, 
order an inquiry and see with the relevant authorities whether there has been connivance between 
the then Minister – I won’t mention names – and the suppliers? Whether the Minister met the 
suppliers here or outside, and whether there has been direct connivance with the suppliers prior 
to the purchase? From my information, it was a tailor-made specification which was made for the 
purchase  of  that  lorry  and  even  civil  servants  were  not  involved  in  the  preparation  of  these 
details. 

 

78 

Dr. Husnoo: I am sorry, I don’t have any exact information on what the hon. Member is 
asking but, obviously, we are going to look into it. If need be, we are going to refer it to my 
colleague.  

Mr Uteem: With respect to the purchase of lorry, being given that now we have high-rise 
buildings in Mauritius, may I know from the hon. Minister, as at now, how high the ladder of the 
lorry can go up to, till what floor, is it adequate for high-rise in Mauritius? 

Dr. Husnoo: The latest one, the one that we have problem now with could have gone to 
about 10 storeys high, but the remaining one can go to about five storeys.  I have discussed it 
with the Fire Services and they told me that they can manage.  In case of fire, they would be able 
to manage.  

Madam Speaker: Last question on this issue, hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Jhugroo: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Can I know from the hon. Minister whether a 
lorry that was bought by the Ministry for outer islands, Agalega, a big and oversize lorry - which 
could  not  be  sent  a  year  before  –  is  still  in  Mauritius  or  whether  it  had  been  landed  there  in 
Agalega? 

Dr. Husnoo: I am sorry again, I won’t be able to answer this question. I will look into it 

and inform the hon. Member. 

CUREPIPE - FORUM -  MARKET FAIR  

(No. B/137) Mrs M. Sewocksingh (Third Member for Curepipe & Midlands) asked 
the  Minister  of  Local  Government  whether,  in  regard  to  the  proposed  construction  of  a  new 
market fair at Forum, Curepipe, he will state where matters stand. 

Dr.  Husnoo:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  the  Municipal  Council  of  Curepipe 
has, following the recommendation of GIBB (Mauritius) Ltd, which was appointed to evaluate 
the State of the Forum, decided to construct a multipurpose building on the site of the Forum 
which will accommodate, among others, a new market fair.  

I am also informed that this project, estimated to cost Rs100 m. and to be financed to the 
tune  of  Rs40  m.  from  the  Government  contribution  and  Rs60  m.  by  the  Council  has  been 
approved  by  the  Project  Plan  Committee.  The  project  has  been  included  in  the  public  sector 
investment programme.  

79 

 
I am further informed that a bidding exercise was conducted in May 2014 by the Council, 
for the appointment of a consultant and the bids received are being evaluated at the level of the 
Central Procurement Board. It is expected that an award to the successful bidder will be made by 
the end of this month. 

Ms Sewocksingh: I would like to thank the hon. Minister for the answer. May I know 
from the hon. Minister why this project is taking a lot time as a sum of money has already been 
earmarked in a previous budget? 

Dr.  Husnoo:  Well,  actually  there  is  a  bidding  process  that  I  mentioned  and, 
unfortunately, it takes time with the bidding process, but it is in progress and we are continuing 
with it. 

Ms Sewocksingh: I would also like to know from the hon. Minister whether the fair will 

be reconstructed, restored or restructured? 

Dr. Husnoo: Actually, Madam Speaker, there were two options for the bidding, either to 
repair the forum as it is, that’s one option or to build it anew. But now, we are going to go for the 
second option because when we look at the price of repairing and the price of reconstructing a 
new one, they are more or less the same. It is about Rs70 m. So we are going to go for building 
anew because that has many advantages as well, it is going to last hopefully longer and secondly, 
it is going to provide more stalls. 

Ms. Sewocksingh: I have a last question, Madam Speaker. I would humbly request the 
hon. Minister to see to it that the work is being held as soon as possible because this is creating a 
big problem not only for the people who are using the fair but also there is a big problem of 
traffic over there? 

Dr. Husnoo: I can assure the hon. Member that we are going to look into it.  

Madam Speaker: Time is over! The Table has  been advised that PQ Nos. B/139 and 

B/143 have been withdrawn.  

MOTIONS 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10 (2) 

 

80 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  that  all  the  business  on  today’s 

Order Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun) rose and 

seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER 

RODRIGUES –LAND SURVEYS 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun):  Madam 
Speaker, with your permission, I would like to make a statement to the House on land surveys in 
Rodrigues. 

On 01 July 2013, the Ministry of Housing and Lands promulgated three regulations under 
section 21 of the Cadastral Survey Act to establish new standards, procedures and guidelines for 
the carrying out of land surveys in Mauritius and Rodrigues. 

These new regulations make it mandatory for the Parcel Identification Numbers (PINs) to 

be included in all survey reports and memoranda of survey prior to registration. 

Subsequently, the Ministry received a request from the Acting Island Chief Executive of 
the Rodrigues Regional Assembly to delay the coming into force of the new regulations in order 
to enable the Island of Rodrigues to comply with the provisions of the new legislations which 
would require, among others, the purchase of new equipment and the setting up of an appropriate 
land administration system in Rodrigues. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  point  out  that  the  Land  Administration,  Valuation  and 
Information System (LAVIMS) does not presently cover the island of Rodrigues.  As such, the 
new land survey regulations cannot be applied in toto in Rodrigues. 

Moreover, it is to be noted that, since 01 July 2013, no land transaction requiring Survey 
Reports  /  Memoranda  of  Survey  can  be  effected  in  Rodrigues  as  per  Reports  or  Memoranda 
require a PIN prior to registration. 

Hence,  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  making  new  regulations  in  order  to  amend  the  existing 
ones thereby exempting, for the time being, the surveyors from the obligations to insert Parcel 

 

81 

Identification Numbers in survey reports and memoranda of survey relating to land parcels in 
Rodrigues. 

These new regulations will come into operation as from 01 April 2015. 

Thank You. 

PUBLIC BILL 

First Reading 

On motion made and seconded, the Finance and Audit (Amendment) Bill (No. I of 2015) 

was read the first time.   

MOTION 

HIS EXCELLENCY, SHRI NARENDRA MODI, PRIME MINISTER OF THE 

REPUBLIC OF INDIA – VISIT – SPECIAL SITTING 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I beg leave to move the motion standing in my 

name which reads thus - 

“This Assembly is of opinion that a special sitting of the National Assembly be held on 
Thursday 12 March 2015, at such time as may be fixed by Madam Speaker, to enable His 
Excellency, Shri Narendra Modi, Prime Minister of the Republic of India, to address the 
House and that such sitting be exempted from the provisions of all the Standing Orders of 
the National Assembly, other than Standing Order 8 insofar as it relates to the election of 
a Speaker for the day, Standing Order 11 insofar as it relates to the adjournment of the 
Assembly by a Minister, and Standing Order 14 insofar as it relates to the issue of the 
Order Paper”. 

Madam Speaker, the aim of this Motion is to allow for a special sitting of the National 
Assembly during the course of which we shall have the opportunity to listen to the message of 
His Excellency, Shri Narendra Modi, Prime Minister of the Republic of India, who will be on an 
official visit to Mauritius on 11 and 12 March 2015. 

It would indeed be a privilege to receive in this august Assembly, His Excellency, Shri 
Narendra Modi, who has emerged on the world stage as one of the greatest political leaders of 
our time.  

82 

 
Mr Modi, who is now leading the world’s largest democracy, began his life journey in his 
hometown  in  North  Gujarat  and  hails  from  a  family  of  humble  origin.  He  is  the  first  Prime 
Minister to be born in independent India.  

During his record four terms of office as Chief Minister of the State of Gujarat, Mr Modi 
had  already  demonstrated  great  statesmanship  when  he  transformed  in  record  time  an 
earthquake-stricken state into a shining, prosperous and vibrant powerhouse of growth and an 
important contributor to India’s development journey.  

His  exceptional  track  record  is  attributed  mainly  to  his  steadfast  commitment  to  the 
principles of good governance, his citizen-centered approach to policymaking and his out of the 
box way of thinking.  

His election as Prime Minister of India in May last has ushered an era of new hopes for 
the whole Indian nation. His Government has pledged to build a strong, prosperous and inclusive 
nation where all Indians can realise their dreams and aspirations. We, in Mauritius, have been 
following  with  keen  interest  the  endeavours  of  Prime  Minister  Modi  in  reducing  extreme 
poverty,  empowering  women,  providing  access  to  electricity  and  investment  in  education, 
especially his very laudable Educate the Girl Child campaign. 

Madam Speaker, as the House is aware, we share very special relations with India which 
is making quantum leaps on the economic front and resolutely enhancing its influence globally. 
The  visit  of  Mr  Modi  to  Mauritius  will  certainly  consolidate  the  already  excellent  relations 
between  our  two  countries  and  lead  to  increased  cooperation  in  the  economic,  scientific, 
technological and cultural spheres. 

I  consider  that  it  will  be  a  privilege  for  this  House  to  hear  the  message  of  our 

distinguished guest.  

With these words, Madam Speaker, I commend the motion to the House. 

Mr Bérenger rose and seconded. 

(4.25 p.m.) 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger): I, of course, second the motion of the 
hon. Prime Minister. It is not only, Madam Speaker, my duty to do so, but I do so with great 
pleasure and pride. 

 

83 

Madam  Speaker,  we  all  know,  India  is  one  of  the  five  countries,  les  cinq  pays  de 
peuplement from where our people came from in the past. The others being China, Madagascar, 
Mozambique and France, mainly. 

Madam Speaker, we all know what India has done for Mauritius since independence and, 
in fact, even before independence. Indeed, India gave Mauritius its full support on our journey to 
independence.  They  have  given  us  total  and  active  support  to  our  sovereignty  claim  over  the 
Chagos  Archipelago  and,  Madam  Speaker,  since  independence,  India  has  given  crucial 
assistance to the development of the country, including Rodrigues and Agalega. 

Madam Speaker, nearly all the former Prime Ministers of India, including Mrs Gandhi 
and her son Rajiv Gandhi and Mr Vajpayee, and nearly all former Prime Ministers of India have 
visited Mauritius. I, myself, Madam Speaker, as Prime Minister for two short years made it a 
duty to visit all the five countries where our people came from in the past, beginning, of course, 
with India. It is, therefore, my privilege, Madam Speaker, to second the motion of the hon. Prime 
Minister  and  to  invite  the  population  of  Mauritius  dans  son  ensemble  to  welcome  Mr  Modi 
comme un grand frère, un ami sincère and one of the most important statesmen of these days. 

 Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed!  

(4.27 p.m.) 

Mr S. Mohamed (First Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port Louis East): Thank 

you, Madam Speaker. May I join the hon. Leader of the Opposition in supporting this motion.  

Only  yesterday,  let’s  call  it  a  coincidence,  I  was,  myself,  reading  about  my  great-
grandfather  who  happens  to  be  from  India  and  my  grandfather,  and  I  am  only  the  second-
generation Mauritian.  Now that I have this opportunity to join the hon. Leader of the Opposition 
and in congratulating the hon. Prime Minister in this motion, allow me, Madam Speaker, since I 
have no doubt that allowing the House to be honoured with the speech of his Excellency, the 
Prime Minister of the Republic of India which is a long-standing tradition will further enhance 
the bilateral diplomatic and historical ties we share with India. 

So, therefore, with those words, I am all for the motion. 

The motion was, on question put, agreed to. 

 

84 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Members, I, therefore, fix the time of the special sitting of the 

National Assembly to be held on 12 March 2015 at 10.55 a.m. 

I suspend the sitting for half an hour for tea. 

At 4.30 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 5.07 p.m. with the Deputy Speaker in Chair. 

 

PRESIDENT’S ADDRESS – MOTION OF THANKS 

Order  read  for  resuming  adjourned  debate  on  the  following  motion  of  the  hon.  Second 

Member for Grand River North West & Port Louis West (Mrs D. Selvon). 

"That  an  Address  be  presented  to  the  President  of  the  Republic  of  Mauritius  in  the 
following terms - 

"We,  the  Members  of  the  Mauritius  National  Assembly,  here  assembled,  beg  leave  to 
offer our thanks to the President of the Republic of Mauritius for the Speech which he has 
addressed to us on the occasion of the Opening of the First Session of the Sixth National 
Assembly." 

Question again proposed. 

Mr  M.  Gobin  (First  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  &  Souillac):  Mr  Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, I rise this afternoon and my very first words would, of course, be to you for your 
election as Deputy Speaker, and I would humbly request you to convey also my congratulations 
to  Madam  Speaker  for  having  been  elected  as  the  first  lady  Speaker  of  this  Assembly.    Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir, I wish also to congratulate my fellow hon. Members of Parliament, who 
have been elected like me, for the first time, especially my learned friends from the Bar.   

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  rise  this  afternoon  also  to  speak  about  the  Government 
Programme.  The title of the Government Programme warrants that we pause a few minutes and 
really understand what it means, ‘Achieving Meaningful Change’. It is not about the meaningful 
change in itself but it is about achieving meaningful change, that is, lay stress on results.  This 
Government  Programme  has  been  designed  to  change  and  bring  economic  progress  for  the 
citizens of this country by a new Government which was voted in office on 10 December last 

 

85 

year.  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it is interesting to note that 10 December is also the International 
Human Rights Day, which is celebrated every year. It is highly symbolic that on such a date as 
the International Human Rights Day that this Government was voted in office by the citizens of 
this country. 

 Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I would here take a few minutes to remind the House how we 
have  come  about  to  be  here  today  in  Government,  and  talking  about  achieving  meaningful 
change.  This Government started the electoral campaign well before the writ of elections had 
been issued.  In fact, we have started our campaign, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, on a very bad note. 
We  have  started  our  campaign  on  a  note  of  betrayal:  the  betrayal  of  Manisa  Hotel  and  the 
betrayal of Flic-en-Flac region; I believe it was somewhere down in the Domaine Anna.  That 
marked the beginning of our campaign, because we felt, and we still feel, betrayal or not, we 
have to remain true to our principles. We had embarked upon a mission to bring change and, 
betrayal or not, we had to bring the change.  Against all odds, 60 men and women stood up to be 
candidates against what was termed then, the mightiest alliance of l’Unité et Modernité. Against 
all odds we mobilised our own families and friends, and my own personal family - I am sure the 
families of everyone here also.  Every time I speak about that, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I get 
emotional and I have to control myself. We suffered transfers - those in the public service - in 
our family; we suffered threats. Daily we exposed ourselves, but did not at all give up the fight 
that we had started, that is, le combat pour néttoyer ce pays de la pourriture, M. le president, 
which had taken root in all our institutions.  

It  is  with  our  resolute  belief  and  our  courage  that  we  set  out  to  fight  against  the  self-
proclaimed kings from north to south, self-proclaimed kings in the east, self-proclaimed kings 
rois du sud, self-proclaimed kings, rois des mathématiques électorales in Constituency No. 13.  

(Interruptions) 

The self-proclaimed king in the east was defeated by something like 7,000 votes between hon. 
Dayal  and  himself.  7,000  votes!  Hon.  Seeruttun  benefitted  a  lot  from  the  wise  words  of  hon. 
Koonjoo.  Despite  the  gaz  lacrymogène  they  were  resolute  and  with  the determination  of  hon. 
Mrs Boygah, le roi du sud has disappeared. 

(Interruptions) 

 

86 

In  my  own  constituency,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  we  had  a  self-proclaimed  king  of 
Mathematics, king of développement économique, king of I do not know what. He had against all 
odds, against all mathematical formulas, anymore. 

We had to put up in Constituency No. 13 with things we could not even think of in this 
day and age. Certains dîners sectaires organisés par ces tristes personnages dans un restaurant 
à Souillac pour une communauté spécifique, telle était la devise. Certaines grosses pointures du 
secteur  privé  s’étaient  jointes  à  cette  équipe-là  and  a  few  handpicks  from  the  private  sector 
wearing  their  ostensible  red  T-shirts  in  La  Flora/Bois  Chéri  and  others,  former  Heads  of 
parastatals, falling, of course, under the Ministry  of  Finance.  In other areas,  I have  even seen 
some distribution de ducklings. 

(Interruptions) 

Distribution de ti-poules, ti-canards à Batimarais, M. le président, using Government vehicles ! 
Heads  of  institutions  falling  uder  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture  also  using  Government  vehicles 
parading in our constituency. Such were the conditions in which we had to campaign. 

On 10 December, the silent revolution took place. My learned friend, hon. Teeluckdharry 
mentioned that. It was a peaceful revolution through the ballots. Never seen before! Mr Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, you will bear testimony to what has happened in my hometown, Curepipe. It was 
unthinkable before! I grew up in that town of Curepipe. Unthinkable that we would have won 
three nil in No. 17! Yet, this is what had happened! This was a peaceful revolution, it took place 
on the 10th. Why am  I mentioning all this when I am supposed to talk about the Government 
Programme? I am mentioning all this to show that the men and women sitting on this side of the 
House, where we come from, the fight that we have put up against those who are on the other 
side, we are determined in our mission. Our mission was to win the elections and we did it. Our 
mission now is to achieve meaningful change and we will do it. 

Of  course,  one  of  the  major  steps  to  be  taken  in  achieving  meaningful  change  is 
forthcoming  very  soon  with  the  presentation  of  the  Budget  Speech.  I  wish  here  to  pause  to 
highlight  one  of  the  key  propositions  which  this  Government  has  put  forward,  namely  the 
creation of the SME Bank. The Bank for Small and Medium Enterprises, Mr Deputy Speaker, 
Sir, will allow, will enable a paradigm shift which we all speak of, but which we have not seen. 
This paradigm shift transforms a jobseeker into an entrepreneur. Once his petite entreprise takes 

 

87 

off, he himself provides jobs for others. This, the SME Bank will enable, and, of course, I have 
to  mention  the  word  of  caution  which  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  has  sounded  against 
commercial  banks.  They  also  will  have  to  walk  that  way  to  empower  our  entrepreneurs, 
especially  our  women  entrepreneurs.  Here,  I  am  thinking  of  the  women  entrepreneurs  of 
Constituency No. 13. 

The  Government  Programme  finally,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir  -  I  know,  I  have  been 
reminded by my very good friend, the Chief Whip, that I do not have many more minutes to go.  
What  our  programme  is  about?  It  is  about  good  governance,  but  I  wish  to  take  the  last  few 
minutes that I have to talk about the other key feature of our Government Programme: Achieving 
Meaningful Change. There is another aspect to achieving meaningful change and that concerns - 
a very important thing - accountability, accountability in public finances, accountability of the 
powers that legislation has bestowed upon institutions and powers that legislation has bestowed 
upon public officers also. 

I cannot be on my feet this afternoon without mentioning what is happening outside this 
House, what is being broadcast about an important constitutional post, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, 
called  the  post  of  the  Director  of  Public  Prosecutions.  It  is  only  and  only  a  question  of 
accountability. Unfortunately, my learned friend, hon. Mohamed is absent today. He has been 
dragging this debate about the constitutional post of the DPP on a political field  when it was 
never such the case. What is it all about?  Mr Deputy Speaker… 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Gobin, I would ask you not to comment on the conduct of 

(Interruptions) 

the Director of Public Prosecutions. 

Mr Gobin: No, certainly not! I want to… 

The Deputy Speaker: I would advise the hon. Member not to talk about the topic which 

is currently a hot topic. 

Mr Gobin: Certainly, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir! Only perhaps to remind hon. Members 
that  what  is  being  sidetracked  as  being  a  political  issue  is  certainly  not!  It  is  a  question  of 
accountability. 

(Interruptions) 

 

88 

And  it  is  very  unfortunate  -  I  wish  also  to  state,  it  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  person.  I  have 
worked at the State Law Office for many years. I have known the person, the DPP now, who was 
not  then  the  DPP.    Personally,  I  have  learnt  a  lot  from  him  and  I  still  enjoy  very  good 
relationship with him, but this is not the time to get passionate about a question which is merely 
a question of accountability of public finances. The independence of the Office of the DPP has 
always  been  guaranteed  by  Section  72  of  the  Constitution  and  nothing  changes.  The 
independence  of  the  DPP  means  the  independence  in  the  question  as  to  prosecution, 
discontinuing prosecution or taking over a prosecution.  Nowhere, at no time, has it been even 
suggested that anything will change regarding section 72. 

I wanted to highlight also that what is being used as a basis for criticism is an Issue Paper 
- I have been to look at it, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir - produced by the Law Reform Commission, 
dated  March  2009,  entitled:  “The  Office  of  Director  Public  Prosecutions:  The  Constitutional 
Requirement for its Operational Autonomy”.  Nothing in this paper is being violated, except for 
one paragraph, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, and  I  have to mention this. At  page 3 of this  report, 
paragraph 6, I quote –  

“The current practice since Independence of law officers working at Attorney-General’s 
Office appearing for or advising DPP falls foul of the principles underlying the setting-up 
in the Constitution of distinct offices of Attorney-General and DPP. This arrangement is 
unconstitutional and should be brought to an end.” 

I humbly beg to disagree. If this paragraph 6, on page 3, is correct, it would mean that each and 
every prosecution undertaken from 1964 up to 2009 would be unconstitutional! Because all law 
officers have been law officers of the Crown at some stage and they have been State Counsel at 
other stages. 

The  DPP,  I  say  it  again,  and  the  law  officers  are  two  separates.  The  constitutional 
independence, the security of the tenure, is guaranteed by section 72. The arguments of Professor 
De Smith are being used to say that we are undermining the independence of the DPP. Any of 
those documents, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the report of the Mauritius Constitutional Conference 
dated September 1965, the report of the Constitutional Commissioner, Professor De Smith, dated 
November  1964,  every  single  recommendation  in  those  reports  has  been  included  and 
incorporated in section 72 of the Constitution.  

89 

 
What do they say? In November 1964 the report of Professor De Smith recommends the 
separation of the Attorney General and the Director of Public Prosecutions suggesting that the 
Attorney  General  would  be  a  Minister  and  the  Direct  of  Public  Prosecutions  a  Public  Officer 
with  exclusive  and  independent  authority  in  relation  to  the  taking  over,  continuance  and 
discontinuance of criminal proceedings. 

The  report  of  the  Mauritius  Constitutional  Conference  dated  September  1965,  the 
relevant part is at page 17, paragraph 27. Perhaps we should pause here to note the presence of 
the Rt. hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth who was present then. He would bear testimony to what was 
recommended and what has been implemented. Paragraph 27 reads –  

“The Constitution will establish the Office of DPP who will have independent powers in 
relation  to  criminal  prosecutions  corresponding  to  those  vested  in  the  Director  by  the 
existing Constitution. A person will not be qualified to be or act as Director unless he is 
qualified for appointment as a Supreme Court Judge. The Director will be appointed by 
the JLSC, his security of tenure will be similar to that of a Judge.” 

Where did we depart from any of those requirements? At no time, I say it again, has any 
suggestion  been  made  that  the  independence  of  the  DPP,  insofar  as  his  prosecution  duties  is 
concerned, will be reviewed. Independence of the DPP does not mean having a whole budget to 
spend without accountability. The only way to have accountability to this House is through the 
Attorney General. 

Unfortunately, I, as a backbencher, cannot address a Parliamentary Question to the DPP. 
He will not answer. I cannot wait au bon vouloir de son attaché de presse pour savoir combien 
d’argent  a  été  dépensé  sur  tel  projet  or  telle  conférence.  The  accountability  concerns  the 
administration and the finances.  

I salute the admirable work the law officers do. I have been myself a law officer. The 
independence of the law officers is guaranteed by the Judicial and Legal Service Commission, 
neither the DPP nor the Attorney General appoints law officers, neither the DPP nor the Attorney 
General  disciplines  them  or  promotes  them  to  higher  ranks.  These  are  the  prerogatives  of  the 
Judicial and Legal Service Commission.  

90 

 
The arrangement prior to 2009 was perfect. 2009 marked a change which was introduced 
not by legislation, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, by a then Cabinet decision which was implemented 
under the Civil Establishment Order and Estimates in the Budget were provided separate, like for 
the Judiciary.  

What Cabinet has decided on Friday, and this is perhaps my ending remark, goes in line 
with what we say in the Government Programme for achieving meaningful change. One of the 
points is regarding exactly accountability. No Government department, no public officer should 
think that he will manage public finances without accountability. 

My  ending  remarks  perhaps,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  very  last  words  of  the 

Government Programme are as follows, this is when the President sums it up and says –  

“Honourable Members, I thank you for your attention and pray that the blessings of the 
Almighty may rest upon your counsels.” 

These are not words which are introduced as a matter only of tradition. With the blessings of the 
Almighty, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we shall achieve meaningful change, the fruits of economic 
reforms, the fruits of these changes will trickle down to all levels of our society.  

With these words, I thank you. 

(5.31 p.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Youth  and  Sports  (Mr  Y.  Sawmynaden):  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir, 
allow  me  at  the  very  outset  to  congratulate  you  for  your  election  as  Deputy  Speaker.  You 
personify  the  trust  that  the  new  regime  has  in  its  young  population.  I  would  also  like  to 
congratulate Madam Speaker to be appointed as Speaker and, today, this Government has made 
history  once  more  to  have  the  first  lady  to  occupy  such  a  distinguished  and,  moreover, 
constitutional post. 

I seize this occasion to convey my thanks to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister who gave me the 
opportunity to serve the country in a ministerial capacity. It is indeed a great honour for me to 
form  part  of  this  new  Government  under  the  leadership  of  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  whose 
experience and wisdom and true class will, no doubt, bring our country back on the right track. 

Sir Anerood Jugnauth, le père du miracle économique, fut aussi désigné comme le père 
de la démocratie aux Etats-Unis pour son geste historique, celui de démissionner comme Premier 

 

91 

ministre en 2003, pour céder la place à l’honorable Paul Raymond Bérenger suite à un accord 
électoral.    Parole  donnée  parole  sacrée !  Est-ce  que  le  Dr.  Navin  Ramgoolam  aurait  fait  de 
même ? J’en doute fort.  

Une  pensée  aussi  à  mes  deux  colistiers  l’honorable  Pravind  Jugnauth,  mon  leader,  un 
homme de principe,  qui, lors de l’élection partielle au No. 8, avait promis qu’il y reviendrait 
comme candidat aux législatives. Il a abattu un travail colossal dans cette circonscription et ce 
depuis 2006. Pravind Jugnauth  a su maintenir la flamme du MSM et,  à  l’élection partielle de 
2009, il doit sa victoire grâce à ses efforts et non pas aux Travaillistes. Il faut se rappeler que le 
PTR,  sachant  très  bien que  nous  allions  remporter  cette  élection,  ne  montra  sa  solidarité  qu’à 
quelques jours du scrutin, alors que la messe était déjà dite, que le poisson était déjà ferré. Navin 
Ramgoolam ne put alors que déclare piti ki pas pu li. 

(Interruptions) 

Un mot aussi pour saluer l’honorable Madame Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun qui a 
été  un  guide,  un  phare,  un  vrai,  lorsque  j’étais  étudiant  au  collège  du  Saint  Esprit.  Durant  la 
campagne électorale, elle m’a été d’un précieux soutien dans la circonscription et nous sommes 
aujourd’hui collègues au Cabinet. Ce trio a fait preuve d’un esprit d’équipe et d’une confiance 
absolue,  deux  ingrédients  suffisants  pour  repousser  et  vaincre  la  campagne  communale.  Cette 
bave de crapaud abject qui n’a pas atteint la blanche colombe, l’électorat de la circonscription du 
no. 8 -Moka/Quartier Militaire.   Without their support, their hard work and their vote, I would 
not be standing here, in this august Assembly.  

M. le président, la performance réalisée par l’Alliance Lepep lors des dernières élections,  
peut être considérée comme un exploit sportif.  When you put your best foot forward, have good 
intentions,  good things happen  with  hard  work and  the  blessing  of  God.    L’Alliance  Lepep  a 
déjoué tous les pronostics en faisant un véritable raz-de-marée que nos adversaires n’ont jamais 
vu venir ! Les deux Leaders du Parti Travailliste et du MMM, the wishful thinkers par excellence 
pour le rêve d’un 60-0, sont aujourd’hui au pied du mur alors que les trois Leaders de partis, que 
ces  messieurs  considéraient  comme  petits  partis  ou  encore  comme  un  gros  boulet,  occupent 
actuellement le front bench du gouvernement.  

Un tel miracle n’aurait pas été possible sans un capitaine hors pair pour nous mener à la 
victoire. Alors que d’autres parlaient de IIème République durant des séances de koz-kozér, Sir 

 

92 

Anerood  Jugnauth,  lui,  interrogeait  le  peuple,  parlait  aux  mauriciens  pour  connaître  leurs 
sentiments, leurs souffrances et leurs attentes. Le père fondateur du MSM est le seul capitaine, 
tel que le peuple l’a voulu, à bord du navire qui vogue vers son deuxième miracle économique. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  as  you  may  know,  the  background  underpinning  the 
unprecedented scandals and bad practices that have rocked the previous regime are today being 
disclosed to the public. People are taking cognizance with disbelief and horror of the way public 
funds have been utilised by a handful of irresponsible politicians, whose lust for power and who 
are greedy to amass disgraceful fortunes sur le dos du petit peuple.  The population has rightly 
tossed away those who preached democracy, but practised kleptocracy with impunity since 2005. 

Personnellement, je ne peux m’empêcher de repenser avec frisson au traitement dont j’ai 
eu droit de la part de ce régime de Gestapo et de passe-droits. Décembre 2012 se révéla être le 
début de la fin pour l’ancien régime. En deux ans beaucoup d’eau a coulé sous les ponts! N’est-
ce pas?   

En 2012, pour les élections municipales, je fus témoin et acteur de l’épisode ‘Ou koné ki 
sanla mwa !’. Quand la police m’arrêta sur instructions de ‘la sirène’ qui disposait d’une carte 
maîtresse au sein du gouvernement, dans la foulée, on fouilla ma maison, terrorisa ma femme et 
mes enfants.  Tout cela pour qu’ensuite la justice décida qu’il y avait no case to answer. 

La  Human  Rights  Commission  du  département  d’État  Américain  a  même  qualifié  mon 
arrestation  d’arbitraire,  tout  comme  celle  de  mon  Leader  Pravind  Jugnauth.    ‘Crache  en  l’air 
tombe lors ou néné !’ , comme  dit si bien le dicton mauricien. 

Je  tiens  à  remercier  mon  épouse,  mes  deux  enfants,  mon  Leader  Pravind  Jugnauth,  Sir 
Anerood  Jugnauth,  Ivan  Collendavelloo  comme  mon  conseiller  légal,  mes  deux  voisins,  les 
honorables Mahen Jhugroo et Mahen Seeruttun, mes collègues du MSM et aussi ceux du MMM  
qui m’ont apporté leur soutien lors de cette terrible épreuve.  Malgré ces persécutions, au moins 
le peuple a su ‘ki sanla ça madame là!’    

Our  new  team  wants  to  do  things  differently  because  Mauritians  have  suffered  enough.  
They  want  a  society  where  good  governance  will  be  the  driving  force  behind  all  endeavours 
being initiated.  The newly set up Ministry for that purpose illustrates the commitment taken by 

 

93 

this Government to restore trust and confidence in our institutions which will have to take up 
major socio-economic challenges in the upcoming years. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, since taking office in December last, I have been conducting a 
vast evaluation of sporting amenities so as to have a clearer idea of the situation.  Last week, in 
his address to Parliament, hon. Franco Quirin was inviting me to undergo un état des lieux.  It 
seems that the speed in which things are moving right now has taken him by surprise.  He should 
know that since taking office on 18 December 2014, I have been visiting gymnasiums, football 
grounds, youth centres and all these are inherent to good sports practice and culture.  And that 
evaluation is still going on.   

The least that I can say  is that the infrastructure is somehow in bad shape.  There is an 
acute  problem  of  maintenance.    My  Ministry  has  already  started  working  on  that  and  we  are 
doing all that we can to revamp these amenities. 

M. le président, c’est notre devoir au niveau des pouvoirs publics de faire en sorte que ces 
installations  soient  bien  entretenues,  ceci  afin  que  nos  sportifs  puissent  s’entraîner  dans  les 
meilleures  conditions  possibles  pour  faire  flotter  haut  le  quadricolore  mauricien.  Comme 
annoncé  dans  le  discours-programme  gouvernemental,  toute  une  série  de  mesures  novatrices 
visant à insuffler une nouvelle dynamique dans le secteur sportif sera mise en œuvre.  

Cette vision se décline en cinq axes, notamment – 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

 la construction de nouvelles installations sportives ; 
 la consolidation du football professionnel et le sport d’élite ; 
 la promotion du sport scolaire ; 
 la vulgarisation du sport pour tous, et 
 la formation et le renforcement des capacités. 

M. le président, le sport qui est un puissant vecteur d’identité nationale, ne peut que jouer 
un rôle catalyseur dans cette conjoncture. Il est vrai que notre but est, avant tout, de réaliser un 
nouveau miracle économique mais nous avons la capacité de réaliser aussi un miracle sportif. 
Nous  voulons  d’une  jeunesse  avec  un  fort  sens  patriotique,  entreprenante,  intelligente  et 
autonome.  Nous  devons  entourer,  encadrer,  soutenir  et  faire  confiance  à  cette  jeunesse.  C’est 
l’avenir de ce pays. Il faut croire en eux, à leurs attentes, leurs envies et leur soif de changement.  

 

94 

Par  ailleurs,  la  promotion  du  concept  ‘d’un  esprit  sain  dans  un  corps  sain’  via  l’activité 
sportive  au  niveau  scolaire  sera  une  de  nos  priorités.  Cela  en  vue  d’inculquer  aux  élèves  des 
écoles  primaires  les  valeurs  du  sport  dont  l’esprit  d’équipe,  le  respect  d’autrui  mais  aussi,  et 
surtout, développer une nation saine.  

Comme vous le savez, les maladies comme le diabète, l’obésité touchent de plus en plus de 
jeunes et les bonnes habitudes - que ce soit pour l’alimentation ou  les exercices physiques - se 
prennent  dès  le  plus  jeune  âge.  Les  discussions  sont  à  un  stade  avancé  avec  la  ministre  de 
l’Education pour que ce projet, qui nous tient à cœur, puisse se concrétiser très vite. Il en va de la 
bonne  santé  et  du  bien-être  de  la  jeunesse  mauricienne.  Je  souligne,  qu’à  ce  niveau,  mon 
ministère  et  celui  de  ma  collègue,  Mme  Leela  Devi  Dookun-Luchoomun,  sont  en  synergie  et 
nous avançons dans la même direction pour le bien-être de la jeunesse mauricienne.  

S’agissant de l’initiation au sport et la détection de nouveaux talents, les enfants, dès leur 
plus jeune âge, auront l’occasion de pratiquer différents sports dont l’acrobatie, la gymnastique, 
le golf et l’équitation, entre autres. C’est la requête faîte par moi-même aux fédérations et elles y 
ont accédé.  

Cela nous permettra de démocratiser ces sports que certains pensent n’être réservés qu’aux 
privilégiés. Ce souhait est partagé par les différents présidents de fédérations que j’ai rencontrés 
depuis ma prise de fonction et ils ont promis de nous aider à ce niveau.  

M.  le  président,  le  sport  ne  concerne  pas  que  les  jeunes.  Le  programme  Sports  for  Life 
destiné aux citoyens, en général, sera revu pour inclure de nouvelles activités et des salles de 
fitness seront construites afin d’inciter la population à pratiquer le sport.  

En  outre,  le  gouvernement  mettra  en  place  des  centres  de  remise  en  forme  dans  les 
complexes sportifs et les centres de jeunesse afin de les rendre plus accessibles au grand public. 
Cette  démarche  vise  à  promouvoir  la  culture  physique  chez  les  mauriciens.  À  noter  que  déjà, 
grâce à la collaboration de ma collègue, l’honorable ministre de l’Education, certains terrains au 
niveau des établissements scolaires publics seront mis à la disposition du public pour la pratique 
du sport. C’est notre moyen à nous de démocratiser la pratique sportive aux quatre coins du pays.  

 

95 

De  plus,  compte  tenu  du  nombre  croissant  de  noyades  à  Maurice,  un  programme  de 
formation au sauvetage sera mis en œuvre afin de former davantage des sauveteurs et sensibiliser 
le public, en général, sur la sécurité en mer. 

Le sport de haut niveau sera consolidé par la mise sur pied d’un institut national des 
sports’ ; ce sera une école de champions qui jettera les bases de l’élite locale, qui va promouvoir 
et  développer  le  renforcement  des  capacités  et  le  leadership  sportif.  Nous  pourrons  aussi 
organiser et dispenser des cours de formation en vue d’améliorer constamment les compétences 
et  les  acquis  des  entraîneurs.  Des  mesures  incitatives  seront  introduites  pour  améliorer 
l’employabilité  des  sportifs  de  haut  niveau  après  leur  carrière  sportive.  Ceci  est  un  aspect 
important  -  comme    vous  le  savez  peut-être  déjà  - car  beaucoup  de  ceux  qui  ont  défendu  le 
quadricolore  mauricien  avec  honneur  sont  ensuite  tombés  dans  l’oubli,  aussi  la  pauvreté  pour 
beaucoup.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the daunting challenge that lies ahead of us in the sport sector is 
the laying foundation for a sporting future for the nation for the next 20 years. In this context, 
much  investment  will  be  made  for  development  of  sport  at  grassroots  and  community  levels. 
Furthermore, we will address the need to create the right linkage between primary and secondary 
institutions by putting the athlete at the center of all sporting development.  

While focusing on high level sport to gain more medals, we should strive hard to provide 
more  opportunities  to  one  and  all  to  practice  a  sport.  The  fact  is  that  both  fronts  are  equally 
important  and  interlinked  with  each  other.  In  fact,  they  are  interdependent.    It  goes  without 
saying  that  more  people  are  practicing  sports.  The  highest  will  be  the  probability  of  tapping 
latent potentials.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, more and more Mauritians suffer from various diseases. 23 % of 
the populations suffer from diabetes and 22 % is pre-diabetic. These figures are very alarming 
and  should  be  a  matter  of  concern  beyond  political  consideration.  This  is  why  it  has  become 
important to raise awareness about the importance of sport and physical activity in our daily life 
in  order  to  reduce  disease  such  as  cardiovascular  disorders  affecting  an  increasing  number  of 
Mauritians. It is, therefore, imperative to change our lifestyle to promote physical activities at 
national and regional levels. The proximity of sports facilities coupled  with the relevant mass 

 

96 

media campaign to create awareness about the benefits of sports activities will definitely enhance 
the practice of sport activities by the population at large.  

We  believe  that  such  facilities  should  be  made  accessible  to  a  larger  segment  of  the 
population. The key is that everyone should be able to find his favoring activity to stay fit. We 
will  keep  abreast  with  worldwide  fitness  trends.  Tai  chi  and  yoga  classes  which  attract  many 
people will continue to be taught in Youth Centres across the country.  

Sport teaches self-discipline and team spirit.  Athletes learn how to win with grace and 
lose with dignity by acquiring a sport spirit. Sport is, in fact, a school for life, contributing to 
give us a sound mind in a sound body, and teaching us how to respect each other.  Given all the 
benefits which can be derived from sports, more emphasis will be laid on its development. My 
Ministry wishes to present a new vision for sport development over the next 10 to 15 years. Sport 
and physical activity can help the Government achieve key objectives. The truth is that only 20% 
of adults in Mauritius take 30 minutes of moderate exercise five times a week, as recommended 
by  health  professionals.  There  are  great  disparities  within  the  population.  Participation  is  low 
among those with lower incomes and falls with increasing age. This means we are a long way 
behind the best achieving nations. For example, in Finland the participation rate is at 80% and 
actually increases with age; but, we should not think that we are losers on the world sporting 
stage. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we will adopt a twin-track approach of increasing participation 
in sport and physical activity and developing sustainable improvement in success in international 
competition, giving particular attention to identifying and nurturing those with sporting talent. 

 We  must  get  more  people  playing  sport  across  the  whole  population,  focusing  on  the 
most economically disadvantaged groups, along with school leavers, women and older people. It 
is a fact that initiation to sports and physical activity when young is crucial if people are to be 
active throughout their lives. This is a firm demonstration that the present Government is in sport 
for the long-term, not the quick fix. We have to tackle the long dropouts in the number of people 
playing sports once they leave full-time education. Young people find it hard to continue their 
interests. This is why forging links between schools and local club is important.  

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  let  me  now  talk  about our  ‘sport  roi’.  Mauritian  football  has 
experienced moments of glory in the 1970s. However, at the end of the 1980s, an attempt by the 

 

97 

then  Government  to  give  a  new  impetus  to  this  popular  sport  through  the  concept  of 
regionalisation did not give the expected results. On the contrary, this process contributed to the 
decline of our football. In addition, shortcomings and malfunctioning at Federation management 
level worsened the situation, bringing the sport to its lowest level in the FIFA world ranking.  

Today, it has become imperative to look at football development with a new mindset. The 
expansion  of  the  football  industry  and  the  business  across  the  world  has  brought  about  its 
professionalisation in many countries, leading to its transformation into a global sport. It is clear 
to everyone that Mauritius cannot lag behind in this sector if we want our football to keep pace 
with  world  trends.  My  Ministry  will,  therefore,  provide  all  its  support  to  sustain  the 
professionalisation of football. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  in  order  to  increase  the  level  and  quality  of  players  and 
contribute to the successful performance of the national team in international games, important 
measures  will  be  taken.    In  this  context,  four  areas  will  be  addressed,  including  increasing 
participation at grassroots level, setting up of a football academy and high-level training centres 
and consolidating professional football.  

Government will support the development of the football industry which has an important 
social economic role to play at national level. Not only full-time jobs for footballers are created 
but  the  holding  of  professional  football  matches  during  weekends  also  provide  sound  and 
entertaining leisure to all citizens across the country. Our youths aged between 8 and 14 will be 
scouted and trained by qualified coaches through a talent development programme, with the aim 
of  identifying  promising  youngsters  and  providing  them  with  technical  skills  and  tactical 
knowledge at an early age.  

A Football Academy will be set up with the help of European professional club teams for 
the  better  development  of  talented  players  who  will  be  channeled  to  the  professional  football 
league.  Appropriate  funding  will  be  made  available  with  a  view  to  helping  them  to  pursue  a 
career as professional football player, either locally or abroad.  

High-level training centres will be set up at Anse-La-Raie and Bel Ombre to provide for 

regular lengthy residential training camps, especially prior to major international games.  

98 

 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, everyone knows the value of sport:  Value in improving health 
and tackling obesity; value in giving young people confidence and purpose to divert them from 
drugs and crime, and value in the lessons of life that sport teaches us.  

My ambition for sports in Mauritius is to start a 20-year process of re-establishing this 
country as a powerhouse in the sporting world, a country that can look at the playground or the 
podium and feel a sense of pride. The Indian Ocean Island Games (IOIG) held in Mauritius in 
1985 and 2003 demonstrated the power of sport to engage the nation. Do you think that it is a 
coincidence that Sir Anerood Jugnauth was the Prime Minister of the country at that time? We 
can be proud of what our top athletes have achieved so far, but we cannot stand still.  

One  of  the  main  focuses  of  my  Ministry  is  the  forthcoming  9th  Indian  Ocean  Island 
Games which will be held in August 2015 in Reunion Island. Five months before the start of the 
games, much is yet to be done. A delegation of approximately 400 athletes, coaches and officials 
will attend the competition. Financial assistance and other support services are provided to the 
National Sports Federation to ensure that preselected athletes are training in optimum conditions. 

 I should also highlight that remarkable effort which is being made by Club Maurice to 
raise  funds  from  the  private  sector  and  managed  to  successfully  support  our  athletes  in  their 
preparation and participation in the games. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  this  Government  has  got  a  clear  mandate  to  establish  a  new 
roadmap  for  sport  development.    Public,  private  and  voluntary  sectors  need  to  work  together 
better towards fulfilling our common responsibilities in increasing participation and developing 
sustainable improvement of our performance at international level, particularly in football. I am 
convinced  that  we  will  deliver  as  a  team  and  Mauritius  is  on  its  way  to  achieve  un  miracle 
sportif.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I shall now list down the main key policies and programmes 
for the Youth Sector. My Ministry will revisit the operation of its Youth Centres to ensure that 
they continue to cater for the young people for the provision of leisure, training and activities of 
youth interest. Hence, Youth Centres will become an important necessary  platform to provide 
physical  and  psychological  space  for  young  people  to  meet,  exchange  ideas,  experiences  and 
take effective leadership roles and initiatives.  

 

99 

For this to happen, I am reviving the Youth Advisory Committees to be responsible for 
the management of Youth Centres. This Committee will comprise of representatives of Youth 
Clubs, youth organisations of the regions, including Forces Vives.  

Consequently,  my  Ministry  will  extend  all  necessary  assistance  in  terms  of  personnel, 

logistics and equipment for activities pertaining to youth development. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, as you are aware, most young people are free in the afternoon 
and during weekends. To this effect, my Ministry has already started to reconsider the hours of 
operation of Youth Centres to ensure their structured activities benefit from all facilities required.  

My Ministry favours the promotion of literacy and artistic activities among young people. 
As such, a series of literary workshops and competitions will be organised both at regional and 
national levels.  With a view to promoting a volunteering culture among our youth, my Ministry 
will set up a National Youth Volunteer Scheme. You will agree that volunteerism can transform 
the  pace  and  nature  of  development.  It  remains  a  powerful  means  of  engaging  the  active 
population in tackling social issues; it benefits both the individual and society at large. It is noted 
with much concern today that volunteerism has drastically decreased.  

We, therefore, need to foster and inculcate, once more, the volunteering culture among 
our Mauritian youth. This will enable the youth to bring in their energy, passion, creativity and 
innovative  solutions  to  pressing  issues  pertaining  to  themselves  and  the  society  at  large.  The 
National Youth Volunteer Scheme will provide opportunities for youth to engage in volunteer 
programmes at regional and national levels.  

As a first step, my Ministry has already started to enrol 100 youth leaders aged between 
18  to  29  who  are  interested  in  voluntary  work  to  undergo  a  basic  training,  both  theory  and 
practical,  in  voluntarism.  The  training  will  cover  topics  such  as  importance  of  volunteerism, 
outreach  strategies, 
leadership  and  communication  skills,  community  service,  disaster 
management and outdoor activities. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the Duke of Edinburgh’s International Award Mauritius is one 
of the best youth development programmes which my Ministry is promoting. It is a balanced, 
non-competitive  programme  of  voluntary  and  challenging  activities  that  encourage  personal 
discovery and growth, self-reliance, perseverance and responsibility to themselves and service to 

 

100 

their community. Participants aged between 14 and 25 undergo four sections, namely service, 
physical recreation, skills and expedition at bronze, silver and gold levels.  

In so doing, my Ministry offers life skills education to young people in colleges, youth 
groups and deprived areas. The modules covered by this programme include values, self-esteem, 
sexuality and health amongst others. As such courses in leadership are provided to the youth to 
equip them with skills such as communication, leadership and group dynamics among others.  

At  this  stage,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  the  National  Youth  Survey  on  Youth 
Behaviour  has  been  conducted  in  2014  and  its  findings  are  being  considered  to  redesign  our 
training programmes to respond to emerging needs and challenges of the youth population. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with a view to providing healthy and positive leisure activities 
during school holidays, my Ministry will revisit the existing activities and organise innovative 
activities and projects like “Camp de Vacances”, cyclo-rallye and youth concerts. A synergy will 
be developed with schools, Parent-Teachers’ Association and the student community to plan the 
various activities.  

In order to address problems facing young people in this fast changing society and also 
where the needs of young people are dynamic, my Ministry will come up with a National Youth 
Counselling Programme. The objective is to provide young people with information and support 
to help them address life tasks. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, employability is the focal concern of any youth as it is rightly 
said  that  a  decent  job  is  the  gateway  for  a  secure  and  prosperous  future.  Youth  being  a  core 
component of our population with lots of energy and potential, must be given proper training and 
guidance so that they  are empowered to face the daunting challenges of life. To that end, my 
Ministry  will  embark  an  ambitious  project  to  further  vulgarise  the  entrepreneurship  culture 
among the youth.  The primary objective being to bring a shift in the paradigm in making youth 
become créateur d’emploi instead of chercheur d’emploi.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the Youth Excellence Award Programme is an annual feature of 
my Ministry whereby young people who have excelled in various fields are rewarded. The areas 
of interest for this year’s edition will comprise leadership and community work, art, design and 
technology  as  a  tool  for  social  development.  I  am  confident  that  the  Government  Programme 

 

101 

2015-2020 will no doubt give a new impetus for our sports activities and set the scene for new 
youth development strategies.  Its aim is to build a better Mauritius. We can only achieve that by 
helping and guiding our youngsters.  

I would like to conclude with these words of Nelson Mandela, I quote - 

“Sport  can  create  hope  where  once  there  was  only  despair.  It  is  more  powerful  than 
Governments  in  breaking  down  racial  barriers.  It  laughs  in  the  face  of  all  types  of 
discrimination.” 

Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody! 

(5.59 p.m.) 

Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West): Thank you, Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir. Let me start by congratulating you for your election as the youngest Deputy 
Speaker of this House and also, please, convey my congratulations to Madam Speaker.  

I also congratulate all hon. Members of this House for their election, especially those who 

are elected for the first time and welcome those who are coming back to the House. 

Let me also welcome the appointment of hon. Yerrigadoo as Attorney General. He has 

been appointed Attorney General, that is, legal adviser of the Government. 

(Interruptions) 

I would also like to thank the constituents of Constituency No. 1 for returning me back to 
this august House and I am sure they can rely on me to do my utmost, as I have done in the past 
to fight for their interest and well-being. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, let me come now to the Programme. Election is over, there is no 
need for further campaigning, so we have to look at the reality and the welfare and well-being of 
the country, but I would like to start by quoting the Attorney General.  Especially as an Attorney 
General, he should be precise when he addresses the House. He should not mislead the House, 
because he is going to give legal advice, so he has to be precise. So, when he started his speech 
on this Programme, he said that on 10 December the people have put an end to almost ten years 
of the reign of Labour Party which certainly was not working in the best interests of our people 

 

102 

and our Republic. This is not precise. In fact, they have put an end to ten years’ of Labour/PMSD 
Government. Let us not deny that fact.  

The PMSD has been in Government for nearly ten years, together with the Labour Party 
and with my good friend, hon. Shakeel Mohamed. They have been in Cabinet. The Leader of the 
PMSD has occupied senior posts. When my good friend, hon. Mrs Selvon, who has been elected 
like me in Constituency No. 1 was making her speech, talking about the economic situation in 
Constituency No. 1, la misère qu’il y a dans la circonscription, we should remind ourselves that 
we have had nearly  four  years of PMSD Minister of  Finance, one and  a half  years of PMSD 
ministre de l’Intégration sociale! And who was occupying the post? No less than the Vice-Prime 
Minister and Minister of Finance, the Leader of PMSD! And who was the PPS of Constituency 
No. 1? It is good to know.  My good friend, hon. Mrs Perraud!  

(Interruptions) 

Four and a half years the hon. Minister occupied the post!  The hon. Minister took the salary with 
all the benefits that go with it, and then, now, the hon. Minister comes and says that the boat is 
sinking!  Let us be clear and honest.  History remains history, facts remain facts.  The PMSD 
was in Government; they should take their part of responsibility.  Not only hon. Mrs Selvon! The 
first  opportunity  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  had  when  he  was  addressing  the  House  on  the 
Additional Remuneration Bill, what had he to say? - I won’t quote the full speech. 

« Les  gens  vivent  de  plus  en  plus  mal.  La  nation  mauricienne  a  subi  une  politique 
économique  qui  appauvrit  les  pauvres  et  qui  enrichit  un  petit  groupe  au  sommet  de 
l’économie. » 

So, this is a fact!  Ten years of Labour-PMSD Government, this is where we are.   

Now let’s come to the programme.  Generally speaking, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we don’t 
have much problem with that programme.  It is a programme which carries more than 90% of the 
programme of the Remake 2000.  And if you compare the two programmes - we imposed our 
programme when we went with the Labour Party  -  you will see that the two programmes are 
more or less the same. When the MMM went with the Labour Party, we agreed on a programme, 
and it was our programme.  Now, the people have made  a  choice.  This Government will be 
judged  on  its  actions,  not  on  the  programme.    I  will  come  to  certain  decisions  which  the 

 

103 

Government has already taken, which shows that they are deviating from their programme, and 
the euphorie which was there on 10 or 11 December is slowly fading out.  Evaporating! 

 (Interruptions) 

I will stress on the political wills of the Government on three issues.  I will limit myself 
on  those  three  issues  because  we  will  have  another  opportunity  to  address  the  House  when  it 
comes to the Budget Speech.  At the time I am talking now, it is less than hundred days that this 
Government is in power.  Already out there, people feel that, in certain circumstances, in certain 
sectors, they have been misled during the campaign by this alliance.  Let’s see the police. We 
have been talking about accountability.  Has there been any change in the acts and doing of the 
police since there has been a change of Government? 

Listen!  The hon. Member had an opportunity! May I be allowed to address the House? 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker:  Yes. No interruptions, please! 

Mr Baloomoody:  I am under your guidance. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Please, hon. Baloomoody, continue! 

Mr Baloomoody:  Commissaire de police!  We know what he has done for the last ten 
years, how there have been many arbitrary arrests.  On both sides of the House we have been 
victims. 

The Deputy Speaker:  No interruptions, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Baloomoody: Now, he asks for his pre-retirement leave!  He gets his pre-retirement, 

his golden handshake. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker:  Silence! 

Mr Baloomoody:  There is no accountability for him? 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Leader of the Opposition, silence please! 

 

104 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Baloomoody:  There is no accountability for the…. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker:  Silence! 

Mr Baloomoody: There is no accountability for the outgoing Commissioner of Police, of 
what he has done to our friend here, for what he has done to my colleague on the other side, my 
colleague  behind  me,  hon.  Dr.  Joomaye!    So,  he  is  not  accountable?  He  takes  his  golden 
handshake  and he  goes!  For the  gentleman  at the RRA, rightly  so, he  has asked for his pre-
retirement  leave,  and  we  have  said  “No,  you  stay  here.    You  will  be  accountable.”  But  what 
about the outgoing Commissioner of Police?  He gets out scot-free! The way there have been 
arbitrary arrests, be it for people on this side.  We were at Les Casernes when hon. P. Jugnauth - 
the hon. Leader of the Opposition was there. 

 (Interruptions) 

The hon. Minister of Sports knows how we supported him at the time he was in difficulty.  But 
what  about  the  Commissioner  of  Police?    He  is  not  accountable?    In  the  Police  Force,  even 
today, unfortunately so, names of hon. Ministers and the hon. Prime Minister are still being used 
– Ah, l’ordre là pé vinn depi lahaut.   

(Interruptions) 

It is a fact!  Not every day!  Yesterday night, the son of Mr Utchanah was arrested; a 21-
year old Pupil Lawyer Master.  He will be called to the Bar.  He was arrested yesterday.  He was 
called to come at the station at 09.30.  He went to the station at 09.30 in company of his counsel. 
He remained there.  Only at three o’clock, they wanted to record his statement.  They recorded 
his statement and finished at 7.00, and when his counsel asked that he be allowed to go home and 
he gave his undertaking that he would come to court today, they said « non, l’ordre là ine vinn 
depi lahaut.  Bizin ferme toi! » 

This is what they said! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

105 

This is what they said!  I am reporting the facts. This may be nonsense! You are not aware, hon. 
Prime Minister! 

The Deputy Speaker:  Please, address the Chair! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Baloomoody: Ask the counsel!   I have spoken to the counsel; I have spoken to the 
parents and some Police Officers who were there.  L’ordre là ine vinn depi lahaut!  And there 
was  no  objection  to  release  that  boy.  This  morning,  they  released  him  with  no  objection 
whatsoever.  

(Interruptions) 

Puni that young boy!  The mentality has not changed in the Police.  It is still the same.  L’ordre 
là vinn depi lahaut!  Especially the Central CID! 

The Prime Minister: I would like to know who said that. 

Mr Baloomoody: I will communicate it to the hon. Prime Minister. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker:  Please, address the Chair!  

Mr Baloomoody:  Because the mentality is the same! 

(Interruptions) 

I  will tell the hon. Prime Minister!   I  will tell the counsel who appeared and stayed there till 
10.30 at night with his client. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Baloomoody, will you please address the Chair?   

Mr Baloomoody: Yes, but the hon. Prime Minister is asking me a question.  I have to answer.  I 
can’t be … 

The Deputy Speaker:  Address the Chair, thank you! 

Mr Baloomoody:  This is respect to the hon. Prime Minister. 

 

106 

This is why this morning I was insisting that it is time that there is accountability in the 
Police because they feel they can do whatever they want.  If in Court tomorrow there is a civil 
proceeding, Government will pay; they don’t have to pay.  We know the State will pay, and we 
know how many payments have been made.  In the case of Ramlagan, Rs7 m.; in the case of 
Kaya;  in  the  case  of  the  couple  Desmarais,  thousands  of  rupees  have  been  paid.    But  whose 
money is that?  Your money, my money, the taxpayers’ money!  But the Police Officers are free; 
they carry on doing whatever they want!  So, we have to bring a change and a good reform in the 
Police; a change of mentalité, make them earn respect.  When I was a child… 

Yes, change their mentalité so that they can earn respect. Police! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Yesterday, at Rivière Noire, Dr. Gujjalu said there were bruises on his body.  Things are going 
on the same, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  

(Interruptions) 

Things have not changed! Through you to the hon. Prime Minister! 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker:  Please, silence!  Let the hon. Member continue.  

(Interruptions) 

Mr Baloomoody: So, we have to bring confidence in the Police.  Today, youngsters - it is 
unfortunate  and  an  act  which  we  condemn  -  have  no  respect  for  the  Police.    Youngsters  are 
attacking the Police.  I am a Curepipien.  Do you know what happens at Jan Palach, Curepipe?  
Whatever  the  number  of  Police  Officers  you  put,  these  young  people  will  continue  to  do 
whatever they want, because Police Officers today do not earn respect.  I remember when I was a 
student, when I saw that Police Officer – I can say his name, Mr Malabar or Sergent Judoo …. 

(Interruptions) 

When you see Police Officers you would get shaky, you go straight to your home or to whatever 
place you have to go, no messing around on the road, but this is not the case today in the Police 

 

107 

Force.  It has to be clear.  There is a majority of Police Officers who do their job wonderfully, 
but, unfortunately, the minority… 

…les brebis galeuses get the whole Police Force into disrepute. 

(Interruptions) 

In  the  Government  Programme,  section  137  talks  about  an  Independent  Police 
Complaint Board.  This is welcoming to have an Independent Police Complaint Board. But then, 
it  is  not  clear.  What  will  happen  to  the  Division  of  the  Human  Rights  Commission?  At  the 
Human Rights Commission, we have a section  which deals with Police brutalité. So, will that be 
closed? Are we going to close the Human Rights Commission completely? To be honest, I have 
been trying to know who is the Minister responsible for human rights. If we believe in human 
rights, we must have a Minister responsible for human rights. According to the law, that Human 
Rights Commission has to publish a report annually and submit it to the Minister responsible for 
human rights. But, unfortunately, I have a Cabinet Paper dated 07 January 2015 with the name of 
25 honourable Members who are Ministers, but it is not written who is the Minister responsible 
for  human  rights.  So,  I  hope  that  when  the  hon.  Prime  Minister  addresses  the  House,  he  will 
enlighten us on who is the Minister responsible for human rights. 

Now,  if  we  have  a  Complaint  Commission,  it  has  to  be  accountable  and  do  its  work 
independently and swiftly. So many complaints are lying down there, with no result! There is a 
concern about the length of time investigation takes. There is a need for all cases to be quickly 
investigated  so  as  to  minimise  both  the  impact  on  the  career  of  the  Police,  but  also  the 
psychological impact of the victim. Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, a weak Civilian Complaint Review 
Board is worse than no Complaint Review Board because it gives the impression of oversight, 
but, in fact, it provides little to none. 

Now, let me come briefly to the Judiciary. There is in that programme the establishment 
of a Court of Appeal. This has been on the Table for quite a long time, in the Mackay Report, the 
previous  Government,  the  Government  before,  the  MMM/MSM  Government  but,  up  to  now, 
there is no consensus as to who the Judges will be. Already in the Judiciary, there is the concern 
about the Judges now who are Judges of the Supreme Court and who do not want to be Judges of 
the High Court. So, who will sit on that Court of Appeal? Is it retired Judges again? Judges of the 
Commonwealth?  We have to have a consensus amongst all the parties concerned. We should not 

 

108 

rush into it. We have to be careful as to who the Judges will be at the Court of Appeal. I have 
listened  and  read  carefully  the  speech  of  the  hon.  Attorney  General,  there  is  no  reform  with 
regard to the Bail and Remand Court. I am sure the hon. Prime Minister will agree with me that 
liberty  is  very  important,  that  somebody  who  is  presumed  innocent  should  not  be  denied  his 
liberty. And we started the Bail and Remand Court! The Mackay Report says there should be a 
Bail and Remand Court, but not for the purpose it is being used today. We wanted a Bail and 
Remand  Court  so  that  there  should  be  no  transfer  of  prisoners.  The  idea  was,  first,  to  have  a 
Remand Court in the prison, but Magistrates did not want to sit in the prison, then they decided: 
‘Let us have a Bail and Remand Court in Port Louis so that we do not have to move prisoners 
from there and there is no exit and entry’, which was, at that time, allowing drugs and all sorts of 
illicit  and  illegal  things.  But,  today,  what  has  the  Bail  and  Remand  Court  become?  Are  you 
aware,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  that  today  if  you  object  to  bail  in  any  District  Court,  the  District 
Court does not entertain your motion in the District Court level? You have to apply to the Bail 
and Remand Court for the motion. If you are accused or suspected, you are in a Police cell, you 
wait up  10 to 15 days to get a date… 

No! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

For certain people, yes! You wait for 10 days because the queue is so long there. So, they have to 
get the accused from Baie du Cap or Souillac, he stays in a Police cell, when you get a date - the 
earliest date you will get at the Bail and Remand Court today - it takes 12 to 15 days. 

(Interruptioins) 

My friend is saying more. And then, he comes to Port Louis, he stays in a Police cell for three 
days; he comes to Port Louis, his bail motion is heard, he goes back, judgment is delivered two 
or three days after, then he has to go back to that Police Station in Baie du Cap or where it is to 
pay  to  be  released.  But,  this  was  not  the  idea  of  the  Bail  and  Remand  Court.  The  Bail  and 
Remand Court was there for only accused who were detained at the prisons centre. We should go 
back to the District Court level, District Magistrates should hear bail cases, as it used to be. We 
have sufficient Magistrates, we cannot complain about that. In fact, there is no space. Magistrates 

 

109 

are sometimes sitting in corridor, in garage - at Pamplemousses it was in a garage. So, we have 
Magistrates.  Liberty  is  important.  We  cannot  deny  somebody  of  his  liberty  just  for  an 
administrative reason. I would invite the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to kindly look into the matter 
and see to it that, at least, where the Police are objecting, there is an opportunity…. 

Yes, we should go there…. 

No, the DPP… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

If  it  is  in  the  interest  of  the  people,  interest  of  democracy,  interest  of  good  governance  and 
interest of justice, if we have to go back, we go back. But, in the case of DPP, it is not in the 
interest of justice. I will come to that later on. 

Now,  let  me  come  to  another  issue.  At  paragraph  169,  there  is  the  Law  Reform  
Commission.  You  intend  to  give  more  power,  more  jurisdiction  probably  to  the  Law  Reform 
Commission. It’s good! But, are  you going to listen to their findings? This is most important. 
What would happen to the report? We know that the Law Reform Commission has got a report 
in 2009. We will come to that report later. So, giving power, allowing the Law Commission to 
bring changes in the law, but if Government was going to set it aside and disregard it completely, 
there is no point about the law, to invest in a Law Reform Commission. 

Now, one issue which has been canvassed heavily during the campaign is the question of 
nomination of advisers and certain persons at parastatal bodies. Hon. Vishnu Lutchmeenaraidoo 
has gone round and said ‘Fini ti copains, ti copines; there will be advertisement, transparency, 
everyone will be given an equal opportunity, there will be accountability.’ But he, himself, what 
has he done at the casino? The casino already is going astray. A professional was hired there to  
put  some  order.  He  had  to  resign  after  a  few  weeks  because  of  the  consultant  who  has  been 
appointed  at  the  casino.  And  he  is  the  one  who  is  going  around,  telling  us  that  there  will  be 
transparency in recruitment! Now, about my good friend, hon. Soodhun! You know, when I first 
heard,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  that  the  Ministries  will  recruit  lawyers  in  the  Ministries,  I 
welcomed that decision. And I am sure - as you are aware - there is quite a lot of young lawyers 

 

110 

out there who are qualified now. In our time, we did our Master after having been called to the 
Bar. Now they do  one, two, three Masters and they come and are called to the Bar. They are 
qualified in several spheres and they can be of good assistance to Ministries because they are 
qualified in a specific sphere. I know of lawyers who are qualified in urbanism, but they were not 
given an opportunity to apply for that post. 

(Interruptions) 

He was not given! It was never advertised. Let alone advertised, send a communiqué to the Bar 
Council and they e-mail it to all barristers.  Are you interested, there is a vacancy? This is how it 
has been done. Most of the lawyers are qualified. This gentleman, I do not know him personally, 
I do not have anything against him.  But what does he have more than others to be appointed 
Legal Adviser? 

(Interruptions) 

Is it only because he is a relative to a Member of this House?  

(Interruptions) 

I hope not! I do not want to make it personal, but this is an appointment which is contrary to the 
principle. There are many appointments where cousins, cousines, familles have been appointed. 
Again, this morning itself, there was a clash between hon. Shakeel Mohamed and the Minister of 
Health.  Last week, we had a clash with the hon. Leader of the Opposition regarding a certain 
appointment at the Cardiac Unit. 

(Interruptions) 

Unfortunately, the question did not come! There was a question of my friend hon. Bhagwan, it 
did not reach. We would have seen that this man had been four times on bail and he has been 
nominated Chairman of I don’t know which cooperative! Four times on bail! But, what is worse, 
we are talking about the fight against corruption, to have the right person in the right place and 
we have to project that image. When looking at that Board, people should say: “Yes, I trust this 
Board. I am going there to complain.” Can we trust the Board of ICAC today, when we have 
learnt the way people have been appointed there?  The rush in which they have been appointed 
within less than 24 hours, and a few hours given to the Leader of the Opposition for consultation!  
The answer that the hon. Prime Minister gave us, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, is that there was a 

 

111 

rush because we, Members of Parliament, had to swear an affidavit for our assets!  He has been 
misled - with due respect to him. The last day for swearing the affidavit was un 21 janvier, not le 
31 décembre. C’était le 21 janvier! This was the last day we had to sign our affidavit with regard 
to… 

Sorry? 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Even this is not a good valid reason. The law says every Member of Parliament; it is 30 days 
after the first sitting of Parliament. 

(Interruptions) 

There were other officials. The hon. Prime Minister told us - when my friend hon. Uteem asked 
the question about who was looking about that important file when the Director was sacked - 
there was a responsible person who was looking for four or five days about these files. But this 
responsible person could not have accepted the declaration of assets, be it for Ministers? Why 
was  the  rush?  The  two  Directors,  one  at  least  we  know,  wanted  to  be  a  candidate  for  the 
elections, has been in a Press conference with the Leader of the MSM! Is this the image we want 
to produce and show to the people? The trust?  We want to tell them that this is a Government 
that wants to fight fraud and corruption, that this is our team, whom you can trust and make our 
complaint? The FIU, yes! Today we learnt that another staff of hon. Minister Bhadain has been 
nominated to look after the FIU.  

Now, when we talk about fraud and corruption - I am sure you must have learnt about 

this interesting judgement…. 

Let me come… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Please, allow the hon. Member to talk! 

112 

 
Mr Baloomoody: There is a decision to set up a Financial Crime Commission (FCC). 
But, again, it is not clear from the speech of hon. Minister Bhadain what the FCC is.  I am aware 
that he is very busy now, working till late.  

(Interruptions) 

Meeting important persons! But, what is that Financial Crime Commission (FCC)? In the first 
paragraph, we read that –  

“A  Financial  Crime  Commission  will  be  set  up  as  an  apex  body  responsible  for  the 
investigation  and  prevention  of  all  financial  crimes  in  Mauritius,  including  fraud  and 
corruption, money laundering, financial practices and other white-collar jobs.” 

Then, on the next page we see –  

“The Financial Crime Commission will be set up as an umbrella organisation to oversee 
the operation of a revised and enhanced ICAC model, the FIU, Assets Recovery, (…).” 

Which is which? Is it going to investigate? Is it going to be an umbrella body? We have to be 
clear  on  how  we  want  to  proceed  with  regard  to  crime,  to  combat  fraud  and  corruption.  Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am sure people on the other side as well are shocked by that nomination.  
What is worse, at the Prime Minister’s Office, one Mr P. M., not the Prime Minister – for good 
reading, let me read a judgement of the Intermediate Court. It is not an ongoing case, it has been 
finished and fine has been paid - Police v/s Boskalis International BV and Baggermaatschappij 
Boskalis BV. Boskalis is an international firm. The two accused were two foreigners and they 
were accused at the Intermediate Court with Cause Number 766/2013. There were six charges of 
giving bribe, but I will read only two, the last two counts.  Count 7 -  

“In  or  about  the  year  2006,  one  Boskalis  International  BV,  as  represented  by  Mr  Jan 
Cornelis  Haak 
20 
3356 Papendrecht, did willfully and unlawfully agree with one Mr R. M.”  

at  Rosmolenweg 

address 

having 

registered 

office 

Commonly known as P.M.! 

“57 years, Consultant…” 

Again! 

“… residing at Ave Maurice Prudent, Floreal, to do an act which is unlawful (…)”. 

 

What is the act? 

113 

“… on or about the aforesaid date the said Boskalis International, which was a bidder for 
a contract with the Mauritius Ports Authority (MPA) did agree with one Mr R. M. to give 
gratification  of  USD  25,000  to  one  Mr  S.  C.  who  was  the  Chairman  of  the  Mauritius 
Ports  Authority  to  consideration  of  which  (…)  did  influence  in  procuring  Boskalis  a 
contract for carrying out dredging works.” 

The other charge, Count 8 –  

“That  or  about  the  year  2006  when  Boskalis  International,  as  represented  by  the  said 
gentleman  Mr  Jan  Cornelis  Haak  having  his  registered  office  of  address  (….)    did 
willfully and unlawfully agree …” 

In this one, he agreed personally –  

“…with  one  R.  M.,  57  years,  residing  at  Ave  Maurice  Prudent,  Floreal  to  give 
gratification  of  USD  60,000  to  one  Mr  S.  C.  who  was  the  Chairman  of  the  Mauritius 
Ports Authority.” 

So, these are the people who have conspired and agreed. And the Company comes to Mauritius, 
retains the service of counsels, pleads guilty, and goes on the other side of the Court, under oath 
relates exactly how the transaction took place and was found guilty and he paid his fine and went 
away. And these are the gentlemen who will be Advisers to the Office of the Prime Minister! I 
understand he  will sit or he is already sitting on the Board of  Air Mauritius, where we know 
that… 

(Interruptions) 

… millions of rupees will be involved when Air Mauritius will renew its fleet. I understand he 
will be at the Board of Investment. Are we going to be confident with these institutions? He has 
not  yet  been  found  guilty  in  another  case  which  is  still  before  the  Court,  this  I  agree;  he  is 
presumed to be innocent in that case. But, we know what Boskalis has come and said in Court 
and he was not challenged, not even cross-examined! 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it is clear that on the issue of fraud and corruption, the issue of 
transparency with regard to nomination of people, this Government does not have the political 

 

114 

will and people are starting to feel that on that issue they have been misled during the campaign 
by the alliance.  

Now, let me come on the last one.  In fact, I would not have spoken on this, but we learnt it 
only on Friday after the Cabinet meeting, the decision to get the Office of the DPP under the 
aegis of the Attorney General, a political nominee. Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, let’s be clear from 
the beginning. There are three issues with regard to the question of the DPP. I am talking about 
the  Office  of  the  DPP,  not  about  the  DPP.    Many  Members  in  this  House  have  intervened;  I 
listened  to  my  friends,  hon.  Teeluckdharry  and  hon.  Rutnah,  and  there  have  been  accusations 
against the DPP that he has abused his Office, he has used money, stayed in hotels and all these 
things.  But this is about the DPP, and I am concerned about the Office of the DPP and not the 
person who occupies that Office.  If the Government feels that there has been abuse or maldonne 
by that gentleman who is occupying that post, the law allows a certain procedure.  Impeach him!  
Start  the  procedure!    But  don’t  touch  the  institution!    If  you  feel  that  somebody  in  that 
constitutional office - there is a procedure!  Let’s do it.  But don’t touch the Office of the DPP! 

Mr Deputy Speaker Sir, my friend, hon. Manish Gobin has quoted, selectively I must say, 
the De Smith report.  But, let me quote the same report, what Professor De Smith has to say in 
his  book  “The  New  Commonwealth  and  its  Constitutions  the  underlying  rationale  for  this 
constitutional  practice”,  when  he  states  that  the  independent  constitutional  status  of  the  DPP 
stemmed from,  I quote – 

“The need to safeguard the stream of criminal justice from being polluted by the inflow 
of  noxious  political  contamination…  To  segregate  the  process  of  prosecution  entirely 
from general political considerations.” 

Professor De Smith had a vision when he wrote that.  It will be good and interesting for you to 
read, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, “Le procès du roi”, written by Jacques Panglose.   What has been 
said in that book has not been challenged. Nobody has challenged that book.  It relates the case 
of late Sir Gaëtan Duval; how there was political interference, how in this House it has been said 
that neither the DPP, nor the Attorney General at that time, were involved, it was only the Office 
of the Prime Minister.  This is very serious.  Are we going back to these dark days, Mr Deputy 
Speaker, Sir? 

We know that in 1998, Lord Mackay proposed a transition in his report, and I quote – 

115 

 
“Those who support the Director of Public Prosecutions in the State Law Office should 
constitute  a  separate  department,  reporting  and  managed  by  the  Director  of  Public 
Prosecutions, and with no responsibilities except those relating to prosecution”. 

This is what Mackay said: ‘reporting and managed’.  An independent institution! When I listened 
to  hon.  Rutnah  on  the  radio,  he  said  nothing  will  change,  the  Attorney  General  will  only 
supervise. Supervise the work of an independent institution!  A political appointee!  We know 
how pre-trial investigation is important in a trial.  We, who practice at the Bar, know how this is 
important, and we know of cases in the past where there has been political interference, which 
have been struck out by the Court.  Are we going in that path again?  Lord Mackay says so.  
Professor De Smith says so.  Now, we have the Law Reform Commission whose Chairman is the 
best constitutional lawyer – I am sure we all agree – this country has ever had so far, Mr Guy 
Ollivry QC.   He presented the report, looking specifically about this issue, to ensure that we do 
not go back to the dark days when politics were mixed with the Office of the Director of Public 
Prosecutions.  He recommends, and this is what he has to say, I quote – 

“It is abundantly clear from the requirements of the Constitution that the Office of the 
DPP  must  operate  independently  of  the  Office  of  the  Attorney  General.  The  current 
practice,  since  independence,  of  law  officers  working  at  Attorney  General’s  Office 
appearing for and advising DPP falls foul of the principle underlying the setting up in the 
Constitution  of  distinct  officers  of  Attorney  General  and  DPP.  This  arrangement  is 
unconstitutional and should be brought to an end.” 

And this is exactly what was done. 

My friend, hon. Gobin, was talking about accountability of finance.  But we know in this 
House what were the amendments after 1989.  The Prime Minister has answered our question 
when we asked about the financial status or expenses at the DPP’s Office.  So, the question of 
accountability  is  here.  There  is  no  need  to  get  the  Attorney  General  to  supervise  to  have 
accountability. In this House, questions have been answered by the previous Prime Minister.  But 
the hon. Member does not know because it’s the first time that he is here.  I do appreciate, but 
then it does not mean accountability… 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Baloomoody, please address the Chair! 

 

116 

Mr Baloomoody:  I am sorry!  Accountability is here.  So, don’t hide behind the shield of 
accountability  when  we  know  there  is  no  accountability  in  many  sectors  today.    Don’t  hide 
behind accountability to say that we have to do away with the separation.  I know of people out 
there,  the  officials  of  the  State  Law  Office,  barristers,  members  of  the  DPP  Office  are  very 
concerned  about  what  is  happening.    Let  me  tell  you  this.    At  international  level,  we  will  be 
watched  very  carefully,  because  this  is  the  trend  at  international  level,  especially  in  the 
Commonwealth countries, to have these offices separate.  This will have a negative effect on our 
legal system, and I hope that the hon. Prime Minister, and the Government, will look into that 
again. 

So, let me conclude, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, by saying that, we, on this side of the House, 
like I said in the beginning, don’t have much problem with the Programme, but we will watch 
carefully to ensure that what you have been elected for, what you told and promised the people, 
and  we  will  support  where  we  need  to  support,  but  we  will  raise  our  voice  wherever  this 
Government deviates from what it has promised.  It is good to note that the question of the DPP 
was never mentioned in the Programme, was never mentioned during the campaign, and was not 
even mentioned by the Attorney General when he addressed the House.  It was put in catimini. 
So, on issue like this, we will be here, and the people can rest upon us. 

Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon Seeruttun! 

 (6.43 p.m.) 

The Minister for Agro-Industry and Food Security (Mr M. Seeruttun): M. le vice-
président,  c’est  avec  beaucoup  de  fierté  que  je  m’adresse  à  la  Chambre  sur  le  discours-
programme  du  nouveau  gouvernement  MSM/PMSD/ML,  issu  des  élections  du  10  décembre 
2014. Un gouvernement que le peuple a plébiscité dans sa sagesse, sa maturité, sa clairvoyance, 
et en toute lucidité. 

Mais avant d’entrer dans le cadre des débats, je voudrais tout d’abord, dans la riche et 
pure  tradition  parlementaire,  vous  féliciter  très  sincèrement  pour  votre  élection  à  la  vice-
présidence de cette auguste Assemblée, et la population mauricienne est certainement heureuse 
de vous voir dans cette fonction, et avoir un jeune de 24 ans à ce poste de vice-président. Nous 

 

117 

marquons ici l’histoire. Cela démontre la détermination du Premier ministre, et son attachement 
à  la  cause  de  la  jeunesse.  Je  voudrais  aussi  profiter  de  l’occasion  pour  féliciter  la  présidente 
d’être  élue,  ici,  par  les  membres  de  l’Assemblée  nationale,  et  je  voudrais  que  vous  lui 
transmettiez ce message de félicitation de ma part. 

Comme vous le savez, c’est la première fois qu’une dame accède à ce poste, et là aussi 
nous marquons, encore une fois, l’histoire, et cette avancée, c’est grâce encore une fois à notre 
Premier  ministre,  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  qui  a  démontré  une  nouvelle  fois  son  attachement 
profond à la cause féminine. N’oublions pas que c’est lui qui, en 1982, avait créé un full-fledged 
ministère des Droits de la Femme, et c’est encore lui qui avait exigé qu’on présente une loi pour 
éliminer  toute  forme  de  discrimination  sexiste  contre  la  femme.  Qui  plus  est,  M.  le  vice-
président,  nous  avons  présenté  neuf  candidates  aux  dernières  élections,  et  elles  sont  toutes 
aujourd’hui présentes dans l’hémicycle. 

(Interruptions) 

C’est une grande première ! Contrairement à nos adversaires, aucune de leurs candidates n’est 
présente, et avec la nomination de Madame la présidente, on peut dire, comme dirait l’anglais – 

“This House has now a MAAM as Speaker.” 

Mais,  à  un  moment  où  tout  le  monde  se  réjouissait  de  l’élection  d’une  femme  à  la 
présidence de l’Assemblée nationale, une nomination qui fait la fierté de la nation arc-en-ciel, 
l’opposition,  principalement  le  MMM,  a  tenté  -  fort  heureusement  en  vain  -  de  reléguer  au 
second  plan  cet  événement  historique.  A  peine  la  séance  levée  le  22  décembre  de  l’année 
dernière,  le  leader  de  l’opposition  -  avec  ses  élus  -  devait  rappeler  la  presse  pour  faire  des 
commentaires  sur  ce  choix.  Qu’avons-nous  entendu?  Qu’avons-nous  lu  dans  la  presse? 
L’honorable  Paul  Bérenger  vient  dire  que  c’est  la  première  fois  qu’un  candidat  non-élu  est 
nommé Speaker. Cela a été rapporté dans tous les titres de la presse écrite, et diffusé également 
sur les ondes des radios privées. Quelle énorme fausseté par le Leader de l’opposition ! Je sais 
qu’il est aussi, à ses temps perdus, un historien, mais je crois, là, qu’il a induit tout le monde en 
erreur. S’il avait fait son homework convenablement il n’aurait pas lâché cette énorme fausseté, 
et ce qui est surprenant c’est que tous ceux dans son entourage l’ont cru. 

118 

 
M. le vice-président, laissez-moi rappeler au Leader de l’opposition que ce n’est pas la 
première fois qu’un candidat malheureux devient Speaker.  Il y en a eu dans le passé. En 1959, 
Harilall  Vaghjee,  avec  2,124  voix,  était  un  candidat  battu  dans  la  circonscription  numéro  11, 
Grand Baie. A cette époque, il y avait 40 circonscriptions, avec un seul élu selon le système de 
first-past-the-post,  et  Harilall    Vaghjee,  devenu  par  la  suite  Chevalier,  était  devancé  par 
Rameshwar Jaypal, bénéficiaire de 2,658 voix, et une année plus tard, soit en 1960, il accéda aux 
fonctions de Speaker, et ce jusqu’en 1979. C’est clair que ce n’est pas la première fois qu’un 
candidat battu aux élections générales accède au poste de  Speaker. Je m’attendais à ce que le 
leader du MMM fasse amende honorable et corrige son erreur. 

J’ai écouté avec attention le précédent orateur, l’honorable Baloomoody. Il a dit qu’il est 
d’accord avec notre programme électoral, mais il attend dans nos actions l’implémentation de ce 
programme. Je dois dire que pendant les dix dernières années, il y avait un gouvernement, mais il 
n’y avait pas de leader. C’était cela le problème de ce pays. Il y avait un manque de leadership. 
Mais, aujourd’hui, avec le nouveau Premier ministre - un vrai leader - nous allons voir que tout 
ce qu’on a promis va être implémenté, et si je peux ajouter, avec notre vice-Premier ministre, 
l’honorable Soodhun, et mon ami l’honorable minisre Dayal, on peut être sûr que tout ce qu’on a 
promis - avec bien sûr nos autres collègues ministres - il y aura des mesures qui vont être prises 
rapidement. Il a aussi fait mention de moins de 100 jours qu’on est au gouvernement. Cela fait 
moins de 10 semaines ; on ne peut pas tout faire durant une période aussi courte. Il y aura des 
changements certes; il suffit d’attendre et de voir que ce qu’on a promis on va deliver. 

Il a parlé de cette décision concernant l’office du DPP. C’était cela notre mandat, on avait 
demandé  à  l’électorat  de  nous  mettre  au  gouvernement  pour  pouvoir  amener  plus  de 
transparence,  et  aujourd’hui,  en  voulant  avoir  plus  de  supervision,  plus  d’oversight,  on  est  en 
train de condamner cette décision. 

Revenons, M. le vice-président, aux résultats des dernières élections. Je voudrais saluer 
tout bas cet électorat de la République de Maurice qui a voté avec intelligence, et avec ce vote 
cet électorat a dit non à l’arrogance du pouvoir, non au pouvoir de l’argent, non au gaspillage, 
non  à  la  violence,  non  à  un  pays  sans  leadership,  et  encore  moins  non  à  un  pays  avec  deux 
capitaines. 

119 

 
Nos adversaires présageaient déjà une victoire avant même que le peuple n’aille voter, et 
avec leur quarante candidats de chaque côté, ils pensaient que le coup était déjà joué. They even 
claimed that they would bury us, but they did not know that we were the seeds that would come 
out of the soil to provide the shades for the population. Souvent on a entendu les quarante qu’ils 
détenaient, et on sait très bien dans le jargon mauricien, qui est bien à nous, ce que ce numéro 40 
veut dire ! 

(Interruptions) 

On savait déjà que quand les deux 40 allaient exploser, cela sentirait la défaite. 

Le Parti travailliste est aujourd’hui un Parti qui respire le scandale à outrance à tel point 

que son leader a dû se retirer.  

Mais ils remplacent le Macarena boy par le Macaroni boy ! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

M.  le  président,  permettez-moi  de  profiter  aussi  de  cette  occasion  pour  remercier 
l’électorat de ma circonscription, Vieux Grand-Port/Rose Belle, qui a su démontrer qu’il n’est 
pas à la merci d’un quelconque Roi autoproclamé du Sud.  Je profite aussi de cette occasion pour 
féliciter mes deux colistiers qui m’ont soutenu dans ces élections. 

Lors de ces élections générales on a témoigné un électorat qui a résisté à la violence, au 
climat de terreur et aux actes d’intimidation durant toute la campagne électorale. Et ce qui s’était 
passé dans ma propre Circonscription - Circonscription No. 11, Vieux Grand-Port/Rose Belle - 
est  toujours  gravé  dans  ma  mémoire.  Je  ne  vais  pas  élaborer  là-dessus  car  la  police  enquête 
toujours  sur  l’affaire  du  gaz  lacrymogène  qui  avait  été  lancé  lors  d’une  réunion  nocturne, 
organisée par l’équipe de l’Alliance Lepep, et j’espère que le ou les coupables seront pris dans 
les filets et ne resteront pas impunis devant la loi. 

Pour revenir au discours-programme présenté le mardi 27 janvier, M. le vice-président, je 
dois  dire  qu’il  a  été  béni  par  ce  peuple  admirable.  Ce  peuple  -  toutes  les  couches  sociales 
confondues  -  a  démontré  sa  confiance,  sa  sincérité  et  sa  volonté  de  soutenir  le  gouvernement 
dans sa politique visant à tout nettoyer. Le sourire qui illumine le visage de tous les Mauriciens, 
y compris le hard core Travailliste, est visible. 

 

120 

Dieu merci qu’on a reçu un autre gouvernement dirigé par Sir Anerood Jugnauth pour 
redonner confiance à la population. Et si c’était l’autre, le pays aurait connu encore des périodes 
d’instabilité et de ‘maja karo’. Vous avez vu les derniers événements qui ont choqué toute la 
population. Les défilés aux Casernes Centrales en témoignent. 

Depuis  le  jour  de  la  proclamation  des  résultats,  le  pays  respire.  La  population  se  sent 
libérée et elle sait qu’elle peut compter sur le Premier ministre et des leaders déterminés à mettre 
bon ordre dans ce pays. Et des leaders qui sont animés par le désir ardent de construire cette 
nation mauricienne. 

Déjà, le travail accompli jusqu’ici par cette équipe prouve que le feel good factor est là. 

Les promesses sont tenues. 

Il fut un temps, M. le vice-président, les policiers devaient être sur nos routes pendant des 
heures pour assurer la sécurité du cortège de l’ancien Premier ministre, surtout quand il devait 
prendre  l’avion  pour  ses  fréquentes  escapades  à  Londres  en  particulier,  et  cela  provoquait 
l’irritation des automobilistes. 

Aujourd’hui on peut comprendre pourquoi autant de sécurité était nécessaire lors de ses 

déplacements à l’étranger. 

Aujourd’hui… 

Comme c’est bien dit ! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Aujourd’hui, les automobilistes saluent le passage de notre Premier ministre, en signe de 

respect, ils flashent le cortège. Ça, c’est la différence, M. le vice-président. 

(Interruptions) 

En  2008,  les  Américains  avaient  dit  ‘Yes  We  Can’.  Mais  le  11  décembre    2014,  les 

Mauriciens ont dit ‘Yes.  We did It’. 

(Interruptions) 

 

121 

M.  le  vice-président,  le  discours-programme  du  gouvernement  énonce  les  différents 

chantiers et champs d’action des cinq années à venir. 

Le gouvernement prend des engagements fermes, et nous nous attèlerons à honorer nos 

engagements. 

Nous nous investirons pour atteindre les objectifs que nous nous sommes fixés. Ce plan 
quinquennal, M. le vice-président, est cohérent, dynamique, bien dosé, empreint de sérieux et est 
pragmatique. Les besoins pressants de la population de Maurice, de Rodrigues et d’Agaléga en 
vue d’améliorer leur quotidien sont pris en considération. 

M. le vice-président, à travers ce discours-programme, nous nous sommes engagés dans 

une longue marche vers la transformation de notre pays. 

Nous avons choisi de réformer notre pays en renforçant la base économique ainsi que les 

entités tombant sous les différents ministères. 

Comme vous le savez tous, le monde est aujourd’hui confronté à de multiples défis. Les 
uns plus difficiles que les autres. Mais, nous ne reculerons devant rien. Nous sommes prêts à les 
relever et nous avons le courage et la détermination, M. le vice-président. 

Nous  avons  un  gros  travail  à  entreprendre.  Le  peuple  est  conscient  de  cette  tâche  et 

ensemble nous l’abattrons. 

Les  pratiques  de  mauvaise  gouvernance  et  de  corruption  favorisées  par  l’ancien 
gouvernement constituent un des défis majeurs à enrayer. Nous comptons sur l’appui nécessaire 
de tout le monde pour l’amélioration de nos performances en matière de gouvernance et de la 
lutte contre la corruption. 

Il y a aussi la gestion des affaires publiques. Vous avez vu le dernier rapport de l’Audit - 
rapport  que  l’ancien  gouvernement  avait  caché  dans  un  tiroir  à  cause  des  élections  générales. 
Nous ne voulons plus de ce type de  gestion. Assez de gaspillage et de  dilapidation des fonds 
publics ! Et c’est pour cela que la création d’un ministère des Services financiers, de la Bonne 
Gouvernance  et  des  Réformes  institutionnelles  sous  la  houlette  de  mon  collègue,  l’honorable 
Bhadain, s’est avérée nécessaire. 

 

122 

Ce discours-programme, encore une fois, M. le  vice-président, a suscité  un réel intérêt 
parmi  la  population.  Et  on  n’a  qu’à  lire  quelques  déclarations  des  gens  de  la  rue,  des  gens 
simples qui vivent terre à terre ainsi que celles prononcées par les dirigeants syndicaux. 

Et je ne fais que citer deux syndicalistes. Monsieur Suttyhudeo Tengur, président de la 

Government Hindi Teachers Union,  a déclaré, je cite - 

« Une nouvelle ère s’ouvre sur la prochaine décennie», pour qualifier ce programme. 

Une  autre  déclaration  qui  vient  cette  fois  de  Monsieur  Haniff  Peerun,  président  du 

Mauritius Labour Congress, je cite - 

 « Le programme du gouvernement est révolutionnaire, c’est un programme qui répond 
aux aspirations du peuple. C’est la première fois que cela provoque une unanimité parmi 
toute la population, y compris le patronat». 

Ça suffit pour résumer les grandes lignes du discours-programme. 

M. le vice-président, je me tourne maintenant vers le secteur de l’Agro-industrie et de la 

Sécurité alimentaire. 

Vous  en  conviendrez  avec  moi,  M.  le  vice-président,  que  sans  ce  secteur  nous  ne 
pourrons  pas  vivre.  Nous  pouvons  avoir  un  toit,  des  vêtements,  mais  la  nourriture  reste 
essentielle  pour  l’être  humain.  Je  me  rappelle  encore  d’une  déclaration  d’un  ancien  Premier 
ministre de l’Inde, le Pandit Jawarharlall Nehru, qui remonte à plus de 65 ans. Il avait dit, je cite 
–  

« Tout peut attendre sauf l’agriculture »  

Cet evergreen statement, M. le vice-président est toujours valable aujourd’hui et le restera pour 
encore très, très longtemps. C’est ce secteur qui nourrit le monde. 

L’avenir de l’agriculture ne concerne pas que les planteurs, il nous concerne tous et pour 
relever les défis mondiaux (accroissement de la population, changement climatique, respect de 
l’environnement),  l’agriculture  a  plus  que  jamais  encore  besoin  non  seulement  de  solutions 
innovantes, mais aussi d’un dialogue ouvert et réaliste. Nous ne sommes pas des « missié conne 
tout ». Les ONGs peuvent avoir des idées brillantes pour faire avancer ce secteur. Il faut que ce 
secteur améliore sa part de contribution au Produit Intérieur Brut (PIB) du pays. Un pays comme 

 

123 

l’Inde, sa part au PIB se situe autour de 22 % et moi je trouve inacceptable que la plupart de ce 
secteur au PIB de Maurice se situe à environ 3 %. Et cela va en diminuant d’année après année. 

Rien  n’a  été  fait,  M.  le  vice-président,  pour  empêcher    la  dégringolade.  Ce  secteur  à 
Maurice,  malheureusement,  a  été  délaissé.    Il  y  a  un  désordre  total.  Mes  deux  prédécesseurs 
n’ont pris aucune initiative pour donner une nouvelle impulsion, pour encourager les jeunes à se 
tourner vers la terre nourricière. 

Une  de  mes  ambitions,  M.  le  vice-président,  parmi  tant  d’autres,  est  de  développer  ce 
secteur en une activité génératrice  de revenus et de création d’emplois capables de résoudre le 
problème  aigu  du  chômage  et  de  la  pauvreté  à  Maurice.  J’insisterai  pour  un  secteur  agricole 
productif  afin d’attirer les jeunes.  

Les services techniques  du ministère sont là.  Il ne suffit que de tout réorganiser pour le 
soutien  nécessaire  aux  personnes  intéressées.    Les  objectifs  de  mon  ministère,  M.  le  vice-
président,  sont  multiples.  Faute  de  temps,  je  ne  peux  qu’énumérer  quelques-uns.  Mais  quand 
même c’est important de faire part de mes soucis, et aussi de tracer dans une certaine mesure 
l’itinéraire à suivre pour que ce secteur à Maurice se retrouve. Mais le plus important, le faire 
progresser d’une façon efficiente pour qu’il contribue au développement socio-économique du 
pays.  La  façon  dont  le  secteur  a  été  géré  durant  ces  dix  dernières  années  laisse  beaucoup  à 
désirer.  Il  y  a  eu  une  approche  d’amateur.  Il  y  a  plusieurs  projets  qui  ont  été  formulés  mais 
jamais implémentés.  

M.  le  vice-président,  durant  ces  cinq  dernières  années  j’ai  été  aussi  membre  du  Public 
Accounts Committee et tout le monde connaît la façon dont les affaires du pays ont été gérées. Je 
vais citer qu’un seul exemple.  Le projet FORIP (Fields Operation Regrouping and Irrigation 
Project) a coûté R 2.5 milliards pour le réaménagement d’une superficie de 9,000 hectares. Une 
mauvaise gestion a fait perdre entre R 500 millions et R 700 millions à l’État. Pour moi, c’est un 
scandale, M. le vice-président ! Que serait-il passé si le PTR/MMM était au pouvoir ? A la page 
22 de son manifeste électoral, cette défunte alliance avait annoncé son intention de poursuivre le 
projet FORIP avec le même style. Et les dégâts auraient continué.  Il faut que ça soit bien clair, 
M. le vice-président. Nous ne sommes pas contre le regroupement. Mais il faut que le projet soit 
bien mené et que cet argent n’aille pas dans les drains.  Je suis déterminé à y mettre bon ordre.  
D’ailleurs, j’ai demandé un rapport complet sur les planteurs qui ont bénéficié du programme 

 

124 

FORIP.  Le plus gros problème, M. le vice-président, c’est qu’il n’y a pas de système pour qu’on 
fasse le contrôle et l’évaluation du projet pour voir si on a atteint l’objectif d’une façon efficiente 
et qu’on a bien utilisé le fonds qui a été mis à la disposition de ces planteurs. 

M. le vice-président, toujours au niveau de mon ministère, il y a plusieurs défis majeurs à 
relever. Pendant ces prochaines cinq années, on va faire tout pour remettre notre secteur agricole 
sur  le  rail  du  progrès  et  du  développement.  Il  est  maintenant  navrant  et  triste  de  constater 
l’héritage catastrophique laissé par l’ancienne administration qui rendra notre tâche encore plus 
ardue et difficile. 

L’industrie  de  la  canne  qui  reste  un  pilier  important  de  notre  agriculture  est  à  bout  de 
souffle et se trouve à la croisée des chemins. Ce secteur, déjà affecté par la baisse de prix par 
36% sur le marché européen depuis 2008, a reçu un coup de massue ces derniers temps avec la 
plongée de l’euro.  Les producteurs et les planteurs qui recevaient R 16,000 par tonne de sucre en 
2013 verront leurs recettes descendre à environ R 12,500 la tonne pour la récolte de 2014. M. le 
vice-président, le gouvernement ne peut rester insensible face à une telle action. Il est de notre 
devoir  de  s’assurer  que  les  producteurs,  surtout  les  petits  planteurs,  obtiennent  des  revenus 
adéquats  qui  leur  permettront  de  continuer  à  cultiver  la  canne  pour  la  suivie  même  de  cette 
industrie.  Mon collègue, l’honorable ministre des Finances et du Développement économique et 
moi-même, avec la bénédiction du Premier ministre, travaillons en ce moment même à finaliser 
des mesures afin de compenser partiellement les planteurs pour la perte de leurs revenus. 

M. le vice-président, le secteur sucre sera appelé à faire face à une concurrence plus féroce 
sur le marché européen à partir de septembre 2017 quand le quota de sucre sur ce marché sera 
complètement aboli. Le Syndicat des Sucres a déjà pris les dispositions nécessaires pour trouver 
des  nouveaux  partenaires  stratégiques  en  Europe  pour  la  vente  de  notre  sucre  à  des  prix 
rémunérateurs. Du côté du gouvernement, on suit la situation de près et on aura des consultations 
régulières avec les principaux acteurs pour prendre des décisions appropriées afin que l’industrie 
puisse continuer à exister et à progresser. 

M.  le  vice-président,  au  vu  de  la  situation  actuelle  dans  laquelle  se  trouve  l’industrie 
cannière, des mesures drastiques et courageuses devront être prises dans le court et moyen terme 
afin  de  la  restructurer  et  de  l’amener  à  bon  port.  Une  étude  sur  l’avenir  de  l’industrie  a  été 
commanditée par le ministère et une ébauche du rapport des consultants vient d’être reçue.  Un 

 

125 

comité de pilotage étudie les recommandations en ce moment même et le rapport sera finalisé 
bientôt  après  consultations  avec  toutes  les  parties  concernées.  Il  est  fort  possible  que  les  lois 
doivent  être  amendées  et  les  honorables  membres  auront  l’occasion  de  s’exprimer  sur  les 
changements à venir.   

M.  le  vice-président,  en  ce  qui  concerne  la  culture  vivrière,  mon  ministère  s’est  fixé 
l’objectif d’atteindre une production bio de nos fruits et légumes à hauteur de 50 % d’ici  à 2020. 
Nous avons un gros problème à présent pour contrôler la traçabilité des résidus des pesticides 
dans les légumes offerts sur le marché et, donc, une nouvelle impulsion sera donnée à la culture 
bio pour s’assurer que les produits que la population consomme soient sains pour la santé.  Nous 
irons  aussi  de  l’avant  avec  le  projet  de  la  construction  d’un  marché  moderne  pour  la  vente  à 
l’encan,  en  remplacement  des  trois  marchés  existants.  Ce  projet  préconisera,  entre  autres,  des 
mesures strictes pour la traçabilité des résidus de pesticides dans les fruits et légumes. Ce marché 
va  aussi  permettre  la  vente  de  nos  produits  agricoles  dans  des  conditions  hygiéniques  et 
sanitaires convenables et éliminera la disparité, parfois énormes, dans les prix de ces denrées à 
travers le pays. 

M.  le  vice-président,  mon  ministère  compte  introduire  des  nouvelles  normes  de 
production  afin  d’améliorer  la  qualité  de  nos  produits  agricoles  destinés  au  marché  local  et  à 
l’exportation. La certification verte sera établie pour les produits bio. 

Mon ministère encouragera l’utilisation des compostes et fertilisants bio pour les champs. 
Les  planteurs  de  légumes  bénéfieront  déjà  d’une  subvention  gouvernementale  sur  le  prix  du 
composte et cette subvention sera maintenue dans le prochain budget afin de populariser l’usage 
de ce produit et décourager l’utilisation des produits chimiques. 

Le gouvernement a accueilli favorablement le projet conjoint de la MCFI et de la MCAF 
concernant la production des fertilisants bio, projet qui a été inauguré par le Premier ministre la 
semaine  dernière.  Ce  projet  cadre  parfaitement  avec  la  politique  gouvernementale  visant  à 
promouvoir la production bio à Maurice. 

M. le président, mon ministère encouragera aussi les agriculteurs à adopter la culture de 
zéro  tolérance,  qui,  tout  en  améliorant  la  qualité  des  produits,  diminuera  aussi  les  coûts  de 
production car les produits chimiques ne seront plus ou peu utilisés. 

126 

 
Une autre culture qu’on doit nécessairement promouvoir est la permaculture qui est une 
mode de production agricole saine et durable. Cette culture, développée il y a une quarantaine 
d’années,  prend  de  plus  en  plus  de  l’ampleur  et  a  été  adoptée  avec  succès  dans  divers  pays 
comme  l’Angleterre  et  l’Australie.  Cette  culture  s’oppose  diamétralement  aux  méthodes  de 
culture qui dépendent des produits chimiques et qui nuisent à l’écosystème et à la santé. 

La permaculture résiste très bien aux changements climatiques et peut assurer la sécurité 
alimentaire dont on a tant besoin. Nos agriculteurs ont intérêt à adopter cette mode de culture qui 
leur sera bénéfique ainsi qu’au pays. 

Mon  ministère,  donc,  se  propose  de  lancer  une  campagne  d’information  et  de 
sensibilisation auprès des agriculteurs pour les intéresser et encourager à adopter cette culture. 
Nous allons assurer que tous les supports techniques et les conseils adéquats leur soient donnés à 
cet effet. 

M. le vice-président, une des contraintes majeures affectant la croissance dans le secteur 
agricole  est  la  non-disponibilité  des  terres.  J’ai  reçu  beaucoup  de  doléances  de  la  part  des 
planteurs à l’effet que des terres agricoles appartenant à l’État ont été distribuées par l’ancien 
régime, non aux vrais planteurs, mais à des agents politiques qui n’ont rien fait jusqu’ici pour les 
développer. 

Mon ministère est en train de faire un audit complet des terres allouées afin d’avoir une 
idée  exacte  de  la  situation.  Des  mesures  appropriées  seront  éventuellement  prises  pour  une 
meilleure allocation de ces terres afin que celles-ci soient mises à bon escient. 

M. le président, j’ai parlé un peu plus tôt de la situation dans l’industrie sucrière. Avec la 
baisse des prix du sucre à l’exportation et l’augmentation des coûts de production, beaucoup de 
petits  planteurs  ont  abandonné  la  culture  de  la  canne.  En  effet,  le  nombre  de  planteurs  a 
drastiquement baissé de 35,000 il y a dix ans de cela pour tomber à 16,000 aujourd’hui. 

On m’a fait comprendre que les terres leur appartenant ne sont plus ou peu cultivées et 
restent donc dans un état d’abandon. C’est une situation dramatique car,  d’un côté, il  y a des 
entrepreneurs et cultivateurs qui cherchent désespérément des terres pour des projets agricoles et, 
de l’autre côté, des grandes superficies de terres sont à l’abandon. 

127 

 
Donc, mon ministère va accélérer la création d’une Land Bank pour enregistrer les terres 
abandonnées et les allouer aux agriculteurs intéressés à travers un contrat dûment signé entre les 
parties  concernées.  Si  ce  projet  se  matérialise,  cela  va  définitivement  donner  un  boost 
considérable à notre production agricole. 

M.  le  président,  le  secteur  de  l’élevage,  pour  ne  pas  être  en  reste,  passe  ainsi  par  des 
moments difficiles. En dépit des fonds substantiels disponibles pour le Food Security Fund et des 
projets mis en œuvre durant ces dernières années, la production du lait et de la viande a régressé. 

Les  éleveurs  de  porcs  font  face  à  d’énormes  difficultés  pour  l’écoulement  de  leurs 
produits à des prix rémunérateurs, ayant à faire face à une concurrence féroce due aux produits 
importés  en  grande  quantité.  Les  nourritures  pour  bétail  coûtent  de  plus  en  plus  chères  et  ils 
n’arrivent pas à nourrir les animaux convenablement. Les régions dans lesquelles ils opèrent à 
Saint Martin et Bassin Requin laissent à désirer. Les éleveurs… 

Bassin Requin, oui ! 

(Interruptions) 

Les éleveurs des vaches et des cabris font aussi face à de graves problèmes, eu égard au 
manque  de  fourrage,  les  prix  élevés  de  la  nourriture  de  bétail,  les  difficultés  à  écouler  leurs 
produits et les prix dérisoires qu’ils obtienent pour ces produits. 

Mon  ministère  se  propose,  donc,  de  créer  des  zones  spéciales  à  travers  le pays  pour 
l’élevage  des  vaches,  des  cabris  et  des  porcs.  Ces  zones  regrouperont  les  fermiers,  les  agro-
processeurs, les entrepreneurs, les distributeurs et les services gouvernementaux en un seul lieu. 
On attend à ce que ce projet apporte plus d’efficience, plus d’économies d’échelle, une meilleure 
gestion des déchets et plus de productivité. 

Mon ministère prendra aussi les mesures suivantes visant à – 

(I) 

élaborer une nouvelle politique d’élevage afin d’améliorer le potentiel génétique 
de notre cheptel ; 

(II) 

revoir le Service d’Insémination Artificiel… 

Je sais que le temps fait défaut, mais c’est un gros ministère, M. le vice-président. 

128 

 
Mais, comme je vous dis il y a aussi le secteur des Bois et forêts. Il y a un gros projet. 
Donc,  le  ministère  s’embarque  dans  ces  prochaines  cinq  années  et  nous  avons  mis  comme 
objectif  d’augmenter  la  superficie  de  nos  forêts  de  2  à  12  pour  cent  dans  les  prochaines  cinq 
années.  Dans  ce  contexte,  quelques  100,000  arbres  indigènes  et  endémiques  seront  plantés 
annuellement  dans  toutes  les  forêts  appartenant  à  l’État  ainsi  que  sur  nos  ilots, les  parcs 
nationaux et les réserves naturelles. 

M. le vice-président, il y a aussi le Jardin Botanique SSR de Pamplemousses. C’est un 
drame de voir l’état dans lequel ce jardin se trouve actuellement. Ce pourrissement est dû à la 
nomination  d’un  ancien  conseiller,  président  du  Conseil  de  District  du  Nord,  à  la  tête  de  ce 
jardin. Aujourd’hui, ce jardin a perdu tout son cachet historique et cela fait la honte d’un pays 
comme Maurice. Donc, je vais tout faire pour qu’on redonne à ce jardin ses lettres de noblesse. 

M.  le  vice-président,  je  vais  conclure  pour  dire  que  nous  avons,  ici,  un  gouvernement 
déterminé, sincère, qui veut travailler  avec le peuple et pour le peuple, avec un Premier ministre 
qui croit dur comme fer que ce pays a tous les atouts pour réussir ; il suffirait d’avoir un vrai 
Leader  et  aujourd’hui  on  a  un  vrai  Leader  et  c’est  cela  qui  va  nous  donner  une  nouvelle  île 
Maurice pour que les jeunes de demain puissent dire merci à Sir Anerood Jugnauth. 

Merci, M. le vice-président. 

(7.23 p.m.) 

The Minister of Gender Equality, Child Development and Family Welfare (Mrs A. 
Perraud): Mr Deputy Speaker, let me, at the very outset, congratulate you for your nomination 
as the youngest Deputy Speaker, and also to convey my congratulation to the Speaker for her 
nomination as the first lady Speaker of this House. Indeed, this nomination is a première and a 
matter of pride for all Mauritians, especially women of the Republic of Mauritius. 

Moreover, it translates into reality a discourse of democracy and conveys the vision of 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister who firmly believes in the potential of women. In the same vein, 
allow me to also congratulate the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for his wisdom and determination to 
committing himself in achieving meaningful change for the country. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, this Government is highly committed to a model of economic 
growth and sustainable development which is socially inclusive and mindful of the environment. 

 

129 

This  was  evident  in  the  electoral  manifesto  of  l’Alliance  Lepep  and  further  reflected  in  the 
Government  Programme  for  the  next  five  years.  Since  coming  to  power,  the  Government  has 
been addressing a number of societal issues while looking for ways and means to enlarge the 
national cake for the benefit of each and every citizen of the Republic of Mauritius. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the policies of my Ministry are well-aligned to the overall vision 
of  achieving  social  justice  which  is  the  common  thread  that  cuts  across  all  the  measures 
enunciated  in  the  Government  Programme.  These  will  undoubtedly  contribute  significantly  to 
women’s  empowerment,  their  increased  involvement  and  active  participation  in  society.  The 
measures will also impact positively on our children and families.  

On  a  daily  basis,  we  deal  with  some  of  the  most  intractable  and  difficult  problems 
affecting the country’s vulnerable members, children and women. In a nutshell, we try our best 
to uphold their basic human rights within the overall framework of the Government Programme 
and its philosophy of working for the betterment of the whole nation through a massive social 
programme. 

In a bid to ensure that economic development has a human face, the elaboration of a well 
thought  Marshall  Plan  to  fight  against  rampant  poverty  and  increasing  social  inequalities  is 
highly commendable. I am sure, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, this Marshall Plan, as announced in the 
Government Programme, will go a long way towards social inclusion. The Marshall Plan will 
also  pave  the  way  to  addressing  one  of  the  poverty  issues.  This  thematic,  as  you  all  know, 
occupies a prominent place on both the international and regional agenda. This issue also figures 
high  on  our  agenda.  For  instance,  the  Ministry  of  Social  Integration  and  Economic 
Empowerment  as  well  as  the  National  Empowerment  Foundation  have  put  in  place  specific 
schemes to cater for the need of the vulnerable groups, including women and children.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in view that the Government Programme makes provision for 
the  restructuring  of  the  National  Empowerment  Foundation  to  render  it  more  proactive,  I  am 
envisaging  to  establish  strategic  partnership  with  the  Ministry  of  Social  Integration  and 
Economic Empowerment to explore avenues of collaboration for the welfare of women. I wish to 
inform  the  House  that  the  National  Women’s  Council  has  a  strong  network  of  women’s 
organisations and can serve as a platform to reach out to the unreached. 

130 

 
In fact, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the National Women Entrepreneur Council has already 
identified about 150 women who are experiencing distressful living conditions in terms of their 
basic  needs.  Thanks  to  the  very  symbolic  contribution  from  the  members  of  the  women’s 
associations,  the  National  Women’s  Council  has  been  able  to  bring  some  immediate  relief  to 
these women. We cannot, however, afford ad hoc interventions.  I, therefore, wish to maximise 
on  the  proposed  structure  of  the  NEF  so  that  we  find  innovative  measures  to  cater  for  these 
vulnerable women. 

Poverty issues concern our children too. I am looking forward that the proposed Marshall 
Plan incorporates measures that will ultimately take into account the strategic needs of children 
living in distressful situations. A well thought Marshall Plan, as enunciated in the Government 
Programme,  is  surely  a  long-term  strategy  that  culminates  in  the  achievement  of  meaningful 
change. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, while women’s human rights are enshrined in our Constitution, 
Section 16 (c) of our Constitution, as amended in September 1995, is explicit that there shall be 
no discrimination, and I quote –  

“… by reason of race, place of origin, political opinions, colour, creed or sex…” 

The reality, however, is a far cry from this principle of equality. For instance, women still face 
discrimination  in  the  world  of  work.  They  are  still  marginalised  politically,  economically, 
socially,  culturally  and  their  full  potential  and  worth  as  human  beings  and  agents  of  social 
transformation are often not appreciated and acknowledged. 

We can debate for hours and days on how best to bridge the outstanding gender gaps to 
ensure that women get their substantive rights. In fact, at the level of my Ministry we are actively 
engaged in these debates and discussions with all stakeholders, the public and private sectors, 
NGOs, women’s groups and civil society in general. Our motto is to raise awareness amongst all 
our stakeholders that gender equality is their agenda too. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it is imperative that development is engendered to ensure that 
development is not endangered, as so rightfully stated by the former UN Secretary-General, Mr 
Kofi Annan. This statement has far-reaching consequences and should be the concern of all. 

131 

 
The  decision  of  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  to  set  up  the  National  Coalition  against 
Domestic Violence Committee, under the aegis of the PMO, is testimony that this Government 
firmly  believes  in  gender  equality.  Having  this  mechanism  at  the  highest  echelon  of  this 
Government is an effective means to ensure a  multi-agency  response to the issue of domestic 
violence. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, domestic violence destabilises families. The strong stand taken 
by the Government depicts its determination to eliminate this problem which is threatening the 
social fabric of our society. Domestic violence, especially against women, is the consequence of 
gender inequality and a major factor undermining peace, development and human rights.  

In  recognition  of  this,  we  shall  also  implement  the  recommendations  of  the  Advisory 
Committee on the reinforcement of framework for protection from domestic violence. We faced 
one  big  issue  which  has  hit  the  headlines  in  recent  days,  that  is,  the  growing  incidence  of 
violence in various forms against women. Not a day goes by without yet another media report 
about a woman somewhere in the country, who has been the target of violence, resulting in deep 
psychological  trauma  or  even  death.  In  recent  weeks,  we  heard  of  the  cases  of  two  elderly 
women in their late 80s who, within a week’s interval, also became victims of this increasing 
gender-based violence. So much so, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that I had to make a statement to 
the  media  condemning  these  acts  of  aggression  which  are  being  perpetrated  against  the  most 
vulnerable and helpless  of our women folk. This deplorable trend in our society should be of 
concern  to  all  of  us,  and  we  should  do  everything  we  can  to  put  a  stop  to  it.  We  shall  also 
endeavour  to  promote  the  economic  empowerment  of  women  survivors  of  domestic  violence.  
To that effect, I will enlist the support of the National Women Entrepreneur Council and other 
relevant institutions. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  am  confident  that  the  National  Coalition  Against  Domestic 
Violence Committee will yield positive results and that the cases of violence against women will 
be addressed in a holistic manner.  

As the well-being of families ranks high on this Government’s agenda, my Ministry is also 
implementing a National Action Plan on the Family to further strengthen family ties and provide 
a healthy environment for a prosperous population.  

 

132 

The  Back  to  Work  Programme  is  another  bold  measure  announced  in  the  Government 
Programme which will ensure the financial and economic emancipation of women from the yoke 
of drudgery and property. Hence, the creation of jobs for women will lead to their economic and 
personal development. 

This year is a particular momentous time for all as we approach the 20th anniversary of the 
Beijing Plateform For Action. The Beijing Action Plan was instrumental as a reference document 
used by many Governments, Women’s groups and NGOs worldwide to advance women’s rights. 
More than ever before, at this juncture, we need to be bold and daring in our decision-making. 
For us to be much more efficient and effective, we have to embark upon some much needed and 
long overdue reforms. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, when the National Women Council Act was enacted in 1985, it 
served  a  particular  purpose:  that  of  rallying  women  across  the  country  into  Women’s 
Associations  and  Regional  Committees.  The  National  Women  Council  has,  no  doubt,  been 
pivotal in terms of establishing a strong network, thereby facilitating the job of my Ministry in 
establishing  linkages  with  women  from  all  walks  of  life.  But  30  years  on,  this  Act  does  not 
reflect changes in society or fit in with a ‘Gender and Development’ agenda.  

At  a  time  when  the  Ministry  has  been  applying  a  ‘Gender  and  Development’  approach, 
aimed at addressing outstanding gender gaps in all sectors of socio-economic development, the 
Regional Committees have not been able to follow suit. Moreover, the ageing membership of 
women’s associations has also resulted in the loss of vibrancy of the National Women Council. 
Hence, the urgent need to revamp and restructure this nationwide platform.  

By  and  large,  women  cannot  continue  to  be  passive  beneficiaries  of  development,  but 
should instead be active agents who collectively work towards transforming society in line with 
the  Government  strategy  of  an  inclusive  development.  The  challenges  regarding  closing  of 
gender gaps across all levels of development should be the prime concern of women. Unless they 
take a proactive role and engage in meaningful advocacy, they would run the risk of their rights 
and freedoms being violated, thus perpetuating gender inequality.  

At an economic level, we have been witnessing worldwide that women are the hardest hit 
during times of economic crisis. There is rising joblessness amongst the female population while 
many women try to survive by working in precarious jobs on a part-time basis. 

 

133 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  National  Women  Entrepreneur  Council  has  been  our  main 
vehicle to support and assist potential and existing women entrepreneurs. However, it too has its 
own weaknesses. It has hitherto helped women entrepreneurs who are largely at the lower end of 
the hierarchy of micro enterprises. There is need for their increased professionalism in terms of 
strategic planning. These enterprises must also try to become more up market with innovative 
products, services and practices.  

It  is  time,  therefore,  to  revisit  the  National  Woman  Entrepreneur  Council,  especially  in 
light of the bold and ambitious vision of the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development for 
Small & Medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs). As the Minister of Finance said recently, the SME 
sector will be the main pillar of the economy in terms of job creation and innovation within 10 
years. I believe that women entrepreneurs will also benefit from the one-stop shop which will be 
established shortly. Similarly, the forthcoming SME bank will enlarge the opportunities of the 
women entrepreneurs in terms of access to finance. Allocating an envelope of the Rs10 billion to 
this revolutionary project, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, speaks volume. 

The issue of protection and well-being of children is also multi-disciplinary and is a matter 
of concern for all. In fact, child protection is the collective responsibility of the Government and 
the community at large. My Ministry has been very much in the limelight with the increasing 
reporting of cases of children who are victims of violence. In 2014, the Child Development Unit 
(CDU) dealt with some 5,900 cases of children who were victims of violence, including cases of 
abuse and neglect reported at the CDUs six outstations across the country. Furthermore, a total of 
445 cases of sexually-abused children (including incest) were also recorded last year.  

Much effort has been deployed to cater for the protective needs of the victims. Yet, we do 
agree, there is still a lot to be done to ensure that victims are properly rehabilitated for eventual 
reinsertion  in  mainstream.  The  decision  of  Government  to  adopt  a  ‘zero  tolerance’  attitude 
against perpetrators of child violence is highly commendable.  

Equipping Police stations with CCTV and audio recording system will for sure avoid 
further trauma of the victims. The separate electronic register and perpetrators of child sexual 
abuse to be set up will result in a better tracking mechanism.  

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  Mauritius  is  party  to  all  major  international  human  rights 
instruments, and is strongly committed to upholding the highest standards in the promotion and 

 

134 

protection of human rights. Children constitute one-third of our population and we attach great 
importance  to  child  development,  protection  and  welfare  and  the  rights  and  participation  of 
children at both national and international levels.  

We  are  committed  to  upholding  the  principles  advocated  under  the  Convention  of  the 
Rights of the Child. Due consideration is given to the convention when developing new policies 
and legislation in order to ensure the ongoing promotion and protection of the rights of children 
in Mauritius. 

 I  am  confident  that  the  forthcoming  Children’s  Bill  will  largely  consolidate  the 
legislation covering all aspects of children’s rights and as such we will provide more protection 
and security to the children of the Republic. This is in line with the recommendations of the UN 
Committee on the Rights of the Child held in Geneva on 14 and 15 January 2015. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  wish  to  commend  the  forthcoming  introduction  of  a  new 
Juvenile  Legal  Framework.  This  legislation  will  provide  more  support  to  minors  who  have, 
unfortunately, been in conflict with the law. This is a concrete measure that will contribute to 
uphold the rights of these children. In the same vein, the proposal to set up a Correctional Youth 
Centre for girls addresses a long felt need in respect of girls who are in need of reform for their 
eventual reinsertion in mainstream. 

Nevertheless,  I  firmly  believe  that  this  Correctional  Youth  Centre  for  girls  will  be 
endowed with all amenities and is rendered child friendly. Enhancing support services for a full-
fledged Family Division is also most welcome.  

As regards the upgrading of District Courts premises, I am sure that care will be taken to 
provide for child friendly space and child friendly arrangement for our children victims who are 
brought to Court on a regular basis. The provision for legal representation of children victims is 
also acclaimed. I am also confident, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that the long-awaited domestication 
of  the  Hague  Convention  on  the  Protection  of  Children  and  Co-operation  in  respect  of  Inter-
Country Adoption will soon become reality. This particular piece of legislation will provide for 
more  permanency  placement  of  children  who  have  been  removed  from  their  familial 
environment. 

135 

 
 Following the recommendation of the UN Special Rapporteur in May 2011, a National 
Child Protection Strategy and Action Plan has been prepared by an International Consultant with 
the assistance of the European Union. This strategy is a visionary framework for child protection 
and sets up goals and priorities to be carried out in Mauritius during that timeframe 2014/2022. It 
aims  at  strengthening  the  main  ‘gatekeeping  mechanism’  of  the  child  protection  system  of 
Mauritius  by  placing  greater  emphasis  on  prevention,  early  intervention,  family  rehabilitation, 
provision of alternative family substitute care, nurturing society and community practices which 
are child protective. The strategy identifies a number of priority areas which represents part of 
the system to be strengthened in the coming years.  

Moreover,  the  Action  Plan  provides  for  primary  and  secondary  prevention  actions, 
specialised  social  services  and  intensive  social  services,  including  alternative  care  where  the 
involvement and collaboration of different stakeholders is called upon to ensure implementation 
of activities under their responsibility for the smooth functioning of the system. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it is important to highlight that the National Child Protection 
Strategy  has  heavy  cost  implications  and  will  have  to  be  implemented  phase-wise  based  on 
priorities. Once materialised, the strategy will give a practical shape to the measures spelt out in 
the Government Programme.  

Before I conclude, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I wish to flag out that,  whilst I have focused 
my  intervention around measures directly related to my mandate, it goes without saying that I 
commend  all  the  other  measures  related  to  other  sectors  of  development.  For  instance,  when 
addressing issues, these definitely have their gender implication, particularly in terms of raising 
awareness on adaptation and mitigation factors. The provision of hot meals to all primary school 
children will, undoubtedly, result in a win-win situation whereby children will be motivated to 
go to school, and needy parents will be eased of their financial burden. Children will have access 
to a balanced meal and enhance their academic performance. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  this  Government  Programme  has  indeed  taken  care  to  make 
provision  for  the  different  segments  of  our  nation,  inclusive  of  its  youth.  Our  youth  has  the 
potential  to  be  strategic  agents  of  change.  The  active  participation  of  our  youth  in  decision-
making processes is essential for their empowerment.  

136 

 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the Government Programme has set the tone for the next five 
years. Members of this Government are committed and determined to translate all the enunciated 
measures into concrete actions. 

Toutes les conditions sont donc réunies pour la concrétisation du discours-programme. I 
am confident that our collective action and synergy will have positive dividends and we shall 
live up to the expectations of the nation and honour our commitment.  

Thank you. 

At 7.51 p.m. the sitting was suspended.  

On resuming at 9.01 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

The Minister of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment (Mr P. Roopun): 
First of all, let me associate myself with the other hon. Members to congratulate you, Madam 
Speaker, for your appointment to this high office. 

Madam Speaker, you are entering history as the first woman to head this august House 
and we hope that very soon, we are going yet to create history again by voting another woman as 
President of the Republic and thus move towards more parity. 

I have no doubt that, with your wide experience as a public officer and as a Member of 
this House for over ten years, you will inspire and guide us all towards upholding the decorum 
and dignity of this House. 

Allow me also, Madam Speaker, to welcome and greet your Deputy Speaker as well as 
the other 35 Members who have joined us in this House. Among them, there are some seven hon. 
Members who have got the added responsibility as Ministers and seven as Private Parliamentary 
Secretaries. 

During the intervention  of some of the new Members, we have had a  glimpse of their 
capabilities and the passion with which they wish to serve. I wish all of them well and pray that 
they have a long and fruitful career and that they will participate fully in the workings of this 
House. 

 Madame la présidente, l’élection de 2014 marque un tournant dans l’histoire politique de 

notre pays au même titre que l’élection pour l’indépendance en 1967 et l’élection de 1982. 

 

137 

C’est pour la toute première fois qu’on a un gouvernement sans la présence ni du Parti 

Travailliste ni celle du MMM. 

Il y a eu une véritable déroute du MMM qui a obtenu le pire résultat depuis son entrée au 
Parlement en 1976. Pour le Parti Travailliste cela a été une grande raclée avec un seul rescapé de 
l’ancienne  équipe  gouvernementale.  Le  comble  est  que  ce  rescapé,  on  peut  même  dire  ce 
miraculé, n’était même pas sur la liste initiale des candidats. 

Le  véritable  enseignement  toutefois  est  venu  du  peuple,  de  la  façon  intelligente  et  la 
maturité  qu’elle  a  démontrée.  La  population  n’est  pas  tombée  dans  le  piège  que  le  Parti 
Travailliste  et  le  MMM  l’a  tendu,  malgré  le  matraquage  que  leur  alliance  était  imbattable  et 
qu’on s’acheminait vers un 60-0. La population a tenu bon. Elle a donné une preuve cinglante 
que c’est elle  qui détient le véritable pouvoir. Cette alliance était si impopulaire que la majorité 
silencieuse  était  résolument  déterminée  à  voter  contre.  Ce  qui  est  clair,  c’est  qu’après  cette 
élection, le peuple a pris pleine conscience de son réel pouvoir. 

Ceci est en elle-même un renforcement de la démocratie et c’est dans ce sens que j’ai 

parlé d’un véritable tournant pour notre pays. 

Ces prétendus experts en matière électorale et politologues autoproclamés, aujourd’hui au 
chômage, trouveront, j’en suis sûr, dans le choix de l’électorat, plusieurs sujets pour des thèses 
doctorales pour meubler leur temps. 

Quant à moi, Madame la présidente, je dois, sans fausse modestie, exprimer ma joie et 
fierté de faire partie de la majorité gouvernementale qui est appelée à servir le pays jusqu’à l’an 
2020. 

Et après ! 

(Interruptions) 

Pour moi ce résultat est une douce revanche sur cette alliance MMM/Parti Travailliste.  
C’est contre cette même alliance que j’ai  entamé ma carrière politique en 1995 aux côtés des 
deux fidèles du MSM, le Vice-Premier ministre, l’honorable Showkutally Soodhun et l’ancien 
député, Soorooj Phokeer. 

Depuis,  j’ai  fait  un  long  cheminement  avec  le  MSM  et  sans  tambour  ni  trompette  j’ai 
participé à toutes les batailles. Ensemble on a, certes, connu des hauts et des bas mais je suis 

 

138 

resté fidèle avec le Parti qui réciproquement m’a fait confiance en m’accordant une investiture 
pour toutes les élections générales qui ont suivi. 

Pour  cela,  je  suis  indéfiniment  reconnaissant  envers  le  Premier  ministre,  Sir  Anerood 

Jugnauth ainsi que l’actuel Leader du MSM, l’honorable Pravind Jugnauth que je remercie. 

Madame  la  présidente,  en  sus  de  ce  que  la  population  a  vu  et  subi  pendant  les  neuf 
dernières années, il est bon aussi de souligner que nous, les députés du MSM, ont dû endurer 
sous le régime Travailliste surtout après qu’on s’est retrouvé dans l’opposition en 2011. 

Le  Parti  Travailliste  a  tenté,  par  tous  les  moyens,  d’anéantir  le  MSM.  On  a  tenté  de 
séduire et de soudoyer nos députés par différents moyens. Quand  cela n’a pas marché, on est 
venu avec des harcèlements et des menaces. Le Chief Whip a expliqué, l’autre jour, ce qu’il a lui-
même subi. 

Ce  petit  groupe  de  députés  n’a  pas  agi  par  calcul  politique  mais  avait  une  ultime 
conviction: qu’on devait par tout et contre tout agir dans l’intérêt du pays.  C’était un véritable 
parcours  de  combattant  parsemé  de  beaucoup  de  défis  qu’on  a  dû  relever  aussi  bien  que  des 
humiliations  subies,  que  ce  soit,  ici,  dans  cette  Chambre  ou  à  l’extérieur  dans  nos 
circonscriptions respectives. 

Je me rappelle très bien, semaine après semaine, les membres de l’ancien gouvernement 
narguaient  que  bientôt  tous  les  membres  du  front  bench  MSM  allaient  porter  un  bracelet 
électronique destiné aux suspects en liberté conditionnelle. 

Madame la présidente, ces derniers temps, on vient parler d’un prétendu ‘dossier orange’ 
mais personne n’est dupe, car on sait très bien que si vraiment un tel dossier existait, le Parti 
Travailliste n’aurait jamais hésité à s’en servir. Pourquoi attendre qu’on soit dans ‘Karo canne’ 
pour parler de ça alors qu’on aurait dû agir quand on était au pouvoir. 

(Interruptions) 

Madame la présidente, le début de l’année 2014 nous a fait découvrir la face cachée de 
certains. Pour eux, la politique se résume implacablement qu’à une question d’intérêt, même si 
on doit renier son ami d’hier et au point de devenir subitement amnésique. 

Agissant par pur calcul politique, ils se lançaient dans un exercice de surenchère… 

 

139 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Rutnah: On a point of order.  Section 40, sub-section 2 of the Standing Orders, hon. 

Bhagwan should withdraw the word ‘batchara’ immediately. 

Mr Bhagwan: I said ‘batchara’ in general. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah, it is for the Chair to determine whether the word has to 

be withdrawn or not. 

Hon. Bhagwan, did you use… 

Please, withdraw! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Bhagwan, kindly, please withdraw that word! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhagwan: I have not said to hon. Gayan ‘batchara’ …  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  But  you have used that word  to whom? To whom did  you use that 

word? To whom was it addressed? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Collendavelloo: Madam Speaker, I am very sorry, I must stand on a point of order. 
My very good friend, hon. Bhagwan, knows that he is out of order when he uses this term in the 
House,  whether  it  is  addressed  to  an  hon.  Member  or  to  anyone  in  general.  He  is  a  seasoned 
politician. 

(Interruptions) 

No! He is a seasoned politician, he should know. My friend hon. Gayan is a seasoned politician. 
Let us just keep calm! Thank you. 

 

Mr Bhagwan: I withdraw. 

140 

Madam Speaker: Okay. He has withdrawn. So, that settles the matter. 

Mr Roopun: Madame la présidente, certains agissant par pur calcul politique se lançaient 
dans  un  exercice  de  surenchère  et  de  marchandage.  Pour  quelques  sièges  additionnels  et  des 
places dans la hiérarchie, ils étaient prêts à tout. Mais quand le MSM a tenu tête sur une question 
de principe, ils se sont résignés à faire un pacte même avec le diable pour accéder au pouvoir. 

On connaît tous la fin de l’histoire. Celui qui voulait tout avoir et tout de suite, se voit, 
ici, chaque semaine, comme dans un purgatoire pour se faire rappeler constamment de cet acte 
de trahison. C’est un boulet qu’il devra traîner jusqu’à la fin de sa carrière, reléguant loin derrière 
toute contribution positive de sa longue carrière politique. La population se souviendra surtout de 
ce requin qu’on a voulu ferrer. Il n’a certes pas atterri dans le filet, que certains avaient prévu, 
mais  il  aura  néanmoins,  en  travers  de  sa  gorge,  un  hameçon  qu’il  ne  pourra  jamais  s’en 
débarrasser. 

L’histoire retiendra aussi l’arrogance de certains qui devront faire face à ceux qu’ils ont 

méprisés. J’espère sincèrement qu’ils vont en tirer les leçons. 

Comme le dit si bien ce proverbe - 

« L’arrogance précède la ruine, et l’orgueil précède la chute, mais celui qui est humble 
d’esprit obtient la gloire. » 

At this juncture, Madam Speaker, before coming to my Ministry, allow me to express 
my gratitude and renew my thanks to the constituents of Flacq/Bon Accueil for having elected 
me to serve the Constituency for yet a second mandate. 

We all know that the Constituency was considered to be a stronghold of a so-called ‘roi de 
l’est’.  So much so that my opponents were harping that they would win by a margin of over 
15,000 votes. I took up the challenge, Madam Speaker, and remained there to fight. This was 
mainly out of loyalty to all the constituents who remained with the MSM, especially after 2005. 
Despite the fact that they were systematically victimised and sidelined, they never lose faith in us 
and gave us all the support. I had made it a point to be there and to be by their side whatever 
happens.  

 

141 

Though this constituency is considered by outsiders to be one of the most difficult, I knew 
the reality of the ground and I knew that we could do it. In fact, when electoral campaign started, 
we knew what would be the results. I am thankful to my two colleagues, hon. Dayal and hon. 
Rampertab who joined in later, but ultimately the electorate of Flacq/Bon Accueil chose between 
someone who has been loyal, who acted on principle and rejected someone who had always had 
merely  his  interest  in  mind  and  wanted  at  all  times  to  be  in  the  winning  team  without  any 
consideration for others  and without any  principle.  I  am  glad that the  electorate of  Flacq/Bon 
Accueil, as in the other 14 constituencies, gave us a 3-0 victory and I am thankful to them for 
that. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to address this House on issues pertaining to my Ministry and 
the  orientation  I  want  to  give  to  the  fight  against  poverty  and  the  empowerment  of  the  most 
vulnerable.    Already  during  the  electoral  campaign,  we  set  the  tone  and  expressed  our  strong 
commitment to reduce inequality and to meaningfully change the life of those at the lower rung 
of the ladder. We had taken a firm commitment to increase the old age pension to Rs5,000 and 
within  days  of  our  coming  to  power,  this  was  realised.  The  first  Bill  before  this  House  was 
designed to grant to all workers and employees of this country a salary compensation of Rs600.  
The hon. Minister of Finance also announced that he will provide Rs10 billion for SMEs.  In the 
same vein, a Minimum Wages Bill will also be introduced and it is in the same philosophy that 
my Ministry will act.  We will ensure that due support be extended to address the immediate 
needs of the most vulnerable, while at the same time affording all facilities for the beneficiaries 
to escape from the poverty trap and become self-reliant. 

Madam Speaker, though I am optimistic, we are fully aware that poverty is a hydra-headed 
scourge  and  combating  it  is  a  herculean  uphill  task  which  even  the  most  developed  countries 
have not been able to tackle efficiently.  

Field realities have demonstrated that providing material supports such as sound housing, 
school materials, etc., is not sufficient to eliminate poverty. Besides, measures taken, so far, to 
empower the most needy has not yielded expected results. 

Accordingly,  we  need  to  reengineer  our  thought  processes  and  come  up  with  a  holistic, 
coherent and time-bound strategy. To this end, it is important that all stakeholders work together 
and develop a concerted approach. In this regard, the Marshall Plan, as mentioned at paragraph 

 

142 

20 of the Government Programme, has all its importance. My Ministry has already set the ball 
rolling.  Preliminary  discussions  have  been  held  and  a  roadmap  is  currently  under  preparation 
after consultation with different stakeholders.  In this respect, I have already enlisted the support 
of international agencies to provide expertise with a view to preparing a detailed plan with short 
and medium-term objectives. 

As at date, there are some 150 pockets of poverty scattered over the island.  Same will be 
redefined. A new holistic and participatory approach will be adopted with the active involvement 
of all partners present on the ground to ensure that these deprived regions are geared downwards 
meaningful change and they are fully integrated within the region. 

Since assuming office, I visited several pockets of poverty, met various beneficiaries, had 
consultations with various stakeholders and also received representations from various quarters. 
Field  assessment  has  already  started  to  identify  the  immediate  and  long-term  need  in  each 
pocket.  I  have  already  contacted  the  Parliamentary  Private  Secretaries  and  they  are  ready  to 
collaborate  fully  in  our  endeavor  to  develop  a  clear  Action  Plan  for  the  socio-economic 
development of deprived regions. 

Decision has also been taken to set up a Technical Unit at my Ministry. This Unit will, 
inter alia, monitor and evaluate ongoing programmes and bring meaningful contributions in the 
formulation of new policies. It will also liaise with other Ministries and Government agencies to 
ensure a coordinated approach in service delivery. This Technical Unit will also be instrumental 
in the preparation and implementation of the Marshall Plan. 

Madam Speaker, my Ministry alone cannot win the fight against poverty. It requires the 
contribution of each and every sector if we want to make meaningful progress. To this end,  I 
shall be adopting an open door policy and invite suggestions from all quarters. In the same vein, 
a help desk with a hotline service will soon be operational at the level of my Ministry to respond 
effectively to all complaints and queries. 

My  Ministry  is  also  envisaging  the  setting  up,  in  the  course  of  this  year,  of  a  Poverty 
Observatory.  This  Observatory  will  be  a  permanent  platform  for  all  relevant  stakeholders  to 
sustainably  address  poverty  which  is  complex,  multifaceted  and  multidimensional.  The 
Observatory will be an independent, consultative Committee comprising of Statistics Mauritius, 
representatives of Civil Society and private sector among others.  It will take stock of poverty 

 

143 

trend  through  feedback  and  field  realities.  The  Observatory  will  also  interface  with  the 
Monitoring and Evaluation Unit and come up with appropriate recommendations to the Ministry 
for adjustment in policies or strategies as deemed appropriate. The Observatory will also act as 
an  advocacy  group  in  the  fight  against  poverty.  I  have  said  enough,  Madam  Speaker,  to 
demonstrate that my Ministry has the commitment to put into place the necessary framework to 
make meaningful strides in the fight against poverty. 

The  National  Empowerment  Foundation,  Madam  Speaker,  falls  under  the  aegis  of  my 
Ministry. Same will be restructured, as mentioned in the Presidential Address, and reiterated by 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister on 01 February at Le Morne in the context of the celebration of the 
180th anniversary of the Abolition of Slavery. The objective is to improve its service delivery and 
field interventions.  Presently, the NEF has three main fields of intervention, namely - 

•  Child Welfare and Family Empowerment; 
•  Social Housing and Community Development, and 
•  Training and Placement. 

All  these  three  pillars  will  be  reviewed  to  ensure  that  the  set  objectives  are  really  met.    In 
addition, new programmes will be introduced for maximum coverage.   

One of the most important components of the Child Welfare Programme is presently the 
distribution of school materials to needy children. For the School Materials Scheme of 2015, it 
has been noted that a large number of vulnerable children from ZEP schools were not among the 
beneficiaries. Under my clear and strict instruction, a cross verification exercise was carried out. 
Some 2,000 children from the ZEP schools, who were initially not covered by the programme, 
were identified and corrective measures were taken.  

Furthermore,  in  view  of  numerous  complaints  received  across  the  island,  the  NEF  was 
requested  to  set  up  special  desks  at  the  Citizen  Advice  Bureau,  Social  Welfare  Centres,  and 
Community Centres.  As a result, some 3,500 new cases were attended and they were provided 
with  school  materials.  In  view  of  the  chaotic  situation,  I  am  now  completely  reviewing  the 
scheme to ensure that the most deserving children benefit from such support. My Ministry is, in 
consultation with the Ministry of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform  Institutions, 
ensuring that all vulnerable families living below the poverty threshold be registered under the 
Social Register of Mauritius.   

144 

 
This will constitute the national database through which all support of the NEF will be 
provided henceforth. Only eligible children under the SRM will benefit from school materials as 
from this year. 

A new scheme will be put in place to address needy children who have not passed their 
CPE exams, but have potential to excel in other disciplines such as arts, music and sports. An 
exercise is presently being undertaken by my Ministry to determine the number of vulnerable 
children who have failed the CPE, SC and HSC exams in order to put up appropriate schemes to 
provide them with additional support. 

On the other hand, needy students who have excelled in their exams will be motivated to 

pursue further studies and benefit from any additional support wherever needed. 

This Government is committed to widen the circle of opportunities for this segment of 

our youth for their social integration and become responsible citizens. 

 Insofar  as  social  housing  is  concerned,  the  NEF  had  initiated  a  scheme  for  the 
construction of a house made up of Corrugated Iron Sheets for the most vulnerable. This scheme 
is being phased out, and presently owners of plots of land and lessees of State lands are provided 
with a 31.5 m2 concrete house covered with a CIS roof. 

The  NEF  also  facilitates  the  obtention  of  the  required  building  permits.  We  are  fully 
aware that the size is not adequate for large families. Following representations made, we are 
presently having consultations with the Ministry of Housing and Lands as well as the Ministry of 
Finance and Economic Development, with a view to harmonising the size layout and also the 
affordability of the housing unit. 

The NEF has implemented a few Integrated Housing Projects at La Valette, Sottise and 
Dubreuil,  where  fully  concrete  housing  units  with  the  necessary  off-site  and  on-site 
infrastructural facilities are provided. 

However, the Ministry has noted with concern that various beneficiaries at La Valette are 

in arrears, and appropriate measures are being initiated to remedy the situation. 

With regard to the Integrated Housing Project at Gros Cailloux, which started as far back 
as  2011,  my  Ministry  has  noted  with  concern  that  remedial  works  are  still  ongoing  and  that 
handing over has not yet been effected. The NEF has been given clear instructions to expedite 

 

145 

matters.  In the meantime, the Ministry will be having consultations with the Ministry of Finance 
and Economic Development in regard to the quantum to be paid by prospective beneficiaries, 
and thereafter the procedure for the allotment of the units shall be initiated. 

The  Training  and  Placement  Programme  of  the  NEF  also  need  revamping.  Over  the 
years,  the  NEF  deviated  from  its  original  objectives  by  providing  training  and  placement 
facilities to unemployed persons irrespective of their economic status, thus duplicating with the 
Youth  Employment  Programmes  presently  under  the  aegis  of  the  Ministry  of  Labour.  The 
Technical  Unit  to  be  set  up  by  my  Ministry  will,  as  a  matter  of  priority,  review  the  whole 
programme and ensure that all schemes be geared exclusively towards vulnerable unemployed. 

To conclude, Madam Speaker, I wish to point out that most of the programmes presently 
in place were  implemented by hon. Xavier-Luc Duval as the then Minister. Unfortunately, after 
he changed Ministry, there had been no significant improvement, both in terms of policy  and 
programme.  I  hope  that  with  the  implementation  of  a  Marshall  Plan  on  poverty,  the 
establishment of a Monitoring and Evaluation Unit and a Poverty Observatory, this Ministry will 
once  again  become  the  focal  point  of  all  actions  regarding  poverty  alleviation  as  well  as 
empowerment of the vulnerable. 

However, I wish to emphasise that no meaningful progress is possible without the support 
of each and everyone, be it colleagues Ministers, hon. Members from both sides of the House, 
the private sector, the civil society and the public at large. 

Let me end, Madam Speaker, by quoting Kofi Annan – 

“In our task in fighting poverty, we cannot succeed without the leadership of the strong 
and the engagement of all.  Let us work in partnership between rich and poor to improve 
the opportunities of all human beings to build better lives.  Let us summon the will to do 
it.” 

Thank you. 

(9.28 p.m.) 

Mr M. S. Hurreeram (First Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien): Thank you, 
Madam Speaker.  Allow me, first of all, to congratulate you for your election as Speaker, and 

 

146 

hon. Adrien Duval as Deputy Speaker.   In both cases, once  again, Madam Speaker, we made 
history. 

This country is turning on a new page now.  Actually, it is writing a whole new book, for 
we hold in our hands the power to change our destiny, the power to build this country from the 
ruins left over by the previous Government, the power to aspire to a better future. Who better to 
lead us than the father of the first economic miracle, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Sir Anerood 
Jugnauth, who I wish to thank for the faith and trust he placed in me to represent Constituency 
No.  12,  Mahebourg/Plaine  Magnien.    I  also  extend  my  heartfelt  gratitude  to  all  leaders  of 
l’Alliance Lepep, in particular hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth, Leader of MSM.  My warm thanks 
also go to all those who stood alongside me during the elections, ranging from my constituents, 
my family and my fellow candidates. 

Madam Speaker, everybody in this House and particularly the population in general have 

expressed an ‘ouf de soulagement’, as if they have been liberated from a suffocating situation. 

11 December 2014 was a turning point.  It brought with it a lush breath of fresh air. The 
last general election outcome has seen what they thought was the non-submersible Titanic, but 
we know the fate of Titanic.  Today, one is politically dead while the other is vanishing  from the 
political arena with three resignations this morning.  At this rate, soon the actual Leader of the 
Opposition will no longer be Leader of the Oppostiion. Pe fini dans la honte! 

Madam Speaker, the expectations of the population are high, and the Presidential Address 
of this Government has clearly shown the way; the commitment and the vision for recurrence of 
economic,  social,  environmental  and  sustainable  development. 
  We  believe  economic 
development cannot be achieved by foregoing social development.  Both have to go in pair, and 
this is what this Government intends and pledges to do. 

On  doit  impérativement  corriger  les  erreurs  du  passé  et  remettre  le  pays  sur  les  rails. 
Nous savons tous comment le pays était en pilotage automatique ces dernières années, et que 
quasi  rien  n’a  été  fait  pour  accentuer  la  croissance  économique  et  assurer  le  développement 
social du pays. Même cette institution, notre auguste Assemblée nationale, a été bafouée avec la 
complicité dudit principal parti d’opposition d’alors ; ‘Koz kozé’ primait sur tout. 

147 

 
Madam  Speaker,  we  recall  the  lamentable  state  in  which  the  country  was  before  Sir 
Anerood Jugnauth came in power in 1982 and the heights his Government had taken the country 
to  during  his  primeministership.  We  understand  this  is  a  democratic  game;  the  population 
decided  to  try  new  venture.    A  dream  of  shortcut  success.  Unfortunately,  this  dream  was 
shattered. All we remember today of the Labour Party in power are scandals, corruption, abuse 
of authority, nepotism, just to name a few. 

Abusing women, of course! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, we are not going to spend time on this.  The people of Mauritius are 
now back in good hands; in the hands of a team which is competent, a team that is just what a 
democratic Assembly should be like, a team like l’Alliance Lepep Government. 

Madam Speaker, this Government is committed to eradicate pessimism from the hearts of 
our youths and the population at large.  Each and every  youth should know that they will get 
what they rightly deserve, because we believe in their abilities and their competencies. 

As a nation, we need our best brains to thrive, and this Government will have to stop the 
detrimental brain drain that this country has known for the past years.  Everyone would recall 
that  the  previous  Government  was  encouraging  our  youth  to  massively  migrate  for  jobs  and 
career prospects. 

By  taking  this  stand,  Madam  Speaker,  they  had  clearly  demonstrated  their  level  of 
incompetence!  I  personally  think  they  failed  lamentably  the  trust  of  our  youngsters  and 
jeopardised the future of our beloved country. Madam Speaker, having said that, the question 
arises:  what  does  this  youth  want  and  what  do  they  need?  What  do  they  aspire  to  -  leisure, 
fairness, social justice, real equal opportunity, including entrepreneurial opportunities, safety and 
security and job creation? We have an agenda, Madam Speaker, to address them. 

This  Government  has  taken  on  the  challenge  to  create  an  unprecedented  number  of 
15,000 jobs annually and firmly believes that the next economic leap forward of the country will 
be achieved through the entrepreneurs. No seed will sprout if not watered properly. Similarly, no 
entrepreneur will ever grow as a business if he/she is not supported properly. The main hurdle 
for  any  small  entrepreneur  today  is  adequate  access  to  capital.  It  is  precisely  to  palliate  this 

 

148 

difficulty that this Government is planning the setting up of an SME bank with an unprecedented 
amount of Rs10 billion which will motivate and support our  youth to put forth their business 
ideas without having to face the dire obstacle that the financing issue is. 

In  order  for  SMEs  to  flourish,  a  winning  concept  which  boosts  competitiveness  and 
shapes a sound business environment is vital. There are 23 million SMEs spread all over Europe. 
This is the result of several influences, not only from the EU and at country level but also the 
regional policies. A broad base of SMEs is very important for the economic tissue of a region 
and, subsequently, for its wealth and sustainability and this is true for Mauritius as well, Madam 
Speaker. 

Madam Speaker, we need to inculcate the go-getter attitude in our youths and banish the 
nepotism which gangrenes the country today. We need to have a generation of fearless economy 
builders to support growth in the forthcoming years. This is why this Government has created an 
innovative Ministry of Technology, Communication and Innovation under the able leadership of 
hon.  Pravind  Kumar  Jugnauth.  How  could  it  be  otherwise,  when  we  know  that  the  sugarcane 
industry in Mauritius is still surviving the international challenges owing to the laudable reforms 
that only hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth had the political guts to implement! 

In  today’s  time,  we  need  such  boldness  if  we  want  our  vision  to  succeed.    Our 
entrepreneurs need to evolve to the next level and be ready to face the global economy in which 
we live today. If we want to be the hub and the spearhead innovation in the region, we need to be 
able to attract the right talents. We need to arm them with the right tools and create the right 
protection  for  them.  We  need  to  create  sufficient  legal  framework  to  protect  the  work  of  our 
researchers and our techno-entrepreneurs.  

This  can  only  happen  through  the  creation  of  contemporary  intellectual  property 
protection  laws  and  recognised  patent  office.  The  patent  office  should  protect  innovations, 
inventions, industry designs and other ideas that should take root in the creative brains of our 
fellow  citizens  and  companies  implemented  here.  The  patent  office  should  be  recognised 
internationally  through  treaties  with  other  technology-based  countries  such  as  the  USA, 
Germany, Japan and South Korea. 

Madam Speaker, we now have the responsibility to gear our island into the digital age. It 
is not an easy task, considering the delay that we have accumulated, all the missed opportunities 

 

149 

and the damage to our international reputation due to mismanagement of the then E-Government 
domain. We shall not dwell on the ‘could haves’, but we will rather focus on what we can do. 
We  note  that  there  is  a  huge  gap  between  our  access  to  technology  and  our  current  use  of 
technology.  For  instance,  most  of  us  have  a  smart  phone.  But,  what  do  we  use  it  for?  Social 
networking?  Messaging?  Web  browsing?  Is  that  the  optimum  use  of  technology?  We  are  far 
away, Madam Speaker, from using it as an e-wallet, electronic transport ticket and access to real-
time information. We need to build the right framework and the right mindset to fully embrace 
the maximum potential of the technology available to us in this age. 

Our youth yearns to be digital entrepreneurs, Steve Jobs or Bill Gates of Mauritius. This 
can  only  happen  when  we  create  the  right  framework  for  e-commerce  and  a  strong  secured 
electronic  banking  system  supported  by  the  right  logistics.  We  are  now  fully  aware  that  the 
Internet knows no boundaries. Let us open the market and the horizon of our entrepreneurs and 
let us help them reach those horizons. We need not be the next Singapore; we just need to be the 
next Mauritius. The Mauritius 2.0, Madam Speaker! We need to reinvent ourselves; we have the 
capacity, the ability and we have the willpower and, above all, Madam Speaker, today we have 
the leadership. 

But what is Mauritius 2.0, Madam Speaker?  It is not a fuzzy concept which is so far-
fetched that it becomes a utopia. It is a paradigm shift in our way of thinking, doing and living. 
We  need  to  have  sustainable  development  goals  such  as  e-education,  e-Health,  high-speed 
broadband technologies, smart grids, smart transportation, real time information and smart cities. 
We  need  to  build  capability  through  research  and  innovation  to  optimise  the  use  of  ICT  as  a 
transformation tool for a better country, a knowledge-based country.  

A  knowledge-based  country  undeniably  will  contribute  greatly  to  economic  prosperity 
and social welfare. It requires a radical transformation in the way the Government interacts with 
citizens,  businesses  and  other  Governments.  The  philosophy  is  a  national  issue  and  we,  as 
policymakers,  should  envisage  renewing  the  National  ICT  policy.  The  new  policy  should 
consider risk factors that can affect the normal running of an IT-based Government and include 
mitigating measures. 

150 

 
The Government should be more cautious in its approach regarding adoption of propriety 
technologies and should not be geared profit-oriented companies in the choice of systems that are 
acquired. 

We should be wary, Madam Speaker,  that our universities and tertiary institutions are 
opening their doors to propriety companies such as Microsoft that while providing frameworks 
for students to learn, also limit their exposure to only one type of system. Such a policy can only 
affect the long-term objectives of the Government who would rely on the locally trained talent 
for the future. 

We, as policymakers, should be bold and ambitious for the realisation of Mauritius 2.0 
and  one  major  shift  would  be  the  implementation  of  a  National  Open  Source  Acceptance 
Initiative. It includes development of software based on an open source philosophy for the whole 
e-government ecosystem. The Government, through a dedicated organisation, would then be the 
custodian of the codes and the systems it creates. This will reduce the risk of overreliance on 
proprietary software vendors. 

Nevertheless,  these  businesses  would  still  play  a  vital  role  in  providing  management 
services to the Government and disseminate the platform throughout the country. The aim is to 
build an information society based on open standards, open data and technological neutrality. 

Madam Speaker, Mauritius 2.0 aims at achieving –  

•  Smart governance; 

•  Smart people; 

•  Smart environment; 

•  Smart mobility, and 

•  Smart economy. 

Throughout our history, we have seen that the legitimate aspirations of our people are 
admirable and legitimate. They deserve to be treated intelligently therefore. Just as other basic 
commodities, such as water and electricity, Internet connectivity should be a basic right for each 
and every citizen of our country. It should be managed by an independent organisation, un peu à 
la CWA, CEB. 

 

151 

This organisation should not be profit based and should be initially funded by Government. 
It will then allow Government to deploy its strategy for a connected Mauritius and pave the way 
for Mauritius 2.0. 

Madame  la  présidente,  aujourd’hui,  encore  une  fois,  avec  la  clairvoyance  et  le  courage 
politique  du  ministre  de  la  Technologie,  Communication  et  Innovation,  l’honorable  Pravind 
Jugnauth, avec la bénédiction de Sir Anerood Jugnauth, et entouré des ces jeunes loups remplis 
d’enthousiasme et de vigeur, on fera de l’île Maurice 2.0 le pilier de ce miracle économique tant 
attendu. 

Madam Speaker, today, I am honoured to be part of this fellowship and humbled to be able 
to  serve  and  build  my  country  for  the  future.    I  will  not  fall  short  of  this  responsibility.    I 
welcome it.  The energy, the faith and my devotion to this cause will never falter. 

Madam Speaker, thank you indeed for your attention. 

(9.45 p.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and  Training  (Mr  S. 
Callichurn): Madam Speaker, allow me to congratulate you and the Deputy Speaker for your 
election as Speaker and Deputy Speaker respectively of this august Assembly. 

It is a real privilege for me to stand up in this House to address you on the Government 
Programme  for  the  period  2015-2019.  This  is  an  exercise  that  has  been  done  by  the  previous 
Government,  but  I  can  assure  you  and  the  House  that,  for  this  one,  the  Government  firmly 
intends to put words in action. This Government will not sell dreams like the former Government 
did, but will realise them for the  benefit of  every single Mauritian, irrespective  of his  creed, 
community and gender. 

I will fail in my duty if I do not pay tribute to our great Leader, the Rt. hon. Sir Anerood 
Jugnauth, who led us to a landslide victory during the recent election; never faltering and never 
losing  heart.    Indeed,  real  leadership  is  not  about  prestige,  power  or  status.    It  is  about 
responsibility.    Beyond  doubt,  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth  is  a  man  of  great  vision  and  strong 
determination  who  will  certainly  lead  Mauritius,  once  more,  with  full  confidence,  to  a  new 
economical miracle.  A strong beginning has been made, and a promising future awaits us.  This 

 

152 

Government, under the leadership of Sir Anerood Jugnauth, is pledged to work for the welfare of 
the poor, the marginalised and the vulnerable sections of the society. 

I have to thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, for placing his faith and 
trust in me, and for assigning me with the responsibility for Industrial Relations, Employment, 
Occupational Safety and Health, and Training. 

Madam Speaker, the people of Mauritius had wisely agreed to bring L’Alliance Lepep to 
power  in  December  2014.    L’Alliance  Lepep  is  a  team  which  I  proudly  belong  to,  a  team  of 
which  I  adhere  to  the  value  and  principle,  a  team  that  means  business,  that  is  ready  to  take 
actions and measures to take away the murky days the country had been facing for the past nine 
years. 

The murky days are gone now. Time is for Mauritius to become sparkling, cheerful and 
bright, as it was the case from 1983 to 1995 and 2000, when it was led by a great statesman in 
the name of Sir Anerood Jugnauth, our beloved Prime Minister. 

Madam  Speaker,  this  Government  is  also  committed  to  conducting  business  on  the 
principles of discipline, transparency, accountability and good governance. These are orders of 
the day for this Government. There will not be business as usual. 

Since  our  massive  victory  in  the  last  polls,  our  opponents  have  been  claiming  that  the 
people did not adhere to l’Alliance Lepep’s programme and team, but just wanted to sanction the 
former regime.  I totally disagree with such cheap statement from these bad losers.  Shame on 
them!  The whole nation has made their choice, and that choice was very clear in their minds.  
People have chosen l’Alliance Lepep because it represented truth over lies, light over darkness, 
stability over instability, and national unity over scientific ethnic theories and calculations. 

Of course, it is true that the Labour Party did achieve some miracles.  They managed to 
make a salesgirl become overnight a mult-imillionaire, now tracked by Interpol.  That was their 
example of democratisation of the economy.  We have recently also witnessed some examples of 
private banking at home, with huge safes, and the former Governor of the Central Bank doing 
some homework at his residence.  We can say that there was, indeed, a culture of savings during 
the Labour Party era. 

 

153 

The  Labour  Party  did  construct  a  wonderful  bypass  between  Terre  Rouge  and  Verdun, 

which lasted, unfortunately, for less than a year before it collapsed. 

One must not forget how holidays had become the trend in Parliament with the blessing of 
the Leader of the Opposition.  Where is he?   He is not present.  The Opposition was often on 
and then off, but the misery of the people was always on. Let me tell you that this Government, 
under the strong leadership of Sir Anerood Jugnauth, is on for a very long time.  No cooling 
period is in the pipeline.  We are here to work hard for the people, and we will continue to work 
hard. Why? Because they deserve it!  They deserve to be rescued from the brink of despair, to be 
lifted and empowered, to believe in this great nation once again.  They had longed for it, but they 
were acrimoniously betrayed for the past nine years. 

But hope is alive!  And the new effective policies, sound economic management and with 
our strong leadership team of competent Ministers, led by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, the people 
of Mauritius will once again live and believe in good trusted governance. 

Madam Speaker, as a former magistrate, I have seen before Court of justices many of our 
unfortunate citizens tried for having stolen food just to feed themselves or their children.  I have 
witnessed people unable to pay their rent, and parents unable to buy uniforms for their kids. The 
former Government did not care about them. 

The  former  Prime  Minister,  himself,  stated  that  he  had  ‘la  classe’  and  that  people  were 
being jealous of him. People were not jealous of him, Madam Speaker.  Actually, people were 
afraid of him, afraid of his dictatorial and dogmatic manners to deal with them. That is why on 
December  10,  the  guy  who  said  ‘foder  ena  classe  pou  fer  seki  mo  pe  fer’  could  not  even  be 
elected  as  a  Member  of  Parliament  in  Constituency  No.  5,  which  was  supposedly  his  arena, 
where he always autoproclaimed himself as ‘Le Roi lion’.  We went on a safari expedition to 
hunt that lion. 

(Interruptions) 

He surely paid for his arrogance, as my fellow constituents in Constituency No. 5 have 
voted  intelligently  and  have  sanctioned  him  without  pity  for  all  the  years  they  have  suffered 
during his reign in power.  One of the main reasons for such defeat was that the people were fed 
up of him and his lies.  

154 

 
One just has to go to see the slums in Baie du Tombeau, the miseries of people in other 
villages like Bois Marchand, the poor conditions of the basic infrastructures in that Constituency, 
that one had as his Prime Minister for nine consecutive years. I feel proud and blessed to be part 
of  the  team  that  won  the  three  seats  in  that  Constituency.  I  seize  this  opportunity,  Madam 
Speaker, to heartily thank all those who have placed their trust and voted for us on 10 December 
2014. 

Madam Speaker, under the Prime Ministership of hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, we have 
given hope to our people and mainly the youth. The youth has been suffering under the former 
Government. The former Government has always preached that one should study hard to find a 
decent job. Nobody in this Government disagree with this statement. Those who work hard must 
be  rewarded.  Nevertheless,  my  heartrending  conclusion  when  observing  their  time  in 
Government was, unfortunately, that one had to be indecent to have a decent job. We want to 
change that and bring meritocracy in every decision-making.  

The  Labour  Government  has  left  a  very  ‘lourd  héritage’,  which  was  threatening  our 
social cohesion. The curve of unemployment has been constantly going up. At the end of 2014, 
the rate of unemployed has attained 7.8% and around 43,600 persons, of whom 25,100 female 
and 20,000 youth between the ages of 16 to 25 were without a job. 

For the past nine years, very few jobs were created. Creation of jobs was not the former 
Government’s priority. Someone who has studied hard needs to be rewarded. So many parents 
invested in the studies of their children. Some of them deprived themselves of so many things, 
convinced  that  the  education  of  their  sons  or  daughters  will  bear  fruits  in  the  future.  But, 
unfortunately,  they  have  been  disappointed.  The  picture  painted  above  is  undeniably  morose. 
That is why I take a strong commitment to tell the youth that this Government cares for them and 
that  job  creation  will  be  the  very  high  priority  in  our  agenda.  We  have  announced  in  the 
Government  Programme  2015/2019  that  we  will  create  some  15,000  jobs  yearly,  both  in  the 
public and private sector. 

Madam Speaker, unemployment of young persons is a real issue not only in Mauritius 
but on the whole African continent and even in Europe. It is disheartening to note that youth are 
more likely to suffer the most as they are the most vulnerable, lacking experience in the world of 
work and less prone to face the situation with maturity and stoicism. 

155 

 
But, fortunately, our future is bright as I am strongly confident that this Government is 
eager  to  create  jobs  through  the  new  economic  pillars  such  as  the  Regional  Bunkering  Hub, 
Ocean Economy, ICT sectors and so many other sectors. You cannot create jobs without a new 
economic pillar. The Deputy Chairman of the World Bank for the African region, Makthar Diop 
insisted upon that last year and I quote – 

“Favoriser les investissements dans de grandes entreprises créatrices d’emplois salariés 
dans le secteur ‘formel’ est fondamental, mais il ne s’agit que d’une solution partielle au 
défi de l’emploi des jeunes en Afrique ». 

We do not want a « solution partielle », Madam Speaker, we aim to bring a meaningful 

change to cut down unemployment rate in this country. 

Failing to invest in our youth is a false economy, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon 
always said to countries who want to achieve a strong and sustainable economy. Having a job 
must not be a lucky fate but a right and we are going to give this right to our fellow countrymen. 

I understand that my colleague, the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development 
is coming with measures to deal with the problem of unemployment in the 2015 Budget. I would 
like to take this opportunity to thank my colleague, the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development, who has agreed to transfer the Youth Employment Programme with its entire staff 
to my Ministry. 

The Youth Employment Programme, which was initiated by my colleague hon. Xavier- 
Luc Duval, indeed, facilitates the transition of youth from education to the world of work. To 
date,  some  9,031  jobseekers  have  been  placed.  In  line  with  the  Government  Programme,  the 
Youth  Employment  Programme  will  be  reviewed  with  the  aim  to  extend  the  duration  of  the 
contract of employment to two years. This will undoubtedly increase the employability of our 
young jobseekers and fresh graduates.  

In  view  of  the  high  rate  of  female  unemployment,  it  is  high  time  that  we  introduce 
measures  which  will  empower  our  womenfolk  to  become  economically  more  independent.  In 
this  regard,  the  back  to  work  programme  will  be  implemented  by  my  Ministry  to  facilitate 
women  to  take  up  or  resume  employment.  We  will  enlist  the  collaboration  of  the  Human 

 

156 

Resource Development Council and the Mauritius Institute of Training and Development for that 
purpose. 

Madam Speaker, jobs will be created and that is not just an ‘effet d’annonce’. We mean 
business. We have shown it when we gave hundred percent subsidies to School Certificate and 
Higher School Certificate exam fees and the increase in the old aged pensions. Another example 
is the abolition of the ‘permis à points’ which was penalising unduly professional drivers. We 
have a comfortable majority and we do not intend to sit back but vow to deliver. 

Madam Speaker, as my Ministry is also responsible for training, we will invest massively 
in training as trained people give them the opportunity to easily find a job in Mauritius as well as 
abroad. 

Support  services  are  essential  to  jobseekers  to  assist  them  in  finding  jobs.  Accurate 
information  on  the  labour  market,  different  training  schemes,  job  requirements  and  other 
counseling activities should be available at a one-stop shop. This Government has proposed in its 
programme  the  setting  up  of  a  National  Employment  Agency  which  will  find  suitable  job 
placements for the unemployed. This agency will be a modern, client-oriented institution which 
will react positively to the expectations of the local needs. The National Employment Agency 
will be equipped with the necessary resources to unlock job opportunities. 

The focus will be on career counseling, providing personal attention to jobseekers, up-to-
date  labour  market  information  on  vacancies  in  emerging  sectors,  training  courses  and  self-
employment opportunities. 

Moreover, my Ministry will guide the students on their choice of career and emerging 

professions through an Integrated Career Counseling system.  

Madam Speaker, the problematic issues of foreign workers has also to be addressed. We 
have  been  facing,  since  some  years,  a  paradoxical  situation  in  the  labour  market  where  the 
number of unemployed is nearly the same as that of foreign workers. There are presently 39,000 
foreign workers in the country and over 30,000 are unemployed in the manufacturing sector. 

The situation is becoming untenable in this context of increasing unemployment. There 
are still a lot of foreigners working in the construction and textile sectors when we could employ 
local people. As a negative impact, this is increasing unemployment rate. 

157 

 
My objective is to reduce our dependency on the foreign workers. There is no one size 
fits  all  solution  to  this  problem,  the  more  so  that  the  replacement  of  foreign  workers  by  the 
Mauritians  does  not  function  as  an  automatic  arithmetical  equation,  as  sometimes  the  local 
jobseekers do not possess the skills and competencies required by our enterprises. 

I have already stated that recruitment of foreign workers will be made only in scarcity 
areas. I wish to highlight that this Government has nothing against foreign workers. Migration 
forms part of this global village that is the world. 

We know that Mauritians are also recruited abroad in many areas of scarcity and the same 
principles will apply here. We shall review the way foreign workers are recruited. We shall also 
address  the  skills  mismatch  problem.  My  Ministry  intends  to  collaborate  very  closely  with 
institutions such as the Mauritius Institute of Training and Development, the Human Resource 
Development Council and other specialised training institutions on this issue. Training will be 
given  utmost  priority  for  our  local  workforce.  This  will  reduce  our  dependency  on  foreign 
labour. 

With  a  view  to  promoting  the  recruitment  of  our  citizens  abroad,  my  Ministry  also 
intends  to  sign  bilateral  agreements  with  other  countries.  Maximum  efforts  will  be  made  at 
regional level also to enable Mauritians to secure jobs in Africa, as well. 

Madam  Speaker,  another  example  of  the  lourd  héritage  of  the  former  Labour 
Government,  is  the  increasing  income  inequality.  The  income  inequality  has  also  been  rising 
steadily during the last decade. 20% of the income earners earn half of the total income of the 
country and the ratio between the highest 20% and the lowest 20% is constantly increasing. The 
irony is that it was the then Governor of the Bank of Mauritius against whom there is a charge of 
money laundering, who was the first to officially pull the alarm at the end of year 2014. 

It is also to be noted that in 2012, 10% of the workers in the private sector were earning 

Rs4,970 or less a month and 32.6% were earning less than Rs8,397 a month. 

This Government has the courage to tackle issues neglected by the previous regime. We 
have indeed decided to work on a minimum wage bill. It will take the time it will take, but no 
Government has done it in the past. Consultations have already been initiated in that respect. I 
have taken note of the recent report of the National Economic and Social Council (NESC) on the 

 

158 

matter.  The  task  of  establishing  a  minimum  wage  policy  is  a  great  one.  All  suggestions  are 
welcomed including those from the Opposition, if you can hear me. 

The introduction of a minimum wage shall, no doubt, constitute a major landmark that 
will contribute to give the workers, who are the driving force of the development of this country, 
the  right  to  a  decent  life,  which  they  so  deserved,  after  so  many  decades  of  exploitation  and 
protracted struggle for dignity. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  current  main  pieces  of  the  labour  legislation,  namely,  the 
Employment Rights Act and the Employment Relations Act, which were introduced in August 
2008 and promulgated on 02 February 2009 to replace the Labour Act 1975 and the Industrial 
Relations Act 1973, respectively, were subsequently amended on two occasions, namely, in July 
2009 and in May 2013. 

This Government, in its endeavour to further improve the plight of Mauritian workers and 
to ensure decent working conditions to all, intends to review these two pieces of legislation. In 
this regard, I intend to have meetings with the representatives of both trade unions and employers 
to request them to submit their views on any amendments they would wish to bring to the two 
pieces of legislation.  

In the same breath, with a view to better supporting working mothers to fulfil their family 
obligations, the Employment Rights Act will be amended to extend Maternity Leave from 12 to 
14 weeks, as stipulated under Article 4 of the ILO Convention No. 183 on Maternity Protection, 
adopted by ILO in June 2000. 

Madam Speaker, the Police Officers of this country will now have the right to syndicate 

to safeguard their interests. Never had this happened before! 

According to the International Labour Organisation, freedom of association and the right 

to organise and bargain collectively are fundamental rights. 

It is now observed, Madam Speaker, that many countries have recognised the rights of 
uniformed  men  and  women  to  form  part  of  their  trade  unions.  Moreover,  in  the  modern 
governance climate, societies around the world are re-valuing the services provided by the Police 
Force, particularly in the context of challenges brought about by terrorism and globalisation of 
the  criminal  activities.  It  is  now  common  to  hear  debates  around  the  proposition  that  better 

 

159 

policing  by  such  forces  is  contingent  on  them  having  rights  themselves.  There  is  now  broad 
consensus that good governance implies treating those who enforce law and order with respect 
for their basic rights. 

Madam Speaker, the Government Programme 2015-2019 mentions that Police Officers 
will be allowed to syndicate to safeguard their interests. This is a historic and bold decision on 
the part of this Government. 

The  effective  implementation  of  the  policy  measures  announced  in  the  Government 
Programme relating to my Ministry requires not only an appropriate legal framework, but also a 
paradigm  shift  in  our  industrial  relations  culture  and  a  change  in  the  mindset  for  all  the 
stakeholders, namely Employers, Trade Unions and Workers. 

I shall, Madam Speaker, be making decent work and social dialogue, the cornerstone of 
the labour and industrial relations policies of my Ministry. It is important and even crucial that 
all  stakeholders,  and  particularly  employers  to  understand  the  need  to  humanise  industrial 
relations, and the need to humanise the workplace where the worker spends the best part and the 
biggest  chunk  of  his  life.  More  importantly,  employers  must  understand  that  the  need  to  give 
proper  attention  to  such  fundamentals  as  -  decent  wage  and  decent  working  conditions,  job 
satisfaction, employee welfare, compliance to labour laws and creation of decent jobs amongst 
others. 

Madam  Speaker,  our  Government  philosophy  is  clear  and  unambiguous.  We  do  not 
oppose job creation to labour rights. I believe that they are the two sides of the same coin. We 
wish to protect workers and, at the same time, protect their jobs. Enhancing job security as well 
as  ensuring  that  workers  continue  to  draw  income  in  a  sustained  manner  will  be  our  main 
concern. If we want a stable Mauritius, Madam Speaker, there will be no other higher imperative 
than industrial peace for a sustainable socio-economic development. 

Madame  la  présidente,  j’aimerai  conclure  mon  discours  en  soulignant  qu’on  a  souvent 
fait des annonces dans cette auguste Assemblée. Mais la question est à quel point on est sincère 
quand on les prononce. 

 

160 

Le gouvernement de Sir Anerood Jugnauth représente cette sincérité tant recherchée par 
la nation mauricienne. Nous voulons redonner au peuple mauricien, et aux îles appartenant à la 
République, sa dignité perdue. 

Comme le dit Vercors dans Le Silence de la Mer, je suis confiant que les obstacles seront 

surmontés, car la sincérité surmonte toujours les obstacles, et nous les surmonterons. 

I thank you and thank the House for their attention.  

 (10.13 p.m.) 

The Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade (Mr E. 
Sinatambou): Madam Speaker, allow me, first of all, to congratulate  you on your election as 
Speaker of this august Assembly. As the first woman Speaker of this House, I am sure that you 
will live up to the expectations of neutrality, of impartiality, of having an iron fist in a velvet 
glove, because I think that this House needs someone like you in order to maintain order and to 
have the right attitude to prevail.  

Allow me also, Madam Speaker, to request you to convey my congratulations to the hon. 
Deputy Speaker for his election -  Oh, he is here.  May I be allowed to congratulate him for his 
election as the youngest Deputy Speaker ever to be elected in this country. Allow me, Madam 
Speaker, to congratulate the Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training, 
hon. Callichurn, for his maiden speech, and also to congratulate all hon. Members of this House, 
both those who have been elected for the first time and those who have been re-elected. May I 
finally, Madam Speaker, thank my constituents for re-electing me to this august Assembly.   

I wish, here, to pay a special tribute to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, 
for his vision and high sense of statesmanship, and to state that I am particularly grateful to him 
for appointing me as Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade.  I 
commit  myself  to  execute  the  high  responsibilities  conferred  on  me  with  full  diligence  and 
dedication. 

Madam Speaker, I was in two minds as to the tone and tenor of my speech this evening.  
Was I going to give a broad overview of the diplomatic agenda of this Government, or did I need 
to  reply  to  some  of  the  repartees  which  we  have  heard  on  the  other  side  of  the  House?  
Unfortunately, I must say that what I have heard coming from the other side of the House is not 

 

161 

to my satisfaction, even if I may say so humbly.  Not to my satisfaction because to take, first of 
all, what I heard from the First Member for Beau Bassin and Petite Rivière, hon. Bhagwan.   

In his speech before this august Assembly on the Presidential Speech, the hon. Member 
cast  an  improper  accusation,  and  that  is  what  I  believe  is  not  acceptable.    Accusations,  if 
substantiated, if evidenced, if true may indeed be made before this House and ought to be made 
before this House, but not if they are unsubstantiated, or are made without any evidence and are 
most gratuitous.  Here, I have to say that I could not understand how he could come before this 
House and say that the promoter of CT Power had financed all the posters of the 2005 General 
Election of l’Alliance sociale when hon. Sinatambou was a candidate.  I have never in my whole 
lifetime had any poster paid for me by anyone, let alone by CT Power, and I believe that it is 
those types of gratuitous aspersions which are most unbecoming from hon. Members from the 
other side of this House.  What is even worse is that a point of order was taken.  I was allowed to 
say  what  was  wrong  because,  indeed,  I  did  explain  that  this  was  casting  imputations  on  my 
election, and that those imputations were not true.  I did insist that this is false and, today, again, 
I heard the hon. Member, in the course of one of his questions, stating again the same gratuitous 
allegation.  I recall some of my friends once telling me how, sometimes, on the other side of the 
House, they have got a very bad habit.  They start a lie, you hear it once, then you hear it twice, 
then the third time, then the fifth time, and the tenth time people start thinking it is true.  This has 
to  stop  because  if  we  bear,  as  was  said  earlier  by  another  hon.  Member  of  this  House,  the 
substantive ‘Honourable’ before our name, we have to act honourably, and I do hope that this is 
the type of bad habit which will stop. 

Here, I would like to pause for a second to also say that it is not only in this House that this 
very  bad  habit  -  I  should  even  say,  perhaps,  this  very  bad  manner  -  of  casting  gratuitous 
accusations and smearing people has happened, and this has to stop.  I would here refer to what I 
heard from the Second Member for Port Louis South and Port Louis Central, my hon. friend, 
Roubina  Jadoo-Jaunbocus,  when  she  seized  the  opportunity  of  her  speech  to  say  that  she 
condemned  the  shameful  attacks  which  were  made  against  women  candidates  during  the  last 
electoral campaign, and especially against the family of my party leader, hon. Pravind Jugnauth.   
L’Alliance de l’unité et de la modernité, so-called, has really acted in a most undignified manner 
in attacking members of his family, and I believe that this should be strongly condemned. 

162 

 
I think that hon. Members, on both sides of the  House, whether from Government or 
from  the  Opposition,  have  to  concede  that  we  have  all  witnessed  how  democracy  has  been 
trampled down, has been stampeded upon, how Parliament has been constantly adjourned, you 
will recall, Madam Speaker, in the year 2014; adjourned, suspended, dissolved.  As we say, ils 
ont tout fait pour garder le Parlement clos.  Parliament, the pinnacle of democracy, était devenu 
un objet entre les mains de certains.  Attempts had even been made to slaughter our Constitution 
and come up with a second Republic designed to suit the needs of some.  But, finally, the will of 
the  people  has  prevailed,  et  le  peuple  has  shown  that  real  power  has  always  and  will  always 
remain with the people.  Our country, I think, we can all say, is breathing again thanks to the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, who has been able to foster the required strength to 
take this country from where it was going to. 

May  I now, Madam Speaker, come to something which is very serious because I just 
heard,  this  late  afternoon,  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  saying  three  words:  masque  pé 
tomber.  I am afraid to say that he was wrong!  Masque finn tomber!   

(Interruptions) 

Masque finn tomber!   Why am I saying that, Madam Speaker?   When we go back, and here I 
have taken the liberty of referring to my good friend, the Third Member for Piton and Rivière du 
Rempart, hon. Rutnah, who was also referring, in his speech, to the smear campaign to which he 
has been subjected.  A smear campaign, where the hon. Member told us how the Opposition had 
managed  to  obtain  a  few  photographs  of  him  with  very  good  friends  at  a  Christmas  party  in 
2007, and with the complicity of a Government newspaper and multimedia, they created a clip to 
discredit him, to ruin his reputation.  But, as he said, fortunately, the electorate is intelligent, and 
did not buy that.  

What struck me in that particular speech was how hon. Rutnah, the former Member of the 
MMM,  said  something  which,  I  believe,  hundreds  of  thousands  of  people  believe  to  be  true 
today.  It  is  that  the  Leader  of  the  Opposition,  very  frequently,  uses  the  word  ‘shame’  in  this 
House. As my good friend, the Third Member for Piton-Rivière du Rempart put it before this 
House, he is ashamed to say that the hon. Leader of the Opposition, against the backdrop of the 
2014 events, has sold the militants, has sold the workers and has sold virtually everybody who 
had trust in him. All the glory that he acquired since the seventies, he sold that glory for nothing 

 

163 

in days, and today, he has been reduced to a man with little or no credibility in this country. I 
believe that if ever someone had any doubt as to the veracity of this particular proposition, the 
fact that the MMM has this very day lost 25% of its elected Members who have just resigned 
from the party, does indicate how wrong they would have been, how wrong the Leader of the 
Opposition is in the way he has been acting. What I think should bother all of us is how – I think 
we have reached the 84th day that Government is in office - they have been acting. And every 
time Parliament has had a sitting, Madam Speaker, you see them putting questions, as if they are 
the big justicers - I would have said Zorro, but Zorro was right, I cannot say Zorro. And I think it 
is so wrong. Let us take, for example, their questions on  Betamax. I must say, I have read… 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Minister, it is their right to ask questions. 

Mr  Sinatambou:  Yes,  however,  Madam  Speaker,  the  very  questions  they  are  putting 
today are the very questions they ought to have put for the whole of last  year, the very same 
questions which they refused to put, the very same questions which they would not ask because 
they were so keen on keeping Parliament closed, which is why… 

Yes, I gladly welcome the questions, but done in the right way. 

 (Interruptions) 

Let  me  now  say,  Madam  Speaker,  one  or  two  things  which,  I  believe,  are  also  of 
importance. Madam Speaker, the state of rottenness which we have inherited, I am afraid, baffles 
the imagination. Before coming into Government myself, what I read in the newspapers, which 
had baffled me - and which I believe must have baffled the majority of Mauritians - is the fact 
that the MBC had paid, I think, Rs5 m. of compensation to the Director-General upon his leaving 
office. That was scandalous! I am sure that the majority of this country will have opined that this 
is not acceptable. But what did we find out once we came at the helm of Government? That, in 
effect, the MBC has a debt of Rs880 m. If Rs5 m. was a scandal, what is Rs880 m.? What is 
worse, Madam Speaker, is that this afternoon, I was shocked when I heard that it cost Rs895 m. 
to maintain the NTC buses for five years in-house, at the cost of Rs2.7 m. of maintenance cost 
for each bus. Where on earth have we heard that? That is where I object, I am afraid, with all due 
respect  to  them.  I  believe  that  this  would  have  been  a  shameful  coalition  because  they  were 
going to be together for five or seven years.  We don’t know, because we have luckily not had 

 

164 

the second Republic where they would have all agreed together to sit on all the scandals for God 
knows how many years! 

Now  having  said  this,  Madam  Speaker,  you  do,  therefore,  appreciate  that  this 
Government was elected against the difficult economic setting which impacted most severely on 
the  lower  rungs  of  the  Mauritian  society.  The  Government  Programme  2015-2019  has  been 
crafted  to  respond  to  the  economic  challenges  that  this  country  faces.  It  also  ensures  that  the 
advancement  of  the  economy  remains  people-focused.  Indeed,  the  measures  enunciated  in  the 
programme reflect the determination of Government to create the necessary conditions for the 
advent of a second economic miracle under the leadership of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Sir 
Anerood Jugnauth. 

Now, what is  going in this respect to be the  role and responsibility of the Ministry  of 
Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade. I have been quite surprised. We 
were  sworn  in  on  17  December  and,  within  the  first  three  weeks,  I  already  saw  a  number  of 
articles regarding the renewal, or rather the lateness of this Government in securing the renewal 
of the Africa Growth and Opportunity Act. And I said to myself: ‘what is this?’ This is the piece 
of  legislation  which  has  been  in  force  since  the  year  2000,  which  is  coming  for  renewal  and 
which is going to expire on 30 September 2015.  Why are we being blamed within less than three 
weeks of our entry in office for not renewing it? What were they doing on both side, whether it 
be the then Government or the MMM coalition partner? And this is what is not right! We agree 
with criticisms, we agree with questions, but the right ones. 

But, fortunately, between 19 and 25 January of this year, an African Union delegation 
went  to  the  United  States,  and  the  Government  of  Mauritius  was  invited  to  be  part  of  the 
delegation, And we have been able to get both bicameral and bipartisan support for the timely 
renewal of the African Growth and Opportunity Act. What is even nicer is that about three weeks 
ago, President Obama has requested the U.S. Congress to make allowance, in the 2015 American 
Budget, for a 10-year renewal of the Africa Growth and Opportunity Act and to make allowance 
for nearly 2 billion US dollars of budgetary funding for that Act. However, I think, here, that we 
need to put a word of caution. What the United States has explained is that the AGOA, as it is 
known, was actually devised to take Africa out of necessity. So, in principle, it is not applicable 
to Mauritius, because as they keep saying: ‘if  you are a middle income economy,  you do not 

 

165 

graduate for that’. But luckily, Mauritius will also benefit from AGOA for the coming 10 years. 
We have now received a letter; this is good to be mentioned in front of this august Assembly, 
Madam Speaker. We have received a letter at my Ministry from no less than the Secretary of 
State, Mr John Kerry, who, first of all, assured me personally that the US administration is giving 
us  full  support  for  the  renewal  of  AGOA.  But,  more  importantly,  for  those  who  keep 
complaining  and criticising, Secretary of State Kerry  has commended this Government  for its 
efforts in good governance and in combating fraud and corruption. I hope it falls in good ears! 

The  other  aspect  which  I  think  I  could  safely  mention  of  this  House  before  the  time 
allocated  to  me  is  over  is  what  is  known  as  the  World  Trade  Organisation  Trade  Facilitation 
Agreement. Why I am mentioning this in particular is because the Trade Facilitation Agreement 
of the World Trade Organisation was actually concluded in Bali at the 9th Ministerial Conference 
of  the  WTO  Members  from  the  3rd  to  6th  of  July  2013.  And  within  the  84  days  of  this 
Government’s  mandate,  Government  has  actually  sent  a  letter  of  acceptance  to  the  WTO 
Secretariat to adopt the Trade Facilitation Agreement. 

Why  I  believe  the  other  side  should  be  condemned  is  because  this  Agreement  was 
adopted  in  December  2013.  Yet,  they  closed  down  Parliament  for  virtually  a  year.  That 
agreement, Madam Speaker, has been analysed by economists, and the International Chamber of 
Commerce  and  Industry  has  evaluated  that  the  global  economy  is  going  to  be  increased  by 
another one trillion dollars if we apply the Trade Facilitation Agreement, and yet, they were busy 
cause causer as opposed to doing what is good for the country! 

The third aspect of economic diplomacy which I would like to bring to the attention of 
this House is what is called the Trade in Services Agreement. The Trade Facilitation Agreement 
deals with trade in goods while the Trade in Services Agreement deals with services. What has 
happened, Madam Speaker, is that since March 2013, 24 World Trade Organisation Members 
have decided to start negotiating this agreement. Those 24 Members make up two-thirds of the 
world’s economy and those 24 countries started negotiating the Trade in Services Agreement in 
March  2013.  They  have  now  reached  the  10th  round  of  negotiation  which  ended  about  mid-
February of this year. And would you believe it, Madam Speaker? Mauritius is not part of the 24 
WTO Member States negotiating! They were negotiating something else here!  

166 

 
What is worse is that the global figures in terms of exports of services for the year 2012, 
which are the latest figures that I have, are that the global export in services is 4.4 trillion dollars! 
We  are  trying  to  set  up  Mauritius  as  a  services  hub.  24  Member  States  of  the  WTO  start 
negotiating  a  Trade  in  Services  Agreement  in  March  2013.  They  have  held  ten  rounds  of 
negotiations up to February 2015 and Mauritius was out of it! I think this is most shameful! 

(Interruptions) 

What bothers me is that they still want to come and teach us lessons! Yes, gentlemen, if it is 
deserved we agree, but from what I have heard up to now, I cannot say that you are right in your 
criticisms. 

At  this  stage,  Madam  Speaker,  because  time  is  of  the  essence,  I  would  like  to  say 
something  which  I  believe  is  very  important.  I  heard  the  Third  Member  for  GRNW  and  Port 
Louis West, hon. Baloomoody, disagree strongly with this alleged constitutional unorthodoxy of 
changing  the  law  regarding  the  Office  of  the  DPP.  Let  us  just  get  our  chronology  right.  The 
MacKay Report dates from before 2000.  

Sorry?  

Two reports… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Minister, please… 

Mr Sinatambou: The one I know is from 1998, Madam Speaker. What I would say… 

(Interruptions) 

with or without the MacKay Report. Let us say, there were two MacKay Reports, one from 1998 
and one in 2006; with or without the MacKay report, the fact is that the decision which has been 
taken, from the way I understand it, would bring the Office of the DPP in the same position as it 
was when the hon. Leader of the Opposition was the Prime Minister of this country. Whether it 
is good or not is not the issue. We are saying it is good. It had never been challenged. Everyone 
has  always  agreed  it  is  lawful.  Now,  suddenly,  and  that  is  the  problem  -  they  will  take  any 

 

167 

argument in my mind.  How can this be undemocratic, when it was democratic when they were 
in there? 

(Interruptions) 

How can it be undemocratic when they have been there for ten years and you found it to be right 
then? 

That is the exact point we want to… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

I will read it, don’t worry. I am good at reading also!  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem!  

Mr Sinatambou: We are good at reading also. But the point we are making and, maybe I 
should also say, I have also in my career been acting Attorney General and what I would like to 
add is that I have also worked at the Attorney General’s Office up to the stage of Principal State 
Counsel.  At  no  time,  when  I  was  there,  has  there  been  any  slightest  apprehension  that  the 
situation to which we are going back with the Government’s decision could have been or was 
unlawful.  

What I would like to suggest to all Members of this august Assembly is, let us not take 

cheap points to score… 

(Interruptions) 

Yes,  that  is  what  I  strongly  think  that  some  are  taking  arguments  just  to  score  points  and 
sometimes too cheaply. 

Let me give you… 

(Interruptions) 

 (Interruptions) 

No! Madam Speaker, the Law Reform Commission is not judicially empowered to make those 
accusations. 

 

168 

 (Interruptions) 

Be that as it may, Madam Speaker, I would like perhaps to ask for five final minutes. 

The first thing that I would like to say in those last five minutes, Madam Speaker, is that 
my  family  and  I  have  suffered  severe  civil  and  criminal  defamation  in  the  course  of  the  last 
political campaign. My wife wanted to be here tonight, but I told her: “don’t bother”. Because, 
she wanted to face the Opposition when I would say that, they had lied and stated that my wife 
was a battered woman. We even went to the Police, Madam Speaker. We reported the matter to a 
Police station. I made a declaration at a Police station at the end of October 2014, against one 
Minister and two Members of Parliament. 

In November 2014, it was a political acolyte of their shameful coalition who started an 
Internet campaign. This time my wife made a declaration in November. Do you know what is 
worst? Nothing happened once again in November! What is now unacceptable is that the two 
leaders  of  the  shameful  coalition  also  made  the  fallacious  accusations!  Do  you  know  what  is 
wrong, Madam Speaker… 

(Interruptions) 

My wife said to me: “Etienne, can we dare to go and make a Police declaration against them? 
What might not happen to us if they win?”  

Look at the type of atmosphere people were living in! Look at the type of fear that was 
being created in this country! Which is why I would insist that I bear no grudge against neither 
the then Prime Minister nor the now Leader of the Opposition. But, I wish that - that’s why I am 
saying it here - either or both of them could make amende honorable and present excuses to my 
wife, not to me. I don’t need their excuses. In politics, we actually develop hard shells. They can 
say whatever they want about me; I don’t care. But, I wish they could apologise to my wife for 
the wrongs that they have done to her. 

Pour conclure, Madame la présidente, je dirai que j’ai été très sensible à ma nomination en 
qualité  de  ministre  des  Affaires  étrangères,  de  l’Integration  régionale  et  du  Commerce 
international de l’île Maurice, et j’en remercie vivement le chef du gouvernement, notre Premier 
ministre, Sir Anerood Jugauth. 

 

169 

Dans  ce  monde  vaste  et  complexe,  comprenant  beaucoup  d’enjeux  et  d’exigences,  la 
diplomatie mauricienne que nous avons engagée sera au service exclusif de l’intérêt national et 
se  conjuguera  avec  les  efforts  déployés  pour  la  réalisation  du  deuxième  miracle  économique 
mauricien.  Accomplir  mon  mandat  dans  lequel  je  me  suis  pleinement  investi  avec  cœur  et 
efficacité,  Madame  la  présidente,  est  toute  mon  ambition.  C’est  pourquoi  je  suis  conforté  par 
l’étendu de mes responsabilités, dont surtout celle de consolider nos acquis nationaux et d’élargir 
le rayonnement international de l’île Maurice par une politique étrangère ciblée. 

With these words, Madam Speaker, I thank you for your kind attention. 

 (10.45 p.m.) 

Mr S. Ramkaun (Third Member for Pamplemousses & Triolet):  Madam Speaker, it is 
indeed  a  great  honour  and  privilege  to  me  to  address  honourable  Members  of  this  august 
Assembly as Third Member of Constituency No. 5, Pamplemousses/Triolet.  Let me join all my 
colleagues to congratulate you, Madam, for having been elected as the first lady Speaker of this 
august Assembly, and my congratulations also to hon. Adrien Duval, the youngest Member, for 
having been elected as Deputy Speaker. 

I would also like to thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, the Vice-
Prime Minister, hon. Showkutally Soodhun and hon. Pravind Jugnauth for the confidence placed 
in  me  to  represent  the  people  of  one  of  the  most  populated  constituency  of  the  Republic  of 
Mauritius. Last but not least, I am thankful to my family, wife, children, campaign committee 
members and constituents who have been always by our side for a massive victory of l’Alliance 
Lepep in the last December elections. 

Madam Speaker, I must say that it has been an outstanding experience to be part of the 
wonderful team of l’Alliance Lepep, and the results of the general elections of December 2014 
showed that the most sincere, hard-working and responsible team has won with flying colours.  It 
couldn’t be the other way, as we noticed during the campaign que l’île Maurice  avait marre de la 
gestion de l’ancienne équipe dirigeante - une odeur nauséabonde avait envahi l’atmosphère de 
notre République ; les gens, du petit au plus grand, suffoquaient sous le poids de la corruption, de 
la fraude et du je-m’en-foutisme qui avaient gangréné toutes les opérations publiques - qui avait, 
en fait, pour mission de mener le pays à bon port. Le pays touchait l’abîme, et il fallait toute la 
vision et connaissance, la gestion du meilleur gestionnaire et administrateur politique qu’est Sir 

 

170 

Anerood  Jugnauth  pour    redresser  la  barre  et  redonner  confiance  à  ce  peuple  admirable  que 
certains  avaient  voulu  réduire  en  peau  de  chagrin.  Fort  heureusement,  le  peuple  a  su,  par  sa 
sagesse, réagir promptement, faisant fi à des promesses farfelues de certains politiciens dépassés, 
et en leur retournant à leur propre étude. 

It has been proven, Madam Speaker, that the people of Mauritius are much more alert than 
some may have thought.  Those people are still applying the lost and found formula based on 
communal  casteism  and  mathematics.    They  thought  that  the  Mauritian  people  would  blindly 
follow them, but, unfortunately  for them, the Mauritians already had in  mind to get rid of  all 
those who had been doing politics for their own sake, putting their interest first. 

Madam Speaker,  I would like again to come back to the last campaign.  I would like to 
share with all of you present in this House what I personally witnessed in Constituency No. 5.  I 
would like to ask anyone of you a simple question.  Have you ever been confronted to a case of 
poverty, where people are living in a condition which can be qualified worse than an animal? 
Madam Speaker, I have lived this unprecedented and awful experience.  How can we forget Cité 
Longère, Cité Florida, Cité NHDC and the surrounding areas of Baie du Tombeau, Cité EDC of 
Pamplemousses and various poches de pauvreté of the constituency?  During our last campaign, 
we were informed by the residents that the former Prime Minister had visited Cité Longère prior 
to  the  2005  general  elections.  After  that,  he  had  never  bothered  about  those  people  living  in 
longères with corrugated iron sheet roofs, open air bathrooms and common toilets.  Such was the 
situation since 1994 !  Et pourtant, c’était dans la circonscription de l’ex-Premier ministre, qui 
avait à ses côtés deux autres ministres de la République.  It is a real shame, Madam Speaker. The 
last electoral campaign was a nightmare which we witnessed in broad daylight.  Hopefully, those 
who were in power are no more, and now the challenges have come on the surface. 

Madam  Speaker,  l’être  humain  est  si  minuscule  dans  cet  univers  qui  est  rempli 
d’incertitudes.  Certains  avaient  essayé  dans  le  passé  de  faire  croire  qu’ils  sont  des  êtres 
supérieurs, et on connaît tous le sort peu enviable de ces gens-là. Aujourd’hui, on prend leur nom 
en guise de cobaye pour décrire la bestialité dans les œuvres de l’homme. A toute proportion 
respectée, notre pays aurait pu connaître le même sort. Mais, comme je l’ai fait ressortir plus 
haut, Madame la présidente, la population a pu prendre conscience de son sort éventuel si l’autre 
avait triomphé. 

 

171 

La femme mauricienne dans sa grande majorité avait dit, ‘Assez d’être réduite au rôle de 
pom-pom  girl.’  Pour  redonner  la  valeur  due  aux  femmes,  le  Leader  de  l’Alliance  Lepep  avait 
choisi  une  femme  en  la  personne  de  Madame  Ameenah  Gurib-Fakeem  pour  être  la  première 
femme présidente. Ce choix est justifiable et ne souffre d’aucune contestation de la part des gens 
qui  voient  juste  et  qui  œuvrent  dans  l’émancipation  de  la  femme  mauricienne,  dont  la 
contribution est primordiale dans le progrès de la nation mauricienne. 

Cependant, il est à noter que certains qui ont bénéficié des largesses de  l’ancien régime 
continuent à jouer le rôle de lèche-botte ; ceux dont l’ancien chef d’État avait fait référence, lui 
qui croyait que les hommes d’honneur n’existaient plus. Il a été complètement pris à contre-pied 
dans sa propre circonscription, et il doit maintenant assumer les conséquences. 

Madame la présidente, ce gouvernement ne vend pas des rêves ; non plus il fera gronder le 
tonnerre. Ce gouvernement est celui de ce peuple de Maurice, débrouillard jusqu’à la dernière 
goutte de son sang, sincère dans ses relations et conscient de son passé qu’il ne rejette pas. Mais, 
ce peuple de Maurice a pris l’exemple du passé pour vivre le présent, et ainsi consolidant dans la 
foulée son futur.  

Ce peuple de Maurice a pris conscience du programme de son gouvernement, et il sait 
que pour cicatriser leurs plaies laissées par l’ancien régime il va falloir du temps, mais heureux 
de ce gouvernement qu’il a aidé à prendre les rênes du pouvoir. Dans sa sagesse, ce peuple de 
Maurice accordera à ses dirigeants le temps qu’il faudra pour redresser la barre et mener le pays 
à bon port. Pour cette prise de position, je dois saluer le peuple, et je suis convaincu que sous le 
double  leadership  de  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth  comme  président  et  de  Pravind  Jugauth,  on  peut 
attendre à un meilleur paysage mauricien social. 

Madame la présidente, le pire est derrière nous, les années qui ont noirci notre ciel bleu et 
notre mer turquoise sont derrière nous. Avec la création des ministères avant-gardistes, avec en 
point de mire la conquête d’autres créneaux de productivité, on peut dire que le pays est entre de 
bonnes mains. La confiance est de retour, et on ne finira pas d’en parler, et les gens sont heureux 
d’avoir pu éviter le pire des scénarios. 

Madam Speaker, I am, in fact, very proud to be part of this team that will cement the 
social life of the Mauritians, which will create jobs, which will make equality a reality and will 
make  Mauritius  flourish  again  en  une  véritable  nation  arc-en-ciel.  Yes,  Madam  Speaker,  this 

 

172 

Government, under the leadership of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, with 
hon. Pravind Jugnauth as the leader of the MSM and leading party of l’Alliance Lepep, together 
with  the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  hon.  Xavier-Luc  Duval,  Leader  of  PMSD,  and  the  Vice-Prime 
Minister, hon. Collendavelloo, Leader of Muvman Liberater, is meant to fulfil all the aspirations 
of the Mauritians. This track record of Sir Anerood Jugnauth is enough  comme une garantie 
pour  une  vie  meilleure.    Now,  it  is  time  for  concrete  actions,  and  I  would  add  that  all  the 
conspirators  who  are  aiming  to  destroy  Mauritius  are  doomed  to  pay  for  their  bad  deeds,  no 
matter who they were or who they are.  We are Mauritians and we will aim for our Motherland.  
One of the main targets of the Government led by l’Alliance Lepep is to realise the deuxième 
miracle économique, and this is paving its way.  A flashback of the premier miracle économique 
that this country witnessed between 1983 and 1995 reminds us, inter alia, of the following - 

diversification of the Mauritian economy; 
full employment; 
industrialisation and its decentralisation; 
tremendous urban and rural development; 
infrastructural undertaking; 
building of a nation of entrepreneurship;  
improvement in the quality of life of the people in general; 
strengthening the Welfare State, and 
social harmony and promotion of education, training and health services. 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
In order to ensure a full-fledged development of the Mauritian economy and the society 

at large, the Alliance Lepep led Government has taken on board modern concepts like - 

innovation; 
good governance, and 
ocean economy as ministerial attributes. 

• 
• 
• 
The implementation of our Programme will be made in consultation with the people and 
in doing so we will aim to achieve the second economic miracle in far lesser time than originally 
planned.  The  organisation  structure  will  be  systematically  reviewed  in  order  to  accommodate 
physical  infrastructure,  related  functions  such  as  tender  exercises,  contract  management  and 
procurement, etc. 

173 

 
Madam Speaker, I am thankful for the confidence placed upon me by hon. Sir Anerood 
Jugnauth  who  has  given  me  the  responsibility  of  Constituency  Nos.  5,  6  and  7  as  Private 
Parliamentary Secretary.  The three constituencies are already on board a fast speed train of all-
around progress and development. The District Council of Pamplemousses-Rivière du Rempart 
will play a major role in the improvement of the quality of life of the northerners.  In order to 
alleviate  the  housing  problems  in  Baie  du  Tombeau  as  well  as  in  other  areas  of  poverty,  a 
Committee chaired by the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands, hon. Soodhun, 
the Minister of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment, hon. Roopun, and the other hon. 
Members of the constituencies, is already working on a scheme to assist these vulnerable people 
to have decent low-cost houses. 

I have also the privilege to meet my mandates regularly.  There is a flow of complaints 
and requests.  It is now that we are acknowledging in what mess the people were in these last 
years under the former Government.  Hopefully, since we assumed our office under the Prime 
Ministership of Sir Anerood Jugnauth, the Mauritian people are breathing hope that their lives 
would be better. 

Madam Speaker, from the first day of assuming power, Mauritians have witnessed that 
Members of the National Assembly of l’Alliance Lepep have taken to their task like a duck takes 
to  water.    We  have  already  implemented  many  points  of  our  Government  Programme  2015-
2019,  and  we  are  aiming  for  a  second  mandate,  as  I  am  more  than  convinced  that  we  will 
succeed in implementing all the points of our Programme. 

One more thing I am sure, Madam, we are conscious of the task that is awaiting us, and 
we will shoulder our responsibilities, as we are all persons having our work culture. We are the 
hommes  et  femmes  de  famille  conscients,  et  on  est  guidé  par  le  respect  de  ceux  qui  nous 
entourent et qui nous côtoient. 

I end my speech, Madam Speaker, by adapting the famous quotation of Charles Dickens 

– 

‘It was the worst time yesterday; it is the best time today. 

It was the age of foolishness yesterday; it is the age of wisdom now. 

 It was the winter of despair till December 2014, and it is henceforth the spring of hope.’ 

 
Thank you for your kind attention. 

174 

(11.01 p.m.) 

Mr K. Tarolah (Third Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE): Madam Speaker, 
first  of  all,  I  wish  to  congratulate  you  for  your  election  to  accede  to  the  Chair  of  this  august 
Assembly, and I am sure all of us present today and the whole of the Mauritian people are very 
proud  for  you  to  be  the  very  first  lady  of  the  Republic  of  Mauritius  assuming  this  great 
responsibility.  My  sincere  congratulations  also  go  to  the  Deputy  Speaker,  hon.  Adrien  Duval, 
who is the youngest Member of this House ever to have assumed such a high responsibility as 
Deputy  Speaker  and,  of  course,  he  has  a  long  way  to  go.    This  is  due  to  our  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister,  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth.  This  symbolises  the  faith  and  confidence  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister has in the young people of today, as well as in the youth 15 years ago, when my good 
friend, hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo, the Attorney General, was then given the portefeuille du ministère 
de la Jeunesse et des Sports. L’histoire retient de bons souvenirs de son parcours. 

I  also  extend  my  warmest  congratulation  to  all  elected  Members  of  the  last  general 
elections of 10 December 2014.  I feel greatly honoured to be among the team of Sir Anerood 
Jugnauth, a man of uncommon integrity, who marks history by becoming the Prime Minister of 
Mauritius for the sixth time in his political career and, obviously, we have lots of things to learn 
from him. I deeply thank the hon. Minister Pravind Kumar Jugnauth, the Leader of MSM, our 
leader, a man of vision and resilience, whom we are extremely proud of - thank you Leader - and 
who, despite lots of lobbies and personal attacks against me, entrusted his confidence in me to 
stand as candidate for Constituency No. 10, Montagne Blanche & Grand River South East.  

Merci à notre président du MSM, l’honorable ministre Soodhun, et d’autres dirigeants, 

et surtout l’équipe des ‘young orange’.   

I am also thankful to all the electors who placed their confidence in me by voting the 

three candidates of l’Alliance Lepep.  

Madam Speaker, Constituency No. 10, where there were three Ministers during the past 
years,  and  it  was  with  a  lot  of  pride  that  they  used  to  acclaim  the  fact  that  it  is  the  only 
Constituency where there are three Ministers, excluding that of Constituency No. 5, but, in terms 

 

175 

of  development  or  progress,  nothing  has  been  done.  It  is  very  sad  to  note  the  one  and  only 
development that Constituency No. 10 has got is the 5-star prison at Melrose. 

Madam Speaker, how can there be any kind of progress in the Constituency, when neither 
former Minister Jeetah nor Minister Seetaram had enough time to look after the problems  faced 
by  the  electors,  as  they  were  both  busy  looking  into  the  matters  of  Betamax  and  Sarako 
respectively.  

Electors of Constituency No. 10 used to ask various questions, such as what is the reason 
behind that the Leader of Parti travailliste, who is actually on leave, can rely on persons like 
Rajesh Jeetah who had numerous frasques in any field he was designated. We cannot forget le 
lait  ‘Amul’,  STCM,  hedging,  université  marron  and  the  famous  accident  at  Sodnac  and  his 
implication in the sale of the clinic Med Point. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker,  perhaps  just  on  the  eve  of  the  last  election,  Dr.  Navinchandra 
Ramgoolam happened to realise it when he finally decided not to give any of the three Ministers 
a ticket to stand as candidate for the election of 10 December 2014, but, what a coincidence, the 
l’Alliance de l’Unité et de la Modernité, also known as the Alliance d’un pays moderne et un 
peuple  uni  a  fait  parachuté  un  novice  chokra  au  nom  de  Washeel  et  deux  senior,  anciens 
ministres, chachi Indranee et l’actuel secrétaire du MMM, Ajay.  

Auparavant, il disait à ses sympathisants qu’il préfère rester chez lui, voir son fils grandir 
au lieu de s’aligner au côté du Travailliste, alors que le choix était clair.  L’électorat a assumé sa 
responsabilité. 

 I  hope  that  hon.  Baloomoody  would  be  of  the  same  opinion  as  far  as  it  concerns  the 
Senior Adviser of PM, as regard to his newly appointed Secretary of the Party whose case was 
pending for several years, and the case terminated just after the concrétisation de l’Alliance de 
l’Unité et de la Modernité. 

The population had been able to do the distinction between the two teams. 

(Interruptions) 

 

176 

Mr Uteem: On a point of order, Madam Speaker. I would like to get the guidance of the 
Chair as to whether the hon. Member can, in this House, challenge a decision of a Magistrate in 
Court. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Tarolah, can you just repeat what you said, did you challenge the 

(Interruptions) 

decision of the Court? 

Mr Tarolah: It’s not a challenge. 

Madam Speaker: Did you just mention that there was a decision of the Court? 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Tarolah: It’s not a challenge. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Uteem,  he  did  not  challenge,  he  just  stated  that  there  was  a 

decision of the Court in that sense. 

Mr Uteem: If he can then clarify that he was in no way imputing that the decision of the 

Magistrate was in any way… 

(Interruptions) 

The  decision  of  the  Magistrate  was  motivated  by  the  fact  that  there  was  an  Alliance  between 
MMM and Labour. 

Madam Speaker: In fact, hon. Uteem, he did not say that the decision was motivated. He 

just mentioned that the case had been settled after an event. 

Mr Baloomoody: On a point of clarification, the case has not been settled, as you tried to 
interpret it; there has been a judgement by the Intermediate Court and the case is still on appeal.  

So, hon. Members should be careful before imputing motives on a Court and the more so 

that the case is on appeal. 

(Interruptions) 

 

177 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody, did you make a point of clarification, was it a point 

of personal explanation? 

Mr Baloomoody: A point of clarification to correct, to have the facts clear to what you 

have said as the Chair. 

Madam Speaker: Please, proceed hon. Tarolah! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Tarolah: Thank you, Madam Speaker. L’Histoire va retenir et ça a créé un mauvais 
souvenir. Dans quelques jours le Leader de l’opposition va célébrer ses 70 ans. Madam Speaker, 
quelle trahison! The scene is still vivid in almost everyone’s mind where you may find the hon. 
Leader of the Opposition, Sir Anerood Jugnauth sharing their birthday cakes, and what a speech 
was delivered by hon. Bérenger on that occasion! Great emphasis was made on patriotism of the 
Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, and everyone knows what was reserved on the 
next episodes with various subtitles as “Cooling-off period”,  ‘Mo fine bien amerder, Pravind 
pas fine consulté Monsieur Bérenger avant li mette so point de droit’, et les ons and offs until 
everything had gone off. But we must be grateful to the hon. Leader of the Opposition for having 
been  able  to  convince  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth  to  leave  the  State  House  as  President  of  the 
Republic and to ‘nettoye pays de sa pourriture la’. Sir Anerood Jugnauth did not hesitate for a 
single  minute  and  was  firm  in  his  conviction.  This  is  what  the  population  respected;  parole 
donnée, parole sacrée. As it was the case in 2003, everyone knows what kind of pressure was 
there  not  to  let  hon.  Bérenger  become  Prime  Minister,  but  ‘sa  ki  nous  dire,  nous  faire’;  the 
slogan was converted to reality. 

Madam  Speaker,  we  remember  those  days  when  hon.  Bhagwan  used  to  advise  the 
militants by saying: ‘Zot bizin mette photo Sir Anerood Jugnauth dans zot lakaz et dire merci Sir 
Anerood’,  and,  Madam  Speaker,  what  a  coincidence  today  that  not  only  the  militants  or  the 
activistes travaillistes, but the whole population are of the same opinion. Everyone is thankful to 
the present Government whether the retired persons, the senior citizens, the civil servants up to 
the students, all of them, chaque couche sociale a bénéficié de ce changement de régime.  That is 
called change, Madam Speaker, not that change which was claimed ‘pou change ou la vie dans 
100 jours’, and not to mention whose life got changed very, very rapidly.  

 

178 

The  pensions  were  increased  as  promised,  increase  in  the  compensation  of  all  civil 
servants were given, SC and HSC exam fees were handled by the present Government. Et ça, ce 
n’est  que  le  commencement.  Dieu  merci,  nous  avons  une  équipe  formidable  à  côté  de  Sir 
Anerood Jugnauth sinon après sept ans avec un Président de la deuxième République ‘pas bann 
coffres, mais containers qui ti pou ouvert pou tire dollars et livres sterling’.  

Madam Speaker, let me give an aperçu de notre circonscription. Our Constituency No. 
10 is just at the side of the Constituency No. 9 where le Roi de l’Est had tarred every single road. 
A good friend of mine used to give that example on quite a lot of meetings organised during the 
past general elections saying: ‘Li chien pas ti pé gagne le temps lever depi lor simin, jusquà li 
chien zot ti pé fini passe coltar, sa vitesse ti pé coltar chemin la dans No. 9’. 

(Interruptions) 

The roads of our Constituency are in a very bad condition and it is a humble request 
made to hon. Minister Bodha to look into the matter.  Constructions and renovation of our social 
welfare centres are very urgent as the buildings are left in very bad states.  Il y a aussi un manque 
d’espace pour les loisirs surtout pour les jeunes when we are talking about bringing football of a 
higher quality.  So, it is a request to the hon. Minister Sawmynaden for a stadium with the latest 
amenities  for  the  village  of  Bel  Air,  where  teams  coming  from  all  around  the  island  used  to 
participate  in  the  tournament  organised  in  that  football  playground  which  is  actually  in  a 
deplorable state. 

To remain in the field of sports, I must add that it is very deplorable to note that there are 
volleyball teams from Camp de Masque Pavé playing in the Second Division at National level, 
but do not have a suitable volleyball pitch for proper practice and training. They usually need to 
move to another village to get such facilities. 

Madam Speaker, I still remember the meeting organised at La Boutique Teoka, Bel Air for 
the last general elections where, at the end of his speech, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister asked a 
question to the crowd present on that day, as to whether they are for the Second Republic or 
water for 24 hours and everybody shouted they need water.  That is called a miracle, Madam 
Speaker, in less than five minutes it started raining and that rain of blessing has bestowed all over 
our country and today almost all our reservoirs are full. But lots of villagers are still complaining 
of the lack of water supply in various regions.  It is a humble request to the Vice-Prime Minister, 

 

179 

hon.  Ivan  Collendavelloo,  to  do  a  study  as  our  constituency  has  the  privilege  of  having  the 
longest river of our island, the GRSE river passing through and carrying lots of water to the sea 
day  and  night.    So,  we  can  have  a  water  treatment  plant  in  the  region  which  can  very  easily 
supply  the  eastern  region.    Madam  Speaker,  this  is  called  meaningful  change  which  will 
definitely be achieved very soon as there is willingness to work to bring that change in the daily 
life of our citizens.   

It  will  be  recalled  that  the  SME  sector  contributes  around  40%  of  the  Gross  Domestic 
Product while providing employment to around 54% of the working population. With a view to 
igniting  the  spirit  of  entrepreneurship  among  youth  and  making  the  Small  and  Medium 
Enterprise sector the main engine of growth, the setting up of an SME bank and a one-stop-shop 
in  Ebène  targeting  young  entrepreneurs  is  announced.    This  will  provide  them  with  all  the 
facilities and incentives to start their business under one roof. A fair share of the budget, that is, 
an estimated amount of around Rs10 billion will be allocated to boost the Small and Medium 
Enterprise  which  is  said  to  play  an  important  role  in  the  development  of  the  economy.  Hon. 
Minister Bholah is convinced that the SMEs can become the backbone for economic growth, and 
I wish him good luck. 

Madam Speaker, I also make an appeal to the hon. Minister, if he can organise a session of 
conference with the winner of  le Prix Nobel de la Paix en 2006 et inventeur du micro-crédit, 
l’économiste Bangladeshi, Muhammad Yunus, qui a dit dans un interview, I quote –  

« Je  crois  à  un  monde  sans  pauvreté,  simplement  parce  que  les  pauvres  ne  sont  pas 
responsables  de  la  situation.    On  doit  créer  les  opportunités  et  les  conditions  pour 
permettre  aux  personnes  de  s’impliquer  dans  un  projet  social  qui  peut  permettre  de 
résoudre  les  problèmes  de  l’économie  actuelle.  Gagner  de  l’argent  peut  vous  rendre 
heureux, mais rendre d’autres personnes heureuses est la plus grande des fiertés.»  

So, Madam Speaker, by improving the general wellbeing of the population under the leadership 
of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, and together with all the hon. Members of 
the coalition partners without forgetting the support of the whole population, will urge for a new 
and modern destiny of the generation to come. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker, and all the hon. Members of this House for your patience and 

attention and I also pray for the blessings of the Almighty to be bestowed upon us. 

 

Thank you. 

180 

Mr Fowdar:  Madam Speaker, I move for the adjournment of the debate. 

 Mr Jhugroo rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Debate adjourned accordingly. 

ADJOURNMENT 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that this Assembly do now adjourn 

to Thursday 05 March 2015 at 11.30 a.m.  

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun) rose and 

seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned.  

At 11.18 p.m. the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Thursday 05 March 2015 at 

11.30 a.m. 

WRITTEN ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

 

TEC - QUALITY ASSURANCE AND ACCREDITATION OFFICER - 

RECRUITMENT 

(No. B/104) Mr S. Rutnah (Third Member for Piton & Rivière du Rempart) asked 
the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  one  Mrs  K.  P.  R.  recruited  as  Quality 
Assurance and Accreditation Officer of the Tertiary Education Commission, he will state if he 
has been informed of the false representations made in relation to her experience and, if so, will 
he, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Independent Commission Against Corruption, 
information as to if an inquiry has been carried out in relation thereto. 

Reply  (Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 
Scientific Research): I am informed by the Tertiary Education Commission that Mrs K. P. R. 

 

181 

was  appointed  as  Quality  Assurance  and  Accreditation  Officer  on  12  May  2009  following  an 
advertisement and a selection exercise undertaken by Tertiary Education Commission.  She is 
still serving as Quality Assurance and Accreditation Officer at Tertiary Education Commission. 

The main requirement for the post of QAAO as per the scheme of service are - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

A post graduate degree preferably at doctoral level from a recognised university; 

at least three years’ teaching and research experience at tertiary level in any area, 
and 

commitment  to  the  enhancement  of  the  quality  of  teaching  and  possess  good 
communication and report writing skills. 

As  per  records  at  the  Tertiary  Education  Commission  a  complaint  was  received  on  05 
June 2014 making serious allegations on a number of issues, including experience of the Officer.  
On  17  June  2014,  the  then  Executive  Director  had  sought  explanation  from  the  Officer 
concerned.  However, there is no record at the Tertiary Education Commission as to whether a 
reply was received and any action taken thereon.  

In regard to the part related to enquiry by ICAC, I understand that a complaint by way of 

an anonymous letter had been received at the level of the ICAC and is being investigated. 

In view of the serious nature of the matter contained in the letter dated 05 June 2014, I 
propose that a full-fledged enquiry be conducted by the TEC Board once it is newly constituted 
to  look  into  the  allegations  and  to  make  recommendations  for  any  action  as  may  be  deemed 
appropriate by TEC.  

ADDIS ABABA - AFRICAN UNION SUMMIT – MAURITIUS 

REPRESENTATION 

(No. B/107) Mr S. Mohamed (First Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port Louis 
East)  asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the 24th African Union Summit, 
which was held in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, between 23 and 31 January 2015, he will state  - 

(a) who represented Mauritius thereat, and  

(b) the outcome thereof. 

182 

 
Reply  (The  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and  International 
Trade):  The 24th Ordinary Session of the Assembly of the African Union was held in Addis 
Ababa from 30 to 31 January 2015.  It was preceded by the following meetings - 

•  Twenty-Sixth Ordinary Session of the Executive Council held on 26 and 27 January 

2015; and 

•  Permanent Representative Committee (PRC) held on 24 and 25 January 2015. 

The  theme  of  the  Summit  was  “Year  of  Women  Empowerment  and  Development 

towards Africa Agenda 2063”. 

The Chargé d’Affaires a.i. of our Embassy in Addis Ababa represented Mauritius at the 

AU Summit. He was accompanied by the Second Secretary from our Mission.  

In addition to the above meetings, the Mauritius delegation also attended the following: 

•  Meeting  of  Sherpas  on  Post  2015-Development  Agenda  held  in  the  margins  of  the 

African Union Summit on 24 and 25 January 2015; 

•  African Union Ministerial Committee on African Candidatures within the  International 

System on 26 January 2015; 

•  Twenty  Second  Summit  of  the  African  Peer  Review  Mechanism  held  on  29th  January 

2015; and 

•  Launch of the African Union Foundation and Ebola Fund. 

 

Various decisions, declarations and resolutions were adopted by the Assembly, amongst 
others: the Ebola Virus Disease outbreak and cancellation of debt of those countries affected by 
it,  Alternative  Sources  of  Financing  of  the  African  Union,  the  Development  of  the  Agenda 
2063, Africa’s engagement at the various international Climate Summits and on Illicit Financial 
Flows. 

I wish to inform the House that the decisions and resolutions have already been circulated 

to the various Ministries concerned for an effective implementation and follow up action. 

I also wish to inform the House that the next Summit of the African Union will be held in 

June 2015 in South Africa and Mauritius looks forward to an active participation therein. 

 

 

183 

PUBLIC PROCUREMENT ACT - AMENDMENTS 

(No.  B/121)  Mr  A.  Ganoo  (First  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River)  asked  the 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the Public Procurement 
Act and related legislation, he will state the amendments he proposes to bring thereto. 

Reply:  As  the  House  is  aware,  in  its  Programme  2015-2019,  Government  has  already 

expressed its commitment to review the Public Procurement Act in order to - 

(i) 

(ii) 

make  it  more  transparent  with  regard  to  the  call  for  bids  for  all  types  of 
procurement; and  
Increase accountability of both public bodies and suppliers participating in tender 
exercises. 

The proposed amendments to the Act  are currently being  worked out and these may 

form part of Finance (Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill in the context of the forthcoming Budget. 

 

PORT LOUIS MARITIME & PORT LOUIS EAST - ROADS 

(No.  B/138)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis East) asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to 
the classified roads in Constituency No. 3, Port Louis Maritime and Port Louis East, he will, for 
the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Road  Development  Authority,  information  as  to  if 
consideration will be given for the urgent – 

(a) cleaning/removal of wastes/soils from the covered blocked drains/canals at -  

(i) Saint François Xavier Street, from its junction with Madras Street up to Delhi Street, 

and  

(ii) Magon Street, towards the Khadafi Square, near the children playground after the 
Dr.  I.  Goomany  Municipal  Centre,  to  prevent  water  accumulation  during  heavy 
rainfalls, and  

(b) replacement of the covered cross slabs by heavy duty slabs, at Saint François Xavier 

Street, at its junction with Bombay Street. 

 

184 

Reply:  With regard to part (a) (i) of the question, I am informed by the Road Development 

Authority as follows - 

(i) 

the cleaning of drains and removal of wastes at Saint François Xavier Street has 
already been completed, and 

(ii)  

the  cleaning  of  drains  along  Magon  Street  is  scheduled  to  be  completed  on  09 
March 2015. 

In relation to part (b) of the question, I am informed that the Road Development Authority 
has started to cast off-site new heavy duty slabs.  The slabs will be replaced by the end of March. 

 

NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR CO-OPERATIVE ENTERPRISE COMMITTEE 

– CHAIRPERSON - APPOINTMENT 

(No. B/139) Mr R. Bhagwan (First Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) asked 
the Minister of Business, Enterprise and Co-operatives whether, in regard to the appointment of 
Mr  V.  M.  as  Chairperson  of  the  National  Institute  for  Co-operative  Enterprise  Committee,  he 
will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Committee, information as to – 

(a) his qualifications;  

(b) his address, and 

(c) the allowances and benefits, if any, to which he is entitled. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

REGISTRATION DUTY – FIRST-TIME BUYERS - EXEMPTION 

(No. B/140) Mr K. Ramano (Third Member for Belle Rose & Quatre Bornes) asked 
the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  whether,  in  regard  to  the  exemption  of 
registration  duty  in  respect  of  the  first-time  buyers,  he  will  state  if  he  will  consider  the 
advisability  of  introducing  amendments  to  the  law  in  relation  thereto  so  as  not  to  restrict  the 
exemption to any price threshold. 

 

185 

Reply: Registration Duty  exemption is currently granted to a qualifying  first-time buyer 
provided that the value of the house purchased does not exceed four million rupees.  In the case 
of acquisition of bare land by a first-time buyer, the exemption threshold is set at one million 
rupees.  

The question of reviewing those thresholds, Madam Speaker, is a matter of fiscal policy 
decision and this is best considered in the context of the current budget exercise. I will, therefore, 
invite the hon. Member to be patient. 

 

DIABETES – CHILDREN - TREATMENT 

(No. B/141) Mr K. Ramano (Third Member for Belle Rose & Quatre Bornes) asked 
the  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  whether,  in  regard  to  diabetes,  he  will  state  the 
number  of  children  presently  under  treatment  in  relation  thereto,  indicating  if  Government  is 
envisaging a permanent sponsorship of medical treatment for such patients. 

Reply:  In reply to the first part of the question, I wish to inform the House that according 
to the National Diabetes Register, there are presently 520 Type 1 diabetic patients, of whom 180 
are below the age of 18.  As regards Type 2 diabetes, the number of children below 18 years is 
36. 

In regard to the second part of the question, I wish to emphasise that in Mauritius, health 

services, at all levels, from primary to tertiary is free of user cost. 

I wish to elaborate on the services that are presently provided to diabetic patients.  These 

are namely – 

•  comprehensive paediatric diabetic management programmes for such patients in all 

Regional Hospitals; 

•  support of all activities related to diabetes care by Diabetes Specialist Nurses; 
•  provision of glucose meters, testing strips as well as latest insulin analogues to all 
children with Type 1 diabetes aiming at achieving excellent control of blood sugar; 
•  conduct of open day activities whereby such patients are screened for eye, kidney 
and cardiac complications.  In addition their blood glucose level and oral health are 
assessed; 

186 

 
•  screening of students of Form III, that is between 13 to 14 years and Lower VI, that 
is  between  17  to  18  years  for  Non-Communicable  Disease  (NCD)  risk  factors.  
Those  who  are  obese  with  a  family  history  of  diabetes  are  referred  for  further 
investigations and follow up, and 

•  conduct of sensitisation and health education programme on diabetes on a regular 

basis to both patients and parents. 

KENSINGTON, POINTE AUX-SABLES – HOUSING UNITS – TREATMENT 

PLANT 

(No. B/142) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
housing units at Kensington in Pointe-aux-Sables, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain 
from the Wastewater Management Authority, information as to when they will be connected to 
the treatment plant. 

Reply:  The  hon.  Member  may  refer  to  the  reply  made  to  past  Parliamentary  Question 

A/19 on 25 March 2014. 

In  my  reply  to  PQ  B/79  of  last  Tuesday,  I  informed  the  House  that  the  Wastewater 
Management Authority has completed a detailed topographical survey and a preliminary design 
in  the  regions  of  Terasson,  Verger  Mangue,  Pointe-aux-Sables,  Petit  Verger  and  Kensington 
Place.  Based on prevailing rates, the cost for the project is estimated at Rs2.4 billion.   

Given  its  location,  the  region  of  Kensington  Place  can  be  connected  directly  to  the 
Montagne Jacquot Wastewater Treatment Plant under a separate project at an estimated cost of 
Rs80 m.  The project duration is some 18 months. 

The  Wastewater  Management  Authority  will  submit  the  project  to  the  Project  Plan 

Committee for approval and funding. 

TERTIARY EDUCATION SECTOR – QUALITY AUDIT - COMMITTEE 

(No. B/143) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) asked 
the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Science  Research 
whether, in regard to the tertiary education sector, she will state if a committee was set up to 
inquire into the quality audit thereof and, if so, when, indicating – 

 

187 

(a)  the composition thereof, and 
(b)  if the committee has completed its inquiry and, if so, will she table copy of the report 

in relation thereto and, if not, why not. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

TEC – EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR - POST 

(No. B/144) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg &Plaine Magnien) asked 
the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Science  Research 
whether, in regard to the Tertiary Education Commission, she will, for the benefit of the House, 
obtain therefrom, information as to if the Executive Director thereof has been dismissed and, if 
so, indicate if the post will be advertised internationally and, if so, when.  

(Vide reply to PQ No. B/117) 

 

NHDC – SOCIAL HOUSING PROJECTS 

 (No.  B/145)  Mr  A.  Ganoo  (First  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River)  asked  the 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and  Lands whether, in regard  to the social housing 
projects, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the National Housing Development 
Company Ltd., information as to the number of -  

(a) housing units built by the Company island-wide, since 2006 to 2014, and  

(b) house seekers presently enlisted at the Company, indicating the categorisation of the 

applicants in terms of monthly earnings. 

Reply: With regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed by the NHDC that during 
the period 2006 to 2014, 1,923 housing units have been constructed on 27 sites across the island; 
and these houses have already been allocated. 

As  for  part  (b)  of  the  question,  39,573  households  have  registered  themselves  at  the 

NHDC for a housing unit. The breakdown of their monthly household income is as follows - 

i. 

11,992 draw a monthly household income of less than Rs6,199; 

ii. 

iii. 

iv. 

v. 

vi. 

vii. 

 
14,123 draw a monthly household income between Rs6,200 and Rs10,000; 

188 

8,157 have a monthly household income between Rs10,001 and Rs14,999; 

3,043 households have a monthly income between Rs15,000 and Rs19,999; 

1,179 have a monthly income between Rs20,000 and Rs24,999; 

492 draw a monthly income between Rs25,000 and Rs29,999, and  

the remaining 587 households are families with monthly household income of Rs30,000 
and above. 

 

SAVANNE & BLACK RIVER - HOUSING UNITS 

(No. B/146) Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the Vice-
Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  whether,  in  regard  to  the  housing  problem  in 
Constituency No. 14, Savanne and Black River, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from 
the National Housing Development Company Ltd., information as to - 

(a) the number of - 

(i) housing units built by the Company thereat, since 2006 to 2014, and 

(ii) applicants living thereat seeking a housing unit from the Company, and  

(b)  if  the  Company  has  any  project  for  the  construction  of  housing  units  and,  if  so, 

indicate in which region/s. 

Reply:  With  regard  to  part  (a)  (i)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  by  the  NHDC  that 
during the 8-year period from 2006 to 2014, the Company has constructed 120 housing units on 
two sites in Constituency No. 14, namely in Bambous (78 units) and Camp La Colle (42 units). 

 As regards part (a) (ii) of the question, 1,681 families living in that Constituency have 

applied to the NHDC for a housing unit. 

 With regard to part (b) of the question, about future housing projects in Constituency No. 
14, three sites namely Bassin-Quatre Bornes, Cascavelle and La Gaulette have been identified.  
The NHDC is presently working on a project proposal for the construction of some 200 housing 

 

189 

units on those sites. In consultation with the MSPA and Medine Sugar Estate, other suitable sites 
are being prospected for future housing development in that Constituency. 

 

PAILLES TREATMENT PLANT - REHABILITATION 

(No.  B/147)  Mr  O.  Mahomed  (Third  Member  for  Port  Louis  South &  Port  Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  whether,  in 
regard to the Rehabilitation and Modernisation of the Pailles Treatment Plant Project, he will, for 
the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  information  as  to  where  matters  stand,  indicating  the 
improvement  expected  thereof  that  will  be  brought  to  the  distribution  of  potable  water  in  the 
region of Port Louis as a result thereof. 

Reply: The works at the Pailles Water Treatment Plant consist of the upgrading of the 
existing 30,000m3/day slow sand filters and the construction of a new Rapid Gravity Filter of 
capacity  80,000m3/day.  Works  started  in  July  2013  and  the  contractual  completion  date  is  14 
March 2015.  

I  am,  however,  informed  by  the  Central  Water  Authority  that  the  plant  will  now  be 

commissioned by end April 2015.   

I am further informed that, according to the contractor, the delay is due to - 

(i) 

(ii) 

the late delivery of the Mechanical and Electrical equipment as a result of cyclone 
Bansi, and  

the procurement of the filtration sand following a ban on the export of sand by the 
Saudi  Authorities.  The  sand  is  now  being  procured  from  India  and  will  be 
delivered by end March 2015. 

The  new  plant  will  treat  80,000  m3/day  at  a  higher  turbidity  condition  of  400  NTU 
(Nephelometric  Turbidity  Units)  as  compared  to  15  NTU  presently.    It  will  ensure  an 
uninterrupted water supply in the region Port Louis, more importantly during and after periods of 
heavy rain when the turbidity of water in the Grand River North West is excessively high.  

 

 

