 

No. 37 of 2015 

 

1 

 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

FIRST SESSION 

 

TUESDAY 27 OCTOBER 2015 

 

 

 

2 

 

CONTENTS 

 

PAPERS LAID  

MOTION 

BILLS (Public) 
E.S.E. (2014) of 2015 

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 
KCMG, QC  
Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 
GCSK  
Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 
Communications 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo, GCSK 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 
Utilities 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 
Sinatambou 
Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 
Perraud 
Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 

Integration 

and  Economic 

of 
Minister 
Empowerment 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 
International Trade 
Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 
Family Welfare 
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance, 
Institutional  Reforms,  Minister 
Technology, 
Communication and Innovation 
Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 

of 

 

Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, 
QPM 
Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 
Cheong, MSK 
Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 

4 

Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 
Institutions 
Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands 
Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 
Disaster and Beach Management  
Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms 

Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and 
Training 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Gopall, Mr Navin (Temporary Transfer to 
RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 37 of 2015 

 

Sitting of 27 October 2015 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 

7 

PAPERS LAID 

 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table - 

 Prime Minister’s Office – 

Certificate of Urgency in respect of the following Bills (In Original) - 

(a)  The Constitution (Amendment) Bill (No. XXIX of 2015).  
(b)  The Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill (No. XXX of 

2015). 

(c)  The Asset Recovery (Amendment) Bill (No. XXXI of 2015).  
(d)  The Report of the Director of Audit on the Financial Statements of the 

Maurice Ile Durable Fund for the year ended 31 December 2014.  

 

 
 

A.    Ministry of Finance and Economic Development - 

The Investment Promotion and Protection Agreement (United Arab 
Emirates) Regulations 2015.  (Government Notice No. 205 of 2015) 

B.    Ministry of  Local Government  – 

The District Council of Pamplemousses (Traffic Centre) Regulations 2015. 
(Government Notice No. 208 of 2015)  

C.    Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection  – 

(a)  The Consumer Protection (Price Label) (Amendment) Regulations 

2015. (Government Notice No. 206 of 2015)  

 

(b)  The Consumer Protection (Control of Imports) (Amendment No. 5) 

Regulations 2015. (Government Notice No. 207 of 2015). 

D.    Ministry of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training – 

 

 International Labour Standards – Paper on proposed action by the 
Government of Mauritius on a Protocol and Recommendation adopted by 
the International Labour Conference at its 103rd Session (June 2014). 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

8 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10 (2) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move that all the business on today’s Order 

Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

PUBLIC BILLS 

First Reading 

On motion made and seconded the following Bills were read a first time – 

(i) 

(ii) 

The Constitution (Amendment) Bill (No. XXIX of 2015) 

The Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill (No. XXX of 2015) 

(iii) 

The Asset Recovery (Amendment) Bill (No. XXXI of 2015) 

Second Reading 

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION (2014) BILL  

(NO. XVII of 2015) 

Order for Second Reading read.  
The Minister of Finance and Economic Development (Mr S. Lutchmeenaraidoo): 
Madam  Speaker,  I  move  that  the  Supplementary  Appropriation  (2014)  Bill  (No  XVII  of 
2015) be read a second time. 

This  Bill  provides  for  the  appropriation  of  an  additional  sum  of  one  billion,  seven 
hundred  and  fifty-eight  million,  two  hundred  and  twenty-two  thousand  and  seven  hundred 
and fifty-four rupees  (Rs1,758,222,754) in respect of services of Government for  financial 
year 2014. 

Madam  Speaker,  this  is  the  second  time  this  year  that  I  am  presenting  a  Bill  to 
supplement an Appropriation Act passed by the previous Government. The first one was in 
April 2015 for financial year 2013. Today, it is in respect of financial year 2014. 

I have to do so by virtue of Section 105 (3) of the Constitution which provides that 
when any Vote requires additional funds over and above what has already been appropriated, 

 

9 

those  additional  funds  must  be  appropriated  by  the  National  Assembly  through  a 
Supplementary Appropriation Bill. 

The Appropriation (2014) Act had made provision for government expenditure of a 
total  sum  not  exceeding  Rs83.6  billion  for  financial  year  2014.  The  sum  actually  spent 
amounted to Rs77.0 billion, that is, Rs6.6 billion less than the total sum appropriated.  

However,  spending  in  four  (4)  Votes  of  Expenditure  exceeded  their  approved 

amounts. These were by way of reallocation of funds. 

The  Votes  of  Expenditure  and  the  sums  requiring  supplementary  appropriation  are 
listed in the Schedule to the Bill.  Details on the items of expenditure concerned are set out in 
the  Estimates  of  Supplementary  Expenditure  (ESE)  that  have  already  been  laid  before  the 
National Assembly. 

The main areas requiring Supplementary Appropriation are as follows – 

• 

first, Rs215 m., to cater for expenses resulting from  the early holding of the 
National Assembly Elections in December 2014; 

• 

•  second,  Rs756  m.,  for  meeting  the  costs  of  compulsory  land  acquisition  of 
various  projects  under  the  Road  Decongestion  Programme  such  as  Terre 
Rouge-Verdun Link Road and Port Louis Ring Road. In addition, funds were 
required for acquisition of land in connection with the Bassin Blanc National 
Park Project;  
third, Rs277 m., mainly for rehabilitation of roads across the country by RDA 
and  implementation  of  community-based  infrastructure  projects  by  NDU. 
Additional funds were also required following a review of the rates payable 
under the Free Travel Scheme to NTC and other bus companies and operators 
as from January 2014, and finally, 
fourth, an amount of Rs510 m., for enabling payment of a minimum monthly 
pension of Rs5,000 to old age pensioners, widows and invalid persons as from 
the month of December 2014 including the end of year bonus. In fact, in line 
with our pledge to the nation, this measure was among the first measures this 
Government decided to implement immediately after taking office. 

• 

Madam Speaker, the House may note that the actual budget deficit for financial year 

 

10 

2014 amounted to Rs12.6 billion or 3.2% of GDP, that is, same as budgeted.   

However, public sector debt, as defined by the IMF, reached Rs237.7 billion at end 
December 2014, that is, Rs6.4 billion higher than the budget estimate. As percentage of GDP, 
it works out to 61.5% compared to the budget estimate of 57.8%.  

For  the  purpose  of  debt  ceiling,  public  sector  debt  amounted  to  Rs209.3  billion.  It 

represented 54.1% of GDP compared to the estimates of 53.2%.  

With these remarks, Madam Speaker, I now commend this Bill to the House. 

Mr Sawmynaden rose and seconded. 

(11.40 a.m.) 

Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis  Central):  
Madam Speaker, it is quite remarkable that for the fourth time this year, this august Assembly 
is called upon to vote an Appropriation Bill. In March, we have had the Appropriation Bill 
relating  to  the  six-month  period  ending  30  June  2015,  followed  by  the  appropriation  Bill 
relating  to  the  financial  year  2015/2016.  In  April,  we  have  had  the  Supplementary 
Appropriation  Bill  (2013)  in  respect  of  financial  year  2013,  and  now,  we  have  the 
Supplementary Appropriation (2014) Bill in respect of financial year 2014. Once again, the 
Appropriation Bill is taken on a Tuesday so that Members of the Opposition cannot ask PNQ 
and PQs. 

It is a fact! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, we are being called upon to approve public expenditure in excess of 
what  had  been  approved  by  this  House  in  2013,  in  the  last  Budget  when  hon.  Xavier-Luc 
Duval was Minister of Finance under the Navin Ramgoolam Government. Why? Because as 
the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  has  rightly  pointed  out,  section 
105(3)  of  the  Constitution  requires  the  National  Assembly  to  approve,  by  a  way  of  a 
Supplementary  Appropriation  Bill,  any  money  that  has  been  expended  on  any  head  of 
expenditure, in excess of the amount approved in the Budget. This time, we are being called 
upon  to  approve  Estimates  -  it  is  not  even  the  final  figures  -  of  Recurrent  and  Capital 

 

11 

Expenditure to the tune of Rs1.7 billion in excess of the amount budgeted and approved in 
2013.  

Madam Speaker, every year we criticise the system; every year we criticise the fact 
that the House is put before a fait accompli; every year we criticise the fact that we cannot, in 
Parliament,  challenge,  block,  disallow  or  even  reduce  the  expenditure  because  they  have 
already been incurred by the time they come before the House. But in vain! Every year it is 
the same story and this year is no exception. Government may change, but the system is not 
changing.  It  is  comical  to  see,  Madam  Speaker,  that  the  Government  of  the  day,  today,  is 
having to condone the additional expenditure incurred by the former Government. Although, 
I suppose la pilule est moins amère vu que l’ancien grand argentier se trouve toujours au 
sein du nouveau gouvernement ; c’était son budget. 

Of course, they are those expenditures which were not foreseeable and we have no 
qualms about them. But all too often, the additional expenditure is the result of lack of proper 
planning.  All  too  often, Ministries  and  Departments  concerned  did  not  do  their  homework 
properly  and  underestimated  expenditures.  All  too  often,  the  excess  of  expenditures  result 
from mismanagement, recklessness and, if not outright, waste. We cannot continue, Madam 
Speaker, with a system which encourages Ministries and Departments to spend beyond what 
Parliament has approved in its Budget. Under the current system, Ministries can overspend 
knowing fully well that Parliament will be bound to approve their additional expenditures ex 
post facto after the event. Truly, Madam Speaker, it is a futile exercise today to come before 
this Parliament, at Committee Stage, ask questions about expenditures when we will not be 
able  to  change  anything.  The  money  has  already  been  spent.  Therefore,  Parliament  is 
deprived … 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Don’t interrupt, please! Hon. Member, please proceed! 

Mr Uteem: Parliament is deprived of its constitutional role to scrutinise the Executive 
and make it accountable for the use of public funds. We should be able, in this House, to 
question expenditure before they  are incurred. Not after! The power of the purse  - as it is 
currently  referred  to  the  power  of  Parliament  to  control  the  expenditure  incurred  by  the 
Executive - is redundant when it comes to approving the Supplementary Appropriation Bill. 
Elsewhere, Government has fallen and had been forced to call general elections because it 

 

12 

could  not  get  Appropriation  Bill  or  Supplementary  Appropriation  Bill  through  Parliament. 
So,  this  exercise  that  is  being  carried  out  today  should  not  be  reduced  to  merely  rubber 
stamping what the Executive has already done. 

Madam  Speaker,  there  are  many  ways  in  which  we  can  improve  the  system.  For 
example, whenever a Ministry expects to exceed the amount that has been appropriated, it 
could notify the Minister of Finance and the latter can come before this House with a specific 
Supplementary Appropriation Bill before the Ministry actually incurs additional expenditure. 
This was something which the then Minister of Finance, hon. Xavier-Luc Duval did in 2013. 
He  approved  an  Additional  Supplementary  Appropriation  Bill  in  2013  itself  before  the 
amount was incurred. Of course, to avoid multiplicity of supplementary Appropriation Bills, 
we could impose a threshold of, say 10% or 15% for each item of expenditure, so that only 
where a Ministry is expected to exceed the appropriated amount by 10% or 15%, it will come 
before the House for approval. I am not reinventing the wheel here, Madam Speaker. This is 
a system that exists already in other Commonwealth jurisdictions. For example, in Kenya, the 
Constitution,  like  Mauritius,  requires  Parliament  to  approve  by  way  of  Supplementary 
Appropriation,  any  amount  in  excess  of  what  had  been  appropriated.  They  have  to  do  it 
within two weeks of the amount spent. What is interesting in the Constitution of Kenya, and I 
quote –  

“In  any  particular  financial  year,  the  National  Government  may  not  spend  - 
under this article - more than 10% of the sum appropriated by Parliament for 
that financial year unless in special circumstances, Parliament has approved a 
higher percentage.” 

So,  therefore,  in  Kenya  the  Executive  cannot  spend  beyond  10%  of  what  had  been 
appropriated in the Budget. 

Madam  Speaker,  maybe  the  time  has  come  for  Parliament  to  set  up  a  Budget  and 
Appropriation Committee which exists elsewhere. For example, in Kenya, there is a Budget 
and Appropriation Committee to investigate, enquire into and  report on all matters related to 
coordination, control and monitoring of the national Budget. The Budget and Appropriation 
Committee  discusses  and  reviews  the  estimates  and  makes  recommendation  to  the  House. 
Maybe the time has come for a thorough rethink of the budgetary process. Maybe we should 
take  stock  of  what  is  happening  in  other  countries  and  follow  the  recommendation  of  the 
OECD and strengthen the power of Parliament in controlling public expenditure and ensuring 

 

13 

greater fiscal transparency, responsibility and accountability.  Maybe the time has come to 
change, to move from cash basis accounting to accrual accounting and  budgeting. We can 
learn from the experience of Australia and New Zealand in that respect. Maybe we can use 
fair value accounting when estimating costs in line with what is done in the private sector 
cost estimate practices. 

But then, again, Madam Speaker, maybe I am being too optimistic. The only change 
which this Government has done relating to budgeting so far, is to move away from project-
based  budgeting  to  line-based  budgeting  which  generally  is  recognised  as  a  major  leap 
behind. The truth is, probably, Madam Speaker, that the Executive is favour of the current 
system which allows them to spend, behind the back of Parliament, and not having to account 
for anything until after it is too late for Parliament to intervene. 

Madam Speaker, turning to the Bill, there are certain … 

(Interruptions) 

Turning  to  the  specific  expenditure  that  we  have  been  called  to  approve  under  the 
Bill,  there  are  certain  expenditures  which  clearly  were  not  envisaged  by  hon.  Xavier-Luc 
Duval when he presented his budget in 2013 and we have no qualms approving them. There 
is,  for  example,  the  Rs200  m.  additional  expenditure  incurred  in  holding  the  general 
elections. We have also no issue when it comes to the Rs715 m. that is being appropriated by 
the Ministry of Social Security in line with the Government decision to increase pension. But 
when  it  comes  to  approving  Rs839  m.  additional  expenditure  incurred  by  the  Ministry  of 
Housing  and  Land,  we  have  serious  reservation.  This  amount  is  almost  300%  above  the 
Rs300 m. that had been appropriated in 2014. What does this item of expenditure refer to – 
from  the  Estimates  of  Supplementary  Expenditure;  the  Rs839  m.  relates  to  additional 
provision required for the payment of compensation related to the compulsory acquisition of 
land, in connection with major Government project - it is not even a complete list - such as 
Bagatelle Valentina link road, Terre Rouge Verdun link road, Port Louis ring road etc.  

How come, Madam Speaker, that such a huge amount of Rs800 m. plus had not been 
budgeted in hon. Xavier-Luc Duval’s last budget? Surely, the projects I have referred to were 
on going before 2014, and there is a planning... 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order please!  

 

14 

(Interruptions) 

Allow the hon. Member to proceed, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Uteem: There is a Planning Division... 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, I said! 

Mr Uteem: There is a  Planning Division and  a Survey Division at the  Ministry of 
Housing  and  Lands,  whose  function  is  precisely  to  identify  land  for  acquisition  and 
compensate beneficiaries whose property is being acquired. Did the Planning Division and 
Survey Division provide the correct information at the time the budget was prepared in 2013? 
Madam  Speaker,  in  July  2015,  the  National  Audit  Office  submitted  a  Performance  Audit 
Report precisely on acquisition and use of lands for Government project and not surprisingly 
the National Audit Office was extremely critical of the existing procedure, and I quote – 

“Ministry of Housing and Lands has not always been able to acquire land ...” 

(Interruptions) 

“(...) on a timely basis”. 

 Let  us  put  something  right  in  perspective.  I  am  not  making  any  controversial 

comments, but the hon. Minister was in Government in 2010 .... 

(Interruptions) 

…and they would still have been, were it not for Medpoint... 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Member, please! Hon.  Uteem, you have to address the Chair, 

first thing, and second thing, come back to what we are discussing.  

Mr Uteem: The comment is from the other side. I am just putting it in perspective. 

They were together. 

(Interruptions) 

 
Madam Speaker: Order, I have said! Allow the hon. Member to proceed!  

15 

Mr  Uteem:  So,  what  the  National  Audit  Office  said  is  that  the  Ministry  has  not 
always been able to acquire land on a timely basis and in a most economical manner. This 
was  mainly  attributed  to  long  procedure  as  well  as  the  absence  of  a  time  frame  for  other 
parties  to  response  to  the  Ministry.  The  National  Audit  Office  criticised  the  Valuation 
Department for the delay in assessing the compensation payable to people whose land was 
compulsorily acquired. The delay resulted in the Ministry having to incur millions of rupees 
in  interest  in  additional  compensation  and  we  are  now  being  called  upon  to  approve  what 
essentially are leeches from the former Ministry and their Officers. 

Worse,  Madam  Speaker,  the  National  Audit  Office  observed  several  plots  of  land, 
acquired  and  vested  in  the  selected  Ministries  and  Government  Department  on  or  prior  to 
year  2010,  were  still  not  developed.  Acquisition  made  without  a  firm  commitment  to 
implement project. So, we are paying compulsory acquisition for land that is not even being 
used.  Madam  Speaker,  as  a  barrister,  I  have  had  the  chance  to  advise  people  from  my 
Constituency  in  connection  with  the  compulsory  acquisition  of  land  for  the  Ring  Road 
Project and I have first-hand experience of the lashes, the inefficiencies, the delay at the level 
of the Ministry. Now that we have a new Minister, I hope that the hon. Minister will come 
and  implement  all  the  recommendations  that  have  been  made  by  the  National  Audit  in  its 
report.  

Coming back to the Bill, we are asked to vote an additional sum of Rs270 m. for the 

Ministry of Public Infrastructure, despite having appropriated ... 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon.  Mohamed, please! Don’t disturb! Hon. Jhugroo!  No cross- 

talking! 

Mr Uteem: Despite having appropriated Rs4 billion in 2014.  And, in fact, although 
we are asked to approve Rs276 m. under this head, really what we are approving is Rs777 m. 
additional  expenditure,  but  this  is  offset  against  an  under-spending  of  Rs300  m.  by  the 
Ministry. MPI, Madam Speaker, is what I call a serial over-spender. If I am not mistaken, in 
every  Supplementary  Appropriation  Bill  that  have  been  asked  to  vote  and  comment  upon 
since  I  have  become  an  MP,  in  every  single  one  of  them,  there  was  a  vote  for  additional 
expenditure  for  MPI.  It  is  therefore  without  surprise  that  once  again  there  has  been 

 

16 

overspending  under  the  item  of  erection  of  tents  for  religious  activities  and  festivals.  This 
time, we are asked to appropriate an additional sum of Rs5 m., which roughly represents 25 
increase over the Rs20 m. or so voted and still ... 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed! I have drawn your attention that you disturb the 

hon. Member. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Uteem: ... and still we do not have any transparency as to how money is allocated. 
We still do not know what are the criteria used to allocate the funding. How many festivals 
and religious activities are we talking about? Does each socio- cultural organisation get the 
same size of tent? Now, that we have a new Minister, I hope again - I am a very positive 
optimistic person - that he will publish the eligibility criteria and ensure fair and transparent 
allocation of tents. We all know Madam Speaker, how Mauritians are religious, we all know 
the  demand  for  tents  whenever  there  is  a  religious  activity,  but  then  those  tents  should  be 
used more to provide shade and shelter to members of public who attend these ceremonies 
and functions unless to provide a platform for political parasites. 

The  bulk  of  the  additional  expenditure  not  surprisingly  once  again  relates  to 
contractors’ fees for work related to road resurfacing and construction of bridges. There are, 
in fact, two items of vote under item 909/103, more than Rs222 m. additional expenditure has 
been incurred which represents more than 25 increase on the initial Rs800 m. budgeted and 
appropriated in 2014. Under item 9/106, an additional amount of Rs121 m. has been incurred 
to  meet  payment  to  contractors  in  relation  to  work  undertaken  for  upgrading  of  roads, 
construction and upgrading of cremation grounds, cemeteries and sport facilities. This item 
represents 50% increase in the budgeted amount of Rs237 m.  

Now, Madam Speaker, how do we explain all these additional expenditure? Do they 
relate to variation cost, claims made by the contractors? Do they relate to resurfacing of roads 
which were not scheduled to be resurfaced? What criteria were used to determine which road 
to resurface and which sport facility to upgrade? Was the work evenly distributed across the 
island, across various Constituencies? In my Constituency, Madam Speaker, there are roads 
that have to be resurfaced, there are bridges that have to be repaired, there are sports facilities 

 

17 

that have to be upgraded and I am sure it is the same in every hon. Member’s Constituency. 
So, what were the criteria used to allocate this extra amount?  

Of course, if it is Budget time, at Committee Stage we can ask, and we do ask for a 
list of all the scheduled work, but if it is ex post facto, as we are now, we have no control, we 
have  no  way  of  ascertaining  why  one  region  has  been  favoured  over  the  other,  why  one 
Constituency has been favoured over the other. This is why, Madam Speaker, I stated earlier 
that  we  cannot  continue  with  the  current  system.  We  need  a  complete  overhaul  of  our 
budgetary approval mechanism. We can’t keep on approving expenditure which have been 
incurred without our knowledge. There should be discipline, transparency and accountability. 

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

(12.01 p.m.) 

Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix): Thank you, Madam 
Speaker.  I  will  be  very  brief  as  this  is  a  traditional  year,  year  in,  year  out  Supplementary 
Appropriation.  

Madam Speaker, many of us were here to approve the Appropriation 2014; I was here. 
We did approve, after a lot of criticisms, which, as Members of the Opposition, we did. We 
appropriated the amount for 2014 and at the end of the year there were savings, there were 
expenses  beyond  what  have  been  appropriated.    When  I  went  through  the  Estimates  of 
Supplementary  Expenditure,  the  big  question  I  asked  myself  is:  how  can  you  supplement 
something that was not appropriated for in 2014? The word itself does not stand good. There 
was no appropriation, how can you supplement it? I did not approve it, even if we were in the 
Opposition. The hon. Members in Government, at that time, approved something that was not 
appropriated.  

At  page  11  of  the  Estimates  of  Supplementary  Expenditure,  under  item  31121  - 
Provision  required  for  the  purchase  of  two  lorries  in  replacement  of  old  ones.  It  was  not 
appropriated in 2014, how did the Ministry approve to buy two lorries if there was no fund? 
Did the hon. Minister or the Ministry or whoever  took it on themselves to approve this sum 
and, today, we come and put that in front of this House to be approved? I would like the hon. 
Minister  to  explain  to  this  House,  and  to  me  personally,  how  come  we  are  going  to 
supplement something that is not appropriated in the last Bill?  

 

18 

There is another item at page 15 which is normally an ongoing grant that we give to 
certain institutions.  Was that forgotten in 2014, Rs16 m. to the MSC Ltd?  It should have 
been appropriated at that time. Was that forgotten, and then they woke up and say: ‘Oh, we 
forgot to give MSC the Rs16 m!”  Is it now that we are in 2015 that they come to tell us to 
supplement this and to ask for the approval of this House to pay Rs16 m? Here also, I would 
like the hon. Minister to explain to the House what is the procedure that the Government - I 
won’t say this Government but the previous Government, probably the hon. Minister will not 
be  able  to  answer  what  the  hon.  Minister  did,  but  there  is  an  ex-Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development who is in the Government, but he won’t be able to take the floor. 

On page 21, also… 

(Interruptions) 

 (Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! Hon. Henry! 

Dr. Sorefan: On page 21, Madam Speaker, here also we see something of the same 
nature, no appropriation, but coming to tell this House to supplement it. It does not fit in my 
understanding at all! 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan, this has always been the practice. So, there is 

nothing new in it. 

(Interruptions) 

Dr. Sorefan: Madam Speaker, if a Member tells me because I am a dentist, ‘rasse les 
dents’, I think you have to tell him that Dr. Sorefan is not un arracheur de dents.  I am a 
professional!  

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Dr.  Sorefan!  Hon.  Dr.  Sorefan,  please!  Come  back  to  the 
point we are discussing, please. You have got to intervene within the framework of this ESE. 
So, please, come back to this Bill. 

Dr. Sorefan: Of course, Madam Speaker.  I am trying to get clarification. If this is the 
natural way Government goes on, so next year we are going to have a lot of supplements that 
have not been appropriated. That’s what I am clearing.  

 

19 

 Madam Speaker, I have been a professional for 35 years; I will not accept anyone to 

insult me in this House. A lot of people respect me … 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Dr.  Sorefan,  please!  As  Speaker,  I  won’t  allow  any  hon. 

Member to insult another hon. Member in this House. 

Dr. Sorefan: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, I will ask a few questions 
at Committee Stage, for clarification. Like I said, I will be very brief. I wanted to know how 
we supplement something that has not been appropriated and you have answered already on 
behalf of the hon. Minister that it is the normal routine. So, I will just say thank you to you 
and to this House.  We will come at Committee Stage for further questions. 

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Sesungkur! 

(12.07 p.m.) 

Mr D. Sesungkur (First Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE): Thank  you, 
Madam  Speaker.  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  grateful  to  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development for initiating this debate today which will help to ventilate the issues 
which have given rise to the Supplementary Budget. But before I go into the subject, I heard 
hon.  Uteem  saying  that  the  timing  of  this  Bill  is  purposely  done  so  as  not  to  allow  the 
Opposition to put their Private Notice Question or their questions. I must say that we have not 
gone as far as the Opposition last year when the Parliament was closed for nearly a year.  

(Interruptions) 

This is a serious Bill, this is an important Bill and it needs the attention of the House.  
Secondly, when we say that it is futile to debate, but this is needed under the Constitution. It 
is  important  for  the  House  to  approve  the  supplementary  expenditure.  In  fact,  the 
Appropriation  Bill  or  the  Supplementary  Bill  is  a  legislative  motion  that  authorises  the 
Government to spend money. It is a Bill which is required and any amount which is spent by 
Government needs the approval of the House.  

Having said so, that brings me to another matter. The Bill before the House today 
relates  to  the  Financial  Year  2014.  As  hon.  Dr.  Sorefan  just  mentioned,  there  is  always  a 
problem in making estimates. We can only go to some extent to estimate expenditure for the 

 

20 

future. We cannot be accurate about expenses.  So, that is why often we have a variance from 
the  budget.  You  may  have  items  which  were  not  expected,  which  cropped  up  like  for  the 
General Election.  So, this is something which is current and which happens everywhere in 
the world. 

Madam  Speaker,  while  this  is  an  important  piece  of  legislation,  the  House  needs  to 
approve those expenditures, yet it is equally appropriate to highlight that the present Bill is a 
mere technicality in the sense that there is no decision to be taken because the money has 
been spent. So, this Bill is a legal requirement, but we cannot do anything about changing 
what has already happened. I, therefore, do not intend to take much time of this House as 
whatever  has  happened  has  happened  and  we  simply  need  the  endorsement  of  the  hon. 
Members.  We simply need the approval of the hon. Members, the approval of the House. 

As detailed in the Schedule to the Bill, the approval of the House is required in regard 
to four budget items totalling a sum of Rs1,758,222,754. I wish to deal with each item in turn.   

The first item concerns an amount of Rs215 m. spent for the organisation of the last 
General Election in 2014 which allowed Mauritius to maintain its democratic principle and 
the democratic rights of our citizens. I sincerely think that this is money well spent. 

Another item which has necessitated additional disbursement of funds is the payment 
for the increase in  pension which amounted to Rs510 m. Again here, the funds have been 
applied for a  good cause by providing a much needed financial assistance to the poor and 
vulnerable  group. This,  Madam Speaker, is a  cost for social stability, as the hon. Minister 
often says: “an investment so that all of us can live in peace in this country.” 

Furthermore, an amount of Rs755 m. has been spent for the compulsory acquisition of 
land by the Ministry of Housing and Lands for development purposes and is classified under 
item Capital Expenditure.  This is good value for money. 

Last year, when we went to the poll, already there was widespread concern in the public 
about  the  way  money  was  being  spent  by  the  previous  regime.  This  Bill  naturally  creates 
apprehension  in  the  mind  of  the  public  with  regard  to  the  Road  Rehabilitation  Project 
undertaken  by  the  Ministry  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport,  where  an  excess 
amount of Rs277 m. has been spent. The queries of the public were legitimate as it is true that 
the previous regime made a blatant abuse of public funds. We all know that the additional 

 

21 

budget  has  been  mostly  out  of  exaggerated  spending  of  funds  on  election’s  eve  to  make 
voters happy, and in some cases, money thrown to the drain. 

Madam Speaker:   Hon. Sesungkur,  I  am sorry  I have to interrupt  you here.  Come 

back to the subject matter! 

Mr Sesungkur:  Yes, I am coming back, Madam Speaker.  We all know the number of 
projects which have been executed and where the queries of hon. Uteem are valid when we 
look at the number of projects which have been executed in Constituency No. 9 by the former 
Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport.  The  Minister  gave  personalised 
treatment to his agents using public funds by asphalting private properties… 

Madam  Speaker:    Hon.  Sesungkur,  please  make  your  comments  on  why  this  extra 

money has been used and query this! 

Mr  Sesungkur:    That was  the  situation,  Madam  Speaker.  The  stark  truth  is  that  the 

previous Government had wasted public money. 

The  other  point  I  would  like  to  make,  Madam  Speaker,  is  that  ever  since  the  new 
Government  took  office,  a  series  of  decisions  and  actions  have  been  taken  to  ensure  that 
public money is spent judiciously and that we do not live beyond our means. For example, a 
new budgetary system was adopted as opposed to the Programme-Based Budgeting to have 
greater  visibility  and  control  over  Government  spending.  The  Government  is  seriously 
working to curtail our budget deficit sooner rather than later.  

The  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  took  a  wise  decision  to  set  up  a  dedicated  Ministry  for 
Good  Governance  precisely  to  ensure  efficiency  and  effectiveness  in  the  management  of 
public funds. We, on this side of the House, are doing everything which is necessary to get 
out of the rotten situation we inherited in December 2014 and we will be coming with a new 
Bill called the ‘Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill’ shortly. We need a change, 
not just in laws and practices, but in ethics, culture and responsibility. All the above steps will 
ensure that any of the spending or abuse of public funds is eliminated and I am confident we 
are on the right track. I, therefore, support the proposal of the hon. Minister. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development! 

 

(12.16 p.m.)  

22 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, I have taken note of the various proposals 
made by hon. Members and wish to thank them for their proposals.  Naturally, when coming 
at Committee Stage, we will have the occasion of seeing line by line items of expenditure and 
come with questions which will be dealt with. 

Therefore, I again commend this Bill to the House. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Bill read a second time and committed. 

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

ESTIMATES OF SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE (2014) OF 2015 

The Chairperson: We will be starting on page 2 and I propose to take page by page.  

So, if you have got any question, page by page we will proceed.  

Vote 1-5 Office of the Electoral Commissioner was called. 

The Chairperson:  Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  Under item 21110 on page 2, Additional 
provision  required  for  the  recruitment  of  two  former  electoral  cadre  as  Advisers  in  the 
context of elections, may I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether their contract has 
been terminated or they are still under contract with the Electoral Commission? 

The Chairperson: Pending you get the information! 

The  Prime  Minister:    Additional  provisions  required  for  the  recruitment  of  two 

Advisers on contract as from 23 May 2014 as follows – 

(i) 

Mr Sewnarain Awatar, former Deputy Chief Electoral Officer, and 

(ii)  Mr Mooroogessen Veerasamy, former Principal Electoral Officer. 

The salary drawn by each of the above-named was Rs48,600 per month.  The Advisers were 
appointed in the context of the review of the Local Government Act and the holding of the 
National Assembly Elections 2014 and the Municipal Council Elections 2015.  The contract 
of employment of both the above-named was terminated on 23 July 2015.  

 
The Chairperson:  Hon. Ganoo!  

23 

Mr Ganoo:  The question has been answered. 

The Chairperson: Yes, pages 2 to 4! No question! 

Vote 1-5 Office of the Electoral Commissioner (Rs215,422,993) was on question put, 

agreed to. 

Vote 4-1 Vice-Prime Minister’s Office, Ministry of Housing and Lands was called. 

(Interruptions) 

The Chairperson: Yes, page by page. 

(Interruptions) 

Page 5! No! Pages 6 and 7! 

Mr  Baloomoody:  On  page  7,  on  item  28212023  NHDC  –  Grant  to  Syndics  for 
maintenance of NHDC Housing Estates. May I know from the hon. Vice-Prime Minister the 
number of NHDC complexes and whether the grant to the Syndics is continuing now or is 
there another process? 

Mr Soodhun: This is an additional provision required for the payment of mangement 

fees for the syndics for period 2012 to 2014, that is, in all 46 Syndics. 

Mr Baloomoody: So, we are continuing with that grant? 

Mr Soodhun: Yes. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Ramano! On page 8 ! 

Mr  Ramano:  Est-ce  que  je  peux  savoir  du  ministre  la  somme  payée  à  ce  jour  en 
terme de compensation pour la compulsory acquisition des terrains faisant partie de l’Avenue 
des  Tulipes  à  Quatre  Bornes ?  Est-ce  que  cette  somme  là  inclut  aussi  les  différentes 
contestations qu’il y a, à présent, des différents propriétaires? 

Mr Soodhun: Madam Chairperson, this provision has been made for the following 

projects – 

•  Bagatelle-Valentina Link Road; 
•  Terre Rouge Road-Verdun Link Road; 
•  Port Louis Link Road; 
•  Access to Tian-Li Industrial Estate; 

 

24 

Improvement of Quartier Militaire Road Bypass at Valentina; 

•  Widening of Avenue des Tulipes, Quatre Bornes; 
•  National Park Project - Bassin Blanc; 
• 
•  Phoenix-Beaux Songes Link Road; 
•  Construction of Savanne District Council; 
•  Construction of Stadium/Sports Complex at Rivières des Anguilles; 
•  Constructions of A1-M1 Link Road; 
•  Multi-purpose Complex at Parisot Phoenix. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Ramano! 

Mr Ramano: La question est précisément pour l’Avenue des Tulipes. Est-ce que je 
peux  avoir  la  réponse  pour  l’Avenue  des  Tulipes,  quelle  est  la  somme  qui  a  été  dépensée 
jusqu’à ce jour en terme de compensation? 

Mr Soodhun: For Tulipes? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Ramano: For Avenue des Tulipes, Quatre Bornes. 

Mr Soodhun: I would request the hon. Minister to come with a substantive question 

because this provision has been made for… 

The Chairperson: Yes. Hon. Members, please ask as to why this additional sum has 

been spent. Hon. Members cannot ask as to why up to date what sum has been spent. 

Mr  Ramano:  La  question,  Madame  la  présidente,  est-ce  cette  somme  là  inclut  les 

différentes contestations en Cour? 

The Chairperson: This is another matter. 

Mr Soodhun: The figure that  I have is Rs1,790,000. Payment has already effected 

and the remaining is Rs52,504. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Ganoo! 

Mr Ganoo: On the same item, Madam Chairperson, but lower down, item 31410(vi) 
the National Park Project – Bassin Blanc. Can I ask the hon Vice-Prime Minister what was 
the  amount  of  money  spent  on  that  project  and  what  was  the  purpose  of  investing  in  the 
National  Park  Project?  Was  it  for  the  acquistion  of  land  at  Bassin  Blanc?  What  was  the 
reason for including this project in this Capital Expenditure? 

 
Mr Soodhun: In fact, according to my information, it is 35 Arpents of land and for 

25 

Bassin Blanc, and paid Rs53 m. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Lesjongard! 

Mr Lesjongard: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Under the same item, with regard 
to the Terre Rouge-Verdun  Link Road, can the hon. Vice-Prime Minister confirm whether 
acquistion of land was also done at a second stage with regard to a new alignment of that 
road? 

Mr Soodhun: In fact, what I have, Madam Chairperson, is 27 Arpents and they have 

already spent Rs230 m., still we have to pay Rs19 m.  

The Chairperson: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. On the same vote, can the hon. Vice-
Prime Minister, later on, circulate on this amount which we have been called to vote. There 
many projects. Can we have a breakdown which can be circulated later on, project-wise; the 
land was acquired from whom and, in each case, y a-t-il eu des contestations and how much 
has been paid ultimately? 

Mr Soodhun: Yes, I will. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed:  I am trying to find out. Once again, at page 8, when  I  read all the 
compulsory acquistion – I take up where hon. friend just left off – does this include any party 
whose land was compulsorily acquired, which was not satisfied with what value Government 
was  offering,  but  had  contested  it,  and  later  on,  there  was  an  increase  somewhere  by  an 
institution that decided that they should be entiled to more money; and this is what provision 
has been made for in there, that is the question addressed by my friend?  

Mr Soodhun: We will be highly delighted to answer if a substantive question will be 

put to me. Anyway, the amendments represent the mutually agreed compensation. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.  Under  the  same  item  of  vote,  hon. 
Bhagwan has requested for the whole list. But may I know from information available to the 
hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister,  whether  any  of  the  amounts  that  have  been  paid  relates  to 
acquisition of land in the context of the light railway transit system, métro léger? 

 
Mr Soodhun: In fact, yes, for the light railway. 

26 

The Chairperson: Hon. Osman Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. On the same vote, with regard to 
the  Ring  Road  Project,  now,  there  is  a  proposition  to  realign  that  road,  especially  along 
Boulevard Victoria elevated with an elevated viaduct. Is the land that has been acquired, any 
at all, located on the original trajectory of the ring road? 

Mr Soodhun: According to my information, I know that provision had already been 
made and, there was land which had been acquired for the previous ring road. Acquisition is 
being  made  for  the  ring  road  based  on  alignment  decided  by  the  Ministry  of  Public 
Infrastructure. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Baloomoody! 

Mr  Baloomoody:  Item  31410  reads  acquistiion  of  land  in  connection  with  major 
government projects, and there is a long list. I do not see the Harbour Bridge on this list. May 
I  know  whether  the  sum  paid  includes  those  compensations  to  inhabitants  of  Les  Salines, 
especially Reserve Street, where the land has been acquired by Government, but not paid? 

Mr Soodhun: I am aware that for Bain des Dames, partly has been already paid and 

also there is negotiation which is going on. 

Mr Baloomoody: Can I ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister whether he can - with the 
list which my learned colleague has asked - send us a copy of the list of those at Bain des 
Dames, Les Salines, who have been paid so that we can be made aware? 

Mr Soodhun: With pleasure! Seven owners have already been compensated out of 

the 66. If the hon. Member wants the 66 names, I am going to circulate it. 

Fine! 

(Interruptions) 

Vote  4-1  Vice-Prime  Minister’s  Office,  Ministry  of  Housing  and  Lands 

(Rs755,526,307) was, on question put, agreed to. 

Vote 9-1 Ministry of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport was called. 

Mr Uteem: May  I  know from the hon. Minister if he  can provide  a breakdown of 
each expenditure under this item of additional expenditure,  to which association it was given, 

 

27 

to which NGO it was given, how much was given and, also, the name of the contractors who 
performed the work? 

Mr Bodha: Madam Chairperson, my colleague is referring to item 22030. From what 
I have been  given here,  there was a budget of Rs14 m. which had been  earmarked with a 
number of festivals over the year and the additional budget is another Rs5.3 m. I will come 
back later with a list of all the associations and federations which were granted additional tent 
facilities for the organisation of these functions. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: On the same Vote, Madam Chairperson, can the hon. Minister inform 
the House - my colleague has asked for the criteria which had been used for the award of this 
facility  -  whether  it  is  still  the  Minister  who  approves  such  requests  and  whether  the  hon. 
Minister is coming with new proposals on this very delicate item? 

Mr Bodha: Madam Chairperson, I have a list of festivals which were earmarked for 
2014 for the budget of Rs14 m. I am going to circulate it. No, I don’t approve each and every 
request with regard to tents. In fact, I presented a Cabinet Memo with a number of very clear 
criteria to all those who can be granted those facilities. In fact, we go by the list which we had 
in 2014 and we have in-house facilities over the island where we can provide about 4x3000 
square feet of tent with in-house facilities which are not contracted out. So, we are not going 
to contract out for tent facilities over and above the budget.  So far, we have been guided 
strictly  by  the  budget  provisions  that  we  have  had  and  we  are  in  line  with  it  and  I  am 
convinced that next year there won’t be any supplementary budget. But, I will gladly provide 
to all the hon. Members the list of all the associations which have benefited. In fact, we may 
also see whether we can, within the same budget, do a better reallocation. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Jhugroo: Thank  you, Madam Chairperson. On the same item, being given that 
there was an amount of Rs20 m. voted on the Appropriation Bill of 2014 and now we are 
coming  with  a  supplementary  of  Rs5  m.,  will  the  hon.  Minister  give  us  a  breakdown 
constituency-wise  what  amount  had  been  spent?  Following  the  question  of  hon.  Uteem  or 
hon. Bhagwan, we want to know the name of contractors coming from each Constituency and 
the details. 

28 

 
Mr Bodha: I will be very glad to provide the information. In fact, there were tenders 
which  were  launched  for  the  provision  of  those  facilities.  But  what  happened  is  that  the 
tenders were launched a few days before the festival and often there were not many people 
who made the bids - for example, one square foot is around Rs4 - and we ended up in cases to 
pay, for example, for Maha Shivaratri, Rs14 per square foot.  What we are going to do now?  
In fact, we have launched the tender  for the whole  year at  a basic average rate  for all the 
festivals. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Jhuboo! 

Mr  Jhuboo:  Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.  Item  26313  Current  Grant  - 
Construction  Industry  Development  Board  (CIDB),  mention  was  made  that  additional 
provision required to cater for insufficiency of funds as the CIDB was not able to generate 
funds. Can I know from the hon. Minister how will the CIDB generate funds and whether it 
will come from the private sector? 

Mr Bodha: No. In fact, Madam Chairperson, the CIDB receives fees which are paid 
by contractors when they  register. So, we had an expectation that a number of contractors 
would register so that the CIDB would be, in fact, operational and be using its own funds. 
The fact is that not all contractors have registered. We still have a backlog and the additional 
funds are replacing the fact that we cannot generate enough funds for the Board to run. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. On the same item 26313, it is stated and 

I quote that –  

“(…)  CIDB  was  not  able  to  generate  revenue  as  forecasted  due  to  circumstances 
beyond its control.” 

May I know what were these ‘circumstances beyond its control’? 

Mr Bodha: I think it was because the Bill had not been presented. The Board had not 

been nominated. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: On the same issue, can the hon. Minister inform the House whether the 

Board has been reconstituted, who chairs the Board and who are the members of the Board? 

 
Mr Bodha: I am going to have the information in a few minutes. The Board has been 

29 

constituted and the Chief Executive also has been nominated. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Ganoo in the meantime.  

Mr Ganoo: Can the hon. Minister explain to the House what use was made of that 

amount of money which we are now voting for?  

The Chairperson: What use was made of that money? 

Mr Bodha: Well, it is the functioning of the Board, from what I have here. Yes, the 
Board has been constituted. There was a grant every year. From the figures I have been given 
here, in the year 2017 the operational cost was Rs6.5 m. The Chairperson of the CIDB is Mr 
Gaétan Siew, the architect. For 2012 the operational cost was Rs6.5 m.; for 2013 it was Rs6.7 
m. and for 2014 it was Rs7.4 m. 

The Chairperson: Yes, page 11. Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Madam Chairperson, under item 21111 Additional provision required for 
payment  of:  (i)  overtime  to  General  Workers  performing  the  duties  of  watchman,  may  we 
have  a  breakdown  which  can  be  circulated  of  where  were  the  duties  performed  by  those 
watchmen? 

Mr Bodha: The additional provision was required for payment of:  

(i) 

(ii) 

overtime to General Workers performing the duties of watchman - as the posts 
of watchmen were still vacant, and 
wages to General Workers posted to other Ministries/Departments - this was 
on the provision of basic salary. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr.  Sorefan:  On  page  11,  item  31121  Provision  required  for  the  purchase  of  two 

lorries in replacement of old ones, may I know from the hon. Minister… 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Members, this is no laughing matter, sorry! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Bodha:   Well,  from  the  information  which have  been  provided  to  me,  Madam 
Chairperson, it is additional provision required for the purchase of two lorries in replacement 

 

30 

of  old  ones.  The  Ministry  had  proposed  to  purchase  two  lorries  as  they  were  considered 
essential  equipment  for  the  improvement  of  service  delivery  in  sub-offices,  that  is,  for  the 
moving  of  furniture  and  materials  from  one  Ministry  to  another,  for  the  erection  of  Salle 
Verte  and  organisation  of  major  sports,  for  cultural  and  religious  celebrations  at  national 
level, like the National Day celebration, Maha Shivratee and Divali.   

The Permanent Secretary approved the purchase in September 2014. The letter was 
sent to the Financial Secretary in that same month. And, in October, the Financial Secretary 
informed that there was no financial objection for the Ministry to use an amount of Rs4 m. 
from its own budget. This was again approved on 07 October and the bids were launched and 
vetted on 14 October 2014. 

Mr Jhugroo:  On page 11, under Item No. 22040, with regard to Office Equipment 
and Furniture.  We see that we have got a supplementary of Rs107,000. Can I know from the 
hon.  Minister  what  we  do  with  the  old  furniture?  Is  there  any  store  to  place  these  items 
because, at the Government House, we see old equipment lying everywhere? 

Mr  Bodha:    Well,  we  will  take  care  of  that,  Madam  Chairperson.  The  additional 
provisions  were  required  for  the  purchase  of  photocopy  machines  and  computers  in 
placement of old ones. 

Dr. Sorefan: On page 12, under item 31113, may we know from the hon. Minister the 
list  of  roads  and  drainage  across  the  country  that  have  been  done  for  this  supplementary 
amount? If he doesn’t have the answer, he can circulate it later on. 

Mr Bodha: I have been told that the old furniture is sold by auction. As regard to the 

list, I will provide a detailed list. 

Mr  Uteem:  On  the  same  item  31113,  will  the  hon.  Minister  circulate  the  list  of 
contractors who have been awarded the contract to carry out these resurfacing and the amount 
they received, and also the procurement method used to allocate the contract to them? 

Mr Bodha: I will certainly do that. But I know that there were two very famous ones. 
One was Super Builders and they had a contract of Rs1.2 billion over a few years, then you 
had Best Contractors who had a contract of Rs700 m. over a few years.  But I will certainly 
provide the list. 

31 

 
Mr Ganoo:  Under item 31113(ii) – the construction of bridges.  I would like to ask 
the hon. Minister, in regard to the rehabilitation of the steel bridges at Tamarin, Rivière des 
Galets and Souillac, if he is in a position to give to the House the sum of money spent for 
each of these bridges and whether, in the case of Tamarin and Rivière des Galets bridges, 
there were cost overrun? Can the hon. Minister give us the original contract price for each of 
these two bridges and what finally was spent at the end of the day? 

Mr Bodha: I will certainly do so. 

Mr Baloomoody:  On the same item, the hon. Minister just mentioned the names of 
two contractors.  Can I know the way the contract was allocated and the procurement method 
used and, secondly, whether the additional provision we are paying is for additional work or 
additional extra time?  What was the original price of the contract and what is the final price 
of the contract? 

Mr Bodha:  In fact, from what I have here, they were the list of works which were 
qualified  as  urgent  and  the  additional  provision  was  required  for  works  related  to  road 
surfacing, road safety measures and drainage.  The programme consisting of urgent works for 
an additional amount of Rs335 m. was submitted and was approved by the then Ministry of 
Finance in September 2014. 

Mr Rughobur:  Under the same item, would the hon. Minister confirm - as he just 
stated  -  whether  it  was  an  emergency  procurement,  and  if  the  Ministry  is  conducting  an 
enquiry on the contract that was awarded under that emergency? 

Mr  Bodha:    I  think  the  exercise  is  on.    In  fact,  the  National  Development  Unit  is 
working on each contract because, from what I understand, there was a first tranche which 
had been paid for the first month of the year.  There are still arrears of about Rs300 m. which 
have not been paid for works, which,  because they were urgent works, often they did not 
have clearance and there was no supervision of those works. 

Mr Jhugroo: Under the same item,  with regard to these two contractors, can I know 
from  the  hon.  Minister  whether  this  case  has  been  referred  to  the  Minister  of  Financial 
Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms, and if so, can we know when and, if 
not, why not? 

32 

 
Mr Bodha: From what I have been told, there is an enquiry.  Some enquiries are at 
the level of the Police; the Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional 
Reforms is looking at most of the contracts of the NDU. 

Madam Chairperson:  Page 13!  Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem:  Madam Chairperson, under item 21111(i) refund of travelling expenses.  
May I know from the hon. Minister how these travelling expenses are calculated?  Is there a 
scale of fees?  Is this a return bus fare ticket? 

Mr  Bodha:    The  information  I  have,  Madam  Chairperson,  is  that  the  additional 
amount  is  for  mileage  allowances  claimed  by  the  Road  Transport  Inspectors  and  Traffic 
Wardens in respect of checks and  enquiries carried out throughout the island.   It was  also 
linked with overtime to staff involved at the Road Transport Inspectors Division. 

Madam Chairperson:  Page 14!  Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan: Under item 25210, from the total number of buses that we are going to 

pay, may we know how many buses were out of order during that period? 

Mr  Bodha:  From  the  information  I  have,  the  bus  companies  were  paid  Rs382  m. 
yearly.    We  have  about  800  individual  bus  owners  and  I  will  have  the  specific  figures  as 
regard to the number of buses which were out of order. 

Mr  Bhagwan:    On  page  14,  item  31113018,  Road  Safety  Devices.    We  are  being 
asked to vote some Rs44.5 m. Can the hon. Minister inform the House whether this concerns 
the street lighting on the motorway and also the traffic lights which are still a big problem 
with regard to road safety?  Can he give us details about the Rs44 m., how many new traffic 
lights have been installed, what action is being taken with regard to the traffic lights on the 
motorway? 

 
Mr  Bodha:    The  cost  of  street  lighting  does  not  fall  under  the  purview  of  this 
provision,  Madam  Chairperson.    But  I  have  a  list  of  the  additional  provision  which  were 
required for supply and fixing of traffic signs for speed cameras, additional emergency works 
at  Plaine  Magnien  for  the  fixing  of  traffic  lights.    We  had  additional  works  for  the 
construction of footpaths and drains at Chebel.  We had a number of other measures which 
were taken to enhance road safety.  I can provide the specific provisions which were made as 
regard to traffic lights. 

 
The Chaiperson: Hon. Uteem! 

33 

Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Under the Item Nos. 25110 and 25210, 

the rational for the increase is set out as being – 

“(...) to cater for increase in the number of beneficiaries”. 

This is the wording of the estimates. May I know from the hon. Minister if there has  been a 
change  in  the  eligibility  criteria  for  the  beneficiaries  and  how  many  new  additional 
beneficiaries were added in 2014?  

Mr Bodha: Well, we know that we have an ageing population; every year the number 
of people who cross the 60-year line is increasing. So, that is why you will have a number of 
beneficiaries  as  from  January  2014  and  then  I  think  this  is  going  to  be  systematically  the 
same for January. 

Dr.  Sorefan:  To  follow  on  the  question  of  hon.  Uteem  and  the  answer  the  hon. 
Minister gave, that the number of beneficiaries are the increasing old aged people. But the 
hon. Minister knows very well that the old aged people don’t travel on those high buses. So, 
it does not fall within the logic of paying about 13% increase. Will the hon. Minister justify 
the 13% - apart from what is written, the increase in the number of beneficiaries - increase to 
the original, when people are not really using the buses? 

Mr Bodha: Rs37 m. out of Rs293 m. does not make 30%, it is less. 13%, yes. We 
have an increase in the number of beneficiaries as regards  the old aged pensioners and, this 
year, we have an increase because we change the number of students travelling on buses. It 
was 85 and we have reduced it to 60 for safety reasons. 

Mr Jhugroo: Hon. Minister, with regard to road safety devices, can I know whether 
with the Supplementary Appropriation Bill that we are voting today,  there is any provision 
for the Plein Bois Road where we had several accidents in the past years and, if so, what are 
the measures taken so far? 

Mr Bodha: This is what has happened in the past; we will have to see now, in the 

new budget, how to make provision for those accident prone areas. 

The Chairperson: Page 15! Hon. Uteem! 

34 

 
Mr Uteem: On item 28213 - Provision required to meet one-off grant to the MSC Ltd. 
for extra lost incurred from the transportation of livestock from Rodrigues. May I know from 
the hon. Minister what was that extra cost and why was it not envisaged? 

Mr  Bodha:  Madam  Chairperson,  the  information  I  have  is  that  there  was  an 
additional provision to meet a one-off grant to the Mauritius Shipping Corporation for each 
extra lost incurred from the transportation of livestock from Rodrigues and there is a Cabinet 
Memo dated  16  May 2014 approving this payment. 

The Chairperson: Page 16! Hon. Quirin! 

Mr Quirin: Can the hon. Minister table a list of all projects implemented under item 

31113, as well as the names of the contractors and the cost for each project, please? 

Mr  Bodha:  Madam  Chairperson,  I  do  have  the  information.  So,  it  is  going  to  be 

circulated right away. 

The Chairperson: Page 17! Yes, hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Just like for the previous page, Madam Chairperson, can we also have a 

list of where those drains were implemented? By whom and how much it cost? 

Mr Bodha: This will be done, Madam Chairperson. 

Mr Baloomoody: Under the same item, may we know the procurement method used 

for all these projects? 

Mr Bodha: From what I gather, there were tenders; there were district constractors 

and rates which were provided and on-site orders were made. 

The Chairperson: Page 17! Hon. Dr. Sorefan!  

Dr.  Sorefan:  Thank  you.  Under  item  31113,  Other  Structures,    with  regard  to 
“Additional provision required to meet payments to contractors for the construction of drains 
mainly in regions affected by torrential rains”. We had a lot of rain and a lot of money also 
went to some people, especially to contractors. May we know from the hon. Minister whether 
when they were allocated the work it was on a piecemeal basis, because of torrential rain, 
they just tell the contractor carry on with the work or was it on a procurement basis? 

35 

 
Mr Bodha: Well, as regard to construction of drains, the additional provisions were 
required  to  meet  payments  to  contractors  for  works  undertaken  in  the  construction  and 
maintenance of drains in areas where you had torrential rain. The maintenance and the money 
was,  in  fact,  earmarked  to  provide  each  Municipality  and  District  Council  Rs3  m.  for  the 
maintenance of drains for the year 2014 in the context of also of the fight against Dengue 
fever.  

Ministry  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  –  Programme  Code  9-1: 

(Rs276,878,547) was, on question put, agreed to. 

Ministry of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions – Programme 

Code 22-1, was called. 

The Chairperson: Hon.  Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan: Madam Chairperson, regarding Rent, 22030 ... 

The Chairperson: Page 18? 

Dr. Sorefan: Yes. Mention is made for payment of arrears in respect to NPF building. 

May we know what arrears are we talking about, for which year? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: From information which I have, I understand that payment 
of the increase in rent  has been backdated with regard to some floors in the NPF building 
rented by my Ministry. 

The Chairperson: Pages 19 and 20! Yes, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Page  20,  on  the  last  line,  item  22900.  We  are  being  asked  to  vote 
nearly Rs1 m. for  “Additional provision required to meet catering services for Lady Shushil 
Ramgoolam Recreation Centre”. 

Can the hon. Minister give us some details with regard to the person responsible for 

catering and how he was given the contract? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Well, Mythos Co. Ltd. for catering services for 2014. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Baloomoody! 

Mr  Baloomoody:  Thank  you,  Madam.  At  page  20,  on  item  22090  Security,  may  I 
know from the hon. Minister the particulars of the payment for security services, who is the 
contractor? Whether we have renewed the contract or extend the contract? How is it that we 

 

36 

had  to  pay  additional  fees  and  also  a  contract  for  alarm  system?  May  we  know  the 
procurement method used for acquiring that alarm system and who is the contractor? 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  For  security  services,  it  is  Defense  High-tech  Security 
Services and Rapid Security Services.  This is the only information I have for the time being. 

Mr Baloomoody:  Have we extended their contract?  What was the procurement used 

to extend their contract and if the Minister can reply for the alarm also? 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Yes.  I  understand  that  one  of  the  contracts  has  been 
extended.  As for the alarm, let me check! No, for the alarm, unfortunately, I don’t have the 
information now. 

Mr Baloomoody: I hope there is alarm there. 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Yes, there is. 

The Chairperson: Page 21. Yes, hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.  Under  item  26313  Current  Grant  to 
Extra Budgetary Units – Additional provision required to cater for insufficiency of funds for: 
(i) Training and Employment of Disabled Persons Board, may I know from the hon. Minister 
the composition thereof? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Can the hon. Member just repeat the question? 

Mr  Uteem:  I  would  like  to  have  the  name,  the  composition  of  the  Training  and 

Employment of Disabled Persons Board and also Chagossian Welfare Fund. 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  The  Board  has  not  yet  been  reconstituted.  It  is  the 
Permanent Secretary who is acting as Chairperson as regards the Training and Employment 
of  Disabled  Persons  Board.    As  for  the  Chagossian  Welfare  Fund,  I  will  circulate  the 
information. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Madam  Chairperson,  on  the  same  page,  under  item  28211  Current 
Transfers to Non-Profit Institutions - Additional provision required to cater for insufficiency 
of  funds  for  Loïs  Lagesse  Trust  Fund  and  other  charitable  institutions,  can  we  have  a 
breakdown of this item, to which institution and also how much the Loïs Lagesse Trust Fund 
received? 

 

37 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Well, from the information I have, it is additional funds of 
Rs475,000  to  meet  the  increase  at  Loïs  Lagesse  Trust  Fund  and  the  other  charitable 
institutions  and  orphanage  in  respect  of  capitation  grant,  inmates  allowances,  wages  of 
attendants, payment of water rates, etc. I don’t have the list; I will circulate it later on. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Baloomoody! 

Mr Baloomoody: On the same page, on item 31122 Other Machinery and Equipment, 

again, it is with regard to the CCTV camera, may we know… 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: On which page? 

Mr  Baloomoody:  On  the  same  page  21;  the  procurement  method  used  for  the 

acquisition of the CCTV camera and the name of the contractor? 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Additional  funds  for  the  supply,  installation,  testing  and 
commissioning  of  CCTV  cameras  at  SSS  Recreation  Centre  and  J.  B.  David  Recreation 
Centre  to  increase  security  of  residents  and  I  understand  that  a  bidding  exercise  has  been 
followed. 

Mr Baloomoody: Can we know the name of the contractor? 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Let  me  check  if  the  officers  have  the  answer!  Well, 
regarding the questions put earlier concerning capitation grants, let me see if I can circulate a 
document which has just been forwarded to me by the officers. Unfortunately, the document 
is not complete. 

The Chairperson: In the meantime, can we move to the next question, please? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Yes. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.  Under  the  same  item  21122  Other 
Machinery and Equipment, may we know why we are providing CCTV camera to these two 
institutions? 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  For  security  reasons  and  to  better  protect  all  elderly  and 

make sure that there is no abuse on their persons. 

 

The Chairperson: Hon. Uteem! 

38 

Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.  Under  the  item  28212  Current 
Transfers to Households – Additional provision required for repatriation expenses and gifts 
to centenarians, may I  know from the hon. Minister the number of people who have been 
repatriated and what criteria are used to disburse money for those who want … 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Yes.  Good  question!  I  have  been  informed  that  seven 
Mauritians in distress have been repatriated in 2014: five students from Ukraine, one person 
from Germany, one person from Spain.  Moreover I have been informed that those persons 
have to refund the amount given to them. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Under  the  same  item,  Madam  Chairperson,  when  the  hon.  Minister 
says  gifts  to  centenarians,  can  we  know  how  many  centenarians  we  have?    Can  we  know 
what is the number as at to date? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Yes. From memory, I can say we have about 109 and most 

of them are females. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Ganoo! 

 (Interruptions) 

Mr  Ganoo:  Under  item  31121,  Madam  Chairperson,  Transport  Equipment  - 
Additional provision required to meet the cost of a semi-low floor bus to cater for travelling 
of elderly and disabled persons for Lady Sushil Ramgoolam Recreation Centre at Pte-aux-
Piments,  can  the  hon.  Minister  tell  us  the  reasons  for  this  supplementary  appropriation, 
because we were told in this very House, in fact, that the cost of such a bus is Rs3.5 m.? So, 
what is the use of providing for that amount of money that we are being asked to vote for? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Well, that this is an additional fund to meet the cost of a 
44-seater semi-low floor to cater for senior citizens, tours at historical tourist places in the 
vicinity of the LSR Recreation Centre for residents.  That is, for proper transportation of our 
elderly. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

 

39 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.  The  hon.  Minister  answered  my 
question  on  CCTV  camera  that  it  was  for  security  purposes  to  the  elderly  and  disabled 
persons.  Is she aware that the building, especially J. B. David Recreation Centre at Curepipe, 
is  not  a  secure  place  for  the  elderly  because  as  per  what  we  read  it  is  on  continuous 
maintenance?  Will  the  hon.  Minister  look  into it  before  putting  CCTV  camera  that  all  the 
floors do not fall on those elderly persons? 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Which  building  is  the  hon.  Member  referring  to  in 

Curepipe?  

(Interruptions) 

No. Which building are you… 

Dr. Sorefan: J. B. David Recreation Centre. 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Well,  I  am  not  aware  of.  If  the  building  needs 

refurbishment, then needful will be done. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Madam  Chairperson,  I  will  again  come  to  item  28212  Current 
Transfers to Households – Additional provision required for repatriation expenses and gifts 
to  centenarians.    I  thank  the  hon.  Minister  for  inviting  us  to  these,  I  would  say,  very 
important  events.    Can  the  hon.  Minister  at  least  have  a  fresh  look  on  the  gifts  which  are 
given to our centenarians, well deserved gifts, because sometimes they are given gifts which 
they can’t use? So, can the hon. Minister have a fresh look on that item and see to it that they 
are given proper gifts that they can use? 

(Interruptions) 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Well, if the hon. Member can make some suggestions, well 

and good, he is most welcome. 

The Chairperson: Pages 22 to 24!  Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Under the last item 31111 Dwellings – 
Provision required for upgrading of Rehabilitation Youth Centre for Girls, may I know from 
the hon. Minister where is the Rehabilitation Youth Centre concerned located, who made the 

 

40 

upgrading,  who  were  the  contractors  who  were  awarded  the  contract  and  what  was  the 
procurement method used to allocate the contract to those contractors? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Let me wait for the officers to give me the answer! 

The Chairperson: Can we pass on to the next question in the meantime? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Yes. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Ganoo! 

Mr Ganoo: I would refer the hon. Minister to item 27210 Social Assistance Benefits 

in Cash. We are being… 

The Chairperson: You are coming back on page 23? We are already on page 24.  

Do you insist on your question? I will allow you. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Ganoo: I am sure the hon. Minister will gracefully answer this question. Under 

item 27210, can the hon. Minister give us the particulars of this sum of about Rs715 m.? 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Well,  it  represents  additional  fund  in  connection  with 
increase in pension rate in December 2014. I don’t have breakdown of the figures, but from 
information  I  have  received  with  regard  to  the  basic  retirement  pension,  we  have  about 
181,000  beneficiaries;  basic  widows  pension:  about  23,700  beneficiaries;  basic  invalidity 
pension: about 26,000; and for those benefitting from the child allowances, we have about 
16,000 beneficiaries. 

The Chairperson:  Does the hon. Minister  have the reply to the previous question? 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Well,  regarding  the  question  put  by  hon.  Uteem,  I  will 

circulate the answer. 

The Chairperson:  Okay! 

Vote  22-1  Ministry  of  Social  Security,  National  Solidarity  and  Reforms  Institution 

(Rs510,394,907) was, on question put, agreed to. 

 

 

41 

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION (2014) BILL 

(NO. XVII OF 2015) 

The Schedule was agreed to. 

Clauses 1 and 2 were called and agreed to. 

The title and the enacting clause were agreed to. 

The Bill was agreed to. 

E.S.E. (2014) of 2015 and the Supplementary Appropriation (2014) Bill (No. XVII of 

2015) were agreed to. 

On  the  Assembly  resuming  with  Madam  Speaker  in  the  Chair,  Madam  Speaker 

reported accordingly. 

Madam Speaker:  I suspend the sitting for one and a half hours. 

At 1.13 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 2.48 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

PUBLIC BILLS 

Second Reading 

THE ARABIC-SPEAKING UNION (AMENDMENT) BILL 

(No. XVIII of 2015) 

THE BHOJPURI-SPEAKING UNION (AMENDMENT) BILL  

(No. XIX of 2015) 

THE CHINESE-SPEAKING UNION (AMENDMENT) BILL  

(No. XX of 2015) 

THE CREOLE-SPEAKING UNION (AMENDMENT) BILL  

(No. XXI of 2015) 

THE SANSKRIT-SPEAKING UNION (AMENDMENT) BILL  

(No. XXII of 2015) 

THE ENGLISH-SPEAKING UNION BILL 

 

42 

(No. XXIII of 2015) 

THE HINDI-SPEAKING UNION BILL 

(No. XXIV of 2015) 

THE MARATHI-SPEAKING UNION BILL  

(No. XXV of 2015) 

THE TAMIL-SPEAKING UNION BILL  

(No. XXVI of 2015) 

THE TELUGU-SPEAKING UNION BILL  

(No. XXVII of 2015) 

THE URDU-SPEAKING UNION BILL  

(No. XXVIII of 2015) 

Order for second reading read.  

The  Minister  of  Arts  and  Culture  (Mr  S.  Baboo):  Madam  Speaker,  with  your 
permission, I move that the Arabic-Speaking Union (Amendment) Bill (No. XVIII of 2015), 
the Bhojpuri-Speaking Union (Amendment) Bill (No. XIX of 2015), the Chinese-Speaking 
Union (Amendment) Bill (No. XX of 2015), the Creole-Speaking Union (Amendment) Bill 
(No. XXI of 2015), the Sanskrit-Speaking Union (Amendment) Bill (No. XXII of 2015), the 
English-Speaking  Union  Bill  (No.  XXIII  of  2015),  the  Hindi-Speaking  Union  Bill  (No. 
XXIV of 2015), the Marathi-Speaking Union Bill (No. XXV of 2015), the Tamil-Speaking 
Union Bill (No. XXVI of 2015), the Telugu-Speaking Union Bill (No. XXVII of 2015), the 
Urdu-Speaking Union Bill (No. XXVIII of 2015) be read together a second time. 

Madam Speaker, Shakespeare once said, and I quote - 

“There is no art to see the mind’s construction in the face”. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! Order, please! 

Mr  Baboo:  Therefore,  language,  be  it  verbal  or  written,  is  an  important  means  of 
communication  and  even  more.    My  colleagues  will  agree  that  language  ensures  the 
dissemination of knowledge and values in a society. 

43 

 
It is, therefore, imperative that the pace be set for a robust and sustainable linguistic 
development. To this end, we have to review and prepare policies and strategies periodically 
to  meet  new  challenges,  new  aspirations  and  ever-changing  needs  of  the  population.  We 
consider  our  multilingual  tapestry  to  be  a  blessing  of  our  National  Cultural  Heritage.    All 
efforts are geared towards the effective promotion of our ancestral languages with a view to 
preserving the cultural identity of all components of the Mauritian society. 

Speaking Unions translate into action the cultural policy and tangible projects as laid 

down in the objects of their respective legislations. 

Madam Speaker, as a matter of fact, the Speaking Unions’ legislations were enacted 
at different period of time since 1993 and there are too many differences such as composition 
of Executive Councils, quorum of meetings, appointment of Auditors and their objects. 

With a view to redressing the situation, I am proposing to bring significant changes in 

the legislations with the following main objects - 

(i) 

harmonise the legislations and place them on equal footing; 

(ii)  make judicious use of public funds; 

(iii) 

adhere strictly to the principles of good governance; 

(iv) 

provide  that  the  statement  of  accounts  on  the  operations  of  the  Speaking 
Unions are audited by the Director of Audit; 

(v) 

review the composition of their Executive Councils, and 

(vi)  maintain the identity of these institutions in a secular manner. 

Madam  Speaker,  this  Government  is  bent  on  putting  the  right  person  in  the  right 
place.    I  would  add,  at  the  right  time  and  at  the  right  cost.  We  want  to  acknowledge  the 
competency of our citizens and designate persons of high integrity and selfless dedication at 
the helm of our cultural institutions. 

Our  institutions  should  shine  as  models  of  management  based  on  the  principles  of 

good corporate governance where prevail - 

(i) 

(ii) 

transparency of corporate structures, decisions and operations; 

proper risk management and internal control, and 

(iii) 

accountability of the Board to Government. 

 
Good Corporate Governance helps to - 

44 

(i) 

(ii) 

facilitate the decision-making process; 

ensure accountability and appropriate delegation of responsibility within and 
outside the institution, and 

(iii) 

confirm that decisions are made in a rational, fair and transparent manner. 

Good  Corporate  Governance  encompasses  authority,  accountability,  stewardship, 
leadership,  direction  and  control.  We  want  judicious  use  of  taxpayers’  money  by  our 
institutions. 

Madam  Speaker,  we  expect  value  for  money  and  a  high  quality  service  to  the 

population and the objectives of these amendments to the Bills are to ensure same. 

The creative industries are increasingly occupying a significant position in the world 
economy:  Printing  and  publications,  closely  related  to  the  promotion  of  language,  have  a 
major  share  in  development.    Culture  must,  therefore,  be  placed  in  the  mainstream  of  our 
economy. 

Our  institutions  must  start  tapping  sources  of  finance  and  create  both  cultural  and 
financial riches rather than surviving as passive revenue consuming bodies. They must start 
thinking out of the box, become creative and innovative. It’s time now to think of increasing 
the  social  and  economic  dividends  from  cultural  products  and  the  creative  genius  of  our 
people. 

Madam Speaker, the quantum leaps in information technology and globalisation have 
significantly changed the lifestyles of our citizens.  We have to reshape the pattern of cultural 
production, distribution and consumption in this world of texts, sounds and images. 

We are in an era of knowledge revolution.  We cannot afford to lag behind with a 

passive mentality and complacency. 

It’s  time  to  move  forward  by  democratising  access  to  our  linguistic  landscape  and 
Government-funded  institutions.    The  use  of  ICT  tools  for  the  promotion  of  literature  and 
books has become imperative today.  E-book, E-bay, Amazon.com are some examples of the 
shift in technology. 

Madam Speaker,  I shall, now, delve on the proposed amendments with a quotation 
from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, at the launch of the High-Powered 

 

45 

Committee  on  achieving  the  Second  Economic  Miracle  and  Vision  2030,  on  Saturday  22 
August 2015. I quote – 

“We  are  introducing  new  and  reinforced  legislations  before  the  end  of  the  next 
Legislative  Session  so  as  to  further  stimulate  a  culture  of  good  governance  and 
rightness among all Mauritians”. 

To this end, concrete measures have already been initiated. This Government is highly 
committed to the cause of arts and culture and to the creation of a conducive environment for 
their development in complete serenity. 

The present legislations for the Speaking Unions have a number of shortcomings that 

are being addressed by the Amendments being proposed. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  main  shortcomings  in  the  present  legislations  of  the  Speaking 

Unions are as follows – 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

the Executive Councils comprise between eleven and thirty members which is 
a major inconsistency; 

some  of  the  Unions  comprise  twenty  or  more  members  resulting  in  funds 
being  mostly  used  for  payment  of  allowances  to  members  instead  of  the 
organisation of activities; 

the  Executive  Councils  of  the  Speaking  Unions  are  normally  constituted 
through  elections  or  nominations  by  ordinary  members  from  among 
themselves.  Hence,  there  are  two  modes  of  appointment  for  Executive 
Councils which is not considered to be fair and equitable for parastatal bodies 
funded by Government; 

(iv) 

some  of  the  Unions  expected  to  appoint  Executive  Council  after  holding 
elections  amongst  their  ordinary  members,  have  not  recruited  any  ordinary 
member till now; 

(v) 

there is no provision for recruitment of staff in certain legislations; 

(vi) 

powers of the Minister exist in certain legislations only; 

(vii) 

in  some  cases,  the  statutory  seat  of  the  Union  is  at  one  place  whereas  the 
official seat is at some other place. 

 
(viii) there is no statutory obligation for the accounts of the Unions to be audited by 

46 

the Director of Audit. 

Madam Speaker, the most recent legislations, that is, the Arabic, Bhojpuri, Chinese, 
Creole and Sanskrit Speaking Unions enacted in 2011 are more or less comprehensive, but 
still have some shortcomings.  I am, therefore, proposing to repeal the other Speaking Union 
Acts and align them with these recent ones after necessary amendments are brought to the 
relevant sections thereof. 

Madam Speaker, with a view to rationalising and harmonising the Executive Councils 
of  the  Speaking  Unions  set  up  in  2011,  I  am  proposing  the  following  amendments  to  the 
Principal Acts - 

The composition of the Executive Council at clause 6 will be as follows - 

(i) 

(ii) 

four members having interest in the promotion of the respective language to be 
appointed by me; 

four  members  following  election  among  ordinary  members  of  the  Union 
having a minimum of 15 members.  In case of Unions, which do not have a 
minimum of fifteen ordinary members, I shall appoint the four members, until 
the Unions recruit the minimum of fifteen members and hold election; 

(iii) 

a President appointed by me from amongst the 8 members, and 

(iv) 

representatives  from  the  Ministry  of  Education  and  Human  Resources, 
Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific  Research,  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development and the Ministry of Arts and Culture. 

In line with the principle of accountability and cost saving in terms of fees paid in a 

cumbersome structure, the number of office-bearers is being reduced from eight to six. 

The  offices  of  First  Vice-President,  Second  Vice-President  and  Public  Relations 

Officers are being abolished.  

The office-bearers will henceforth be as follows - 

•  President; 
•  Vice-President; 
•  Secretary; 
•  Assistant Secretary; 

47 

 
•  Treasurer, and 
•  Assistant Treasurer. 

The members and office-bearers shall hold office for a period of three years instead of 
two, to enable them to implement a comprehensive plan for the promotion of the respective 
languages. 

At clause 5, provision is made for the setting-up of such Ad-hoc Committee as may be 
necessary  for  specific  purposes  to  avoid  unwarranted  appointment  of  numerous  co-opted 
members for an indefinite period as in the existing legislation. 

Madam Speaker, the quorum of all Speaking Unions is being harmonised as it varies 
from  one-third  to  half  of  the  total  number  of  Executive  Council  Members  in  the  present 
legislations. Henceforth, the quorum will be seven out of eleven members. 

With  a  view  to  maintaining  checks  and  balances  and  ensuring  sound  financial 
management,  the  Director  of  Audit  will  be  the  auditor  of  all  Speaking  Unions  to  ensure 
scrutiny as public funds are involved. 

With regard to good governance and financial accountability, the Unions will have to 

submit an annual report and an audited Statement of Accounts on its operations. 

Madam Speaker, with the aforesaid harmonisation, the legislations on the Speaking 
Unions  will  be  more  efficient  and  will  satisfy  the  needs  of  the  various  linguistic  groups. 
Therefore, the Speaking Unions will be legally empowered to recruit staff as per clause 9 of 
the Speaking Union Bills. 

Clause 13 will make provision for Powers of the Minister. The official seat will, now, 
be determined by the respective Speaking Unions under clause 3(3). Transitional provisions 
have been made for the Minister to appoint, at the commencement of this Act, eight members 
of the Council as well as its office-bearers for a period of six months.  Thereafter, in the event 
that the minimum number of members required  is reached,  election  would be held for the 
four  members  amongst  ordinary  members  of  the  union  to  form  part  of  the  new  Executive 
Council. 

Madam  Speaker,  this  Government  is  committed  in  maintaining  the  acquis  of  the 
Speaking Unions.  As already highlighted, the existing ordinary members will continue to be 
the ordinary members of the Speaking Unions.  However, it has been observed that in certain 
cases,  ordinary  members  are  not  being  recruited  resulting  in  a  limited  number  of  ordinary 
members being eligible for appointment to the Executive Council. 

48 

 
With a view to remedy  the situation, the Speaking  Unions will require  a minimum 
threshold of 15 members else appointment will be made by the Minister.  This will definitely 
trigger the recruitment of new members especially for those Speaking Unions which have not 
recruited any member since their establishment. 

The Transitional provision will also provide the following - 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 

the current “Patron” shall continue to be the Patron of the respective Union. 
the existing ordinary members shall continue to be ordinary members. 
any act or things done by the Speaking Unions under the repealed Acts shall 
be  deemed  to  have  been  done  by  the  new  Unions.    Hence,  any  affiliation 
obtained or projects started under the previous legislations will continue under 
the new legislations. 

Madam Speaker, we are broadening the spectrum of the different languages in use in 
Mauritius to evolve in a multicultural set up as integral parts of our linguistic heritage.  This 
will  give  a  new  dimension  to  the  concept  of  mutual  understanding  and  sharing  of  values 
enshrined in the different cultures making our colourful Nation, a model to be emulated. 

Today, we stand to bring linguistic equity and open the ocean of knowledge to each 
and every citizen of Mauritius.  The objects of the Speaking Unions are being reinforced by 
including  the  promotion  of  intercultural  and  inter-linguistic  understanding  and  harmony 
through exchanges and participation in joint projects. 

Madam Speaker, this is a landmark achievement in the linguistic history of Mauritius 
as language is a strong source of unity and nation-building.  Eleven Speaking Unions will be 
fully operational in the days to come without any distinction or differences in their missions. 

Thank you, Madam, Speaker 
Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo rose and seconded. 

(3.08 p.m.) 

Mr  V.  Baloomoody  (Third  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West):  Madam 
Speaker,  I  am  sure  all  of  us  in  this  House  believe  that  only  by  promoting  our  ancestral 
language  and  culture  we  will  be  able  to  consolidate  national  unity  and  promote  peaceful 
coexistence amongst our multicultural population. This is why since the early 90s we have 
had  many  Governments  and  each  Government  has  had  its  contribution  towards  nation-
building.  

49 

 
We have had, in 1993, the first Speaking Union - that is the oldest one we have - the 
English-Speaking Union. Then, we had under the MMM/MSM Government, all the cultural 
centres.  Then,  under  the  Labour  Party  Government  we  had  the  Speaking  Unions.  We  all 
agree that language and culture are the two sides of the same coin. But, when we look at the 
objectives, especially the objectives of the English Speaking Union which were copied by the 
subsequent Hindi, Marathi, Tamil, Telugu and Urdu Speaking Unions, it is important to know 
what was the idea behind it. Let me quote from the then Minister when he introduced to this 
House, in 1993, the English-Speaking Union Bill, I quote –  

“The purpose of this Bill is to provide for the establishment of an English-Speaking 
Union,  an  autonomous  body,  which  would  aim  primarily  at  promoting  the  English 
culture, both in written and spoken (…).” 

An autonomous body! And he goes further – 

“The  English-Speaking  Union  is  an  independent  private  organisation,  established 
from 30 years of the world which sponsor a number of (…), etc.” 

He  was  speaking  about  the  Union  which  existed  before  amongst  certain  intellectuals, 
composing of Judges, ex-Vice President, QCs at that time. But the setting up of that in 1993 - 
they  wanted  to  set  up  a  non-governmental  organisation  which  would  pool  and  utilise 
resources  for  the  promotion  of  English  language,  not  only  among  students  but  among  the 
population  at  large  -  comes  at  the  right  time  and  fits  within  the  efforts  of  Government  to 
promote quality teaching, etc. So, the idea was to have an independent autonomous institution 
which will promote language and this one was for the English-Speaking Union. He goes even 
further, and I quote – 

“The Union would operate independently and without interfering in the work of the 
Ministry and existing non-governmental organisation.” 

This was the idea behind, to have volunteer, independent cultural persons in their respective 
culture and language to promote their language. The principle was the same for the English-
Speaking  Union,  the  Hindi-Speaking  Union,  the  Marathi-Speaking  Union,  the  Tamil-
Speaking  Union,  the  Telugu-Speaking  Union  and  the  Urdu-Speaking  Union,  to  have  an 
independent  autonomous  organisation,  independent  of  the  Ministry,  independent  of  the 
interference from any outside party. That was the idea. 

50 

 
Today, the hon. Minister comes and tells us that we have to move with time, we have 
to reactivate, but when we look at the law, what he is amending today, he is not touching the 
objective  and  function  of  the  institution,  starting  from  the  English  one  to  the  recent  one, 
which means that the objective and the function remain the same. What objective did they 
have in 1993? Same is valid for 2004 when we created the other Speaking Unions and same 
is valid today. Because with the new amendments coming and where the previous Acts are 
being done with, the Ministry is keeping the same objectives and the same functions. I am not 
going to read it, but it is listed in the new Bill. It is the same that is listed in the Act of the 
English-Speaking Union and  all the other Unions. So, we  are not changing the vision, the 
mission of the Speaking Unions. What we are doing is changing the vision and mission of the 
Minister!  

Today, we are coming mainly with two amendments. What do that two amendments 
talk  about?  On  the  first  one,  we  do  not  have  any  quarrel  with  regard  to  regulating  their 
financing.  We  believe,  and  we  have  said  it  in  our  first  report  of  the  Public  Accounts 
Committee, that, wherever public funds is used, and where there is scrutiny by the Director of 
Audit, we want even the Public Accounts Committee to have the authority to look into it. 
Concerning the financing, we have no problem because it is public money and it has to be 
accountable. But when it comes to the composition of the Executive, this is where we  are 
going to have political interference. And when the hon. Minister said: “We are going to put 
the  right  person  in  the  right  place”,  histories  has  shown  us  that  political  appointees  have 
always made misuse of public funds.  

This is what we are going to have, political appointees!  Because four of them will be 
appointed by politicians, by the Minister, by the Government and another four - in case there 
are no 15 - again will be appointed by the Minister.  And what we have, apart from the eight 
nominees by the Minister, a representative of the Ministry, a representative of the Ministry 
responsible for the subject of Education - it is unfortunate that the Minister of Education is 
not here because I am going to quote her - and a representative of the Ministry responsible for 
the  subject  of  Finance.  So,  on  the  Government  side  itself,  we  will  have  eight  from  the 
Ministry  and  three  from  other  Ministries.  11  out  of  15!  This  is  autonomous!  This  is 
independent! This is non-interference! What the Minister is doing and what Government is 
doing today is politicising these institutions! Find an excuse, a monetary excuse, taking that 
opportunity to politicise that institution! Appointing les petits copains et les petites copines 
and have a control, and this is dangerous, Madam Speaker!  

51 

 
The Father of the Nation has said one thing: “You never play politics.”  I have just 
said it about culture. And when I talk of culture, I talk of religion. We have been taught in 
this  multicultural  country  that  we  should  never  play  politics  with  religion,  culture  and 
language.  This  is  what  exactly  this  Government  is  doing  today  by  putting  the  maximum 
people from their Ministries, from the Government side on these institutions.  

Let me remind what the hon. Minister of Education - she is shining by her absence, 

not taking part in such an important Bill because the idea …. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Member, please! You can’t make these remarks.  The hon. 
Minister may be taken elsewhere or she is not in Mauritius.  So, please, don’t make remarks 
about her. 

Mr  Baloomoody:  She  is  on  official  mission,  we  are  not  informed.  Anyway!  But 
Hansard remains and I shall quote from what she had to say when the Telugu and Marathi-
Speaking Unions Bills were being presented.  At that time, the Ministry was appointing only 
one person.  And this is what she had to say – 

“We have passed a few legislations in the past. We have the Urdu-Speaking Union, 
the English-Speaking Union and I have gone through these Acts and I have noted that 
nowhere  in  these  Acts  was  the  Minister  given  so  much  power  than  in  to  nominate 
members and as many as 40 members of the Union. I wonder what was the rationale 
behind it. I believe (…)”  

And she goes on to say – 

“I do not think it should be for the Minister to decide.” 

Hon. Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun was then a backbencher; she was speaking on the Bill 
when, in fact, in that Bill there was only one person appointed by the Minister. And today, we 
have 4, 4 and 3, that is, 11 persons appointed by the Minister on the Board. And they want us 
to  believe  that  these  bodies  will  function  better!  They  call  that  democratisation.  She 
mentioned the word ‘democratisation’ of our language, of our Speaking-Union - when you 
are dominating the Executive. After having decided to dominate the Executive, the Minister, 
when he was reading, he did not mention the Minister - and hon. Soodhun was looking at me, 
and we were both shocked.  

 

52 

He said: “I will appoint”, not even mentioned ‘the Minister”.  When he was reading his First 
reading, he said: “I will appoint the president”. Who is the Minister today to know better than 
the  Urdu-Speaking  Union,  the  English-Speaking  Union,  the  Tamil-Speaking  Union,  the 
Telugu-Speaking Union? He said: “I will appoint”. He is the one who knows best about all 
the languages, all the Unions! At least, he should have said “the Minister” and not “I”. But 
even there, is it the role of the Minister to appoint a Chairperson – we are supposed to have a 
team,  be  it  of  13  or  15,  or  I  do  not  how  many?  The  Minister  decides  to  appoint  the 
Chairperson! 

(Interruptions) 

 Of course! This is directly controlling these institutions and directly telling them what to do 
and  not  what  to  do!  And  we  know,  in  the  past,  how  these  institutions have  been  used  for 
political  purposes,  for  political  mileage.    We  know  how  these  Cultural  Centres,  these 
Speaking-Unions - even when there was no political appointee - have been used, but now it 
will be worst. It will be worst! 

(Interruptions) 

Don’t say Ramgoolam!  It will be worst, because you are choosing, you are appointing, you 
are the majority! It will be worst! You are going to do politics with these institutions and it 
will be used for political gain. 

So, when we talk about these institutions... 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

Mr Baloomoody: So, what we are doing today – now the election. At least the hon. 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life came forward to amend the Pharmacy Bill.  He said 
that the election should be conducted by the Electoral Commissioner; he should organise, but, 
here,  the  Permanent  Secretary  will  organise  the  election!  Apart  from  nominating  all  the 
parties  for  the  four  poor  chaps  who  are  going  to  be  elected,  the  Permanent  Secretary  will 
organise! You have to drop your candidacy at his Ministry, go and give your name, give your 
address, he would decide whether you are suitable, whether you are eligible to be a candidate, 
then,  they  will  have  the  election.  Why  is  it  that  the  Ministry  will  decide  to  conduct  the 

 

53 

election? So, we say today, and I will terminate here, this is the first step by this Government 
to politicise our cultural institution and it is a dangerous move, we are playing with culture, 
language and religion. This is dangerous. I ask the hon. Minister, the Government to review, 
especially when it comes to the members of the Executive Committee.  

Thank you. 

(3.21 p.m.) 

Mrs  Jadoo-Jaunbocus  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  and  Port  Louis 
Central):  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  speechless.  Speechless  I  am  because  today  I  thought  we 
were  going  to  talk  about  culture;  I  thought  we  were  going  to  talk  about  Speaking  Union, 
about language, the emphasis being again once more on culture. What I saw was a display of 
emotions. 

(Interruptions) 

And drama indeed! When we talk about language, Madam Speaker, we talk in the words of 
Edward Sapir who quoted that language is a feature of our daily use and we rarely pause to 
think about it; we just use it; we just display it; we just end up in a rhapsody, but we do not 
really think about what language means.  

It  is  not  true  to  say  that  language  comes  as  natural  as  walking  to  man  because 
wherever  you  will  put  man,  he  will  walk  and  yet,  wherever  he  will  put  man,  he  will  talk 
differently. Of course, to put in a political context depending on which side you are sitting 
and  which  side  you  are  defending;  of  course,  you  will  talk  differently.  You  will  speak  a 
certain language when  we saw everything was  right, but when, here, we are talking about 
reforming, we are talking about transparency, we are talking about good governance, we are 
talking about setting things right and breaking Boys Club, then we are to be blamed and the 
Minister is being called arrogant! Let us look at the different sections of the law and what it is 
meant to bring about! We had heard earlier on... 

Mr Baloomoody: On a point of order! 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Mrs  Jadoo-Jaunbocus,  please  sit  down,  I  think  the  hon. 

Member has... 

Mr Baloomoody: I don’t know how my friend interprets what I have said, but I have 

never mentioned that the hon. Minister is arrogant. I never used the word ‘arrogant’.  

54 

 
Madam Speaker: Could you please take note of this, because I think you have just 
mentioned that hon. Baloomoody said that the hon. Minister was being arrogant. He said that 
he did not say this. 

(Interruptions) 

Mrs Jadoo-Jaunbocus: I did not say hon. Baloomoody was arrogant. I did not say 

that.  I just made reference to arrogance. 

Madam  Speaker:  No,  you  misunderstood  what  I  said.    You  said  that  hon. 
Baloomoody  has  said  that  the  hon.  Minister  was  being  arrogant.  So,  he  did  not  say  this, 
please withdraw this! 

Mrs Jadoo-Jaunbocus: I take note, Madam Speaker. 

(Interruptions) 

I was saying that language, Madam Speaker, is something that is, of course, influenced by 
culture, by tradition, by our environment.  Of course, we are predestined to talk, but what we 
say and how we say is impacted by culture and it is not an instinctive legacy, it is an acquired 
cultural function, hence, my emphasis on cultural, be it religious, be it custom, be it act of 
people, everything will impact on languages.  

In  fact,  languages  are  essential  to  the  identity  of  groups  and  individuals  and  they 
constitute a strategic factor of progress and it contributes towards sustainable development 
and harmonious relationship between the global and the local context. That was the case in 
2008, as stated, as was in the message of the then Director General of UNESCO and this is 
the truth of today. What these Acts, these series of 11 Bills intend to do is to give recognition 
but also go beyond and revitalise and create a greater symbiosis, and I will go into what is 
happening. The hon. Minister had talked about it and I will go about it in a minute.  

According to survey undertaken by UNESCO some years back, 50% of the world’s 
70,000  spoken  languages  face  the  danger  of  disappearance  from  the  surface  of  the  globe. 
Therefore, for the hon. Minister to come with such Bills is actually to salute that. What he has 
done is he has taken recognition of what UNESCO is saying that our different languages are 
on the face of disappearance and he is coming to revamp it, and ways to revamp it are found 
through the Bills. We had talked about the English Speaking Bill and what hon. Baloomoody 
–honourable  and  learned,  both,  of  course  -  had  said  that  this  actual  Bill  does  not  bring 
anything new. In fact, I would urge hon. Baloomoody to have a closer look at Act 17 of 1993 

 

55 

and he will see that in that Act, there was no provision for the promotion and organisation of 
literary activities and interchange of books, pamphlets, etc. and this is something new that is 
being brought about by section 4, subsection (g) of this Bill. It promotes the publication of 
literary  works  and  newspapers  and  that  is  again  something  which  is  new.  It  promotes 
intercultural  and 
through  exchange  and 
participation in joint projects. That again is new and that is found at section 4 subsections (g), 
(h) and (i) of the Bill. 

interlinguistic  understanding  and  harmony 

Principles of good governance are something that l’Alliance Lepep has espoused right 
from the start, be it in the Government Programme, be it through the dedication of a Ministry 
for that purpose. So, what is being achieved through these Bills is nothing less. What we are 
talking  about  is  the  Ministry  of  Arts  and  Culture  is  injecting  colossal  sums  of  money  to 
promote these respective languages, these respective unions. But, at the end of the day, we 
are talking about public funds and I am glad that hon. Baloomoody, at least, agreed on that 
and he agreed that what we need is greater transparency. With greater transparency comes 
greater benefit to the society. Good governance, in fact, increases the organisation’s purpose, 
it  focuses  on  the  organisation’s  purpose,  hence,  the  respective  Speaking  Unions’  purposes 
and the outcome is that the better good comes for each and every citizen of the country and 
the population at large.  

When we look at section 14, indeed what we have through the Bill is that the Minister 
has greater droit de regard. In fact, ‘greater’ is the wrong word, I should rather use un droit 
de regard full stop. What was happening in the past was that the Ministry is here funding, 
providing  funds  to  these  institutions.  Yet,  he  could  not  even  have  a  droit  de  regard  and 
therefore what we are having, public funds no accountability, public grant no transparency. 
What are we doing? We are merely doing what we said we are doing. Those whose mind is 
tainted and are bent on seeing the negative and the bad, of course, will only see through the 
glasses that they look at and will only see that. 

This Government here - we are on this side of the House - is committed to saying and 
doing what we have promised and this is what we are doing. The hon. Minister may now and 
there  are  parameters  set  at  Section  13.  I  beg  the  House  to  look  at  Section  13.  The  hon. 
Minister  may  give  written  directions  of  a  general  character.  We  are  talking  about  general 
character to the Council. It has to be in consistency with the Act itself and it will have to be in 
the public interest only then the hon. Minister will give directions. We are not the kind of 

 

56 

Government which will say put our ‘petits copains’ here and there, we are not this kind of 
Government.  We  are  a  Government  dedicated  to  work  for  the  public,  to  work  for  each 
respective union that we have set up and we are dedicated to that. Funny it may seem, but to 
those sitting on the other side of the House, we are bent on that and we will do that. 

The House may find this funny, but what we had before was that the Council would 
act as it may please. The Council had no duty and there was no provision in the law for the 
Council to go and say to the Ministry: ‘these are what we have organised’. Now, Section 13 
Subsection 2 actually gives the power to the Minister to require the Council to furnish such 
information and in such a manner in respect of activities that the Council carry out. What is 
wrong in that? Again, if we are intended to go and see and ascribe motives, we will, through 
the rest of our mandate do that, but here, what we are saying is : Tell us what you have done, 
we have given so much grant, what activities have been carried out to promote such and such 
language, to promote such and such culture. This is what Section 13 says. 

Now, we go further as regards the provision for general fund. The Union, as has been 
in the past, shall set up a general fund but it is now mandatory that all donations, all grants, 
everything, go through that general fund and all payments also are effected through that fund. 
Is this a Government or a Ministry that wants to control or is it the act of a Ministry which 
wants to actually see things being done in an accountable and transparent manner? We go 
further.  

When we look at Section 17 of the Bill and compare it to the former Section 10 of the 
respective Bills which actually made it possible it was the way that it was operating. These 
Unions, through their Council, would select an auditor to audit the accounts but what are we 
doing  now  through  Section  17  of  that  the  Bill?  We  are  saying  that  the  Council  shall  and, 
therefore,  it  is  imperative  upon  the  Councils  to  act  in  accordance  with  Statutory  Bodies 
(Accounts  and  Audit)  Act.  They  will  prepare  the  Annual  Report  and  submit  it  to the  hon. 
Minister together with an audited statement of accounts on operations of the Union in respect 
to every Financial Year. So, what we are promoting, what we are enhancing is, again, once 
more  accountability.  We  are  not  saying:  you  should  not  be  there.  Do  what  you  do  for  the 
promotion  of  the  aims  and  objectives  of  each  respective  Union;  however,  do  so  in  a 
transparent manner, show us what you have done with public fund, show us how you have 
promoted that particular language, that particular culture.  

 

57 

This is what it is all about. This is what the Ministry of Arts and Culture is about: 
promotion of such respective languages and culture in this particular context. What is more is 
that now the Minister, himself, under Section 17 subsection 2, shall be able to lay a copy of 
that annual report and audited accounts before this very Assembly. These accounts that we 
are  actually  asking  for  in  these  Bills  will  be  laid  to  scrutiny  of  this  particular  Assembly, 
something which has never happened before. In my humble submission, Madam Speaker, I 
shall say that, what is going through all these eleven Bills, there are no dark motives. We are 
here  to  increase  dialogue,  to  increase  transparency,  to  promote  all  these  cultures  and 
languages and we are doing it through the Bills. I think the hon. Minister should be applauded 
for this laudable and honourable transparent Bill. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mrs Monty! 

(3.34 p.m.) 

Mrs M. C. Monty (Third Member for Port Louis North & Montagne Longue): 
Madame la présidente, l’union autour de la langue est une force indéniable autour de laquelle 
se réunit, se  reconnaît un groupe, une communauté, un peuple  et en l’occurrence notre île 
Maurice  pluriethnique,  pluriculturelle,  multilingue.  N’oublions  pas,  Madame  la  présidente, 
que  les  langues  sont  les  instruments  les  plus  puissants  pour  préserver  et  développer  notre 
héritage réel et intangible.  

Madame  la  présidente,  si  nous  faisons  l’historique  autour  de  la  reconnaissance  des 
langues, nous verrons que les Nations Unies ont trouvé un moyen pour les peuples du monde 
de  faire  l’observance  au  sujet  de  certaines  questions  convenables  touchant  l’ensemble  des 
divers peuples. Ainsi, entre autres, le 21 février nous célébrons la Journée internationale de la 
langue maternelle. Ainsi, la langue étant l’expression propre de la personne humaine, d’une 
communauté, de l’ensemble d’un peuple et de la reconnaissance identitaire de chacun d’entre 
nous.  Il est intéressant,  Madame la présidente, de reconnaître l’aspect identitaire autour de 
l’observance de cette date proclamée par la Conférence de l’UNESCO le 17 novembre 1999 
et observée chaque année depuis l’an 2000 pour favoriser la diversité, le multilinguisme et le 
multiculturalisme.  

Donc, Madame la présidente, tous les mouvements visant à favoriser la diffusion des 
langues  maternelles  serviront  non  seulement  à  encourager  et  à  soutenir  la  diversité 

 

58 

linguistique et l’éducation multilingue mais aussi à développer une conscience plus totale des 
traditions  linguistiques  et  culturelles  dans  le  monde  entier  et,  bien  sûr,  dans  notre  pays  et 
aussi à inspirer la solidarité basée sur l’encouragement, la tolérance et le dialogue. Ainsi notre 
pays n’est pas resté en reste de cette reconnaissance des diverses langues parlées et écrites et 
autour  desquelles  se  tissent  les  échanges  tant  au  niveau  national  qu’international.  Les 
Speaking Unions en elle-mêmes se veulent être un espace d’échange culturel et interculturel 
visant à promouvoir tant l’expression personnelle que la reconnaissance identitaire.  

Madame la présidente, nous devons reconnaître la chance que nous avons d’habiter un 
pays où les différentes communautés se respectent et où les différentes Speaking Unions se 
complètent et qu’on vit dans la paix même si nous savons que l’UNESCO a proclamé le 21 
février journée internationale des langues en souvenir d’un triste événement ayant eu lieu le 
21 février 1952, après que quatre étudiants bangladais avaient été tués à Dhaka alors qu’il y 
avait une polémique autour des langues de Bengali et de l’Urdu, et qu’ils s’étaient montrés en 
faveur d’une langue particulière. Il est bon aussi de rappeler qu’au Bangladesh le 21 février 
est jour férié en souvenir de ce malheureux incident et qu’un monument portant le nom de 
Shaheed Minar ou connu comme le monument du martyr a aussi été érigé à Dhaka.  

Ce gouvernement, Madame la présidente, ne veut rien laisser au hasard et c’est dans 
ce souci de réajustement que viennent s’inscrire les différents amendements aux différentes 
Speaking  Unions  de  notre  pays.  À  chaque  langue  parlée  et  écrite,  est  accordée  une  place 
autour de laquelle s’inscrivent de nombreuses initiatives de développement et d’échange. Je 
cite le slogan de l’UNESCO qui dit - 

« Dans  la  galaxie  des  langues,  chaque  mot  est  une  étoile  et  tient  le  premier 
rôle. » 

Et c’est ce à quoi ce gouvernement veut tenir et c’est justement dans ce but de donner une 
meilleure  structure  que  viennent  s’inscrire  les  différents  amendements  du  nouveau  Bill 
proposé. Il est bon de rappeler aussi, Madame la présidente, que les amendements prévus ne 
touchent en rien aux buts et objectifs de nos différents Speaking Unions mais ils viennent au 
contraire proposer une refonte du comité exécutif. Ainsi seront éliminés dans le nouveau Bill 
les rôles encombrants du premier vice-président, du deuxième vice-président.  

On se verra alors, comme dans presque tous les comités, avec un président, son vice-
président, un secrétaire, son assistant secrétaire, un trésorier et son assistant. Et aussi éliminer 

 

59 

le  PRO,  l’officier  des  relations  publiques,  rôle  trouvé  superflu  au  sein  d’un  comité 
judicieusement constitué. Toutefois demeurera en poste, un comité incluant le président et ses 
membres  sur  une  période  de  trois  ans  au  lieu  de  deux  ans  permettant  ainsi  aux  membres 
d’être  en  fonction  pendant  une  période  beaucoup  plus  étendue  et  de  mieux  servir  la  cause 
pour laquelle ils ont été nommés. 

Si une nouvelle législation vient régir les Speaking Unions, relative à l’anglais, l’hindi, 
le marathi, le tamil, le telugu , l’urdu, les autres Speaking Unions n’en seront amendées qu’au 
niveau  de  certaines  clauses  et  le  changement  le  plus  conséquent  est  apporté  au  niveau  du 
comité  exécutif  où  nous  voyons  que  le  comité  devra  être  composé,  entre  autres,  des 
représentants pouvant montrer impérativement leur lien avec la langue parlée et aussi leurs 
intérêts  et  leurs  engagements  au  niveau  du  développement  de  la  promotion  de  la  langue 
spécifique au Speaking Union à laquelle il adhère. 

En  sus  des  autres  membres  élus  selon  la  sous-section  2,  comme  spécifié  selon  le 
Schedule, on verra une représentativité élargie où un représentant du ministère concerné sera 
présent  avec  en  plus  un  représentant  du  ministère  des  Finances  pour  veiller  aux  dépenses 
judicieusement choisies. 

Si on voit une autre composition, ce sera un autre aspect de la composition du comité. 
On  verra  qu’il  y  a  aussi  un  représentant  du  ministère  de  l’Éducation  à  juste  titre,  car 
n’oublions pas que nous parlons de langues et de développement et du statut de la langue, 
subtile, moyen de communication et l’échange linguistique et culturel.  De plus, Madame la 
présidente, il est bon de rappeler que l’identification dû à toutes les langues parlées et écrites 
se trouve facilité à travers les différentes  Speaking Unions.  C’est une bonne initiative qui 
vient  naturellement  ajouter  -  comme  le  gouvernement  veut  le  faire  -    sa  pierre  vers  la 
réalisation de cette reconnaissance des langues. 

De  grands  efforts  sont  faits  par  les  différents  organismes  sociaux  culturels  pour 
favoriser et préserver les langues telles que le tamil, le telugu, le marathi, l’urdu, le mandarin, 
l’hindi, le bhojpuri, le sanskrit ou le créole. C’est dans cette perspective qu’au conseil des 
ministres  du  16  octobre  2015,  ces  amendements  aux  différentes  Speaking  Unions  ont  été 
proposés, ayant pour but de consolider ces initiatives devenues des acquis et sur lesquelles se 
base notre société pluriculturelle, pluriethnique et plurilingue. Société qui se veut tolérante, 
juste, égale et qui vise à faire une place au soleil de l’île Maurice à tous ces enfants et à leur 
donner reconnaissance et respect. 

 

60 

Madame  la  présidente,  je  veux,  pour  terminer,  féliciter  l’honorable  ministre  pour  les 

amendements qu’il a voulu apporter et, sur ce, je vous remercie de votre attention. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Toussaint! 

(3.43 p.m.) 

Mr  J.  C.  Toussaint  (Second  Member  for  Curepipe  &  Midlands):    Thank  you, 
Madam  Speaker,  for  giving  me  the  opportunity  to  say  a  few  words  on  these  amendments. 
First of all, I would like to congratulate my good friend and his staff for bringing changes 
that,  comme  on  dit,  Madame  la  Présidente,  vont  ouvrir  l’espace  linguistique  et  cuturel  de 
notre pays. 

Pendant la préparation, je me disais bien où est-ce que j’allais commencer parce que 
nous parlons ici de langues.  Les langues sont vivantes et ici nous parlons de onze langues et 
de onze Speaking Unions. Et voilà qu’actualité oblige, arrive hier Jane et je me suis dit que je 
vais me baser sur ce que j’ai déjà entendu de Jane Constance. En passant, je la félicite ainsi 
que toute sa famille.  Je l’ai déjà entendu chanter en français, en créole, en hindi en Inde aussi 
bien qu’en anglais, aussi bien qu’en italien. Voilà le riche parcours, voilà le riche espace que 
je disais, l’espace linguistique et culturel des gens de notre pays. Et je parle là, d’un enfant. 
Ce que mon ami, l’honorable ministre Dan Baboo, apporte avec ces changements, c’est de 
pouvoir  promouvoir  encore  plus  les  langues  que  nous  côtoyons  journellement  dans  notre 
pays. 

J’ai bien envie de répondre un peu aussi - ma bonne amie, l’honorable Jadoo-Jaunbocus 
l’a fait - aux critiques de l’honorable Baloomoody.  Je lui dirais d’aller écouter la chanson de 
Dalida - “Paroles, Paroles, Paroles”.  

(Interruptions) 

Il  n’est  pas  nécessaire  de  faire  le  show.  Il  n’est  pas  nécessaire  de  faire  le  spectacle.  Nous 
sommes  là  pour  parler  de  choses  sérieuses.    Nous  ne  sommes  pas  nécessairement  là  pour 
ricaner à tout bout de champ, mais ce serait bon aussi que nos amis puissent nous écouter 
sans nous interrompre. 

Oui, good manners! Alors la langue est un théâtre dont les mots sont les acteurs.  

(Interruptions) 

 

61 

(Interruptions) 

C’est de Ferdinand Brunetière. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Mohamed, don’t interrupt! 

(Interruptions) 

But you can’t ! Cross talking is not allowed! 

You are interrupting the hon. Member. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Toussaint:    Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.    Donc,  je  disais  qu’on  parle  ici  de 
promotion  de  nos  langues,  promouvoir  nos  langues.    Nous  sommes,  il  me  semble,  un  des 
rares  pays  où  nous  organisons,  à  travers  le  ministère  des  Arts  et  de  la  Culture,  un  drama 
festival – si je fais une faute, l’honorable ministre pourra me corriger - en 11 ou 12 langues il 
me semble. Les officiers sont là ; nous sommes un des rares pays au monde à le faire. Et moi-
même dans le passé, j’ai eu l’occasion de participer dans une pièce  française, créole.  J’ai 
même aidé une collègue à monter une pièce en hindi et tout ceci vous montre le foisonnement 
qu’il  y  a  autour  de  la  langue.    Nous  avons,  dans  notre  auguste  Assemblée,  pas  mal  de 
connaisseurs des langues. L’honorable Madame Monty qui vient de faire son discours, sait de 
quoi je parle. Et on ne peut pas aujourd’hui rester insensible à ce qui va venir, à ce qui va 
s’améliorer dans ce que nous avons déjà.   

J’ouvre  une  petite  parenthèse.    Il  y  a  en  ce  moment,  nos  tous  petits  de  la  CPE, 
aujourd’hui ils ont eu leur premier papier dont fait partie ma fille. Je les salue d’ailleurs ces 
enfants-là. Jeudi, ils vont avoir leur papier d’Asian Language.  Et vous vous rendez compte 
donc qu’aujourd’hui, dans notre pays, nous avons des jeunes enfants de 11 ans qui parlent 
couramment et qui écrivent très, très bien, que ce soit le mandarin - ma fille a fait le mandarin 
– que ce soit le créole mauricien, que ce soit l’hindi, l’urdu, le tamil, toutes ces langues. Moi, 
je ne peux ne pas rester insensible et je ne peux pas sentir cette vibration d’entendre et de voir 
les jeunes parler couramment ces langues. 

(Interruptions) 

 

62 

Et ce que nous disons ici dans ces différents amendements, c’est d’emmener tout ceci à un 
niveau encore plus élevé. 

On  a  parlé  de  livres,  on  a  parlé  de  CDs,  le  côté  informatique  sera  un  outil 
extraordinaire, l’informatique une traduction immédiate. On a qu’à taper quelque chose sur 
l’ordinateur et on a la traduction immédiate dans la langue que nous voulons. Et nous aurons, 
dans quelques années, à travers ces jeunes, ces petits qui montent, et grâce aux amendements 
apportés, ici, par le ministre,  un peuple, une population qui va parler, qui va s’exprimer dans 
différentes  langues.  Quand  un  étranger  va  venir  dans  le  pays,  qu’est-ce  qu’il  va  se  dire ? 
Qu’est-ce qu’il va dire ? Qu’il se retrouve ! Il y a le monde qui est là. Il se trouve en Asie, il 
se retrouve en Europe, en Chine, il voit tout cela dans notre petite île Maurice. Sur certaines 
cartes nous n’apparaissons même pas et vous vous rendez compte, aujourd’hui, ce que nous 
sommes en train de faire! 

Donc, soyons positifs ! Allons voir un peu plus loin que le bout de notre nez, s’il vous 
plaît, allons voir l’avenir, si nou contan nou pays nou participer avek tou ce ki pe vini. Et si je 
fais cela, c’est aussi, en même temps, l’espoir que, peut-être un jour - ce n’est pas le débat, 
mais  on  en  parle  tellement,  tout  le  monde  parle  du  créole  mauricien  -  éventuellement,  le 
créole mauricien fera son entrée au Parlement. Ça c’est un autre débat. 

Donc, Madame la présidente, je ne vais pas aller dans les détails techniques légaux et 
tout ça. Il y a certaines personnes qui font semblant de ne pas comprendre. Tant pis pour eux! 
Moi, je vois le côté riche de tout ce qui vient. Les langues que nous utilisons, ici, dans le 
pays,  nous  font  devenir  très  riches.  J’avais  noté  quelques  petits  points  comme  ça.  Oui, 
quelque chose de très important - le ministre en a parlé lui-même - c’est le tourisme culturel. 
C’est à travers justement ces amendements que nous pouvons emmener tout cela. Ce serait 
intéressant. Je prends un exemple, pour les Chinois qui viennent dans le pays pour voir les 
petits mauriciens, les petits africains - nous faisons partie du continent africain -  et leur dire 
ni hao, she she. Ils seront ébahis, ils seront contents de voir tout cela.  

(Interruptions) 

Non, mon appran ek mo tifi. Cela ne va pas se faire comme ça. Il faut qu’il y ait des cadres, il 
faut qu’il y ait des structures, il faut mettre de l’ordre et c’est tout cela que ces amendements 
apportent. 

Pour terminer, je vais citer une petite phrase d’un Nobel Prize Winner in Literature in 

1956, Juan Ramón Jiménez qui nous dit – 

 
«Qui  apprend une nouvelle langue acquiert une nouvelle âme». 

63 

Donc, chers amis, commencez à apprendre quelque chose de nouveau - il y a tout plein - une 
nouvelle langue. Essayez et éventuellement, vous aurez une nouvelle âme. 

Merci beaucoup Madame la présidente. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah! 

(3.54 p.m.) 

Mr  S.  Rutnah  (Third  Member  for  Piton  &  Rivière  du  Rempart):  Thank  you 
Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, firstly, let me start by congratulating the Minister of Arts 
and Culture for having brought this legislation which, in fact, is going to revolutionise the 
Speaking Unions functioning in this country for the first time. 

Let me remind Members of this House that it is through this Minister, hon. Baboo, 
that  we  had  the  refurbishment  of  Serge  Constantin  Theatre  at  Vacoas  which  was  in  a 
dilapidated  condition.  He  also  transformed  the  Cultural  Centre  Trust  by  making  it  a  more 
accountable and more transparent institution in Mauritius. It is his Ministry currently working 
on  the  law  that  is  going  to  revolutionise  and  modernise  the  Rights  Management  Society, 
which society, today, is in a shame condition when you look at what happens with the Rights 
Management Society and how copyright issues are affected in this country. 

Madam Speaker, after having heard all hon. Members, who have intervened so far, 
from the other side of the House and from this side of the House, it is an undeniable fact, it is 
undeniable  that  language  promotes  culture,  language  promotes  the  spirit  of  nationalism, 
language promotes identity. We are one of the rare countries in the world where we have a 
blend of languages that exist. They are not simply there in their existence, but they are there 
in the usage in everyday life, whether in written form or in spoken form and these languages 
reflect our culture, our tradition, our religion, and, with this richness of tradition, culture and 
religion,  today,  we  are  a  society  that  sets  example  of  what  we  call:  living  in  peace  and 
harmony. 

We  should  never  forget  the  objective  of  this  Government  that  we  are  trying  to 
promote, firstly, to bring economic miracle, l’harmonie sociale et la paix sociale. And how 
do we bring that? We bring that by virtue of acting in a way that we make everybody in this 
country feel that they belong to this country, to a community, to a cultural identity and to a 
society that is knitted to bring economic development in our country. 

64 

 
Now,  my  friend  Baboo,  the  hon.  Minister,  has  been  vehemently  criticised  by  hon. 
Baloomoody,  insofar  as  how  the  Minister  is  going  to  nominate,  how  the  PSC  is  going  to 
nominate.  But,  let  me  remind  him  one  thing.  The  entire  objective  of  introducing  this 
legislation is to bring transparency, is to bring harmony as between other laws that exist in 
the country. Now, what do we have in one of the clauses of this legislation? The Director of 
Audit will audit the accounts of all the Unions. Now, are we going to say that the Office of 
the Director of Audit is not an independent body; the Auditor is not an independent person? 
Is this politics that my hon. friend has referred to? Now, let us look at just a few of them… 

Mr Baloomoody: On a point of order, Madam Speaker. I never referred the Director 
of  Audit  of  doing  any  politics.  I  referred  to  the  Members.  I  have  much  respect  for  the 
Director of Audit and I would like that my friend withdraw or if he did not understand what I 
have said I hope that now he understands because we agree that the Director of Audit should 
audit the accounts and we are for it. I have never mentioned that we are playing politics. This 
is an issue that we should not play politics. 

Mr Rutnah: I am grateful to the point that has been raised by hon. Baloomoody. I 
never said that he referred to the Director of Audit as not being an independent person. What 
I said, I asked the question rhetorically that: are we going to say insofar as accountability is 
concerned, that the Office of the Director of Audit is not an independent office? I asked the 
question rhetorically because there was allegation made that this Government, in particular 
the Minister, is going to politicise the issue.  

Now, let us talk about politics a little bit. Let us look at the previous legislation, the 
one he referred to, for example. Let us look at section 6 (4) of the English-Speaking Union. 
What section 6 (4) of the English-Speaking Union, the precedent one, says, is as follows –  

“Notwithstanding this section, the members of the Committee and the office bearers 
of the Union shall be the persons specified in the Schedule.” 

Now, let us look at the Schedule - a few names only. The Schedule comprises of - I 
am not saying he is a politician or he is involved in politics, that is a matter for people to 
draw conclusion –  

•  Prof. Jagdish Manrakhan; 
•  a representative of the Prime Minister’s Office; 
•  a representative of the Ministry of External Affairs; 

65 

 
•  a representative of the Ministry of Education & Science; 
•  a  representative  of  the  Ministry  of  Arts,  Culture,  Leisure  and  Reform 

Institutions… 

Mamma mia! 

(Interruptions) 

 (Interruptions) 

Goodness! Gracious me! If this was not politics in action, then what are we going to term 
this? 

Now,  let  us  look  at,  for  example,  the  Hindi-Speaking  Union,  without  going  into 

details of all the Unions. Let us have a look at section 5 (3) –  

“The  office  bearers  of  the  Council  shall  be  the  persons  specified  in  the  Second 
Schedule to the Act.” 

Now, let us look at the names on the Second Schedule of the Act – 

•  Mr Deepchand Beeharry;  
•  a representative of the Hindi Pracharini Sabha; 
•  a representative of the Ministry of Education & Science;  
•  a representative of the Ministry of Arts, Culture and Youth Development. 

Then we have got a number of names –  

•  Mr Deotam Santokhee, and 
•  Mrs Meenakshi Seetulsingh. 

Jesus Christ! Are we going to say… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Member, I think it is good that you restrain yourself to the 

Bill without making any abusive comments, please! 

Mr Rutnah: I apologise if the word ‘Jesus Christ’ offends the House today.  

 (Interruptions) 

 

Madam Speaker… 

66 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah, I am not saying that one word is offending the House 
or the other word. I am just telling you to restrain yourself to the parameters of the Bill. You 
address yourself to the Speaker and if you could restrain yourself from saying “mamma mia” 
or what not! Please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Rutnah: Madam Speaker… 

(Interruptions) 

 I am just loving this debate and that is why I am coming with all these. But, I will now deal 
strictly with what is happening in this House today. 

Now, at the end of the day, Madam Speaker, after I gave all these examples of the 
endemic culture of political control that existed and today the  changes that the Minister is 
bringing in this House, the changes that he is bringing are, firstly, to harmonise the legislation 
and place them on equal footing. Secondly, to make judicious use of public funds. Taxpayers’ 
money should be used judiciously and without that money being abused by any institution 
that exists in this country. Thirdly, to adhere strictly to the principle of good governance. We 
have  a  mandate  from  the  people,  we  have  a  mandate  from  the  nation  to  ensure  that  good 
governance becomes the culture in this country and that is why this Government has created a 
Ministry specifically designated to Good Governance.  

Very  soon,  when  in  this  House  there  will  be  a  Good  Governance  and  Integrity 
Reporting  Bill  that  will  come  to  actually  reinforce  this  principle  of  good  governance  that 
today is concerned with this Bill, and the Unions will have an obligation to come up with 
accounts to show how they have spent taxpayers’ money and, as I said earlier on, the Director 
of Audit will have a bird’s eye view on how they are using the money, I am sure any misuse 
of funds will be chased and those who misuse those funds will be accountable somewhere 
somehow.  

The review of the composition of the Executive Council and maintain the identity of 
these institutions in a secular manner, of course, without revising the Executive Council we 
will lag behind and, what we are doing today is to ensure that those who are going to sit on 

 

67 

that Executive Council will not do politics. They are going to promote the Speaking Unions. 
They are going to promote the culture. They are going to promote identity in this country. 

Madam Speaker, as I said, this is for the first time that such a Bill has been presented 
in  this  House  which  is  compatible  and  compliant  with  the  mission  statement  of  this 
Government.  

On this note, Madam Speaker, I am honoured and with great pride I say thank you 

that I have been given the opportunity today to intervene on this Bill. 

(4.08 p.m.) 

Mr S. Mohamed (First Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port Louis East): Let 
me say, Madam Speaker, that I am also honoured to be able to participate in this debate and, 
as parliamentary tradition demands, it is my right nay, but my duty as well to not only listen 
to all Orators who have addressed this august Assembly on this particular Bill but I should, as 
I  have  just  stated,  parliamentary  tradition  dictates  that  I  should  also  come  up  with  what  I 
believe the Bill says. But, also rebut whatever has been said if I believe that whatever has 
been  said  is  devoid  of  any  merit,  and  if  I  am  of  the  view  that  whoever  made  certain 
statements  in  this  august  Assembly  –  stated  whatever  he  said  in  a  way  that  he  did  not 
understand what he was saying – maybe I should clarify matters. 

I have listened to everyone today and none of us have addressed the very important 
element: do we really need to have Speaking Unions? If we do really need to have them as 
organisations  that  are  created  to  be  separate  to  cultural  centres,  is  it  really  a  good  policy 
decision?  

That is the question that one should ask oneself. The reason why I asked that is the 
following: true it is that we have an advantage as a country, a country where we have people 
who  have  come  from  various  corners  of  the  world  and  who  have  brought  their  cultures, 
religions  and  their  languages.  When  we  put  all  those  elements  together,  it  does  indeed 
potentially, I say, create such a dynamism that can really propel our country to new heights. 
Have  we  managed,  as  a  nation,  to  put  together  all  those  various  elements  of  different 
languages that make us inherently a strong people? Have we managed to bring it together and 
turn it into energy that could propel us forward as a nation? And the answer, in my humble 
view, is no, we have not.  

68 

 
I remember at a time when I went to Geneva for a Conference - and many friends in 
this  august  Assembly  have  attended  confluences  in  Geneva  only  recently,  if  I  am  not 
mistaken.  When  you  go  to  all  those  international  conferences  what  you  do  see  are  small 
booths; booths where  you find translators, instant translators.  I was happy one day when I 
was there as the former Minister of Labour and I had this young man who came to touch my 
shoulder. He introduced himself and I was so surprised seeing this young man and he spoke 
Creole to me. He said that he is from Mauritius. He was not more than 24 years old. He was 
working in Geneva and was appointed by the United Nations to carry out translation for this 
activity of the organisation for migration.  

(Interruptions) 

As an interpreter!  He was there doing a fantastic job. He told me that he decided to take it 
upon himself to come over to Geneva, go to a school, be qualified as an interpreter and, at the 
age of 24, he was so happy that he was earning more than €7,000 a month. At 24!  

When I looked at him, it made me so proud to see this young Mauritian man, who had 
taken it upon himself, he could not obtain the training in Mauritius because the exact training 
for him to be qualified to work for the United Nations or any other international organisation, 
is not available in Mauritius. So, he searched the Internet, in his thirst for knowledge, in his 
thirst  for  betterment,  decided  to  take  it  upon  himself.  Coming  from  a  very  humble 
background, sacrificed himself and his parents also sacrificed themselves and paid for him to 
go to Geneva and become this vibrant young man who was, once again, made the pride of our 
country through his ability to master what we have as the basis of knowledge for languages, 
bring it in such a way and turn it into a way that he can earn his money on the international 
scene. Have we, as a nation, managed to do it?  

I looked at the website of Arts and Culture of the Government of the United Kingdom 
and it says that languages not only - as well as arts - can bring us together as a people and 
sure create national unity that we so desire, that we dream of, that we must continuously try 
to work for and strive towards. But it also ensures that languages can propel the country to 
economic success. So, the question is: has Mauritius used languages, that is, our forte, from 
babe  in  arms  -  the  children  of  this  country  learned  various  languages  -  when  we  are  still 
infants, we learn not one but sometimes three or even four languages. From the ancient days 
in Mauritius, when people started going to all religious schools for languages; from the times 
in  the  villages  when  we  had  baitkas  to  the  times  of  today  when  we  learn  languages  in 

 

69 

different modern means. The strength of this country, the strength of our people is that we 
have the  ability to master various languages.  But have we used it to make it an  economic 
strength? The answer is: no, we have not.  

The pity is that I expected the hon. Minister who only recently stated that he wanted 
to make of Arts and Culture another pillar of our economy. This is an opportunity that has 
been missed. Because when you look at the objects of each and every Bill, when you look at 
the functions of each and every Speaking Union, never a single moment do we have in there 
as you have in the United Kingdom that the object of arts and culture is to propel a nation to 
economic success. Nowhere in there is this very simple idea mentioned. The reason why it is 
not mentioned is because at the seat of Arts and Culture – and here  I  am not blaming the 
Minister, but I am saying that his role is to administer that proper policy decisions are taken.  

What I am saying here is that at the seat of the Arts and Culture, it has always been 
the case that they do not see it as a potential for an economic force. I am not saying only you 
from the moment that you become Minister; it is not only since he has become Minister. It 
has been the case for the past 30 years or even more that no-one has seen language as a way 
of going forward as a strong economic force. England does not have what we have; France 
does not have what we have; Spain does not have what we have. We have it! 

In  Mauritius,  we  have  the  ability  to  master  English  and  French,  let  alone  other 
languages. Imagine the strength of a people that can do that. Just go to the websites and look 
at jobs offers, just go to international job offers and look for what they look; bilingual people. 
Imagine  if  we  could  put  that  on  our  side  and  make  us  economically  strong!  Look  at  the 
beaches of Mauritius; look at all the sellers of various wears to tourists, people who have not 
been to school, who, all of a sudden, master Italian, German, Russian, after simply having 
been  exposed  to  tourists  from  those  various  countries  and  they  speak  those  languages  as 
though  they  were  native  speakers!  What  a  strength  that,  as  a  people,  we  possess  and  we 
should really look at that element! Because if we have it in our DNA, as a people to master 
languages, it is something that other countries look at with jealousy and envy.  

So,  I  would  have  expected,  Madam  Speaker,  that  this  element  -  since  the  hon. 
Minister has already said that he wanted to turn Arts and Culture into a pillar of our economy 
- should have been seen into this Bill; it is an opportunity that has been missed; make this 
piece of legislation something different, something that has never existed before, be different 

 

70 

and there to be different to previous Ministers of Arts and Culture.  There to be better and, 
unfortunately, it is an opportunity that has been missed.   

This is my view. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Mohamed: When I look at this Bill and I maintain that it is an opportunity that 

has been missed, it is because I will get to the rebuttal element of my intervention.   

Hon.  Rutnah  talks  about  –  and  I  love  seeing  hon.  Rutnah  smile  because  he  knows 
what’s coming and he knows exactly what’s coming - Wohi hota hai jo manzoore khuda hota 
hai!  He knows exactly what is going to come.  I hope so.  I am causing the suspense. I mean 
we are not trying to be over-dramatic, but suspense we need to have it.  He talked about the 
English-Speaking Union and he talked about a Schedule of the English-Speaking Union, the 
old  law  with  glee,  with  such  a  smile  that  he  usually  shows  us.    How  he  is  so  happy  with 
himself!    Hon.  Rutnah  came  up  and  said:  “Madam  Speaker,  we  have  Professor  Jagdish 
Manrakhan  there”,  he  was  obviously  laying  the  blame  of  what  is  in  the  Schedule  of  that 
particular  old  piece  of  legislation  at  the  doorstep  of  the  previous  Government  or 
Governments.  He thought that what he was doing is scoring a very important point because 
just  before  saying  that,  he  said  he  was  going  to  take  care  of  the  politic  side  and  being  a 
politician,  normally  we  expect  him  to  score  political  points.  That  was  an  own  goal  and 
beautifully executed in such a style that no one would want to even copy him. So, how he 
masterfully said: “we are going to deal with politics now, we are going to deal - look at what 
they did in the past”, Professor Manrakhan… 

That is difficult.  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No cross talking! 
Mr Mohamed: He was expected to make everyone in this august Assembly believe 
and obviously he’s learning very fast, each and every time that he hears something, you see 
his head turns slightly up looking at the press gallery ... 
(Interruptions) 

 

71 

I have taken many years to learn that but the good thing is that in the rank of Government, 
Madam Speaker, they are fast learners, they are very fast learners but then again if only he 
had used the small inclination in his head to look at his speech and look at the law he would 
have seen 1993 and you see now he is shaking his head saying, my God I should have read 
better! 

I  guess  when  he  saw  me  stand  up  and  said  ‘I  would  rebut  what  he  has  to  say’,  he 
thought to himself - have I missed something there, what is he going to come up with. I’ll 
come up with nothing else but a simple reading exercise - ‘1993’. He has only the... 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order please! Hon. Jhugroo don’t interrupt! 
Mr Mohamed: So coming back to that issue - there is more to come, unfortunately. 
The great thing about this debate today, Madam Speaker, is that even colleagues on the other 
side - and I call them colleagues former, future or otherwise I don’t know  -  are enjoying the 
blunder of hon. Rutnah.  

Even people on his side of the House are all smiles and are laughing, and really being 
fair and accepting and agreeing; admitting that blunder there was and he should have read 
better. Now, I fear for him, I guess at the next Parliamentary meeting he would be called to 
order and he would be told: next time that you make a speech ensure that you read who was 
President  then  -  it  was  hon.  Cassam  Uteem  President  of  Republic,  it  was  Sir  Anerood 
Jugnauth Prime Minister.  Let me explain the reasoning behind it. It was an English Speaking 
Union that already existed and hon. Baloomoody kindly passed me on the Hansard for those 
days when that Bill came and a little reading exercise carried within a few seconds here just 
when the hon. Member was speaking allowed me to see where he went wrong. 

Now,  having  said  that,  the  whole  object  of  this  whole  debate  when  I  have  heard 
everyone  here  is  to  ensure  the  independence  of  the  Unions,  but  before  I  get  to  the 
independence of the Unions, let me just talk about whether or not we need Speaking Unions. 
Because no one has really talked about it and the reason why people try to avoid speaking 
about this is what: because sometimes people view it as politically incorrect to even go and 
challenge the idea of saying why should we create Speaking Unions. I believe it in this day 
and  age  to  be  politically  correct  to  try  to  see  and  analyse  independently  whether  it  goes 
against the previous Government’s policy to whom I belong.  

Sometimes hon. Soodhun also belonged to that Government, hon. Xavier-Luc Duval 
belonged  to  that  Government,  hon.  Henry  belonged  to  that  Government;  hon.  Sinatambou 
belonged to that Government, at some point in time, not recently. But we all have to look at 

 

72 

what  we  have  done  in  the  past  and  say  maybe  we  should  look  at  ourselves  and  criticise 
constructively.  

Do  we  need  unions?  Already  we  have  Islamic  Cultural  Centre,  we  have  different 
cultural centres. Imagine and let us analyse as hon. Members, Madam Speaker, what is the 
cost  of  having  a  Speaking  Union  and  a  Cultural  Centre?  I  could  have  proposed  that  the 
Islamic cultural Centre simply has a department where you have the Urdu there and you have 
Arabic as well there. It could have been basically amalgamated. You could have a merger of 
a Cultural Centre and a Speaking Union in order to be more efficient in the work, in order, to 
be more economically efficient and in order pour ne pas avoir du gaspillage, parce que c’est 
du gaspillage. Let us not forget that taxpayers’ money would be paying each Speaking Union 
and, finally, at the end of the day, let us analyse what has this country managed to achieve 
after  so  many  years,  after  independence  in  terms  of  Unions.  Is  it  true  or  not  today  that 
youngsters  are  speaking  less  English?  Fact,  we  have  an  English  Speaking  Union  but 
youngsters in this country speak less English. It is true also that youngsters speak less and 
less languages of our ancestors.  

I remember the times when I was forced to go and learn Urdu, I was forced by my late 
grandfather to ensure that I could understand and even write Urdu, which I am proud I do, I 
can, but today, I, as a father and many of us here are fathers and mothers or even grandfathers 
and grandmothers, we are afraid for the people out there and we say to ourselves - will we be 
able to see the day and guarantee the day when our children and our grandchildren will be 
able  to  master  all  those  languages  like  our  parents  forced  us  to?  Will  we  have  the  same 
opportunities? Will they be able to transmit it to their children? The fact remains in that it 
does  not  in  any  way  help  to  have  a  proliferation  of  unions  or  a  proliferation  of  cultural 
organisations, it does not help. What helps is that there is efficiency within, what helps is that 
money is spent and well spent.  

Today I am ready to come out and say the Urdu Speaking Union, one of the founding 
fathers was my late grandfather. He ensured that the Urdu Speaking Union was in Mauritius 
in order for people to understand and speak it and that it is spread to all those who would 
have the love of Urdu and poetry. He ensured that I had lessons every single day until I was 
18 to learn Urdu but does it mean that it is going to keep on working for the new generation - 
it  does  not.  So,  in  my  humble  view,  and  this  is  the  view  I  have,  we  should  try  to  merge, 
amalgamate  all  those  organisations  and  not  simply  have  a  proliferation  because  it  is  not 
helping out.  

73 

 
Another issue which I would like to get at here is the issue of independence. I will 
basically try to pick up where hon. Baloomoody had left. Hon. Toussaint had stated, at some 
stage,  that  hon.  Baloomoody  has  criticised  the  Minister.  At  no  time  did  hon.  Baloomoody 
criticise the hon. Minister, this is Parliamentary tradition that we criticise the policy of the 
Minister and not the Minister. It is very, very unfortunate that Members on the other side - 
some Members on the other side - feel that whenever you criticise a policy, they are already 
on the defensive. Even before you start criticising a policy they are on the defensive. What 
have they got to fear? Why are they so paranoid that they have to basically believe that we 
are criticising the person. We are not criticising the person, we are criticising the policy and 
not a single Member of Government who stood up today has managed to come and explain 
why is it that, in the previous legislation there was only one representative of the Ministry 
that was going to be on that Council. As opposed to today – you have seven when you count 
them; I’ve counted them and have come to seven. Let’s go through it.  

In the previous Act there was only one representative of the Ministry and when there 
was  this  one  representative  of  the  Ministry  I  remember,  as  rightly  pointed  out  by  hon. 
Baloomoody, the intervention in this august Assembly of hon. Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun who 
said - and it is in Hansard: “I do not think it should be for the Minister to decide”. 

Here, she was talking about the policy of the then Government to appoint one member 
of the Ministry, not un petit copain - un ami d’un ministre ou quelqu’un qui est proche du 
pouvoir - ou une copine. Ce n’était même pas ça l’intention, ce n’était même pas ça dans la 
loi.  Ce  qu’il  y  avait  dans  la  loi,  Madame  la  présidente,  c’était  simplement  -  rien  de  plus 
compliqué que cela - le ministre qui avait le droit de choisir un membre du ministère des Arts 
et de la Culture et de l’envoyer sur ce conseil d’administration. Pas plus que ça. Et à cela, 
l’honorable Mme Dookun-Luchoomun avait dit, I go on - 

“I think the Union should have elected their own members. I am sure there are plenty 
of people  who would be happy; who would be  ready to do the job and it does not 
really  sound  good  for  the  Minister  having  so  much  of  mainmise  over  Speaking 
Unions.”  

Let me repeat that. Hon. Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun stated in this august Assembly that, 

and I quote - 

“It  does  not  really  sound  good  for  the  Minister  having  so  much  of  mainmise  over 
Speaking Unions.”  

 

74 

What  does  mainmise  mean?  According  to  hon.  Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun  then, 
nominating  one  member  of  the  Ministry  was  mainmise,  nominating  one  member,  a  civil 
servant,  was  mainmise.  If  this  is  mainmise,  what’s  this  today?  Today,  this  is  a  hostile 
takeover, that is, a conquest. This is this very Government, Madam Speaker, that said in the 
electoral  programme,  on  all  political  platforms  and  now,  Madam  Speaker,  just  like  hon. 
Rutnah did, I will also embark on that political agenda, but I will make sure to read properly 
before I say anything. This is this Government that said they will not go on platforms to make 
speeches when there are religious festivities.  

This is this Government that took an oath in front of the people, a sacred commitment 
that  they  would  not  mix  politics  and  religion,  that  they  would  keep  those  people  at  arm’s 
length.  This  very  Government  has  found  an  excellent  scheme:  “we  will  not  go  on  this 
political platform, we will not make a speech at all those festivals, but what we will do is that 
we will go and sit in the Speaking Unions ourselves.” Basically, you could not bring yourself 
to go to the platform of those religious organisations, but what you did is that when to sit and 
squat, you went to squat in the Speaking Union yourself. This is what happened. Because, 
here,  if  hon.  Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun  believes  that  one  person,  a  civil  servant,  was  a 
mainmise, not one Member from the Government side - not one - has managed to justify this 
decision.  They  have  just  simply  stood  up  and  said:  ‘why  do  they  criticise  the  Minister?’ 
Nothing followed afterwards. 

Hon. Mrs Jadoo-Jaunbocus stood up, has she come up with one single argument to 
come and justify the need to have more people nominated by the Minister as opposed to the 
previous  Bill?  No!  Not  an  iota  in  an  argument  to  come  and  support  this  decision  of 
Government. So, what I expect today? What the people outside expect today? And this is not 
a show, as hon. Toussaint believes. This is diabolical on the part of the Minister. He said … 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Member, please! 

(Interruptions) 

You know the golden rule of debates in this House is not to be passionate, to be calm and not 
to be passionate about what you are saying. 

Now,  you have just said the word ‘diabolical’.  I don’t think  you  can treat the hon. 

Minister like this. Please, withdraw this word. I am appealing to you. 

 

75 

Mr Mohamed: I withdraw the word ‘diabolical’ but then again, I find no words to 
describe  -  let  me  put  it  that  way  -  the  amazing  feat  of  the  hon.  Minister,  that  has  been 
approved by Cabinet. Therefore, Cabinet stands by this Bill, Government stands by this Bill, 
Government believes that it is okay to have a representative of the Ministry nominated by the 
Minister; believes that four members have to be appointed by the Minister; a representative of 
the  Ministry  responsible  for  education  appointed  by  the  Minister,  a  representative  of  the 
Ministry of Finance and Economic Development appointed by the Minister. We have come 
from the figure one to seven. There are eleven Members on the Executive Council, seven of 
the eleven are decided and appointed by the hon. Minister.  

Now, do we need any other explanation as far as Mathematics go? I did not call it by 
any word that anyone may deem provocative or passionate or unparliamentary. I leave it to 
posterity to know what exactly this hon. Minister and Government has done, because I would 
like to hear today why seven and not one.  Let us take the reasoning further, let me say that I 
agree  with  hon.  Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun  that  one  is  a  mainmise,  what  is  seven?  What  is 
seven? 

(Interruptions) 

‘Mo pou allé encore are sa!’ Because it hurts, that’s why, and it is the truth. Why seven? I 
would like to hear the hon. Minister, Madam Speaker, to come and explain, to tell us, is this a 
Government  that  wants  to  really  make  an  organisation  independent?  And  what  is  more 
shocking is what was said in 1993 in this august Assembly by a Minister of hon. Sir Anerood 
Jugnauth.  It  was  hon.  Parsuramen  as  he  was  then.  And  hon.  Parsuramen,  when  he  was 
Minister then, what did he say? He talks about autonomous. That is in Hansard in 1993. 

In 1993, the Government led by Sir Anerood Jugnauth believed that an organisation 
such as the Speaking Union should, by all means, be autonomous. That is all to his honour, 
hon. Parsuramen then, as he was. Many, many years later on, the same Government, with the 
same  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  with  more  experience  behind  him,  with more  wisdom  behind 
him,  believes  that  the  autonomy  which  he  stood  for  in  1993  should  be  thrown  out  of  the 
window. The same Prime Minister who stood for autonomy in 1993, today presides Cabinet 
and approves a Bill that comes to this august Assembly that kicks out the whole autonomous 
mechanism out of the window. If this is not a clear operation of this Government in order to 
take over completely, même pas une mainmise,  not even the hand, this time the whole body, 
the foot and the whole corpse has been brought into that Speaking Union.  

76 

 
This is basically supplanting the role of an autonomous organisation. I can assure you, 
Madam Speaker, that I know what will happen. I will be told off by people who can’t accept 
that someone like us, in the Opposition, may have a different view. I may be told off because 
some people will say: well, he was overdramatic. But it is a dramatic situation that demands 
one  to  be  dramatic.  I  may  be  told  off,  but  you  will  see  there  will  never  be  an  iota  of  an 
argument to come and explain why from one to seven. He cannot justify, because if it would 
be easy to justify, we would have heard the justification already. He would not be turning 
towards the other bench of Government and finding the answer and because he has no answer 
and the only way he could really defend himself is by attacking.  

Therefore,  let  us  bring  down  this  Parliament  into  a  situation  where  whatever  we 
propose - we thought until recently, that whenever we came with amendments, it was going 
to be something different that the Government was starting, new, that even our Government 
did not do. When they believe that there are situations that demand that there is transparency 
and autonomy, that they would come and listen to good suggestions and bring amendments. 
Until  today,  I  have  lengthened  that  speech,  waiting  every  second,  waiting  every  minute, 
hoping that the hon. Minister would circulate an amendment. People out there are  waiting 
that they would not use it as a political tool. People out there are waiting to ensure that they 
would not use those Speaking Unions and Cultural Centres as political tools and we expect to 
see an amendment circulated. Do we see anything? No! 

What  you  will  see  in  conclusion,  Madam  Speaker,  is  simply  just  like  certain  other 
countries that they believe that numbers are the sign of might.  They believe that numbers are 
a sign of might. But what they don’t realise is that you may have numbers here, but out there 
people want autonomy and not this is what in the Bill. 

Thank you very much. 

Madam Speaker:  Yes, hon. Baboo! 

(4.40 p.m.) 

Mr Baboo:  Madam Speaker, I wish to thank hon. Members on both sides of the House 
for their brilliant exposés on the Bills and for their positive contributions in the debates.  I 
have  taken  good  note  of  their  proposals  which  will  be  taken  into  consideration  at  the 
implementation stages once the Bills are passed.  

 

77 

As  regards  the  nomination  by  the  Minister,  it  is  to  be  pointed  out  that  only  four 
members of the Executive Council will be concerned, out of 11 members. This neither forms 
the  quorum  nor  commands  of  the  majority  in  the  Executive  Council.    In  fact,  these  four 
members who should have an interest in the development, propagation and promotion of the 
respective languages, will bring new blood and a new perspective in the management of the 
affairs of the unions. 

Referring to what hon. Baloomoody has mentioned that no changes have been brought 
to the new objects of the Speaking Union Bills. In fact, hon. Baloomoody should understand 
well the new objects. The new objects have been enriched and the promotion of intercultural 
and  interlinguistic  understanding  has  now  been  introduced  in  the  objects  to  promote 
intercultural dialogue at section 4 (d) and section 4 (i).   

It is the duty of the Government to have some control on the grants ranging from Rs1 
m.  to  Rs2.3  m.  being  given  to  the  Speaking  Unions.    Exercising  to  same  extent,  financial 
control  does  not  mean  that  the  Unions  are  not  autonomous.  It  is  not  seven  as  the  hon. 
Member on the other side just said.  It is four nominated by the Minister, four elected by the 
Union, three from the office or representatives of the Ministry. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Don’t interrupt the Minister, please! 

Mr  Baboo:    Four  nominated  by  the  Minister,  four  elected  by  the  Union  and  three 

members nominated who are representatives of other Ministries.  So, it makes seven.   

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order, please! 

Mr Baboo: Madam Speaker, we  are being faithful to our roots by consolidating our 
linguistic heritage and opening them to all our citizens. We are assured that the unions will be 
instrumental in maintaining... 

Pas peur nous prend li compte! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

78 

…our customs, traditions and folklore from the linguistic perspective.  The strength of our 
colourful nation lies in the multiplicity of our roots and origins.  Our linguistic landscape is 
being given the necessary space to blossom in the best condition.  

Madam Speaker, I commend the Bills to the House. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Bills read a second time and committed.  

COMMITTEE STAGE 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

The following Bills were considered and agreed to - 

(a) The Arabic-Speaking Union (Amendment) Bill (No. XVIII of 2015)  
(b) The Bhojpuri-Speaking Union (Amendment) Bill (No. XIX of 2015), 
(c) The Chinese-Speaking Union (Amendment) Bill (No. XX of 2015), 
(d)  The Creole-Speaking Union (Amendment) Bill (No. XXI of 2015); 

(e)  The Sanskrit-Speaking Union (Amendment) Bill (No. XXII of 2015); 

(f)  The English-Speaking Union Bill (No. XXIII of 2015); 

(g) The Hindi-Speaking Union Bill (No. XXIV); 

(h) The Marathi-Speaking Union Bill (No. XXV of 2015); 

(i)  The Tamil-Speaking Union Bill (No. XXVI of 2015); 
(j)  The Telugu-Speaking Union Bill (No. XXVII of 2015); 

(k)  The Urdu-Speaking Union Bill (No. XXVIII of 2015). 

On  the  Assembly  resuming  with  Madam  Speaker  in  the  Chair,  Madam  Speaker 

reported accordingly. 

Third Reading 

On motion made and seconded, the following Bills were read the third time and 

passed –  

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 

The Arabic-Speaking Union (Amendment) Bill (No. XVIII of 2015); 
The Bhojpuri-Speaking Union (Amendment) Bill (No. XIX of 2015); 
The Chinese-Speaking Union (Amendment) Bill (No. XX of 2015); 
The Creole-Speaking Union (Amendment) Bill (No. XXI of 2015); 

79 

The Sanskrit-Speaking Union (Amendment) Bill (No. XXII of 2015); 
The English-Speaking Union Bill (No. XXIII of 2015); 

 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii)  The Hindi-Speaking Union Bill (No. XXIV of 2015); 
(viii)  The Marathi-Speaking Union Bill (No. XXV of 2015); 
The Tamil-Speaking Union Bill (No. XXVI of 2015); 
(ix) 
(x) 
The Telugu-Speaking Union Bill (No. XXVII of 2015); 
The Urdu-Speaking Union Bill (No. XXVIII of 2015). 
(xi) 

ADJOURNMENT 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that this Assembly do 

now adjourn to Tuesday 03 November 2015 at 11.30 a.m. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun) rose 

and seconded. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned.  

 

(5.04 p.m.) 

MATTERS RAISED 

PRB REPORT – LATE PUBLICATION 

Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River): Madam Speaker, I am 
grateful to you for having allowed me to intervene at Adjournment Time on a matter which 
concerns the civil servants of this country. In fact, it is concerning the late publication of the 
PRB Report.  

As  we  all  know,  Madam  Speaker,  this  report  was  scheduled  to  be  published  in 
October of this year and was to be implemented in January of next year. It is the first time 
that the report of the PRB will be published after three years instead of five years and it is the 
first time in history also, as far as I know, that the PRB Report has not been published at the 
scheduled time.  

As  I said, it was announced that the report was to be implemented in January next 
year, but with the delay of the publication, many questions have arisen and the civil servants 
in  this  country  have  already  expressed  themselves.  We  have  listened  to  many  trade  union 
leaders already giving their opinion, expressing their apprehension, their confusion, disturbed 

 

80 

and they have expressed also their dismay because this delay will inevitably impact upon the 
situation  and  the  life  of  many  civil  servants.  This  late  publication  will  impact  upon  the 
recruitment,  the  promotion,  the  restyling,  among  other  things;  this,  as  a  result  of  the  late 
recommendations of the forthcoming report.  

I don’t have to say also, Madam Speaker, that the late publication of the report will 
cause prejudice to those who are intending to retire as soon as the report would have been 
published. Therefore, different Civil Service Federations have already reacted, as I have just 
said, to this late publication of the report. Different trade unionists have reacted differently at 
the announcement of this late publication and we have also heard how they have also been on 
different wavelengths.  

Why  has  there  been  this  delay?  All  the  civil  servants  are  asking  the  question.  One 

trade union leader has said, and I quote –  

“Les torts sont partagés et que tous doivent jouer le jeu.” 

Is the late publication of this report due to the PRB itself, to the Ministry of Civil Service and 
Administrative  Reforms,  to  certain  Departments  which,  we  have  been  told,  have  failed  to 
submit their proposals in time? It is the same trade union leader who has been reported to say 
that the new Director of the PRB has opined that the report could be ready by mid-December 
si chacun joue son rôle.   

Another trade union leader, Madam Speaker, has squarely called for the revocation of 
the Director of the PRB after Cabinet had issued its communiqué on 09 October of this year 
which communiqué, I will just remind the House, talked about, and I quote –  

“The  PRB  report  will  be  published  in  the  first  quarter  of  2016  owing  to  factors 
beyond the control of the Bureau.” 

So, in view of all this confusion, this trade unionist has suggested that a 15% increase be paid 
on an interim basis pending the publication of the report.  

The point of my intervention, Madam Speaker, today is to request the hon. Minister to 
enlighten the House as to the real reasons of the delay of this report and also if he could give 
the guarantee to the civil servants of this country that the report will be implemented as from 
01 January next year as originally scheduled, whatever be the date, time and month in which 
this report will be made public. 

 
I have done, Madam Speaker. 

81 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  would  like  to  intervene.  I  am 
surprised by the hon. Member’s statement. This is the first time, Madam Speaker, that the 
PRB is being made over a period of three years and not five years and that is a major step 
forward, Madam Speaker, and that is the main reason why it is taking a little bit longer. It is 
because it used to take five years to be prepared, now it has to be prepared within three years 
and it is taking a few months more. Of course, it will be effective as from 01 January of next 
year. But that is the reason, I say again that it is because we have made a huge step forward 
for the civil servants, instead of waiting for five years, they will have it in three years.  

It is a major achievement.  Therefore, that is the reason, Madam Speaker.  Of course, 
also in the meantime there has been a change of Government and priorities have changed. 
According to the will of the people, Government has changed. Obviously, there have been 
views and submissions which have changed.  So, there is no need to panic and it will be there 
in the first quarter of next year. 

(5.10 p.m.) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Gobin! 

 

RIVIÈRE DES ANGUILES & SOUILLAC - FLOODING 

Mr M. Gobin (First Member for Rivière des Anguiles & Souillac):  Thank you, 

Madam Speaker, for allowing me the opportunity of speaking at Adjournment Time.   

The reason why I rise this evening is due to the increasingly urgent issue of flooding 
in Constituency No.13.  On Sunday 25, two days ago, there were hardly two hours of heavy 
rain and what I have witnessed in my Constituency, starting from Camp Banane, Grand Bois, 
La  Flora  and  going  down  to  Souillac  at  Pont  de  Negres  was  that  there  had  to  be  traffic 
diversion.   I witnessed that about noon, the worst point.  Right at the doorstep of the Fire 
Services  at  Saint  Aubin,  the  Police  had  to  solicit  help  from  inhabitants  to  effect  a  traffic 
diversion because of heavy rains, water overflowing the only main road which goes through 
Saint Aubin and down to Souillac. This situation has been there for too long, far too long and 
it requires the urgent attention of authorities, NDU on one hand, MPI on the other and also 
Environment for the cleaning of the rivers.   

82 

 
There are situations where this spills over to other Constituencies, when excess water 
flows down Rivière du Poste, it floods over in Marc Tabac, in Constituency No.12.  We have 
witnessed the worst situation, I think, earlier in the year, in March/April and on Sunday last, 
just two hours of heavy rain and it was back to square one.   

I am appealing to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister as Minister responsible for NDU, the 
hon. Minister responsible for MPI and my very good friend, hon. Minister for Environment 
and Cabinet, as one team, to have a personal attention to this situation.  Urgent works are 
required and I am rising this evening, once more, to appeal to Government to see to it. It is 
good that my very good friend, the hon. Minister of Finance is here to release the appropriate 
funds for the works to be done.    

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

The Minister of Environment, Sustainable Development and Disaster and Beach 
Management (Mr R. Dayal):  With the permission of the Leader of the House, I would like 
to state a couple of things which are very important for hon. Gobin to know. 

First,  I  was  in  my  car  when  I  heard  somebody  on  Top  FM  airing  his  concern 
concerning flooding in Batimarais area in the South, St Aubin.  Immediately, I reported to the 
Meteo  Services,  I  called  for  Mr  Servansingh  and  I  called  equally  for  Mr  Golaub  and  Mr 
Mangra.  I took the decision that we should initiate a special bulletin because, according to 
meteo conditions, if we have 25 mm of rain in half an hour, it is already a subject of concern 
and this is what flash floods are all about.  We have to take action and be prepared for action. 
We activated the National Disaster Centre and we made a special bulletin.  We were right, the 
diversion happened because I triggered the mechanism for the diversion. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Minister, can you please sit down! Please, sit down! Can you 
be brief please because we have got two other hon. Members who want to intervene?  You 
have to reply to the hon. Member what you propose to do. 

Mr Dayal:  I have already done what should be done in the best interest. We are the 
only  country  in  the  world  where  we  have  flash  floods,  we  have  no  casualty,  no  loss  of 
property.  So, we are doing what should be done. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Ameer Meea! 

 

 

 

83 

DESBOUCHERS ROAD - REPAIRS 

Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  and  Port  Louis 
East):  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  There is a problem in my Constituency; it is in relation 
to la rue Desbouchers qui se trouve à Roche Bois.  It starts from Route Nicolay till the end of 
the motorway to the North.  It is in a very bad state and with the recent heavy rainfall, there 
have been so many nids de poule which constitute a serious danger for motorcyclists.   

I urge the hon. Minister of Local Government to take necessary steps so as to remedy 

the situation urgently. 

Thank you. 

The  Minister  for  Local  Government  (Dr.  A.  Husnoo):    Madam  Speaker,  we  are 
aware of this problem and, actually, this road is on the NDU list to be done this year.  It is 
included in this financial year, so it is going to be taken care of, the drains and the road. 

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. S. Mohamed! 

(5.16 p.m) 

AIRMATE - MR RAWAT – LOSS OF JOB 

Mr S. Mohamed (First Member for Port Louis Maritime and Port Louis East):  
Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I had in a recent past, well, several months back, raised an issue 
at Adjournment Time, which touched a lot of Members on both sides of the House.  It was 
the very sad story of this young man living in my Constituency who is one Mr Rawat.  He is 
a very young man aged 20 years old; someone who is dumb and deaf and loses his job when 
he is employed by Airmate. 

Now, I had stated here to the hon. Prime Minister …. 

(Interruptions) 

This is where a lot of people had been fired by Government; it is that place, Airmate!   

Finally, I said here to the hon. Prime Minister to please look into this matter because 
all of us, on both sides of the House, try to ensure that people who are citizens of this country, 
who are weak, who have problems such as being deaf and dumb, should not lose their jobs 
simply; for no reason whatsoever. No reason was given in the letter simply kicked out. When 
people are being kicked out, they call it the cleaning process.  There was an undertaking on 

 

84 

the  part  of  the  hon.  Prime  Minister  that  he  would  personally  look  into  that  precisely  on 
humanitarian grounds, precisely because this  young man is wondering  why he has lost his 
job.  No one has explained to him up to now.  He is someone now who is cloisonné chez lui.  
He cannot go outside.  He does not want to go and visit the public out there because he feels 
that  once  he  had  a  job,  he  had  obtained  prizes  there.  He  was  performing  and  was 
congratulated for his excellent work.   

People in his place of  work appreciated him and today  I  expected something to be 
done since many months. I wait every day and call the family to find out if something has 
been  done.  Until  today,  no  one  has  even  bothered  to  call  the  family.    No  one  has  even 
bothered to even find out or tell them: listen, we are going to look into the matter, please give 
us some time.  No one has even bothered to lift a phone call or even send a telegram or God 
knows what in order to, at least, tell the person that you are an equal citizen of this Republic 
and we recognise that we must help you.  No one!   

So, I reiterate my request. I hope this time it does not fall on deaf ears that this young 
man  of  20  years  old  -    I  mean  if  someone  wants  to  go  and  see  him  and,  at  least,  make 
publicity that this Government has given him a job again, so be it.  But, at least, he should be 
given  a  chance  to  function  as  a  normal  citizen  in  this  country  and  that  his  handicap  -  we 
recognise it, it is a handicap  - is not a barrier for him to keep a job.  On the contrary, he 
should be encouraged to continue being a productive citizen. I am speaking more than I did 
last time because the first time it did not work.  So, I am trying to put the more masala in it in 
order to make it work. 

Madam Speaker:  I am sorry, we are time bound. 

The Deputy Prime Minister:  By chance, I have a letter from Mr Rawat in my hand 
at this very moment in time, it was by chance.  In the absence of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, 
Madam Speaker, I will look into the matter.  It is a matter of fact that large companies do 
need to employ 3% of their staff among the handicapped. 

At  5.23  p.m.,  the  Assembly  was,  on  its  rising,  adjourned  to  Tuesday  03  November 

2015 at 11.30 a.m. 

