No. 23 of 2015 

 

1 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

 

 

FIRST SESSION 

FRIDAY 24 APRIL 2015 

 

 

 

 

 

 

                              CONTENTS 

2 

 

PAPERS LAID 

QUESTION ( Oral) 

MOTION 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER 
BILLS (Public)  

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 

KCMG, QC  

Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 

GCSK  

Communications 

Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo, GCSK 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 

Utilities 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Minister 

of 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Integration 

and  Economic 

Empowerment 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 

Sinatambou 

International Trade 

Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 

Perraud 

Family Welfare 

Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain 

Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 

Institutional Reforms 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 

 

4 

Institutions 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 

Shipping and Outer Islands 

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, 

Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 

QPM 

Disaster and Beach Management  

Hon. Marie Roland Alain Wong Yen             Minister of Civil Service and Administrative  

Cheong, MSK 

 

 

 

       Reforms 

    Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn            

Minister  of  Labour, 
Employment and Training 

Industrial  Relations, 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

 
Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

 

          Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Gopall, 

Transfer to RRA) 

Mr 

Navin 

(Temporary  

 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra  

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 23 of 2015 

 

Sitting of 24 April 2015 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 2.30 p.m. 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7 

                                                            PAPERS LAID  
 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table – 

 A. 
 
B. 
 

Office of the President 
The Annual Report 2014 of the National Human Rights Commission. (In Original) 
Prime Minister’s Office  
Certificate  of  Urgency  in  respect  of  the  Road  Traffic  (Amendment)  Bill 
(No.VI of 2015). (In Original) 

C.  Ministry of Housing and Lands   
 

The  Annual  Report  and  Financial  Statements  2013  of  the  Town  and  Country 
Planning Board. 

D.  Ministry of Finance and Economic Development 
 

The  Report  of  the  Director  of  Audit  on  the  financial  statements  of  the  Mauritius  
Ex  Services  Trust  Fund  (MESTF)  for  the  year  ended  31  December  2013. 
(In Original) 

E.  Ministry of Technology, Communication and Innovation  
 

(a) 

The Fifth Annual Report of the Data Protection Office for period January to 
December 2013. 
The Sixth Annual Report of the Data Protection Office for Period January to 
December 2014. 

 

(b) 

F.  Ministry of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific 

Research  
The Annual Report 2012 of the Mahatma Gandhi Institute. 

 
G.  Ministry of  Local Government 
 

(a) 

(Markets)                    

 

 

 

 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

The Municipal Council of Curepipe (Fees for Classified Trades) Regulations 
2015 (Government Notice No. 53 of 2015). 
The  District  Council  of  Flacq  (Cemetery/Crematorium)  Regulations  2015 
(Government Notice No. 63 of 2015). 
The Municipal Town Council of Beau Bassin-Rose Hill (Naming of Public 
Places) Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 64 of 2015). 
The Municipal Town Council of Beau Bassin-Rose Hill (Naming of Public 
Places) (No.2) Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 65 of 2015). 
The  Municipal 
(Amendment-Amendment  of  Schedule)  Regulations  2015  (Government 
Notice No. 66 of 2015). 

Council 

Bornes 

Quatre 

of 

The Annual Report 2014 of the Sugar Investment Trust. 

H.  Ministry of Agro Industry and Food Security 
 
I.  Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
 

The Rodrigues Consumer Protection (Control of Price of Taxable and Non-Taxable 
Goods) (Amendment No. 7) Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 62 of 2015). 

8 

 
J.  Ministry of  Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions 
 

(a) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

(f) 

(g) 

(h) 

 

(Increase 

in  Pensions) 

The  National  Savings  Fund  (Collection  of  Contributions)  (Amendment) 
Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 54 of 2015). 
The  National  Savings  Fund  (Collection  of  Contributions)  (Amendment  
No. 2) Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 55 of 2015). 
The  National  Pensions  (Increase  in  Pensions)  (Amendment)  Regulations 
2015 (Government Notice No. 56 of 2015).  
The  National  Pensions 
Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 57 of 2015). 
The  National  Pensions  (Pension  Points)  (Amendment)  Regulations  2015 
(Government Notice No. 58 of 2015). 
The  National  Pensions 
Regulations 2015 (Government Notice No. 59 of 2015). 
The  National  Pensions  (Amendment  of  Schedules)  Regulations  2015 
(Government Notice No. 60 of 2015). 
The National Pensions (Industrial Injuries) (Amendment) Regulations 2015 
(Government Notice No. 61 of 2015). 

(Collection  of  Contributions) 

(Amendment  No.2) 

(Amendment)  

 

 

9 

ORAL ANSWER TO QUESTION 

BRAMER BANK & BAI CO. (MTIUS) LTD – EMPLOYEES, LICENCE, ETC. 

The  Leader  of  the  Opposition  (Mr  P.  Bérenger)  (by  Private  Notice)  asked  the 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the Bramer Banking 
Corporation Ltd. and the BAI Co. (Mtius) Ltd., he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain 
information as to - 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

if the respective employees thereof have become employees of the  National 
Commercial Bank and of the National Insurance Company, respectively, and 
if so, indicate if the respective years of service thereof are being reckoned; 
the  time  at  which  the  licence  of  the  Bramer  Banking  Corporation  Ltd.  was 
revoked by the Board of the Bank of Mauritius and if the minutes of the Board 
of the Bank of Mauritius in relation thereto will be circulated; 
the  date  when  the  Board  of  the  Financial  Services  Commission  decided  to 
replace Ms C. A-H as the Chief Executive thereof, and 
if the appointed conservators of the BAI Co. (Mtius) Ltd. were informed of the 
stand of Government concerning the policyholders thereof. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, let me recall for the benefit of the House 
that since the revocation of the banking licence of the Bramer Bank, Government has been 
giving  utmost  priority  to  dealing  with  the  crisis  situation  and  working  out  the  most 
appropriate remedial measures in the national interest.  We have acted expeditiously. 

As I explained in reply to PNQ of 07 April 2015, Government took immediate steps 
to  protect  the  clients  and  employees  of  the  Bank.  Government  gave  the  assurance  that 
deposits of all clients would be safeguarded and I enumerated a number of actions that we 
had taken already. 

Thus, to-date the clients of the former Bramer Bank are able to have access to banking 
services from the newly set up National Commercial Bank Ltd and all depositors have normal 
access to their funds. 

To  recap,  the  new  entity,  National  Commercial  Bank  Ltd  was  incorporated  on 
Monday  06  April  2015  and  subsequently  received  the  banking  licence  from  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius on Friday 10 April. 

10 

 
The transfer of all assets and liabilities of the Bramer Bank was done on Saturday 11 
April and the new Bank became operational on Monday 13 April.  All the 20 branches and 
the 28 ATMs became fully functional for business on that day. 

The situation in the new bank is stable and the element of trust of the clients in the 

National Commercial Bank Ltd is now well entrenched. 

These prompt actions have been effective in averting any systemic risks arising from 

the failure of the Bramer Bank and the social upheavals it could have generated. 

Madam  Speaker,  as  regards  part  (a)  of  the  question,  the  employees  have  been 
seconded to the National Commercial Bank Ltd but are still under the responsibility of the 
Receivers of Bramer Banking Corporation Ltd (in receivership). 

Let  me  here  reiterate  Government’s  commitment  to  ensure  that  employment  is 
safeguarded.    Already  all  employees  have  been  paid  their  April  salary  on  the  20th  of  this 
month. 

As  regards  parts  (c)  and  (d)  of  the  question  and  matters  relating  to  the  National 
Insurance Co Ltd in part (a), I wish to point out that the FSC and the insurance sector fall 
within the portfolio of my colleague, the Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance 
and  Institutional  Reforms.  Consequently,  it  would  not  be  appropriate  for  me  to  reply  to 
matters relating to FSC and the insurance sector.  The hon. Leader of the Opposition may 
wish to address these questions to the Minister concerned. 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, again, as the hon. Minister did, when I put my PNQ 
on 07 April, he did not say anything about the years of service of the employees of both the 
Bramer Bank and the BAI Co. (Mtius) Ltd. Can I again ask what will happen to their years of 
service? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Yes. In fact, this question was answered in my paper, it must 
be somewhere. It is quite natural that the years of service of each employee is being taken 
care of.  Either they have a portable pension or whichever, the years of service of each officer 
working in Bramer Bank is being take care of. 

Mr  Bérenger:  The  Minister  has  replied  for  Bramer  Bank  only,  but  he  gave  a  full 
proof,  total  guarantee  as  far  as  all  the  full-time  employees  of  BAI  Co.  (Mtius)  Ltd  is 
concerned.  Do  I take it  that, because it  was  full proof,  all the  full-time  employees will be 

 

11 

guaranteed their employment; does that guarantee the employment of the 30 companies for 
which Mr Sattar Hajee Abdoula has been appointed Administrator? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Well,  as  far  as  the  National  Insurance  Company  is 
concerned, the question of transfer of years of service will apply. Now, the commitment of 
Government is limited to what we have done with Bramer Bank afterwards and what we have 
done with the BAI Co. (Mtius) Ltd afterwards, that is, we have taken total commitment for 
those  two  companies.  And  maybe  the  House  would  like  to  know  also,  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister just had  a press conference to say that we have  gone a long  way.  I  think we are 
walking  out  of  a  major  crisis  because  Cabinet  today  and  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  just 
announced it, we have found a solution for those who have been the direct victims of the 
Ponzi players. I mean the 24,000 people. 

(Interruptions) 

Yes. But maybe within your question, this answer would fit in.  If you do not mind, I will just 
complete it by saying that Government will forthwith refund all those policyholders the first 
Rs500,000  which  have  been  invested  and,  through  this  measure,  we  are  covering,  in  fact, 
nearly 50% of those Ponzi victims. I think this is something which is extraordinary. I must 
here congratulate… 

my colleague the Minister for… 

Yes. So, this… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please! Please! 

Avoid… 

Please! 

Order! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

Order! 

Order, please! 

12 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Order!  Allow the hon. Minister of Finance to reply! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger: Yes, but the Minister is replying - I will come to that later on.  We are 
on  employees.  Do  I  take  it,  from  what  I  have  just  heard,  that  the  guarantee  given  to  the 
employees of BAI Insurance does not include a guarantee for the safety of employment of the 
employees of the 30 companies that are now administered by Mr Sattar Hajee Abdoula? That 
is my point. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: The 30 companies are not covered by this guarantee. 

Mr Bérenger: Well, as we know, Mr Sattar Hajee Abdoula who has been appointed 
administrateur of these 30 companies has been very tough publicly. Does the hon. Minister 
have any comment to offer on his stand that he is seul maître à bord and that he is going 
ahead with what he is going ahead with? Does the hon. Minister have any comment on that? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Je ne sais pas s’il est maître à bord d’un bateau qui coule! 
That  is  his  problem!  However,  this  issue  concerns  directly  my  colleague  the  Minister  of 
Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms, and the FSC, and I am sure 
that this question would be better answered by him. 

Mr Bérenger:  I did not hear the Minister tell us at what time in the middle of the 
night the banking licence of the  Bramer  Bank  was revoked.  Is there  any  reason?  Did the 
clock stop? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: No, there is no secret there. A Government that is moving 

fast works 24 hours round-the-clock! 

(Interruptions) 

Therefore, in this case, the decision to revoke the licence was taken by a Board of Directors 
of the Bank of Mauritius at probably 10.00 p.m. or later. 

 
Mr Bérenger: Is the hon. Minister prepared to circulate that part of the minutes of 

13 

proceedings relating to the revocation, of that Board decision? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: It would not be proper, under the Banking Act, to circulate 

the information requested. 

Mr Bérenger: Since the hon. Minister is not prepared to circulate the minutes, will 
he,  at  least,  tell  us  whether  all  members  of  the  board  were  present  on  that  occasion  and 
whether Government exercised any pressure on that board that evening? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: How can Government put pressure on any member of the 
board? The board was convened, as a matter of urgency, and the decision was taken, as far as 
I  know,  by  consensus.    In  fact,  there  had  to  be  consensus  for  the  banking  licence  to  be 
revoked.  All members were present, hon. Leader of the Opposition. 

Mr Bérenger: The hon. Minister gave us two pieces of information when replying to 
the Private Notice Question on 07 April.  One, he told us that in a letter dated 27 February, 
the Bank of Mauritius directed Bramer Bank to invest Rs350 m. by 31 March 2015. Can we 
have a copy of that letter from the Bank of Mauritius to Bramer, and can we know what was 
the reaction of Bramer to that? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  I  cannot  take  on  myself  to  decide  on  this  issue.    This  is 
governed by the Bank of Mauritius. But what I can say is that, following the liquidity crisis of 
Bramer - when I speak of liquidity crisis, I mean that Bramer was reverting more and more 
on  overnight  credit  facilities  from  other  banks,  interbank  facilities  -  when  this  point  was 
reached,  Bramer  Bank  made  a  request  for  a  line  of  credit  of  Rs1  billion.  Following  an 
investigation which was done by the Bank of Mauritius in its normal course of business, the 
Bank of Mauritius came to the conclusion that Bramer was in need of Rs2.5 billion of capital 
injection to be in a position with the law, as far as ratios are concerned. 

The Bank of Mauritius, on the request of the Rs1 billion line of credit, asked Bramer 

Bank to inject fresh capital of Rs350 m. 

Mr Bérenger: Give us a copy of this and the reply! 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Well, this I cannot promise now! There are issues which are 
governed  by  the  Banking  Act.    The  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  has  to  take  me  by  my 
words! 

Mr Bérenger: We want to go to the bottom of that! 

 
Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: We can go further down the bottom also, if the hon. Leader 

14 

of the Opposition wants to! Nevertheless, the question would not… 

(Interruptions) 

What I am telling you is: what happened exactly because I was briefed by the Governor of 
the Central Bank, and I believe what he told me! What he told me was that Bramer had to 
inject Rs350 m. by 31 March. This was not done. At one time, BAI said that they could inject 
this  amount,  but  that  we  will  have  to  agree  that  they  would  increase  their  related  parties’ 
transactions. The Bank of Mauritius could not go with this! No one will go with the principle 
whereby they increase their inter-companies dealings. So they were requested to inject fresh 
funds. That was the point! They refused. They refused and they never paid that money! So, 
on the basis of this event, non-payment which would have released - the House should know 
that the Bank of Mauritius would have released Rs1 billions of line of credit had the Bank 
increased its injection of capital by Rs350 m. It never did so!  

Mr Bérenger: We are wasting time, Madam Speaker! Now, again, on the same day, 
replying to the Private Notice Question, the Minister said that on 27 March, one month later, 
the bank wrote to the Bank of Mauritius referring to massive withdrawals of deposit. Again, 
can we be provided with a copy of that letter from Bramer Bank to the Bank of Mauritius? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  If  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  has  a  copy,  then  he 

should not ask for it! 

I do not have one! 

I am working… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Well, if the hon. Leader of the Opposition has this type of information with him, referring to 
the letter from Bramer… 

Mr  Bérenger:  The  hon.  Minister  said  so!  He  was  replying  to  the  Private  Notice 

Question and he said so! 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Then if I said so, then it is so! 

(Interruptions) 

 

15 

Well, I do not refuse. I have nothing to hide on this issue. I just trust the Central Bank and the 
Governor of the Central Bank who gave me this information, and I think it is in line with 
what happened afterwards.  

 Mr  Bérenger:  Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  whether  he  has  discussed  with  the 
Governor  why,  instead  of  starting  by  revoking  the  licence  then  appointing  receivers, 
therefore, Bramer Bank losing all its value, it no longer had a licence and it could not go and 
look for purchasers, for people who wanted from overseas or here to buy the bank, instead of 
doing that, they went the other way round, revoked the licence, crashing down the value of 
the assets of the bank, including its licence? Why did they go the other way round? Why did 
they  not  appoint  receivers,  close  the  branches  temporarily,  so  that  there  is  no  run  on  the 
accounts,  and  see  what  to  do  instead  of  starting  by  revoking  the  licence  and,  therefore, 
bringing down completely the value of the assets of the bank? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  The  question  is  good  because  some  people  have  put  the 
question as to whether there were other ways of dealing with the bank. There is none!  Under 
the banking law there is only one solution: you revoke the licence! There is none! No second 
solution! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger: I do not hold a brief for that bank, but it is not legally true what the 
hon. Minister is saying! There were plenty of options; including administrators could have 
been appointed in the case of the bank, just as administrators and not liquidators have been 
appointed in the case of BAI  Investment Co. Ltd. This is the law. Can I the hon. Minister 
whether he is aware of it before he tells us that the real thing that could be done is revoking 
the licence! 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  I  do  not  say  that  we  are  perfect.  The  House  should 
understand that crisis management is crisis management, and I had to move fast! It is very 
fine to become wise after the event, to say that we could have done certain things. We could 
have, but we have not because we were dealing under a crisis situation, and I am sure that we 
took the right decision also.   There might have been other alternatives probably, but in crisis 
management we did what we had to do. When you have your house on fire, you do not look 
for the type of water you want to use or the colour of the water. You use water just to … 

(Interruptions) 

16 

 
Mr Bérenger:   Last time, when replying to my  PNQ, the hon. Minister replied on 
certain matters dealing with the FSC whereas today he backtracks on that and refers to his 
colleague. Therefore, I will come back later on.  

As far as the last part of my question is concerned: ‘if the appointed conservators of 
the  BAI  Co.  (Mtius)  Ltd  were  informed  of  the  stand  of  Government  concerning  the 
policyholders thereof?’, why I am putting that? It is because, on again, while replying to my 
PNQ, the hon. Minister was forthwith, and I am sure he will repeat that, that all the 138,933 
ordinary insurance policyholders - he said - would lose nothing; whereas, in the report dated 
17 April, the administrators have come forward and recommended to Government that loses 
should be shared between the two categories, that is, loses should be shared between these 
138,933 and those holding the Super Gold Cash machin truc. According to what I have read 
in the report, which I am not supposed to have, what the administrators have proposed is that 
each should lose  about  one third of the value of the  assets, which is in contradiction  with 
what the hon. Minister said. So, will he please reconfirm, that, as far as these 138,933, they 
will lose nothing and that, therefore, these proposals from the administrators to share losses 
between the two categories concerned will not be followed by Government? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Madam  Speaker,  we  have  gone  much  further  than  the 
conservators, in the sense that the 137,000 something will not lose anything, their policies 
being  totally  respected  by  100%.  However,  we  have  gone  further  than  this.  The  24,000 
victims who have lost Rs1.6 billion, well, we have gone much further, in the sense that what 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has announced today is really a total solution for all the Ponzi 
victims,  inclusive  the  24,000.  I  must  tell  you  one  thing,  I  am  quite  impressed  by  the 
teamwork which has been going on since the past two weeks within our Ministries and which 
has allowed this country to come with the proposal that is just allowing us to move out of a 
major crisis. Replying to the hon. Leader of the Opposition, I would say that we have gone 
further than what was promised before. 

Mr  Bérenger: 

  I  wanted  to  be  reassured  and  we  are  reassured  that  the 
recommendations from the administrators will not be applied. That is what I wanted to hear 
and that those 138,933 will be fully in possession of all their pension rights. Now, I am really 
surprised. I have just heard the hon. Minister, again, talk of 24,000 policyholders in the so-
called Gold machin truc Scheme. Well, will he confirm that, in fact, there are no - he said that 
when  replying  to  the  PNQ  and  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  corrected  that  in  the  press 
conference.  Now, he tells us, again, that there are 24,143. Will the hon. Minister correct that? 

 

17 

These are policies but, in fact, will he correct that we are dealing with 14,754 policyholders 
and, therefore, he should stop referring to 24,000 policyholders? There are 24,000 policies, 
but 14,000 policyholders. Is that correct? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: The hon. Leader of the Opposition is right. It is correct. In 
fact,  we  are  speaking  of  24,000  policies,  but  even  then  I  have  to  beg  for  the  House  to 
understand that we were operating under exceptional circumstances. It is only after that, and 
even it is, in fact, a few days back that, while working through the policies, we realised that 
there were some policies which had the same name. Therefore, there were 24,000 policies 
concerned  and  14,000  something  of  policyholders.  In  addition,  those  are  the  people  now 
which shall be dealt with through the proposals we have made today. 

Mr  Bérenger:    Before  I  leave  the  floor  to  others,  Madam  Speaker.  With  your 
permission, Madam Speaker, although probably the Minister will refer me to the Minister of 
Financial Services, but this is a national issue. The law provides - it has provided since the 
Insurance  Act  has  been  voted  years  back,  I  think  in  2007  if  I’m  not  mistaken  -  that  there 
should be a compensation fund with operators, and those contributing regularly into that to 
build up a compensation fund, precisely to compensate people in the case that we have met 
with now. Have the hon. Minister and his colleague responsible for the Insurance Sector, and 
Government, looked into that and are we going to set up what the law provides for  years, 
since 2007, for a compensation fund? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: For a compensation fund, the principle has been approved. 
In fact, I was going to announce it in the last Budget, but then it needs further studies. What 
the fund means is that banks will need to contribute to a fund that will build up in the course 
of years and, if a bank crashes, then this fund, some form of insurance policy, will intervene 
to  compensate  the  depositors  who  have  lost  their  money.    Therefore,  we  have  already 
approved in principle the setting up of this fund. 

Madam Speaker:  Yes, hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I need, first of all, to declare my interest.  I 
am  a  shareholder  of  Bramer  Banking  Corporation  and  my  shares  were  worth  around 
Rs350,000 at the time it went into receivership.  Now, we have been informed that the whole 
of  the  bank  has  been  sold  for  one  Rs1.    May  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  whether  the 
Government or the Central Bank or even the National Commercial Bank is coming forward 

 

18 

with any plan in regard to those thousands of shareholders of the listed Bramer Bank who are 
now going to get zero cent because the bank which was worth billions has been sold for Rs1? 

Mr Lutmeenaraidoo:  My friend will know that when you take the risk of investing 
in the stock market, you have to bear the risk of losing everything. This is a common practice 
everywhere in the world: a company collapses, all shares are worth zero!  Therefore, what I 
would say is that those who had shares in the Bramer have taken the risk of investing in a 
bank which was going to collapse.  That is their problem, not ours! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Uteem: This being the case, may I ask the hon. Minister if he could initiate an 
enquiry at the level of his Ministry as regards the National Pensions Fund, Port Louis Fund 
and the State Investment Corporation which have been massively selling shares they own in 
Bramer  Bank since January to March  -  I understand more than 2.5 million of shares have 
been sold by the Government?  Will the hon. Minister talk to the FSC to initiate an action to 
see whether there is any criminal offence of insider dealing? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:    We  should  not  mislead  the  House.    The  hon.  Member 
should not do it!  Those are brokers working on the floor of the Stock Market and that are 
selling shares. They are brokers, we call them stockbrokers.  Now, do not tell me that the 
stockbroker where the Government has an interest should be responsible for selling shares of 
Bramer.    In  fact,  you  should  know  also  that  we  have  invested  in  Bramer  Bank.  SIC  has 
invested in Bramer Bank and is losing money.  Therefore, it is not only individuals, all those 
who have invested money have lost including State Investment Corporation.   

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Ganoo! 

Mr Ganoo:  May I ask a question to the hon. Minister of Finance.  In view of what 
has happened in the past concerning the closure of banks and the present saga concerning the 
Bramer Bank, doesn’t the hon. Minister think that it is high time for Government to come up 
with a legislation, a Depositors’ Protection Scheme Bill - as has been announced many times 
in the past in different Budgets so that, in the future, the depositors may be afforded better 
protection, as it obtains in other countries? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Yes,  I  think  that  the  hon.  Member’s  question  has  been 
answered. The Leader of the Opposition asked if we are proposing to set up a fund that will 
insure people who have had their account in banks in case of failure. So, the principle of this 

 

19 

insurance fund has been approved already. It is now a question of working on it and setting it 
up. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The hon. Minister of Finance mentioned in 
the  first  PNQ,  two  weeks  ago,  that  the  Central  Bank  had  required  Bramer  Bank  to  inject 
Rs3.5 billion in a phased manner, and the first tranche was Rs350 m. Today, he mentioned 
Rs2.5  billion,  but  I  think  he  will  stand  by  Rs3.5  billion.  May  I  know  then  from  the  hon. 
Minister  of  Finance  whether  he  is  satisfied  with  the  Central  Bank’s  decision  to  award  the 
licence?    We  are  talking  about  the  same  banking  business,  same  depositors’  money,  same 
liabilities, but requiring only an injection of Rs200 m., whereas they were asking for Rs3.5 
billion previously. 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  It  is  not  just  Rs200  m.,  Madam  Speaker.  We  have 
guaranteed the total amount of investment made by depositors in this bank. We have gone a 
long  way  into  not  only  securing  the  employees  continuation  of  work,  but  we  have  also 
guaranteed as a Government. It could have been a multi-billion payment on our side. This is 
the  risk  we  have  taken  to  maintain  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  and  to  avoid  a 
systemic risk.  So we did the right thing.  It is not only Rs200 m.  It is a commitment taken by 
this  Government  -  and  it  is  a  huge  one  -  to  come  forward  and  say,  ‘We  guarantee  all 
depositors’.  And we have done it.  

Mr Bérenger: My last question.  I think we can all agree that this Bramer Bank/BAI 
saga and the way Government has handled it is doing a lot of harm to our image as a financial 
sector.  I  am  sure  the  hon.  Minister  is  aware  that,  apart  from  that,  there  is  the  Belvedere 
Management  Company  dimension  where  it  is  alleged  that  there  is  a  multi-billion  dollars 
international  Ponzi  Scheme  based  in  Mauritius  -  the  FSC  started  action  against  them  in  a 
recent past - and their partner is Capital World Markets, based in London, where 13 people 
from them have already been arrested on 03 March by the London City Police.  All this is 
damaging  when,  here,  the  Ponzi  Scheme  is  referred  to  in  the  case  of  Bramer/BAI.  ‘The 
Economist’ of 18 April has mixed it altogether; Ponzi Scheme in the case of Bramer/BAI, 
international Ponzi Scheme in the case of the  Belvedere Management Company with their 
partner. What are the Government, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, the Minister of Finance - the 
Minister responsible - doing to stop that hurting still more the image of Mauritius?  What is 
happening? 

20 

 
Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Well,  I  beg  to  disagree.    I  appreciate  that  when  you  put 
order, there is disorder.  In fact, we have taken the commitment to cleanse. The concept of 
cleansing means disorder first. What we are all seeing in Mauritius is the consequence of the 
commitment of Government to cleanse the country, and part of the cleansing process is what 
we are discovering: on one side, coffers, on the other side, coffins. Well, this is part of the 
game. The second point is: is this affecting our world image? Is this Ponzi Scheme affecting 
the financial image of Mauritius?  It is very funny!  I would say, ‘no’.  In fact, I met this 
morning  with  bankers  from  Luxembourg,  and  they  said  that  they  are  coming  to  Mauritius 
because they know that there is here a Government committed to putting order in the House; 
that there is a Government here committed to transparency and good governance. So, what I 
would conclude is that we might get the impression of disorder, of chaos. The chaos is only 
the consequence of putting order, that is all. It is quite normal that when you put order you 
have some chaos.  But then, further down the road, I think that the image of Mauritius will be 
multiplied, will be much better that it is now. Much better! 

Madam Speaker: Time is over! 

 

 

 

21 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10 (2) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move that all the business on today’s Order 

Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun) rose 

and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER 

SUBRAMANIA BHARITI EYE HOSPITAL, MOKA –  

AVASTIN INJECTION – INCIDENT 

The Minister of Health and Quality of Life (Mr A. Gayan): Madam Speaker, with 
your permission, I wish to make a statement regarding the incident which arose as a result of 
injections of Avastin at the Subramania Bharati Eye Hospital at Moka. 

The  House  will  recall  that  four  patients  developed  complications  in  their  eyes  as  a 
result of the Avastin  Injection. On 22 May 2014, 28 patients attended Subramania Bharati 
Eye Hospital for intra vitreal Avastin injection for retinal disorders. 

They were admitted for treatment at Moka Eye Hospital on 23, 24 and 25 May, 2014 
respectively.   As there  was no improvement in  their condition, three of  them were sent to 
Sankara Nethralaya Hospital, Chennai, India on 16 June 2014 and the fourth patient on 23 
June 2014.  The four patients, however, lost vision of their injected eyes. 

On  09  July  2014,  a  Committee  of  Enquiry,  chaired  by  Dr.  Isabelle,  Consultant  in 
Ophthalmology, was consequently set up to look into the circumstances of this incident.  I 
have recently received the report and I am tabling a copy of that report. 

Thank you. 

 

PUBLIC BILLS 

Third Reading 

 
On motion made and seconded, the Appropriation (2015) Bill (No. III of 2015) and 

 
the Appropriation (2015-2016) Bill (No. IV of 2015) were read a third time and passed. 

22 

Question put and agreed to. 

First Reading 

On motion made and seconded the Road Traffic (Amendment) Bill (No. VI of 2015) 

was read a first time. 

(3.12 p.m.) 

Second Reading 

THE ROAD TRAFFIC (AMENDMENT) BILL  

(No. VI of 2015) 

Order for Second Reading read 

The  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  (Mr  N.  Bodha): 
Madam Speaker, I move that the Road Traffic (Amendment) Bill (No. VI of 2015) be read a 
second time. 

Madam,  Speaker,  the  Bill  before  this  House  today  is  meant  first  and  foremost  to 
address  a  major  injustice  inflicted  on  our  road  users,  since  the  coming  into  force  of  the 
Penalty Point System. The system, which was qualified by the previous Prime Minister, as “a 
landmark  in  the  history  of  road  safety  in  Mauritius”,  in  fact,  marked  history  as  the  most 
repressive road safety measure implemented so far in the country. I would like at the very 
outset  to  state  clearly,  Madam  Speaker,  that  this  Government  has  very  much  at  heart  the 
safety of our road users and is also conscious of the fact that the severity of sanctions for road 
traffic offences is directly proportional to the level of compliance.  

However, we are also very much alive to the fact that our citizens should be treated 
with fairness and dignity and as such, any road sanctioning mechanism should be compatible 
with the norms, values and sense of justice held by the people themselves.  

Madam  Speaker,  as  rightly  pointed  out  by  the  famous  research  psychologist, 
Noordzij,  in  one  of  his  report  “influencing  road  users’  behaviour”,  if  we  really  want  to 
increase road traffic compliance, the following five basic rules must be fulfilled: Traffic laws 
- 

(i) 

must be known and accepted by road users; 

 

23 

(ii)  must be easy to understand;  
(iii)  must be easy to follow;  
(iv)  must not be in contradiction or conflict with any other laws, and  
(v) 
above all, must be easy enough for anyone to identify any violation of the law.  
A closer look at the Penalty Point System recently introduced in Mauritius reveals that 
it has none of the characteristics just highlighted.  Indeed, Madam Speaker, the dual system 
of  fixed  speed  cameras  and  Penalty  Points  is  seen  as  unfair  and  is  not  supported  by  the 
majority of our road users.  

The unfairness in the system stems from the fact that in addition to the normal penalty 
such as fines imposed for road offences, penalty points were also meted out to the offender. 
Besides,  the  system  was  viewed  as  quite  complex  making  it  difficult  for  road  users  to 
understand  its  functioning,  which  explains  why  some  of  them  were  often  caught  unaware. 
Members of the House will agree that this huge mechanism put into place was viewed more 
as  revenue  generating  mechanism,  rather  than  a  measure  to  reduce  the  number  of  road 
accidents  in  Mauritius.  In  addition,  Madam  Speaker,  we  have  seen  that  the  way  it  was 
conceived, was not only repressive, but administratively and legally cumbersome.  

More  than  half  of  the  120,000  road  traffic  offenders  still  have  their  cases  pending 
before Court.  Studies have proved that when there is too much a gap between violation and 
sanction, the link between the two becomes weak and this does not lead to major changes in 
road users’ behaviour.  

Madam Speaker, the safety of our road users remains a priority of this Government 
and as such, much effort is being put at the level of my Ministry to reinforce the road safety 
measures and bring in new ones. The ambitious goal of the Ministry is to significantly reduce 
the number of killed and seriously injured - what we call the KSI - by the year 2020 and to 
achieve  our  objective,  a  new  road  safety  strategy  2015-2020  will  be  developed  soon. This 
strategy will consist of a new set of initiatives with significant potential to reduce road trauma 
and frustration which may eventually lead to road rage. It will address key areas such as road 
safety  education,  enforcement,  as  well  as  road  environment  and  road  safety  engineering 
issues amongst others. 

Madam Speaker, in introducing this Bill, our aim, first and foremost, is to honour our 
commitment  towards  the  citizens  of  this  country,  by  doing  away  with  the  Penalty  Points 
System as promised and by replacing it by a new penalty system which is more humane and 

 

24 

which takes into consideration the concerns of the various parties, while ensuring that road 
safety remains our main focus. 

 In  fact,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  during  the  preparation  of  this  amendment 
Bill, a number of consultations were held with different stakeholders and most of their views 
and suggestions have been taken on board.  

Madam Speaker, this Bill aims at changing the behaviour and attitude of road users 

through the introduction of the five crucial measures, namely - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

The replacement of the penalty point system by a new sanctioning mechanism 
for certain specified serious driving offences;  
The introduction of a graduated scale of fines for persons convicted of 
exceeding speed limits; 
The disqualification of persons convicted of more than 5 specified serious 
driving offences and cancellation of the driving licences for those who have 
been disqualified a second time, and 
The introduction of a rehabilitation course for repeated traffic offenders. 

(iv) 
Let me now elaborate on these five key elements, Madam Speaker.  

Firstly, as announced by this Government at the beginning of its mandate, road traffic 
offenders  will  no  longer  be  sanctioned  through  the  system  of  penalty  points.  Accordingly, 
while clause 28 of the Bill makes provision for all penalty points accrued before the coming 
into  force  of  this  new  legislation,  they  will  be  rendered  ineffective.  Clause  10  of  the  Bill 
provides  for  section  123  AG  of  the  principal  Act,  which  relates  to  “Allocation  of  Penalty 
Points”,  to  be  repealed  and  to  be  replaced  by  a  new  section  123  AG  which  will  instead 
provide for “Cumulative Road Traffic Offences”.   

Before I elaborate further on the first amendment, I would like, at this point, Madam 
Speaker, to emphasise that the new sanctioning mechanism for serious road traffic offences, 
under section 123 AG, will relate to a limited list of offences.  

In fact, the list of 19 serious road traffic offences contained in the Third Schedule in 
the Act is being reviewed and will be brought down to 11 serious offences, which will be 
easy to understand and may be memorised by road users.  

Coming back to the core amendment relating to section 123 AG, the “Penalty Point 
Certificate”  provided  for  under  the  Ninth  Schedule,  will  be  replaced  by  the  “Cumulative 
Road  Traffic  Convictions  Certificate”.  The  purpose  of  this  document  is  to  assist  repeat 

 

25 

offenders to keep track of the number of offences committed, with a view to avoiding any 
future disqualification or cancellation of their driving licences. The offences will be fed into 
an electronic offence recording system at the Police Department and the “Cumulative Road 
Traffic Convictions Certificate” will be issued to the road user upon application, if he wants 
to have it.  

In view of the fact that the Penalty Point System will no longer be effective, sections 
191, 192, 193, 195 and 196 of the Act are being amended, as per clauses 14 to 18 of the Bill 
to remove any references to the Penalty Point System and to cater for the new sanctioning 
mechanism.   

Madam Speaker, the Bill also provides for the Court to suspend the driving licence of 
any  person  convicted  on  a  sixth  occasion,  within  a  period  of  24  months,  of  one  or  more 
serious road offences and to disqualify that person from driving or obtaining a driving licence 
for a period of 6 to 12 months.  This amendment, Madam Speaker, aims at bringing at a more 
humane touch to the Bill and constitutes a major turnaround in the terms of sanction. Instead 
of imposing heavy penalties for the very first offence, we intend to provide repeat offenders 
enough opportunities to improve their driving behaviours.  

However, if the driver fails to take advantage of the opportunities provided to him and 
turn out to be a chronic offender in spite of the various warnings, disqualification, or in the 
worst situation cancellation, will ensue.   

Madam Speaker, speeding remains the number one road safety problem not only in 
Mauritius, but in many countries around the world and also constitutes an aggravating factor 
in all road accidents.  

In spite of a common understanding of the risks linked to high speed, the prevalence 
of speeding remains high. To properly address the issue of illegal speeding, much efforts and 
resources have to be put in on the enforcement side. Studies conducted so far show that speed 
camera is an effective intervention in reducing fatal road accidents. 

 In line with the same principle of encouraging a change in behaviour following the 
commission  of  the  first  offence,  this  Bill  provides  for  the  level  of  sanction  for  speeding 
offences to escalate, as the level of the speeding above the authorised speed limit increases. 
Accordingly, clause 21 of the Bill provides for a minimum fine of Rs1,000 for exceeding the 
speed limit by not more than 15 kilometres; a fine of Rs1,500 for exceeding the speed limit 

 

26 

by more than 15 kilometres but not more than 25 kilometres per hour, and a fine of Rs2,500 
for driving at a speed of more than 25 kilometres, above the authorised speed limit.  

Madam Speaker, notwithstanding the payment of fines, as a form of sanction, for the 
first five offences, this Bill also makes provision for severe penalties such as disqualification 
or cancellation to be applied to chronic offenders. But these penalties will be imposed by the 
Court, over and above the payment of fines, in respect of repeat offenders and our aim here is 
to  keep  on  monitoring  and  addressing  the  risk  posed  by  high-risk  drivers  with  patterns  of 
dangerous driving behaviour.    

Accordingly, road traffic offenders will be disqualified from driving if they commit 

more than 5 offences within a period of 24 months.  

Furthermore, if in spite of a first disqualification, the person keeps on defaulting and is 
disqualified on a second occasion, within a period of 3 years from the date of expiry of the 
first  disqualification,  he  will  have  his  licence  cancelled  and  in  addition  he  will  have  to 
successfully undergo a fresh driving test, for a new licence to be issued, after the period of 
disqualification. Holders of provisional driving licences will be subjected to the same types of 
sanctions, while the period of disqualification for persons without a valid driving licence or 
international driving permit will range from 12 to 24 months instead of 6 to 12 months.    

Madam Speaker, the Bill aims at dealing equally forcefully with Mauritian as well as 
foreign  drivers.  The  holder  of  a  foreign  driving  licence  who  has  been  disqualified  from 
driving in Mauritius, will also have his driving licence suspended.  

However, if he needs to travel abroad within the period of disqualification, he will have 
to submit an application to the Court and his foreign driving licence will be restored upon 
departure  from  Mauritius  and  in  case  he  returns  to  Mauritius  within  the  period  of 
disqualification, he will have to surrender his Driving Permit again to the licensing officer 
within 5 days of his arrival.   

Madam Speaker, Clauses 9 and 12 of the Bill provide for the amendment of Sections 53 
and 123 AI of the Act to enable the restoration of driving licences, among others following a 
period  of  disqualification.  The  procedures  for  the  restoration  of  the  driving  licences  for 
different categories of licence holders and permit have been clearly detailed out in  the Bill. I 
wish to point here, Madam Speaker, that, in the case of provisional driving licence holders, 
the  provisional  driving  licence  is  cancelled  and  is  not  restored  if  the  person  has  been 

 

27 

disqualified under Section 123 AG.  In that case, a new application has to be put in, after the 
period of disqualification.  

As  regard  the  disqualification  of  driving  instructors,  the  driving  instructors’  licence 
would have to be surrendered to the Commissioner of Police and will be restored after the 
disqualification period.   

Madam Speaker, I will now come to one of the most salient features of this Bill and 
which can be qualified as a major breakthrough as regards to road safety in Mauritius. So far 
only  financial  penalties,  penalty  points  or  institutional  convictions  were  imposed  on  road 
traffic offenders to improve their driving skills. This Bill will assist us in moving one step 
further  through  the  introduction  of  an  Intensive  Traffic  Offenders  Rehabilitation  Program 
aimed  at  helping  chronic  road  offenders  to  be  aware  of  their  driving  behaviour  through 
education, with a view to motivating them to change their attitudes.  

Madam  Speaker,  it  is  a  well-known  fact  that  traffic  violators  primarily  do  not  lack 
driving  skills  but  they  mostly  lack  positive  attitudes  towards  social  responsibility.  Our 
objective  is  to  engage  the  participants  in  the  process  and  to  help  them  to  understand  that 
driving does not require manoeuvring skills only, but they should be aware of the principles 
of  social  responsibility  as  well.  Studies  have  shown  that  punishment  and  withdrawal  of 
driving licences are not sufficient to change driving behaviours and to keep our road safe. To 
prevent recidivism, those persons need to be rehabilitated and that is the reason why we are 
now introducing different types of rehabilitation courses, tailored to the deficit of the client 
and based on the nature of the offence committed.   

The  rehabilitation  courses  will  be  imposed  by  the  Courts,  as  part  of  the  package  of 
penalties  to  be  inflicted  in  respect  of  repeat  offenders  only.  Accordingly  those  who  have 
committed more than 5 offences within a period of 24 months will not only be disqualified 
from  driving,  but  will  also  be  compelled,  upon  a  Court  Order,  to  follow  a  rehabilitation 
course, failing which their driving licences will not be restored.  

The  course  will  be  designed  on  the  basis  of  best  international  practices  and  will  be 
conducted either by the Police Department or an authority approved by the Commissioner of 
Police. A certificate of attendance will be issued to the trainee at the end of the session and 
should be produced at time of application for restoration of the driving licence and we will 
have the help of the driving schools to design this rehabilitation course.  

 

28 

I would like here, Madam Speaker, to draw the attention of the House to the fact that 
the rehabilitation courses proposed will also apply to serious road traffic offences provided 
for under the Second Schedule to the Road Traffic Act, in cases of disqualification. 

These  include  drink  driving,  careless  and  inconsiderate  driving  among  others. 
Accordingly, Sections 52 and 53 of the Road Traffic Act are being amended as per Clauses 8 
and 9 of the Bill.  

My last point, Madam Speaker, relates to the speed limit signs posted on various types 
of roads to prohibit the driving of motor vehicles above the authorized speed limit. Currently, 
for any change in speed limit along any road, be it permanent or temporary, the Ministry has 
to proceed through a cumbersome process of Gazetting. 

For practical purposes, the Bill will now amend Section 124 of the Road Traffic Act to 
enable the Ministry to cause speed limit signs to be erected over any type of road without 
Gazetting.  Consequently,  the  Bill  also  makes  provision  at  Clause  27(2)(b)  for  the  Road 
Traffic (Speed) Regulation 2011 to be amended to bring it in line with Section 124 of the Act. 
Madam  Speaker,  we  are  also  seizing  this  opportunity  to  amend  Regulation  7  of  the  Road 
Traffic  (Speed)  Regulation  2011  to  enable  the  Ministry  to  cause  the  speed  limit  to  be 
decreased, based upon the geometric design of the road which we couldn’t do formerly.   

Currently, the law caters for speed limits to be reduced for various reasons, except for 
geometric  design  speed  of  the  road.  Consequently,  whenever  such  a  situation  arises,  the 
attention of motorists is drawn only through warning signs and no legal action can be taken 
even if they are driving at inappropriate speed.  

Madam Speaker, in line with our objective to reduce the number of road accidents, the 
Bill also makes provision at Clause 27(2)(d), for the harmonisation of speed limit along our 
roads for different classes of vehicles. Accordingly, the Schedule to the Road Traffic (Speed) 
Regulation  2011  is  being  repealed  and  replaced  by  the  Sixth  Schedule  to  the  Act.  The 
purpose of this amendment is to reduce and provide a safe speed limit for certain classes of 
vehicles,  along  certain  categories  of  roads  and  to  render  the  speed  limit  system  more  user 
friendly, only two speed limits will be posted for different categories of roads.  

For example, the maximum speed limit on motorways will either be 110 km per hour or 
80 km per hour. This process will be carried out administratively under Section 124 of the 
Road Traffic Act.  

 

29 

With regard to the speed camera system, my Ministry is currently carrying out a survey 
for the removal and relocation of some speed cameras, which in some cases, may be viewed 
as a speed trap rather than a device to deter speeding. The visibility of speed cameras will 
also be enhanced through the provision of a yellow retro reflectorized sheeting. In addition, 
the attention of drivers will be drawn to the presence of speed cameras through transverse 
road markings at a distance of 300, 200 and 100 metres from the cameras.  

Madam Speaker, road accidents are a leading cause of death and injury worldwide. The 
World Health Organisation has projected that, by 2020, road crash injuries will be the third 
highest threat to public health, outranking other serious public health problems.  

As our nation’s economy will keep on growing, the challenges in terms of road safety 
will  also  increase,  mostly  in  terms  of  growing  level  of  traffic,  more  sophisticated  and 
powerful vehicles and increase mobility, amongst others. This will put more pressure on our 
road network and to cope with these challenges, and to offer a better level service across our 
roads, the road network would have to be extended. 

Our second challenge, Madam Speaker, relates to the worldwide phenomenon whereby 
road  accidents  disproportionately  affect  the  cyclists,  motorcyclists  and  pedestrians.  In 
Mauritius, out of 3610 road casualties reported in 2013, 41% were motorcyclists and 38 of 
them were fatal, involving mostly male drivers under the age of 45. 

In  view  thereof,  my  Ministry  is  putting  into  place  a  new  strategy  for  motorcyclists, 
which will include an improved licencing scheme as well as the setting up of “moto-école”, 
which as now is not available in Mauritius. In that respect, my Ministry has already engaged 
in high level discussions with the authorities in Reunion Island to get the required assistance 
from them.   

With  regard 

to 

the  Driving  Examination  Centres,  we  have  embarked 

in  a 
decentralization  process,  Madam  Speaker,  and  a  new  driving  centre  has  been  set  up  at 
Curepipe recently. According to figures available from the Police Department, 1250 driving 
tests have already been carried out for the last two months in Curepipe. This number will tend 
to increase, thus significantly relieving the pressure at Port Louis and at the Line Barracks.  In 
line with our objective to make our roads safer, we intend to come up in the near future, with 
new regulations to raise the driving standard in Mauritius.  

Madam Speaker, lack of awareness and consciousness about road safety also account 
for the rise in the number of road accidents. Accordingly, we will see to it that we have a two 

 

30 

year road safety communication strategy which is under preparation and we will have to see 
how it will impact on school children at primary and secondary level.  

Madam  Speaker,  we  are  also  laying  a  lot  of  emphasis  among  school  children,  as  I 

said. 

Madam Speaker, although road crashes are classified among modern society’s biggest 
social ills, they remain nevertheless a hidden concern. Our mission is to try by all means to 
raise awareness on the risks associated with dangerous driving and to leave no stone unturned 
to mitigate those risks. My Ministry is therefore committed to bringing real and meaningful 
change to make our roads safer.  

Before I end, Madam Speaker, I would like to pay tribute to all the drivers and road 
ushers who have daily contributed to our road safety, since January last in spite of the fact 
that  all  the  speed  cameras  were  not  operating.  In  fact,  the  number  of  accidents  has  gone 
down. I hope I would be able to rely on their continued support to keep our road safer.   

With these words, Madam Speaker, I commend the Bill to the House. 

Mr Sawmynaden rose and seconded. 

Mr Bérenger: I understand that it has been agreed that I move for adjournment of the 
debates so that we have time to study the speech from the Minister. If that is the case, then I 
would request the Minister to let us have a copy of his speech straightaway so that we can 
spend some fruitful hours rereading it. So, if that is the case, I move for the adjournment of 
the debates. 

Mr Uteem rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Debates adjourned accordingly. 

 

ADJOURNMENT 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  that  this  Assembly  do  now 

adjourn to Tuesday 28 April 2015 at 11.30 a.m. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun) rose 

and seconded. 

 
Question put and agreed to. 

31 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned.     

At 3.38 p.m. the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Tuesday 28 April 2015 at 

11.30 a.m. 

 

