 

1 

 

 

No. 03 of 2015 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

FRIDAY 20 FEBRUARY 2015 

 

 

 

2 

CONTENTS 

 

 

 

PAPERS LAID 

QUESTION (Oral) 

MOTIONS 

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC)) 

Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, 

KCMG, QC  

Hon. Charles Gaëtan Xavier-Luc Duval, 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 

GCSK  

Communications 

Hon. Showkutally Soodhun 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public 

Utilities 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo 

Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 
Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Minister of Social Integration and Economic 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Empowerment 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 

Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and 

Sinatambou 

International Trade 

Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon. Mrs Marie-Aurore Marie-Joyce 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister of Gender Equality, Child Development and 

Perraud 

Family Welfare 

Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain 

Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and 

Institutional Reforms 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 

 

4 

Institutions 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 

Shipping and Outer Islands 

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, 

Minister of Environment, Sustainable Development and 

QPM 

Disaster and Beach Management  

Hon. Marie Roland Alain Wong Yen             Minister of Civil Service and Administrative  

Cheong, MSK 

 

 

 

       Reforms 

Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn                   Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, 

Employment and Training 

 

 

 

5 

 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

 
Lotun, Mrs B. Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

           Clerk Assistant 

 

 Hansard Editor 

Navin 

(Temporary  

Gopall, 
Mr 
Transfer to RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

 

 

           Serjeant-at-Arms 

 Badal, Mr Ramesh 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 03 of 2015 

 

                                       Sitting of 20 February 2015 

 

The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 3.00 p.m. 

   

 

  The National Anthem was played 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

 

7 

PAPERS LAID 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table – 

A. 

 

Prime Minister’s Office – 

The  Reports  of  the  Director  of  Audit  on  the  Financial  Statements  of  the 
National Human Rights Commission for the years 2011, 2012 and 2013.  (In 
Original) 

B.   Ministry of Finance and Economic Development 

 

 

 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

The  Customs  Tariff  (Amendment  of  Schedule)  (No.  4)  Regulations 
2014 (Government Notice No.12 of 2015). 

The  Annual  Report  2013  of  the  Mauritius  Revenue  Authority.  (In 
Original) 

The  Annual  Report  2013  of  the  Gambling  Regulatory  Authority. 
 (In Original) 

C.  Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection  – 

 

The Rodrigues Consumer Protection (Control of Price of Taxable and Non-
Taxable Goods) (Amendment No. 2) Regulations 2015 (Government Notice 
No. 13 of 2015). 

D.  Ministry of  Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions 

– 

 

The Annual Report 2013 of the Senior Citizens Council.  (In Original) 

 

 

8 

ORAL ANSWER TO QUESTION 

TERRE ROUGE-VERDUN LINK ROAD (M3)  

The  Leader  of  the  Opposition  (Mr  P.  Bérenger)  (by  Private  Notice)  asked  the 
Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the Terre Rouge-
Verdun Link Road (M3), he will state –  

(a)  the total sum paid to date to Colas Mauritius/Colas Madagascar and consultant 

EGIS BCEOM International; 

(b) if a tender for treatment of landslides was awarded in 2014;  

(c)  why the original alignment was modified;  

(d) if  a  prima  facie  case  of  conspiracy  has  been  established  at  the  level  of  the 

Road Development Authority;  

(e)  the temporary and permanent solutions that are being implemented concerning 

the cracks and settlement problems, and  

(f)  the urgent measures being taken to ease traffic in and out of Port Louis North.  

Mr Bodha:  Madam Speaker, the project Terre Rouge-Verdun Link Road was designed 
in year 2006 to act as a bypass to Port Louis for traffic from the South/East to the North and 
to provide convenient and secured access for vehicles coming from the existing roads with 
the objective to relieve congestion on M1 and M2 Motorways. Consequently, this Link Road 
provides for a new corridor by bypassing Port Louis, taking into account the rapid economic 
development in Mauritius during the last decades.  The project, as initially conceived, was 
referred to as Malinga/Crève Coeur Road and has, subsequently, been turned into the Terre 
Rouge/Verdun Phase I, and later, to Phase II of Terre Rouge/Verdun to address the issues of 
landslide works which was decided in 2013.  

In regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed that the total amount paid to Colas 
(Maurice)/Colas (Madagascar) as contractor for the project was Rs3,028,859,365.53, whereas 
a total amount of Rs120 m. was paid to EGIS BCEOM, which was the consultant appointed 
for the project.  

 

9 

With regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed that following repeated landslides 
at around 1.5 km from Ripailles Roundabout to Valton Roundabout, it was decided to carry 
out slope stabilisation works in September 2013. Consequently, Sinohydro Corporation Ltd 
was  selected  as  contractor  for  the  project  following  an  international  bidding  exercise.  The 
project consists of slope stabilisation works and stabilisation of the landslide zones in four 
specific areas and the completion of the road and drainage works over the 2.5 km section of 
the southbound carriageway.  

However, as a consequence of the embankment failure which has been identified lower 
at  Valton  in  January  of  this  year,  my  Ministry  decided  that  comprehensive  geotechnical 
investigations  and  tests  should  be  carried  out  over  the  whole  stretch  of  the  road  so  as  to 
establish the exact nature of the failure and to come up with appropriate reconstruction design 
for  permanent  remedial  works.    It  was  accordingly  agreed  to  stop  the  slope  stabilisation 
project  being  implemented  by  Sinohydro  pending  the  completion  of  the  geotechnical 
investigation and tests.  This was done a few weeks back.  

Madam  Speaker,  in  relation  to  part  (c)  of  the  question,  it  was  decided  initially  to 
implement the Malinga-Crève Coeur road project which would provide a link between the 
district of Moka and Pamplemousses by connecting the villages of Malinga and Crève Coeur.  
The  detailed  design  and  the  tender  documents  were  prepared  by  Luxconsult  SA  from 
Luxembourg. 

However, after a Cabinet decision in December 2005, a consultant was nominated and 
the  consultant  recommended  that  the  project  be  reviewed  to  take  into  account  future 
developments in the region of Moka and to provide an alternative access to the development 
at Ébène and a link from the North to East and to Plaine Wilhems and to relieve traffic on 
existing  motorways.    A  new  alignment  was  consequently  proposed  extending  from  Terre 
Rouge to Verdun and this alignment was recommended for the following reasons – 

(i) 

it will reduce the travelling distance between the northern and eastern part of the 
island; 

(ii) 

that traffic load on the Motorways M1 and M2 will be reduced; 

 (iii) 

it will provide an alternative link to the proposed new administrative city at 
Ébène, and 

10 

it will generate development in the Moka and Pamplemousses area. 

 
(iv) 

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (d) of the question, I wish to inform the House, 
that following the embankment failure which was observed on 18 January 2015, Government 
had,  at  its  meeting  held  on  23  January  2015,  decided  to  request  the  Ministry  of  Financial 
Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms to carry out a technical and financial 
audit  into  all  the  contracts  awarded  by  the  Road  Development  Authority  since  2010. 
Furthermore, the Road Development Authority Board had, at its meeting held on 02 February 
2015, decided to suspend two officers of the Road Development Authority who were directly 
involved  in  the  implementation  and  monitoring  of  the  project  in  their  capacity  as  Site 
Engineer  and  Project  Coordinator  respectively  and  to  set  up  an  inquiry  under  the 
chairmanship  of  Me  Ravin  Chetty  to  investigate  and  to  situate  the  responsibilities  of  the 
officers and of the RDA. 

It is proposed eventually to refer the matter to the Police and to the ICAC, if need be, if 
it is established that there is any element for a prima facie case of conspiracy, and in the light 
of the findings of the technical and financial audit and the Enquiring Committee which has 
been set up at the level of the Road Development Authority.  

Madam Speaker, concerning part (e) of the question, I wish to highlight that while I am 
fully aware of the daily hardships of road users caused by the closure of the Terre Rouge-
Verdun Link Road, my main concern remains the safety of all road users. 

The temporary and permanent solutions to be implemented would therefore depend on 
the  findings  of  the  comprehensive  geotechnical  investigations  and  tests  which  are  being 
carried  out  now.  It  would  consequently  be  available;  the  results  will  be  available  in  three 
months  and  it  would  be  advisable  to  wait  for  the  results  to  determine  the  appropriate 
reconstruction design for any temporary and permanent remedial works because we have to 
know what is the cause of the failure.   

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (f) of the question, the Traffic Management and 
Road Safety Unit of my Ministry and the Police Department have come up with the following 
measures with a view to easing traffic in and out of Port Louis - 

(i) 

Creation of an additional lane entering Riche Terre Roundabout to the Overhead 
Pedestrian Crossing at Roche Bois whereby the traffic are diverted to Abattoir 
Road into the ABC Motors Roundabout where the traffic have five options - 

 

11 

• 
• 
• 
• 

• 

to join the Motorway again at Quay D; 
to join Farquhar Street parallel to the Motorway; 
to join the South of Plaine Verte through Nicolay Street; 
to join Route des Pamplemousses and the North of Plaine Verte, and 
last 
to  join  Route  des  Pamplemousses,  Boulevard  Victoria,  Old  Moka 
Road and Camp Chapelon on Motorway 1. 

(ii)  Part  of  the  traffic  using  the  Terre  Rouge-Verdun  Link  Road  are  diverted  from 
Valton  Roundabout  to  Ripailles  Roundabout  through  Long  Mountain  and  Les 
Mariannes to reach Ripailles. 

 (iii)   Heavy  motor  vehicles  are  restricted  to  move  from  North  to  South  on  the 

Motorway during morning peak hours.  

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr Bérenger:  As far as the first part of my question is concerned, Madam Speaker, if 
I heard the hon. Minister rightly, the contract was awarded to Colas for Rs2.1 billion, and he 
said that to date Rs3 billion – slightly more – have been paid.  Are there outstanding claims 
emanating from Colas and his consultant EGIS still being paid as a consultant?  

Mr  Bodha:    From  the  information  I  have,  Madam  Speaker,  there  was  a  number  of 
claims by Colas amounting to about Rs500 m., but then, there was the Agence Française de 
Développement and there was an independent arbitrator.  Finally, the arbitrator decided on a 
sum of Rs93.3 m. and this was paid to the contractor and an extension time of nine months 
was granted.  As regard to EGIS as well, there is no outstanding claim. 

Mr Bérenger: My point is: are they still being paid as a consultant? 

Mr Bodha: Are they? 

Mr Bérenger: Are they still being remunerated, paid as a consultant? 

Mr Bodha: No. 

Mr Bérenger: As far as part (b) is concerned, Madam Speaker, I think here the hon. 
Minister  tells  us  the  value  of  the  treatment  of  landslides  award.  Can  he  confirm  that 
Sinohydro was awarded the contract for Rs800 m., that, up to date, 8% have already been 

 

12 

paid?  He  tells  us  that  Sinohydro  has  agreed  to  stop  works,  on  what  conditions  and  is 
Sinohydro  also  being  investigated  into  by  the  Committee  and  so  on  of  hon.  Minister 
Bhadain? 

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, as regards Phase II of Terre Rouge-Verdun, I would like 
to enlighten the House on one fact. In fact, tests were carried out in 2006, 2010 and 2011. For 
the 3 test periods, the first period was 15 days, the second was 5 and the third was 3. For the 
whole  project  of  Terre  Rouge-Verdun,  the  tests  which  were  carried  out,  Madam  Speaker, 
lasted only 21 days. If I remove weekends, I think it must have lasted even less. The amount 
paid by EGIS to the geotechnical expert was 12,000 euros. It is clear, Madam Speaker, that 
the tests which were carried out at a site which is very complex and an area which is very 
wet, were totally inappropriate for such a project which were to cost Rs2.1 billion. After the 
implementation of the project in 2010, landslides occurred in the region where there were the 
cuts and the tests were done for 5 days – yes! But what I am saying is that, at one point in 
time, regarding the three lanes going southbound, the project was stopped, because the AFD 
and Government decided at that time that there could be no variation in the contract, because 
already the contract had moved from Rs2.1 billion to Rs3 billion. So, it was decided to have a 
Phase II of the project, just to cater for the landslide area. That was the contract which was 
allocated to Sinohydro for, as the hon. Leader of the Opposition put it, Rs800 m. Up to now, 
5% of the works have been carried out and we visited the sites. 

(Interruptions) 

5% of the works have been carried out. We went on site and we have decided, together with 
the expert that we have chosen, ARQ from South Africa, to do the geotechnical tests, to stop 
the works, to do the tests again, to see whether the design and the remedial works for the 
landslides are the right ones and after three months, we will be able to say whether they can 
continue on that design and on those works.  

As  regards  Sinohydro,  I  don’t  know  whether  the  team  of  my  colleague  from  the 
Financial Services has yet asked Sinohydro to come in to give their explanation. But, so far, 
only  5%  of  the  works  have  been  carried  out  and  I  need  some  confirmation  as  regards  to 
whether there has been any payment made to Sinohydro. 

Mr  Bérenger:  But  my  point  is:  has  Government  decided  that  Sinohydro  will  be 
amongst  the  dossiers  that  will  be  investigated  into  by  that  Committee  chaired  by  hon. 

 

13 

Bhadain?  Because we know the past performance of Sinohydro; this has been raised here. 
Has Government decided to include that file of Sinohydro in the files to be investigated? 

Mr Bodha: The decision of Cabinet was, in fact, to include all projects which have 
been implemented since 2010. Well, Madam Speaker, I have been informed that there has 
been an advance payment of 10% against a guarantee to be furnished by Sinohydro. 

Mr  Bérenger:  That  is  why  I  am  interested  to  know  the  conditions  that  Sinohydro 
supposedly  has  agreed;  they  must  have  set  conditions  to  stop  works,  because  mobilising 
equipment and money.  So, what are the conditions that Sinohydro has agreed to stop work? 

Mr  Bodha:  Concerning  the  conditions,  we  have  told  them  that  we  want  to  prove 
whether the design and the works that have been proposed by EGIS under the contract are 
right and adequate because we all agree today that it is a very difficult area, it is a very wet 
area and there have been landslides in 2010, 2011 and we have decided to ask Sinohydro to 
stop the works for three months. 

Mr Bérenger: For three months? 

Mr Bodha: Yes. 

Mr  Bérenger:  Good!  The  next  part  of  my  question  is  that  I  tried  to  catch  all  the 
reasons that explained why there have been a change in tracé, in alignment of the road. Two 
questions! The officer responsible - who is still in post, he has not yet retired, I understand - 
Mr Kadress Dorsamy had stated that the alignment had been changed pour attirer le trafic, 
that the previous alignment would not have caught the traffic as it should. Is that confirmed 
and is it being investigated by, again, this all-powerful committee chaired by hon. Bhadain, 
whether there has been land speculation around that realignment, as was alleged publicly and 
here in the past? 

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, the baby is here. There is a new alignment.  

(Interruptions) 

What I am saying is that the baby is here. Concerning the alignment, from what I understand, 
the MSM/MMM Government in 2000-2005 had decided on the road Crève Coeur-Malinga 
with  four  kilometers  to  go  through  Long  Mountain.  The  Government  which  came  after  in 
December decided on the alignment to connect Ébène and to connect the northern part of the 

 

14 

island.  Well,  I  don’t  have  any  information  as  regards  land  speculation  or  as  to  why  the 
alignment, in fact, we ended up from Crève Coeur-Malinga and we ended up to Terre Rouge-
Verdun. 

Mr Bérenger: Well, we are interested to know.  There have been inquiries all over 
the place and there have been clear allegations here, in the Minister’s presence, in this august 
Assembly, that there has been land speculation. So, can I insist that Government should look 
into  that  also? We  are  looking  into  all  sorts  of excesses.  This  is  a  very  serious  allegation.  
Why will it not be investigated? 

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, it will be investigated into. 

Mr Bérenger: The next part of my question, Madam Speaker, I asked if a prima facie 
case  of  conspiracy  has  been  established;  now  I  understand  that  the  case  has  not  yet  been 
referred to the Police. I have not heard the Minister say that anybody has been suspended. 
Which is which? There has been strong allegations by the hon. Minister himself. The words – 

 “On s’était évertué à me faire croire que everything was fine and then serious 
allegations were made.” 

So, which is which? 

Mr Bodha: The serious allegations are still there, Madam Speaker. We have evidence 
now  that  in  2010  already,  there  were  some  problems  with  the  site  where  we  have  the 
embankment failure. Now, whether this was reported to the management under the Board of 
the RDA, we are investigating into the matter. In February 2013, there was a site visit by the 
two suspended Engineers when cracks were, in fact, observed and brought to the knowledge 
of  EGIS,  that  is,  the  designer  and  the  supervisor,  and  the  contractor,  in  fact,  proposed 
remedial works, but EGIS decided that the remedial works should not be done. That was in 
February 2013. So, we have proof that the cracks occurred and that there was no disclosure of 
this  essential  information  by  the  Engineers.  But  we  are  taking  the  right  procedure,  we  are 
having the investigation under the  chairmanship of Me Ravin Chetty and, of course, we’ll 
delve into the matter. I am convinced that we will come to the conclusion that the allegations 
will be proven. 

 As  regards  Mr  Dorsamy,  the    Manager  of  the  RDA,  he  requested  to  leave  on 
preretirement. But Government decided not to grant this order to leave because we need him 

 

15 

in the investigation of the Terre Rouge-Verdun Project  and, of course, in the investigation of 
the other projects which are being taken care of by my colleague, the Minister of Financial 
Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms. 

Mr  Bérenger:  Outside  this  House,  Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Minister  was  more 
precise. Here, he said February 2013, out there he made reference to correspondence dated 23  
February 2013 in which Colas brought to the attention of the Engineers of RDA and of the 
consultant  the  very  serious  problem  that  was  arising.  Is  he  prepared  to  table  copy  of  that 
correspondence received by the RDA and by EGIS? 

Mr Bodha:  I have no issue on that,  Madam Speaker. 

Mr  Bérenger:    There  were  also  allegations  that  there  was  some  kind  of  trafic 
d’influence    since  the  contractor  gave  privilège,  as  it  was  stated,  to  not  less  than  six 
Engineers. Is that part of the inquiry?  Has this to date been established? 

Mr Bodha:  This is in the contract, Madam Speaker.  In fact, in the contract between 
the contractor, that is,  the builder and the RDA,  you have one clause where six Engineers 
are   granted  a vehicle of their choice to do the  site visits for three  years and this is being 
investigated into. 

Mr Bérenger:  Comments in the press have been very tough. Is the hon. Minister, at 
this  stage,  telling  us  that  this  clause  between  Colas  and  the  RDA  was,  if  not  illegal,  
unacceptable  or  is it current practice? 

Mr Bodha:  From what I have heard, it was in the practice of these contracts to  have 
such a clause.  But it is clear that this clause is totally unreasonable given that the Engineers 
are officers of the RDA which provides them with all the resources for the site visits.  But 
what is also strange, Madam Speaker,  is that  the cracks occurred in February 2013, there 
were site visits between the Engineers and the contractor, but, to my knowledge, we do not 
know whether the two Engineers of the RDA were there.  The most important thing is that 
why  I  made  serious  allegations  is  because  in  management  meetings  where  I  asked  the 
question twice: “whether you were aware of cracks occuring on the road before the opening 
of the road in December 2013” and twice on those management meetings the answer to me 
was “no”.  It was later that I got this evidence that, in fact, cracks had occurred in February 
2013 and I informed the Cabinet about it.  

16 

 
 So,  what  has  happened,  Madam    Speaker,    is  that  the  RDA  relied  totally  on  the 
consultants and it relied totally on the tests which were carried out.  It is very clear today that 
they were totally inadequate for such a project.  Today, I have had a working session with the  
South African experts.  The embankment, that is, the road infrastructure (which is about 7 
metres)  rests on natural ground, (which is about 20 metres) above the rock. Tests which have 
been carried out as regards the resistance of the natural ground to support the embankment 
has shown that the natural ground is too weak because they have a test called the standard 
penetration test and it is 10, it should be at least 30 on a scale of  0 to 50 . So, it is clear that 
the whole road was built on a natural ground which could not support that structure. 

The other thing is there was no, I would say, appropriate test as regards the drainage 
pattern of that area.  When we went on site, many of the planters there told us that, in fact, 
this  was  a  very,  very  wet  area.  When  the  embankment  collapsed,  we  did  the  drilling,  the 
water level was only at 3.5 metres from the surface which means that the whole natural soil 
and part of the embankment was under water.  

Mr Bérenger: The hon. Minister has been very tough on the RDA, on the contractor 
Colas  and  on  the  consultant  EGIS  and  now  relies  heavily  on  the  Japanese  International 
Cooperation Agency and now we hear some South African experts. Can we know what is the 
staffing  locally  of  the  Japanese  International  Cooperation  Agency?  How  equiped  is  the 
staffing  to  do  that  kind  of  assessment  right  now  and  who  appointed  those  South  African 
experts? Can we know who they are, their qualifications and who appointed them? 

Mr Bodha: Let me explain this, Madam Speaker. When there was the collapse of the 
embankment failure, in fact, I wanted to understand what had happened. The experts of JICA 
- we have two Engineers who were working on the landslides in Chitrakoot and in the South 
of  the  island  -  were  there.    So,  I  took  them  to  the  site  and  they,  in  fact,  investigated  the 
embankment failure correctly and under their guidance we decided not to have any remedial 
works because they said it was very serious. In the meantime, ARQ from South Africa, which 
are geotechnical experts, building dams in India and Latin America, have been requested to 
provide the design and the remedy for the failure of Ring Road 1 which they are currently 
implementing. We went to the site together with ARQ and the Japanese experts to have a 
common  opinion  because  my  reading  was  that  we  should  know  what  is  the  cause  of  the 
failure. Once we know what is the cause of the failure, then we can come with the permanent 
works because, at the end of the day, this road has already cost us more than Rs3.8 billion 

 

17 

and today the mess we are in is not the making of this Government, but decisions taken today 
will have a bearing on what is going to happen tomorrow and we do not want to have the 
same problems. 

So, the ARQ team is already here to monitor and supervise the works at the collapse 
of Ring Road 1.  The Ministry had requested them, together with the experts from the Japan 
International Cooperation Agency (JICA), to work together to come to a common opinion to 
understand why this region is so dangerous. 

Madam Speaker: One last question! 

Mr  Bérenger:  The  public  wants  to  know  urgently  when  this  Terre  Rouge-Verdun 
Road will be reopened.  Today, the Minister tells us that the test will be  available in three 
months’  time,  outside  he  said  six  months.  The  newspapers  quoted  him  as  saying:  “in  six 
months’ time the results of the tests will be available.” Now, he says three months. Even if it 
is  three  months,  we  had  the  test;  we  have  to  examine  the  test.    Then  we  have  to  tender 
whatever we have to tender and so on. Can he give an indication to the country, to the road 
users, who need urgently to use that road again, when roughly will that road be reopened?  

Mr Bodha: I think it is a genuine concern of the country, Madam Speaker. I do not 
know what the Press has reported. But I have always said that the tests have to be extensive 
and have to be final so that what we do as remedial works are going to be permanent. Now, I 
can say today that the tests are going to take three months and they will include the tests at 
the embankment failure, the revision of the design at the mountain cuts, that is, the Sinohydro 
project; they will also include all the other segments from the whole stretch from Valton to 
Ripailles so that, at the end of the day, after three months we will be able to say to Sinohydro 
that they  can continue.  We will also know exactly what is the design for the embankment 
failure and what are the permanent works at the site where we have the problem and also on 
the other segments of the road.  

I understand from what I have been told by the experts that the tests will take three 
months and the works may take from nine to twelve months.  In the meantime, to alleviate 
the traffic, because, as we said, 30% of the traffic going south goes through Terre Rouge-
Verdun,  we  are working on the design of a track road of  a diversion of about 400 metres 
which will allow vehicles to use the road south of Valton and north of Ripailles so that we 
will have better fluidity to the centre of the island and we are working on the design of this 

 

18 

track road which we will use during weekdays just to see to it that we do not have this huge 
congestion problem going through Port Louis. 

But,  Madam  Speaker,  I  would  like  to  say  to  this  House  that  as  regards  the 
Government, the most important thing is that we should have a motorway which is safe. We 
have already spent almost Rs4 billion, we are doing the tests now and we hope to be able to 
come with a design which will see to it that it is a permanent road between Terre Rouge and 
Verdun. 

Madam Speaker: Thank you. Time is over! 

(Interruptions) 

I am sorry, time is over! 

Mr Bérenger: I am on the last part of my question. 

Madam Speaker: I will allow the hon. Leader of the Opposition one last question! 

Mr  Bérenger:  Urgently,  traffic  congestion  must  be  solved  in  and  out  of  north. 
Already we have had two flops. A troisième voie was tried, flopped and then a diversion à 
travers Camp Yoloff was tried and flopped. Now, we are told - I understand - a third solution 
to this urgent traffic congestion problem. Will a third flop occur and who is responsible at the 
RDA to coordinate with the Police at this stage as far as traffic congestion is concerned? 

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, we did one day what is called a contra lane, that is, 
diverting the traffic to Port Louis on the lane which was bound towards the north and that 
created  a  national  problem.  But  I  must  say  that  the  diversion  through  l’Abattoir  to  Plaine 
Verte and to the centre of Port Louis going through Farquhar Street which we have opened is 
today being taken by one thousand vehicles during peak time and that is about 10% of the 
traffic entering Port Louis. So, that is a solution. The third lane is being worked upon and we 
are going to open it most probably in about ten days and we hope that will also bring some 
fluidity. 

But, Madam Speaker, there is no magic solution! We have 9,000 vehicles entering 
Port Louis from the north and 10,000 from the south. So, at the end of the day, at the peak 
time,  we  have  about  20,000  vehicles  going  through  Place  d’Armes.  So,  this  has  been  a 

 

19 

problem with us for many years and the Terre Rouge-Verdun was one solution to it. We will 
work with the Police. 

As regards the last question, I must say that the Police has been giving us a helping 
hand and the Traffic Management and Road Safety Unit as well. Well, the RDA has not been 
involved in all this. What they have been doing is to supervise the works throughout the third 
lane, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Time is over!   

MOTIONS 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10 (2) 

The  Prime  Minister:    Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  that  all  the  business  on 
today’s Order Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

PRESIDENT’S ADDRESS – MOTION OF THANKS 

Order read for resuming adjourned debate on the following motion of the hon. Second 

Member for Grand River North West & Port Louis West (Mrs D. Selvon). 

"That an Address be presented to the President of the Republic of Mauritius in the 
following terms - 

"We, the Members of the Mauritius National Assembly, here assembled, beg leave to 
offer our thanks to the President of the Republic of Mauritius for the Speech which he 
has addressed to us on the occasion of the Opening of the First Session of the Sixth 
National Assembly." 

Question again proposed. 

  

 

 

 

 
(3.41p.m.) 

20 

Mrs  D.  Boygah  (Second  Member  for  Vieux  Grand  Port  &  Rose  Belle):    Madam 
Speaker,  I  feel  deeply  privileged  to  stand  today  in  this  august  institution,  the  National 
Assembly, that is, the symbol and hallmark of our democracy and make my maiden speech, 
as an elected Member to the Assembly from Constituency No.11, Vieux Grand Port and Rose 
Belle.   

Allow  me,  at  the  very  outset,  to  extend  my  heartiest  congratulations  to  you,  Madam 
Speaker, for occupying such a highly significant post and also extend my heartiest gratitude 
to the hon. Deputy Speaker and to all the Members of this Assembly.  

I would avail myself this opportunity to thank, first of all, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, 
Sir Anerood Jugnauth, who confidently confided his confidence in me, to the leader of the 
MSM,  hon.  Pravind  Jugnauth,  my  colleagues  from  the  party  and  all  the  components  of 
l’Alliance Lepep. 

Obviously, I place on record the support of the intelligent and reliable electorate from 
my constituency, who have placed their trust in me and heartfelt thanks to all of you ‘Mam’.   

On  this  auspicious  day  in  early  December,  we  sealed  a  pact  with  the  people  of  the 
Republic of Mauritius.  We agreed that we would fulfil those responsibilities vested upon us 
with integrity, commitment and all transparency.  

Now that the elected period is behind us, now that the dust has settled, we all know that 
we have a job to do.  We also know that we have the inspired leadership built on an elevated 
edifice of experience and know-how of our esteemed Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Sir Anerood 
Jugnauth, to guide us. In this Mauritian politics, Sir Anerood Jugnauth has always delivered 
what he promises.  

We all know that he has done it in the past, enabling the country that was caught in an 

economic maelstrom to move out and become a beacon of prosperity and development.  

And we all know that the hon. Prime Minister will do it again. We know he has the 
silver bullet to bring the country out of the terrible miasma it has been entangled in the past 
few years. 

 

21 

Madam  Speaker,  in  the  past  nine  years,  our  country  had  come  to  a  point  where  the 

country as a whole had nothing but misgivings about the future.  

The  impact  of  one  scandal  had  hardly  had  time  to  sink  in  before  another  one  came 
along to piggyback it. The people whose will have to be served, become, in fact, subservient 
to the will of a few, a selected few of a coterie.  

Ask any young person who had had some education; the first instinct was to find a way 
out of the country that could not offer any prospect for employment commensurate with their 
qualifications.  

The grass always seems greener elsewhere because the Eldorado had ceased to exist in 

Mauritius.   

Bogus universities shattered the legitimate dreams and aspirations of so many youths 
and parents who pinned their hopes for economic mobility on higher education that came at a 
cost.  

 I need hardly stress that institutional credibility had reached an unheard of low esteem 
in the public.  Disillusion, demotivation and disenchantment had thus set in, flying in the face 
of a vision that we had all entertained of presenting our paradise, Mauritius, as a showcase of 
modernity and efficiency on the international scene. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  nine  years  or  so,  you  will  agree  with  me,  was  nothing,  but  a 
standstill  of  our  motherland  in  all  fields  of  life.  We  came  across  nothing,  but  social 
degradation; decline of moral values, and, needless to say, a very near economic crash. It was 
nothing, but a paradox, when the whole world was in the process of active mobility, we came 
to a point of standstill. During those years, scandals after scandals were the ingredients of the 
day, with crime rate and the nature of crime alarmingly increasing. I need not enumerate the 
numerous  scandals  which  are  being  unveiled.    “Compter  fini  scandales  rester”,  and  you 
know nowadays, Madam Speaker, “Compter fini billet rester”. 

Our living environment had been suffocating, children on one side, old people on the 
other side, but the true sufferers were our householders on whose shoulders, our daughters, 
our sisters, our young girls lie. 

 

22 

Madam  Speaker,  if  today  I  am  here  in  this  august  House,  I  do  feel  that  I  am  the 
representative of so many thousands of citizens of this country who had been taken hostage 
for the past nine years, ruled under the leadership of a self-proclaimed lion and his cubs. 

My voice today represents those voiceless victims who had been desperately struggling 
to voice out. These voiceless people were those sisters, housewives, daughters, who, in their 
attempt  to  survive,  had  to  undergo  unthinkable  traumas  of  the  infamous  “touse  sali,  mette 
bikini, danse Macarena” episodes and to dance with the tune of those, whom today after our 
victory, have come to light and to some to shame. 

Madam Speaker, in their attempt to retain power, not only the young womenfolk had 
been subjected to humiliation, pitilessly, even our grannies, our nanis, our mawsis had not 
been spared. In fact, they made a mockery of those old, innocent, naive elderly by bribing 
them  to  sing  and  dance  to  the  glory  of  the  self-proclaimed  lion.  In  so  doing,  they  made  a 
mockery of the very root of our culture. God made them pay heavily for this and history bears 
witness. 

I  can’t  help  myself,  Madam  Speaker,  from  voicing  my  disgust  to  what  we  are 
witnessing  these  days.  While  street  children  are  striving  for  a  meal,  one  in  particular  has 
thousands of millions of rupees in store for his petty expenses. An inquiry is on, I better don’t 
dwell on this issue right now. 

Madam Speaker, I could go on illustrating many more of these follies and foibles that 
have been engaged in by  the previous regime, but that have resulted in  slowing down our 
social progress and development in this country. But we have been elected by the population 
to optimistically look forward instead. 

Madam  Speaker,  this  new  Government  has  brought  along  a  feel  good  factor  in  the 
population.  The  Rt.  hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth  incarnates  hope  for  the  poor  people, 
unemployed  and  les  laissés-pour-compte  of  our  country.  Ever  since  in  charge,  the 
Government  has  set  itself  to  task.  No  stone  will  be  left  unturned  to  make  this  300-point 
programme a reality, a happening in the next five years. Our Rt. hon. Prime Minister has set 
the example.   Il a placé la barre très haute, à nous, élus du peuple, de l’aider dans sa divine 
mission de mener le pays vers un deuxième miracle économique, Madame la présidente, et 
restaurer la moralité dans la façon de faire la politique. 

 

23 

However,  I  think  it  must  be  stressed,  Madam  Speaker,  that  there  are  some  cardinal 
lessons that the last elections have brought home to us all. One of them is the dominant, even 
overriding role played by the youths and women.  

They are the ones who decided to throw in their lot with us and decided to carve and 

shape their own future and thereby achieve meaningful changes.  

Here,  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  not  talking  of  youth  and  women  from  a  specific  ethnic 
group, race or creed.   I  am not talking about women with a specific dress style, is it sari, 
churidaar or minis.  I am not talking about women applying lipstick of any color, is it red, 
purple,  orange  or  of  any  color,  Madam  Speaker?  Madam  Speaker,  we  are  talking  here  of 
people from all backgrounds and walks of life.  We are united to say no to corruption, no to 
nepotism and no to cronyism.  And when people are united in their rejection of what they see 
as fundamentally immoral, unethical, there is no stopping in the surge. 

Madam Speaker, there is another lesson that we have garnered from the results of the 

last elections. It is simply – 

“As a policy shaper and policymaker, we have taken a commitment to serve the 
people.  But  to  do  so,  we  should  create  conditions  for  innovative  ideas  and 
concepts to swarm up to us instead of believing that everything has to start from 
us”. 

For  it  is  obvious  that  the  prized  goals  and  objectives  we  have  set  for  ourselves  are  the 
reflection of the heartfelt needs of the people.   It goes without saying, therefore, that their 
implementation cannot be successfully achieved without the support of the people. 

 The  Government  has  pledged  very  clearly  its  determination  to  “govern  for  the 
people  with  the  people”,  Madam  Speaker.    People  empowerment,  Madam  Speaker,  is 
therefore a new name of the game. And I, who have been bestowed with responsibility as a 
PPS, will ensure that this becomes a reality and I act as a facilitator of an effective interface 
between the people and the Government machinery. And the people have endowed us with a 
mission to transport the country so that the Second Economic Miracle and social and cultural 
spin-offs become a reality. In short, Madam Speaker, we have been mandated to ‘Achieve 
Meaningful Change’ which is the leitmotiv of our Government Programme 2015-2019.  

Madam Speaker, a political manifesto is commonly defined as a public declaration of 
principles, policies or intentions of a political nature. It becomes a document that is based on 

 

24 

fundamental questions like, ‘What are the concerns of the people?’ ‘What do people expect 
from the party or parties wishing to be voted to power?” and the like. 

The  manifesto  of  the  ‘Alliance  Lepep’,  kept  all  these  dimensions  and  all  these 
concerns in mind and served as a blueprint for the Government Programme 2015-2019. It has 
been  the  brainchild  of  a  dedicated  collective  team  of  thinkers,  but  also  experienced 
practitioners who have been close to and systematically feeling the pulse of the people.  

What  was  the  music  to  the  ears  of  the  people  is  that,  after  9  years  of  inanity  and 

wishy-washiness, they are being told in a clear, genuine and no-nonsense manner that – 

 “Government  is  committed  to  concluding  business  on  a  principle  of  discipline, 
transparency, accountability and exemplary governance”. 

This commitment alone, given the prevailing context of indisciplinary, opacity, non-
accountability and wanting governance over the past nine  years, explains the high level of 
possible  positive  accolade  and  receptivity  that  the  Programme  has  received  along  the  rank 
and file of the population. 

Madam Speaker, I am proud to state that this Programme carries a host of pro-poor 

policies and the needs for genuine social inclusion. 

Allow me to spell out just a few of them.  To start with –  

•  The elaboration of a Marshal Plan to combat poverty and social exclusion; 
•  The review of sales by levy procedures; 
•  The  reinforcement  of  laws  relating  to  the  protection  and  prevention  of 

domestic violence which has become a bane in so many households today; 

•  The  establishment  of  a  system  of  visits  by  specialised  nurses  as  well  as 
dedicated counters in our primary health care centres and hospitals to cater for 
the needs of the elderly and disabled people; 

•  Full subsidies on SC and HSC examinations for all learners as well as a free 

hot meal for all the pupils. 

Nor  have  the  foundations  of  the  economic  transformation  of  the  country  been 
forgotten.  The  Government  Programme  places  a  premium  on  new  growth  poles  like  the 
development of Mauritius as a regional bunkering hub, the provision of a new fillip to the 
ocean economy and the creation of 15,000 jobs annually, among others. 

25 

 
Obviously, Madam Speaker, our economy will be at risk unless we develop our young 
jobseekers  into  a  skilled  and  experienced  workforce.  Education  is  thus vital  to  a  nation  in 
what  it  helps  accelerate  the  pace  of  development,  both  human  and  infrastructural  and 
guarantees the scope of profitability and satisfying employment and paves the way for social 
mobility.   

And no one will deny that it has become opportune and timely to both introduce a 
Higher  Education  Bill  that  will  transform  Mauritius  into  a  genuine  knowledge  hub  and 
rethink about the CPE and ensure that there is a proper institutionalisation and actualisation 
of a genuine “Learning for All”. 

Madam Speaker, during the last nine years of the several economic factors that have 
had a very bad impact upon our people, one of the toughest has been underemployment and 
unemployment. When a country reaches a point where young people with Masters and PhDs 
have to drag their feet and their application for an odd job opening turned down, where they 
have  to  be  recruited  as  service  providers  to  perform  tasks  in  Ministries  under  Service  to 
Mauritius Scheme, we realise something is amiss and has gone tremendously wrong. Madam 
Speaker, if I have so far stressed the situation of youth,  you will appreciate that I am also 
aware that there is an issue that concerns women as well. 

As an entrepreneur myself, I am all too conscious that women have to labour under a 
double-jeopardy handicap, that women have for long been participating in the labour force is 
never questioned in Mauritius. In fact, gender equality in the workforce is a primary factor 
that  guarantees  a  major  human  resource  is  not  being  wasted  but  rather  contributes  to  the 
economic growth and, therefore, national development.  

This is the influential role of gender equality at the workforce. But, Madam Speaker, 
what about the social and domestic fronts? Madam Speaker, all of us, hon. Members of this 
Assembly of both sexes are all aware of the heavy burden of some of  our sisters made to 
carry  on  the  domestic  and  social  front.  Violence  against  women  can  and  should  never  be 
treated as a primary problem as we often tend to see happening in our country. 

I remember reading a few years ago a series of aggravating factors listed by the SOS 
Femmes as related to the dynamic of domestic violence. Among these figured prominently 
alcoholism and drugs, financial problems and unemployment as well as the trivialisation of 
domestic violence. 

26 

 
Can  we,  hon.  Members  of  this  Assembly,  honestly  say  that  matters  have  changed 
much  these  days?  The  average  crime  perpetrating  against  women  today  is  domestically 
related. The most vulnerable victims of chain-snatching on the road are the women and those 
who are less likely to secure a job after losing one are, again, women. 

It is to be appreciated, therefore, that this Government Programme aims at redressing 
the situation, dealing with the issue of domestic violence, protecting further women and girls 
in  dire  circumstances  and  coming  up,  among  other  measures  with  a  ‘Back  to  Work 
Programme’ to facilitate their re-entry in the world of work.  

You will have noticed, Madam Speaker, that I have concentrated only on some facets 
of the Government Programme, but largely on the social ones. This time, Government has 
decided to lay much more emphasis on both women and children and people of all classes. 
Still,  the  House  will  agree  with  me  that  the  ground  has  effectively  been  laid  in  our 
Government  Programme  for  sound  and  further  reaching  policies  to  deliver  a  better  social 
outcome. 

Madam Speaker, it is beyond dispute that the Government Programme addresses the 
concern of every single Mauritian - as I stated before - of all ages, of all classes, of all social 
backgrounds. Every single measures included has no gut in itself to be dismissed. I am afraid 
for my friends on the other side to prove which single word of the Programme is out of tune, 
let  alone  our  measures.  Madam  Speaker,  how  can  anybody  go  against  this  Government 
Programme  whereby  such  measures  are  being  targeted  and  some  already  realised  and 
materialised with standing ovation of the whole population?  

Before  ending, Madam  Speaker,  I  would wish the House to reflect on the message 
inherent to the Government Programme for its 2015-2019 mandate. In its professed intention 
to  drive  the  nation  towards  a  tryst  with  its  destiny,  the  following  phrase  in  the  preamble 
expresses all too clearly an unflinching and unflagging determination, I quote – 

“To bring meaningful change to the daily life of our people and to lead them 
towards happiness, prosperity and a better future”. 

Let nobody be fooled by the simplicity behind these words. These words are pregnant with 
significance in that they reflect the determination of the Government to scale-up and improve 
the sustainability - economic, social, human, cultural and political - of the nation as a whole. 

27 

 
In this venture, everybody is to be and will be taken on board. All persons have to be 
and will be integral to the fruitfulness of this enterprise. This is why, Madam Speaker, I will, 
through  you, invite the hon. Members of the Opposition to join us in this mission that we 
have set for on board.  All persons have to be and will be integral to the fruitfulness of this 
enterprise. 

This  is  why,  Madam  Speaker,  I  will,  through  you,  invite  the  hon.  Members  of  the 
Opposition  to  join  us  in  this  mission  that  we  have  set  for  ourselves.  They  do  not  have  to 
oppose all the time.  

There  are  moments  when  reaching  across  the  aisle  can  be  beneficial  rather  than 
detrimental to the national interests. There are moments when, despite differences of opinion, 
people can still speak to one another. And if, in the interest of the people, we speak the same 
language and read from the same song script, then this augurs well for our democracy. 

Pour terminer, j’aurais aimé partager avec vous, Madame la présidente, l’anecdote 
d’un de mes mandants. Pour l’anniversaire de son fils de 10 ans, son fils lui demanda un petit 
cadeau et le père lui répondit, et lui dit -  

« Tone  fini  gagne  to  cadeau  beta,  to  cadeau  mone  donne  toi  ça  le  10  décembre 
quand  mone  vote  l’Alliance  LEPEP  et  quand  mone  mette  toi  dans  la  main  Sir 
Anerood Jugnauth, to l’avenir ine fini assuré. » 

With these words, I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

 (4.02 p.m.) 

Mr  D.  Ramful  (Third  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien):  Madam 
Speaker, let me, first of all, congratulate you for your election as Speaker of this House. May 
I also congratulate hon. A. Duval for his election as Deputy Speaker and I have no doubt that 
you will make use of your good office to uphold the rules of this Assembly for the sake of 
democracy. Let me also congratulate hon. Mrs Boygah for her maiden speech.  

Madam  Speaker,  I  stand  before  you  today  in  this  august  Assembly  as  a  young 
Member freshly elected having at heart the future of my country and the faith of its people. 
So, my speech today will be the vox populi, that is, la voix du peuple, the voice of the people, 
beyond  party  politics.  The  people  of  this  country  have,  on  10  December,  elected  the 
Government of the day to be in the driving seat.  And this Government has chosen as their 

 

28 

destination the shaping of un second miracle socio-économique in the interest of one and all. 
The way forward, the path to follow to reach this heavenly destination, has been set out in the 
Government Programme. I, being the mouthpiece of my electorate and although being in the 
Opposition,  I  acclaim  the  choice  of  this  destination,  which  is  a  second  socio-economic 
miracle.  

However, Madam Speaker, choosing a destination is one thing, reaching it is another 
matter. It requires commitment, committing yourself to the people and committing yourself to 
your programme. Creating a feel good factor just after the election is most welcomed, but that 
is  not  sufficient  to  attain  our  goals.  Surely,  doing  exactly  the  contrary  to  what  has  been 
promised would slowly but inevitably instil in the minds of the very people who voted for 
this  Government,  a  feeling  that  they  have  been  betrayed  and  conned,  in  other  words,  a 
sentiment de ‘dévirer mam’.  

The recent U-turns… 

(Interruptions) 

The recent U-turns in Government decisions, in particular, depriving the consumers of 
the  benefit  they  legitimately  deserve  as  a  result  of  the  fall  of  petroleum  prices  on  the 
international  market  and  the  recent  appointments  of  CEOs  and  Chairpersons  in  parastatal 
bodies are just a few examples of deviations from the promises made to the people and, this, 
if it continues would tend to reinforce what the political analysts are saying outside, that the 
vote expressed by the people on 10 December was a vote de sanction against the previous 
Government,  et  pas  un  vote  d’attribution  to  the  present  Government.  If  this  theory  is 
confirmed and if Government continues, mark my word,… 

(Interruptions) 

…nothing will stand in the way of the people for change. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

Mr Ramful: Madam Speaker, I have read the chapter on economy; I can perceive that 
there are good intentions from the present Government. I sincerely hope that the Government 
of the day do achieve what they have proposed. The  creation of new pillars for economic 

 

29 

growth, such as making Mauritius a regional bunkering hub, the development of the Ocean 
Economy,  the  implementation  of  the  Duty-Free  Shopping  Paradise  are  not  new  to  this 
Assembly. They have been invoked in the past by previous Governments. 

The Deputy Prime Minister, hon. Duval, who was serving as Minister of Finance in 
the previous Government, did mention in the 2014 Budget, about making Mauritius a Marine 
Services  Hub.  He  mentioned  the  creation  of  a  Marine  Services  Platform  as  a  new  pillar 
centered  on  growing  the  bunkering  facilities.  He  also  mentioned  that  currently  we  attract 
bunkering  traffic  for  only  300,000  tonnes  and  the  demand  for  bunkering  in  the  region  is 
expected to rise to around 8.6 m. tonnes. And this is why the previous Government took the 
decision  to  liberalise  the  importation  of  bunker  fuel  resulting  in  more  competitive  tariffs. 
However, this won’t be enough because there are other factors that should be considered such 
as the need to have the infrastructure and equipment and the human resource to support an 
efficient bunkering operation in the port. So, Madam Speaker, such a project should be given 
its utmost priority and I suggest that there must be an exhaustive study and we should follow 
the path led by Singapore which has now become the world’s largest bunkering port. 

The  Ocean  Economy  is  yet  another  pillar  mentioned  by  the  hon.  Deputy  Prime 
Minister, the then Minister of Finance, under the previous Government. A roadmap had been 
prepared and various opportunities were identified for the exploration of the 2.3 m. square 
kilometres  of  maritime  zone,  including  petroleum  and  mineral  exploration,  seafood  and 
aquaculture, deep ocean water applications, marine renewable energies and ocean knowledge. 
A National Ocean Economy Task Force was even set up to oversee the implementation of 
that roadmap. Even experts from World Bank were roped in to help in the realisation of this 
new pillar of economic development. And I congratulate this Government for their decision 
to continue with this project.  

The  Duty-free  Shopping  Paradise,  again  another  laudable  project  initiated  by  hon. 
Pravind Kumar Jugnauth back in 2005 when he announced the abolition of 80% tax on about 
1850  varieties  of  goods,  including  fabrics,  electronics  and  jewellery.  However,  it  is 
regrettable  that  this  project  has  not  really  materialised.  We  still  find  most  of  our  tourist 
visitors  coming  with  their  10kg  luggage  and  leaving  the  country  with  their  10kg  luggage.  
Now,  I  believe  that  maybe  this  duty-free  concept  should  be  extended  to  more  varieties  of 
products  to  the  taste  and  to  the  needs  of  the  visitors,  but,  at  the  same  time,  we  should  be 

 

30 

careful not to make things more complicated for those export-led industries, especially in the 
present context of the fall in the Euro. 

The creation of an SME bank and earmarking Rs10 billion for the SMEs, again it is 
good intention to increase growth and create jobs, but until and unless these SMEs do not 
explore the right market to exhaust their products, no amount of fiscal alleviations would help 
them. Our market is too small for the survival of these SMEs and they should, therefore, be 
encouraged to export overseas.  Measures should be taken by the Government so that these 
SMEs have easy access to information, advice and finance so that they can have the required 
technology to compete on the international market. 

Madam Speaker, bringing our country to a higher level of economic development or 
attaining a second socio-economic miracle, whatever terms we use, what is important is that 
we should develop new strategies to maximise our opportunities in a new world environment.  
We  cannot  take  any  risk  and  formulate  economic  policies  haphazardly.    This  Government 
cannot take any risk and it will have to fulfil the promise of making the economic miracle, 
otherwise the future of a whole generation will be wasted.  This is why I suggest that maybe 
the present Government should consider the setting-up of an Economic Strategies Committee 
under  the  chairmanship  of  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  comprising  of  experts.    This 
committee should engage itself in obtaining views and suggestions from various stakeholders, 
including  the  industries,  business  chambers  and  associations,  universities  and  think-tanks, 
unionists,  professionals,  entrepreneurs  and  members  of  the  public.    Proposals  from  this 
committee would then help to develop meaningful social and economic strategies to create 
growth. 

Madam Speaker, only economic growth will help to create jobs. The Government has 
promised the creation of 15,000 jobs annually and a significant number of jobs in the public 
sector.  We are all concerned with the number of unemployed school leavers and graduates 
who are struggling to find a decent job. Palliative measures such as the “Youth Employment 
Programme’  will  not  solve  the  problem.  Government  should  make  an  assessment  of  the 
current  ‘Youth  Employment  Programme’  to  find  out  how  many  of  those  enlisted  in  that 
programme do retain their jobs after the completion of their one-year contract and then come 
up with reforms. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  quest  for  a  second  socio-economic  miracle  would  not  be 
accomplished if we do not come up with an adaptable and realistic reform in the education 

 

31 

sector.  I am glad to see in the programme that Government is aiming at providing a high 
standard of academic education and skills for our youngsters.  It is also encouraging to see 
that the education reforms will focus on curriculum review and performance improvement at 
all levels. The reforms should not only consider providing high standard of quality education 
but should also include value education. The level of discipline in our schools has been the 
subject  of  a  lot  of  debates  recently  and  this  is  what  parents  are  saying  outside.    They  are 
saying:  ‘when a three or four-year-old child comes to school for admission, the child comes 
as  a  little  angel  but  when  the  child,  now  a  young  adult,  leaves  the  school  at  the  age  of 
seventeen or eighteen, he/she often leaves as a little devil.’  So, we have to bring meaningful 
change in the educational sector that would take account of both quality and value education. 

When talking about quality  education,  I would like to draw the attention of the hon. 
Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources  to  the  book  called  ‘Ti-Matou’  that  was 
introduced  in  the  primary  education  curriculum  last  year  with  the  blessing  of  the  previous 
Minister. 

(Interruptions) 

This book, Madam Speaker – I have said I will speak with the voice of the people - has been 
a complete failure. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order, please! 

Mr Ramful: There have been a lot of complaints from parents about the contents of 
that book.  Instead of raising their level of education, it has created confusion in the minds of 
young  children  at  their  tender  age.  How  can  a  child,  who  is  still  struggling  with  learning 
words, be taught to read lengthy texts at the first year cycle?  How can a child be taught to 
learn words without being taught syllables? How can educators be asked to work on a book 
without having been given proper and adequate training?  I hope that the hon. Minister shall 
take immediate corrective measures as she did for the Enhancement Programme which was a 
complete waste of public money and  which was being used by some parents working late 
hours as a ‘garderie’ for their children after school hours. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Jhugroo! 

 

32 

Mr  Ramful:    I  take  note  of  the  Government’s  decision  to  introduce  a  9-year  basic 
continuous  schooling  and  to  replace  the  Certificate  of  Primary  Education  by  an  end  of 
primary cycle assessment.  However, before embarking on such a course, I would request the 
hon. Minister to come with an integrated roadmap or a green paper with concrete proposals 
so that there are constructive inputs from different stakeholders on such an important issue.   

I  also  welcome  Government’s  decision  to  come  up  with  an  Integrated  Career 
Counselling Service to enable the young students to better plan their career.  I would like to 
seize the opportunity to draw the attention of the hon. Minister that under my chairmanship 
when I was at the Human Resource Development Council, we have worked on this project 
for  the  setting-up  of  such  a  Career  Counselling  Service  and  the  project  has  reached  an 
advanced stage.   

Madam Speaker, I cannot end my speech without referring to the Police inquiry against 
the former Prime Minister that led to the seizure of bank notes found in his safes.   I shall 
refrain myself from engaging in a debate about the source of that money, since there is an on-
going  Police  inquiry  and,  above  all,  we  should  not  give  the  impression  of  being  ‘des 
hypocrites’ or close our eyes to the obvious. But there is…. 

(Interruptions) 

…a public outcry that the time has come for the introduction of a comprehensive Bill on the 
financing of political parties. 

 (Interruptions) 

It is a crude reality that with the increasing cost of election campaigns, political parties cannot 
survive on the relative paucity of membership contributions.  Political parties have thus been 
forced to seek financial support from wealthy individuals, contractors and corporates. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

 (Interruptions) 

Order, please! 

33 

 
Mr  Ramful:  This  has  rightly  raised  concern  that  elected  members  might  become 
collectively  more  accountable  to  powerful  donors  than  to  their  electorates  thus  giving  the 
perception of corruption. Previous Governments have, time and again, promised the people 
for the setting-up of a regulatory framework and for bringing legislative reforms to empower 
the  Electoral  Commission  to  monitor  political  financing  during  electoral  campaigns.  This 
Government  has  made  the  same  promise  in  its  programme,  for  the  introduction  of  a 
Financing of Political Parties Act and I do hope that this will be a reality in the near future. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  the  present  Government  well  in  their  endeavour  to  bring 

meaningful change, but I shall end by saying these cautionary words – 

“Words can be twisted in any shape. Promises can be made to lull the heart and to 
seduce the soul. But the people will judge you by your actions.” 

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Soodhun, do you think you will be for long? For how long 

will you be? Half an hour? Okay, then! Hon. Soodhun! 

 (4.23 p.m.) 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun): 
Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to congratulate the hon. Members for their maiden 
speech, but only pity the previous orator.  He is considered as la brebis égarée. I really pity 
the hon. Member because he knows himself what he is talking about and I hope he believes 
what  he  has  said  and  I  pray  God  that  in  future  he  will  be  enlightened.  In  this  august 
Parliament, we learn a lot from elders like the  Rt. Hon. Prime Minister and even the hon. 
Leader of the Opposition. That is how the Parliament has been an instrument where we can 
contribute  a  lot  and  also  he  can  compare  his  own  party.  He  has  doubts  as  to  whether  this 
Government is going to realise what it has promised.  He has to just go back to see what we 
have promised and the new Government has been appointed. I hope that one day any doubt 
that he has will be cleared. 

By saying that, Madam Speaker, I join my colleagues, hon. Members, who addressed 
before  me  in  this  House,  in  congratulating  you,  on  your  appointment  as  Speaker  of  this 
august  Assembly.    It  is  for  the  first  time  that  in  the  history  of  Mauritius  we  have  a  lady 
Speaker.  Congratulations  once  again  in  the  name  of  all  the  women  of  this  country!  I  also 

 

34 

extend  my  heartfelt  congratulations  to  our  youngest  Member,  hon.  Adrien  Duval,  for  his 
election as Deputy Speaker. 

Allow me, to have a special word of thanks for my constituents for having elected me, 
my  two  fellow  candidates  and  also  my  good  friend,  hon.  Dr.  Sorefan,  to  be  their 
representatives in the National Assembly. This is a fact; this is my seventh mandate in this 
Assembly. 

I need also, here, to thank the whole population for the massive support which it has 

given to L’Alliance Lepep. This is more than a commitment on our part.  

Madam Speaker, with the coming in of the new Government, it is literally a wind of 
change that is blowing over the country. The population and the hon. Members on the other 
side also can rest assured that with this Government of the day, the fundamental principles of 
democracy  will  be  respected.  Meritocracy  will  prevail.  Economic  growth  will  become  a 
reality. 

Madam Speaker, we talked during the electoral campaign, raising many expectations. 

Now, we walk the talk by concrete actions. We mean business.  

The  Government  Programme  contains  a  whole  string  of  measures  which  cover  all 
social  and  economic  activities.  These  measures  have  been  elaborated  to  allow  this 
Government  to  create  the  necessary  conditions  for  a  second  economic  miracle,  which 
Mauritius is eagerly looking for. 

Madam Speaker, I am sure that the public at large has noted that we intend to promote 

democracy at all levels. 

The former Government led by Dr. Navinchandra Ramgoolam had promised various 
legislations to assure the respect of democratic principles. For example, electoral reform. Lots 
of  “kozer  kozer”  have  taken  place  on  the  issue.  But,  at  the  end,  nothing  came  out  of  the 
promises. 

This present team led by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, will live 

up to all promises made. 

35 

 
To promote democracy, the Government is engaging itself to come up with various 
legislations such as a new Declaration of Assets Act – hon. Members should not be worried – 
a Financing of Political Parties Act and a Freedom of Information Act. 

We will give the Electoral Supervisory Commission the necessary powers to sanction 

fraud, corrupt practices and conflict of interest. 

Madam Speaker, putting emphasis on education is one of the surest ways to empower 
our people, thus opening to them interesting employment opportunities, as mentioned by the 
previous orator. 

The former Prime Minister, Navinchandra Ramgoolam, always stated: “One graduate 

per family.  But after that, he forgot to add: “One unemployed per family”. 

Ene somer par famille avek ene fosse certificat. 

(Interruptions) 

This  is  the  unique  country  and  the  unique  leadership  of  Navinchandra  Ramgoolam 
where  the  setting  up  of  “Universités  Marrons” avek  certificat  marron, certificat  fosse  has 
been tolerated by the Labour Party. 

(Interruptions) 

The Labour Party Minister of Tertiary Education, what a shame!  Today, we can go and see, 
the  Director  of  “Universités  Marrons”,  whose  family  as  well  has  been  involved  in  this 
business. 

Authorisation from international bodies, such as UGC of  India, has been bypassed. 
Questions have been raised on the validity of degrees awarded by many institutions. All this 
resulting into Mauritius earning disrepute. 

We  will  recall  that  the  MSM  in  alliance  with  MMM  during  2000-2005  has  built 
nearly 46 additional secondary schools. Just imagine how chaotic the situation would have 
been  today  if  such  school  infrastructure  development  had  not  been  undertaken  –  ti  pu lire 
emba pied! What would have happened? 

Universités Marrons! 

(Interruptions) 

 

36 

(Interruptions) 

This present Government will continue to broaden access to education, while, at the 
same  time,  ensuring  that  quality  is  not  compromised.  A  tangible  example  of  our  policy  to 
provide access to education to each and every student is the provision of 100% subsidy for 
the  examination  fees  for  SC  and  HSC  students,  a  measure  which  will,  no  doubt,  comfort 
many needy parents. C’est déjà an initiative and an electoral promise for l’Alliance Lepep we 
are implementing.  It is one among many. 

Madam Speaker, with your permission, I shall now dwell on the Housing and Lands 
sector  over  which  I  have  ministerial  responsibilities.  I  have  to  thank  the  Rt.  hon.    Prime 
Minister who has appointed me and has also placed trust on me - and I am very thankful - for 
nearly 28 years. I can also say that in politics, people should always know and learn loyalty 
and sincerity.  It is payable in politics. I thank him for the trust that he has placed upon me. 

Madam  Speaker,  of  late,  we  have  been  witnessing  persistent  representations  and 
protests  from  different  quarters  about  the  way  State  land  was  being  allocated.    Since  my 
arrival at the Ministry, I have examined numerous files where, during the past years, many 
procedures have been bypassed and twisted to allocate State land to certain persons. In many 
cases, Cabinet’s approval has not even been sought. A middle-class person awaits a long time 
to get a building permit for residential purposes. But if you share close ties with the Labour 
Party Government which was in place, you are allocated State land in 24 hours! 

(Interruptions) 

24  hours!  Not  one  arpent,  13  arpents  in  24  hours!  We  even  have  a  case  where  a  former 
Minister  of  Labour  who  had  been  allocated  a  plot  of  State  land,  tried  to  use  his  power  to 
proclaim a public beach as private!  Do you know how he got the EIA licence? He stood up 
in front of a mirror and he asked for his… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, he stood up in his own house in front of a mirror and he asked for an EIA 
licence.  He said “I need an EIA licence.’’ And it said: “Yes, you will get it tomorrow.” 

 We had this type of Minister in the previous Government! 

(Interruptions) 

 

 Yes, he himself answered! 

37 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 Because he was the Minister who gave EIA licence! 

(Interruptions) 

Zot coz devant miroir ça! A political… 

Listen to me, Madam Speaker… 

… a political agent… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: I am listening to you, hon. Vice-Prime Minister! 

Mr Soodhun: A political agent and her partners obtained almost 30 arpents of State 
land which has not been developed within the time frame set in the lease condition. But the 
former Government was okay with that. No problem! Why?  If actions were to be taken, that 
agent would have said: “Do you know me?” 

“Do you know who I am?” 

Everybody knows who she is! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Government has already gained possession of the land. 

(Interruptions) 

38 

 
Madam  Speaker,  many  beneficiaries  have  indulged  in  a  speculation  with  a  view  to 
make money out of State land. As soon as they signed their lease, they looked for foreigners 
to  sell  off  the  State  land  at  an  exorbitant  price.  Millions  of  rupees,  I  know!  Millions  and 
millions of rupees! Very soon, I am coming to this august Assembly with a statement giving 
all the details so that hon. Members know who they are. I will give the names, all the details 
and  all  the  transactions  which  have  been  made.  Most  of  them  have  not  respected  their 
contractual obligations. Some lessees do not even pay their annual rents which represent huge 
sums of money. We say that example comes from above. L’exemple vient d’en haut. Well, 
the former Prime Minister…  

(Interruptions) 

Bizin en colère! The former Prime Minister himself did not pay the premium and the rent 
since 2011! 

(Interruptions) 

He owed Rs6.8 m. for his bungalow. It is only after his defeat at the general elections on 12 
December 2014 that he settled his account late at night! 

Loup-garou! 

(Interruptions) 

 (Interruptions) 

I am referring to the file from the Ministry. I must add that even the maîtresse of the political 
agent has obtained State lands as rewards! 

I am going to give all the details.  

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Can you imagine a plot of land in a cemetery being allocated to a person very close… 

Cimetière aussi! Pe met piloti lor cimetière! 

(Interruptions) 

 

39 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! Order, please! 

Mr Soodhun: A very close relative of the Prime Minister to set up an artisanal shop! 

Mo krwar piloti lor cimetière… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker,  in  Mon  Choisy  even  public  toilets  have  been  converted  into  a 

‘snack’! 

 (Interruptions) 

With  the  approval  of  Mr  Seeruttun  from  the  Beach  Authority  and  without  notifying  the 
Ministry of Housing and Lands! 

(Interruptions) 

The perfect term to describe the situation is: ‘Braderie des terres de l’État!’  

Madam  Speaker,  many  cases  have  been  referred  to  the  State  Law  Office  to  seek 
advice for corrective action. The Land Fraud Squad of the Police is already inquiring into 7 
test cases. 

My Ministry has decided to appoint a full-time lawyer for the first time, telma ena 
volers, fine coquin, who will assist us in examining all the files where procedures have not 
been respected. It will take me at least six months to clean the mess created by the previous 
Government  in  my  Ministry.  I  can  say  that  hundreds  of  cases  are  still  waiting  for  legal 
clearance,  to  be  referred  for  Police  inquiry!  I  can  go  on  and  on  about  many  cases  where 
people who share personal and political ties with the former Government have been granted 
lease over State land, but time will not allow me to do that. 

Madam  Speaker,  recently  the  State  has  taken  possession  of  58  arpents  of  land 
allocated to Neotown project. The promoter did not fulfill its contract obligations since 2009. 
Even in the case of Jin Fei, where 500 arpents are concerned, transfer to Jin Fei to Jin Jin, 
from Jin Jin to Sin Jin, and now Government has taken it. 

(Interruptions) 

 

There is Tianli and all types of names. 

40 

Madam Speaker, we all know that there is scarcity of State land. Therefore, State land 
must be used judiciously. Government is coming forward with a policy framework, which 
will govern the allocation of State land to ensure accountability, fairness and transparency. 

Insofar  as  building  sites  are  concerned,  the  new  framework  will  focus  on  the  most 
vulnerable  and  deserving  families,  who  would  be  given  priority  of  consideration,  for  the 
allocation of State land so that they can have a decent dwelling. 

The new system also provides for the establishment of a State land register, which will 

be a component of the National Spatial Data Infrastructure.  

With the State Land Register, each parcel of State land that can be developed for either 
commercial  or  touristic  purpose,  will  be  identified  and  then  the  information  placed  on  the 
website of the Ministry, calling for expression of interest. 

The promoters should satisfy  a predetermined set of criteria,  among others: financial 
credentials  of  the  promoter,  the  proven  track  records  of  the  promoter,    the  proof    and 
justification  of  the  amount  of  Foreign  Direct  Investment  to  be  injected  in  the  project.  A 
certificate from a recognised banking institution would have mandatorily to be produced. 

Madam Speaker, the first national level spatial development plans to guide and control 
development were prepared in the 70s. Successive Governments have since reviewed it from 
time to time.  

The Government of the day considers that now is the time to move on and to introduce 

another dimension to the planning function.  

My  Ministry  will  come  up  with  a  revised  National  Development  Strategy.  The  new 
National Development Strategy will assess the implications of the amount of land available 
for  development,  identify  constraints  and  make  proposals  for  an  integrated  public/private 
transport  strategy,  smart  growth  principles  and  address  a  range  of  urban  planning  and 
development issues. 

Madam Speaker, my Ministry will also provide for an enabling planning legislation so 
that projects are implemented in a coherent manner. We will also be consolidating the other 
provisions for an effective and sustainable development.  

 

41 

The  new  legislation  will  scope  the  cost-sharing  mechanisms  within  clearly  defined 
parameters and establish its mode of operation. It is proposed to set up a strong Planning and 
Development Commission to replace the Town and Country Planning Board to advise on use 
of  land,  coordinate  the  management  of  land  and  infrastructure  and  oversee  their 
implementation. 

Madam Speaker, my Ministry is responsible for acquiring land for all public projects. 
Arrangement will be made for the legislation to provide for more clarity on matters related to 
claims for compensation as they are heavily dependent on planning decisions.  

Betterment of land and windfall gains will also be covered so that any enhancement in 
private land values resulting from public works could be captured and apportioned between 
public and private investors. 

Madam  Speaker,  during  the  electoral  campaign,  L’Alliance  Lepep  harped  on  its 
commitment to have 2,000 families to access to a decent housing unit every year. This has 
been duly reflected in the Government Programme. This Government will mobilise all the 
necessary resources and will put in all the required efforts to honour that commitment.  

My  Ministry  has  already  started  the  identification  of  land  for  the  construction  of 
housing units. The budget will be catered for by the Ministry of Finance, I don’t have any 
doubt about that. 

I also had a meeting with the Mauritius Sugar Producers Association. I am following 
the  matter  closely  with  the  MSPA,  to  ascertain  that  land  to  be  acquired  for  the  National 
Housing Programme is suitable for housing development.   

Over  the  years,  housing  policy  has  become  increasingly  fragmented,  with  the  result 
that, attending to the needs of the targeted segment of the population has been significantly 
obscured.  

A mechanism for coherent cross-governmental policy development for housing, with a 
pre-evaluation  element  is  missing.  The  housing  system  in  Mauritius,  as  a  whole,  has  not, 
unfortunately, become more robust, responsive and self-sustaining. 

Government will, for sure, cater for housing for the low-income earners. On the other 
hand,  we  cannot  ignore  the  fact  that  middle  income  groups  also  experience  difficulties  in 
securing a decent house at an affordable price.  

 

42 

As Minister of Housing and Lands, it is my prime duty to see that we develop the right 
strategies to provide a wide choice of housing types to cater for the different income groups. 
Therefore,  Government  will  introduce  different  housing  schemes  to  meet  the  needs  for  a 
larger clientele. 

What  have  we  seen  over  the  years?  Blocks  of  houses  have  been  built  and  allocated. 
And as the time passes by, the environment was no more pleasant. It was as if just for the 
sake of accommodating people in social houses that this has been done. We cannot just dump 
people like that in social houses. That is confining them in a sort of ghetto. 

We have to develop new housing strategies, bearing in mind that a decent house is a 

very important component in the social life of the families. 

First of all, the environment has to be embellished. Other than basic amenities, we have 
to  look  at  planting  of  trees,  landscaping  works,  a  central  meeting  hall/place  for  various 
activities of the residents, jogging park and children’s playground. 

In  short,  we  will  be  implementing  integrated  housing  projects,  whereby  community 

living principles are promoted. 

In the process, I shall ensure that the National Housing Development Company Ltd is 
revamped  so  that  it  can assume  its  role  and  responsibility  in  the  overall  National  Housing 
Programme. 

At  the  same  time,  we  have  to  make  the  residents  of  social  houses  aware  of  their 

responsibilities so that self-discipline is the “maître-mot”.   

Madam Speaker, the Government housing policy will aim at motivating more people to 
own their home and help create new jobs in the housing sector. The private sector will also 
rope in our housing strategies. 

I  seize  the  opportunity  to  call  upon  hon.  Members,  be  it  of  the  Government  or  the 
Opposition, to cooperate with my Ministry. Whatever suggestions you have, whether it is at 
national level or in  your respective constituencies, due consideration will be given thereto. 
The propositions of NGOs and the public at large will be welcomed. 

 

43 

For  instance,  I  intend  to  meet  Monseigneur  Maurice  Piat,  who  called  upon  the 
Government  in  his  recent  message  in  the  pastoral  letter,  to  take  cognizance  of  his 
propositions for housing policies. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to say a few words on squatters. The previous Government 
could not deal  with this situation as it should have been done. Every time, it was like  “la 
tisane après la mort.” My Ministry is currently working on a plan about how to tackle the 
issue. We will be coming up with various solutions. 

Madam Speaker, as you are aware, I am also the responsible Minister for Hajj affairs. 
Allow me, Madam Speaker, Hajj is a sacred pilgrimage and it is one of the most important 
events  in  the  life  of  every  Muslim  citizen.  I  have  the  responsibility  to  make  sure  that  the 
religious trip of all hajjis happens in the most favourable condition. For the hajj organisation, 
after consultation with the hon. Prime Minister, I have set up an independent Hajj Committee 
whereby  the  members  are  completely  apolitical.  The  committee  will  be  presided  by  the 
former hon. Member, Mr Samioullah Lauthan, a noble man who is totally engaged in social 
works.  I  have  no  doubt  that  he  is  the  right  man  at  the  right  place.  I  must  add  that  he  has 
decided to do the work on a voluntary basis. It is for the first time that we are having the 
President of the Islamic Cultural Centre who has refused to be paid any allowance and will 
work without any remuneration. The Hajj Committee will make sure that there are no flaws 
in the organisation and that everything happens in a very smooth manner. I must also add that 
the Government has requested a meeting with the Saudi Arabian Authorities with a view to 
set  up  our  Mauritian  Embassy  there.  Once  this  project  becomes  a  reality,  it  will  greatly 
facilitate the trip of Mauritian hajjis in Saudi Arabia.  

Definitely,  Madam  Speaker,  I  will  keep  all  hon.  Members  who  are  concerned 
informed  about  this.  I  will  keep  in  touch  with  them  before  my  departure  after  having  the 
meeting and we would like to share because it is completely, as I said, apolitical. I hope that I 
will have the collaboration of all hon. Members concerned.  

Madam Speaker, I shall conclude here by reiterating to the House the commitment of 
this Government to uphold development aims and objectives which will give the necessary 
boost to the socio-economic development of Mauritius. I am sure, Madam Speaker, that with 
the relentless efforts and support of the population and, finally, with the great experience of 
the  miracle  économique,  under  the  supervision  and  able  leadership  of  the  Rt.  hon.  Sir 
Anerood Jugnauth, we shall fulfil the agenda we have set up ourselves for the next five years. 

44 

 
Thank you very much. 

At 4.53 p.m., the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 5.32 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Minister Bhadain! 

The Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms 
(Mr S. Bhadain): Madam Speaker, the Government Programme presented before this august 
Assembly  on  27  January  last  translates  the  spirit  of  the  electoral  manifesto  on  which  this 
Government has been elected. This is our commitment to the people for the next five years. It 
outlines the vision of this Government and the society we will build for the next generation. 
History  begins  anew  for  us;  the  history  which  we  shall  live  and  act  and  others  will  write 
about. 

Madam Speaker, we have all suffered the pains of labour and hearts are heavy with 
the memory of this sorrow. Some of those labour pains continue even now. Nevertheless, the 
past is over and it is the future that beckons to us now. That future is not one of ease or of 
resting, but of relentless effort so that we may see the return of dignity, decency and pride in 
all aspects of public life through the fulfilment of the pledges in our Government Programme. 

Madam Speaker, this programme is wide in scope and takes into account the needs of 
a future generation of dynamic and enthusiastic Mauritian citizens to the extent of what could 
be reasonably and realistically achieved during our mandate. Everyone has a legitimate right 
to  be  critical.  As  faithful  democrats,  we  give  due  respect  to  any  diverging  views  and  we 
humbly accept constructive criticism. 

Madam Speaker, since independence, a number of programmes have been presented 
before  this  House  and  we  are  aware  that  the  extent  of  implementation  has  varied 
significantly.  The  fate  of  the  programmes  presented  by  the  last  Government  is  known  to 
everybody.  Most  of  the  promises  and  intentions contained  therein  simply  remain  promises 
and intentions. We are all aware that over the last 10 years the focus was elsewhere and the 
implementation  of  the  measures  in  the  last  programmes  would  have,  to  some  extent, 
improved the plight of ordinary citizens, instead of any improvement.  We have helplessly 
witnessed a gradual and sustained propensity towards wastage of public funds, favouritism, 

 

45 

corruption,  fraudulent  practices  and  shameless  depravity.  We  have  witnessed  a  continuous 
erosion of values and a degradation of the quality of life of the population in all respects. 

Madam  Speaker,  since  the  advent  of  this  Government,  the  winds  of  change  are 
blowing  and  an  aura  of  confidence  and  renewed  trust  has  been  instilled  in  the  hearts  and 
minds of all sections of the population. The obscurity which was pervading our country is 
now behind us. There is now clarity, Madam Speaker. The doors of the safes have now been 
opened. To borrow a quote from my friend, hon. Rajesh Bhagwan - 

“’Chef Ali Baba’ is no longer a ‘chef’ nor is he safe anymore.” 

People  are  now  voicing  their  feelings  freely.  Opacity  has  been  replaced  by 
transparency. The events that have unfolded so far prove beyond the shadow of any doubt 
that all the dangers we had referred to during the campaign and which our country had been 
confronted with were real dangers and the Sword of Damocles was indeed hanging over the 
heads of all Mauritian citizens. What I fail to understand, Madam Speaker, however, is how 
the  allies  of  the  previous  Government  who  had  already  pledged  to  forget  the  past  were 
apparently going to clean up our country whilst being wilfully blind to all the misdeeds of the 
Labour Government which had plagued this country. 

Madam Speaker, everyone knows that money does not grow on trees, but the media 
has  made  all  of  us  witness  the  unbelievable,  shocking  and  outrageous  cascading  of  US 
dollars,  Euros  and  Mauritian  rupees  when  the  safes  from  the  alcoves  of  Riverwalk  were 
opened, bank notes … 

(Interruptions) 

…travellers  cheques,  and  dozens  of  credit  cards  spring  out  like  worms  which  had  been 
swelling in the entrails of a diseased animal. 

Madam  Speaker,  it  appears  that  this  was  only  the  tip  of  a  melting  iceberg.  This 
Government  will  now  track  down  every  single  cent  of  ill-gotten  gain  which  has  left  our 
shores  whether  in  suitcases,  by  electronic  transfers,  by  the  use  of  credit  cards  as  bank 
accounts or the use of prête-nom to hold assets in other jurisdictions.  All accomplices who 
have assisted in those unlawful transactions and have enriched themselves to the detriment of 
our nation, will be lawfully taken to task. We  will track them down, smoke them out like 
rabbits  from  their  dark  hiding  holes  and  bring  them  to  justice  whether  they  are  hiding  in 

 

46 

Parma, in Milan or even in the palaces of Venice. They can run or transfer the funds as much 
as they want, but they will not be able to hide as every financial crime leaves a trace and an 
audit trail. 

This  Government  has  already  solicited  the  assistance  of  the  US  Government  with 
regard to the millions of US dollars which have entered our country. The US Federal Bureau 
of Investigation (FBI) is in Mauritius as from today to look into this matter. 

Madam Speaker, I need not elaborate more on the performance of the previous Labour 
Government  as  they  have  already  been  sanctioned  by  an  admirable  electorate  and  there  is 
only one survivor of the previous regime in Parliament today. Credit to him, I might add, it 
would  be  inelegant  to  place  the  burden  of  all  the  misdemeanours  and  failures  on  the  sole 
survivor as other hon. Members of the current Opposition are fully aware of the shady deals 
of  Airway  Coffee,  Betamax,  Neotown,  CT  Power,  Bagatelle  Dam,  the  unforeseen 
circumstances  and  outrageous  variations  paid  for  the  collapsing  Ring  Road,  the  subsiding 
Terre Rouge-Verdun Road, the apparently dire need to purchase six airbuses and undertake 
the Métro Léger Project as a matter of priority, the leaking New Airport Terminal which had 
cost  billions  of  rupees,  the  inclusive  and  exorbitantly  expensive  new  Biometric  ID  Card 
System.  

In the name of party line, young professionals amongst the flock decided to follow the 
irrational, absurd and most bizarre approach of their on-off shepherd who was only motivated 
by the sheer greed of becoming the Prime Minister of this country for the five consecutive 
years  and  in  the  process,  in  the  name  of  a  Second  Republic  agreed  to  grant  extraordinary 
powers and immunity for seven years to someone who has now turned out to be a suspected 
money  launderer,  conspirator  and  liar  whose  alleged  mistress  has  fled  the  country  and 
disappeared into the dark alleys of suburb Italy, leaving Mr Bunker to hold all the bags alone.   

Madam Speaker, this introduction was necessary to set the scene for the subjects of my 
intervention and to show that by associating themselves with an ailing  and failing regime, 
those on the other side of the House have, of their own volition, forfeited the right to give 
lessons on how to govern a country.  Madam Speaker, I shall be selective on the aspects of 
the Programme on the subjects relevant to my  Ministry.  The Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Sir 
Anerood  Jugnauth,  has  translated  his  promise  to  the  people  of  Mauritius  to  clean  up  our 
country by setting up the right tone at the top and having a dedicated Ministry for Financial 
Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms.  Parole donnée - parole d’honneur - 

 

47 

parole sacrée! This is a bold and unprecedented step, not only in the history of Mauritius, 
Madam Speaker, but it is the first initiative of a kind in an African context.   

Madam Speaker, in his first official visit to Africa, the President of the United States, 
Barack Obama, stated before the Ghanaian Parliament in Accra on 11 July 2009, and I quote 
- 

‘‘The essential truth of democracy is that each nation determines its own destiny. But 
what America will do is increase assistance for responsible individuals and responsible 
institutions, with a focus on supporting good governance.’’ 

President Obama also stressed on the need for, and I quote – 

‘‘Concrete  solutions  to  corruption  like  forensic  accounting  and  automating  services 
strengthening  hotlines,  protecting  whistle-blowers  to  advance  transparency  and 
accountability.’’ 

He further stated that, and I quote – 

‘With better governance,  I have no doubt that Africa holds the promise of a broader 
base of prosperity.’’ 

Madam Speaker, this is where this Government is now heading after five years have 

been lost due to inaction of the previous regime.   

A  new  Bill  to  protect  genuine  whistle-blowers  to  encourage  reporting  of  accurate 
details  of  fraudulent  malpractices  and  irregularities  will  soon  be  introduced  and  will  be 
modelled  on  the  UK  Public  Interest  Disclosure  Act  1998  and  the  Indian  Whistle-blowers 
Protection  Act  2011,  which  also  provides  a  mechanism  to  investigate  misuse  of  power  by 
public servants and protect anyone who exposes alleged wrongdoings in Government bodies, 
projects and offices.  The Public Sector Efficiency Bureau has already been set up under the 
aegis  of  my  Ministry  and  together  with  the  Office  of  Public  Sector  Governance;  new 
methodologies are being put in place to eliminate wastage in public sector organisation and 
State-owned enterprises.  

The  Internal  Control  Department  of  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development has also been transferred to my Ministry and a dedicated team is being set up 
for the regular monitoring and performance evaluation of Chairpersons, Board members and 

 

48 

CEOs  of  parastatal  bodies  and  State-owned  enterprises  based  on  predetermined  Key 
Performance  Indicators  (KPIs),  Self-Assessment  Questionnaires  (SAQs)  and  generally 
accepted  performance  evaluation  methodologies  and  best  practices.    360  degrees  (360°) 
feedback principles will also be applied to all Boards where Chairpersons will appraise their 
CEOs and Board members, and vice versa. 

In order to ensure that recommendations in the report of the Director of Audit are taken 
into consideration and promptly implemented, the responsible officers of each Government 
department  and  State-owned  enterprises  concerned  will  have  to  sign  off  on  an  agreed 
implementation  plan  and  timeline  that  will  be  rigorously  monitored  by  my  Ministry  and 
relevant actions will be taken in cases of non-compliance.   

A  special  Investigative  Unit  is  in  the  process  of  being  set  up  to  review  the  risk  of 
malpractices  and  irregularities  with  regard  to  processes  and  procedures  in  awarding  major 
Government contracts.  Assistance has been sought through the UK High Commission from 
institutions such as the Serious Fraud Office in the UK with regard to capacity building and 
training of relevant officers.  For the enhancement of the administration and management of 
public  enterprises,  my  Ministry  has  already  laid  down  a  new  framework  which  has  been 
approved  by  Cabinet.    The  new  framework  provides  for  the  segregation  of  duties  and 
responsibilities  of  the  CEO  and  the  Chairperson  of  a  Board.    The  functions  of  CEO  and 
Chairperson will no longer be exercised by the same person after relevant changes are made 
to appropriate legislations, for example, in the case of BPML.  

My  Ministry  has  had  several  meetings  with  the  representatives  of  the  National 
Committee on Corporate Governance and the Mauritius Institute of Directors with a view to 
harmonising the new vision on good governance in both public and private sector and a new 
code is being drafted to replace the existing one.  

Madam Speaker, the Programme places heavy emphasis on good governance and, inter 
alia,  the  efficient  delivery  of  public  service  and  elimination  of  wastage.    These  concepts, 
however,  over  the  last  decades,  have  fallen  into  oblivion  and  the  consequences  are  now 
serious.  We have inherited derelict public bodies where public funds have been spent with 
extreme impunity by those close to the regime.  The Betamax case is only one of a series of 
scandals about which Mauritians have been shocked to learn.  The prevailing opacity with 
regard  to  these  contracts  is  even  more  disturbing  and  is  nothing  short  of  a  potential 
conspiracy hatched in broad daylight with the participation of senior public officials who just 

 

49 

executed the orders of the previous regime passively. There was no attempt whatsoever to 
resist such orders either for fear of recrimination and retribution or in other cases to remain in 
the good books of those in power and, in the process, benefit from added perks.  Ethics, good 
governance, transparency and the rule of law had been buried deep.   

The State  Law Office initially advised that the provisions of the Public  Procurement 
Act  had  to  be  followed.    These  words,  however,  fell  in  deaf  ears.    Moreover,  those 
responsible  displayed  wilful  blindness.    Madam  Speaker,  this  is  the  kind  of  rot  that  this 
Government has to address.  The system has been made completely dysfunctional.  Public 
officers made a mockery of loyalty and misrepresented the facts to the detriment of public 
interest.    This  situation  raises  the  fundamental  issue  of  a  culture  of  public  services  in 
Mauritius.  Many  services  are  provided  by  public  bodies  and  funded  by  taxpayers’  money.  
Despite many excellent public servants, the service offered is often patronising and arrogant. 
Some  believe  that  as  the  service  is  free,  everyone  should  be  grateful  for  whatever  they 
received even if it was sloppy.   

There is a mentality in some part of the public service that no one has responsibility to 
provide  a  better  service  to  the  public  unless  they  are  gratified  with  more  pay  or  shorter 
working hours. For years now, services have been run carelessly, wastefully, arrogantly and 
much more to the convenience of the providers rather than the users.   

Madam Speaker, within a period of two months, this Government has demonstrated its 
determination to govern for the good of the people of Mauritius.  The Betamax case has been 
resolved and the STC can now take advantage of market rates to import petroleum products.  
The land allocated to the promoters of Neotown has been retrieved.  The land allocated for 
the  Tianli-Jinfei  project  has  also  been  retrieved.    Old  age  pension  has  been  increased  as 
promised. These achievements already speak volumes in terms of their impact on society at 
large.    Madam  Speaker,  other  contracts  and  projects  are  currently  being  reviewed  and 
scrutinised, including the purchase of airbuses by  Air Mauritius, contracts awarded for the 
construction of a New Airport Terminal, Bagatelle Dam, variations paid to contractors for the 
Terre Rouge-Verdun Road and cases involving the dishing out of State lands.   

Madam Speaker, it took Winston Churchill five years to win the Second World War 
and it took Clement Attlee six years to build the Welfare State in the UK.  Surely, ten years 
were more than enough for the previous Government to get a grip on the problems that faced 
Mauritius  today.    The  taxpayers  contributed  towards  the  payment  of  salaries  and  of  the 

 

50 

privileges of the hon. Members of Parliament.  The taxpayers have never defaulted in their 
obligations.  However, instead of reaping the benefits accruing out of their contribution, they 
have been cheated.  Promises have not been honoured and, to add insult to injury, the benefits 
were generously distributed to the close friends and relatives of those in power.   

Madam  Speaker,  proper  institutional  reforms  have  not  been  undertaken.  This 
Government  understands  the  cry  for  a  society  of  opportunity,  a  compassionate  society,  a 
society where the taxpayer feels that he is getting a fair deal, not because he is the relative of 
a politician, but because he honestly believes in his rights and responsibilities. Institutional 
reform, Madam Speaker, is imperative if we want to have a modern society. 

A Financial Crime Commission (FCC) will be set up as an apex body, responsible for 
the  investigation  and  prevention  of  all  financial  crimes  in  Mauritius,  including  fraud, 
corruption, money laundering, financial malpractices and other white-collar crimes. Over the 
last  decade,  there  has  not  been  any  major  case  of  money  laundering  investigated  by  the 
ICAC, relating to the global business sector, which has been successfully prosecuted before 
our Courts. Obviously, disseminations have been made by the FIU. The ICAC, however, has 
not been able to conduct any successful prosecution. 

The House will appreciate that since the setting-up of the ICAC in 2002, the State has 
disbursed nearly Rs2 billion for the operations of the Commission. The previous Director-
General and the members of the then Commission had their day and did enough to deprive 
the institution of any credibility. The results obtained are to say the least disappointing. With 
a total of about 130 convictions for petty corruption cases, the amount spent per conviction 
would  amount  to  some  Rs15  m.  per  case,  successfully  prosecuted.  I  leave  it  to  the 
appreciation of the Members of this House as to whether value for money has been obtained 
and whether we should continue with such a model. 

The  Financial  Crime  Commission  will  be  set  up  as  an  umbrella  organisation  to 
oversee the operations of a revised and enhanced ICAC model, the FIU and Asset Recovery 
Unit,  the  enforcement  units  of  the  FSC  and  the  Financial  Reporting  Council  relating  to 
securities, insurance and financial reporting fraud, within a newly set up anti-fraud unit. This 
will bring the much needed harmonisation and structure in the fight against financial crime in 
Mauritius, will ensure better coordination amongst existing institutions and mitigate the risks 
of fraudsters exploiting loopholes in the functioning of institutions, such as in the recent cases 

 

51 

of  Ponzi  Schemes,  where  many  innocent,  but  gullible  persons  have  lost  their  hard  earned 
money. 

As an immediate measure pending the setting up of the Financial Crime Commission, 
an  amendment  will  shortly  be  brought  to  the  Asset  Recovery  Act  and  the  Asset  Recovery 
Unit  will  be  removed  from  the  Office  of  the  Director  of  Public  Prosecutions  and  will  be 
merged  with  the  FIU,  in  a  similar  way,  whereby  the  NCIS  (National  Crime  Intelligence 
Service) in the UK merged with the Asset Recovery Agency to form what is now operating as 
the UK National Crime Agency. 

Major  reforms  will  also  be  brought  within  the  Mauritius  Police  Force  with  the 
eradication  of  the  abusive  provisional  charge  system  which  has  caused  prejudice  to  many 
people  who  have  been  arrested  on  the  basis  of  mere  allegations,  without  any  shred  of 
corroborative evidence. 

As I recall, my friend, hon. Dr. Joomaye, who was also a victim of the provisional 
charge  system,  as  a  tool  to  harass  political  opponents,  had  eloquently  stated  that  “his 
constitutional rights had been butchered on the altar of the Central CID at Line Barracks by 
the Police of Navin Ramgoolam.” 

Madam  Speaker,  a  new  and  modern  Police  and  Criminal  Evidence  Bill  will  be 
introduced to make the system fairer. Our Police Force will have to be trained to overcome 
this culture shock and will be provided with enhanced infrastructure, logistics and equipment 
to discharge their duties more effectively and efficiently. In the same regard, a new Police 
academy  will  also  be  created  for  Police  Officers  to  be  trained  on  the  use  of  information 
technology and the latest investigative methodologies to combat crime in Mauritius. A few 
notes counting machines will also be provided to the Police Force. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, in the suffocating climate which has prevailed recently, improving 
the quality of public service becomes a daunting challenge. However, I am confident that the 
situation will be reversed. The standard of governance and reforms in the public sector is vital 
and  instrumental  towards  attaining  our  objective  for  an  efficient  and  transparent  public 
service.  We  lag  behind  tremendously  in  the  field  of  governance.  The  absence  of  new 
methodologies and technologies is particularly embarrassing. The concepts developed in the 
aftermath of major scandals in Europe are still being applied in Mauritius, while these are 

 

52 

now obsolete. The novelty which was brought to my attention and seen as a major revolution 
is  the  concept  of  audit  committees  in  the  public  sector.  Well,  the  composition  of  such 
committees  is  itself  an  aberration.    Just  imagine  an  audit  committee  where  the  General 
Manager is a member or an audit committee chaired by a junior member of staff! These are 
the artefacts which we have as legacy. 

Madam  Speaker,  after  47  years  of  independence,  the  rules  governing  the  public 
service legated to us by the British are still in force. This is a self-imposed tyranny which is 
costing the public exchequer millions every year without any improvement in the quality of 
service. These inefficiencies are a drag to the economy. 

Moreover, they waste time and money and cause frustration and pain. The time for 
reform is now or never. Both the structures and standards have to be revisited. We need to 
build  a  truly  inclusive  society  where  everyone  should  be  able  to  go  as  far  as  his  talent, 
ambition and effort takes him, without any reference to background, race, creed, religion or 
connection with politicians of the day.  We should aim for a society of opportunity where 
people can have a better future for themselves and their families by their own efforts. 

Madam Speaker, the Financial Services sector is today at crossroads and has, in the 
wake of the recent cases of suspected money laundering, become vulnerable. The ongoing 
Police investigations have made headlines worldwide, thus reducing the leeway for damage 
control. It is questionable whether it was essential for the Central CID to detain the former 
Governor of the Central Bank at Alcatraz in Line Barracks. Only the Commissioner of Police 
would have the answer to that one. Be that as it may, such events do not bode well for the 
international repute of Mauritius, especially when we have a daunting challenge ahead to re-
launch our Financial Services sector, and we need the collaboration of all the stakeholders, 
both in the public and private sector. Too much is at stake and we have no right to fail! 

It has to be admitted that the regulatory institutions in the Financial Services sector 
have  fallen  short  of  expectations  to  create  new  avenues  to  promote  our  Financial  Services 
sector  as a strong pillar  of our  economy. These  institutions created  years ago have simply 
tried  to  fulfill  the  obligations  defined  and  intended  by  the  legislator,  without  making  any 
singular  attempt  to  innovate  and  become  forward-looking.    The  result  is  obvious.  The 
framework, under which operations are carried out, is no longer appropriate. The Financial 
Services Commission has continued to tick boxes, to ensure compliance and perform certain 
inspections. The Financial Reporting Council has, on its part, remained passive, while at the 

 

53 

Financial  Intelligence  Unit,  certain  persons  were  more  involved  in  romance  and  overseas 
travelling  than  tracking  the  movement  of  illicit  funds  and  suspected  proceeds  of  crime. 
Intelligence gathering on the personal life of the staff was the main focus of senior staff of the 
FIU. 

At  this  juncture,  it  is  worth  mentioning  that  this  Government  has  deemed  it 
appropriate  to  reduce  the  excessive  monthly  salary  of  Rs238,000  attributed  to  the  then 
Director of the FIU to Rs150,000, as well as eliminating the benefit of the chauffeur-driven 
car for both private and official use in addition to the Director having duty-free facilities to 
purchase a private vehicle. 

Similarly,  this  Government  has  also  reduced  the  salaries  of  the  Board  Members  of 
ICAC from Rs180,000 monthly to Rs110,000 monthly and, again, eliminated the benefit of 
the chauffeur-driven car for both private and official use in addition to them having duty-free 
facilities to purchase their private vehicle. 

Madam Speaker, it is a matter of regret that I have to make such statements and to 
bring everything in the public domain so that everyone appreciates the scale of the challenge 
before us. I am sure that this Government’s faith in our democracy, which is the life blood of 
our  nation,  is  shared  by  all  Members  of  this  House.  I  know  that  regardless  of  political 
affiliation,  the  Members  of  this  House  want  our  country  to  thrive  as  an  integrated  and 
sophisticated  international  financial  services  centre  of  substance.  So,  if  the  Opposition 
Members have valid and constructive proposals, this Government will listen to them. 

In the field of Financial Services, we are, again, lagging behind, not only in terms of 
innovation  and  sophistication  of  our  product  offering,  but  also  in  terms  of  substance.  The 
situation is serious enough to warrant immediate attention.  

While we are faced with challenges, be it with the renegotiation of the Mauritius-India 
Tax  Treaty,  or  the  OECD’s  upcoming  Framework  Adoption  for  Base  Erosion  and  Profit 
Shifting  (BEPS),  my  Ministry  believes  that  we  can  turn  these  potential  threats  into  well 
identified opportunities to develop our financial services sector. 

Madam Speaker, as an immediate priority, sustained efforts will have to be made to 
promote  Mauritius  as  an  international  financial  services  centre  and  address  growing 
opportunities provided by the development of a wealth management and asset management 

 

54 

sector to position Mauritius as a  centre for private placements, trading  of bonds and other 
sophisticated financial instruments.  

In  the  same  breath,  the  Stock  Exchange  of  Mauritius  will  be  positioned  as  an 
attractive  capital  raising  platform  for  international  and  African  focused  financial  products. 
Madam Speaker, I will ensure that the Financial Services Consultative Council which I will 
chair  is  adequately  set  up  and  operational  as  from  next  month  so  that  we  move  forward 
rapidly.  

Madam Speaker, another area which warrants serious attention and if not promptly 
attended  to,  may  jeopardise  the  reputation  of  Mauritius  is  our  anti-money  laundering 
framework. It cannot be business as usual and we will monitor the situation closely to ensure 
that  our  reputation,  as  a  clean,  credible  and  reputable  jurisdiction,  is  safeguarded.  The 
creation of the Financial Crime Commission will go a long way to mitigate any associated 
risk. The National Committee on Anti-Money Laundering and the Combating of Financing of 
Terrorism will start meeting regularly to discuss and coordinate matters.  

Madam Speaker, to conclude, I would refer to an episode during the general elections 
in Britain in April 2005. During an organised question and answer session, a student named 
Jessica Hague told Tony Blair, and I quote –  

“It’s heartbreaking when you work so long to get a Labour Government in power and 
they turn into a Conservative one.” 

Mr Tony Blair replied as follows, and I quote –  

“If  you  measure  any  Government  against  perfection,  you  would  vote  for  someone 
else, but you must measure us against the alternative which is the Conservatives.” 

These  words,  Madam  Speaker,  aptly  summarise  the  situation today.  Our  opponents 
will  certainly  try  to  measure  us  against  perfection  or  performance  level  which  they 
themselves could never attain. Well, then they should measure us against the alternative, if 
any. In short, Madam Speaker, this Government provides the best hope and the best scope to 
bring  about  growth  with  social  justice,  equal  opportunities  to  all,  creating  productive 
employment opportunities for our youths, effective and efficient governance and, above all, 
cleansing  our  country  of  red-tapism,  fraud,  malpractices  and  corruption  so  that  Mauritius 
becomes a better place to live and work. 

55 

 
Thank you for your attention. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

(6.04 p.m.) 

Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière):  Madam 
Speaker, allow me first to congratulate you on your appointment as Speaker of this National 
Assembly, the more so that  you are the first woman Speaker since Mauritius has obtained 
independence. Madam Speaker, having known you over the years, not only as a Senior Chief 
Executive, a Civil Servant/Senior Civil Servant, but also as a Member of Parliament, I know 
that we can rely on your impartiality for the good running of this august institution. 

I would also like to thank my friends who have been elected for the first time at the 
National Assembly and also welcome those who have come back again in this very august 
Assembly, starting from the Prime Minister. I would also like to thank my good friend, hon. 
Minister Bhadain, for his maiden speech. I have taken good note how far he works and also I 
have  noted  with  concern  that  he  has  not  given  us  any  single  information  of  how  he  will 
conduct an inquiry on the inception over the CT Power Project which stinks corruption. So, I 
will come to that later on because we had the opportunity to discuss that problem before he 
was a Member of Parliament, as a citizen, as an inhabitant of Albion Village.  

Madam Speaker, it is with a deep sense of pride, loyalty and history that I stand up 
again in this august Assembly to take part in the debates on the Presidential Address on the 
New  Government  Programme.  A  sense  of  pride  because  for  almost  a  generation,  more 
precisely 32 years soon, that I shall be serving my Constituency No. 20 of Beau Bassin & 
Petite Rivière as a Member of Parliament, in an uninterrupted manner. It is no mean feat, you 
will  agree  with  me,  Madam  Speaker.  I  would  like  to  thank  my  family,  God  and  all  my 
electorates, my Party for their support at all times. 

Madam Speaker, a deep sense of loyalty because either as a Minister of Government 
or a Member of the Opposition, in this very same House, I have been nothing but loyal to my 
Party,  to  my  constituents  and  to  the  country  under  the  leadership  of  the  Leader  of  the 
Opposition,  hon.  Paul  Bérenger,  who  together  with  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  and  hon. 
Ganoo are among the oldest serving Members of this House.  

56 

 
A sense of history, Madam Speaker, because since I was sworn in, I still remember, as 
a Member of Parliament after the august general election of 1983 in the Salle du Trône then, 
not only I have been witnessing history unfolding in the Chamber, but also have I been part 
of history in the making. That reminds me of the crude fact that some of the so-called opinion 
leaders outside the House who are crying night and day to instil a false sense of history were 
not even politically conscious nor to say, were not even born when I first joined my Party in 
the 80s, the MMM which is parti intégrant de l’histoire contemporaine, un fait historique 
indéniable. N’en déplaise à ceux qui croient pouvoir écrire l’histoire avec un crayon papier 
dans la main droite et une gomme élastique dans la main gauche, je dirais tout simplement, 
Madam Speaker, que gold never rusts even it is old ! 

Madam  Speaker,  we  are  starting  a  new  session  after  the  general  election,  we  have 
taken the oath, here, in the National Assembly and we are all Members of the House, we have 
sworn allegiance to the public and in front of our names, we have hon. Member. I think too 
many things have happened these years that we have witnessed, in what sort of action certain 
hon.  Members  have  been  going  into,  causing  disrepute  to  this  very  important  function  of 
Member of the National Assembly or député. We have witnessed over the years. We have 
also witnessed - I have heard my good friend talking about Ali Baba and coffre-fort. We will 
be around to see that there won’t be a politique of petits copains and petites copines.  The 
Government is having a crusade against what has happened over the past years and it is a 
fact.  We  have  been  witnessing  ourselves  all  these  big  potentates  earning  millions  and 
travelling  a  lot.  Certain  individuals  who  had  been  appointed  as  Chairpersons  of  Parastatal 
Bodies,  Government-owned  companies,  instead  of  working  for  the  State,  have  been  going 
outside to buy horses! I will also, without being personal to the PMSD, remind them that up 
to recently they were in Government; I do not want to go into details about what I am saying. 
We had one Chairperson of the Mauritius Marine Authority and we all know the saga of what 
has happened.  

We are entering a new era. The Government has clearly indicated in its Government 
Programme its vision for a better Mauritius, good governance and transparency.  I will draw 
the attention of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, the hon. Member has talked about Ali Baba and 
coffre-fort, but I know him personally and we all know him. We will be here around to make 
sure that there will be no new ‘Alibaba’s.’  The first call as they are appointed:  what type of 
cars  they  will  have;  what  type  of  CCs;  what  type  of  office,  what  are  the  lists  of  official 

 

57 

functions that they will be having as Chairperson instead of coming to implement their own 
Government Programme and their own projects.  

Madam Speaker, as I have stated, we will be around.  In the MMM, we have accepted 
the verdict of the electorate.  We know that we are in the Opposition.  History has shown that 
each time the MMM has been in the Opposition, we have put the country first.  We have been 
around.  Hansard can prove, either through the PNQs that the Leader of the Opposition has 
asked in Parliament, through our questions or through our interventions in Parliament. We 
have made proposals.  We have criticised.  We will be criticising, Madam Speaker.  We will 
be coming with PQs.  We will be intervening at Adjournment time.  These are tools which 
are given to us as Members of Parliament to, at least – I won’t say harass - ask Ministers to 
reply.  We will be around to see whether the Minister will come and tell that he needs notice 
or he has to compile.  We have seen in  the past, my friends in Government, when they were 
in the Opposition - you know better than me, Madam Speaker, how things were happening.  
So,  we  will  see  in  the  months  to  come  whether  we  will  have  the  same  ‘refrain’  like 
‘information is being compiled’ or ‘I don’t know.’ 

Madam Speaker, as  I have stated, we are starting a new session of Parliament under 
your Chairmanship.  We will be called during the coming days to appoint Sessional Select 
Committees.    We  will  be  having  these  committees  set  up  under  your  guidance  during  the 
coming weeks.  We will be having a Committee of Selection. We do not have any problem.  
This is a Committee of Selection comprising Members from both sides.  Then, we will be 
approving  the  setting  up  of  a  Public  Accounts  Committee.    Over  the  years,  the  Public 
Accounts Committee and its report have been a matter of discussion, here, as to how do we 
implement its recommendations and the means which are given to the Committee to perform. 
And also, urgent need to bring amendments so that officers can be taken to task.  There are 
sanctions which will be taken after the publication of its report and the Director of Audit’s 
Report.  I am sure my colleague will be intervening on that.  So, there is an urgent need to 
give more powers and more tools to the PAC.   

Madam Speaker, we have another one, that is the Standing Orders Committee.  This 
Committee has not met  for  years.    I’ll  give one  example.   In  every  session of Parliament, 
Members are allowed to have Private Members’ Motion.  We have seen in the past where a 
Private Members’ Motion has been going on for four or five years.  It has become a sort of 
‘farce’ and, at a certain period of time, we had decided that we would not intervene on the 

 

58 

Private Members’ Motion.  So, there is an urgent need.  I am not saying only on one item, but 
there  are other items  also where there is need to upgrade the Standing  Orders, not for the 
worst like preventing us from asking questions.  We have seen in the past.  Limitating the 
hours of Question Time; limitating the number of questions which we can ask.  Then, we 
have  the  House  Committee,  which  will  be  chaired  by  the  Deputy  Speaker,  who  is  present 
here.  I have been in that Committee, Madam Speaker.  We go there and sit and we have no 
powers.  That Committee has no powers.  No powers at all!  We can only suggest that there is 
a  problem  of  rats  in  the  underground  of  the  Government  House  because  we  are  suffering 
from what is happening down there.  But this Committee has no powers.  It is a Committee 
which is supposed to look at our welfare and not to make money.  I am sure that the Deputy 
Speaker is taking good note.  At least, it should not be a nonsense committee.   

Lastly,  Madam  Speaker,  the  Parliamentary  Committee  on  ICAC.    I  have  been  a 
Member of that Committee.  I have gone on that Committee once, twice or thrice, but it has 
no powers, unless it is a question of interpretation.  The Director comes and says that this is 
not within your purview. So, we are only there just to approve the budget.  And then, there is 
a question of interpretation, and, the moreso that this Committee does not publish any report, 
so, there is a need to bring amendments so that this Committee - I am sure there will be a new 
Prevention of Corruption Act or whatever – which would be appointed and which would have 
the sufficient tools, and also Members who would be forming part of the Committee can, at 
least, see that whatever they are proposing are taken into account by the responsible person.   

Madam Speaker, another suggestion, which is not personal is that we have seen in the 
past how we are invited in missions overseas.  So, Parliament is never aware.  We do not 
have  any  report  on  each  and  every  mission  that  Members  of  the  National  Assembly  are 
attending.    A  report  can  be  circulated.    We  have  the  CPA  Conference  on  Sustainable 
Development.  So that those who go on missions, with due respect to you, Madam Speaker - 
even the Opposition is invited - can submit a report.   

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Bhagwan, I think we have discussed about these issues and I’ll 

be coming shortly with … 

Mr Bhagwan:  I think with experience, Madam Speaker, I can make a suggestion, at 
least,  in  the  House  here  because  we  will  be  appointing  Members  to  go  there.    Also,  the 
African/Carribean  EU,  Parliamentary  group,  we  will  be  having  one  permanent  Member.  
There also it is a very important Forum; the concern of Mauritius is being taken, our voice is 

 

59 

being  heard.    So,  we,  parliamentarians,  we  do  not  know  what  our  representative  is  doing 
there.  So, I think there also there is a matter for reflection.   

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I raised the issue the other day and the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
replied  about  live  coverage  on  radio,  TV  and  other  media  for  the  sittings  of  the  National 
Assembly.    The  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  replied  the  other  day  for  the  setting  up  of  a  new 
Select Committee which will take into consideration the Select Committee presided then by 
hon. Bodha and its recommendations.  I think it is urgent for our democracy to become more 
modern, more transparent for the public.  At least, the Government can come rapidly with 
proposals  and  the  Opposition  will  contribute  normally,  I  am  sure.    We  have  already 
contributed, at least, on this question of live coverage by radio and TV as far as PQs, PNQs, 
important  matters,  like  it  is  in  the  case  of  the  Lok  Sabha,  the  UK  Assembly,  l’Assemblée 
Nationale Française and so on. 

Madam Speaker, these were a few of my comments as we are starting a new session.  I 
shall now come to a few comments on one or two specific subjects before concluding on my 
constitutency.   

Madam  Speaker,  I  will  be  talking  about  environment  because  I  was  Minister  of 
Environment for a period of time and I am very interested in this matter.  Madam Speaker, in 
Mauritius, we also have a crossroad.  We have our local problems as far as environmental 
matters are concened.  Today, we are talking about the développement durable concept.  My 
good friend has been very active on that.  This issue of environment is now global.  We have 
the issue of climate change.  We have the issue of beach erosion which is affecting our small 
island.    We  have  the  issue  of  Small  Islands  Developping  States,  especially  as  far  as  our 
common  problems  are  concerned.    I  think  this  is  one  very  important  sector  where 
Government  and  the  Minister  will  make  sure  that  there  is  progress,  there  is  not  only  des 
paroles.  

I take note of paragraph 52 of the declared commitment of Government to a sustainable 
and eco-friendly development. This is what is being mentioned. We have seen the same in the 
past years, but there have been so many contradictions at times in the implementation of a 
strategy. Indeed, Madam Speaker, just to take an example, there has been over the years a 
‘laisser-faire’ and ‘laisser-aller’ with regard to the management of coastal zones. It is not a 
question of having State lands - I still remember the Environment Protection Act then, it still 
provides for an environment coastal zone management, to have a harmonious development of 

 

60 

the coastal zone and this is not the case. So, Government has started a remise en ordre not 
only  as  far  as  land  is  concerned,  but  there  are  other  issues  also  which  are  under  the 
responsibility of other  Ministries.  I hope that Government will take that into consideration 
because coastal zone is indeed a precious natural resource for our fishermen community, for 
the tourism industry and also the most popular recreational activity.  So, the clean-up should 
start at the Beach Authority and the Ministry of Housing and Lands, where there should be an 
action concertée so that effective management can take place. 

Madam Speaker, every new Government while assuming office always announces a 
review of the Environment Protection Act, which, in 2002, I brought to Parliament then and 
also new regulations. Admittedly, we need regular review of the legislative framework but 
pending the implementation of the regulations or whatever Act, this should not be an excuse 
for not ensuring effectiveness of existing environmental legislation.  

There  is  existing  environmental  legislation  which  empowers  the  Ministry  of 
Environment to take action with regard to so many environmental problems and it is clear, 
Madam Speaker, that there is urgent need for the Ministry to take les taureaux par les cornes.  
I know the hon. Minister is like a TGV.  There is urgent need to take a concerted action.  If I 
can take littering, Maurice est sale.  Je ne fais pas un procès d’intention. The bad habits of 
Mauritians throwing here and there; illegal dumping in sugar cane field; lorries of industries 
going to throw des morceaux de tissus dans les champs de cannes, les restes de construction, 
etc.  And  this  is  why  in  year  2000,  in  our  Programme,  we  created  the  Police  de 
L’Environnement. The Police de L’environnement was created by me and the present Prime 
Minister  in  our  Government  then.  It  was  a  very  important  and  effective  tool  from  2000 
onwards and this Unit needs to be revamped.  If you see the state of the vehicles of the Police 
de  L’Environnement,  bizin  prend  l’environnement  même  contravention.    Only  a  few 
Policemen  are  there;  incentives  are  not  given  to  the  Police  Officers.  Corruption  has  been 
taking place over the place. So, there is urgent need to revamp the Police de l’Environnement.  

 Mention  is  made  in  the  Programme  about  the  reinforcement  of  the  Police  de 
L’Environnement, but it should not become a Police parallel.  I make an appeal to the hon. 
Minister  that  the  Police  de  l’Environnement  should  get  its  environmental  job  –  noise 
pollution, littering and illegal dumping. But, Madam Speaker, the Police de L’Environnement 
should not be used to harass people for other activities. This is why, Madam Speaker, on that 
score, we amend the legislation to fines – ‘Ou jeter ou payer!’ So, this legislation should be 

 

61 

implemented, Police Officers should be everywhere, not as Gestapo, but, at least, to make 
people respect the environment, especially for our tourism industry.  

Madam Speaker, no sustainable results will be achieved if each single Ministry works 
on its own. I have been witnessing that over the years; this is why the present Prime Minister 
presided three or four times over the National Environment Commission where all Ministers 
were  convened,  even  the  Minister  of  Finance  to  provide  funds,  where  clear  directives  are 
given to the Ministries to implement one National Policy as far as Government is concerned. 

Madam Speaker, at paragraph 62, it is said – 

“Government  will  adopt  a  responsible  and  environmentally  sustainable  policy 
regarding  energy  production,  waste  management  and  physical 
infrastructural 
development”. 

Madame la présidente, on a la nette impression que these crucial issues have merely 
been  lumped  together  and  that  nobody  can  say  that  these  issues  have  not  been  taken  into 
consideration.  Madam  Speaker,  the  real  time  bomb  today  is  our  completely  unsustainable 
solid waste management system.  I think Mauritius should review; at least, the hon. Minister 
concerned should have a complete review of the solid waste management system, because so 
many  problems  crop  up  because  of  derelict  systems;  the  presence  recently  of  algae  in  the 
reservoir, water quality in our boreholes and rivers, lagoonal water quality, proliferation of 
rats  and  crows.  These  are  the  issues  which  should  be  addressed  urgently  not  only  for  the 
safety of our population but also for our tourism industry.  

Madam Speaker, the introduction of a sustainable waste management system will help 
to change the mindset of the population and our economic operators as well as consumers, 
especially  with  regard  to  sustainable  consumption.  Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to 
unsustainable packaging and even products, we have to carry out live cycle analysis before 
determining whether these products can be put on the market. The environmental laboratory 
in Réduit should have a more proactive role and should be more present on the field.  I still 
remember  that  Mauritius  invested  on  a  fixed  mobile  station  within  the  precinct  of  Royal 
College,  Port Louis and then we had mobile equipment going around the country, dans les 
gares routières, dans les places publiques to check the air quality and then publish reports. 
So far, I don’t think we have seen all this. 

 

62 

On the energy front, Madam Speaker, I’ll come only to CT Power and just say a few 
words. And right from the start, I can say, on the MMM side, we were the one, the pioneer of 
the CT Power project and I’ll take all these PQs, starting from the PNQ of the Leader of the 
Opposition - Debate No. 24 of 15 July 2008. This is why I took note of the silence of my 
good friend, hon. Minister Bhadain, who is the new Colombo of the Government as far as 
fraud and corruption are concerned.  

So,  our  Colombo  has  forgotten  the  CT  Power,  the  more  so  that  he  is  a  resident  of 
Albion.  That  project,  Madam  Speaker,  stinks  of  corruption.  I  won’t  mention  names; 
everybody knows who were the people. Ça nom là mo pas capave pas dire, Mr Dulthuman! 
He  has  been  around  Mauritius,  around  my  Constituency  giving  donation  of  loudspeakers, 
bribing people of the region, of the Shivala, to come and give support for that project. I won’t 
say  other  members  of  socio-cultural  groups  who,  at  one  period  of  time,  were  doing  press 
conference, forgetting the interest of the people of Albion village. And history will say - my 
colleague hon. Quirin is here, apart from the hon. Prime Minister and other colleagues - we 
have,  weeks  after  weeks,  been  asking  for  information,  querying  the  then  Government,  the 
Minister and alerting the population.  

I would not go into as to how we have supported, in our way, the inhabitants of Albion.  
I just reiterate what I have said.  We are against - as MPs of the Constituency - the setting up 
of that CT Power. If Government has been able to retrieve other big contracts, why would 
Government say that it is unable to do so?  That project has not yet started and I would not go 
into what my colleagues… 

(Interruptions) 

…have said during the electoral campaign. If I go to what has been said, les déclarations des 
candidats, hon. Alain Wong Yen Cheong à Pointe aux Sables exhortait les habitants à ne pas 
voter  en  faveur  de  telle  ou  telle  alliance  pour  boycotter  le  projet  de  CT  Power.  My  good 
friend, hon. Alain Aliphon : ‘Nous sommes en guerre contre CT Power.’ L’honorable Anil 
Gayan : ‘Nous fine discute lor projet CT Power, nous fine décider pou remette en question’.  
He is here. It has been said.  We have also canvassed against that.  The people are against that 
project there. So, it is up to the Government now to find ways and means. 

(Interruptions) 

 

63 

What we want to hear from Government is: why Government does not set up a Commission 
of Inquiry to look into… 

‘Pas presser. Attane to causer! Toi qui to pé causer, mo pé cause are toi là?’ 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, why Government… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please proceed, hon. Member! 

Mr Bhagwan: ‘Tone change parti couma chiffon!  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Don’t interrupt the hon. Member, please! 

 Mr Bhagwan: ‘Tone change parti couma chiffon, mouchoir ; pas cause are moi toi!’ 

Madam Speaker, what I am saying… 

(Interruptions) 

‘Tone change parti ene paqué fois.’ 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan, please proceed! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhagwan: ‘Tone change parti toi. 

(Interruptions) 

Tone change parti ene paqué fois! To pas causer are moi !  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Members, please don’t interrupt! Allow the hon. Member to 

proceed! 

(Interruptions) 

 

64 

Mr Bhagwan: Madam Speaker, what I … 

Madam Speaker, what I am stating… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Henry, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhagwan: ‘Eta Gros Derek, ferme to la bouche do Gros Derek! Ferme to la 

bouche do ! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhagwan: ‘Eta aller do, Gros Derek!’ 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, what I am reiterating to the hon. Prime Minister is - Government is 
committed to clean, we are applauding, the population is applauding - to set up a Commission 
of Inquiry on the implementation of CT Power; who were the fundraisers and who were those 
who had money? I still remember once my good friend, hon. Bhadain, came to see me, we 
discussed about the reçu d’affiche and this has been canvassed in Court by certain people.  
The promoter of CT Power financed all the posters of the 2005 General Election of l’Alliance 
Sociale when hon. Sinatambou was a candidate then. I won’t say others, the PMSD.  This is 
clear; there is a case which has been lodged on the financing of that project.  

(Interruptions) 

So, Mr Colombo, you were a candidate… 

Mr Sinatambou: On a point of order, Madam Speaker! 

(Interruptions) 

 

65 

Yes, I do not know where this information comes from. I don’t know of any financing. 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, what is the point of order? He is giving a personal 

explanation. What is the point of order? Which Standing Order? 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Minister, can you say whether it is a point of order or whether 

it is a point of personal explanation? 

Mr Sinatambou: It is a point of order, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Yes. So, what is the point of order? 

Mr Sinatambou: The hon. Member… 

(Interruptions) 

Will you please allow me to speak? 

On a point of order, Madam Speaker, the hon. Member is casting imputations that my 
election was financed with dirty money. That is not true. I do not know where he is taking 
that. 

(Interruptions) 

It is an imputation. Where does he get that? This is nowhere to be found, nowhere to be seen 
and never evidenced. Maybe they are talking of their dirty money for this election. 

Madam Speaker: Okay. So, I take it as a point of personal explanation and the matter 

rests there. Please, proceed, hon. Member! 

Mr Bhagwan: May I say again, Madam Speaker that for the General Election of 2005 
for the l’Alliance Sociale, the CT Power was one of the financing agencies, especially with 
regard  to  posters  coming  from  each  and  every  country  and  the  documents  are  there  at  the 
Line Barracks, at the Central CID to prove. So, the Government is well placed to see all these 
records, the records are there, statements have been given to the Police and if Government 
has the will, he can set up a Commission of Inquiry.  

As far as the inhabitants of Albion are concerned, a village in my Constituency, it is a 
fact,  since  years,  that  they  have  been  against  that  project  and  je  me  fais  moi-même  et 

 

66 

l’honorable  Quirin,  ici,  de  notre  côté,  le  porte-parole  des  habitants  comme  nous  l’avons 
toujours fait et le Hansard peut prouver ce que nous avions dit. 

Madam Speaker, this is what I had to say on CT Power and energy. I would not go 
into other problems. I have one small observation, Madam Speaker, at paragraph 256. I have 
been here in this House for many years, I have stated, I’m not blowing my own trumpet, I 
have seen history. So, I welcome this paragraph of Government - 

“An ‘anti defection’ legislation will be introduced to make it more difficult for MPs to 
cross the floor.” 

(Interruptions) 

‘Eh, talère mo pou alle cause ça.  Pas faire moi cause séki pas bizin!’ 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! Order! Hon. Bhagwan, please address the Chair! 

Mr Bhagwan: I have taken…  

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

‘Eh, mo pas encore fini! Ale paye la boutique ; la boutique, élection to pas encore fini payer, 
taxi, ale causer, ale payer!’ 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan, please sit down! 

Please, sit down! I am on my feet!  

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Bhagwan, please sit down! I am on my feet! Can I appeal to hon. Members not to lose 
the time of the House? Please, allow hon. Bhagwan to proceed. You will have the opportunity 
to reply to him when you intervene. 

Mr Bhagwan: I have not put my ‘ti copine’ everywhere, Madam Speaker.  I don’t 

have any ‘ti copine’ or ‘ti copain’, so, I am very happy. 

 

67 

(Interruptions) 

I have taken good note, Madam Speaker, of what hon. Collendavelloo stated publicly 
that he won’t accept any transfuge.  At least, he has said so, it is in writing.  Madam Speaker, 
this is a fundamental question which has been discussed over the years. In 1982, it was not in 
the Programme. We still remember when there were manifestations and so on in 1982 and 
then onwards, I had been told - I was here - that it was difficult to legislate, to have a proper 
legislation.  In other countries, they have had problems. In India, there is one model, I’m no 
expert on that, but, at least, Government must and should put that into our law, about this 
‘anti defection’ legislation and Government will have our full support. I think Mauritius is 
right pour empêcher le transfuge et c’est important pour la démocratie qu’il y ait une loi anti 
transfuge.  

Madam Speaker,  I  will  end by talking on two small issues, the MBC/TV.  I have  a 
question on Tuesday, so, I am not going to be long. I have been watching the MBC/TV every 
day. Every day there is the episode of CID, so it’s not my problem. It has been stated that 
there would be change at the MBC/TV. What the population wants to have, we are paying for 
the licences, we will have figures on Tuesday, the debts and the saga of Mr Hitler. I have 
been the one who has criticised Mr Callikan the most, here, in Parliament and we have even 
thrown him out of the House here.  

In front of him!  We have thrown him out. Yes. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker,  what  the  population  does  not  want  to  have,  ‘même  produit  ine 
change l’emballage’. This is why, I know that the Minister responsible, hon. Jugnauth, has 
put up committees and so on, but there is urgent need to clean up the mess there and also to 
come with a new, modern legislation, with transparency, all the safeguards for those who pay 
these hundred rupees to have a better MBC/TV. 

Madam Speaker, I will conclude on the Local Government.  I have only one suggestion.  
We had in the past  - when we  were discussing about the new  Bill regarding the Regional 
Assembly of Rodrigues with the present hon. Prime Minister - put up in the Constitution the 
existence of a Regional Assembly.  I think it is time also to put in our Constitution - like it is 
in  South  Africa  and  in  other  modern  countries  -  the  existence  of  Local  Authorities  in 
Mauritius.  I think it would be a progress.  I know that there is a committee working on it.  

 

68 

We have had this fantastic piece of legislation when we were in Government, but it is now 
urgent  for  us,  for  the  country  to  put  the  existence  of  the  Local  Government  in  the 
Constitution. 

Madam  Speaker,  these  were  the  few  words  that  I  had  to  say  on  the  Government 
Programme and my suggestion as far as Parliament is concerned.  We will be around.  We 
will be, I would say, making le bilan du governement.  We shall not be anti-patriotic.  We are 
Mauritians.  We live here.  So, we want our country first, but also, we want the Government 
to deliver and we will assess the performance of Government in actions during the days and 
the months to come.   

Thank you.   

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Yerrigadoo! 

(6.43 p.m.) 

The  Attorney  General  (Mr  R.  Yerrigadoo):    Madam  Speaker,  allow  me  to 
congratulate  you  on  your  appointment  as  our  first  ever  Lady  Speaker  of  the  House.    It  is 
indeed  a  great  honour  and  privilege  for  me  to  address  this  august  Assembly  as  a  new 
Attorney General.  I am grateful to the hon. Prime Minister for my appointment. Thank you, 
Sir.   

The election results marked the end of an era and brought a new beginning.  Enn nuvo 
soleil finn lever, Madam Speaker.  But as Henry Wadsworth Longfellow once said, I quote - 

‘Great is the art of beginning, but greater is the art of ending.’ 

I  pay  tribute  to  our  enlightened  electorate  and  wish  to  reassure  them  that  we  hear  their 
message  loud  and  clear  and  their  message  is:  ‘nettoyer  mam.’  As  recent  events  unfold, 
Madam Speaker, the people are relieved and comforted to see that they did the right thing on 
10 December last.  They put an end to almost ten years of the reign of Labour Party which 
certainly  was  not  working  in  the  best  interests  of  our  people  and  our  Republic.    Labour 
Government conveniently overlooked the unemployment problem, especially the youths and 
women unemployment.  They allowed all sorts of universités marrons to operate and duped 
parents and lured students into bogus schemes. 

 

69 

Madam Speaker, the waste of a country’s most precious assets, the talent and energy of 
its people, makes it duty  bound to Government to seek a real and lasting cure.  There are 
many things to be done to set this nation on the road to recovery and I don’t mean economic 
recovery alone, but a new independence of spirit and a zest for achievement.  For that, we 
need to lay the foundations for recovery.  We believe in our people and we all share common 
values of respect and hard work and I am confident that together we will bring our country 
back on track.   

Madam Speaker, I am humbled by the fact that my office will have a key role to play in 
the implementation of our ambitious Government Programme.  One of the basic tenets of the 
democratic State is an independent Judiciary.  Our Government is fully committed to uphold 
democratic values, believes that the Judiciary should be fully equipped to operate effectively.  
In that respect, investment will be made throughout our tenure to enable a better service to 
the public. 

Madam  Speaker,  any  person  who  has  been  to  a  District  Court  will  tell  you  that  the 
buildings which house most of them, if not all of them, are in a pitiful state and do not have 
proper facilities.  There is hardly any parking.  There is no waiting space for the public to 
shelter  from  the  sun  or  rain,  no  proper  toilets,  not  enough  information  to  first-time  users.  
And yet, this is an important encounter of the public with our justice system as the bulk of 
our Court cases are, in fact, dealt with at the level of District Courts. I am pleased, Madam 
Speaker,  to  announce  that  following  consultations  from  the  Judiciary,  Government  has 
decided  that  all  District  Court  premises  will  be  reviewed  and  upgraded  to  ensure  better 
services to all users and stakeholders.  Some District Courts will be rebuilt completely.  This 
is an ambitious and costly project which will be done in collaboration with the Judiciary and 
will last throughout our mandate.  Government will also provide for the construction of a new 
building to house the Supreme Court and all its Divisions.   

The current historical building will be restored as it bears witness to the legacy of our 
forefathers and our history.  The Family Division of the Supreme Court will also be provided 
the required support services so as to improve the operation of its division which plays a key 
role in the resolution of family matters.  The Family Division will be better equipped to be 
able  to  respond  to  the  emerging  challenges  and  to  deliver  a  service  which  reflects  the 
expectations and attitudes of our evolving society.   

 

70 

Reforms will aim to ensure that there will be speedy settlement of dispute regarding 
and relating to marriage and family matters.  Counselling services will be made available to 
parties in proceedings before the Family Division of the Supreme Court and the Family Court 
will be empowered to appoint any medical expert or such other person including a person 
engaged in promoting the welfare of the family as the Court may think fit to assist the Court 
in the determination or settlement of disputes. 

Madam Speaker, how many times have we heard ‘justice delayed is justice denied’?  
This legal maxim is the basis for the right to speedy trial and similar rights which are meant 
to expedite the legal system because it is unfair for the injured party to have to sustain the 
injury  with  little  hope  for  resolution.    The  phrase  has  become  a  rallying  cry  for  legal 
reformers who view Courts as acting too slowly in resolving legal issues either because the 
existing system is too complex or because it is overburdened.  The Judicial Committee of the 
Privy Council which is our final Court of Appeal has yet again highlighted that it is troubled 
by the delay with which cases are disposed of before our Courts.   

Madam Speaker, having said this, il ne faut pas non plus faire de la démagogie. All 
legal practitioners would agree that there is no simple solution to the question of delay.  I am 
aware that the Judiciary is addressing this issue and there is already a lot of effort being put 
into better case management.  But, Madam Speaker, we cannot lie back. We have to work 
together to bring further reforms to expedite the determination of Court cases and to improve 
the  services  provided  to  the  public  in  the  judicial  field.    These  reforms  will  include  the 
introduction of statutory time limits to deliver judgments.  This measure aims to ensure that 
as a service provider the Judiciary provides a timely resolution of disputes.  Decreasing time 
to  dispose  of  judicial  proceedings  will  not  only  reinforce  the  rule  of  law  and  public 
confidence in the Judiciary, but will have a positive impact on investments in Mauritius.  The 
digital and audio recording systems of our Courts will also be upgraded to ensure accurate 
record-keeping and speedier delivery of justice.   

Madam Speaker, access to justice is very important.  We must ensure that those who 
cannot afford to pay for the services of Counsel and Attorney, be provided with same.  The 
Barristers and Attorneys representing persons who currently received legal aid are currently 
paid  a  pittance.  To  make  legal  aid  meaningful  under  our  law,  our  Legal  Aid  and  Legal 
Assistance Act shall be reviewed.  However, it is important to ward off any abuse by proper 
checks and the right balance will have to be struck in the best interest of justice and fairness.  

 

71 

In the same vein, let me highlight that special schemes will be reinforced for our Courts to 
provide certain facilities to special categories of witnesses bearing in mind the vulnerability 
and  fragility  of  some  witnesses,  especially  children  and  victims  of  abuse.    It  is  felt  that 
Mauritius should not lag behind in improving the protection given to witnesses. 

Madam  Speaker,  Lord  Mackay,  in  his  report,  in  1998  made  a  number  of 
recommendations regarding the structure of our judicial system.  We are, today, in 2015 and a 
number of those recommendations have yet to be implemented. 

This Government will, in line with the Mackay Report, introduce legislation to set up 
an Independent Court of Appeal, thus an Appeal Section and a separate High Court Section 
will be created in the Supreme Court. This measure heralds a new era for our justice system. 

Madam Speaker, it is a great privilege to practise law. However, with privilege comes 
responsibility.  Law  practitioners  have  the  responsibility  to  serve  the  public  ethically, 
diligently  and  competently.  It  is  their  ethics  and  professionalism  which  will  help  in 
maintaining  public  confidence  in  the  justice  system  by  defending  the  rule  of  law  and 
upholding their duties and responsibilities towards the Court. 

Madam Speaker, I have received a lot of representations on the  courses delivered to 
and examinations taken by our would-be legal practitioners. I intend to carry out consultation 
with all stakeholders with a view to addressing those concerns and dispel any doubt about the 
integrity of the process. 

Madam  Speaker,  our  Government  believes  that  our  laws  have  to  keep  abreast  with 
social changes. Our Code de Procédure Civile which was adopted in 1808, still governs the 
procedure in civil matters and in the vast array of cases. The Code de Procédure Civile will 
be revamped to bring it in line with aspirations of modern Mauritius. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  Police  and  Criminal  Evidence  Bill  is  long  overdue.  This 
Government will bring together in one enactment, subject to certain exceptions, provisions 
which  relate  to  the  exercise  by  Police  Officers  of  the  powers  to  stop,  enter,  search,  seize, 
arrest  and  detain,  and  a  treatment  and  questioning  of  detainees,  and  will  amend  certain 
provisions relating to evidence in criminal proceedings. This should be done so as to better 
guarantee  the  citizens’  constitutional  right  to  liberty,  protection  of  property,  freedom  of 
movement and protection of the law. 

72 

 
This Bill shall also increase the penalty for non-attendance of witnesses in Court, give 
a  Court  a  general  power  to  exclude  unfair  evidence,  make  it  an  offence  to  interfere  with 
witnesses or potential witnesses in criminal matters, provide for the enforcement of the rights 
of  victims  of  offences,  introduce  the  concept  of  spent  convictions  for  the  purposes  of 
sentencing  and  makes  statutory  provisions  for  the  regulation  of  the  admissibility  of 
confessions.  

Madam Speaker, another important measure that will be taken up by Government is 
the  amendment  of  the  Criminal  Code.  The  way  in  which  crimes  used  to  be  committed 
hitherto, has drastically changed. Technology evolves at an incredible pace. Offences related 
to  the  use  of  technology,  financial  crimes  and  other  criminal  offences,  including  those 
relating  to  Ponzi  schemes,  are  more  and  more  common  and  may  go  unpunished,  if  our 
Criminal Code is not amended to cater for those offences. 

In  addition,  there  are  few  if  any  offences  which  are  committed  today  where 
technology is not used or where technology cannot be used in the elucidation of a crime. The 
Law  Reform  Commission  will  be  further  empowered  and  will  be  called  upon  to  make 
proposals for the reform of other laws to ensure that they meet the aspirations and needs of 
contemporary Mauritius. 

A  further  important  amendment  that  will  be  brought  to  our  Criminal  Code  is  the 
provision for better legal framework for dealing with sexual offences. The procedural context 
in which such cases are currently dealt with, will also be enhanced. This amendment will go 
hand in hand with the amendment I referred to earlier regarding the protection of vulnerable 
witnesses. In particular, Madam Speaker, I am pleased to announce that the evidential laws 
and rules which are at the core of our justice system, will be revamped and codified in line 
with the recent developments in the Commonwealth. 

Madam  Speaker,  as  already  announced,  Government  will  bring  amendments  to  the 
Certificate of Character Act with a view to increasing the employability of people convicted 
of  minor  crimes  and  misdemeanours.  Government’s  policy  is  that  minor  criminal  offences 
should cease to appear on the Certificate of Character of convicted persons after a period of 
one year, so that such persons who have been convicted of minor offences do not fall into the 
poverty  track  by  being  excluded  from  the  job  market,  by  reason  of  not  having  a  clean 
Certificate of Character. 

73 

 
Government has a vision to modernise judicial system and will ensure that while the 
system  is  modernised,  our  citizens  fully  benefit  from  the  advances  in  technology. 
Government  will  aim  to  introduce  electronic  bracelets  as  a  tool  to  monitor  detainees  who 
have  been  released  on  bail.  This  measure  will  increase  the  range  of  measures  available  to 
Magistrates with regard to the imposition of conditions on detainees admitted to bail. To do 
the cost element involved in the implementation of such measure, Government will restrict 
this alternative to certain categories of offenders with a view to ensuring an optimal use of 
available  bracelets.  This  measure  will  be  introduced  while  the  procurement  process  of  a 
bracelet is completed and the monitoring facilities associated with the use of such eletronic 
bracelets when operational. 

Government  will  be  adopting  tough  measures  and  crime  and  will  come up  with  an 
array of measures to provide more protection to the most vulnerable fellow citizens. Thus, 
sentences for crimes committed on the elderly,  women, children and physically challenged 
persons will be substantially increased. 

As  a  Government  which  is  intended  in  ensuring  that  law  and  order  are  stringently 
respected, these measures will send a strong signal to our non law abiding citizens and a clear 
message to would-be offenders is that this Government means business in relation to tackling 
the  prevailing  law  and  order  situation  in  Mauritius.  Such  a  measure  will  ensure  that  our 
citizens can  go about their daily life  without worrying about their safety and the safety of 
their dear and loved ones. 

Another important measure will be adopted in the field of victim protection. Under 
our law, presently, victims cannot make any representations regarding sentencing. Legislation 
will be enacted, Madam Speaker, in particular, to provide that representations by or on behalf 
of victims would be taken into consideration at sentencing stage. Government will also, in 
consultation with the Office of the DPP, which has a dedicated Victim Support Unit, come up 
with measures which ensure that when victims depone in Court, they do so under the best 
possible circumstances. Further, best practices in Commonweath jurisdiction with regard to 
treatment of victims in the judicial context, will be studied with a view to enhancing the way 
victims are treated in the context of judicial system. 

Allow  me,  Madam  Speaker,  to  deal  with  another  measure  referred  to  in  the 
Government Programme. Government will introduce a Juvenile Justice Bill to provide for a 
more modern juvenile justice system. Our present Juvenile Offenders Act dates back to 1935 

 

74 

and it is outdated. The new Juvenile Justice Bill will give paramount consideration to the best 
interests of juveniles. The Juvenile Justice Bill will take into account recent United Nations 
Conventions, Guidelines and Rules, as well as reports produced by UNICEF and by local and 
foreign resource persons. The Bill will, accordingly, address the following issues – 

• 
• 

• 

• 

• 
• 

• 
• 
• 

• 

• 
• 

the minimum age of criminal responsibility; 
the setting up of  a Central Juvenile Court which will have the assistance of 
trained professionals in the field; 
the  duties  of  Police  and  other  Public  officers  regarding  the  arrest,  detention 
and release of minors; 
the  possibility  of  divertionary  measures  as  an  alternative  to  prosecution, 
particularly, for mediation and mentoring; 
timely prosecution and trial of juveniles; 
the requirement of a Presentence Report where a juvenile is convicted of an 
offence. 
the manner in which uncontrollable juveniles are to be dealt with; 
the provision of a periodic review of a detention of minors; 
the SCO protecting of privacy of juveniles as well as that of complainants and  
other witnesses; 
the range of choice of sentencing options where a juvenile is convicted of an 
offence; 
the institutions, another place is available for the detention of minors; 
the exceptional cases in which a minor can be detained after he reaches the age 
of 18, and 

•  of course, the setting up of one Central Juvenile Justice Committee which will 
assist  and  advise  on  the  implemention  of  the  Act  and  be  responsible  for 
supervising the management in operation of every institution. 

Madam Speaker, the Curatelle Act will also be amended to make better provision for 
the administration of vacant estates. Amendments will be made to ensure that the approval of 
the Attorney General be sought before claim is made against a vacant estate is settled; the 
curator of vacant estates may sell an immovable property vested in him and a claim to which 
a curator is a party referred to in arbitration. Further, the Curatelle Act will be amended to 

 

75 

provide for an increase in the value of property which a curator is empowered to hand over 
on behalf of the minor or an interdicted person. 

Madam Speaker, my Office will have a key role to play in the implementation of our 
Programme. We shall ensure that the Office is adequately and properly equipped in order to 
continue to function as a leading 21st century set of Chambers. I will shortly be embarking 
upon  the  restructuring  of  the  Attorney  General’s  Office  and  the  Office  of  the  Director  of 
Public Prosecutions, bearing in mind the provision of our Constitution, the recommendations 
made in the MacKay Report and the need to optimise our human and other resources in the 
legal service. 

Madam Speaker, this Government has at heart the interest of the society and a strong 
and  efficient  justice  system  is  the  key  to  preserving  the  harmony  of  our  society  and  in 
promoting sustainable development. 

Let me end, Madam Speaker, by quoting a Maori proverb -  

"Turn your face towards the sun and the shadows will fall behind you.”  

I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

(7.02 p.m.) 

Mr  E.  Boissézon  (Third  Member  for  La  Caverne  &  Phoenix):  Madame  la 
présidente, je vous félicite pour votre élection et vous assure que je m’efforcerai de toujours 
collaborer avec vous. À mes collègues des deux côtés de la Chambre qui ont obtenu d’autres 
responsabilités dans l’hémicycle, je vous félicite et je vous souhaite plein succès dans vos 
nouvelles fonctions. 

Respectueusement,  je  remercierai  le  Premier  ministre,  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth  et  les 
leaders de l’alliance Lepep, faisant fi du slogan démagogique 60-0, 3-0 et autres quolibets 
tels que ‘camion saleté’, ‘mercenaires’ et autres mots que je ne dirai pas dans ce Parlement.  
Vous avez su créer un groupe et proposer un programme qui cadrait avec les aspirations de la 
Mauricienne et du Mauricien. 

Le discours programme reflète judicieusement les propositions que nous avions faites 
pendant la campagne électorale et a été acclamé par tous les quartiers. Je cite Aniff Peerun, 
président du Mauritius Labour Congress -  

76 

 
« Le  programme  de  gouvernement  est  révolutionnaire ;  c’est  un  programme  qui 
répond  aux  aspirations  du  peuple.  C’est  la  première  fois  que  cela  provoque  une 
unanimité parmi la population, y compris le patronat. » 

Nous avons été élus sur un projet. L’immobilisme et le conservatisme ne sont plus à l’ordre 
du  moment,  nous  voulons  que  l’ambition  fraternelle  que  nous  avons  inculquée  pendant  la 
campagne  se  concrétise  le  plus  vite  possible.  Nous  voulons  que  l’implémentation  de  nos 
projets se fasse en communion avec le peuple. 

Nous  avons  cinq  ans  pour  réussir  notre  pari ;  cela  paraît  long  mais  très  court  dans 
l’histoire d’un pays. Aujourd’hui, nous avons constaté et constatons combien Maurice a été 
injuste  envers  la  population  pendant  cette  dernière  décennie.  Combien  de  crimes  ont  été 
commis  au  nom  de  la  démocratie  de  l’économie !  Nous  avons  vu  Airway  Coffee,  la 
conversion des rues en plage de pieds dans l’eau.  Pas une semaine ne passait avant 2014, que 
le Leader de l’Opposition ne déterrait un scandale. Maurice avait perdu sa voie et était en 
voie de perdre son âme. 

Les propositions incluses dans le Discours Programme du gouvernement sont les unes 
plus intéressantes que les autres, mais aujourd’hui je m’appesantirai sur le paragraphe 20 qui 
stipule –  

“A  medium  to  long  term  Marshall  Plan  will  be  elaborated  to  combat  poverty  and 
social exclusion”. 

J’ai  noté  avec  plaisir  que  le  Premier  ministre,  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth  ait  réitéré  son 
intention  d’une  inclusion  sociale  avec  l’élaboration  d’un  Marshall  Plan  dans  son  discours 
lors de la cérémonie de la commémoration de l’abolition de l’esclavage à Maurice au Morne.  

La lutte contre la pauvreté et la raison d’être même du ‘Muvman Liberater’. Je voudrais 
exprimer notre solidarité avec ceux qui ont faim, qui connaissent la solitude, ceux qui sont 
confrontés à des conditions de vie difficiles. Nous vous assurons que notre pays se remettra 
sans  cesse  en  question,  tant  que  les  droits  fondamentaux  ne  seront  effectifs  pour  tous.  De 
l’immobilisme et le manque de justice sociale de ces dernières années, ce sont les pauvres et 
ceux  qui  n’ont  pas  de  statut  qui  ont  payé  en  premier,  alors  que  certains  remplissaient  des 
coffres. 

77 

 
Autrefois,  on  était  pauvre  quand  on  n’avait  pas  de  quoi  s’éduquer,  se  nourrir,  se 
soigner, s’habiller et avoir un toit. Mais comment qualifier celui qui travaille et qui ne gagne 
pas  assez  pour  terminer  le  mois,  qui  doit  emprunter  pour  payer  le  ticket  d’autobus  qui  le 
mènera à son lieu de travail ? Cette situation est intolérable et ce gouvernement a bien fait de 
prendre  l’initiative  de  résorber  ce  fléau,  car  trop  longtemps  cet  enjeu  social  a  été  négligé. 
Nous avions une situation où le riche devenait plus riche et le pauvre plus pauvre. 

Je félicite le gouvernement pour la révision des prestations sociales, et de l’uniformité 
de  la  compensation  salariale  et  de  faire  provision  d’un  salaire  minimum.  L’exercice  de 
compensation  salariale  et  de  l’uniformité  des  prestations  sociales  a  coûté  des  milliards  de 
roupies,  n’en  déplaise  à  certains  mais  a  su  créer  un  feel  good  factor.  Même  l’indice  de  la 
confiance des investisseurs a augmenté de 6.4% lors de ces trois derniers mois.  

Je cite M. Renganaden Padayachy de la MCCI qui dit qu’il constate que la situation 
politique s’est apaisée après les élections générales du 10 décembre, et à créer un feel good 
factor.  La  Chambre  de  Commerce  s’attend  aussi  à  des  meilleurs  jours  pour  l’emploi  et 
l’investissement.  

Madame  la  présidente,  si  l’approche  monétaire  est  pertinente  pour  calculer  la 
pauvreté,  la  tendance  générale  est  de  dire  qu’elle  est  insuffisante  et  qu’il  faut  prendre  en 
compte  d’autres  indicateurs.  Chacun  a  un  droit  à  l’éducation,  à  la  formation,  l’emploi,  le 
logement,  la  protection  de  la  santé,  la  protection  de  la  famille  et  de  l’enfance.  C’est  au 
gouvernement  de  faire  connaître  ses  droits,  en  prévenir  l’exclusion  et,  plus  globalement, 
assurer  un  épanouissement  de  l’individu  dans  la  vie  sociale.  Nous  devons  nous  fixer  un 
objectif de réduction de la pauvreté et de l’exclusion dans la République, mettre des éléments 
de mesures. Je sais que c’est un exercice complexe et difficile, mais nous pouvons trouver les 
éléments d’un tableau de bord. Ce faisant, cela nous permettra de suivre notre avancement 
vers notre objectif. Cela nous permettra de voir où la pauvreté et l’exclusion sévit le plus, 
dans  quelle  tranche  d’âge  et  dans  quelle  catégorie.  Nous  cernerons  les  tenants  et  les 
aboutissants, les causes et conséquences du mécanisme qui créé la pauvreté et l’exclusion. La 
lutte contre l’exclusion, au-delà du fait d’être un engagement politique, ce doit être une messe 
de  la  solidarité  et  de  la  fraternité.  C’est  l’affaire  de  tous.  La  solidarité  c’est  avant  tout  la 
proximité. C’est pourquoi aux côtés de l’État, les collectivités locales, le secteur privé et les 
ONG ont un rôle à jouer et ils devront être mis à contribution.  Cet engagement sera long et il 

 

78 

sera difficile et complexe.  Nous faisons confiance au gouvernement qui n’a pas froid aux 
yeux.  Il sera donné un visage humain à la lutte contre la pauvreté. 

Madame  la  présidente,  venons  aux  droits.    Je  passerai  plus  de  temps  sur  l’éducation 
faute de temps, le droit à l’éducation.  Ayons un devoir de vérité en ce début de quinquennat 
et  l’implémentation  d’un  gouvernement  qui  aborde  une  politique  de  vérité.    Qui  ne  voit 
qu’aujourd’hui la réussite scolaire, dépend moins de notre système d’éducation mais plutôt à 
une certaine appartenance.   

Que  constatons-nous  lors  des  résultats  des  examens  de  la  HSC ?  Qui  sont  les 
boursiers ?  Enfants  d’enseignants,  de  cadres  supérieurs,  du  privé  et  du  secteur  public!  La 
bourse obtenue par le fils du chauffeur de camion ou du chauffeur de bus révèle de l’exploit. 
Pourquoi ?  Parce que dès les premiers pas de l’enfant dans le système éducatif, il est mieux 
encadré.  Nous  avons  une  disparité  criante  entre  le  niveau  de  certains  établissements.  Ce 
constat n’est pas le résultat de la performance des établissements concernés seulement, mais 
des effets conjurés de l’environnement, de la position géographique des écoles, mais surtout 
d’un  gouvernement  qui  au  cours  de  ces  dix  dernières  années,  au  lieu  de  préconiser  une 
politique d’éducation équitable pour tous, priorisant et mettant plus d’effort et de ressources 
dans les établissements dits défavorisés pour qu’ils puissent rattraper leur retard, a remis le 
rat race de l’élitisme à outrance sur les rails. Je félicite le gouvernement d’abolir les examens 
de la CPE et la mise en application du 9-year schooling. 

Le succès d’un système éducatif ne devrait pas se mesurer sur le pourcentage de pass 
aux examens de la CPE, SC et HSC, encore moins sur le nombre de lauréats, mais par le 
nombre de drop-outs. 

Combien de jeunes quittent le système éducatif sans qualification?  S’est-on déjà posé 
la question de la cause de cet échec? Qui a échoué : le pauvre élève ou le système? A-t-on 
mis en place un système de suivi de ceux qui ont échoué ? Ou les laisse-t-on avec leur mal 
pour des laissés-pour-compte? Avons-nous essayé de comprendre le mal, le martyre de cet 
élève qui a déjà des difficultés à étudier, de comprendre ce qui lui arrive ?  Déjà au cours de 
la première année où il redouble, il subit un mal psychologique. Malheureusement, il est seul, 
livré à lui-même, considérant le redoublement comme une punition. Exclu de sa promotion, 
c’est le premier pas vers l’exclusion. 

 

79 

Le deuxième échec, exclusion du collège même, s'il est parqué dans une institution pré-
vocationnelle.  Je  dis  parqué  –  je  pèse  bien  sur  ce  mot  -  car  ce  lieu  est  bien  souvent  un 
purgatoire d’attente que l’élève ait les 16 ans légal pour quitter le système d’éducation. Une 
fois les 16 ans atteint, on oublie ces jeunes. 

Il  faut  faire  plus  pour  ces  jeunes.  Ils  sont  des  Mauriciens  qui  sont  minés  par  un 
sentiment  d’oubli  de  notre  contrat  social,  qui  sont  humiliés  par  l’absence  d’avenir 
professionnel, au point de refuser les échanges avec ceux qui veulent les aider, pour devenir 
la proie facile des prédateurs tels que les marchands de drogues, d’alcool et de sexe. Rester 
sans  réaction  devant  cet  échec,  c’est  accepter  l’inégalité  et  du  ressentiment  qui  sera  plus 
grand. C’est là le clivage invisible qui sépare la société mauricienne. 

L’éducation  a  un  rôle  important  dans  l’intégration  de  tous  les  citoyens  dans  une 
démarche de fraternité et de solidarité nécessaire à l’avancement du pays. L’inclusion dans le 
système  éducatif  ne  nécessitera  pas  un  apport  supplémentaire  de  financement,  mais 
nécessitera un paradigm shift.  Les parents des enfants fréquentant les établissements au taux 
d’échec important devront être formés quant à leur rôle de parents ; les enfants doivent être 
suivis  de  façon  plus  systématique.  Le  ratio  élève-parent  devra  être  revu  et  j’espère  que  le 
Remedial Education, Primary School Readiness Programme devienne une réalité. 

Une  fois  qu’on  s’est  occupé  de  l’éducation  de  nos  enfants,  nous  devons  avoir  une 
pensée à l’emploi.  Ne pas travailler alors qu’on en a la capacité d’être en mesure de le faire 
est  excluant.  Les  paragraphes  30  à  42  du  récent  programme  démontrent  la  volonté  du 
gouvernement,  non  seulement  de  créer  15,000  emplois  annuellement,  mais  de  s’assurer  de 
l’encadrement nécessaire à la formation, la protection de l’emploi, etc. 

Autre point c’est que nous devons faire un effort envers les exclus, c’est le logement et 
je ne serai pas trop long sur ce sujet parce que le ministre responsable du logement en a parlé.  
Mais nous devons noter qu’une des raisons des drames conjugaux et familiaux est le fait que 
trop de familles vivent en proximité. Chaque semaine amène son lot de drames. Combien de 
fois nous rencontrons des enfants qui n’ont jamais vécu sous un toit décent et dont les parents 
eux-mêmes n’ont pas eu droit à des logis dans lesquels ils auraient pu songer à construire un 
avenir. 

Ici, j’ouvrirai une parenthèse.  En ce moment, des appartements sont disponibles pour 
les familles à faible revenu, c’est-à-dire ceux touchant moins de R 10,000 par mois. Mais ils 

 

80 

doivent souscrire à un dépôt de R 40,000. Je prierai le ministre de voir la possibilité, au lieu 
d’un non-recevoir, d’étudier le cas par cas. 

Le mauricien et la mauricienne ont droit à une protection de la santé.  Encore une fois, 
j’ai été précédé par le ministre de la santé et je ne serai pas long.  Mais le seul point que je 
dirai c’est l’accueil.  Parce que nous disons du ministère de la santé que -  

“Government is committed to providing universal, accessible and quality health 
services, free of any user cost, with emphasis on customer satisfaction”.  

N’importe  qui  va  à  l’hôpital,  est  écœuré  par  l’état  d’insalubrité  des  lieux.  Le  manque  de 
dialogue  entre  le  médecin  et  le  patient.  Combien  de  patients  ne  savent  pas  de  quoi  ils 
souffrent.  Les  deux  points  soulevés  pourraient  être  résolus  en  mettant  l’emphase  sur  la 
médecine de proximité. 

Madame la présidente, nous notons aussi dans ce discours programme, que dorénavant 
c’est le Premier ministre qui aura la charge du National Development Unit.  Cette unité fut 
utilisée auparavant comme outil politique et étant PPS responsable des circonscriptions 19 et 
20, je peux noter aujourd’hui le retard du développement qu’il y a dans ces circonscriptions.  
Et pour cause, je ne veux pas faire de fleur aux membres de l’opposition mais nous savons 
que  le  ministre  précédent,  sachant  que  ces  deux  circonscriptions  étaient  sous  la  tutelle  de 
l’opposition,  n’a  presque  rien  fait  dans  ces  circonscriptions.    Je  demanderai  que  peut-être 
nous revoyions ces circonscriptions lors du prochain budget. A Coromandel, il y a un gros 
problème de drain et à la rue Berthaud, Quatre Bornes, il y a des développements qui ne sont 
pas faits.  

Je vais terminer par citer Monsieur Barack Obama; décidément aujourd’hui il a la cote 

- 

“This is our moment. This is our time, to put our people back to work and open doors 
of opportunity for our kids; to restore prosperity and promote the cause of peace; to 
reclaim the American Dream and reaffirm that fundamental truth, that, out of many, 
we are one; that while we breathe, we hope.  And where we are met with cynicism, 
and doubts and those who tell us that we can’t, we will respond with that timeless 
creed that sums up the spirit of a people: Yes, we can.” 

Merci. 

 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bholah! 

81 

(7.22 p.m.) 

The Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives (Mr S. Bholah): Madam 
Speaker,  at  the  very  outset,  like  others  before  me,  let  me  congratulate  you  on  your 
appointment as Speaker of this august Assembly. You are making history as the first woman 
in the Parliamentary history of the Republic of Mauritius to accede to such a distinguished 
position. It is said that the Speaker is the beating heart of democracy in any country and I am 
confident  that  with  your  wide  experience,  dignified  personal  aura,  in-depth  knowledge  of 
State  matters  and  added  to  that  your  charismatic  personality,  you  will  give  an  added  but 
deserved dimension to the function of Speaker. 

I  would  also,  like  my  other  colleagues  who  preceded  me,  wish  to  thank  His 
Excellency the President of the Republic for having, in a measured but solemn manner, laid 
down the architecture upon which we propose to build the Mauritius of the future and achieve 
that  second  socio-economic  miracle  which  will  usher  us  in  yet  another  golden  era  of 
Mauritius economic history. 

As  I  stand  in  this  House,  I  feel  humble  but  proud  of  the  opportunity  given  to  me 
because of the solemnity of the place which is the shrine of democracy in our Republic. We 
know  that  an  institution  is  the  lengthening  shadow  of  a  man.  This  institution  is  the 
lengthening shadow of all men and women who have been voted and sent as representatives 
here. To be part of the history of this House and to be counted among those men and women 
who have left their imprint on Parliamentary history is a dream that I could never ever fancy, 
even when awake. 

Madam Speaker, in a democratic society, there is no greater honour than to be chosen 
as a representative of one’s Constituency in Parliament. In this House, there are few known 
heroes, but there are innumerable unknown and unsung heroes out there on the ground. They 
believed in us, worked for us relentlessly night and day and with dedication and commitment. 
I wish to thank them all, and together with them, the inhabitants of GRSE/Montagne Blanche 
for conferring that honour upon me and my other colleagues. For those who voted for me, I 
hope my efforts over the next years will reward their faith. For those who chose otherwise, I 
will be working to earn their support and trust. In either case, I am here to serve. 

 

82 

Needless to say that when the National Assembly was dissolved on 06 October 2014 
and  the  Nomination  Day  fixed  for  24  November  2014,  the  stakes  were  very  high,  not  on 
whether we would win, but on the extent and magnitude of our defeat. Some considered that 
we  were  not  even  an  outsider  in  the  race.  For  others,  we  were  fighting  a  losing  battle. 
However, under the able leadership and guidance of an accomplished political leader, in the 
person of Rt. hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, we slowly but surely managed to turn the tide. In 
the  beginning,  the  target  was  to  have  a  handful  of  our  candidates  to  be  elected.  Then,  we 
became  more  ambitious  and  aimed  at  preventing  a  three-quarter  majority.  Then,  we  found 
that success was within our reach and ultimately we knew that it will be a landslide victory. 
The rest is history. 

Madam Speaker, what brought about this momentous achievement? It was the trust 
and faith the population had in our wisdom. We were not selling dreams. Nous n’étions pas 
des  marchands  de  rêves.  Our  programme  was  readily  assimilated  by  the  population  and 
l’Alliance  Lepep  and  lepep  became  one  entity.  It  is  this  programme  which  has  now  been 
translated into the Government Programme 2015-2019 read so gracefully on 27 January last. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  world  is  undergoing  profound  changes.  Associated  with  those 
profound changes, there are a number of diverse and significant challenges which cut across 
all countries. However small and remote we could be in terms of size and location, we must 
realise  that  we  are  part  of  a  global  world  and  anything  happening  elsewhere  will  have  an 
impact on us in Mauritius. We are not immune and we must brace ourselves to face these 
challenges frontally and fearlessly. These challenges include, among others - 

(i) 

growing income inequality and poverty; 

(ii) 

jobless growth and growing unemployment, mainly among the youth; 

(iii) 

environmental degradation and climate change; 

(iv) 

poor leadership and lack of good governance; 

(v) 

loss of moral values; 

(vi)  weakening of the democratic structure. 

In  addition  to  these  generic  challenges,  our  country  is  also  faced  with  the  specific 
problems associated with ageism, lack of natural resources and limited human capital. The 

 

83 

Government  Programme  2015-2019  is,  therefore,  meant  to  address  the  challenges  and  to 
provide the country and its people with the required tools to successfully address and tackle 
these  challenges.  Our  focus  will  be  on  our  people,  their  quality  of  life,  the  economy,  an 
excellent  leadership  and  governance  framework  associated  with  a  strengthening  of  the 
democratic structure of the country. 

Madam  Speaker,  if  we  want  to  tackle  the  challenges  and  problems  associated  with 
income inequality, growing poverty, unemployment among the youth, then there is no other 
option than to promote entrepreneurship among the population. While we equate inequalities 
with jobs, yet inequalities can be multidimensional, encompassing access to income, assets 
distribution, disparity of wages and access to other forms of resources and facilities. 

During  the  last  five  years,  there  has  been  a  remarkable  increase  in  inequality  in 
Mauritius  and  the  Gini  coefficient  increased  from  0.34  to  0.37,  slowing  down  the  pace  of 
poverty eradication. As a result, relative poverty has increased from 8.5% in 2007 to 9.8% in 
2012.  More  importantly,  income  growth  of  the  bottom  40%  of  the  population  has  been 
disappointing and increased at an annual rate of 1.8% compared to 3.1% for the population at 
large. 

From my point of view, most of these disparities can be tackled if we embark on a 
structural  transformation  of  the  architecture  of  the  economy  where  entrepreneurship  is  the 
focal point. We must, therefore, in parallel to promotion of entrepreneurship, address issues 
such as vocational training, technology transfer,  access to financing and  infrastructure, but 
also  the  institutional  arrangements  in  place  to  assist  the  entrepreneurs  in  their  efforts  to 
become more competitive and to graduate to higher levels. 

Madam  Speaker,  we  have  made  it  clear  that  we  will  spare  a  huge  amount  of  our 
financial resources to promote entrepreneurship. We have the ambition of making SMEs the 
engine of economic  growth over the next five  years. We will be able to do so only if the 
institutions  that  provide  Business  Development  Facilities  align  their  vision  and  strategic 
orientations.  Unfortunately,  it  is  well  documented  that  we  have  too  many  institutions 
duplicating  their  services  to  SMEs.  Our  challenge  would  be  to  rationalise  and  create  an 
institutional environment where the entrepreneur is not lost in procedural issues but instead 
he can devote his time to do what he knows best. This is why a re-engineering of SMEDA 
and other Business Development Support institutions would be undertaken. 

 

84 

Madam Speaker, if we want to fight poverty and integrate the base of the pyramid into 
the value chain of enterprises, there is no best option than to promote inclusiveness. We have 
the ambition of creating an environment where the inclusive business approach is not only 
promoted but that it becomes one major way of doing business. In so doing we will integrate 
the base of the pyramid in mainstream business activities. 

We are well aware that environmental degradation and the consequences of climate 
change are now considered as fundamental issues around the world. Mauritius is no exception 
to this. 

It  is  important  that  on  the  business  front,  strategies  are  developed  and  put  in  place 
where enterprises would go green. This would ensure that we halt and reverse the adverse 
trend of environmental degradation. 

We  would  need  in  this  context  to  be  innovative  and  think  out  of  the  box.  But  we 
cannot reinvent the wheel. There are many initiatives being developed around the world. It 
would, therefore, require our imagination to adapt and adopt them to suit the local context. 

Madam  Speaker,  as  regards  the  marketing  of  our  products,  either  locally  or 
internationally, there is need to develop a strong brand that can capture the uniqueness of the 
Mauritian  products.  We  already  have  a  national  brand  for  the  country  but  we  need  to 
harmonise with the private sector which is marketing its own brands. More than one brand is 
not in the interest of the business community. In this context, we will work with the private 
sector to find a common ground so that we do not shoot ourselves in-between our legs. 

Madam Speaker, globalisation has many advantages, but it also brings together its lot 
of constraints.  I have started visiting local  enterprises and my  assessment is that they  face 
fierce  competition  from  imported  products,  mainly  from  China  and  the  other  far-east 
countries. I feel extremely happy when I find that despite such level of competition, our local 
enterprises are still able to survive. I consider that it is the duty of any Government to do its 
utmost  to  protect  the  local  entrepreneurs  and  help  them  to  thrive  in  such  a  competitive 
environment. It is in this context that our forthcoming budget would be focussed insofar as 
SMEs and other local enterprises are concerned. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  handicraft  sector  must  also  be  looked  into  with  care  and 
attention. The handicraft sector is vital for a country to display what is its cultural heritage. 
The demand for cultural goods or destination products will become more and more pressing 

 

85 

given that we are a tourist destination. It can also be a major source of employment creation 
for Small Island Developing States like Mauritius. 

However, despite every effort, we find that more and more of our local artisans are 
faced  with  competition  from  imported  products  which  are  then  resold  as  Souvenirs  of 
Mauritius. The situation is going from bad to worse to the extent that even our “la terre sept 
couleurs” is being imported from China, in the form of keyholders and then sold to tourists 
as products of Mauritius. This is a serious cause for concern. Despite all the constraints we 
face to address this issue, I can assure the House that I will explore whatever possibility we 
have to protect our local and cultural heritage which is manifested in the form of destination 
products. 

Madam  Speaker,  as  regards  the  cooperative  sector,  I  consider  that  it  is  a  hidden 
treasure. For too long, it has been confined to a certain category of people and a primary form 
of business. However, it is my firm belief that cooperatives can play a catalytic role and make 
meaningful  contributions  to  economic  growth  and  social  advancement.  The  cooperative 
sector  in  Mauritius  has  suffered  for  too  long  from  a  negative  legacy  and  an  inappropriate 
policy  environment.  In  addition,  there  is  a  problem  for  them  in  terms  of  markets  for  their 
products.  If given the right incentives the cooperative sector can also flourish and achieve its 
objectives. 

While we are fighting an uphill battle for companies and other businesses to adopt a 
proper governance framework, yet we need to acknowledge that the cooperative movement 
has many values already embedded in the concept itself. The Cooperative Model of Business 
could be a valuable tool in building sustainable, grassroots agricultural businesses, as in the 
case  in  many  parts  of  Italy  for  parmesan  cheese,  champagne  production  in  France,  milk 
production in India and so on. 

Cooperatives  are  based  on  the  values  of  self-help,  self-responsibility,  democracy, 
equality,  equity  and  solidarity.    In  the  tradition  of  their  founders,  cooperative  members 
believe in the ethical values of honesty, openness, social responsibility and caring for others. 

In fact, cooperatives are one of the most democratic forms of business that exist with 
the concept of one person one vote and I propose over the next five years to bring about a 
complete turnaround in the sector and restore its lost prestige. 

 

86 

We propose to embark on an aggressive information, education and communication 
campaign in order to further sensitise all our stakeholders, essentially the youth and women 
who  are  not  aware  of  the  advantages  of  the  cooperative  model  of  enterprise  and  join  the 
Cooperative  Movement.  This  will  help 
their  self-esteem  and  solve 
unemployment problems.  They will learn teamwork, leadership and communication skills as 
well  as  receive  encouragement  to  become  active  members  in  the  community.  Since 
cooperatives do not figure in school curricula, young people may not realise that the products 
and services that they use may be provided by cooperatives. 

to  strengthen 

The great Mahatma Gandhi has said, and I quote - 

“Educate a man, you educate a person; educate a woman, you educate a family.” 

Thus the Cooperative Movement which is already more than 100 years old will, once 

again, contribute towards economic empowerment and social harmony in Mauritius.  

Madam Speaker, new sectors would be identified where the cooperatives model can 
be  adopted  and  new  markets  would  be  tapped  for  co-operators  to  sell  and  channel  their 
products. 

In the field of basic supplies, there are many areas for cooperatives. For example, in 
the  Consumer/Retail  Sector,  focus  will  be  placed  on  the  Fast  Moving  Consumer  Goods 
(FMCGs)  and  also  Fairtrade.  Fairtrade  has,  so  far,  been  very  successful  in  Consumer 
Cooperatives dealing with sugar. This will be extended to other sectors such as pineapple and 
also honey production in Rodrigues. 

The supply of green energy, catering in primary schools, repairs of roads and other 
public infrastructural works can very well be secured by cooperative societies. Some services 
in schools, hospitals and many other areas of public health, as well as care for the elderly, 
need not to be handed over to private investors. All these tasks can be accomplished by  a 
cooperative society. The marketing of goods and services, housing, even the creation of jobs 
can  be  organised  through  cooperative  societies  for  the  mutual  benefit  of  those  involved. 
Banking  itself,  through  credit  unions,  has  been  a  stronghold  of  cooperative  societies  and 
could be taken back from the financial economy. 

The values that count are self-help, responsibility, democracy, lawfulness, solidarity, 
honesty, openness, social responsibility and care for the other. Let us live these values and 

 

87 

become examples for the youth. Then the cooperative society can give us the network that is 
so crucial to shape a sustainable and peaceful human co-existence.  

Let me here quote Hermann Shulze-Delitzsch – 

“Who denies responsibility, denies also freedom.  Responsibility and freedom are the 
bedrock of a moral, political and economic world.”  

Madam Speaker, service to the people is service to God. So, Cooperatives, which are 
first and foremost community-based organisations, will assist in the formalisation of informal 
employment  through  collective  voice  and  economies  of  scale  and  extension  of  social 
protection. This will be done through continuous training and capacity building programmes 
undertaken  by  the  National  Institute  for  Cooperative  Development  (NICE).    NICE  will 
partner  with  other  academic  institutions  locally  or  abroad  so  as  to  deliver  cooperative 
entrepreneurship training and education. This will help build competence for members of the 
cooperative movement and also employees allowing for job mobility and advancement both 
within the cooperative movement as well as skills that they can also carry with them to other 
enterprises.  The capacity building programmes will be linked with support for cooperative 
start-ups in the form of business advisory services and access to finance.  

Madam  Speaker,  the  Government  Programme  for  the  next  five  years  is  extremely 
ambitious.    We  cannot  not  be  ambitious.  We  have  taken  a  commitment  to  transform 
Mauritius into a high-income economy. The population will judge us on our achievements in 
five years.  As a Government, we have to perform. Our credibility is on the line. We cannot 
fail  because  the  level  of  expectations  is  high.  But  how  can  we  fail  when  we  have  such  a 
dedicated and committed team working relentlessly night and day. 

We have already delivered on many of our promises. Others will take some more time. 
But,  nevertheless,  under  the  able  leadership  of  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  we  are  bound  to 
succeed.  And let me reassure hon. Ramful that we will travel and reach our destination.   

Madam  Speaker,  every  time  I  am  in  the  company  of  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  I  am 
overawed because I know that I am in the presence of wisdom and history.  Wisdom because 
he is a man who has almost 52 years of political experience, 4 years as a Minister, 18 as a 
Prime Minister of this country, 9 years as President of the Republic and Head of State, more 
than  1,200  meetings  of  Cabinet  and  countless  number  of  hours  of  Parliamentary  sessions 
under his belt.  During the recent electoral campaign, when all odds were against us, with his 

 

88 

calming presence he provided us with an anchor of comfort in a sea of political confusion.  
His wisdom is such that whatever he does in politics and those who rally around him found 
themselves on the right side of history. 

In fact, we are not in the presence of an individual but an institution in his own right.  
Those who chose to leave and go for greener pastures elsewhere have chosen to be on the 
wrong side of history, to borrow an expression from President Obama. 

No doubt he is history.  One day when the political history of Mauritius will be studied, 
no serious student will be able to deny the fact that the December 10, 2014 General Elections 
provided the most remarkable turnaround.  It will be quasi-impossible for students of history 
to  come  to  terms  with  the  fact  that  two  of  the  most  powerful  political  parties,  which 
seemingly rallied more than 80% of the electorate, were squarely beaten.   

For most political observers, it was a battle between David and Goliath.  But as David, 
despite his small stature, defeated the mighty Goliath, likewise the l’Alliance Lepep under the 
leadership of Sir Anerood Jugnauth also made history by defeating a political Goliath.  Mais 
on ne le savait pas; c’était un géant aux pieds d’argile.  They thought they were unbeatable.  
But  they  had,  unfortunately,  never  come  across  this  beautiful  but  wise  verse  of  Rumi,  the 
Persian mystic, and I quote – 

“Tie two birds together, they will not be able to fly even though now they have four 
wings.” 

It is exactly what happened in Mauritius.  Two mighty political birds tied themselves 
together believing that they would now fly more easily since they had four wings.  But they 
could never take off and were defeated by the sage Sir Anerood Jugnauth.  This is history.  
Pure and unalterable!  

Thank you, Madam Speaker! 

Mr Henry: Madam Speaker, I move that the debate be now adjourned. 

Mr  Boissézon rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Debate adjourned accordingly. 

 

89 

ADJOURNMENT 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  that  this  Assembly  do  now 

adjourn to Tuesday 24 February 2015 at 11.30 a.m.  

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 

Collendavelloo) rose and seconded. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned. 

Question put and agreed to. 

MATTER RAISED 

(7.45 p.m.) 

MONNERON SSS – RENAMING - ABDUL HAMID GOOLAM MOHAMED ISSAC 

SSS 

Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port  Louis  East):  
Madam Speaker, I take this opportunity which I thank you for giving me to address a matter 
of importance - in my view - to the House and it is that on 19 July 2013, Cabinet took the 
decision and agreed that Monneron State Secondary School be named after late Abdul Hamid 
Goolam Mohamed Issac also known as Gorah Issac.  He was the Municipal Councillor from 
1951 to 1953.  He was elected as a Member of the Legislative Assembly from 1959 to 1963.   

Mr Issac devoted much of his time to education of the youth, free coaching students 
who could not afford private tuition, and during his mandate he fought for the inclusion of 
Urdu and other Oriental Languages for the Cambridge and London University Examinations.  
He  presented  motions  to  the  Legislative  Assembly  for  sustaining  private  colleges  and 
Madrassas so that they could operate more efficiently.  I pray, therefore, Madam Speaker, to 
the hon. Prime Minister and also to the hon. Minister of Education and Human Resources, 
Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific  Research  if  that  Cabinet  decision  could  be  implemented 
because  it  still  hasn’t  been  implemented  even  though  it  has  been  decided  and  we  pray, 
therefore, that this could be implemented because Mr Issac is, indeed, a hero who should be 
remembered for what he has done for this country.  

Thank you. 

 
(7.47 p.m.) 

90 

The  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 
Scientific Research (Mrs L. D. Dookun-Luchoomun):  I have taken note and I will look 
into the matter and inform the House at a later stage regarding the issue. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Members, I wish to inform you that provision has been made 

for dinner.  

At 7.48 p.m. the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Tuesday 24 February 2015 

at 11.30 a.m. 

 

