 

1 

 

 

No. 16 of 2015 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

FIRST SESSION 

THURSDAY 02 APRIL 2015 

 

 

 

 
 

2 

                              CONTENTS 

 

 

 

QUESTION (Oral) 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER 

MOTION 

            BILL (Public)   

 

 

 

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 

KCMG, QC  

Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 

GCSK  

Communications 

Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo, GCSK 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 

Utilities 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Minister 

of 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Integration 

and  Economic 

Empowerment 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 

Sinatambou 

International Trade 

Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 

Perraud 

Family Welfare 

Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain 

Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 

Institutional Reforms 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 

 

4 

Institutions 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 

Shipping and Outer Islands 

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, 

Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 

QPM 

Disaster and Beach Management  

Hon. Marie Roland Alain Wong Yen             Minister of Civil Service and Administrative  

Cheong, MSK 

 

 

 

       Reforms 

    Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn            

Minister  of  Labour, 
Employment and Training 

Industrial  Relations, 

 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Madam Speaker 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, 

      GCSK 

Deputy Speaker 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Hurreeram,  Hon.  Mahendranuth 
Sharma 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

(Temporary  

Gopall,  Mr  Navin 
Transfer to RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra  

Badal, Mr Ramesh 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

 

           Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 16 of 2015 

 

Sitting of 02 April 2015 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

 

7 

ORAL ANSWER TO QUESTION 

 

SCHOOL BUSES – ACCIDENTS 

 

The  Leader  of  the  Opposition  (Mr  P.  Bérenger)  (by  Private  Notice)  asked  the 
Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the school buses, 
he will state the number thereof involved in accidents since 2013 to date, on a yearly basis, 
indicating –  

(a) 

the number of cases of injuries sustained in the course thereof and regarding 
the recent accident in which student K. P. was killed, indicate –  
(i) 
(ii) 

if the school bus driver was arrested and the bus examined, and  
at the material time, regarding the said bus –  
A. 
B. 
C. 

if any conductor was on duty;  
the number of students who were present therein, and  
whether the doors were secured, and  

(b) 

the  number  of  school  buses  presently  in  operation,  indicating  the  number 
thereof which are over 16 years old. 

Mr Bodha:  Madam Speaker, I wish to thank the hon. Leader of the Opposition for 
having put this question which is of a national utmost importance. I think that today we have 
a system which is not safe and which is not accountable and time has come to review the 
whole system. There has been a very sad tragedy.  One tragedy is more than what we should 
have and I have personally presented our sympathy to the parents.  We need today - it is more 
than compelling - to find a solution to this national issue which is costing Government Rs800 
m. per year.  The public transport system costs Rs1.2 billion and for the students, it is Rs800 
m. 

Madam Speaker, regarding part (a) of the question, I am informed that, at to date, a 
total number  of nine accidents involving school buses have been reported to the Police and 
eight students have been injured in these accidents as detailed hereunder -   

Year 
2013 
2014 
2015 

 

 
 

No. of Accidents 
 
 
 

6 
2  
1 

No. of Injuries 
 
 
 

6 
2 
1 fatal 

8 

 
Madam Speaker, regarding part (a) (i) of the question, I am informed by the Police 
that on Monday 23 March at 16.40 hours, Mr V. S., driver of the bus involved in the accident 
in which student K. P. sustained serious injuries, gave a statement at the Rose Belle Police 
Station.  That is the statement of the driver.  He reported that, on the same day, at 15.00 hours 
he  was  performing  a  trip  and  conveying  students  of  Hindu  Girls  and  Dunputh  Lallah 
Colleges from Curepipe to their place of residence in the south. On reaching the vicinity of 
Patisserie Sylvestre at Union Park, he was informed by some of students in the bus that one 
student has jumped from the bus through the rear emergency door some 500 metres behind 
and which he did not notice. That was his report.  

I  am further informed that the victim was taken by volunteers to Jawaharlal Nehru 
Hospital for treatment. As regards the driver of the bus, an alcohol test was carried out and 
was found to be negative.  On the same day, his statement of defence was recorded in the 
presence  of  his  lawyer  and  was  released  on  parole.  Subsequently,  on  25  March  2015,  a 
provisional plaint of “Involuntary wounds and blows by imprudence” was lodged against the 
driver before the District Magistrate of Grand Port Court and he was released on bail upon 
furnishing a surety of Rs5000 and a recognizance of Rs50,000. 

On  31  March  2015,  the  driver  was  arrested  anew  -  that  was  after  the  death  of  the 
student  -  and  brought  before  the  District  Magistrate  of  Grand  Port  Court  on  a  provisional 
plaint of “involuntary homicide” and he has been released on bail upon furnishing a surety of 
Rs20,000 and his first provisional was consequently struck out. The bus was examined by 
both  the  Police  and  the  Officers  of  the  National  Transport  Authority.    I  am  informed  that 
there were 73 passengers (60 sitting and 13 standing) on the bus and there was no conductor 
on duty at the material time.   

Madam  Speaker,  as  regards  part  (a)  (ii)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  an 
investigation is going on by the Police.  However, according to reports from the Police, it has 
been found that the security system was out of order.  The investigation is being carried out to 
know how the accident occurred. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that soon after the accident, a committee 
was  set  up  at  the  level of  my  Ministry  to  look  into  the  immediate  measures  that  could  be 
taken to address the safety issues related to school buses.  

According to current legislation, the authorised number of students on board school 

buses is as follows - 

(i) 

three students are allowed to occupy seats providing for a seating capacity of two 
passengers, that is 3 out of 2, and  

 

9 

(ii) 

four students are allowed to occupy seats providing for a seating capacity of three. 
In view thereof, buses were allowed to transport up to 80 students. However, in May 
2013,  the  National  Transport  Authority  decided  to  limit  the  number  of  students  in  school 
buses to a maximum of 75. The number was inserted on the Certificate of Fitness of each bus 
with a view to ensuring that the insurance policy covered all 75 students.  

With a view to reinforcing the security measures on board school buses, my Ministry 
has  now  decided  that  henceforth  all  buses  providing  school  services  will  convey  students 
strictly as per the authorised seating capacity of the buses and no more. To that effect, the 
provisions  of  the  Road  Traffic  Regulations  of  1954  will  be  accordingly  amended.  The 
committee  has  also  recommended  that  henceforth  the  presence  of  a  conductor  will  be 
mandatory in all buses.  

Furthermore,  the  legislation  now  in  force  requires  that  the  emergency  doors  of  all 
motor buses will be equipped with an audible alarm system connected to the driver’s cabin in 
order to warn the driver in case the door is not properly closed. New buses licensed as from 
August 2010 have been fitted with the alarm system. The committee has recommended that 
this alarm system will be fitted to all buses used in the public transport.  

To ensure compliance with the provisions of the law relating to transport of students, 
the NTA and the Police will step up enforcement and take such action as may be necessary in 
the event any bus owner or bus crew is found to contravene any of these provisions.  

Madam Speaker, besides legal enforcement measures, working sessions will be held 
with the Ministry of  Education  and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific 
Research  –  I  have  talked  to  my  colleague  -  and  School  Managers  to  discuss  all  possible 
measures to ensure that students travel to and from school in the most convenient and safe 
manner. Possibility to have school officials appointed to maintain order among students when 
boarding buses and to ensure that there is no overloading will be considered. In fact, we are 
thinking of one person dedicated by the PTA to see to it that all the students take the buses 
properly and in proper conditions before leaving the school premises because the children are 
under the responsibility of the schools and the institutions whilst they have not yet boarded 
the buses.  

I  have  also  decided,  Madam  Speaker,  that  a  dedicated  unit  of  the  NTA  will, 
henceforth, deal with this transport of students’ problem. Today, Madam Speaker, we do not 
know  how  many  buses  went  to  the  schools,  how  many  drivers  were  there,  how  many 
conductors were there, how many students were there in each bus and yet, we are paying at 
the end of the month. So, we have decided that, henceforth, each bus will have to send back 

 

10 

to the NTA, on a daily basis, the number, the name of the driver, the name of the conductor, 
the number of students carried out so that we will have a daily record of the number of buses 
and who is travelling from one place to the other.  

The second thing is that we are working with the institutions or the schools so that 
dedicated persons who will help the students board the buses will also have a record of which 
bus, which conductor, which driver and the number of students travelling in that bus. Then, 
we  can  have  checks  and  balances  as  to  the  number  of  students  travelling  in  each  bus  and 
under whose responsibility the students were. 

In a wider perspective, to review school bus services, my Ministry proposes to come 
up with proposals to have a completely dedicated fleet which will be limited to transport of 
students. These buses will be equipped with video cameras to monitor the whole operation 
while students are being transported because there is a huge problem of discipline aboard the 
buses.  In fact, it is a problem involving the institutions, the authorities, the parents and the 
students themselves. And I must say, Madam Speaker, that I have gone through what is being 
done elsewhere and I have read about the Canadian system. Buses are designed in Canada for 
the transport of children because they are considered to be vulnerable and they have to be 
transported in the best and the safest manners and there are a number of regulations which 
have been imposed.  The driver, in fact, has the authority of the teacher in the bus, by law. 
So, there should be a sense of responsibility at all levels. A safe and secure transportation will 
also be applied with combined efforts of educational institutions, bus operators, students and 
parents. 

Madam Speaker, the number of buses over the age of 16 - today, we have 10% of our 
fleet,  that  is,  about  200  buses  which  are  above  16  years  old  and  we  still  do  not  have  the 
breakdown of the number of buses over 16 which are used every day. But if we were to say 
that 10% of the buses are over 16, it would mean that every day, in the morning, 450 buses 
are used for students and almost 600 buses are used in the afternoon.  As you know, some 
students are brought in by their parents and they leave by the school bus. I would presume 
that out of the 189 buses which are over 16 years old, about 10% is being used every day. So, 
that  would  mean  that  it  would  be  about  20  buses.  Many  of  them  are  NTC  buses,  in  fact. 
These buses, I have been told, are being dedicated for schoolchildren, that is, they are being 
used for the transport of children in the morning and in the afternoon and the drivers also 
have just that responsibility. But as we are going to renew the fleet of the CNT soon, we will 
scrap this at the level of the CNT,  but we are going to see to it that no bus over 16 years are 
being used for the schoolchildren. 

11 

 
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, if I can start with the last part of my question, but 
before  that,  you  will  allow  me  to  renew  the  expression  of  our  sympathy  to  the  family 
concerned. So, we do not have a figure of how many buses above 16 years old are used to 
convey students to and from schools. We do not have that figure? 

Mr Bodha: That’s what I am saying. We do not have the number of buses over 16, 
we do not have the number of actual buses on a daily basis and we do not have the number of 
actual students. Now, we are putting a system which will give us a record on a daily basis at 
the NTA, of the number of buses, what are the buses, who are the conductors and who are the 
drivers.    This  will  allow  us  to  know  what  are  the  buses  that  are  involved  in  the  morning 
which are over 16 years. Madam Speaker, we have 15 days - because tomorrow is the Easter 
holidays – to come up with a new system with emergency measures which will come into 
force at the next semester. 

Mr Bérenger: I am sure the hon. Minister will remember - he was in the Opposition 
then with us - that at one time, the Ministry and the CNT reserved the buses that were no 
longer allowed to travel on normal route with normal passengers for students’ transport. All 
the old buses that were no longer allowed to take passengers, we managed to stop that. But 
now, is the Minister telling us that it is only now that he knows that these buses, more than 16 
years old, are being given in priority to convey students? 

Mr  Bodha:  No,  no.  There  are  a  few  buses  which  are  dedicated  for  the  school 
transport  and  they  are  over  16  years.    But  most  of  the  other  students,  in  fact,  take  the 
dedicated buses or normal buses. 

Mr  Bérenger:  I  put  my  question  again.    How  many  buses  conveying  students  are 

over 16 years old? 

Mr Bodha: We do not have the exact figure and what we can say is about 10%.  We 
have about 10% of 200; that would be about 20 buses. Most of them are CNT buses. But 
what I have asked them is to see to it that the buses are in good condition. Up and until, in a 
few months, we are going to have new buses at the CNT and this system will be scrapped 
totally. 

Mr Bérenger: If we can move on, Madam Speaker, to the accident itself. In the report 
which  this  driver  gave  -  from  what  I  understand,  on  the  same  day,  immediately  after  the 
accident - is he arguing that he did not hear? Because my information is from the moment 
that young girl fell off the bus, all the students were shouting and making noises. He did not 
stop until I don’t know how many bus stops later on. Is he arguing that he did not know that 
that child fell off the bus? 

12 

 
Mr  Bodha:  The  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  is  right!  This  is  what  the  driver 
reported.  But  I  have  talked  to  a  number  of  people  and  there  is  a  report  also  about  the 
volunteer who took the poor student to the hospital and he said that he was driving behind 
and the door opened and the student fell. The driver himself is saying that he was informed 
500  meters  ahead.  So,  in  fact,  that  is  his  version.  But  the  Police  have  recorded  the  other 
version and I personally think what must have happened is that, at one point in time, the bus 
must have stopped, some of the students must have alighted and the door was not securely 
closed and the driver must have just sped without seeing what was happening behind. The 
door opened and the girl fell down. Because from my information, she fell at the back and the 
injuries sustained were the injuries at the back of the head. 

Mr  Bérenger:  Then,  we  have  at  least  the  Police  have  taken  statements  from  the 
witness that helped that poor girl. Have statements been taken from the students who have 
been witnesses to that? 

Mr  Bodha:  I  have  no  such  information,  but  the  Police  are  carrying  out  their 
investigation. We have the report of what the volunteer who took the student to hospital said. 
As regards the students, the investigation is still on and I think that the Police will question 
some of the students and see what was their version of what happened. 

Mr Bérenger: From what I understand, Madam, he drove to the Police Station. Can I 
know what happened to the students who were on board? He drove to the Police Station, gave 
a statement, from what I understand, that he only realised that there was trouble and yet he 
put in his statement - from what the Minister has said - that she jumped. 

Mr Bodha: Yes! 
Mr Bérenger: But can I know the Police taking a statement from somebody like that, 
what was the action that the Police took immediately? Did they arrest the driver? Did they go 
on the spot immediately? What happened?  

Mr Bodha: The information I have is that the Police recorded the statement and he 
was brought to Court the day after and there was a first provisional charge on the day after. It 
was  when  the  student  passed  away  that  he  was  rearrested  with  a  provisional  charge  of 
involuntary homicide and that was on 31 March. 

Mr  Bérenger:  That  is  not  my  point.  My  point  is:  a  very  serious  accident  like  that 
occurred; we are told that the driver drove to the Police Station. What happened to all those 
students who were on the bus? Secondly, when he made that kind of statement, what did the 
Police do? Did they arrest him? Did they go on the spot immediately? What did they do? 

13 

 
Mr Bodha: From the information I have, the Police went on the spot and examined 
the vehicle. That is where they found out that the security system was not in order. As regards 
the students from the bus station, I have no information about what happened. I believe that 
buses which must have come after must have found a solution to this so that they could reach 
their home. 

Mr  Bérenger:  Is  the  Minister  telling  us,  Madam,  that  this  examination  by  these 
policemen immediately after it was reported is the only examination to which the bus was 
subjected? 

Mr Bodha: There was an examination which was subjected by the NTA, but that was 
two days later and I do not agree at all with what was recorded because that was two days 
after.  So,  I  think  that  I  would  go  by  the  report  of  the  Police  which  said  that  the  security 
system was out of order.  

As regards the Police, I have been told that his defence was recorded in presence of 
his lawyer. So, that was the day after. The report of the NTA says that the emergency door 
was  found  to  be  locked  and  those  devices  were  working,  that  was  two  days  later.  In  my 
humble opinion, I would rather go with the report of the Police. 

Mr Bérenger: Is the Minister telling us that it is only with the death of that student 
that  he  realises  now,  if  I  understood  him  rightly,  that  it  is  not  mandatory  for  huge  school 
buses  with  70  students  on-board  to  have  an  attendant  whereas  regulations  already  provide 
that small school vans have to have an attendant?  Well, if that has gone on for so long, who 
is going to be taken to task? 

Mr Bodha: What has happened so far, there was a law, but it was not respected. That 
is,  what  I  am  saying  is  that  the  NTA  now  will  have  a  dedicated  unit  just  to  cater  for  the 
transport of students with a record on a daily basis as to the number of vehicles, the name of 
the  driver,  the  conductor  and  the  number  of  students  who  are  being  transported  from  one 
place  to  the  other.  That  will  be  counterchecked  by  a  dedicated  person  at  the  level  of  the 
institution. That is how, I think, we could be able to control it. In the meantime, I think, we 
are going to reduce the number of students travelling by the bus and we are also coming with 
a total overhaul of the system which is costing us Rs800 m. with 80 students travelling every 
day in all buses, with all drivers and that is totally a system which cannot continue. 

Mr Bérenger: Again, that is not my point! My point is, when replying I think I heard 
the Minister - if I heard wrongly, correct me - say that it is now that it is going to be made 
mandatory that a conductor has to be on the bus. This is what I heard. Is that so? Whereas, as 

 

14 

I  said,  in  vans  for  years  now,  after  pressure  from  us,  it  is  in  the  regulations  that  it  is 
mandatory to have an attendant. 

Mr Bodha: The law is there, the law has not been respected. 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Mahomed! 
Mr Mahomed: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to suggest two issues since 
the Minister said that there is going to be a total review of the whole system which I think is 
high time. First of all, there is a problem about attitude on behalf of the bus conductors. They 
believe  that  the  students  are  benefiting  from  a  free  transportation,  free  trip,  and  that  they 
adopt a carefree attitude on one hand when, in fact, it is the taxpayers’ money. The second 
point is that there is a mismatch between the morning bus and the afternoon bus because of 
students going to private tuition… 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mahomed, can you come with your question?  We have got a 

time constraint! 

Mr Mahomed: Can the hon. Minister assure the House that these two issues will be 

taken on board in the review? 

Mr Bodha: All the issues will be taken on board. I think that we should put our heads 
together and I am very open to the suggestions from both sides of the House and from the 
other stakeholders. Because if we do not have the collaboration of all the stakeholders, the 
parents, the institutions, the NTA, the bus owners, bus drivers and conductors, we will not be 
able  to  have  a  sound  and  safe  accountable  system.  I  am  very  open  to  all  the  suggestions 
because I think we all agree that this system has to change. We cannot have 150,000 people 
travelling every day and spending Rs800 m. not having a system where we feel at home as 
parents that our children are being transported in the right manner. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea, you have got a question? 
Mr Ameer Meea: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In his reply, the hon. Minister stated 
that a sum of Rs800 m. is being disbursed to bus companies for payment of free transport. 
But is the hon. Minister aware that the Director of Audit has severely criticised the payment 
mechanism to bus owners for free transport? Therefore, can I ask the hon. Minister if he is 
considering to review the payment modality to private and public bus companies so that it is 
more effective and transparent? 

Mr Bodha: We have been asking questions on the system.  I asked, as Leader of the 

Opposition, the question in those days; it cost only Rs600 m. 

 I think the hon. Member is totally right. We have to see to it that every cent which is 
being spent is spent properly in the safety of our children, because when we go on what is 

 

15 

being  done  elsewhere  -  it  is  clear  that  what  has  happened  was  a  tragedy,  and  what  is 
happening every day should not happen and should not continue to happen. 

Mr Bhagwan: Can I know from the hon. Minister whether he has gone into the files?  
This is not the first case of such type of accident occurring where schoolchildren are being 
severely injured following the misconduct, I can say, of the bus conductors/drivers.  So, can 
the hon. Minister have a review of all the pending cases and the case which has occurred? I 
know one case in my Constituency of a girl in Canot Village who suffered an accident - a girl 
of Aleemiah College - and the parents are having a lot of difficulties.  Even the Police report 
has not yet been finalised up to now, and there is connivance with the bus company, at least, 
to know the truth.  Can I ask the hon. Minister to have a dedicated desk at his Ministry to go 
into past accidents and review case-by-case, and to see where actions have not been taken and 
also help the poor families whose children have suffered severe injuries? 

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, I can assure the hon. Member that this will be done. 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, can I know whether you have many 
more questions?  Because I have got a long list of people who want to ask questions on this 
issue.  Do you have many more questions? We have got five minutes. 

Mr Berenger: No, I have one last. 
Madam Speaker: One last!  So, I can ask hon. Uteem to put his question then. 
Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.    The  hon.  Minister  mentioned  that  the 
emergency  door  was  working  properly  according  to  one  report,  and  not  working  properly 
according to the Police.  But doesn’t the hon. Minister agree that emergency doors should be 
used only in emergencies and not every day by passengers, and that proper legislation should 
be introduced to see to it that any misuse of an emergency door should be punishable? 

Mr Bodha: The hon. Member is right, Madam Speaker.  That is why we are coming 
with the semi-low floor buses. We are going to impose them on the companies and on the 
private  owners  as  well.    Because  there,  the  exit  from  the  bus  is  in  the  middle  and  the 
emergency door can be used exceptionally in cases of emergency. 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Is  the  hon.  Minister  aware  that,  despite  several  requests  from  many 
school rectors to the bus companies because they have got above 100 students, they get only 
one bus?  And in this bus, you have got more than 120 students every afternoon.  So, will the 
hon. Minister consider to ask to these bus companies to review the number of buses provided 
to these secondary schools? 

Mr  Bodha:  It  is  clear,  Madam  Speaker,  that  when  we  will  reduce  the  authorised 
number of students, we’ll need some more buses.  But I think that the whole system has to be 

 

16 

accountable.  As I said, today we don’t know in the morning what buses were used, who were 
the drivers, who were the contractors, who were the students and how many travelled.  And 
yet we are going to make the payment.  If it is Rs800 m. per year, it means that it is about Rs2 
m. a day. 

Mr Ganoo: Can the hon. Minister confirm whether the driver, when his attention was 
drawn to the fact that the girl had, unfortunately, fallen off the door whilst driving the bus, 
said that he would not stop because this is not his problem - pas mo problème ça?  Can the 
hon. Minister also explain to the House why was this bus not secured on the same day, which 
allowed the repairs to be effected when it was inspected two days afterwards?  Why was this 
driver released?  Because in such a state, the state of health of the victim is monitored, and 
unless she is out of danger the suspect is always detained by the Police until the victim is 
completely out of danger, which was not the case in this precise matter. 

Mr Bodha: It was not the case, Madam Speaker. This is right. The driver did not stop; 
he continued. His version is saying that the students told him that somebody had fallen 500 
metres  behind.  This  is  exactly  what  happened.  As  regards  the  security  system,  the  Police 
made an examination of the security system of the vehicle and found out that it was out of 
order. The NTA did an examination two days later and it was in order. That’s why I said that 
we have two reports.  But I would believe that the report of the Police is what actually was 
the state of affairs. 

Ms  Sewocksingh:  Is  the  hon.  Minister  aware  that,  apart  from  students,  these  school 
buses sometimes pick up members of the public? And also, sometimes not only girls or boys; 
there is a mixture.  Both girls and boys are in the same bus, and sometimes there are more 
than 80 to 90 students in one bus with only a bus driver. Can the hon. Minister inform us if he 
is aware that there are not only girls or boys, but also members of the public in the buses? 

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, we have dedicated buses going to each institution.  But 
then,  you have a number of students who travel with the normal buses.  So, I don’t know 
whether the hon. Member is relating to dedicated buses or to the normal bus system where 
you have the students and you have the other passengers.  But, anyway, I am going to look 
into the matter. 

Mr Bérenger:  I am sure the hon. Minister will agree with me that it is also very sad 
that it took this death for the whole thing to be reviewed and an emergency committee to be 
set up and so on.  I congratulate him for that.  The family is in despair.  They feel that there 
has been complicity between the Police, the driver and maybe other people in the CNT.  They 
do  not  know  what  is  happening.    So,  can  I  request  from  the  hon.  Minister  that  both  the 

 

17 

Ministry and the Police – not the people involved in the incident – should keep that family 
informed as the inquiry progresses? 

Mr Bodha: Well, as it happens, it’s sad.  My secretary is, in fact, the aunty of the girl 
who passed away.  So, I have been talking to the parents regularly.  I talked to the mother 
and, of course, the feeling of the parents is that something like this should not happen again.  
That is why I said that this was a very important question of national interest, and I think that 
we have to find a solution.  We’ll find some urgent solutions for the next 15 days and then 
come up with a whole overhauling of the system.   

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 
Madam Speaker: Time is over! 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10 (2) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move that all the business on today’s Order 

Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 
Question put and agreed to. 

 

(12.17 p.m.)  

STATEMENT BY MINISTER 

CEB - GENERATORS 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo): Madam Speaker, I would like, with your permission, to make a statement to 
clarify a specific issue raised yesterday in relation to a supplementary question to the PNQ. 

The  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  referred  to  a  previous  statement  in  the  House 
mentioning that there is an allowance of 60 MW for scheduled maintenance, which has now 
been reduced to 30 MW. 

I have checked the records, and I have noted that it was my predecessor who mentioned 

this figure of 60 MW in reply to a PNQ on 22 November 2013. 

In  my  reply  yesterday,  I  stated  that  the  CEB  is  now  providing  for  30  MW  of 
scheduled maintenance for the year 2015-2016 during the crop season, when CEB units are 
usually on maintenance. 

I am informed that the CEB has revised its maintenance allowance to 30 MW on the 

basis of the recommendations of the World Bank draft report submitted in January 2015. 

18 

 
The  World  Bank  has  carried  out  a  historical  analysis  of  CEB’s  past  maintenance 
schedules  during  the  crop  season  when  all  the  power-generating  plants  of  the  Independent 
Power Producers are fully operational.  

The  unit  sizes  of  CEB  generating  sets  are  10,  15,  20  and  30  MW.  This  allows 

flexibility to optimise on maintenance during the period 2015-2016. 

On the basis of its analysis, the World Bank has concluded that during the crop season 

the CEB can safely allow for 30 MW by optimising its maintainance schedule. 

 Thank you,  Madam Speaker. 

 
(12.20 p.m.) 

PUBLIC BILLS 

Second Reading 

THE APPROPRIATION (2015) BILL 

(NO. III OF 2015) 

& 

THE APPROPRIATION (2015-2016) BILL 

(NO. IV OF 2015) 

Order  read  for  resuming  adjourned  debate  on  the  Second  Reading  of  the 
Appropriation (2015) Bill (No. III of 2015) and the Appropriation (2015-2016) Bill (No. IV of 
2015). 

Question again proposed. 

Mrs  J.  Monty  (Third  Member  for  Port  Louis  North  and  Montagne  Longue): 
Madame la présidente, permettez-moi tout d’abord de presenter comme il se doit, selon la 
tradition,  mes  vives  félicitations  à  l’honorable  ministre  des  Finances  et  du  Développement 
Économique  pour  le  budget  présenté  cette  fois  de  façon  plus  accessible.  Madame  la 
présidente, mes félicitations et mon appréciation dépassent largement cet aspect de tradition 
et vient dire bravo au ministre des Finances qui, par son brillant exposé, a été une fois de plus 
égale à lui-même. Bravo encore, pour le contenu de son discours qui éclaire nettement son 
souci de redonner souffle à une économie et une croissance essoufflée à évacuer toute forme 
de stagnation, et à redonner espoir et dignité à une population, hélas, trop longtemps bernée et 
trahie dans sa confiance.  

19 

 
Ce  budget,  qualifié  de  novateur,  entraîne  dans  son  sillage  non  seulement  des 
mesures  phares,  mais  traduit  de  manière  implicite  un  souci  marqué  de  remettre  ce  peuple 
debout, de le prendre en charge, et d’enlever la crasse dans tous les secteurs de ce pays qui a, 
hélas, sournoisement glissé dans les pans de la corruption et sombré si profondément dans les 
plis du mensonge et de la honte à son sommet le plus haut.  

Madame la présidente, ce budget vient, comme il a été si bien qualifié, à la croisée des 
chemins, où les avenues du progrès et du redressement sont clairement dessinés. Madame la 
présidente,  nos  secteurs  pilliers  de  notre  économie  sont  à  la  croisée  des  chemins,  comme 
l’illustre et le dit si bien le fascicule présenté par l’honorable ministre lors de la présentation 
du budget : ‘Mauritius at the Crossroad’.  

En  effet,  Madame  la  présidente,  nos  secteurs  phares  ont  atteint  un  stade 
d’essoufflement  et,  pour  le  relancer,  ce  budget  est  axé  sur  quatre  objectifs  majeurs, 
notamment, orienter l’économie vers l’investissement et l’emploi, assurer un développement 
durable  pour  tous,  atteindre  une  plus  grande  équité  en  ayant  la  justice  pour  tous,  et  aussi 
promouvoir la transparence et la bonne gouvernance dans la gestion des affaires publiques. 
Ces  objectifs  visés,  Madame  la  présidente,    sont  en  ligne  avec  nos  engagements  et  nos 
promesses  faites  durant  la  campagne  électorale,  et  pour  laquelle  nous  avons  été  élus 
massivement sans conteste.  

L’alliance Lepep poursuit sur sa lancée en inscrivant le social au cœur de ses actions 
politiques. Permettez, Madame la présidente, que je parcours les mesures phares.  Au niveau 
de l’infrastructure, décongestionner les centres névralgiques afin de permettre la fluidité au 
niveau de la circulation est une mission que le gouvernement tient à cœur. Dans cette optique, 
un fly over sera érigé à la rue De Caen pour réduire le trafic entrant et sortant de Port Louis. 
Un  futur  projet  grandement  novateur  pour  décongestionner  la  capitale,  sera  l’utilisation  de 
ferry-boat entre Pointe aux Sables et  Port Louis et Baie du Tombeau.  

Madame la présidente, un autre volet du projet de décongestion sera le pont reliant 
Coromandel et l’autoroute, et ce n’est pas pour rien que le grand argentier parle de Maurice 
comme étant un vaste chantier à en devenir. Quel soulagement, Madame la présidente, pour 
tous les usagers de la route, habitués de prendre leur mal en patience et pour qui la route est 
une  source  de  stress,  avant  même  d’atteindre  leur  lieu  de  travail  et  de  commencer  leur 
journée.  Ce  sont  là  des  mesures  que  la  population  va  attendre  avec  impatience.  Moins  de 
bouchons, réalité à en devenir.  

Autres secteurs à faire ressortir, Madame la présidente, demeure celui de l’eau et de 
l’énergie. Outre les 6 m³ d’eau gratuitement à chaque famille, le peuple est encouragé à faire 

 

20 

l’utilisation des énergies renouvelables, laquelle démarche sera récompensée par la déduction 
au niveau des impôts. 

Madame  la  présidente,  le  gouvernement  est  venu  prouver,  contre  toute  spéculation, 
qu’il  n’est  pas  de  celui  qui  prend  de  la  main  gauche  ce  qu’il  donne  de  la  main  droite.  La 
mauvaise foi de certains avait commencé à gagner les esprits.  Il y avait quand même une 
crainte que la taxe soit augmentée après l’offre généreuse et immédiate aux aînés juste après 
les résultats des élections. Mais cela n’a pas été le cas.  

Autres secteurs, Madame la présidente, sur lesquels j’aimerais parler c’est l’éducation 
et j’avais fait mention dans mon maiden speech de mon engagement professionnel dans ce 
domaine.  Mais  avant  de  parler  du  secondaire,  j’aimerais  souligner  la  décentralisation  des 
centres de formation, à l’instar d’une école polytechnique qui proposera des cours en Middle 
Management, en Technologies, de l’Information et de la Communication. Comment passer 
sous silence, Madame la présidente, celle de Montagne Blanche qui offrira la formation liée à 
l’hôtellerie et au tourisme, ou alors celle de Pamplemousses offrant la formation médicale et 
qui serait loin des universités champignons conçus pour servir des intérêts personnels, tels 
que le D. Y. Patil et autre EIILM University. 

Madame la présidente, les diplômés chômeurs dont la formation ne correspond pas 
aux  demandes  du  marché  de  l’emploi,  suivront  un  crash  course  fait  sur  mesure,  et  l’État 
contribua jusqu’à R 80,000 par année par étudiant.  Telles sont, Madame la présidente, mes 
impressions dégageant de ce budget et dont la particularité couvre 18 mois avec les dépenses 
prévues à R 154,3 milliards, et les revenus de R 131,2 milliards menant à un déficit égal à 3,6 
% du PIB, comparé à 3,2 % en 2014. Pour que les rêves et les projets se réalisent, Madame la 
présidente, en général, la population est invitée à travailler ensemble. Il lui est donc offert une 
incitation de taille, pas de hausse fiscale ni de nouvelles taxes et moins d’occasion à gratter 
les  cartes ou se laisser tenter par les jeux du hasard.  
I would like, Madam Speaker, to comment on the major educational project identified in the 
Budget and, of course, I am referring to the nine-year schooling project. The nine-year 
schooling  project  is  a  unique  opportunity  to  address  the  weaknesses  of  teaching  and 
learning in our present educational system and, for this Government, its people remain au 
centre de ses préoccupations. So is its youth. Such is our will to target quality education 
in Mauritius and outer islands. First of all, there have been criticisms about the lack of 
details provided in the Budget on this reform, but, Madam Speaker, it is not the role of the 
hon.  Minister  of  Finance  to  give  technical  details  about  this  project.  This  is  the 
responsibility  of  the  hon.  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

 

21 

Education  and  Scientific  Research,  and  I  am  but  more  than  optimistic  that  the  hon. 
Minister will come to this House and give adequate information once the orientations and 
principles of this reform are set before it is implemented.  

At this stage, I would like to point out that the debate on this major structural reform, 
with a significant pedagogical implication started at the end of the 80s, but this Government, 
Madam Speaker, has the will and capacity to implement it now. This reform should allow us 
to  obtain  three  different  types  of  results.  We  should  be  able  to  reduce  the  considerable 
pressure that the actual system exerts on all actors of our education and, in particular, on our 
children. It should provide us with the opportunity to shift our focus from road learning to 
creativity - meaningful learning and critical thinking. In this sense, we will align ourselves on 
the philosophical principals underpinning education systems of developed countries. 

 More  importantly,  Madam  Speaker,  it  should  help  us  to  rethink  the  relationship 
between primary and secondary education and also the pre-primary. I am aware that this is a 
major project  which will involve careful planning, identification of  adequate technical and 
human resources necessary for its implementation, but I am confident, Madam Speaker that 
the  hon.  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 
Research will leave no stone unturned in order to achieve the aims set.  

I  would,  however,  recommend  a  careful  monitoring  of  the  project  during  the  first 
years of its implementation phase. This should allow us to identify the potential problems and 
weaknesses which could be addressed at the early phase of the nine-year schooling project. I 
would also humbly propose that the monitoring be carried out by educationists who are not 
necessarily  part  of  the  Ministry.  I  would  also  like  to  comment,  Madam  Speaker,  on  the 
Marshall Plan against poverty.  

In the same line of thought, I wish to congratulate the hon. Minister for translating his 
vision and the vision of this Government to revisit the structure and application of the CSR 
system so as to make it more effective. I would like to comment on the Marshall Plan against 
poverty, but I would like, first of all, to congratulate both the hon. Prime Minister and the 
hon.  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 
Research  for  this  bold  initiative.  I  agree  with  the  Minister  of  Finance    and  Economic 
Development that the Government needed to be bold in order to state plainly that the plight of 
vulnerable  families  has  been  getting  worse  in  recent  years  and  to  adopt  a  more  direct 
approach to extend support to the very poor families living in identified poches de pauvreté. 

J’ai  été  heureuse  d’apprendre,  Madame  la  présidente,  les  différentes  actions 
identifiées pour combattre la pauvreté, ensuring that all children attend school and develop 

 

22 

their  full  talents  creating  sports  and  leisure  facilities.  I  would  also  like  to  stress  the 
importance of revisiting existing services offered to the public with the fight against poverty, 
for example, in youth centres offering leisure facilities, we will have to train the staff to step 
into their new roles.  

However, I firmly believe in the paramount implication of the role of both formal and 
informal education and what they have to play to strengthen pre-primary educational facilities 
in those poches de pauvreté. This will be a great step, Madam Speaker.  We should measure 
the  true  value  and  importance  of  the  role  that  pre-primary  education  can  play  in  reducing 
educational failures.  

Another  aspect  not  to  be  neglected  remains  technical  education.  As  for  non-formal 
education,  sensitisation  campaigns,  fight  against  all  identified  evils  of  our  society  like 
alcoholism and drugs, will need rethinking. However, the best tool any Government has to 
combat poverty is education and in the same line of thought, I would like to congratulate the 
hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  for  translating  this  vision  of  the 
Government in proposing to revisit the structure and application of the CSR companies which 
are now invited to invest wholly in a chosen poor region and for this, again, I congratulate the 
hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development. 

 C’est une brillante idée, Madame la présidente, et une décision fort louable que de 
vouloir  changer  la  face  d’une  nation  dans  ce  qui  constitue  la  triste  réalité  de  nos  propres 
concitoyens. On n’a qu’à imaginer les cités phares qui naîtront des gouffres de pauvreté où la 
misère  et  la  pauvreté  se  côtoient  quotidiennement  et  amèrement  et  à  faire  pâlir  les  plus 
audacieux  des  gouvernements.  Ce  n’est  nullement,  Madame  la  présidente,  une  volonté  de 
jeter ses responsabilités dans un secteur privé, mais au contraire, d’inviter ce secteur privé à 
ne  pas  se  disperser,  mais  à  vraiment  contribuer  à  apporter  un  réel  changement  soutenu  et 
visible  en  remettant  debout  nos  propres  citoyens.  De  plus,  ce  n’est  pas  comme  l’a  dit  un 
membre de l’opposition, une liste exhaustive des poches de pauvreté, mais comme on l’a cru 
mais un échantillon de poches, hélas trop nombreuses à énumérer.  

Ce gouvernement, Madame la présidente, fait appel à ces best brains, car la perte des 
talents appauvrit un pays. Cependant, la pratique non-méritocratique à des postes clés est un 
étendard de vérité qui a repoussé bien des concitoyens préférant évoluer sous d’autres cieux. 
Certes, les propositions salariales doivent être alléchantes pour pouvoir attirer nos cerveaux. 
Mais un autre aspect serait les liens familiaux irremplaçables qui pourraient les tenter surtout 
si la taxe ne sera pas payable sur une période de dix ans. 

 

23 

The Police Academy, Madam Speaker, is a laudable initiative qui vise à faire de nos 

soldats de l’ordre et des femmes formées, capables de servir ce pays de façon plus civilisée.  

Le  secteur  de  l’agro-alimentaire,  Madame  la  présidente,  est  un  autre  aspect  ayant 
retenu mon attention. Madame la présidente, l’ambitieux projet de se lancer dans la culture 
des produits bio, certes, est un projet des plus attrayants représentants un moyen d’offrir un 
produit par lequel des fertilisants et des pesticides chimiques sont prescrits et à sortir de la 
culture  traditionnelle.  Mais  cette  nouvelle  culture  requiert  une  expertise  extrêmement  bien 
rodée,  une  mesure  qui  certes  créera  deux  catégories  de  consommateurs :  ceux  ayant  un 
meilleur pouvoir d’achat et ceux ne pouvant s’en procurer. Mais il n’en demeure pas moins 
que le souci de préserver la santé pousserait des consommateurs à vouloir s’en procurer quel 
qu’en  soit  le  prix.  Mais  soyons  réalistes  et  armons-nous  de  patience,  car  le  chemin  sera 
surement long. Donc, osons rêver et attendons! 

Madame la présidente, puisqu’on parle des produits alimentaires, permettez que, par 
ricochet, je me tourne vers le projet de bannir les sacs en plastique que je trouve courageux. 
N’empêche que je ne puis m’empêcher de mentionner que ce qu’on appelle communément 
sacs en plastique sont devenus comme notre pavillon national. 

Mauritian people are easily recognised even at marketplaces abroad with their sacs 
en plastique and it will take time to get rid of these. Alternatives may be found as nos sacs en 
papier  actuellement  sur  le  marché  se  défoncent  à  vue  d’œil  et  on  se  demande  comment 
disposer de la saleté après que nous, Mauriciens, ayant été habitués maintenant - disciplinés 
que nous sommes - à disposer des restes dans nos fameux grands sacs en plastique noir. 

Before concluding, Madam Speaker, I wish to precise that this Budget highlights the 
leadership  of  all  the  Leaders  of  this  Government  and  I  wish  to  quote  John  W.  Work’s 
definition which qualifies effective leaders as those individuals who in their inimitable ways, 
I quote –  

“Inspire  confidence,  undermine  despair,  fight  fear,  initiate  positive  and  productive 
actions, define the goals and paint brighter tomorrows.”  
My plea, Madam Speaker, if we have listened to the words, let us not lose the music 
that underlies the measures taken to allow the country to breathe, its people to sigh and to 
better live under the sun of prosperity and hope.  

My appeal to all hon. Members of this House will be to remain in togetherness so as 
to  unfold  a  new  page  of  our  history,  heal  the  nation’s  wounds  and  make  our  people  fully 
adhere  to  our  programme  de  redressement.    Let  us  bring  this  consumer  and  ‘zougadère’ 
tendency in our people to turn into one nation responsable dans son comportement citoyen, 

 

24 

familial et dans sa contribution économique et aussi, dans son comportement social, dans sa 
marche vers une société plus juste où le soleil de cette île ne sera pas seulement un atout 
touristique à vendre, mais où chaque Mauricien se sentira partie prenante d’une île Maurice 
debout ayant retrouvé ses marques et sa dignité. 

Let us look around, Madam Speaker!  This Government is special with the best team 
ever. I should also say, this House is special and if honesty and dedication remain our keys on 
both  sides  of  the  House,  our  country  will  be  blessed  in  the  realisation  of  the  financial 
programme set by our Grand Argentier to whom I wish many other brilliant budgets. May 
God bless the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister, the two other Vice-Prime 
Ministers, the Leader of the MSM and my wishes extend to the hon. Leader of the Opposition 
and to each and every Member of this august Assembly. May God bless us all in our mission! 
Long live this Government!  

On these words, Madam Speaker,  I wish to leave the floor  and thank  you for  your 

attention. 
 
(12.39 p.m.)  

The Minister of Youth and Sports (Mr Y. Sawmynaden): Madame la présidente, je 
voudrais  tout  d'abord  féliciter  l’honorable  ministre  des  Finances  et  du  Développement 
Économique pour la présentation d'un budget intitulé, à juste titre, «At the Crossroad ». 

Nous nous trouvons effectivement à un carrefour après le bilan décevant, pour ne pas 
dire catastrophique du précédent régime; il faut aujourd’hui avancer vers une nouvelle ère de 
développement.  

L`honorable Vishnu Lutchmeenaraidoo sait comment démarrer une économie, il l’a 
fait en 1983 toujours dans le sillage d’une politique de petits copains et de gaspillage menée 
par les travaillistes.  

Aujourd’hui,  en  2015,  il  convient  de  rappeler  que  ce  budget  a  été  préparé  dans  un 
contexte  de  conditions  économiques  mondiales  difficiles  et  avec  des  incertitudes  locales, 
notamment - 

•  
•  
•  
•  

un investissement étranger direct faible ; 
un taux de chômage galopant ; 
une dette publique à son plus haut niveau, et 
un déficit budgétaire représentant plus de 50% du PIB 

25 

 
 De par ce contexte, le gouvernement nouvellement élu de ‘l’Alliance Lepep’ n’avait 
d'autre choix que de prendre le taureau par les cornes pour redresser l'économie et mettre tout 
en  place  pour  réaliser  un  deuxième  miracle  économique,  comme  promis  par  le  père  du 
premier miracle économique, Sir Anerood Jugnauth.  

Nous avons là un budget bien équilibré, bien conçu où il y a un parfait mélange de 
mesures sociales et économiques. Un mélange déjà salué par la population car plus de 80% - 
83%  plus  précisément  -  de  la  population  parlent  d’un  feel-good  factor!  Les  mesures 
annoncées  vont  certainement  fournir  la  base  pour  atteindre  le  taux  de  croissance  ciblée  de 
5,3% pour 2015-2016. 

Hélas,  les  oiseaux  de  mauvais  augure  ont  déjà  commencé  à  chanter.  Exemple:  la 
mauvaise foi des membres de l`opposition qui qualifient ce budget de décousu. Il est facile de 
critiquer le grand argentier mais je tiens à rappeler à l’honorable Leader de l’opposition les 
éloges  faites  à  Vishnu  Lutchmeenaraidoo  lors  de  son  adhésion  au  MMM.  Mais  aussi  ces 
paroles à l’encontre du MSM après la cassure du Remake, selon ses dires: « sa ti parti 3.5%, 
si au moins zot ti pe tombe dans caro cannes, zot ti pou ena cannes pou manzé mais zot pe 
alle dans désert». 

Et,  aujourd’hui,  tel  Dubaï  qui  a  émergé  d’un  désert,  l`Alliance  Lepep  est  au 
gouvernement grâce au mandat obtenu auprès du peuple et telle une bénédiction du ciel, le 
désert s`est transformé en de vertes pâtures grâce à la pluviométrie régulière. 

(Interruptions) 

D’ailleurs, on en sait plus désormais sur les vraies raisons de la cassure du Remake et 
qui en est le principal responsable. Cela n’a jamais été  à  cause de la place de l’honorable 
Reza Uteem sur un éventuel front bench car l’honorable Pravind Jugnauth n’a jamais été cet 
assoiffé  du  pouvoir  et  se  sent  le  devoir  de  servir  comme  l`a  si  bien  inculqué  Sir  Anerood 
Jugnauth, je suis sûr que cela le portera toujours plus haut.  

Ce  n’est  pas  non  plus  à  cause  de  la  manière  dont  le  leader  du  MSM,  l’honorable 
Pravind Jugnauth, se défendait dans le procès Medpoint. D’ailleurs, sans vouloir commenter 
une affaire en Cour, nous voyons bien que cette affaire suit son cours without any delaying 
tactics et que bientôt toute la vérité triomphera. 

Non, Madame la présidente, la véritable raison de la cassure, nous le savons depuis ce 

matin, avec les confessions sur les ondes radio, de l’honorable Alan Ganoo. 

(Interruptions) 

26 

 
Aussi, un des porte-paroles du Parti travailliste a eu le culot de dire publiquement 
que  ce  gouvernement  a  sous-traité  les  problèmes  des  pauvres  à  des  entreprises  privées  à 
travers la réorganisation du CSR.  

Je voudrai citer Abraham Lincoln – 

« Better to remain silent and be thought a fool than to speak out and 
remove all doubts ». 

Madame la présidente, je félicite l’honorable ministre des finances pour son initiative 
de travailler avec tous les secteurs et tous les mauriciens de bonne volonté afin de pouvoir 
transformer et créer une Ile Maurice où il fait bon vivre.  

Pour  atteindre  cet  objectif,  nous  avons  besoin  de  la  contribution  de  tous,  un  vrai 

travail d`équipe, de vrais patriotes.  

Ce alors que nos adversaires proposaient, eux, un vrai massacre de l`avenir avec un 
requin  et  un  lion  au  commande  d`une  Rolls  Royce,  avec  une  sirène  comme  dame  de 
compagnie, un vrai cirque. 

Cette Opposition choisit d’oublier la série de mesures annoncées dans le budget pour 
l'indépendance de la famille et le bien-être des enfants, pour la formation et le placement des 
jeunes et les projets de logements. En l'absence de tout argument valable, elle a délibérément 
gardé le silence sur ces mesures de manière de créer une fausse impression dans le public.  
That’s what we call cheap politics! 

Madame la présidente, la population en a assez de cette politique bon marché. Je ne 
peux  m’empêcher  de  penser  aujourd’hui  aux  attaques  de  l`Alliance  PTR/MMM  contre 
l`Alliance Lepep lorsque nous avions proposé l`augmentation de la pension de vieillesse à R 
5,000. L`Alliance Lepep a non seulement donné au troisième âge mais a aussi augmenté la 
pension de ceux ayant plus de 89 ans et pour nos centenaires, sans oublier l`augmentation de 
la pension pour les veuves et les orphelins sans augmenter la taxe. 

Madame  la  présidente,  le  peuple  le  décrit  comme  un  magicien.  Il  n`est  pas  David 
Copperfield mais bien un grand économiste, humble et humain avec le cœur sur la main. Il l’a 
déjà fait 25 ans auparavant ce miracle; il le refera en duo avec Sir Anerood Jugnauth et tout le 
gouvernement.  L`honorable  Vishnu  Lutchmeenaraidoo  est  tout  le  contraire  du  shadow 
Minister of Finance de l`Alliance PTR/MMM, Rama Sithanen, qui à la place du cœur a un 
ordinateur et qui à la place des mots, jonglait avec des formules savantes dont cette ultime 
équation 40+40 est égale  à une raclée aux élections, malgré le contexte difficile et l’héritage 
laissé par le précédent gouvernement, en présentant un no-tax budget.  

27 

 
Madame la Présidente, en outre, en vue de relever les défis et l'équité sociale de la 
création  d'emplois,  l’honorable  ministre  des  finances  et  du  développement  économique  a 
annoncé  une  série  de  mesures  visant  à  promouvoir  le  grand  potentiel  de  notre  secteur  des 
PMEs locales pour stimuler la croissance économique. 

D'autre  part,  les  mesures  fiscales  appropriées  ont  été  prises  par  le  gouvernement 
nouvellement  élu  pour  rendre  la  nation  plus  prospère  et  habiliter  les  gens  à  améliorer  leur 
qualité de vie grâce à un travail acharné au lieu de devenir accro aux jeux du hasard.  

Nous voulons une jeunesse entreprenante, responsable et saine et non une jeunesse de 
zougadères, chômeurs avec des diplômes marron. L’honorable Vishnu Lutchmeenaraidoo a 
fait ressortir que nos grand-parents et nos parents nous ont appris que c`est par le travail et le 
sacrifice que la réussite  est belle et honorable et non en grattant des cartes, et non aussi à 
l’exemple d’une sirène grattant le dos d`un lion pour se payer un château de cartes à Venise. 
Espérons qu’à son retour au pays, elle n’aille pas s`offrir toutes les pirogues de la régate de 
Mahebourg vu son talent à véhiculer en gondole en Italie.   

Madame  la  présidente,  ce  type  de  jeu  du  hasard  est  un  fléau  social  qui  est  devenu 
endémique  dans  tout  le  pays.  Il  était  donc  de  notre  devoir  en  tant  que  gouvernement 
responsable de lutter contre cette plaie purulente dans notre société en prenant des décisions 
courageuses.  

Je  dois  dire  que  c’est  avec  beaucoup  de  soulagement  que  la  population  a  salué 
l'annonce  de  l'interdiction  de  la  publicité  sur  les  jeux,  en  particulier  les  fameuses  cartes  à 
gratter. Let’s go back to work, no more scratching! 

Madame la présidente, l’heure est à la reconstruction et au changement de mentalité. 
C’est  un  véritable  coup  de  balai  que  ce  gouvernement  doit  passer  et  nous  avons  déjà 
commencé !  J’écoutais  hier  l’intervention  de  l’honorable  Franco  Quirin,  député  de 
l’Opposition. Il regrettait que ce budget ne fasse point mention de provisions pour le combat 
contre la drogue. Je l’en remercie de se sentir concerné en vrai patriote. Mais je lui dirais que 
là-aussi l’honorable Vishnu Lutchmeenaraidoo a innové car, en moins d’une heure et trente 
minutes, il ne pouvait pas lister toutes les mesures de ce gouvernement. 

Je suis persuadé que sous la houlette de Sir Anerood Jugnauth, le combat contre les 
barons  de  la  drogue  sera  mené  de  manière  ferme.  Nous  ne  nous  défilons  pas  devant  nos 
responsabilités,  nous  les  assumons  et  nous  tiendrons  parole  car  elle  est  sacrée.  We  mean 
business, don`t you doubt about that! 

28 

 
 Madame la présidente, je suis reconnaissant à l’honorable ministre des finances et du 
développement économique pour avoir accordé une augmentation significative dans le budget 
de mon ministère en dépit des contraintes économiques.  

L'accent, cette année, sera sans aucun doute sur la préparation des équipes nationales 
participant  aux  Jeux  des  Iles  à  La  Réunion  en  août.  Une  ligne  budgétaire  spéciale  a  été 
élaborée à cet effet. Un comité technique a été mis en place pour suivre des programmes de 
formation de nos équipes nationales afin de s’assurer de la bonne marche de la préparation.  

L'introduction  d'une  ligue  de  football  professionnel  à  l'île  Maurice  a  généré  300 
emplois  directs  et  il  faut  savoir  que  les  joueurs  sont  aujourd'hui  rémunérés  sur  une  base 
mensuelle.  Jouer  au  foot  est  désormais  une  profession,  un  métier  et  le  gouvernement  ne 
pouvait pas rester à l'écart de ce projet national qui créé des emplois et qui voit aussi nos 
meilleurs talents évoluer à l’étranger depuis peu. 

Madame  la  présidente,  afin  d'augmenter  le  niveau  et  la  qualité  des  joueurs  et  de 

contribuer aux performances de l'équipe nationale, des mesures importantes seront prises. 

Nous donnerons la priorité à la participation des jeunes avec un accent sur les zones 
défavorisées  de  manière  à  promouvoir  le  football  au  niveau  de  la  base  (grassroot  level). 
Ainsi, toute la structure du football des jeunes sera remaniée avec l'aide du nouveau DTN, 
Didier Six. Un entraineur qui apporte déjà un nouveau souffle,  car vous  l’aurez remarqué, 
notre  sélection  nationale  ne  perd  plus  et  marque  surtout  des  buts,  chose  compliquée 
auparavant et malgré notre classement dans les bas-fonds du tableau de la FIFA, 190 sur 209, 
les équipes figurant parmi les 100 premiers ne nous font plus peur! 

De plus, beaucoup d'investissement sera fait pour le développement du sport à la base 
et au niveau communautaire. Mais comme vous le savez, l`argent, il n’y en a  jamais assez, 
cependant avec la volonté, nous pouvons accomplir des miracles. Nous relançons aussi les 
centres de formation de volley-ball, de basket-ball et d`autres disciplines. 

En  outre,  il  est  nécessaire  de  créer  une  bonne  liaison  entre  les  établissements 

primaires et secondaires en mettant l'athlète au centre de tout développement sportif. 

Par exemple, un médaillé d'or aux Jeux Olympiques va maintenant être récompensé 
par un prix en argent de R 2,1 millions. Nous avons également augmenté le montant des prix 
en espèces en faveur des médaillés pour les Jeux Paralympiques ainsi que pour les Jeux des 
Iles de l'Océan Indien. 

29 

 
Madame  la  présidente,  mon  ministère,  conscient  des  lacunes  et  des  anomalies  du 
Sports  Act,  a  invité  les  fédérations  sportives  à  soumettre  leurs  points  de  vue  et  des 
propositions d'amendements. A cet effet, j’ai aussi invité l`honorable Franco Quirin à nous 
faire parvenir ses propositions. Je viendrai sous peu avec la version amendée de la loi sur le 
sport pour fournir un cadre juridique en vue de mieux encadrer les organisations sportives. 

J’ai maintenant le plaisir de commenter sur l'impact positif du budget sur nos jeunes 
qui constituent une force dynamique à compter avec l'harmonie sociale et le développement 
national. 

Investir dans le développement de la jeunesse revient à construire un avenir meilleur 
pour le pays. Les jeunes sont doués avec de la passion et la créativité qui, lorsqu'ils sont bien 
dirigés  peuvent  contribuer  efficacement  à  la  croissance  économique,  alors  que  l`ancien 
régime se contentait de dire à nos jeunes d`aller voir ailleurs.  

Madame  la  présidente,  Les  jeunes  sont  des  vecteurs  du  changement  et  cela  a  été 
illustré lors des récentes élections générales lorsque l'ancien gouvernement a été renversé par 
une majorité de nos jeunes qui ont adhéré au slogan Viré Mam. Mon ministère continuera de 
soutenir  nos  jeunes  à  travers  un  large  éventail  de  programmes  pour  leur  croissance 
personnelle  et  la  participation  effective  dans  le  processus  du  développement  pour  la 
transformation sociale. 

Madame  la  présidente,  je  vais  maintenant  énumérer  les  différents  projets  et 
programmes qui seront effectués dans nos centres de jeunesse. Comme la société mauricienne 
a subi de profonds changements dans les domaines socio-économiques, les complexités de la 
vie moderne ont conduit à un changement dans les besoins et les aspirations des jeunes. 

Afin  de  répondre  à  ces  changements,  mon  ministère,  en  collaboration  avec  le 
ministère de l`Éducation et celui des Administrations Régionales vont mettre à la disposition 
des  mauriciens  toutes  les  infrastructures  sportives  existantes  dans  les  écoles  publiques,  car 
après  les  heures  de  cours  et  pendant  les  vacances  scolaires,  ces  infrastructures  demeurent 
fermées et non utilisées. Nous voulons avoir une utilisation intelligente et optimale de ce qui 
existe déjà au lieu d`investir de grosses sommes d’argent dans des projets pour ces mêmes 
infrastructures. 

Madame la présidente, la section de la jeunesse sera remaniée. Des unités spécialisées 
avec des responsabilités bien définies seront créées dans le domaine de l'entrepreneuriat, de la 
vie familiale et du career guidance, entre autres. 

30 

 
Mon  ministère  réexaminera  le  fonctionnement  de  ses  centres  de  jeunesse  pour 
s’assurer qu'ils continuent de répondre aux aspirations des jeunes à travers la fourniture de 
loisirs, la formation et les activités d'intérêt aux jeunes.  

Ainsi,  le  centre  de  jeunesse  deviendra  une  plate-forme,  un  espace  physique  et 
psychologique pour les jeunes de se rencontrer, échanger des idées et expériences. Pour ce 
faire, je relance les comités consultatifs de jeunes qui seront responsables de la gestion des 
centres. Ce comité sera composé de représentants des clubs de jeunes et des organisations de 
jeunesse de la région, y compris des forces vives. 

Madame  la  Présidente,  vous  le  savez  la  plupart  des  jeunes  sont  libres  dans  l'après-
midi  et  le  week-end.  A  cet  effet,  mon  ministère  a  déjà  commencé  à  revoir  les  heures  de 
fonctionnement  des  centres  de  jeunesse  pour  s`assurer  que  des  activités  structurées 
bénéficient de tous les équipements nécessaires. 

En vue de promouvoir une culture de bénévolat chez les jeunes, mon ministère mettra 
en place un système national de jeunes bénévoles. Vous conviendrez que le volontariat peut 
transformer le rythme et la nature du développement. Il reste un moyen efficace pour engager 
la population active dans la lutte contre les problèmes sociaux. 

Fini la culture macarena et touss sali; bienvenue aux valeurs du civisme. 

Afin  de  résoudre  les  problèmes  que  rencontrent  les  jeunes  dans  cette  société  en 
mutation rapide et aussi là où les besoins des jeunes sont dynamiques, mon ministère viendra 
avec un programme national de conseils pour les jeunes. L'objectif est de fournir aux jeunes 
des informations et un soutien pour les aider à aborder les épreuves de la vie. 

Je vais conclure, Madame la présidente, en disant que ce budget a ouvert de nouvelles 
voies propices à l'émancipation des jeunes et la construction d’une nation plus saine. En cela, 
une mesure fort symbolique, l’interdiction des sacs en plastique, prouve que ce gouvernement 
a aussi la fibre écologique. 

Alors,  mobilisons  nos  efforts  et  saisissons  cette  formidable  opportunité  pour 

transformer le pays, et demain nous pourrons tous dire « Mission accomplie Mam!!» 

Merci. 

  

 

 

(12. 55 p.m.) 

31 

Mr T. Henry  (Fourth  Member for Mahebourg &  Plaine Magnien):  Madame la 
présidente,  je  voudrais  tout  d’abord  féliciter  le  ministre  des  Finances,  l’honorable  Vishnu 
Lutchmeenaraidoo pour le budget 2015-2016. 

C’est un budget qui fait l’unanimité dans toute la population. C’est un budget axé sur 
le social. Il a un impact direct sur la population, quelle que soit la sociale. C’est surtout un 
budget qui répond aux attentes du peuple, ce qui est normal venant d’une alliance qui a été 
élue par le peuple et pour le peuple. 

Nous prouvons ainsi que nous tenons nos promesses, comme nous l’avons fait dès les 
premiers  jours  où  le  gouvernement  a  pris  ses  fonctions  avec  notamment  la  hausse  de  la 
pension  de  vieillesse  et  la  suspension  du  permis  à  points,  des  mesures  qui  ont 
considérablement allégé le fardeau qui pesait sur un grand nombre de nos compatriotes. 

Madame  la  présidente,  je  ne  vais  pas  m’étendre  sur  toutes  les  mesures  qui  ont  été 
annoncées par le ministre des Finances, mais je souhaiterais m’exprimer sur certaines d’entre 
elles. 

Ces mesures ont un impact très positif sur – 

-  Les personnes les plus vulnérables ; 
-  Les habitants de ma circonscription, numéro 12, Mahebourg/Plaine Magnien 

car nous savons tous qu’il y a un gros problème de chômage qui touche cette circonscription 
et  nous  connaissons  les  fléaux  sociaux  dont  ses  habitants  sont  victimes.  C’est  pour  cette 
raison que j’accueille avec enthousiasme les mesures suivantes – 

-  Le Plan Marshall pour la lutte contre la pauvreté. 
-  La  création  d’une  cybercité  à  Rose  Belle  et  le  projet  d’Airport  City  à  Plaine 

Magnien. 

-  Toutes les mesures pour redynamiser les PMEs qui sont très nombreuses dans ma 

circonscription. 

-  Enfin,  toutes  les  mesures  pour  le  secteur  touristique  qui  a  une  bonne  assise  à 

Mahebourg et dans ses environs. 

Madame  la  présidente,  en  ce  qu’il  s’agit  du  Plan  Marshall  contre  la  pauvreté, 
j’accueille favorablement le principe de parrainage qui a pour but d’améliorer les conditions 
de logement, de rehausser le niveau de l’emploi, d’éliminer les fléaux sociaux, d’améliorer la 

 

32 

qualité de la vie et d’assurer que tous les enfants soient scolarisés et puissent développer leurs 
talents en leur donnant notamment accès aux loisirs et aux sports. 

Tout  cela,  Madame  la  présidente,  doit  cependant  passer  nécessairement  par  une 
restructuration  urgente  de  la  National  Empowerment  Foundation,  car  cet  organisme  avait 
démarré sur les chapeaux de roues avec notre Premier Adjoint, alors ministre de l’Intégration 
Sociale, mais il a perdu toute son efficacité après le départ de l’honorable Xavier-Luc Duval. 
Il faut maintenant le remettre en état de marche car il sera le fer-de-lance de l’application du 
Plan Marshall.  

Il y a surtout une mesure dont la NEF est directement responsable, celle qui prévoit un 
repas pour chaque enfant dans le besoin qui va à l’école. Il  y a, à ce niveau, un problème 
d’implémentation. Chacun sait qu’un enfant qui a le ventre vide ne peut suivre une scolarité 
normale.  J’aimerais  attirer  l’attention  du  ministre  de  tutelle  car  c’est  un  problème  qui  ne 
touche pas uniquement ma circonscription mais le pays tout entier. 

Une autre problématique qui touche le pays tout entier, Madame la présidente, c’est le 
logement social. J’avais fait ressortir lors de mon intervention sur le Discours Programme le 
fait que le barème d’éligibilité pour l’acquisition d’une maison NHDC devait être revu à la 
hausse car chacun sait que le coût de la vie a considérablement augmenté depuis l’application 
de  ce  plan  de  logement.  Et  je  suis  heureux  de  constater  que  le  Vice-Premier  ministre  et 
ministre  du  logement,  mon  ami  l’honorable  Soodhun,  a  décidé  de  revoir  ce  barème  à  la 
hausse. 

(Interruptions) 

Ce sera un grand soulagement pour un grand nombre de familles dans le besoin qui veulent 
faire  l’acquisition  d’une  maison.  Comme  le  logement  est  un  facteur  essentiel  de 
développement social, l’emploi est lui aussi un  élément fondamental qui amène le progrès 
économique et social dans les familles.  

À  ce  titre,  Madame  la  présidente,  j’accueille  avec  beaucoup  d’enthousiasme  la 
création de cinq technopoles dans le pays dont une à Rose Belle ainsi que le projet d’Airport 
City à Plaine Magnien. Ces deux projets permettront à un grand nombre de jeunes diplômés, 
souvent  issus  de  familles  modestes,  qui  ont  fait  des  sacrifices  pour  l’éducation  de  leurs 
enfants, de trouver un emploi qui soit à la hauteur de leur aspiration. Tout comme le projet 
d’Airport City à Plaine Magnien qui donnera un boost magistral au développement de toute la 
localité  avec  non  seulement  la  création  d’emplois  pour  les  habitants  mais  la  possibilité 
d’entrer de plain-pied dans une nouvelle phase de développement à long terme. D’ailleurs, le 

 

33 

nouveau  visage  du  sud-est  permettra  aux  PME  de  participer,  elles  aussi,  pleinement  à  cet 
essor. 

Madame  la  présidente,  déjà  avec  les  facilités  offertes  par  l’ancien  ministre  des 
finances, l’honorable Xavier-Luc Duval, les PME avaient, à leur disposition, tout un éventail 
de  facilités.  Aujourd’hui,  les  mesures  introduites  par  l’honorable  Lutchmeenaraidoo  leur 
permettront  d’approfondir  leur  expansion.  J’aimerais  suggérer,  à  ce  stade,  que  tous  ces 
développements  de 
la  configuration  non  seulement  de  ma 
circonscription mais aussi celles des autres régions où vont se développer les Smart Cities, 
permettront la participation des PME qui ont souvent de grandes compétences mais qui n’ont 
pas  le  loisir  d’apporter  leur  contribution.  Plus  spécifiquement,  les  PME  doivent  pouvoir 
décrocher des contrats intéressants dans cette vague de développement qui va toucher le pays 
et qui va créer ce deuxième boom économique en ayant elles aussi leur part du gâteau. 

taille  qui  modifieront 

Enfin, Madame la présidente, le dernier point sur lequel j’aimerais m’exprimer est le 
tourisme, le pilier de notre économie. Ce secteur, sous l’impulsion du Deputy Prime Minister, 
l’honorable Xavier-Luc Duval, est déjà en train de connaître un nouveau souffle. On le voit 
déjà à travers le pourcentage des arrivées touristiques… 

(Interruptions) 

… qui ont provoqué l’enthousiasme dans ce secteur. Je voudrais remercier ici le ministre des 
Finances qui a considérablement augmenté le budget de la MTPA. Cela permettra à la MTPA 
de s’aventurer sur de nouvelles avenues de promotion tout en consolidant notre place sur les 
marchés  existants.  La  restructuration  de  la  MTPA  et  de  la  Tourism  Authority  aura  pour 
objectif de standardiser le niveau des services offerts par les différents prestataires de services 
dans l’industrie touristique. 

Nous  accueillons  aussi  très  favorablement  l’arrivée  de  nouvelles  compagnies 
aériennes.  Ce  qui  va  booster  les  chiffres  du  tourisme.  Avec  les  arrivées  touristiques  à  la 
hausse,  il  ne  faudra  pas  cependant  négliger  l’aspect  environnemental  et  je  vois  avec 
satisfaction que le budget 2015-2016 a fait provision pour un programme d’embellissement 
des plages et des sites touristiques car nous sommes tous attachés à un environnement propre 
et attrayant aussi bien que pour les loisirs des touristes que pour le bien-être des mauriciens. 

Pour  conclure,  Madame  la  présidente,  je  n’ai  aucun  doute  que  ce  budget  nous 
amènera  vers  le  deuxième  boom  économique  car  l’équipe  dirigeante  de  ce  gouvernement 
menée par le Premier ministre, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, n’a qu’un seul souci, c’est le bien-être 
de la population. Malgré la mauvaise foi de certains membres de l’Opposition qui ne croient 
pas  à  notre  ministre  des  Finances,  certains  membres  de  l’Opposition  ne  croient  pas  en  ce 

 

34 

budget, ils préfèrent faire confiance à des grands calculateurs, des grands manipulateurs, des 
grands prévisionnistes qui n’avaient pas pu prédire les résultats des dernières élections sans 
se douter qu’ils allaient en fait s’écraser dans le mur. Heureusement que le peuple ne leur a 
pas fait confiance. C’est grâce à cela, qu’aujourd’hui, le gouvernement de l’Alliance Lepep 
est au pouvoir et je suis sûr et certain qu’on a beaucoup de belles années devant nous. 

Merci, Madame la présidente. 
Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for one and a half hours for lunch. 
At 1.03 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 2.38 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

Dr. Z. Joomaye (Second Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac):  Thank 
you, Madam Speaker.  The first Budget of a newly elected Government is the occasion to 
give the economic and social directions which it intends to give to the country.  In general, it 
should  be  in  line  with  an  electoral  programme  for  which  the  population  had  expressed  its 
votes.  This Government has been entrusted with a clear majority.  This clear majority has 
been given because the population wanted a drastic change - starting from the highest level of 
the  State  -  in  the  economic  policy  which  people  of  our  country  is  expecting  to  lead  to  an 
improvement of their daily life. 

A  lot  has  been  promised  in  the  Government  Programme  the  title  of  which  was 
‘Achieving  Meaningful  Change’.    Indeed,  we  agree  with  the  main  points  in  the  new 
Government Programme even if we qualified it as a déclaration de bonnes intentions.  We 
know that translating electoral promises into concrete action is not an easy matter apart from 
a few spectacular measures which we have seen and which we have fully supported, one of 
which  has  been  the  increase  in  old  age  pension.    But,  on  the  overall,  cosmetic  measures 
cannot bring meaningful change.  Only corrective measures can; corrective measures which 
would  have  changed  the  economic  direction  taken  from  2005  to  2010,  and  somehow 
continued until 2014.  An ultra-liberal trend is harmful to the working class deprived of social 
justice,  and  constantly  increasing  the  gap  between  the  rich  and  the  poor;  a  cold-blooded 
technocratic approach dealing with figures instead of thinking at the level of the individual. 

This  Budget  was  the  occasion  to  give  a  new  breath  to  our  economy  with  a  new 
Minister and a new style.  Instead, we were served with a holistic approach, with loads of 
wishful thinking in view of creating a temporary feel-good factor, which in no case will help 
to attain the main objectives defined in this Budget. 

35 

 
Any Government would want to steer the economy towards a path of high investment 
and full employment.  Who would not want to secure long term sustainable development for 
all and achieve greater equity?  Who would not want social justice for everyone?  And more 
than a policy guidance, it is the duty of any Government to promote transparency and good 
governance  in  the  management  of  public  affairs.  We  share  the  same  views,  the  same 
objectives,  as  these  are  an  émanation.    Yes,  Madam  Speaker,  une  émanation  de  la 
Commission  économique  du  MMM,  at  that  time  chaired  by  the  present  hon.  Minister  of 
Finance.  But we find the measures announced insufficient and not daring enough to really 
reboost our economy. 

Madam Speaker, it is good and even very good that we make our country become un 
vaste chantier de développement.  However, a substantial part of our development cannot be 
based only on real estate speculation.  In the last three words, Madam Speaker, there is one 
very  dangerous,  ‘speculation’,  which  can  lead  to  the  collapse  of  an  economy  and  the 
bankruptcy of a State.  We can all recall the subprime crisis in the United States.  Allowing 
and  promoting  the  creation  of  wealth  on  paper  or  in  manipulated  financial  forecast  can 
jeopardise the future of all actors.  We wish all the megaprojects announced - some of which 
freshly removed from the freezer - success.  But should it go wrong?  Should the speculation 
fail? 
 
creating jobs we will see the contrary. 

We will see blue chips become insolvent, our banks being weakened, and instead of 

My colleague and friend, hon. Uteem, rightly mentioned the CentrePoint and Meritt 
Elipsis projects.  We do not want any more of these.  After all, even our blue chips are only 
SMEs  in  the  global  financial  world.    It  is  the  duty  of  the  regulator  to  prevent  them  from 
crossing  the  line  of  cautiousness,  in  terms  of  business  risk-taking.    Considering  the  list  of 
smart  cities  projects,  we  fail  to  understand,  Madam  Speaker,  how  this  Government  is  not 
favouring the concentration of productive assets in the hands of a few.  We usually say that 
‘quand la construction va, tout va’.  But our local contractors and builders have a different 
opinion.  The feeling is that it goes better for some foreign companies who are usually well-
known to pay little regard to the rights of their workers. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  social  review  in  this  Budget  is  very  poor,  inadequate  and 
disappointing.    A  lot  more  could  have  been  done  as  far  as  health  and  social  security  is 
concerned.  In the health sector, the change in Government would have been a great occasion 
to lay the foundation of a well-thought restructuration of our health system, be it public or 
private,  moving  from  an  industrially  inspired  quantity-based  delivery  of  service  towards  a 

 

36 

patient-centred, more humanised and caring approach.  The quality of service and the level of 
care in our public hospitals can only be enhanced if the conditions of work of the healthcare 
professionals  of  all  categories  are  improved.  We  will  not  put  the  blame  on  the  present 
Government for this state of the situation. I would only say that this should change.  As the 
hon. Minister of Health constantly repeats: Government is Government.  And in this case, as 
well, it can decide. 

The  high  load  of  work  and  the  pressure  generated  by  more  than  25,000  patients 
walking  daily  in  our  public  health  sector  compromises  the  quality  of  care.  The  minimum 
accepted time spent by a healthcare professional with one patient is insufficient.  This gives 
rise to communication problems, resulting in situations of conflict, and greatly contributes in 
the  increased  number  of  cases  of  alleged  medical  negligence.    There  is  an  urgent  need  to 
decentralise  the  delivery  of  service  from  our  regional  hospitals.    The  opening  of  the 
Mediclinics  on  a  24-hour  basis  would  only  be  of  little  help,  as  our  compatriots  are  more 
desirous of personalised care.  

The  biggest  contribution  to  the  decongestion  of  our  hospitals  would  be  the 
implementation of the family doctor system mentioned in the Government Programme but 
not catered for in the Budget.  This would also bring a solution to the unemployment problem 
faced by some 400 young medical practitioners. 

Announcing  the  recruitment  of  100  doctors  is  good,  but  not  enough  to  really 
improve  the  level  of  care  in  the  public  sector.    In  the  medical  field,  Madam  Speaker,  to 
reduce  backlogs  and  waiting  lists,  public/private  partnership  should  be  contemplated.  Our 
medical infrastructure definitely needs upgrading and we welcome the construction of a new 
ENT Hospital.  

Madam Speaker,  all the hon. Members present  constantly  face situations with their 
mandants where pension for invalidity has been refused or has been discontinued. Even if in 
a few cases, the demand does not seem to be really genuine, nevertheless, sometimes it is a 
real need and the reasons for which pension has been stopped are not clear. It is, therefore, 
very  important  to  have  uniform  criteria  for  allocation  of  pension  in  order  to  avoid  all 
subjective bias, which might be prejudiciable to the one in need. Same would apply to the 
physically and mentally handicaped.  

Madam Speaker, I will not end without saying a few words about my Constituency, 
Rivière  des  Anguilles  and  Souillac,  well-known  to  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  as  well.  
Water supply problem concerns the whole southern region of Mauritius. It is with regret that I 
noted  that  no  financing  will  be  made  available  for  the  construction  of  the  Rivière  des 

 

37 

Anguilles dam. I am sure that the hon. Minister is aware about the recent flood that, once 
again, affected L’Escalier, La Flora, Bois Cheri and Grand Bois. The construction of drains 
already planned but long overdue is still pending. I am hereby making a special appeal to the 
hon. Minister of Finance to release funds for this project, thus preventing any forthcoming 
sad  event.  Our  Constituency,  Madam  Speaker,  est  l’enfant  pauvre  du  sud;  the  two  sitting 
Members on the Government side have not been nominated Minister or PPS. We have a high 
rate of unemployment, very poor infrastructure, no industrial or touristic activity. The once 
flourishing tea sector is in a dire state. I can recall during the electoral campaign of 2010, 
standing by me as candidate of the MMM was the present hon. Minister of Finance. We held 
a meeting with the métayers of the tea industry and, at that time, he promised to subsidise 
each kilo of leaves produced if he would become Minister of Finance –  he now is! These 
métayers always think of ‘Vishnu’ as a man of word. I am fully confident that he will not 
deceive them.  

To conclude, Madam Speaker, I will only remind the House that this Opposition that 
we are, will continue to raise issues of public interest.  We will carry on with constructive 
criticisms; we will not indulge in cheap politics or in character assasination. It is in this spirit 
that we say that this Budget has not met the expectation of the business community and the 
whole nation. 

 Madam Speaker, I have done.  

 
 (2.53 p.m.) 

The Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade 
(Mr.  E.  Sinatambou):  Madam  Speaker,  I  would  first  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  pay 
tribute  to  my  colleague  and  wise  senior,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development,  for  drawing  up  what  is  an  excellent  Blueprint  which  puts  Mauritius  on  the 
right  track  for  economic  recovery.  I  add  my  voice  to  all  those,  who,  before  me,  have 
congratulated him for his avant-garde vision and learned craftsmanship here. I would like to 
request the hon. Members on the other side of this House to refrain from going on with their 
doomsday scenario. Let’s look at what is good for this country! Let’s look at what we have to 
do to get it right on track. I believe that this is what this august Assembly should be doing. To 
the detractors, who, for petty politicking, have qualified the Budget as a bluff or have given it 
the so many unfair negative connotations, I would say that, what is no bluff is their sterile 
legacy  and  their  obsoleteness.  I  say  with  no  fear,  Madam,  that  the  Budget  which  the  hon. 

 

38 

Minister  has  presented,  is  an  Action  Plan  to  repair  the  economy  of  Mauritius  and  place  it 
towards sustainable growth.  

That  Budget,  Madam  Speaker,  has,  in  my  respectful  submission,  captured  the  key 
issues, which will enable us, as a nation, to continue along a trajectory that will harvest the 
true potential of Mauritius. It is in my view, and I believe in the view of most well intended 
Mauritians, a Budget which cares for our people, and here, I will simply say that it epitomises 
the wise words of Mahatma Gandhi who said, and I quote – 

“A nation’s greatness is measured by how it treats its weakest members”. 
Madam  Speaker,  I  pause  here  for  a  minute,  just  to  highlight  what  I  consider  to  be 
unfair  comments  made  by  Members  on  the  other  side  of  this  House,  and  here,  I  must 
unfortunately start with the First Member for Port Louis South and Port Louis Central, hon. 
Uteem,  who  I  note,  not  later  than  yesterday,  alleged  that  I  was  not  here,  ‘busy  tracing 
millionaires’. 

Now, let me say to this House that I have, in the course of the last three months, had 
two missions abroad. The first one in January and in that respect I will later be responding to 
a criticism of the hon. Leader of the Opposition and the second one, last week, where I was 
attending the Heads of State and Heads of Government Summit to the COMESA and where I 
had  the  difficult  task  of  replacing  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  –  someone  who  cannot  be 
replaced in my mind. What we were doing there, we were speaking about the inclusiveness 
and  sustainabilty  of  an  industrialisation  policy  for  eastern  and  southern  Africa.  Not  busy 
tracing millionaires as stated in a negative and derogatory manner! 

(Interruptions) 

Well, what I said was an answer to a question – this is the knack of this Opposition. 
It  was  an  answer  to  a  question.  If  a  journalist  asks  you,  Madam,  when  we  say  in  the 
Government Programme that our diplomacy is  going to be  an economic diplomacy  with a 
focus on our people, how do you expect that to happen? Is it going to happen with them in 
power? Certainly not!  It is only  going to happen when we  get the right investors with the 
right investment capacity, who come into this country to do what is required to get it back on 
track. But going so far as to say that I was busy tracing millionaires is wrong, while, in fact, 
this country is being commended abroad for even its help in solving the piracy problem of 
Africa.  

Even in that respect, Mauritius is being commended and they try to find something 
negative and that is what has to stop. They have to look at the future of our country with a 
bigger picture in a bigger manner and not simply by making accusations right, left and centre 

 

39 

as quickly and as early as they can, especially when this could have as a result – how do I say 
-  depressing  people!  What  they  do  sometimes  peut  être  si  déprimant  pour  le  reste  de  la 
population. On the contrary, we need to bring enthusiasm; we need to bring keenness to this 
population,  because  we  have  nearly  8%  of  unemployment,  because  we  have  nearly  USD8 
billion of public debt. We have to do what is needed for that and this is what precisely this 
Budget is about. 

Madame  la  présidente,  le  Budget  2015-2016  est  résolument  axé  sur  la  relance  de 
l’économie de notre pays et le redressement des finances publiques. Le gouvernement s’est 
donné  les  moyens  dans  ce  budget  pour  atteindre  ses  objectifs  et  retrouver  l’équilibre 
budgétaire. La relance, ce n’est pas une obsession, c’est une obligation, and this is what this 
Budget has set out to do. Ce Budget, Madame la présidente, nous engage tous à accomplir 
tous  les  efforts  nécessaires  pour  créer  de  la  richesse  et  des  emplois  et  faire  bénéficier  les 
Mauriciens d’un modèle social enviable. Loin d’être une liste de vœux pieux, il s’agit d’un 
exercice  budgétaire  qui  est  empreint  de  rigueur  et  d’espoir  comme  en  témoignent  les 
nombreux  engagements  qu’il  comprend.  Nous  mesurons  pleinement  l’ampleur  de  ses 
engagements et nous les tiendrons. Ce Budget améliorera certainement la vie de l’ensemble 
des Mauriciens et des générations futures. 

Let me here pause for a second, Madam Speaker, to now respond to what I had said 
earlier, because apparently the hon. Leader of the Opposition did, in one of his interventions 
in  the  House,  criticise  the  importance  that  this  country  is  giving  to  its  foreign  policy  on 
Africa, I quote - 

“Also on Africa, Madam Speaker, I join with those who have criticised the fact that 
we are supposed to give Africa toute sa place dans notre  stratégie, alors qu’en fait 
nous ne sommes tout simplement pas sérieux. Nous, je dis le gouvernement précédent, 
et so far this present Government also.» 
I beg to differ, Madam Speaker. Why I beg to differ is because the complaint which 
the hon.  Leader of the  Opposition was making was about the absence of a Minister at the 
African Union Summit from 24 to 31 January of this year. Then, it is my duty to inform this 
House  that  the  African  Union  itself  had  asked  Mauritius  to  be  part  of  an  African  Union 
ministerial delegation going to Washington from 19 to 25 January to lobby the United States 
of America for the renewal of the Africa Growth and Opportunity Act. I won’t say we were 
lucky, but I think I can say that it is to the great satisfaction of the African Union that the two 
words which were used by the Americans to encapsulate the results of our lobbying mission 
for the renewal of AGOA, as it is known were that the renewal was - 

40 

 
(a) 
(b) 

Inevitable, and  
imminent.  

I don’t think we could have done better in the course of that mission.  
 
Furthermore,  after  that,  we  had  the  Government  Programme  being  read  by  the 
President  of  the  Republic  and  I  believe  that,  having  done  our  part  of  our  task,  having 
discharged our responsibility towards the Union from the 19 to 25 January, I believe and I am 
convinced  that  this  Government  was  very  right  that  all  its  Ministers  should  be  here  in 
Mauritius  when,  after  doing  our  share  for  the  African  Union,  the  Government  Programme 
2015-2019  was  being  read  for  the  first  time  in  our  country.  And,  in  any  event,  we  were 
represented  there  in  Africa,  if  that  is  unknown  to  the  other  side  of  the  House.  So  much, 
therefore, for our insistence that this Government has been devising what it believes to be a 
strong  African  strategy  and  it  will  continue  to  do  so.    May  I  just  add  that  in  the  event  - 
because as opposed to some, we will never claim to be perfect - that anyone on the other side 
of the House has any proposal or any bright idea to offer to this side of the House as to our 
strategies whether it be in foreign policy matters or on the Africa strategy as such, he or she 
will be most welcome to discuss them with this side of the House and I can assure them that 
my Ministry will listen and, if convinced, will act accordingly.  

But coming back to the Budget, Madam Speaker, I will, with your permission, brief 
the House on the trajectory which my Ministry intends to take to deliver on the promises that 
this Budget holds for the nation. In order to make a real difference in the life of each and 
every Mauritian, my Ministry is committed to the pursuit of a foreign policy that meets the 
aspirations  of  our  people  for  a  just,  peaceful  and  prosperous  Mauritius  which  makes  them 
proud. Driven by national interest and key deliverables, our foreign policy  will be aligned 
with the object and purpose of the Budget 2015 as well as its implementation. In fact, as a 
nation at the crossroad, the central theme of the Budget, we can no longer afford to remain 
inward looking. On the very contrary, if we believe, as I do, that we will have “un  second 
miracle économique”, it will demand more effective partnerships that are growth inducing.  

Allow  me,  here,  Madam  Speaker,  to  refer  to  paragraphs  137  to  140  of  the  Budget 
Speech which lays emphasis on ‘Opening Mauritius to the World’. Such an opening will be 
crucial  to  ensure  a  sustained  growth  path  for  our  economy.  An  important  component  of 
Opening Mauritius to the World will be the further consolidation of our partnership with the 
rest  of  Africa  for  mutual  benefit.  I  cannot  over  emphasise  the  importance  of  developing  a 

 

41 

strong partnership with Africa or the significant role that such a partnership would play in our 
future development.  

Suffice  it  to  say  that,  to  respond  to  hon.  Uteem’s  averment  that  there  is  no  clear 
foreign policy as regards Africa, I shall say that my Ministry will encourage the pursuit of a 
forceful  policy,  not  only  to  take  advantage  of  the  rising  prospects  in  Africa,  but  also  to 
contribute to the development of the continent. And, here, I shall refer to the Mauritius-Africa 
Fund  and  state  that  this  fund  will  be  a  key  factor  in  ensuring  the  concretisation  of  such 
partnerships  and  a  case  in  point  is  the  establishment  of  special  economic  zones  between 
countries from the African continent and Mauritius.  

Already, I am pleased to inform the House that three sister countries have expressed 
interest  in  working  with  Mauritius  regarding  the  establishment  and  development  of  those 
special economic zones. These are respectively Madagascar, Ghana and Senegal. But I can 
assure the House that this list is in no way exhaustive as we are and will be pursuing other 
avenues.  

Madam Speaker, let me now turn to our appurtenance to the two regional economic 
blocks  which  are  the  Common  Market  for  Eastern  and  Southern  Africa  and  the  Southern 
African  Development  Community.    Indeed,  it  is  the  policy  of  Government  that  those  two 
economic  blocks  are  going  to  be  two  important  instruments  that  will  help  us  expand  our 
footprint  in  Africa.  Just  to  give  some  quick  figures,  Madam  Speaker,  the  COMESA  and 
SADC  economic  blocks  put  together  provide  a  combined  market  of  some  529  million 
inhabitants with an overall Gross Domestic Product of 624 billion US dollars.  If Mauritius 
could manage to tap just 1% of that market, 99% we leave to everyone else, we could be 
bringing in this country 6.24 billion US dollars per year and if it is in this context that the 
hon. First Member for Port Louis South and Port Louis Central said that I was busy chasing 
millions, I will say yes.  I believe this could be the most patriotic thing to do if it is to get 
intra  trade,  intra  COMESA  trade  or  intra  SADC  trade  for  this  country.    To  give  you  an 
example, Madam Speaker, because I thought figures by themselves would mean nothing, but 
what is important to know is that if we just take the SADC - if we only take the Southern 
African Development Community - we went to the statistics and what we found out is that 
the  share  of  Mauritius  in  the  export  of  goods  to  SADC  is  only  0.14%  of  what  the  SADC 
countries import every  year.  So, yes, with no apology to anyone, in this context, the hon. 
Minister of Foreign Affairs, with the blessing of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, is and will be 
chasing millions.  I believe this is what this country requires. It also needs to be stated here, 
Madam Speaker, that although SADC and COMESA remain high on our agenda, this country 

 

42 

has now been discussing a third agreement which is the setting up of a tripartite free trade 
area. What is going to be this tripartite free trade area, Madam Speaker? It is now a free trade 
area  which  is  going  to  encompass  the  SADC  countries,  the  COMESA  countries  and  the 
countries of the East African Community.  Why?  It is because, put together, the 26 Member 
States of this tripartite free trade area will amount to 600 million people with a total GDP in 
excess of one trillion dollars.  This is the type of market which will be opened and I believe it 
is the duty of everyone - not just the Ministry, not just the Government, but of every single 
person - in this country to create, to help create the right atmosphere, to help create the right 
circumstances for this country to remain in a position where it can tap those markets.   

One of the other things I can say about my visit to Ethiopia in the last few days is how 
Mauritius was commended.  You know, I was quite surprised that they are all aware of the 
demise of the Labour Party/MMM coalition which was sure that they would win 60-nil. They 
all cited us as being an exemplary instance of rule of law, of good governance and of how our 
democracy  works  well,  especially  in  the  light  of  the  victory  of  this  Government.    So,  let 
criticisms be levelled when they are constructive.  You know just that they are true, do not 
make them right!  Something may be wrong, but the way you actually say it, may be wrong.  
Something may be wrong, the criticisms you make about it may be right, but if you use it in 
the wrong manner, that cannot be right.  That has been my consistent complaint about the 
other side of the House.  Let us rather make this country not only get out of the turmoil which 
others have brought it into, but let us also make it flourish; we need to have a big good front 
to show to the rest of the world. We are commended in Africa. We are commended by other 
countries outside Africa on other continents. Let us not get smeared by base accusations, if 
not  baseless.  Let  us  try  to  make  sure  that  our  country  stands  the  test  to  which  it  is  being 
confronted at the moment. 

Madam Speaker, the Budget 2015 has set the tone for the empowerment of our people 
through the construct of ‘Ile Maurice Nation d’Entrepreneurs’. That is why I believe that it is 
wrong to just stick to one side of the proposals and say that “this is speculation, real property, 
a  subprime  problem.”    Let  us  rather  look  at  this  concept  of  ‘Ile  Maurice  Nation 
d’Entrepreneurs’.   

The  setting  up  of  this  one  stop  shop  for  the  SME  sector,  the  fast  tracking  of 
administrative procedures, the creation of an SME bank, the provision of seed capital without 
personal  guarantees,  the  multiplication  of  SME  parks,  the  exemption  of  SMEs  from 
corporation tax for the first eight years of existence are evidence enough of no stone being 
left unturned to channel our youth towards business and wealth creation. This is something 

 

43 

which should be congratulated.  Rs10 billion of which the first Rs2 billion are in this Budget 
should be applauded because this is probably the one and only way to actually wipe up our 
unemployment problem. For this, the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development 
should be commended.  

Linked to this SME project, as I will call it, and to this notion of ‘Ile Maurice Nation 
d’Entrepreneurs’,  what 
the  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 
International  Trade  will  do  is  to  continue  to  strive  to  find  market  openings  for  those 
entrepreneurs.  Not  only  for  the  big  boys,  but  for  those  SMEs  who,  we  believe,  should  be 
helped and we are equally taking steps to facilitate trade for them.  

I  recall  having  said  earlier  how  Government  had  decided,  during  the  month  of 
February  or  March,  to  send  our  letter  of  acceptance  of  what  is  called  the  WTO  Protocol 
amending  the  Marrakesh  Agreement.    What  was  this?    It  was  our  letter  of  acceptance 
regarding  the  World  Trade  Organisation  Trade  Facilitation  Agreement.  What  has  been 
happening is that the world as regards trade in goods, has now known the quasi-abolition of 
tariff barriers. So, taxes, duties, excise, all these are being gradually abolished.  In Mauritius, 
for example, we have now abolished nearly 95% of such taxes and duties, but what remain 
are what we call non-tariff barriers and those non-tariff barriers can be even more damning 
for entrepreneurs than tariff barriers.   

One  quick  example  is  that,  when  you  sign  the  World  Trade  Organisation  Trade 
Facilitation Agreement, it may be agreed that it will take five days to clear a container from 
Customs. Now, if we do that, but another country in Africa takes 42 days, what happens to 
your perishable goods? So, the world is trying to align the rules and regulations regarding 
non-tariff barriers. We are abolishing them slowly but surely. What has to be known is that 
we  are  only  the  fourth  country  in  the  world  to  have  ratified  this  WTO  Trade  Facilitation 
Agreement, the first three ones being Hong Kong, Singapore and the United States.  But why 
is it important? Because of the African Growth and Opportunity Act. If the biggest economy 
in the world, with 16 trillion dollars of GDP, has actually ratified the protocol, it was the view 
of  Government  that  since  we  are  trying  to  send  our  products  in  the  United  States  under 
AGOA, it is evident that we should adopt the same rules of clearance. And what needs to be 
known here, Madam Speaker - and I think maybe some hon. Members might not perhaps be 
aware of that - is that 90% of our exports to the United States under AGOA for the last 14 
years  have  been  textile  and  textile  only.  And  why  is  that  not  right?  It  is  because  AGOA 
actually  provided  Mauritius  and  the  whole  of  the  African  continent  the  possibility  of 

 

44 

exporting more than 6,200 products. I tried to get a list, but it is a 120 pages list and 90% of 
our  exports  to  the  USA  have  been  confined  to  textile  and  apparel.  So,  indeed,  I  think  we 
should all be chasing millions, if that is the complaint on the other side of the House. 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, but getting them in the right way is what this Government is about. 

As regards this trade facilitation process for the Ile Maurice Nation d’Entrepreneurs 
Project, we are persuaded of the need to streamline Customs procedures in order to facilitate 
trade  across  borders  through,  indeed,  as  I  said,  the  elimination  of  unnecessary  regulations 
which had no value but rather constitute a disporportionate burden, especially for small and 
medium-sized enterprises. 

Here,  I  can  also,  as  a  matter  of  policy,  disclose  to  the  House  another  step  which 
Government  has  taken  and  which  is  in  line  with  the  philosophy  of  our  Budget.  Indeed, 
Madam  Speaker,  we  are  at  the  moment  looking  ahead  to  the  early  operationalisation  of 
something  called  TOAM.  TOAM  is  a  Trade  Obstacles  Alert  Mechanism.  If  we  want  our 
SMEs to be in a position to export, it has been felt that Mauritius should be at the avant-
garde  of  alert  mechanisms  regarding  trade  obtstacles,  and  it  is  in  this  respect  that  this 
mechanism has been devised with the assistance of the International Trade Centre. It is an 
online  platform  which  will  favour  the  exchange  of  information  between  commercial 
operators and public institutions with a view to identifying and eliminating trade obstacles as 
they arise, whether at the time of importation or at the time of exportation. 

This is part of the policies of Government in foreign affairs. I say this and stress on 
this, because I did see from the intervention of the first Member for Port Louis South and Port 
Louis Central that he claimed that there was no clear policy statement for several Ministries 
and it seems to me that he also meant about my Ministry. So, I want to reassure him that a lot 
is being done, part of which is being unfolded before this House today. 

Now,  let  me  come  to  the  bilateral  relations  with  our  development  partners.  I  think 
everyone who is sensible and who is fair, will accept that one of the prime objectives of this 
Budget is to steer our economy towards an investment and an employment path. In keeping 
with such a mandate, my Ministry will seek to devise the right policy orientation to ensure 
that we strengthen our foothold on the global export market and secure the necessary support 
at  international  level.    This  is  where  engaging  in  a  constructive  manner  with  our  bilateral 
partners will, therefore, remain a priority of this country’s diplomatic agenda and this with a 

 

45 

view to enlisting the support of our development partners and other friendly countries for all 
areas outlined in this Budget. 

I could go on here. We have India, China, a number of European countries, a number 
of economic blocks, the European Union and the United States. There is so much to say, but 
maybe I should say one word in particular to a promise made and a promise kept. Here,  I 
refer to the decision taken this year to open an Embassy, our first Embassy in the Gulf region, 
that is, in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, as the Rt. hon. Prime Minister had pledged. This 
Embassy  will,  in  addition  to  facilitating  the  annual  Holy  Hajj  pilgrimage  for  many  of  our 
brothers  and  sisters,  allow  us  to  open  a  new  and  meaningful  chapter  in  our  bilateral 
relationships with this important country in the Middle East and I believe that it will be the 
start of fruitful relations with the Gulf region. Maybe here, I shall say, although I have not 
delved  into  our  relationship  with  our  bilateral  partners  and  other  development  partners 
because I would take two hours and we could write a book, that there is so much that can be 
done and there is so much, with the stewardship of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, which will be 
done. 

But I should perhaps say just a few words about the trade and investment managers 
announced  in  the  Budget,  leaving  aside  our  relationship  with  our  bilateral  and  multilateral 
partners.  Indeed,  as  regards  the  trade  and  investment  managers,  I  believe  that  our  country 
should  welcome  the  decision  taken  by  Government  to  appoint  eight  trade  and  investment 
managers in the strategic cities mentioned in the Budget, that is, Beijing, Geneva, Pretoria, 
London, Moscow, Mumbai, New York and Paris. 

To us, on this side of the House, Madam Speaker, this is a natural follow-up to our 
conscious decision to empower the nation through the rise of a class of entrepreneurs. We see 
those  commercial  attachés  as  a  natural  extension  of  our  diplomatic  efforts  to  extend  our 
frontiers and access various parts of the world.  

I  must  now  say  something  very  quickly,  Madam  Speaker,  about  services.  All  this 
time, we have spoken about diplomatic relations and we have spoken about foreign policy as 
regards trade in goods. But I think, we must realise that we have limitations as regards trade 
in goods which are amplified by the exiguity of our domestic market which is itself limited 
by the concept of economies of scale.  

Therefore, Government believes that it is very important for Mauritius to strengthen 
the services sector. Madam Speaker, we may, in this respect, have remained insensitive to the 

 

46 

continuous upsurge of  global imports and exports of trade in services. Just to give  you an 
example, for the year 2013, the global imports and exports of trade in services totalled 8.6 
trillion US Dollars. Out of 8.6 trillion US Dollars, 4.4 trillion US Dollars were for exports of 
services and 4.2 trillion US Dollars were for imports of services.  But there is no agreement 
regulating services in the world to this day and this is why Government has given its green 
light  for  Mauritius  to  participate  in  ongoing  plurilateral  discussions  on  trade  in  services 
taking place in Geneva. Here, I think the other side of the House should be blamed because 
these negotiations known as TISA (Trade in Services Agreement) have been ongoing since 
March 2013 and as at February 2015, the 24 WTO members negotiating with TISA had held 
10 rounds of negotiations. Mauritius was out of it because they were busy cozer cozer from 
2013 and during 2014… 

(Interruptions) 

Yes!  And  we  were  out  of  it!  You  realise  we  failed!  We  could  not  access  a  market  of  4.2 
trillion US Dollars… 

(Interruptions) 

We could not access a market of 4.4 trillion US Dollars of trade in services because they were 
busy cozer cozer and had closed down Parliament!  

To say the least! 

(Interruptions) 

 (Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 
Mr Sinatambou: The last thing I will say before concluding, Madam Speaker, is how 
Mauritius is recognised as a champion of rule of law, human rights, democracy, social justice, 
transparency  and  good  governance.  The  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration 
and International Trade will pursue the advocacy efforts of this country in those fields which 
is why I need to bring to the attention of the House the signature on 17 March, that is, nearly 
two  weeks  only  now,  of  the  United  Nations  Convention  on  Transparency  in  Treaty-based 
Investor-State  Arbitration  also  known  as  the  Mauritius  Convention  on  Transparency.  I 
believe this country should take pride in Mauritius having been the first country to sign that 
UN Convention, demonstrating the commitment of this Government to upholding principles 
of transparency and good governance and to enhancing our visibility as a regional centre of 
excellence for arbitration. 

This  House  must  know  that  this  is  the  only  instance  where  a  United  Nations 
Convention  specifically  bears  the  name  of  Mauritius.  By  entering  into  the  annals  of  UN 

 

47 

history, the Mauritius Convention will outlive us all, but will certainly give greater visibility 
to our appurtenance to the United Nations family… 

(Interruptions) 

To  conclude,  Madam  Speaker,  I  will  simply  say  that  the  work  of  the  Ministry  of 
Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade is a long haul to achieve the 
foreign  policy  objectives  of  our  country  within  the  vision  of  a  prosperous  and  sustainable 
Mauritius fully integrated in a globalised and equitable world. Under the leadership of the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister, my Ministry will gear itself, building both on its established networks 
and  by  seeking  out  new  ones  in  order  to  strategise  on  the  potential  sources  required  to 
succeed in our endeavour to obtain a second economic miracle of Mauritius. Our sense of 
purpose will pervade our actions and will be more focused on tangible outcomes and benefits. 
To conclude, Madam Speaker, I can only say that Budget 2015 is good for Mauritius. 
This is why I and I believe everyone should stand up at some stage and commend it to our 
nation. 

Thank you, Madam. 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Husnoo! 

 
(3.35 p.m.) 

The Minister of Local Government (Dr. A. Husnoo): Madam Speaker, to start with, 
if you would allow me to say a few words on the speech of my colleague and good friend, 
hon. Dr. Joomaye. In the section about health service, I think, I am in a better position to talk 
about the health service - I mean, no disregard to him - because I have been in the service in 
both the private and public sectors. So, I think I can talk a bit about the service. I joined the 
service in 1982 so that I have a bit of experience in the service as well. 

To come and criticise the public sector, I think, was a bit unfair. I remember when I 
came in 1982 how the service was and in what way the service has improved. When he came 
and talked about the public sector, I think that was a bit unfair again. He was criticising the 
Minister of Health. Why? Because in the last three months that he has been here, he is going 
to take only hundred doctors. He should have taken 400 doctors. But we have been here only 
for three months! He was talking about the ENT Hospital. Good! But the Minister has come 
with the opening of a hospital for cancer treatment as well. The Minister has come with the 
decentralisation  of  the  ophthalmology  service,  in  fact,  in  his  constituency,  in  Souillac,  if  I 
understand well. Maybe he forgot to mention about it! That too in the last three months! A 
new hospital is going to be built at the ENT, a new cancer hospital, decentralisation of the 

 

48 

ophthalmology service, hundred doctors are going to be taken, for three months I don’t think 
we can… 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, not to mention the methadone treatment as well. I don’t think we should be too unfair to 
the health service! Then he talked about the Mediclinic.  He said that he would prefer better 
personal care. We all like to have better personal care. But because of that, we should not 
blame the Mediclinic. The Mediclinic opening 24 hours is providing a good care to the whole 
population. I mean tell me in which country in the world where we can get 24 hours a day 
personal care. Does it exist in UK? Does it exist in France? Does it exist in the USA? Not in 
one country in the world! 

(Interruptions) 

Exactly! To say that we should provide personal care, I think we have to be reasonable a bit 
as well. These were the one or two things that I wanted to mention, I do not want to go into 
more details, but what I want to say is that we have to be a bit fair, in the last three months, I 
think the Ministry of Health has done quite a bit and I think we have to agree to that. 

Now,  if  you  will  allow  me,  Madam,  to  come  to  my  speech.  Allow  me,  Madam 
Speaker,  from  the  very  onset  to  congratulate  my  colleague,  the  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic  Development  who  has  presented  a  Budget  that  will  gear  the  economy  to  a  new 
path of prosperity, modernity and greater social justice. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  essence  of  a  modern  and  equitable  society  has  already  been 
highlighted in the Government Programme for 2015-2019 where we have outlined our vision 
to shift the country to its next level of development and where every citizen can enjoy the 
fruits of economic progress and aspire for brighter future.  

This Budget is, in fact, part of a bold and sound strategy to prepare the country to move 
into  the  next  phase  of  its  development.    It  aims,  among  others,  at  making  the  country’s 
economy more globally competitive, improving the quality of education and health services, 
as well as providing better infrastructure, promoting ICT development and sustaining sound 
environmental development. 

Madam Speaker, the massive investment proposed in some of the key sectors, namely 
Social Security (over Rs18 billion), Education (over Rs14 billion), Health (Rs10 billion) and 
Public  Infrastructure  (over  Rs3  billion),  is  a  clear  indication  of  this  Government’s 
commitment to shift from the lethargy of the previous Government in order to prepare the 
country to face the various challenges lying ahead. 

 

49 

In fact, one of the trademarks of this Government is that we dare to take bold decisions 
and  stand  up  to  the  challenges  as  we  are  confident  that,  with  our  principle  of  good 
governance  and  our  dynamic  team,  we  shall  successfully  reach  our  targets  and  objectives.  
Our achievements over the 100 days since we are in power are references of our seriousness 
and the capacity to deliver. 

Madam Speaker, Mauritius cannot sit back and hope for miracles.  We just cannot do 
that.    Failure  to  act  now  will  have  profound  negative  consequences  in  the  coming  years.  
Hence,  the  propriety  of  presenting  such  a  Budget,  aiming  amongst  others  of  instilling 
confidence  in  the  private  sector  by  creating  a  conducive  environment  for  investment  and 
revamping the economy. 

In this Budget, the Minister of Finance and Economic Development has rightly pointed 
out that Mauritius is at a crossroad, and has set four objectives which we need to aim at to 
gear the country on the right path ahead, that is, high investment and high employment, long-
term sustainable development, greater equity and social justice, and transparency and good 
governance in the management of public affairs. 

Madam Speaker, during the debates on the Government Programme, I talked about two 
main issues which were at the heart of the Government policy, namely fighting poverty and 
fighting corruption.  The Minister of Finance and Economic Development has now come up 
with  a  Marshall  Plan  to  fight  poverty,  with  a  massive  budget  for  the  Ministry  of  Social 
Security,  National  Solidarity  and  Reform  Institutions,  confirm  the  construction  of  1,700 
houses  and  436  service  plots,  identify  a  minimum  -  I  say  a  minimum  -  of  38  pockets  of 
poverty  which  would  be  taken  care  of  by  the  National  Empowerment  Foundation  and  the 
CSR. 

Madam Speaker, as you are aware, the economy has been stagnating with an average 

growth of 3% of the last decade. 

Our  traditional  sectors  are  experiencing  low  growth  rate,  low  investment  and  low 
employment creation, bordering even on a negative job creation.  I would like to highlight a 
couple of measures mentioned in this Budget, which we, on this side the House, are confident 
will give a solid boost to the economy. 

Firstly, the vast infrastructural development through the 13 mega projects, namely the 
Omnicane Airport City, the St Felix Village Project, the Medine Integrated Park, the Roches 
Noires, the Azuri and the Terra Project, the Highlands City, the Riche Terre Project and not 
to forget the five Technopoles. 

50 

 
 
Madam  Speaker,  as  mentioned  by  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development, six of these projects are almost ready for implementation.  These projects will 
involve  7,000  acres  of  land  and  will  mobilise  about  Rs120  billion  or  private  and  foreign 
direct  investment.    Just  imagine,  Madam  Speaker,  the  boost  that  this  will  give  to  the 
construction industry and job creation opportunities. 

The  local  authorities  concerned  will  have  a  very  crucial  role  to  play  in  the 
materialisation of this project, and they will not only have to ensure that all the necessary 
permits required from their end are given in a timely manner, but also acting as a facilitator at 
their level to make the project a success. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, one of the mesures phares in this Budget is to transform the 
country into a land of entrepreneurs.  In fact, with this Budget, we are ensuring that we walk 
the  talk.    We,  on  this  side  of  the  House,  are  confident  that  with  the  plethora  of  measures 
enunciated  for  the  SMEs,  we  are  going  to  make  the  slogan  “Ile  Maurice,  nation 
d’entrepreneurs’ a reality. 

Among the numerous measures announced to boost the SME sector is the SME bank 
that will be created with an injection of Rs10 billion over the next five years.  A number of 
actions will be taken to improve the ease of starting a business. A one-stop shop will give all 
the  necessary  support,  financing  and  information,  as  well  as  the  delivery  of  permits  and 
licences. The number of permits and licences will be reduced to a minimum. 

Moreover, SMEs registered under this scheme will be exempted from the payment of 
corporate  tax  for  a  period  of  eight  years,  Madam  Speaker.    In  the  same  vein,  it  is  worth 
pointing out the scheme of the Government to tailor-made crash course at the University of 
Mauritius  for  3,000  gradués  chômeurs.    This  course  will  cost  an  average  of  Rs80,000  per 
student  per  year.    This  measure  will  no  doubt  provide  an  opportunity  for  the  youth  to  be 
better  equipped  to  find  a  job  on  the  market,  or  to  build  on  the  training  and  experience 
gathered to start a project if they really want. 

Thirdly, the project for transforming the Port Louis harbour into a regional hub. 
Madam  Speaker,  with  the  gradual  relocation  of  the  administrative  activities  to  the 
Highlands City, Port Louis will have to reinvent, to transform itself into a dynamic regional 
port and become a key contributor to the economic development of this country.  That’s why 
this transformation of Port Louis harbour from a destination port to a regional hub has all its 
importance.  Port Louis will develop into a hub for bunkering, both offshore and onshore - 
and that has already started - seafood, transshipment, cruise and petroleum service and the 
development of the container terminal. 

 

51 

To ensure the successful development of these projects, the Government is coming with 
a fast track committee, which will steamroll any impediment that may hinder their smooth 
implementation. 

I  believe  that,  with  the  will  of  the  Government  and  the  active  participation  of  the 
private  sector  and/or  foreign  investors,  there  will  be  a  major  transformation  of  the  whole 
island in the years to come. 

It  goes  without  saying  that  the  Ministry  of  Local  Government,  through  the  local 
authorities, will also have to play a major part in this transformation process. With all the 
changes being envisaged in the economic landscape of the country, the local authorities will 
also have to revisit their way of doing things. 

The  administrative  bottlenecks  at  the  level  of  the  local  authorities  would  have  to  be 
eliminated, and they will have to develop and adopt a fast track mechanism and a quick way 
of doing business.  This is very important because investors are not going to waste their time 
waiting for ages to get a permit, Madam Speaker.  The whole system of issuing permits and 
licences  would  need  to  be  revisited  for  the  rapid  determination  of  all  applications  in  a 
harmonised manner. 

Moreover,  work  is  ongoing  to  enhance  the  portal  of  the  local  authorities  for  the  e-
payment  facilities  to  become  a  reality  at  the  earliest.  The  existing  IT  infrastructure  of  the 
local  authorities  is  being  enhanced  for  online  submission  of  applications  for  Building  and 
Land Use Permit, and the determination thereof will be communicated to the applicants via 
email  as  well.    The  objective  of  these  initiatives  is  to  improve  the  proximity  of  the  local 
authorities to the citizens and to provide a more efficient service to the public. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  local  authorities  will  have  to  be  more  efficient.  We  cannot 
continue as it used to be.  We all have at heart the development of our country and all the 12 
local authorities will need to endeavour to improve on the manner of doing business. 

If we want the country to progress or rather to catch up what we did not manage to 
achieve in the last 10 years, it cannot be business as usual. I am sure that, with the support 
and collaboration of one and all at the level of the Local Authorities, all the impediments to 
progress will be removed and we will contribute in the making of this new Mauritius.  

On a different level, Madam,  we are all aware of the negative impact of gambling on 
the household budget. If a handful of people has become millionnaire by chance, the majority 
has  lost  and  continue  to  lose  a  sizeable  portion  of  their  monthly  income.  We  are  totally 
supportive of the Government’s intention and the measures announced to control gambling 
and  betting  in  Mauritius,  more  particularly,  the  ones  pertaining  to  the  total  ban  on 

 

52 

advertisement  and  the  substantial  increase  in  the  gaming  licence  fee  and  betting  tax.  The 
relocation  of  the  gambling  houses  from  the  city  centres  to  other  designated  areas  will,  no 
doubt, help in preventing people becoming addicted to gaming.  

Madam Speaker, as I have mentioned previously, the problem of hawkers is a major 
social  and  economic  problem.  I  repeat,  we  have  to  solve  it  in  a  humane  way,  taking  into 
account  the  interests  of  everybody  concerned;  the  shop  owners,  the  market  traders,  the 
hawkers and the public at large. As mentioned in paragraph 152 of the Budget Speech, the 
implementation of the project for the reconstruction of a Hawkers Centre at La Gare du Nord 
will start this year. My colleague, the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 
and I, are working on the project and I am confident that the actual work will start very soon. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  would  also  like  to  emphasise  the  particular  attention  that  
Government is paying to the Mauritius Fire and Rescue Service, which is called upon to play 
a  more  active  role  in  the  forefront  of  today’s  society  in  building  safer,  stronger  and  more 
resilient  communities,  through  a  better  emphasis  on  prevention,  education  and  emergency 
preparedness. Madam Speaker, in fact, we saw the Fire Service in action in the recent flood 
and I think we all commend their action.  

With the changing global weather pattern, the country may have to face more violent 
cyclones, flash flood, etc. It is a fact that we will have to live with. The Mauritius Fire and 
Rescue Service should therefore be adequately prepared to stand up to the challenging rescue 
operations as a result of these climatic changes. 

My Ministry will support the Mauritius Fire and Rescue Service in its endeavour to 
have  the  required  manpower,  physical  infrastructure  and  access  to  modern  firefighting 
methodologies. The improvement of the Mauritius Fire and Rescue Service forms part of a 
strategic  vision  and  direction  of  Government  to  make  Mauritius  a  modern  and  highly 
developed nation. The underpinning objective of this vision is the improvement of the quality 
of life and standard of living of all of our citizens, similar to that of developed societies of the 
world. 

In this context, with a view to enhancing the rescue capabilities of the Mauritius Fire 
and Rescue Service, the construction of three new fire stations are programmed in the years 
to come. 

Moreover, the feasibility study for the reconstruction of the Port Louis Fire Station is 
in the pipeline. We are all aware of the poor state of the current building and the potential 
threats  and  hazards  to  both  its  occupants  and  firefighters.  The  building  has,  in  fact,  been 

 

53 

found to be unsafe for its users and beyond economic repairs. A comprehensive plan for the 
complete reconstruction of the building is thus being envisaged. 

Further,  funds  have  been  earmarked  for  the  acquisition  of  firefighting  and  rescue 
equipment  to  the  tune  of  Rs40  m.  for  the  period  January-June  2015  and  Rs42  m.  for  the 
financial year 2015-2006. The equipment to be acquired include, amongst others, semiurban 
vehicles, water tankers, fire hydrants, etc. 

Moreover,  to  help  improve  other  firefighting  capabilities  and  other  emergency 
actions, 165 new firefighters will be recruited this year. As such, we will improve the fire and 
other emergency coverage ratio and also equip our firefighters to better perform their duties 
towards our local communities. 

Madam Speaker, we, as a caring Government, will act on all our commitments taken 
vis-a-vis the population. My Ministry will provide the Mauritius Fire and Rescue Services all 
the assistance it will require to achieve its mission. 

To  conclude,  Madam  Speaker,  as  my  colleague,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development has said in his speech, it cannot be business as usual; there should be 
a major paradigmshift. With the support of the whole Mauritian people, I think we can take 
up these economic and development challenges and build up a prosperous Mauritius for the 
benefit of one and all.  

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

 

(3.55 p.m.) 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):  Madam Speaker, the issues and challenges of my Ministry are such that I 
will be devoting the whole of my speech to the energy and water sector. However much, I 
would have liked to delve into other issues, more specially, the Constituency that I represent, 
No.19. I shall unfortunately not have the time to go into it; I will try. 

The last two PNQs of the hon. Leader of the Opposition have, and indeed, the PNQs 
which he asked from my predecessor indicate one thing, that energy is a matter of national 
interest  and  what  has  emerged  is  that  it  is  a  non  partisan  issue,  except  for  variations  of 
policies; but, it shows that the nation is at one on that considerably important subject which is 
called  energy  and  water.  When  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  -  on  the  day  following  the 
elections - told me that he wanted me to look after the energy sector, I said there must be 
something  wrong  with  him,  but  then,  I  did  not  think  for  very  long,  and  I  accepted  it  as  a 
challenge in a field in which I hold no expertise and do not profess to be able to compare with 

 

54 

people like hon. Jahangeer, but yet, that gives me the bird’s eye view, the eagle view of the 
matter,  and  probably  an  objectivity,  which  others  would  not  have  had  because  of  their 
speciality  in  this  subject.  I  have  talked  very  often  with  hon.  Jahangeer  and  I  can  see  how 
dangerous  it  can  be  to  have  a  specialist  dealing  with  policy  matters,  in  matters  of  his 
speciality, doctors at the Ministry of Health or Engineers in Public Infrastructure, etc. 

(Interruptions) 

Because for the Attorney General, the Constitution has obliged him to be the Legal Advisor 
of Government.  

Now, the first matter which we have to deal with is the fear that we may not be able to 
meet the demand for electricity. Time and time again, that has been the overall consideration. 
The  Leader  of  the  Opposition  is  right  when  he  says  this;  I  am  not  too  sure,  what  CEB  is 
telling us, whether this is right, but we have got to be cautious.  And what I have said is that, 
although I am not overtly optimistic, I am not a doomsday scenario person.  

Let us see the main issues. First of all, we have St. Louis. At St. Louis, there has been 
a redevelopment plan by CEB about five  years ago to install 60 additional MW. We have 
peak demands of about 450 MW, so, 60 MW is very well towards meeting a sufficiency. I 
have said in my PNQ why, up to now, St. Louis is not starting and just now I have phoned 
people to know what has happened at the level of the Independent Review Panel because I 
told  CEB:  you  have  got  to  inform  them  that  now  we  are  going  on  a  new  tender  and 
apparently, even this is meeting some obstacles. I am going to review this immediately after 
my speech, to know what has happened and why anything has happened. We need St. Louis; 
there is no doubt about it.  

Second,  CT  Power,  let  us  be  clear  on  one  issue!  CT  Power  is  one  thing,  coal  is 
another thing. The only thing that has happened on CT Power is that Government has refused 
to  sign  an  implementation  agreement  which  would,  in  effect,  guarantee  the  obligations  of 
CEB.  Why?    Because  CT  Power  could  not  establish  its  financial  capabilities  to  our 
satisfaction!  I  have  discussed  this  with  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development,  we  were  of  the  same  view  and  we  have  said,  we  are  not  going  to  sign  the 
implementation agreement. That is contractual, that is legal. I am not concerned, and we are 
not concerned with allegations of fraud, corruption, environmental issues and neighbourhood 
issues; these have not been relevant consideration in the making of our decision. This has got 
to be made clear because CT Power was unable to satisfy us of the financial capabilities of 
that component.  

 

55 

Thirdly,  we  have  Beau  Champ.  Beau  Champ  came  to  expiry  and  it  came  up  for 
renegotiations.  If  we  had  not  been  successful  on  Beau  Champ,  then  I  would  have  been 
extremely worried and not simply worried, but we have been successful. We know that now 
there is a Power Purchase Agreement for 22 MW. So, we are on - what the hon. Leader of the 
Opposition calls - the tightrope. It is never comfortable to be on a tightrope, because you need 
something to balance yourself, and it is that balancing exercise which we all in Government 
will need to do with the help of all political parties. 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, he is on the tightrope. Yes. But then the problem is that he has got no balance to hold, 
that is the problem.  

So,  it  is  22  MW  up  to  2018  so  that,  for  the  moment,  we  can  say  that  we  are 
comfortable and that we should not have fear of any blackout rolling or otherwise; rolling 
blackouts, that is, one day in Port Louis, one day in Curepipe, etc.  

I am convinced of CEB’s arguments and of their facts and figures. I am waiting for 
the final World Bank Report on that issue and I shall be asking Government whether it agrees 
to make it public so that it may become the subject of debates, if need be, in the press and 
even in the Assembly if that is the wish of the House so that we know what the future holds 
for us.  

Whether Beau Champ CT Power, St. Louis, etc., there is no doubt that by 2018 we 
will need additional capacity. Experts tell me it is 100 MW; I don’t have any reason to doubt 
them. Of course, I can say 2018 is behind me, let me not bother about 2018, but, of course, 
we  need  to  bother  about  2018.  I  have  a  lot  of  respect  for  my  predecessor,  not  only  as  a 
person,  as  a  Minister  as  well,  but  I  think  he  failed  when  he  did  not,  because  of  political 
pressures.  

It is astounding that the energy sector had been turned into a political and even racial 
issue by the previous Government. Pressures were brought to bear on my  predecessor and 
you can see it when reading through the files that there was pressure from above not to do 
this, not to do that, because the Prime Minister had to make an incendiary speech wherever -
and it was based only on the colour of the skin. That was amazing and the result is that now 
we are faced with the lack of proper planning and this is what we have got to make up for.  

What is our policy, now? Let us try and see what is the policy at the Ministry! CT 
Power has traumatised public opinion. Public opinion is that coal is a nasty, dirty thing which 
is going to invade our house, but that was a consequence of the issue in CT Power.  Because 
CT Power could not convince anyone of their financial standing or of their source of funds or 

 

56 

who they were and what they were, they became branched on that debate, issues relating to 
the environment.  

Today, coal can be zero CO2 emission. This is what people tell me, and I have been 
told today, the German Ambassador came to talk to me with offer of technical assistance as 
well  as  financial  assistance  in  Germany.  I  hope  that  our  Ambassador  in  Germany  will  be 
proactive on that issue and will be able to bridge the gap between Germany and Germany is 
ahead of all the world on that issue and that is from where we have got to tap resources; these 
advanced countries would know what to do and we will be able to do a lot about this. When I 
hear no to coal, it is as if I hear people saying no to alcohol. 
(Interruptions) 

We should not be extremists. Of course, we can’t have coal burning itself into our 
houses, but we need to see what other fields can be envisaged. The one that has impressed me 
- and I am going to put up a special cell, I have asked somebody who knows about it to be my 
special adviser on this. It is liquefied natural gas which one can obtain from Mozambique, but 
it is costly to transport and we need harbour facilities. The question will be financial more 
than anything else. We shall see whether we can come with the plan on LNG because this can 
be  obtained  from  Mozambique.  And,  again,  our  Ambassador  in  Mozambique  can  be 
extremely helpful on that matter. We shall need to see whether our exclusive economic zone 
does not contain liquefied natural gas. There have been researchers and  I am sure that the 
people who have the data on this matter know where to look for in order to see whether we 
have LNG. If we have, then it is bonanza for us. Apart from that, we have solar energy, we 
have wind energy.  

Today, solar and wind energy is far advanced in this field.  I know, I meet lots of 
resistance when I talk about it, as if it is romance and poetry, but just go to Reunion anytime 
you want. See what Reunion has done in the field of wind turbines and solar energy. Alright, 
you will tell me they have got France!  Then, go to the Seychelles!  They don’t have France.  
See what they have done in the field of solar energy. It is feasible. There was the will because 
we have Plaine Sophie  which was initiated under the previous  Government.  It has not  yet 
started, but there have been issues on the felling of trees, etc.  I gave the answer to a PQ two 
weeks or one week ago. And then, we have got Plaine des Roches, a small wind farm which 
is going to give us some 9 MW.  I hear people say: “Oh no, wind turbines, they make noise. 
We don’t know what to do with them and then they produce little electricity”, but it is the 
addition of little by little that makes us become energy sufficient. There is the solar PV farm 
at  Bambous;  the  Seetaram  one.  There  is  an  issue  of  surplus  land  which  has  been  used  by 

 

57 

them. My very good and efficient friend of the Ministry of Housing and Lands is looking into 
it, but apart from that, technically it is sound. It is a German project. I have met these German 
people. They appear to me to be sound people and it is, in fact, working. The only thing is the 
contractual price which was imposed on CEB.  CEB is paying Rs6.11 and this we know why 
they have got that good price.  What can we do?  Contractually that is the price!   

(Interruptions) 

Now,  what  are  we  going  to  do?  Very  soon,  we  are  going  to  issue  invitations  for 
expressions of interest for all promoters who are interested to implement projects using solar, 
wind, biomass and waste. I shall come to these later.   

Projects are piling up on my desk and I have said: “Instead of that, we need to invite 
all people, make a public invitation and then we set up a special cell with my advisers and 
with CEB to see which projects we are going to take on the first call”.  I have seen interesting 
projects.    For  example,  planting  bamboo  in  Madagascar,  converting  them  into  pellets  and 
bringing them to Mauritius to fire our turbines.  That is South-South Corporation at the same 
time.  Madagascar  will  give  us  as  much  land  as  we  want  for  this  and  bamboo  grows  in 
Madagascar, the Malagasy know how to do this and we will just need to have the adequate 
machinery to convert into pellets and then we will send them here and we can try and do this.  
A very good business as well!  If you see paragraph 120 of the Budget Speech, it says - 
“To encourage households to have their own solar energy unit, I am 
allowing the total investment in such equipment to be deductible from 
chargeable income.” 

   

Let us say it clearly! If Government does not give incentives, people will not do it.  
Rooftop solar PV is a solution.  Not necessarily to be sold back to CEB, but, of course, this is 
possible  but  then  it  means  CEB  re-inventing  its  grid,  having  a  smart  grid  to  be  able  to 
accommodate this additional one.  CEB will have to do it.  CEB cannot continue to be just 
classical and there is going to be a new Board  with a new General Manager with specific 
instructions as a matter of policy to look at the possibilities of modernising its structures and 
its grid; the same will apply for the CWA, much more.  CEB has got a good infrastructure, 
but they have got to use it.   

First of all, the first reason why we have got to do that is the environment.  It is by no 
coincidence  that  energy  has  been  placed  by  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  in  that  chapter 
dealing with environment.  Environment and energy go together.  My colleague, hon. Dayal 
and myself, we work hand in hand and we have got to progress. In December this year, there 

 

58 

is going to be a United Nations Conference in Paris. My colleague, hon. Dayal, will go there.  
I hope he takes me there as well. 

(Interruptions) 

But it is something that concerns his Ministry and mine as well; energy and the environment 
together.  COP 21! And we want Mauritius to head the Small Island Developing States.  

(Interruptions) 

I think Sir Anerood Jugnauth was Prime Minister when the SIDS came in 2003.  We took the 
lead and then we lost that lead because when there was an international conference in Samoa, 
the previous Prime Minister is not interested in going to Samoa. he took his plane to London. 
He sent his porte-parole to go to Samoa and the poor porte-parole did not understand a thing 
about what it was all about.  He went practically alone.  We lost the lead and Samoa took the 
lead.  Now, I went to Paris and I tried to snatch that lead from Samoa. I think, I have been 
able to do this. 

(Interruptions) 

Hold on!  Hold on! Now, with the cyclone in Vanuatu, Vanuatu has attracted a lot 
of  international  sympathy  and  probably  Vanuatu  will  be  in  the  driving  scene  because  the 
Europeans will want to show what they are doing for Vanuatu which has been devastated by 
a cyclone where everything can be built and it has become an experimental station.  

Secondly, we have to reduce our dependence on fossil fuels and thirdly, energy will be 
the  principal  tool  for  development.    Therefore,  we  have  the  three  issues:  environment, 
reduction on imports and thirdly, our economic  development.  Therefore, if we fail on the 
energy front, there is a risk that we fail on the development front.  How do we do it? The hon. 
Minister of Finance has announced it, at paragraph 119, that there will be the creation of a 
Mauritius Renewable Energy Agency (MARENA).  Why MARENA? It is because there is 
IRENA which is the United Nations arm of renewable energy. IRENA is already committed 
to work for us.  They came in December, but it was General Election period.  They could not 
do much work.  They will be coming back. There is a formidable person who is at the head of 
IRENA.    He  has  promised  us  all  the  technical,  legal,  logistical  advice  which  we  require 
because we must promote the use of renewable energy. That is not enough to produce energy.   

If we produce energy and then we waste it, then the overall effect is negative. This 
is  why  we  need  to  have  an  Energy-Efficiency  Programme.  I  have  discussed  with  Mr  Raj 
Makoond  of  the  JEC,  with  the  Agence  Française  de  Développement,  with  the  French 
Ambassador,  they  are  all  involved  and  we  are  all  involved  in  the  Programme  National 

 

59 

d’Efficacité Energétique (PNEE). Now, they have started with public building. This is with 
the support of Agence Française de Développement and the European Union. What we will 
do is to carry out energy audits in 100 energy intensive enterprises. I have seen the films of 
what  they  do.  They  visit  the  factories  and  they  pinpoint,  they  say:  ‘This  is  where  you  are 
wasting energy and this is what you have to do at very little cost’. 

Major Government buildings have already been surveyed and we need to refurbish the 
7 most energy inefficient buildings, Madam Speaker; the amount of energy which is being 
lost  through  energy  inefficiency  and  which  we  could  save.  I  know  there  is  the  project  of 
Sotravic to use sea water for air-conditioning. The file, I understand, must be worked out, the 
contractual mattters must be worked out, but it may also lead to reduce consumption of these 
Government buildings from 44 MW to 4 MW. That is what the promoters say. I am not sure I 
can count on what they say. We will need awareness campaigns, labels on refrigerators, etc. 
Therefore,  there  is  not  only  a  lot  of  hard  work  to  be  put  in  the  energy  sector,  but  also 
goodwill.  

The water sector is also a difficult one. In order to achieve our promise for 24-hour 
clean drinkable water, de l’eau potable, we need to replace our pipelines. We need to put new 
service reservoirs which we are going to do at Cluny, Balisson, Rivière Dragon, Alma and 
Riche  en  Eau.  They  will  service  these  reservoirs  and  we  will  replace  200  kilometers  of 
pipelines  between  2015-2019.  Bagatelle  Dam  will  mobilise  about  60,000  cubic  meters  of 
water  and  the  lower  parts  of  Plaines  Wilhems  and  Port  Louis  will,  I  hope,  with  the 
rehabilitation of the Pailles Treatment Plant, improve the supply of water to these areas. 

Concerning  the  Rivière  des  Anguilles  Dam  and  the  treatment  plant,  this  will  give 
40,000 cubic meters of water resources to improve water supply in the south and Le Morne 
up to Tamarin. I was rather disappointed to hear and to read what my very good friend, hon. 
Uteem, had to say on Rivière des Anguilles. Let us not forget what I have said in answer to a 
Parliamentary  Question.  There  was  a  consultancy  firm  which  did  the  designs  of  Bagatelle 
Dam. They failed miserably and it has cost us a lot of money. Now, they are discussing a way 
out of the settlement. My good friend, the Attorney General, is looking after this and I am 
assisting him in the little way that I can. These were the appointed consultants for Rivière des 
Anguilles.  The Government - and I believe rightly so - at the time said: “No, we can’t have 
you again”, and that caused us a setback. That does not mean that Rivière des Anguilles has 
been abandoned. My learned friend, hon. Uteem, is an extremely right  guy. MPs from the 
south, hon. Maneesh Gobin will be happy to learn that no provision is made for the actual 

 

60 

construction of Rivière des Anguilles Dam until after 2016. Of course, when he said that, the 
term ‘actual’ is whispered so that you believe, when you hear him, that we will not do Rivière 
des Anguilles Dam. Hon. Maneesh Gobin will be happy to learn that no provision is made for 
the  actual  construction  of  Rivière  des  Anguilles  Dam  until  after  2016.  Technically,  that  is 
absolutely correct.  But then he adds: “Because this Government has chosen not to go ahead 
with the construction of the Rivière des Anguilles Dam in the south.” 

Let us look at the facts in the Budget. To do Rivière des Anguilles Dam, we have, 
now,  to  start  the  commissioning.  Let  me  go  through  the  list.    We  need  to  request  the 
proposals for the appointment of a consultant and the reservoir is expected to be operational 
in  2018.  My  good  friend  contradicts  himself.  Let  me  say  that  it  is  perhaps  through  a 
misreading or like me, he fell asleep when… 

(Interruptions) 

…this part was being dealt with. He cannot say there is no plan for the actual construction 
until after 2016 and then say Government has abandoned the project. That is not possible. 
This is what I read. I was not sure I had heard correctly. 

(Interruptions) 

I am sorry! I took Hansard, because as you say, I was not sure I had heard correctly. This is 
why I asked a copy of my learned friend’s speech, because this Government has chosen not 
to go ahead with the construction of the Rivière des Anguilles Dam in the south, whatever it 
may be, let me reassure my good friend. 

(Interruptions) 

I am sure that is what you meant. Within the 18 months, we are not going to start Rivière des 
Anguilles Dam. Why? 

We have the same thing for what he says on La Ferme. Again, the same language! La 
Ferme is a reservoir which dates back to 1914. None of us, not even you thought of at that 
time. It is old; it has got to be rehabilitated. But what is the problem? The problem is that 
there are a number of squatters and some private land which are there. Those who have been 
involved in Constituency  No. 14 know it better than  I do.  I have read it from the file. Mr 
Aimée did a big political thing about it. I must say, in all fairness, to hon. Ganoo, he did not 
do this. I am not going to involve you in this matter, of course, Madam. He tried to bring 
about, in his usual way, conciliation on this matter and I rely on him to… 

 

61 

(Interruptions) 

But Aimée came and said: “Oh, no!” with his communal language and the project halted. But 
what  is  going  to  happen  if  that  dam  breaks.  So,  now,  I  have  taken  a  plan,  I  have  put  the 
Ministry  of  Housing  and  Lands,  the  National  Empowerment  Foundation  and  we  have 
earmarked a plot of land in Beaux Songes. We are going to try and do something of good 
grade for the squatters, this time a smart village. If I can manage this, I will be extremely 
happy to have done something positive for my country and that is what we need to achieve 
and then rehabilitate La Ferme.  

We have already got the prequalification and bid documents ready. That was under 

the old regime, under my predecessor, I am not taking any credit for this… 

(Interruptions) 

… and all this will be – La Nicolière, Constance, Piton du Milieu and then Pailles treatment 
plant. This is costing Rs735 m. and it will be completed this month, I mean, in April. We still 
have got the whole month of April to go and we hope that we will eliminate all the problems 
of water supply in the area. 

Regarding wastewater - I am going to go a bit fast as my time will be running out very 
soon - provision of Rs1 billion for the completion of the Plaines Wilhems Sewerage Project 
and  the  Pailles-Guibies  Project.  Certain  regions  which  have  been  raised  in  certain 
parliamentary questions, for example, the Albion area which has been raised twice by hon. 
Bhagwan  and  which  my  learned  friend  hon.  Lepoigneur  also  raised  with  me  in  a  sort  of 
common partnership between the MMM and l’Alliance Lepep for this… 

Yes, but l’Alliance Lepep! 

(Interruptions) 

I have gone there myself to see whether there was no exaggeration on the part of hon. 

Bhagwan which he is prone to do… 

(Interruptions) 

… but I went there and he did not exaggerate, on the contrary, he understated the problem… 

(Interruptions) 

The problem is acute. I have asked the Wastewater Management Authority that they must do 
something, at least, pumping of the wastewater for the moment as an alleviation. We have 
also got the Verger Bissambur which is high on my preoccupations. 

62 

 
The  problem  of  wastewater  is  that  this  has  been  a  sort  of  deep  bucket.  The  cost 
overruns are impossible to calculate. We don’t know how much money has been wasted in 
wastewater… 

(Interruptions) 

… down the drain! So, Government has decided, on my suggestion, that we have to make a 
complete audit, technical, management and financial in order to know what has happened. 
How come billions - we are talking of billions of rupees - have been lost without anything to 
explain it! So, I hope that this audit will help to improve future project planning, monitoring 
and implementation. Let me say that we should not jump to the conclusion that this is through 
fraud  and  corruption,  it  could  be  through  gross  mismanagement.  There  is  no  contract 
management unit. This is… 

(Interruptions) 

… common practice. Yes, it was a common practice of the last Government. I cannot imagine 
how  people  who  have  the  Mauritian  nationality,  who  are  born  in  Mauritius  and  whose 
children  are  to  live  in  Mauritius,  can  have  mortgaged  the  future  of  next  generations  on 
wastage! 

Yes, wastewater! That is a crime! 

(Interruptions) 

 (Interruptions) 

Lastly, what I am going to do is to make operational the Utility Regulatory Authority. 
We  cannot  continue  to  have  the  CEB  being  the  producer,  the  transmitter,  the  seller,  the 
invoicer and the contractor and itself doing with everything on electricity. There must be… 

Yes, it is like Dufry, everybody does… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, with the socioculturel also having an influence on that! We cannot continue like this. 
We need a regulatory authority. At that time, my predecessor invited for people to express 
their interest to be the General Manager of that Authority. There was one who was selected, 
who appears on paper to be excellent, a foreigner. Then, of course, everyone wanted to put 
his political nominee there. There it was! It came to a standstill. 

Let  me  come  to  nominations.  I  hear  lots  of  people  talking  of  nominees,  political 
nominees. What political nominees? We are putting competent people who are close to us 
and this is what I am doing at the CEB, the CWA and Wastewater. What do you want me to 

 

63 

do? I go to the Labour Party Constituency of Belle Rive and choose somebody to put on the 
CWA! 

(Interruptions) 

Or do I want to put somebody who shares my vision and my policy to implement this? 

(Interruptions) 

When we compare with what was being done then… 

Alright, let me just forget about that issue because I… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

I promised to be non-polemical. But let me finish with a note of polemic! 

I heard hon. Quirin and hon. Uteem. Let us be clear on what the MMM wants! Hon. 

Lutchmeenaraidoo, the Minister of Finance… 

(Interruptions) 

He was leading the economic package of the Remake! Sir Anerood Jugnauth and 
hon.  Bérenger  had  agreed  that  hon.  Lutchmeenaraidoo  was  going  to  be  the  one  to  be  the 
driving force. It is not strange that his Budget should resemble what the MMM and the MSM 
had agreed when they were working together to implement the plan! 

(Interruptions) 

And we retained what is good! When I hear hon. Quirin, I hear exactly that same language 
with, of course, a few criticisms. I applauded him because his speech was MMM. But when I 
hear hon. Uteem, I am sure he does it unconsciously… 

(Interruptions) 

…  and  I  commend  him  to  a  re-reading  of  his  speech  and  I  commend  a  re-reading  of  his 
speech to all Members of this House. You know what? This is Labour Party talk! 

I can hear… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! Order, please! Order! 

Order! 

Mr Collendavelloo: Of course! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

Of course, there is a… 

…. dose of exaggeration in what I say! 

64 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

But, all told, we have a remarkable situation in these two speeches which we have 
heard from two Members coming from the same party! I will be waiting impatiently for the 
speech of the hon. Leader of the Opposition to see where he positions himself. Is it as certain 
people pretend that the MMM/Labour Party alliance is not dead? 

(Interruptions) 

Is it as we have heard yesterday on the radio that with the Labour Party of Dr. Boolell, we 
can talk and with the  Labour Party of Dr. Ramgoolam we cannot talk? Is there something 
afoot? We shall have to be very clear on that because we owe it to our people to speak carré 
carré with them. 

(Interruptions) 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for half an hour for tea. 
   
  At 4.36 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 5.10 p.m. with the Deputy Speaker in the Chair. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Hurreeram! 

Mr  M.  Hurreeram  (First  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien):    Thank 
you,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.    Allow  me,  first  of  all,  to  congratulate  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister,  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  hon.  Vishnu  Lutchmeenaraidoo,  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic  Development,  and  the  Government  for  a  Budget  that  is  paving  the  road  to  the 
Mauritius 2015. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, most people in life fail not because they aim too high and 
miss but because they aim too low and hit.  This Government has, indeed, aimed very high in 
its ambition to build a better Mauritius.  This is what the Opposition is failing to understand.  
We have also taken note of the comments of the Opposition, which glorify nothing else but 
their  ignorance.    It  shows  that  they  are  failing  to  see  the  bigger  picture  that  this  Budget 
projects.  On the other hand, all professionals, economists, technocrats and even, with all due 
respect, the hard to please trade unionists, have shown their appreciation.  Only the Leader of 
the Opposition has voiced trivial remarks in his usual attempt to create buzz.   What did he 

 

65 

say about this Budget?  Un budget décousu!  What did he have to say regarding last year’s 
Budget?  Un budget décevant!  The same charade year in, year out!  We can even foretell 
what his comment would be for the next Budget.  Fortunately, we know that no one takes him 
seriously; not even in his own Party nowadays. 

Let me refresh the memory of the hon. Members.  In 1982, during his first Budget as 
Minister  of  Finance,  when  the  country  was  au  bord  de  la  banqueroute  left  by  Parti 
travailliste, hon. Bérenger gifted Rs57 m. taxpayers’ money aux barons sucriers.  Why?  His 
justification  was  that  only  the  private  sector  would  bring  economic  growth.      Well,  this 
Budget is appealing to the private sector … 

I know it hurts!  So, hon. Members better listen! 

(Interruptions) 

This Budget is appealing to the private sector for its provision to alleviate poverty 
by adopting an integrated and holistic approach in a systematic and controlled manner, and 
with a proper monitoring of the CSR from the private sector is in itself un projet d’envergure.   
But,  now,  hon.  Bérenger  finds  that  we  are  relying  too  much  on  the  private  sector  for  its 
contribution to the needy people.  What he fails to understand again is that we want to create 
a new corporate culture where companies are not only profit geared, but also socially geared.  
You  imagine  the  plight,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  of  the  employees  whose  companies  are 
making significant impact on the life of the socially and fortunate countrymen. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, on the other hand, we have a leader in waiting and being a 
porte-parole, reminding  us here of the very famous  Iznogoud  who wants to be  calife à la 
place du calife of his very tiny Party that is now the type of thing that no one wants to touch 
even from far with a stick.  We will not linger on his nonsensical comment.  Maybe, he was 
busy  distributing  macaroni.    Just  because  he  is  only  a  porte-parole,  he  had  to  make  some 
nasty  comments.    I  ask  myself  if  only  he  had  time  to  even  read  the  Budget,  leave  alone 
understanding it. 

At the same time, the four survivors, through their chef, admitted their hope in our 
Budget and this Government.  Could it be otherwise when they are so used to the inaction of 
their own former Government?  Most of whom sitting here were part of that Government, 
even if some now pretend to be political virgins.  They have become something that no one 
will touch even with a stick.  One has been Chairman of HRDC with zéro bilan, and using 
HRDC  as  a  political  tool  to  secure  election  ticket,  if  I  may  say,  while  the  other  heading 
‘Maurice Ile Durable’ that has been a total waste of public funds.  Once again, zéro bilan.  
Could there be better examples of nepotism?  Anyway, dan dizef poule pas capav gagne ti 

 

66 

canard.  They  sit  here,  representing  the  culture  Parti  Travailliste.    The  population  should 
beware: ‘The fruit never falls far from the tree’. To quote hon. Bérenger: ‘La honte lor zot!’  
Today, with this Budget, the Government is starting a completely new era where hard 
work  and  competencies  will  be  valued.  Our  youth  will  be  allowed  to  dream  and,  as 
Government, we will make sure we give them the necessary means, ranging from world class 
education to access to finance to realise those dreams. It is in this line that we are creating an 
SME  Bank  that  will  be  a  one-stop  shop  for  entrepreneurs.  We  now  note  with  horror,  Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir, the modus operandi of the SMEDA under the Labour Government. It 
has  failed  our  entrepreneurs.  Any  project  that  did  not  entail  manufacturing  of  pickles  and 
macramé were discredited. How could we then expect innovative products and services? No 
wonder,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  label  ‘Made  in  Moris’  never  reached  the  height  it 
belongs to. How many fathers and mothers have lost their jobs due to the incompetence of the 
previous  Government  in  protecting  our  enterprises!  They  were  then  brainwashed  that  they 
could hit the jackpot by scratching here and there, becoming overnight millionaires.  

We all know who actually hit the jackpot at the expense of these desperate parents! 
There is nothing more heart-breaking, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, than to see the jobless father 
having to send his kid to school without food, after giving in to the temptation and spend his 
last  rupee  on  scratch  cards.  Like  it  has  been  clearly  mentioned  in  the  Budget  that  ‘nation 
zougader’  is  based  on  the  illusion  that  life  is  a  jackpot,  when  the  real  jackpot  lies  in  our 
creativity, our productivity and ability to embrace innovation.  

This Government, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, firmly believes in the savoir-faire of its 
citizens and encourages  innovative business plans. We also know that the bank  red taping 
clip that rings our entrepreneurs, the new SME Bank will remove all bureaucratic hurdles and 
give  easy  access  to  worthy  projects  and  allow  the  budding  businesses  to  take  off  with  the 
appropriate guidance and framework. These businesses are what will give jobs to the current 
unemployed  and  support  economic  growth.  This  Budget  has,  again,  shown  that  this 
Government  is  very  much  anchored  in  the  21st  century.  The  concept  of  Smart  Cities,  as 
elaborated in the Budget, is truly ground-breaking in terms of vision and development. In my 
maiden speech, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I did put forward the concept of Ile Maurice 2.0 and 
the Smart Cities. This shows that this team is on the same wavelength and has a common 
vision for the future of this country.  

The Smart Cities are going to reshape the economy and social outlook of the country 
for decades to come. For those who are clueless and think that the Smart Cities are going to 
be just a bunch of buildings built without any plan, they cannot be  further from the truth. 

 

67 

Each  Smart  City  will  have  some  specific  objectives;  if  one  city  would  be  geared  towards 
technology,  another  could  be  geared  towards  financial  services.  Another  example  is  the 
Airport City that has  an ambitious objective to transform Mauritius in a regional transport 
hub. Each facility in the city will be set in a specific order to allow optimum efficiency. Some 
cities that require to work according to international time zones will have different energy 
requirements,  therefore  smart  grids  have  to  be  set  up.  The  Smart  Cities  will  incorporate 
enhancement,  such  as  smart  transportation  and  real-time  information,  both  vertical  and 
horizontal integrations of technology aimed at maximum efficiency. The momentum gathered 
by the Smart Cities will stimulate the countrywide awakening. These are the changes that will 
make  our  country  attractive  to  international  investors  again.  It  will  redefine  Mauritius  and 
will again be the Star and Key of the Indian Ocean. This employment rich mega project will 
require polyvalent, creative and productive manpower, thereby creating thousands of jobs at 
different levels of the ladder for our young people. I am delighted to note that one of those 
cities will be in Constituency No.12, the ‘Airport City’ when we know in the past, under the 
Labour Government, this Constituency has not been given the means required to keep pace 
with the development, despite all the efforts put in by my colleagues, hon. Henry and hon. 
Jhugroo.  

With  this  Government,  and  les  projets  d’envergure  in  the  Constituency,  we  look 
forward to drastically decrease the rate of unemployment and, at the same time, decrease the 
rate of alcoholism as a direct result of unemployment. Furthermore, to ensure our youth are 
ready to embrace those new avenues and careers that the proposed Smart Cities will offer, we 
can only congratulate the laudable effort of the Government to cover the costs of the fees of 
conversion courses. 

It would be intellectually dishonest to claim that we would be trying to transform a 
doctor into an engineer, as hon. Uteem mentioned in his speech. But we certainly mean tailor-
made  courses  in  the  field  of  high  job  prospect.    For  instance,  an  accountant  may  require 
specific IT skills to be able to work with specific software or a doctor can be trained to work 
into  a  new  biomedical  industry.  So,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  much  has  already  been  said 
about this Budget. I will not take much time of the House to repeat the same arguments, but 
we will all agree here that the road to make it the second economic boom is well underway. 
L’Alliance Lepep had made electoral promises during the campaign which the other side of 
the  House  said  could  not  be  achieved.  We  have  kept  our  word  and,  within  hundred  days, 
those promises were fulfilled. We have proven them wrong and those who have said that this 
ambitious Budget is not achievable, we will prove them wrong once again. Under the able 

 

68 

leadership of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, this Government will leave 
no stone unturned to make this lovely island the Tiger of the Indian Ocean, once again. 

Thank you for your attention. 

 (5.28 p.m.) 

Mr  S.  Ramkaun  (Third  Member  for  Pamplemousses  &  Triolet):  Mr  Deputy 
Speaker,  Sir,  let  me  also,  first  of  all,  congratulate  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development, hon. Lutchmeenaraidoo, for his Budget Speech. I must say that he has not lost 
his socialist and human touch in this exercise. He showed his grandeur d’âme and I am proud 
to be one of this team of L’Alliance Lepep’.  

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  must  say  that  this  Budget  has  been  made,  taking  into 
consideration  the  priorities  and  concerns,  as  voiced  out  by  all  stakeholders,  and  without 
forgetting  our  electorate  who  has  given  us  and  this  Government  a  clear  mandate.  This 
Budget, presented by the Government, considers the numerous challenges that we are facing, 
and  which  have  never  been  considered  by  the  previous  Government.  The  task  of  the 
Government to put the country back on rail is not an easy one.  

First of all, we have to tackle all the drawbacks that the country has suffered during 
the last nine years of the Labour Party and Navinchandra Ramgoolam’s administration, and 
to come forward with such a budget, not a trompe d’œil, as per belief of certain on the other 
side of the House, can only be achieved by great leaders who think wisely as has been doing 
this majority.  

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo has shown qu’il n’a rien perdu de sa verve, dans 
son enthousiasme et de sa sincérité. En un peu plus de 90 minutes, il a fait la leçon à ceux qui 
devaient parler à longueur de journée pour ainsi dire rendant l’exercice de la présentation du 
budget ennuyant. En peu de temps, l’honorable Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo a démontré qu’il 
demeure  le  faiseur  de  miracle.  En  lui  donnant  le  temps  voulu  et  sous  la  direction  de  Sir 
Anerood Jugnauth, le pays est entre de bonnes mains. 

Coming to the Budget itself, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am sure that there are many 
positive measures which would enlighten the everyday life of our countrymen. Allow me, Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir, to enumerate some of the measures as stated by the hon. Minister of 
Finance  and  Economic  Development.  The  no  tax  budget  is  indeed,  I  would  say,  another 
landmark  of  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development.  With  this  Budget, 
Mauritius  est  en  passe  de  devenir  un  vaste  chantier  avec  des  projets  infrastructurels 
d’envergure. Ce qui laisse à préjuger que l’industrie de la construction connaîtra un nouvel 
essor. 

 

69 

The hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, 
has clearly stated that la création de la richesse passe résolument par l’investissement. So, 
we  have  to  highly  invest  to  get  high  employment.  D’où  certains  secteurs  sont  appelés  à 
connaître  une  transformation  radicale.  The  idea  to  unlock  the  13  employment-rich  mega 
projects spread across the country, as recently mentioned by my colleague, hon. Hurreeram, 
will  surely  decrease  unemployment.  More  so,  with  the  public-private  partnership,  eight 
projects of the Smart City concept will bring about a total revolution in the way of living, 
working and playing of our people.  

Some  hon.  Members  on  the  other  side  do  not  believe  in  the  Smart  City  concept 
because most probably they have not understood this concept. For the information of those 
hon. Members, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the concept of Smart Cities seems to rotate around 
six main arenas based on their regional competitiveness: smart mobility, smart economy,…  

(Interruptions) 

…smart  environment,  smart  living,  smart  people  and  smart  governance.  Its  role  involves 
greater  emphasis  on  ICT  technologies  rather  than  digital  or  intelligent  city.  A  Smart  City 
seems to pioneer innovative measures to achieve a city with low carbon use and high quality 
of life, high economic value, wire network, technical energy systems and maintain low fossil 
value use which all reach beyond provisional environmental targets. No doubt, there will be a 
complete change in the lifestyle of our people. 

M.  le  président,  l’idée  de  faire  de  notre  secteur  portuaire  un  centre  régional  par 
excellence ne peut venir que d’un  gouvernement qui a une vision  claire  et tournée vers le 
progrès de son peuple, ce qui avait défaut chez l’ancien gouvernement.  

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  must  say  that  the  country  will  be  indebted  to  the  hon. 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development to give a new dimension to the Small and 
Medium Enterprises sector. It is rightly said – 

 
 « Inciter cet engouement à la nation de devenir une nation d’entrepreneurs ».  
 
The setting up of an SME bank will stimulate this sector with new perspectives. I am 

sure that it is one of the most prolific sectors.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, this nation needs incentives, confidence and sincerity from 
the political deciders to reach heights. I still remember, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that it was, 
in  fact,  ce  duo  de  choc  composé  de  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth  et  de  l’honorable  Seetanah 
Lutchmeenaraidoo qui avait donné vie à la nation mauricienne alors que d’autres voulaient 

 

70 

marcher sur les cadavres des Mauriciens pour arriver à leurs fins machiavéliques sur le plan 
politique.  I  must  say  that  la  remède  de  cheval  which  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development has adopted is to tackle le dossier d’un jeu de hasard which has been 
highly appreciated by the majority of the population. 

Il n’est pas un secret pour personne que le jeu du hasard introduit à Maurice durant 
ces dernières années ont fait plus de mal aux foyers mauriciens. La population s’est appauvrie 
davantage.  The  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  has  chosen  the 
righteous  way  to  instil  to  the  population  le  sens  de  la  responsabilité  envers  soi-même  et 
envers sa famille. This is one of the highlights of the mission statement of this Government.  
Everyone here, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, will agree with me that during those last nine 
years, les mauriciens avaient perdu le sens de responsabilité and I am convinced that with the 
measures which the Government wants to introduce pour appliquer un frein à ce fléau du jeu 
du hasard qui ronge notre société will show a positive side of the nation. However, I would 
like to stress on a critical point which concerns illegal betting. It is obvious that with the rise 
in tax on betting, il y a une crainte que des bookmakers clandestins ne font surface surtout 
dans les régions rurales. Ce dont je demande à la police des jeux d’être sur leur garde et je 
demanderai aussi au public en général de ne pas tomber dans ce piège et ainsi donner plus 
d’ampleur à ce fléau rendant toute bonne action du gouvernement de débarrasser le pays, 
inexistante. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we are all aware of the fiasco de la politique du logement of 
the former Government. I am among one of those deeply concerned of the housing problem 
which is actually facing the Mauritians in my Constituency. As a politicien de proximité, I am 
deeply sad to say that sometimes when confronted with the doléances of my mandates, in 
Constituency No. 5, Pamplemousses/Triolet, namely Cité Mère Theresa, Cité Longère, etc., 
that  I  realise  of  the  failure  of  the  former  Government  so  far  as  the  problem  of  housing  is 
concerned. 

(Interruptions) 
“Lion pane faire narien. So base Roches Noires!” 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, je ne vais pas être un optimiste démesuré, but I must say that 
with the measures announced in the Budget, there is hope that much will be done pour tirer 
les plus démunis de ce trou dans lequel l’ancien gouvernement les avait mis.  

As far as the measures which will be introduced for grant of slab are concerned, they 
will be highly beneficial for low-income earners. This is, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, one of the 
qualities of a caring Government which has as priorities the fate of the people.  

 

71 

As far as recruitment in the public sector is concerned, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, this 
Government, under the leadership of Sir Anerood Jugnauth, has struck very fast. Déjà, il y a 
600 nouveaux recrus au sein de la force policière ; une académie de police est in the pipeline 
pour avoir un meilleur effectif de la police. Notons aussi, que ce caring Government ne veut 
pas  être  une  nation  malade.  D’où  il  compte  investir  dans  la  santé  publique  avec  le 
recrutement  d’une  centaine  de  médecins  et  plus  de  1,400  professionnels  pour  pallier  un 
manque dans ce secteur. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  am  optimistic  that  once  le  gouvernement  a  redressé  la 
barre et qu’on ait atteint notre vitesse de croisière comme cela a été le cas dans les années 
80, notre pays vivra une deuxième ère d’une rare gaieté, de confiance et de sincérité dans 
l’effort avec le tandem Sir Anerood Jugnauth/Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo.  

I have always had in mind that on prend l’exemple du passé pour vivre le présent 
tout  en  construisant  l’avenir.    I  am  sure,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  that  this  Government, 
through  this  budget,  has  left  no  stone  unturned  dans  ce  contexte  difficile  pour  redorer  le 
blason des dirigeants politiques en qui la population avait perdu confiance. Suite à ce qu’elle 
a vécu en termes de ‘coze-cozé’,  de trahison, de coups de couteau dans le dos ou encore 
d’une tentative de suicide bidon que pour berner la population.   

I am again thankful to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and hon. Minister of Finance for 
providing in this budget amounts of Rs543 m. for January-June 2015 and Rs945 m. for 2015-
2016 for capital projects for the National Development Unit and also, Rs268 m. for January-
June 2015 and Rs600 m. for 2015-2016 budget through the Build Mauritius Fund for land 
drainage project for the National Development Unit for the 20 Constituencies.   

This  Government  means  business  and  it  will  be  ensured  that  all  the  projects  be 
designed,  planned  and  executed  in  a  professional  manner.  Consultants,  professional 
engineers, planners, supervisors are to ensure proper conceptual design, structural design and 
management  of  projects,  including  quality  workmanship  during  execution  of  all  projects 
where  taxpayers’  money  is  involved.    Cost  overruns,  as  observed  in  those  projects  being 
undertaken by the previous Government, shall have to be ruled out and minimised to limits as 
stipulated in the bid documents.  Any defects like those settlements at Pailles Link Road and 
Terre Rouge-Verdun Road executed by the previous Government will not be there.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, to conclude, I will try to be short, laissant derrière moi le 
goût  amer,  le  cauchemar  vécu  par  la  population  lors  de  ces  neuf  derniers  mois  et  qu’on 
aurait pu vivre si les résultats des dernières élections étaient autrement. Heureusement que le 

 

72 

peuple  de  Maurice  a  voté  intelligemment  et  il  mérite  amplement  un  budget  digne  de  la 
confiance qu’il a placé en nous, l’Alliance Lepep.   

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, nous sommes là non pas pour faire de la politique mais pour 
montrer à ce peuple que nous sommes là pour diriger le pays vers un meilleur avenir et que 
notre mission commence par ce budget. 

I, therefore, commend the Bill to the House.  Thank you for your attention. 

Mr Rutnah: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I move that the debate be now adjourned. 

Mr Hurreeram rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Debate adjourned accordingly. 

ADJOURNMENT 

The Prime Minister:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I beg to move that this Assembly do 

now adjourn to Tuesday 07 April 2015 at 11.30 a.m.  

The Vice-Prime Minister,  Minister of Housing & Lands (Mr S. Soodhun) rose 

and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

The Deputy Speaker: The House stands adjourned.     

                                     

MATTER RAISED 

(5.37 p.m.) 

CUREPIPE - EUROPA BUILDING  

Mrs M. Sewocksingh (Third Member for Curepipe and Midlands):  Mr Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, may I know from the hon. Minister of Local Government if he can inform the 
House about a building in the town Curepipe known as ‘Europa’ which was, a long time, a 
hotel; if there are any actions or measures taken as this building is a ruin and it is attracting 
illicit activities? It is also an eyesore and it seems to be a public danger?  May we know if any 
actions or measures are being taken?   

Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

 

73 

The Minister of Local Government (Dr. A. Husnoo):   Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir,  I 

will look into the problem and I will come back to the hon. Member.  Thank you.  

At 5.40 p.m. the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Tuesday 07 April 2015 at 

11.30 a.m.  
 

