No. 38 of 2015 

 

1 

 

 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

 

 

 

FIRST SESSION 

 

TUESDAY 03 NOVEMBER 2015 

 

 

 
 

 

2 

 

CONTENTS 

 

PAPERS LAID 

QUESTIONS (Oral) 

MOTION 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER 

BILLS (Public) 

ADJOURNMENT 

QUESTIONS (Written) 

 

 

 
 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

THE CABINET 

Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 
KCMG, QC  

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 

Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 
GCSK  

Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 
Communications 

Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo, GCSK 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 
Utilities 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

 

 

Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Education and Scientific Research 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan 

Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 

Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

of 
Minister 
Empowerment 

Social 

Integration 

and  Economic 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 
Sinatambou 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 
International Trade 

Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 

Attorney General 

 

4 

Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  

Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 

Hon. Santaram Baboo    

Minister of Arts and Culture 

Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  

Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 

Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 
Perraud 

Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 
Family Welfare 

Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain 

Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance, 
Institutional  Reforms,  Minister 
Technology, 
Communication and Innovation 

of 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 

Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 
Institutions 

Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands 

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, 
QPM 

Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 
Disaster and Beach Management  

Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 
Cheong, MSK 

Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 

Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms 

Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and 
Training 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Gopall, Mr Navin (Temporary Transfer to 
RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 38 of 2015 

 

Sitting of 03 November 2015 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7 

PAPERS LAID 

 

The Ag. Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table –  

A.    Office of the President – 

The Annual Report 2014 – 2015 of the Ombudsperson for Children’s Office. 

B.    Ministry of Finance and Economic Development - 

(a)  Virement Certificates Return – Quarter 1 (July-September 2015) 

(Estimates 2015-2016). (In Original)  

(b)  Virement Warrant Return Nos 1 to 3 – Quarter 1 (Estimates 2015 – 

2016). (In Original)  

(c)  Virement (Contingencies) Warrant Return Nos. 1 to 4 and 6 – Quarter 

1 (Estimates 2015 - 2016). (In Original) 

(d)  The Annual Report of the Bank of Mauritius for Year ended 30 June 

2015. 

(e)  The Public Procurement (Electronic Bidding System) Regulations 

2015.  (Government Notice No. 210 of 2015).  

 

 

 

 

C.    Ministry of  Local Government  – 

The District Council of Black River (Collection and Disposal of Refuse) 
(Amendment) Regulations 2015. (Government Notice No. 209 of 2015).  

D.    Ministry of Arts and Culture – 

(a)  The Mauritius Marathi Cultural Centre Trust (Amendment of 

Schedule) Regulations 2015. (Government Notice No. 212 of 2015).  

(b)  The Mauritius Tamil Cultural Centre Trust (Amendment of Schedule) 

Regulations 2015. (Government Notice No. 213 of 2015).  

(c)  The Mauritius Telegu Cultural Centre Trust (Amendment of Schedule) 

Regulations 2015. (Government Notice No. 214 of 2015). 

 

 

E.    Ministry of  Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions 

The Reform Institutions (Premises) (Amendment) Regulations 2015. 
(Government Notice No. 211 of 2015).  

 

8 

ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

BAIN DES DAMES - TANK FARM & COMBINED CYCLE POWER PLANT 

PROJECT  

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Vice-
Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to the new Tank 
Farm and Combined Cycle Power Plant Project to be implemented at Bain des Dames, he 
will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Central Electricity Board, information as to 
if it has – 

(a)  

requested that all the EIA and Ramsar Committee/Wetlands requirements and 
considerations  be  waived,  indicating  if  the  recent  National  Report  of  the 
Ramsar Committee on the said project will be rendered public, and 

(b)  

effected advance payments therefor before the completion of all the required 
formalities in relation thereto. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):  Madam Speaker, I intend to reply with regard to the Tank Farm because 
for the Combined Cycle Gas Turbine or the Combined Cycle Power Plant, CEB is still in the 
process of appointing a consultant for the execution of the project.  

In order to obtain new storage capacity to ensure at least two months’ storage capacity 
including additional requirements for the new St Louis Power Station, the Central Electricity 
Board decided to construct a tank farm on a plot of land of 14A87 at Les Grandes Salines.  

On 24 May 2013, the Central Electricity  Board  applied for the EIA  Licence which 
was  granted  on  30  September  2013.    Among  the  conditions  contained  in  the  EIA  licence, 
condition 9 stipulated that, I quote - 

“The necessary setbacks shall be observed from the water drain and marshy 
areas found in the vicinity of the site”.  

No mention was made of the existence of wetlands on the site itself. 

I am tabling a copy of the EIA licence. 

On  04  July  2014,  the  Central  Electricity  Board  invited  bids  for  the  construction  of 
three storage tanks of capacity 6,500 m3 each.  The Central Procurement Board approved the 
award of the contract on 09 February 2015.  After the issue of the notification to all bidders, 

 

9 

there  was  a  challenge  filed  at  the  Independent  Review  Panel,  which  was  set  aside  by  the 
Panel. 

The  Central  Electricity  Board  awarded  the  contract  on  29  May  2015  to  Arun 

Fabricators for the value of Rs540 m. exclusive of VAT. 

The  contractor  mobilised  on  site  on  28  August  2015.    On  08  September  2015,  the 
contractor  consulted  the  Forestry  Department  for  the  cutting  of  trees.  Doubts  were  then 
expressed  on  the  possible  presence  of  wetlands.    On  12  September  2015,  the  Central 
Electricity Board referred the matter to the National Ramsar Committee. 

I am informed that a sub Committee of the National Ramsar Committee carried out a 
site visit on 02 October 2015.  The National Ramsar Committee had a first meeting on 12 
October 2015.  It had a second meeting on 26 October 2015 and, by a letter dated 30 October 
2015,  it  has  issued  clearance  to  the  Central  Electricity  Board.    I  am  tabling  a  copy  of  the 
letter. 

I am informed that there is no “National Report” of the National Ramsar Committee.   

The  House  may  wish  to  know  that  the  National  Ramsar  Committee  comprises 

seventeen members including the - 

Ministry of Agro Industry and Food Security; 
The National Parks and Conservation Service; 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii)  Ministry of Environment, Sustainable Development, Disaster and Beach 

Management; 

(iv)  Ministry of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, Shipping and Outer 

Islands; 

(v)  Ministry of Housing and Lands; 
(vi)  Ministry of Local Government; 
(vii)  Ministry of Tourism and External Communications; 
(viii)  Ministry of Arts and Culture; 
(ix)  Ministry of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and 

Scientific Research; 

Forestry Services; 

(x)  Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection; 
(xi) 
(xii)  University of Mauritius; 
(xiii)  Mauritius Institute of Education; 

10 

 
(xiv)  Central Water Authority; 
(xv)  Wastewater Management Authority, and 

(xvi) 

Two NGOs:  Mauritian Wildlife Foundation Environmental 

Protection & Conservation Organization (EPCO) 

As regards part (b) of the question, I am informed by the Central Electricity Board 
that after the submission by the Contractor of the Performance Security, the Contractors all 
risk  Insurance  Policy  and  an  advance  payment  guarantee  of  Rs54m.,  Central  Electricity 
Board proceeded with the advance payment of 10% to the Contractor on 25 August 2015. 

The contract is for a Design and Build project which implies that the Contractor has to 
apply  for  permits  and  other  clearances  from  relevant  Authorities  required  under  the  EIA 
licence conditions. 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister has chosen to reply to the part of 
my question which deals with the new tank farm and to ignore completely the project, the 
proposed  Combined  Cycle  Power  Plant  Project.  Will  he  confirm  that,  in  a  letter  dated  08 
October  2015,  the  General  Manager  of  CEB  wrote  to  the  Senior  Chief  Executive  of  the 
Ministry  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  requesting,  in  fact,  that  all  EIA  and  Ramsar 
considerations  be  waived  both  for  the  new  tank  farm  project  and  the  proposed  Combined 
Cycle Project, if I can quote the last, but one paragraph of that letter before I table it as usual. 

 “On account of the sound reasons stated above, we hereby solicit your prompt 
intervention so as to seek a waiver from the relevant authorities to depart from 
the setback  requirement  in the EIA and to allow the CEB to utilise the full 
extent  of  the  site  (including  the  marshy  area  thereof),  to  enable  the  timely 
implementation of the project, that is construction of the three fuel oil tanks 
and erection of CCGT power plant.”  

I table a copy of the letter and can I ask the hon. Minister, therefore, why does he deal 
with the three fuel oil tanks only and try to keep from public attention the request for a total 
waiver for both projects? 

Mr Collendavelloo: No. That is not so. I think this is an unwarranted reaction. I did 
say, at the outset, that I was not going into the CCGT because we were still in initial stages. 
Now, this request was made by the Senior Chief Executive to Mr Bikoo and Mrs Nababsing 
attention and that was written by CEB to SCE. The Ministry did not go forward with this.  

 
Mr  Bérenger:  So,  I  take  it  therefore  that  no  decision  has  been  taken  to  waive 

11 

completely all EIA considerations and the Ramsar consideration for both projects. 

Mr Collendavelloo: If the term waiver means that the legal provisions are not going 
to apply to this project, then there has been no waiver. However, we see from the document 
which I have tabled that the Ramsar Committee has now given its approval to the project with 
regard to the tank farm. 

Mr Bérenger: Arms twisting and we will get to that letter – it is a shame! If I can 
look at the EIA granted years back dated 30 September 2013, is the hon. Minister therefore 
aware that it was for a tank farm only? There is no EIA clearance or even request as far as the 
new plant is concerned and one of the two key conditions is that necessary setbacks meaning 
30 metres as per the existing legislation from water drain and marshy areas is one condition. 
Is the hon. Minister honestly telling us that there is no marshy land on the site itself when we 
have EIA saying that there is and the CEB requesting that the EIA conditions we waived on 
that point? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  Perhaps  the  House  will  read  carefully  condition  9  which  I 
underlined, which states that the water drain and marshy areas are found in the vicinity of the 
site. We are talking only of tank farm. We have received an EIA - the CEB I mean - only for 
the tank farm. No EIA has been asked yet for the Combined Cycle Power Plant for a simple 
reason because the consultant has not even started the work. When the consultant will come - 
and the hon. Leader of the Opposition knows this - with his project and with the siting of the 
plant, then we will see whether the EIA will be granted or not.  

Mr Bérenger: As far as the tank farms are concerned, is the hon. Minister aware that 
a second condition in the EIA certificate authorisation, the 17th  condition, is that the tanks 
shall be located at the northern extremity of the site furthest away from the residential area 
and that now when he chose a contractor, the CEB has also agreed that the contractor - that 
he has been paid Rs54 m. - Arun Fabricators carry out the soil investigation now for new 
location at its cost and submit their findings and so on? So, now we are talking about moving 
both the tank farms and the forthcoming plan away from the agreed site in the EIA. Is the 
hon. Minister aware of that? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Yes. 

12 

 
Mr Bérenger: Well, is the hon. Minister aware that in the letter which I tabled, the 
CEB  says  that  if  the  EIA  conditions  –  can  I  quote  instead  if  you  will  allow  me,  Madam 
Speaker -  

“In case the CEB makes the necessary setback allowance of the 30 metres, as 
per Planning Policy Guidance issued by the Ministry of Housing and  Land, 
the  extent  of  land  left  for  development  will  be  negligible  for  the  Project 
contemplated.” 

Both “(… the proposed layout of the tank farm and the CCGT plant and - what they add as - 
the visual extent of the marshy area).” 

Is the hon. Vice-Prime Minister aware that the CEB says that if, as it requests, all the EIA and 
Ramsar considerations are not waived, it simply cannot implement that project there? 

Mr Collendavelloo: This is the view of the CEB.  It is not shared by the Ministry.  

(Interruptions) 

This is the view of the CEB, which is not shared by the Ministry.  Just like the hon. Member 
does not share that view! 

Mr Bérenger:  It is shameful what you are doing!  It is really shameful in that case.  
Is the hon. Vice-Prime Minister aware that when the contract was awarded to the contractors, 
it was said that they should look for a new location at the other end, that is, near the houses, 
the habitations?  These contractors have been chosen, paid an advance payment of Rs54 m., 
contrary to the EIA.  We are talking about the Tank Farm.  I have not yet reached the new 
plant. 

Mr Collendavelloo: Well, there are many questions in that supplementary.  Let me 
start with the first one, that is, the relocation of the Tank Farm.  There is nothing surprising 
that, in the course of works, the exact location could be changed.  It is in order to comply 
with the setback which is required under the EIA licence.  The CEB has made the request and 
it is going to be worked under the close monitoring of my Ministry as well as the Ministry of 
Environment and the Ministry of Agro-Industry, that is, the Ramsar Committee. 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, as far as the lease is concerned, is it not a fact that the 
lease granted in - if I have the date of the lease - September 2015, the lease just granted to the 
CEB is for the Tank Farm only?  The lease recently granted in September 2015. 

Mr Collendavelloo:  The lease was granted in 2013, but signed in 2015.   

 

13 

(Interruptions) 

But signed in 2015.  Everybody who has been involved in Cabinet knows that, with regard to 
the  lease,  there  is  a  letter  of  intent,  a  reservation  before  it  is  finally  drafted  and  signed.  
Nobody who has been in Cabinet and worked, of course, could fail to know this! 

Yes, I am arrogant before… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please! Hon. Shakeel Mohamed, please! No foul language against 

any other Member, please! 

No, please!   

 (Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

I have said no provocative language! Please! 

Mr Bérenger: In the same letter, which I have tabled, the CEB pretends that - never 
before  -  recently  when  authority  was  sought  to  cut  trees,  then,  for  the  first  time,  it  was 
mentioned  that  there  are  marshy  lands,  that  there  is  a  marshy  land  problem,  which  is 
completely false, and the hon. Vice-Prime Minister has himself quoted the EIA certificate, 
going back to 2013, which mentioned precisely ‘marshy lands’.  Is the Vice-Prime Minister 
aware that the CEB had the cheek to put that on record? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  I  don’t  know  about  the  cheek!    What  I  know  is  that  the  EIA 
licence mentioned wetlands in the vicinity of the site and not on the site.  This is what is 
mentioned on the EIA licence and I will stick to this. 

Mr Bérenger: Well, the documents are now public and we are playing on words.  I 
ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister again.  Is he saying that, on the site that has been leased, 
there is no marshy land?  There is a lease which has been approved, which has been drafted.  
Is the hon. Vice-Prime Minister saying that there is no marshy land on the land leased? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  There  is  a  map  which  has  been  annexed  to  the  letter,  to  the 
clearance of the Ramsar Committee.  The map speaks for itself.  As from that map, CEB will 
have  to  do  the  needful  so  as  to  comply  with  the  conditions  of  the  EIA  or  the  Ramsar 
Committee.  The  Ramsar  Committee  has  given  its  clearance;  EIA  has  given  its  clearance. 

 

14 

Now, everything has been done, all the permits have been granted for the Tank Farm.  If CEB 
goes ahead with the Combined Cycle Power Plant, then, of course, new licences will have to 
be applied for. 

Mr Bérenger: If I precisely can move on to this Ramsar so-called clearance, it is an 
awful shame.  The hon. Vice-Prime Minister has tabled a copy of the letter and he calls that 
letter a clearance from the Ramsar National Committee.  Will the hon. Vice-Prime Minister 
confirm that there are no less than seven conditions attached to the so-called clearance?  And 
can I quote – 

“In the light of the above, the  National Ramsar Committee has exceptionally 
approved  the  grant  of  the  Ramsar  clearance  for  the  project  subject  to  the 
following conditions (…)”. 

Seven conditions!  Will the hon. Vice-Prime Minister agree that, in fact, there is no Ramsar 
clearance?  Those conditions include - the hydrogeology characteristics of the site need to be 
confirmed  by  an  expert  in  the  relevant  field  now;  the  necessary  geotechnical  investigation 
should be carried out on the site, and construction of all infrastructure works will need to be 
supervised by an experienced consultancy firm and so on.  Will the hon. Vice-Prime Minister 
agree with me that this is no clearance?  There has been arm-twisting. This is no clearance.  
The list of conditions shows that it is not clearance. 

Mr Collendavelloo: Anyone can say whatever comes to his mind, but I am reading 

what I read.  The National Ramsar Committee has exceptionally… 

It may be shame!  I can also use ‘shame’! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please! 

Mr Collendavelloo: Poor him! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please! No, comments from a sitting position, I said! 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  The  letter  states  clearly  that  the  Committee  has  exceptionally 
albeit, but it has approved the grant of Ramsar clearance.  There are conditions attached to all 
clearances  as  there  are  to  EIA  licences,  to  building  permits,  to  all  sorts  of  permits  and 

 

15 

licences.  It has put its conditions and, of course, it is for CEB to ensure compliance or else 
the clearance will be removed.  Surely, anybody of some narrow experience can know this! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger: Shame on the hon. Vice-Prime Minister!  Madam Speaker, we have a 
National  Ramsar  Committee  chaired  by  the  Permanent  Secretary  of  the  Ministry  of  Agro-
Industry… 

(Interruptions) 

with a very extensive… 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed, please! 

Mr Bérenger: …membership. Can I know the date on which that Ramsar Committee 
sat,  whether  it  sat  under  the  chairmanship  of  the  Permanent  Secretary,  whether  the  full 
Committee sat under the chairmanship of the Permanent Secretary, and  can  I  know which 
members were present at that Committee that supposedly approved that so-called clearance, 
which is not a clearance at all? 

Mr Collendavelloo: What I know is that the sub-committee of the National Ramsar 

Committee… 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, a sub-committee of the National Ramsar Committee - because the Committee is allowed 
to appoint a sub-committee - carried out a site visit on 02 October 2015.  Then, the National 
Ramsar Committee - not the sub-committee, but the Committee - had a first meeting on 12 
October  2015.    It  had  a  second  meeting  on  26  October  2015.  What  I  know  is  that  it  was 
chaired  by  the  Deputy  Permanent  Secretary.  I  do  not  know  who  else  formed  part  of  the 
Committee, but if a question is asked… 

(Interruptions) 

Well, can I be allowed to speak without unruly interruptions?  Or else, I’ll just sit down! 

Madam  Speaker:  Please!  You  have  asked  the  question,  hon.  Leader  of  the 

Opposition.  Allow the Vice-Prime Minister to reply! Please! 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  Sorry,  I  do  not  reply  by  permission  of  the  Leader  of  the 

Opposition. He is not here to allow me to answer questions! 

 
Mr Collendavelloo: I have… 

16 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister,  please,  sit  down!  Please,  sit  down!  I 
have  given  my  ruling  on  this;  I  have  said  that  we  should  have  order  in  the  House.  The 
Opposition has the right to ask questions, you have the right to reply to the questions. Please, 
proceed in order! 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, if I can move on to the award which has been granted 
to the contractor! Is it not a fact that the contract was awarded in August 2015 for the Tank 
Farm without, as I said, a new location having been found, without the tests that are supposed 
to be carried out for the Tank Farm for Rs540 m. and a down payment of Rs54 m. has already 
been paid, whereas, as I quoted earlier on, soil investigations are supposed to be carried out, 
they are asked to find another location and the CEB says that they are unable to hand over the 
site which is likely to make them liable to legal proceedings? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Well, this contract is a designed and built contract; this is why a 
down  payment  is  made  before  certain  procedural  steps  are  made.  This  is  part  of  the 
contractual documents, and then it starts its work. There is nothing much we can do about it. 

Mr Bérenger: If I can move to a part of the letter which I have tabled - the hon. Vice-
Prime Minister is in the habit of saying that I exaggerate, I dramatize things, etc. Can I quote 
the following passage and tell him whether he is aware of that part of the letter? Can I quote, 
Madam Speaker? 

“The  non-implementation  of  the  project  or  any  further  delay  in  its  implementation 
may have (…)” 

We are talking about both. We are talking about the Tank Farm and the new combined plant. 
I repeat, Madam Speaker, with your permission - 

“The  non-compliance  thereof  or  any  further  delay  in  its  implementation  may  have 
serious consequences on the electricity supply in the country as from 2018.” 

And they add – 

“The  storage  capacity  of  heavy  fuel  oil  will  not  be  sufficient  to  operate  the  new 
generating sets which have been installed - already - at Fort Victoria Power Station 
and those that would be installed at St. Louis Power Station by 2017.” 

Is  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  aware  that,  now,  the  CEB  itself  is  talking  that  kind  of 
language, that the situation is urgent, not just for the new power plant to come, but they are 

 

17 

saying that there is no room now to store additional fuel required if that fuel tank project does 
not go ahead, right now? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Well, it is clear that this project is an integral and important part 
of the development plan of the CEB. This is why we see that the Ramsar Committee starts by 
saying the project is of national importance. 

Pardon! Qu’est-ce que c’est? 

No, that is one. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please! Please, proceed! 

Mr Collendavelloo: That is why the Ramsar Committee… 

(Interruptions) 

Of course, the Ramsar Committee! 

Madam Speaker: Please, proceed! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Collendavelloo: Not Rughoobur! 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Vice-Prime Minister, we are left with only two minutes! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Collendavelloo: I am sorry! 

Madam Speaker: Please, proceed with your reply! 

Mr Collendavelloo: The Ramsar Committee itself acknowledges that the project is of 
national  importance  to  ensure  security  of  electricity  supply  in  Mauritius.  This  is 
acknowledged by one and all. The letter of the CEB is addressed to the Ministry of Energy to 
set out all the parameters. That was not sent to the Ramsar Committee or to the EIA. The 
Ministry had to be made aware of the strategic importance of that portion of land. 

Madam Speaker: Last question, hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr  Bérenger:  Being  given  that  the  CEB  itself  is  saying  that,  if  we  do  not  go  full 
steam ahead with both projects, we are in trouble, not only concerning the new power plant to 

 

18 

come, but concerning the new machines which will not be supplied adequately by fuel; the 
hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  has  not  replied  to  most  of  the  points  raised  today,  either  he  has 
chosen or he cannot, can I request - because we are dealing with a national issue - that he 
should come and reply to all the points which I have raised, including that there is no marshy 
land on the land leased as per the Lease Agreement? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  Well,  let  us  not  mix  issues.  With  regard  to  the  strategic 
importance of that plot of land and even of the Tank Farm, the Combined Power Plant, from 
the beginning I have said that it is part of the national strategy. And I agreed, and it is clear 
from  the  World  Bank  Report,  from  my  statements  in  Parliament,  that  it  will  be  a  severe 
setback if we are unable to go ahead with this project. 

Now, with regard to wetlands and marshy lands, I feel I have answered correctly, but I 
will review all the questions of the hon. Leader of the Opposition when I read the transcript 
and  shall  come  back  with  a  statement  should  I  feel  that  I  have  been  under  the  standard 
required by the hon. Leader of the Opposition. 

Madam  Speaker:  Time  is  over!  Hon.  Members,  the  Table  has  been  advised  that 
Parliamentary Question No. B/754, in regard to loans guaranteed by Government in favour of 
Air  Mauritius  Ltd.,  will  be  replied  by  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development. The Table has further been advised that Parliamentary Question No. B/753 has 
been withdrawn. Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

 

AIR MAURITIUS LTD. – UPGRADING OF AIR TICKETS – BENEFICIARIES 

(No. B/750) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and 
National Development Unit whether, in regard to Air Mauritius Ltd., he will state the names 
of the passengers having benefitted from free upgrade of air tickets from economy class to 
business class and from free extra luggage entitlement when travelling on the flights thereof 
over the period 2012 to 2014 on instructions from the Prime Minister’s Office, indicating in 
each case, the names of the officer having given the said instruction. 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, as already indicated in replies to previous 
Parliamentary Questions, Air Mauritius Ltd. is a Company listed on the Stock Exchange of 
Mauritius  and  is  governed  by  the  Memorandum  and  Articles  of  Association  and  the 
Companies Act. 

 
It  would,  therefore,  not  be  appropriate  to  provide  the  information  asked  for  by  the 

19 

hon. Member. 

Dr. Sorefan: Madam Speaker, I am very sorry to hear that and I do not see why the 

hon. Ag. Prime Minister is misleading the House. The question is… 

Madam Speaker: I am sorry! Hon. Member, you cannot say that! Please, withdraw 
this word, because if you say that the hon. Ag. Prime Minister is misleading the House; you 
take your own responsibility. 

Dr.  Sorefan:  I  do  withdraw.  But  Air  Mauritius  is  suffering  from  beneficiaries.    It 
comes  from  the  PMO  to  give  direction  to  Air  Mauritius  to  do  so.  Air  Mauritius  is  losing 
money; it has nothing to do with the internal affairs of Air Mauritius. My question is: who are 
the beneficiaries that make Air Mauritius lose about Rs150 m.? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: I do not know if the figure that the hon. Member is quoting 
is right or wrong; I have no clue, Madam Speaker, but I will refer the hon. Member to a reply 
that the Prime Minister himself gave in the House, saying that, henceforth, he would not reply 
to questions relating to Air Mauritius as it is a listed company and, therefore, information, as 
the  hon.  Member  may  or  may  not  know,  has  to  be  provided  accordingly  to  the  Stock 
Exchange which has listing rules. These listing rules - he should refer to them - are very clear 
and  say  that  information  regarding  a  listed  company  should  be  provided  in  priority  to  the 
Stock Exchange and to the shareholders. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Ganoo! 

Mr  Ganoo:  Even  if  the  hon.  Prime  Minister  does  not  want  to  answer  questions 
relating  to  past  practice,  can  he  tell  the  House,  at  least,  whether  this  practice  has  been 
discontinued now? 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  I  am  not  aware,  Madam,  whether  this  practice  has  been 
discontinued  or  not.  I  stand  by  the  decision  of  the  Prime  Minister  concerning  this  issue 
questions  coming  from  any  quarters,  whether  it  is  from  the  Government  side  or  from  the 
Opposition side, Madam. 

Mr  Ganoo:  On  a  point  of  order,  Madam  Speaker,  if  this  is  the  case,  is  it  not 
parliamentary  practice  if  Government  has  decided  to  take  that  stand  that  such  questions 
should not even be allowed to appear on the Order Paper? 

 
Madam Speaker: Let me tell the hon. Member that I do not have any control on the 

20 

reply of the Minister. 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, if I may just enlighten the House. There 
are  two  questions  concerning  Air  Mauritius  today;  this  one  concerning  the  practice  of 
upgrading or not and another question concerning loans guaranteed by Government for Air 
Mauritius. That particular question, because it relates to public funds, is being responded to, 
but not this question. Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan: I have got a supplementary question on this, Madam. 

Madam Speaker: I have already said next question! 

 

NDU - PROJECTS – IMPLEMENTATION 

(No. B/751) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and 
National Development Unit whether, in regard to the projects implemented by the National 
Development Unit since 2013 to date, he will state the number thereof in respect of which the 
contract has been awarded – 

(a)  

through  the  emergency  procurement  method,  indicating  the  number  thereof 
which have been – 

(i)  

completed  as  per  the  contractual  terms  and  conditions,  indicating  in 
each case, the cost thereof, and  

(ii)  

not completed as at to date, and  

(b)   without the approval of the Central Procurement Board, indicating the number 

thereof which have been – 

(i)  

completed  as  per  the  contractual  terms  and  conditions,  indicating  in 
each case the cost thereof, and  

(ii)  

not completed as at to date. 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  National 
Development Unit (NDU) that following the flash floods of 13 February 2013 and 30 March 

 

21 

2013 respectively affecting the northern regions of the country and the regions of Port Louis 
and Canal Dayot respectively, the NDU resorted to the emergency procurement method. 

Madam Speaker, section 21 of the Public Procurement Act stipulates that -  

 “(1)   a  public  body  may  purchase  goods,  other  services  or  works  from  a 

single supplier without competition in cases of extreme urgency. 

(2)  

The  scope  of  the  emergency  procurement  shall  as  far  as  possible  be 
limited to the period of the emergency, so that appropriate competitive 
procurement  methods  may  be  utilised  at  the  conclusion  of  the 
emergency period.” 

I  am  tabling  a  list  of  24  emergency  projects  that  Cabinet  approved  on  15  and  22 

 
February 2013, respectively. 

I am also informed that under the emergency procurement method for the year 2013, 

 
an additional 45 projects were also awarded by the NDU to either  

(a)  

(b)  

(c)  

the NDU Zonal Contractors,  

the Road Development Authority (RDA) Contractors, and  

one particular construction company, namely Nawrang Co. Ltd. 

The  list  of  69  projects  that  were  to  be  implemented  under  the  Emergency  Procurement 
Method with the required information is also being tabled. 

Out  of  these  projects,  Madam  Speaker,  it  is  to  be  noted  that  6  were  subsequently 
cancelled  though  Works  Orders  were  issued.    The  reasons  for  same  are,  inter  alia, 
unavailability of way leaves and complexity of projects. 

Madam Speaker, as the House is aware, there is presently an ongoing inquiry by the 

CCID on this issue. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  May  I  know  from  the  hon.  Ag.  Prime 
Minister  whether  those  additional  contracts  were  approved  by  Cabinet  and  the  Central 
Procurement Board, and whether the Minister concerned at that time asked for approval from 
the Minister of Finance? 

 
The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  Madam,  I  would  like  your  guidance,  do  I  respond  with 

22 

respect to Cabinet decisions on this issue?  

Madam Speaker: Yes, next question, hon. Rutnah! 

(Interruptions) 

 

COURT CASE V O. G. – CONVICTION 

(No.  B/752)  Mr  S.  Rutnah  (Third  Member  for  Piton  &  Rivière  du  Rempart) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  recent  Intermediate 
Court case of Police V O. G., following the death of one O. B., he will, for the benefit of the 
House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to the - 

(a)  

(b)  

initial charge lodged against the suspect, and  

outcome thereof. 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of 
Police that O. G. was first arrested on 18 May 2012 and provisionally charged for ‘Assault 
with premeditation’ for having wilfully and unlawfully inflicted wounds and blows upon the 
person of one O. B.  She was bailed out on the same day. 

Following  the  death  of  O.  B.  on  24  May  2012,  O.  G.  was  arrested  anew  and  the 
provisional  charge  of  ‘murder’  was  lodged  against  her  before  the  District  Court  of 
Pamplemousses.  On 16 June 2012, she was released on bail. 

In regard to part (a) of the question, I am further informed by the Commissioner of 
Police that upon the completion of the enquiry, the case file was referred to the Director of 
Public Prosecutions on 29 March 2013, and on 16 September 2013, the Director of Public 
Prosecutions advised prosecution of O. G. under the charge of ‘wounds and blows causing 
death without intention to kill’ in breach of section 228(1) and (3) of the Criminal Code. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  Director  of  Public  Prosecutions  that  on  01 
October  2015  i.e.  the  day  when  the  case  came  for  trial  before  the  Intermediate  Court,  the 
prosecution had moved to amend the information to provide for a charge of simple ‘assault’ 
in breach of section 230(1) of the Criminal Code since no causal nexus between the death of 
O. B. and the act of O. G. could be established with certainty on the basis of medical records 

 

23 

and opinions communicated to the prosecution in May 2015.  The cause of death of O. B. was 
septicaemia.   

Madam Speaker, in regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed that O.G. pleaded 
guilty to the reduced charge to simple assault and the accused was convicted on 01 October 
2015.  On 08 October 2015, O. G. was sentenced to pay a fine of Rs2,000 and Rs500 as costs. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Rutnah! 

Mr Rutnah: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In relation to the issue of causal nexus, is 
the Ag. Prime Minister aware that on 13 May 2012, the deceased made a statement to the 
Police and she said the following –  

“sa tifi Gokool là fine bate moi partou lor mo le corps…” 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Member,  please  sit  down!  I  don’t  think  you  can  quote  the 

statement made by whomever. Please! Ask your question otherwise! 

Mr Rutnah: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In relation to the causal nexus, is the Ag. 
Prime  Minister  aware  that  the  deceased  actually  gave  a  statement  wherein  she  stated  very 
clearly that she was subject of an assault all over her body and, as a result of that, she was 
also pushed and actually fell in sugarcane… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  Now,  hon.  Member,  the  Ag.  Prime  Minister  will  not  be  able  to 
reply to your question because it is a question for the Commissioner of Police to carry out the 
enquiry and it is a matter for the Court to decide. 

Mr Rutnah: Madam Speaker… 

(Interruptions) 

Is  the Ag. Prime Minister aware that the deceased was told by the doctor that all her nerves 
could not work as a result of the… 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Member, I am really sorry, I have to interrupt you because, 
here, we are not in a Court, we are in the National Assembly and the Ag. Prime Minister has 
given you his reply. On the basis of the reply, if you have got other clarifications, you can 
ask, but  you cannot come to this House and make as if  you are in Court and that  you are 
cross-examining the Ag. Prime Minister! Please! 

(Interruptions) 

 
Mr  Rutnah:  Madam  Speaker,  can  the  Ag.  Prime  Minister  say  whether  the  Police 

24 

actually made proper enquiry as to the cause of the death itself? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I understand from the Ag. Commissioner 
of  Police  that  according  to  his  information,  the  injuries  suffered  by  the  victim  were  slight 
injuries. This is what I am informed.  

As far as the rest is concerned, Madam Speaker, as far as the enquiry is concerned, 
and  as  far  as  the  decision  of  the  Director  of  Public  Prosecutions  is  concerned,  Madam 
Speaker, these are totally independent bodies. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Jhugroo! 

 

HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION - LEGISLATION 

(No.  B/753)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Human  Rights 
Commission, he will state if consideration will be given for the law in relation thereto to be 
amended  to  increase  the  powers  thereof  to  investigate  into  alleged  cases  of  miscarriage  of 
justice. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

AIR MAURITIUS LTD. – LOANS 

(No.  B/754)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to Air Mauritius Ltd., he will 
state the number of loans guaranteed by Government thereto, indicating in each case, the – 

(a)  

(b)  

(c)  

quantum thereof;  

date on which the loan was; guaranteed, and  

terms and conditions of the guarantee. 

(Withdrawn) 

Madam Speaker:  Next Question, hon. Jhugroo! 

 

25 

 

GOVERNMENT PUBLICITY - NEWSPAPERS 

(No. B/755) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to Government publicity, he 
will give a list of the newspapers the services of which have been retained for the publication 
thereof,  since  July  2005  to  December  2014,  indicating  in  each  case,  the  total  amount  of 
money paid out thereto. 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am advised by the Attorney-General’s 
Office that it would not be in order for me to provide the information called for by the hon. 
Member as disclosure of the information is likely to prejudice the outcome of a case against 
the State, which is pending before the Supreme Court. 

 

ARSENAL - ALLEGED ARSON CASE 

(No.  B/756)    Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis East) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister 
for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the alleged case of arson 
of  the  residence  of  one  Mr  I.  B.  of  Jogeea  Lane,  in  Arsenal,  reported  to  the  Terre  Rouge 
Police Station, on or about 24 September 2015, which was thereafter referred to the Central 
Criminal  Investigation  Division,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the 
Commissioner of Police, information as to where matters stand as to the inquiry carried out 
thereinto. 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of 
Police that so far, 6 persons have been arrested in relation to the alleged case of arson of the 
residence of Mr I. B. at Arsenal.  Two of them have been remanded to jail and four have been 
released on bail. 

I am further informed by the Commissioner of Police that, in view of the complexity 
of  the  investigation,  the  case  has  been  taken  over  by  the  Central  Criminal  Investigation 
Division, and that enquiry is still ongoing. 

Mr Mohamed: Is the hon. Ag. Prime Minister aware that it is following a programme 
on radio that the Commissioner of Police was approached by the victim and asked to transfer 

 

26 

the matter from Terre Rouge CID and to send it over to Central CID. It was then that this 
matter was transferred over and it was only then that the Police started really looking into the 
matter with some sérieux? 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  That  may  be  so,  Madam  Speaker,  but  the  information  I 
have is because of the complexity.  Obviously, Madam Speaker, there were reasons which 
motivated the Commissioner of Police to transfer the file to the CCID. 

Mr Mohamed: Is the hon. Ag. Prime Minister aware that one of the persons who was 
arrested on 26 October - if I am not mistaken - was taken the very next day - when he had not 
even been taken to the Central CID since the case has been transferred to the Central CID -  
directly to the Bail and Remand Court, where a bail application has already been made and 
where  the  Police  stood  up  instead  of  objecting  to  bail  for  a  case  as  serious  as  giving 
instruction to commit a crime, the crime of arson, when there are witnesses who have given 
declaration against him… 

 (Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:    Again,  hon.  Mohamed,  let  me  tell  you  something.    The  hon. 
Member can ask his question directly in relation to the main question which has been asked, 
but  he  cannot  go  into  the  complexity  of  the  matter.    The  Minister  will  not  have  all  the 
information. 

Mr Mohamed:  I understand what you are saying, but this has nothing to do with the 
complexity.  Could the hon. Ag. Prime Minister tell us or find out from the Commissioner of 
Police  why  is  it  that  the  Police  did  not  stand  up  and  object  to  bail  in  this  matter  when  a 
statement itself had not even been recorded? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: I will pass on this request to the Commissioner of Police, 

Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker:  Next Question, hon. Mohamed! 

 

QUARTIER MILITAIRE POLICE STATION  

- POLICE OFFICERS - TRANSFER 

(No.  B/757)  Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis East) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister 

 

27 

for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Quartier  Militaire 
Police Station, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, 
information as to the number of Police Officers who, since December 2014 to date, have been 
transferred – 

(a)  

(b)  

therefrom and  

thereto, indicating in each case, the  

(i)  

grade of the officer transferred and  

(ii)  

reasons for the transfer. 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, as regards part (a) of the question, I am 
informed by the Commissioner of Police that, as from 01 December 2014 to date, 43 Police 
Officers have been transferred at various points in time from Quartier Militaire Police Station 
as follows - 

Chief Inspector 

Inspector 

Sub-Inspector 

Woman Sub-Inspector 

Sergeant 

Corporal 

Police Constable 

Trainee Police Constable 

Woman Police Constable 

Trainee Woman Police Constable 

 

1 

1 

1 

1 

9 

4 

18 

1 

6 

1 

Madam  Speaker,  likewise  during  the  same  period,  37  Police  Officers  have  been 

posted thereat as follows – 

28 

 

Chief Inspector 

Inspector 

Woman Sub-Inspector 

Sergeant 

Police Constable 

Trainee Police Constable 

Woman Police Constable 

Trainee Woman Police Constable 

1 

1 

1 

9 

15 

4 

5 

1 

Madam Speaker, it is to be noted that, for the time being, Quartier Militaire Police 

Station is operating with a contingent which is above the authorised staffing. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  transfer  and  posting  of  Police 
Officers are the sole prerogative of the Commissioner of Police and these are carried out in 
the  best  interest  of  the  Force  coupled  with  the  exigencies  of  the  service  whilst  ensuring  a 
quality service delivery.   

Indeed transfer in the Police Force is a usual feature which contributes to increasing 

 
the officers’ experience by exposing them to different work environment. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Please! Hon. Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed: Recently we have all talked about Quartier Militaire Police Station, 
the population has seen the ability of certain Police officers to - I do not know how to call it, 
some people called it belly dance.  So, some people have seen the whole belly dancing on 
YouTube...   

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Member, ask your question! 

Mr Mohamed:  It has gone viral. 

Madam Speaker:  Put your question! 

29 

 
Mr Mohamed:  Are those five Police officers  – if  I am not mistaken  – concerned 
since they were transferred and brought there at the beginning of the  year, have they been 
transferred away from that Police station, and if they have been transferred, is the hon. Ag. 
Prime Minister aware where they have been transferred to? 

The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:    Madam  Speaker,  I  am  aware  that  all  five  have  been 
transferred and that there has been a Police inquiry into this matter.  The inquiry is complete 
and there will be disciplinary procedures against all five; where they have been transferred 
exactly, I do not know. 

Mr Jhugroo: Can the Ag. Prime Minister confirm to the House whether, in the past, 

with regard to the briani case of Quatre Bornes, Police officers… 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, please! This question is totally irrelevant. 

Order, please!  

Order!  

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed: Could the Ag. Prime Minister … 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

 (Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed: If he is going to do that, I am going to run! 

(Interruptions) 

Could the hon. Ag. Prime Minister state, since I understand that they were transferred as a 
punitive measure, if it is because of their ability to belly dance that they were transferred to 
Plaine Verte and Vallée Pitot? 

The Ag. Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, I am sure that the hon. Member is a best 

judge of that. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ramful! 

 

 

 

30 

POLICE – CRIME STATISTICS 

(No. B/758) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to criminal offences, he will, 
for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to if the 
Mauritius Police Force regularly compiles statistics in respect thereof and, if so, indicate the 
figures of the latest exercise carried out in relation thereto, region-wise, further indicating – 

(a)  

if an analysis of the said figures has been carried out to establish the regions 
where there has been a rise in the number of cases thereof,  and  

(b)  

the remedial actions envisaged in the light of the findings thereof. 

The Ag. Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of 
Police that data in regard to criminal offences are compiled at the level of Police Stations and 
Units on a daily basis, and forwarded to the Police Information and Operations Room. After 
compilation of the figures provided by the Police Stations and Units, the Police Crime Record 
Office  prepares  monthly  reports  by  type  of  offences  and  region-wise.    I  am  tabling  the 
information regarding latest figures compiled region-wise for September last. 

In regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that crime statistics and data are analysed in detail on a daily basis by a specially constituted 
Team,  comprising  specialists  from  all  branches  of  the  Mauritius  Police  Force,  led  by  the 
Commissioner  of  Police  himself.    The  team  has  a  daily  monitoring  meeting  during  which 
crime data are analysed on the basis of timing of criminal activities, specific locations and 
regions where criminal activities are being carried out as well as the modus operandi used by 
the  offenders.  This  in-depth  analysis  enables  Police  to  identify  hot  spots  and  crime  prone 
areas. 

In regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that, in the light of data analysis carried out, strategies are formulated as to immediate actions 
to be taken on the ground by Divisional Commanders.  In the event a rise in crime rate is 
observed in a specific region, the following actions are taken by the Police - 

(i) 

(ii) 

increase in mobile and foot patrol; 

intensification of stop and search; 

(iii) 

crackdown operations; 

31 

public awareness campaign; 

pooling of resources from Divisional Supporting Unit and other station areas; 

 
(iv) 

(v) 

(vi) 

intelligence led operations. 

According to the Commissioner of Police, based on the assessment of crime data, a 
special  operation  known  as  “Make  Safe”  was  launched  in  the  months  of  September  and 
October 2015, aimed at improving safety of citizens be it in their houses, in public places or 
on  roads.  The  operations  were  carried  out  island-wide,  one  region  at  a  time.  During  the 
operation,  a  total  of  1387  contraventions  were  established  for  different  offences,  3  arrests 
were made, and one motorcycle was recovered within a period of seven days. 

I  am  further  informed  that  the  Commissioner  of  Police  holds  a  periodic  meeting 
known as the “Force Strategic Guidance Review” with all Deputy Commissioners of Police 
and  Branch  Officers  to  evaluate  the  effectiveness  of  special  operations  carried  out,  and 
further discussion on remedial actions to be taken. 

Mr Ramful:  As regards the Southern Division which consists of localities like Rose-
Belle  and  Mahebourg,  I  am  informed  by  their  inhabitants  that  there  has  been  recently  an 
increase in the number of crimes specially involving larceny by breaking. Can the hon. Ag. 
Prime Minister confirm this fact and can I request him to ensure that there are stop and search 
controls regularly in strategic places? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Yes, Madam Speaker. In fact, if I can give the information 
– the hon. Member is talking about the Southern Division. Southern Division crimes, Madam 
Speaker,  in  July  were  46;  misdemeanours:  374;  drug  cases:  nil.  In  August,  crimes:  52; 
misdemeanours: 447, and in September, crimes: 51; misdemeanours: 444. So, there has been 
a slight increase, but I understand from the Commissioner of Police that the October ‘Make 
Safe Operation’ was successful all around the country. 

Mr Jhugroo: Will the Ag. Prime Miniser confirm to the House that with the arrival of 
the  new  Commissioner  of  Police,  we  have  got  many  crackdown  operations  and  Police 
Officers are used more diligently than previously when we have seen Police Officers posted 
in every 100 metres whenever the former Prime Minister was leaving or coming from foreign 
trips? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, personally, I think Police Officers need to 

be used where they are more effective. 

 
Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Sesungkur. 

32 

 

FOREIGN NATIONALS - VISA/ PERMANENT RESIDENCE PERMIT 

(No. B/759) Mr D. Sesungkur (First Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to immigration, he will state – 

(a)  

over the period 2005 to 31 December 2014, the number -  

(i)  

of  foreign  nationals  who  have  been  granted  a  visa  for  a  period 
exceeding 5 years or permanent residence, indicating in each case, the 
main reason/s and purpose/s of the stay, and  

(ii)  

application for the issue of a visa/ permanent residence permit which 
have been rejected, and  

(b)  

the assessment of Government of the policy in relation thereto. 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, foreign nationals who come to Mauritius 
for short stay for the purposes of visit or business are granted a visa or entry permit.  Those 
who come to reside in the country for a longer period for work and/or residence purposes are 
granted  a  Residence  Permit,  an  Occupation  Permit  or  a  Permanent  Residence  Permit  in 
accordance with relevant sections of the Immigration Act. 

The following categories of persons are, subject to terms and conditions, eligible for 

long-term residence permits - 

(i) 
(ii) 

(iii) 

holders of Permanent Residence Permit for 10 years; 
non-citizens  who  have  acquired  a  residential  property  under  the  Integrated 
Resorts  Scheme  (IRS)  and  Real  Estate  Scheme  (RES)  until  such  time  they 
hold the residential property, and 
non-residents who have contracted civil marriage with a citizen of Mauritius 
are granted a Residence Permit for an indefinite period. 

The spouse, children and dependents of holders of permits referred to are also eligible 

for a Residence Permit for the corresponding period. 

33 

 
In regard to part (a)(i) of the question, the breakdown of the different permits issued 
for a period of above five  years under approved schemes over the period January 2005 to 
December 2014 are as follows - 

•  Permanent Residence Permit for 10 years 
•  Residence Permit under IRS/ RES 
•  Foreign spouses of citizens of Mauritius         

 

      
    

   179 
2,260 
5,239 

Permanent Residence status has also been granted to 72 foreigners under the defunct 
Permanent  Residence  Scheme  and  a  Scheme  to  Attract  Professionals  in  Emerging  Sectors 
(SAPES) which were revoked with effect from 01 October 2006. 

Madam  Speaker,  in  regard  to  part  (a)  (ii)  of  the  question,  19  applications  for 
Permanent Residence Permits for 10 years have been turned down since its operation in 2012 
up to 31 December 2014. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, I wish to inform the House that Government is 
currently in the process of reviewing the various schemes governing the issue of Residence 
Permits to foreign nationals. 

Mr Sesungkur: Is the hon. Ag. Prime Minister in a position to give us some figures - 
if he has - regarding the estimated permits that would be given with the implementation of the 
Smart City Scheme? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: I don’t have these figures, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: You don’t have any supplementary questions on this one.  So, next 

question! 

 

DRUGS & ALCOHOL RELATED OFFENCES – LEGAL PROCEEDINGS 

(No. B/760) Mr D. Sesungkur (First Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  hard  drugs  and  alcohol-
related  offences,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Commissioner  of 
Police, information as to the number of males and females in the 10-12 , 13-16 and 17-18 
years age group respectively against whom legal proceedings have been  initiated, over the 
period  January  2013  to  date,  indicating  the  number  thereof  having  been  found  guilty  and 
sentenced to immediate custody. 

34 

 
The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  tabling  the  required  information 
pertaining to the number of males and females in the age bracket of 10 to 12, 13 to 16 and 17 
to 18  years age groups against whom legal proceedings for hard drugs and alcohol-related 
offences have been initiated over the period January 2013 to date.  

According to records available at the Rehabilitation Youth Centre falling under the 
Ministry  of  Social  Security,  National  Solidarity  and  Reform  Institutions  no  one  has  been 
sentenced to immediate custody in respect to hard drugs or alcohol-related offences. 

Mr  Sesungkur:  Can  the  hon.  Ag.  Prime  Minister  say  what  assessment  he  makes 

about this situation? 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Again, Madam Speaker, as you will note from the figures 
which we are tabling, there has been an increase in these offences over the last two to three 
years, Madam Speaker and this is, I am sure, something that the Commissioner of Police as 
well as the Minister for Gender Equality, Child Development and Family Welfare are well 
aware of and remedial measures are being envisaged. 

Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Ag. Prime Minister consider asking the Commissioner of 
Police  whether  he  can  send  Police  Officers  -  in  civil,  not  wearing  Police  uniforms  -  in 
discotheques all over the island to go and see whether these drugs are being ... 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, the presence of minors in discotheques is 
a disturbing issue. I have raised it, myself, with the Tourism Authority and the Commissioner 
of Police and I will pass on this request to the Commissioner of Police. 

Madam Speaker: At the beginning of Prime Minister’s Question Time, I stated that 
PQ No. B/754 was to be replied by the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development. 
I have now been informed that PQ No. B/754 has been withdrawn.  

Hon.  Members,  the  Table  has  been  advised  that  PQ  No.  B/770,  in  regard  to  the 
Construction  of  another  football  ground  at  Le  Morne  Village  and  addressed  to  the  hon. 
Minister of Youth and Sports, will be replied by Dr. the hon. Minister of Local Government. 
PQ No. B/776, in regard to risks of landslide in the region of Vallée Pitot and addressed to 
the  hon.  Minister  of  Environment,  will  be  replied  by  the  hon.  Minister  of  Public 
Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport.  PQ  No.  B/777,  in  regard  to  the  Civil  Service  Family 
Protection  Scheme  Act  and  addressed  to  the  hon.  Minister  of  Civil  Service  and 
Administrative  Reforms,  will  be  replied  by  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development. PQ No. B/803, in regard to the proposed development project of the Port Louis 

 

35 

harbour and addressed to the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development, will be 
replied by the hon. Ag. Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External Communications. 
PQ Nos B/783 and B/808 have been withdrawn. I am now being informed that PQ No. B/761 
has been withdrawn.  Next question, hon. Quirin! 

 

SPORTS COMPLEXES & FOOTBALL GROUNDS - FEES 

(No.  B/761)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Local  Government  whether,  in  regard  to  the  sports  complexes  and 
football grounds managed by the local authorities, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain 
from the local authorities, information as to if the utilization thereof by local clubs and by 
individuals is free of charge and, if not, why not. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

MINISTRY OF YOUTH AND SPORTS - ADVISERS/COACHES 

(No.  B/762)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the advisers/coaches attached to 
his Ministry, he will give a list thereof, discipline-wise, indicating in each case, the terms and 
conditions of appointment thereof. 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  circulating  the  information  regarding 
advisers/coaches attached to my Ministry along with their respective discipline and also the 
terms and conditions of their appointment. 

Mr Quirin: Madame la présidente, je remercie le ministre de bien vouloir déposer les 
informations  requises,  mais,  cependant,  j’aimerai  qu’il  nous  indique  quelles  sont  les 
conditions d’emplois de ces advisers/coaches? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Actually, all of them have got different terms and conditions of 

employment. It is in the list, the hon. Member will find it there. 

Mr  Quirin:  L’honorable  ministre  peut-il  nous  dire  si 

le  contrat  de  ces 

advisers/coaches peut être résilié à n’importe quel moment?  

Mr Sawmynaden : Actually, for some of them, their contracts have already expired 
and they have been retained on a month-to-month basis with a view of close monitoring and 

 

36 

assessment of their performance. Most of them, within one month notice, as prescribed by the 
law, we can stop their contracts. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Quirin ! 

Mr Quirin : Peut-on savoir, Madame la présidente, si un adviser/coach qui a quinze à 
vingt années de service et prend sa retraite; est-ce qu’au moment de sa retraite bénéficie-t-il 
d’une compensation ou d’une pension? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, they are not employed by the Government. They 
are on contract. I think if the hon. Member can come with a question on that, then we can 
reply. 

Mr  Quirin:  Madame  la  présidente,  une  dernière  question.  L’honorable  ministre  ne 
trouve-t-il pas que c’est inhumain?  Je sais qu’il vient de me dire de venir avec une autre 
question, mais je pense que la question supplémentaire a sa raison d’être.  Quelqu’un qui a 
été  au  service  du  sport  pendant  de  longues  années,  ne  trouve-t-il  pas  que  c’est  inhumain 
qu’une  personne  qui  a  donné  toute  sa  vie,  qui  a  passé  toute  sa  carrière  professionnelle  au 
service du sport, se retrouve sans rien, sans aucune compensation ou pension quand elle se 
retire? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker,  as  I  mentioned,  I  will have the answer to this 

question with another question from the hon. Member, I will be more than happy to reply. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Quirin ! 

 

MAURITIUS GYMNASTIC FEDERATION – INQUIRY 

(No.  B/763)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Youth  and  Sports  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Mauritius  Gymnastic 
Federation, he will state – 

(a) 
(b) 

if it is recognized by his Ministry, and 
the findings of the inquiry carried out by his Ministry thereinto, earlier this 
year, indicating the actions taken in relation thereto, if any. 

Mr Sawmynaden : Madam Speaker, I have to inform the House that in March 2014, 
the Mauritius Gymnastic Federation was granted derogation by my predecessor to operate in 
six sports regions with a total of five clubs for an initial period of one year.  The derogation 

 

37 

was conditional to the Federation undertaking to expand the sports in all the regions and also 
to ensure to have the required number of clubs in each region during the one-year period. 

In March 2015, it was noted that the Federation had not made any effort to comply 
with the conditions of the derogation and was requested to submit written explanation as to 
why  it  has  not  fulfilled  the  terms  of  the  derogation.  The  Federation  did  not  submit  any 
explanation  to  my  Ministry  within  the  requested  time.  The  Ministry  had,  therefore,  no 
alternative than to suspend its recognition as per section 11 (6) (b) of the Sports Act 2013 for 
noncompliance with sections 12 1 (a) and 12 2 (a) of the Act regarding the number of regions 
and sports clubs enrolled within it. 

As regards part (b) of the question, I wish to inform the House that the Federation has 
lodged  a  case  in  the  Supreme  Court  against  the  decision  of  the  Ministry  to  suspend  its 
recognition. As the case is still before the Supreme Court, the House will appreciate that it 
will not be appropriate for me to comment further on the matter. 

Mr Quirin: Madame la présidente, je comprends la position de l’honorable ministre 
mais j’aimerai qu’il nous dise cependant ce qui est advenue de la demande de conciliation 
qu’avait faite le Curepipe Super Sports Club devant l’Ombudsperson for Sports et qui date du 
17 février dernier?  Il y avait une demande de conciliation. 

Mr Sawmynaden:  There was a demand, but then they have lodged a case in front of 

the Supreme Court. So, now I don’t think that it is appropriate for us to reply. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, next question, hon. Ameer Meea! 

 

SALE BY LEVY SOLIDARITY FUND - BENEFICIARIES 

(No.  B/764)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  whether,  in 
regard to the Sale by Levy Solidarity Fund of Rs100 m, he will, for the benefit of the House, 
obtain from the Fund, a breakdown of the funds disbursed therefrom, as at to date, indicating 
in each case, the names of the beneficiaries thereof. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo): With your permission, Madam Speaker, I shall reply to that question.  The 
information requested is being tabled.  I have to add that the Sale by Levy Solidarity Fund 
which was created in 2007 is no longer operational.   

 
Follow up arising out of cases dealt by the Fund are being handled by the National 

38 

Solidarity Fund. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea:  Can I ask the hon. Vice Prime Minister if Government proposes to 

bring amendments to the Borrowers’ Protection Act? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Well, I am sure that if a proper question is put, we shall see after 

discussions. 

Madam Speaker:  Yes, hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea:  May I ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister what is the total value 

that has been disbursed out of this Rs100 m. that has been earmarked? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Well, the figures are on the paper which I am tabling.  You just 

need to do the addition, some Rs15 m. approximately. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Speaker, I realise that the hon. Vice-Prime Minister is 
not the substantive Minister, but the hon. Vice Prime Minister just mentioned that the Fund is 
no longer in existence and cases are being dealt with by the National Solidarity Fund; so, may 
I know from the hon. Vice-Prime Minister whether the same criteria that has been used under 
the  Sale  by  Levy  Solidarity  Fund  is  being  used  by  the  National  Solidarity  Fund  or  no 
consideration at all is being given to victims of Sale by Levy? 

Mr Collendavelloo: First of all, the exact figure is Rs15.7 m., not far from my first 
guess.  To answer the question by my hon. friend: financial assistance of up to Rs500,000 per 
beneficiary was provided.  This measure was restricted to cases occurring in financial years 
2007-2008, 2008-2009.  Now, no new cases are being dealt by the NSF.  Let me just see that!  
But  the  National  Solidarity  Fund  is  currently  paying  five  beneficiaries,  old  age  persons  a 
monthly rental of Rs1,250 subject to the presentation of a life certificate every three months. 

Mr Ganoo:  I know the hon. Vice-Prime Minister is not the substantive Minister of 
Finance, but in his Budget Speech, the hon. Minister of Finance announced that an enquiry 
would be set up in the case of Sale by Levy.  Can the hon. Vice-Prime Minister inform the 
House whether the whole process has started? 

 
Mr Collendavelloo: The Committee currently set up is going to be requested to look 

39 

into the advisability of revamping the Sale by Levy Solidarity Fund.  

Madam Speaker:  Okay.  Next question, hon. Ameer Meea! 

 

DOMAINE LES PAILLES LTD – LARCENY CASES 

(No.  B/765)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  whether,  in 
regard to the Domaine Les Pailles Ltd., he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the 
State Investment Corporation Ltd., information as to the number of reported cases of larceny 
having occurred thereat, since January 2015 to date, indicating the additional measures that 
have been or will be taken to reinforce the security of the premises thereof and of the assets 
thereat. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Collendavelloo:  You can bring information if you want! 

Madam Speaker: Please, I said no cross-talking! 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  State  Investment  Corporation  as 
follows -  

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

for the period January 2015 to date, three cases of larceny have occurred and 
have been reported to the Police for enquiry;  

two cases were reported on 22 August and 25 August 2015 respectively which 
relate to the Alambic Rum Distillery at Domaine Les Pailles Ltd; 

the third one which relates to the theft of 20 metres of electric cables, was 
reported on 08 September 2015;  

these cases occurred at a time when the security services were outsourced 
following the cessation of business of Domaine Les Pailles in July 2015;  

the contract of the security company was terminated with immediate effect;   

the security services at Domaine Les Pailles are now being assured by an 
internal team constituted by State Investment Corporation Ltd. 

40 

 
Mr  Ameer  Meea:  According  to  information  made  public  in  the  press,  a  whole 
distillery was being stolen.  It is like a very, very big machine.  Can I ask the hon. Minister if 
he has an idea where this has landed.… 

(Interruptions) 

if this has landed in the factory of vié feraille and also, if this distillery was insured and what 
has been the outcome with the insurance company, if any claim has been made thereof? 

Mr Collendavelloo: I don’t think that the whole thing was removed in one day.  

(Interruptions) 

What I understand is that on 22 August, there were some distillery items including red 
copper  pipes  estimated  at  Rs200,000.      On  25  August,  that  is,  three  days  later,  further 
distillery items were stolen.  The value stolen is unknown. There is no idea as to where they 
have landed, and no further information is available. There has been also a theft of 22 metres 
of electric cables. With regard to the insurance, I am afraid I do not have the information. 

Mr Ganoo: It is good that the hon. Vice-Prime Minister is informing the House that 
the  value  of  this  object  is  Rs200,000,  from  the  information  in  his  file.  But  can  he  tell  the 
House who has ascribed this value to this pièce d’antiquité? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  This  was  given  by  the  declarant,  that  is,  the  ex-Estate 
Management  of  Domaine  Les  Pailles,  when  he  reported  it  to  the  Police.  He  reported 
Rs200,000 for the first theft, the second one was value stolen unknown. For the 20 metres of 
electric cables, the value was estimated at Rs2,000. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ameer Meea! 

 

FREE WIFI HOTSPOTS PROJECT - IMPLEMENTATION 

(No.  B/766)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 
Institutional Reforms, Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in 
regard  to  the  proposed  Free  WIFI  Hotspots  Project,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House, 
obtain  from  the  Mauritius  Telecom,  information  as  to  where  matters  stand  as  to  the 
implementation thereof, indicating – 

(a) 

the proposed locations that have been identified therefor, and 

41 

 
(b) 
if it will be funded under the Corporate Social Responsibility of the company. 
The Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade 
(Mr  E.  Sinatambou):  Madam  Speaker,  with  your  permission,  I  shall  reply  to  both 
Parliamentary Question B/766, asked by the hon. Second Member for Port Louis Maritime 
and Port Louis East, and to Parliamentary Question B/778, asked by the hon. First Member 
for Port Louis Maritime and Port Louis East, as they both relate to the same issue, that is, 
access to internet and installation of WIFI Hotspots. 

Madam Speaker, as regards the installation of WIFI Hotspots across the island, I am 
informed by Mauritius Telecom that the implementation is in progress and that the project is 
expected to go live in early 2016. Presently, Mauritius Telecom is finalising the evaluation of 
equipment.  The  sites  which  have  been  identified  for  provision  of  the  free  WIFI  Hotspots 
include  community  centres,  elderly  day  care  centres,  social  welfare  centres,  municipal 
councils, district councils, youth centres, women centres, post offices and village halls.  This 
project is funded under the Corporate Social Responsibility of Mauritius Telecom.  I am also 
informed that Mauritius Telecom is currently offering free WIFI service in its Orange Shops 
and at the Bagatelle Shopping Mall. 

As regards households having been given access to high-speed internet service, I am 
informed  that  Mauritius  Telecom  has  already  connected  more  than  160,000  households  to 
high-speed  internet  services.  This  is  over  and  above  the  customer  base  of  402,499,  as  at 
September  2015,  who  can  access  high-speed  internet  while  being  mobile,  namely  through 
mobile phones, tablets and laptops. 

By the end of 2018, it is expected that all the households in Mauritius will have the 

possibility of being connected to high-speed internet through fibre by Mauritius Telecom.   

Mauritius  Telecom  has  also  undertaken  a  number  of  actions  to  make  high-speed 

internet more affordable to all Mauritians. 

Firstly, I am informed that, in July 2015, Mauritius Telecom has introduced a high-
speed internet package at Rs499 VAT inclusive, thereby offering high-speed internet at the 
cheapest price in the African region. 

Secondly, since 01 June 2015, customers of Mauritius Telecom who subscribe to the 
ADSL internet service have benefitted from a 30% decrease of the internet tariff, which has 
dropped from Rs699 VAT inclusive per month to Rs499 VAT inclusive. 

42 

 
Thirdly,  between  January  and  October  2015,  Mauritius  Telecom  has  also  migrated, 
free of charge, about 50,000 households from the traditional copper network to a new fibre 
network. The internet speed of these customers has been upgraded by up to 10 times without 
any additional charge on their monthly rental. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, Mauritius Telecom has, since 01 September 2015, reduced 
the price of high-speed connectivity offers to the BPO industry by an average of more than 
65%, thereby positioning Mauritius as one of the cheapest BPO destinations in the world.  At 
least, so am I informed. 

I 

think 

I  heard 

Mr  Bérenger: 

the  hon.  Minister  confirm 

this  
WIFI Hotspots Project is being financed by Mauritius Telecom through its Corporate Social 
Responsibility. Madam Speaker, being given that, under the Income Tax Act, the companies 
have to submit to the MRA details of all CSR projects and the MRA approves or does not 
approve  these  projects,  can  I  know  whether  that  idea  of  the  CSR  of  Mauritius  Telecom 
financing the free WIFI Hotspots has been approved by the MRA and, if yes, whether we can 
have a copy of the authorisation from the MRA and what sum we are talking about? 

that 

Mr Sinatambou: Well, the hon. Leader of the Opposition will appreciate that, firstly, 
I am not the substantive Minister.  Secondly, I certainly can confirm that, from information 
given,  I  have  been  told  that  this  is  going  to  be  financed  from  the  Corporate  Social 
Responsibility  of  the  company.    But,  thirdly,  I  would  suggest  that  the  hon.  Leader  of  the 
Opposition comes with a substantive question on the issue of taxability and approval. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Madam  Speaker,  this  measure  was  in  the  electoral  manifesto  of 
Alliance Lepep and it was set as a priority for the first three months of the Government. Now, 
we heard that this measure will come into practice next year, in 2016. May I know why this is 
taking so long, and also what is the total amount that has been earmarked for this project, 
which was supposed to be financed by the Government, but now financed by the Mauritius 
Telecom? 

Mr Sinatambou: I must say, Madam Speaker, I put the exact same question to the 

people responsible and the reply I have obtained is as follows – 

First of all, Mauritius Telecom has had to test several types of equipment that fit the 

purpose. 

Secondly,  after  pilot  testing  of  the  equipment,  Mauritius  Telecom  has  had  to  go 

through a tendering process for procurement of the equipment. 

 
Thirdly, at this stage, that is, early November 2015, the tender evaluation is ongoing. 

43 

And finally, the free WIFI deployment, as  I said just before, is expected to go live 

early 2016. 

I don’t have that reply at this stage. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Mohamed:  Madam  Speaker,  I  do  understand  that  the  hon.  Minister  is  not  the 
substantive Minister albeit he was once upon a time, I do recall, Minister of Information and 
Communication Technology.  Based on that previous experience, I gather it will be easy for 
him to answer. I have heard him say with regard to WIFI spots, community centres, elderly 
people centres and municipal councils.  Those are all places that he is making mention of that 
had already being taken care of by the previous Government. What is he doing which would 
be new; something innovative? Does this Ministry intend to innovate or does it intend to just 
basically state what the previous Government has already done? 

Mr Sinatambou: Well, quite surely, if we speak of WIFI Hotspots, my understanding 
is  that  people  using  all  the  apparatus  around  or  in  those  various  locations  will  be  able  to 
actually manipulate their apparatus and have access to the internet free of charge. Before, you 
would have to go through the ADSL and get connected. For me, what is important is that - I 
did state earlier in the reply - by the end of 2018, it is expected … 

(Interruptions) 

I know something. Madam Speaker, I cannot be interrupted by someone who has... 

Madam Speaker: Please, address the Chair! Address the Chair and make your reply! 

Mr  Sinatambou:  I  would  appreciate  if  I  were  not  interrupted  unduly  by  the  hon. 

Leader of the Opposition! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Minister,  I  have  asked  you  to  proceed  with  your  reply, 

please! 

Mr  Sinatambou:  What  I  am  told  is  that,  under  the  last  Government,  only 

Municipalities had actually initiated WIFI Hotspots; that’s what I know. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Mohamed! 

44 

 
Mr Mohamed: Could the hon. Minister, at least, tell us what will be the high-speed 
connectivity at those new places that would really be something innovative? Madam Speaker, 
it is easy to say high-speed but, what would be the speed? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Sinatambou: Let me say that… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

Mr Sinatambou: … the information that I have is that if it is actually copper wire, it 
is going to be 512Kb and if it is actually optical fibre it is going to be 10Mb. For someone 
who does not know anything, I hope they will appreciate. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: Last one on the same issue... 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: If you insist, No. B/767. 

 

INDEPENDENT BROADCASTING AUTHORITY  

– APPOINTMENTS & COMPLAINTS 

(No.  B/767)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 
Institutional Reforms, Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation  whether, in 
regard  to  the  Independent  Broadcasting  Authority,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House, 
obtain therefrom, information as to the -  

(a)  

(b)  

names and terms and conditions of appointment of the Chief Executive Officer 
and Chairperson thereof respectively, and  

number of complaints received thereat, since January 2015 to date, indicating 
in each case, the outcome thereof. 

The Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade (Mr 
E. Sinatambou): Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that the Independent Broadcasting 

 

45 

Authority  (IBA)  became  operational  in  2001  under  a  Government  led  by  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth.  Its objectives are, inter alia, to - 

(i) 

(ii) 

ensure that licensees include, in their services, regular locally produced 
programmes; 

set acceptable standards for programmes and advertising and monitor 
compliance with those standards, and 

(iii) 

ensure that broadcasting services are impartial and accurate. 

It also has among its objects a duty to inquire into public complaints against a licensee 

and take any action it thinks appropriate. 

As regards part (a) of the question, there is presently no Chief Executive Officer since 
the  demise  of  the  former  Director,  Mr  Dulliparsad  Suraj  Bali  on  15  December  2014.  The 
latter was drawing a total salary in excess of Rs170,000 per month plus 21 days refundable 
annual leave every year, two months’ gratuity and full duty free for a 1600 c.c. car.   

With regard to the current Chairperson of the IBA, the incumbent is Mrs Washeelah 
Youshreen Choomka.  She was appointed for a period of three years on 30 April 2015 by the 
President of the Republic, in accordance with section 6 (a) of the Independent Broadcasting 
Act 2000.  The Chairperson is earning a monthly allowance of Rs50,000.  She is also entitled 
to  a  travelling  allowance  of  Rs10,000  and  a  refund  of  telephone  expenses  of  Rs2,000 
monthly.  Of course, Madam Speaker, all the payments mentioned are before tax. 

I wish to inform the House that the post of Director of the IBA has been advertised 

since 26 October 2015 and I am tabling a copy of the advert.   

As regards part (b) of the question, I am informed that since January 2015 to date, ten 
complaints have been received at the IBA.  As a comparison, Madam Speaker, for the year 
2013 there were twelve complaints and for the year 2014 there were eight complaints.  I am 
tabling the list of complaints for 2015 together with their outcome or their current status. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:    Madam  Speaker,  I  did  not  hear  the  hon.  Minister  about  the 

outcome of the Complaints Committee. 

46 

 
Mr Sinatambou: I just said, Madam Speaker, that I am tabling the list of complaints 
for 2015 together with their outcome or their current status if they have not yet reached an 
outcome. 

Mr Ameer Meea: What is the reason that it took almost a year to advertise for the 
post  of  Director  of  the  IBA?  Was  it  because  a  Parliamentary  question  was  being  asked? 
Because it is a coincidence… 

Madam Speaker: Don’t make any comment! Please, ask your question! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Sinatambou: I have no idea. But what I am sure of is that this Government does 

not need to have Parliamentary questions from the other side to do its work! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  Under  the  IBA  Act  there  are  certain 
qualifications that are required before someone can be appointed to the Board. May I know 
from the hon. Minister - this Chairperson that he has mentioned - how many years at the Bar, 
as  a  barrister,  does  she  have  before  she  has  been  appointed  as  Chairperson  of  this  very 
important institution? 

Mr Sinatambou: I have no idea of the number of years of the Chairperson at the Bar 
but, there are a few things I know.  Premièrement, on dit que la valeur n'attend pas le poids 
des années… 

(Interruptions) 

Secondly,  I know of many people with many  years at the Bar who are still not able to do 
work properly. So, I don’t think that this is pertinent to her appointment as Chairperson. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for one and a half hours. 

At 1.03 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 2.36 p.m. with the Deputy Speaker in the Chair. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Leopold! 

 

 

47 

DOMESTIC VIOLENCE 

(No. B/768)  Mr J. Leopold (Second Member for Rodrigues)  asked the Minister of 
Gender Equality, Child Development and Family Welfare whether, in regard to the problem 
of violence in the family, she will state the identified common causes thereof according to her 
Ministry, indicating – 

(a)  

(b)  

(c)  

if  weaknesses  susceptible  of  jeopardizing  the  prevention  thereof  have  been 
identified in the policy of her Ministry in addressing same;  

the scale and severity thereof in Mauritius, and  

the remedial measures that will be taken in relation thereto. 

Mrs  Perraud:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  would  like  to  inform  the  House  that 
according to cases reported by victims of domestic violence at my Ministry, the underlying 
causes of domestic violence, whether in the form of isolated acts or systematic patterns of 
violence, is a combination of several factors, the most common ones being conflicts between 
partners,  absence  and  lack  of  communication,  extra-marital  affairs,  conflicts  over  finance, 
interference of in-laws, and substance abuse, amongst others.  

With  a  view  to  addressing  the  problem,  my  Ministry  has  adopted  a  two-pronged 
approach,  namely  intervention  and  prevention.  As  regards  the  intervention  aspects,  an 
integrated service is provided through the 6 Family Support Bureaux of my Ministry where 
psychological  counselling,  assistance 
legal 
legal  advice  and 
representations at Court and counselling to perpetrators, amongst others are provided.  

to  victims  at  Court, 

Insofar  as  prevention  is  concerned,  awareness  raising  campaigns  are  carried  out 
throughout the year, to sensitise various segments of the population on the magnitude of the 
problem  and  the  ways  of  addressing  it.  These  sensitisation  campaigns  are  held  in 
collaboration  with  various  stakeholders,  namely  the  Police,  the  Ministry  of  Health  and 
Quality  of  Life,  religious  organisations  and  NGOs  such  as  NATReSA,  the  Centre  Idriss 
Goomany, and the Mauritius Family Planning and Welfare Association, amongst others. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  as  regards  weaknesses  in  policies  that  may  jeopardise  the 
prevention of domestic violence, I wish to inform the House that the Report of the Advisory 
Committee on Reinforcement of Framework for Protection from Domestic Violence, which I 
will call the Domingue Report, has identified a series of issues that may impede our efforts in 
curbing domestic violence.  These include, among others – 

 
(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

(v) 

(vi) 

48 

the definition given to the concept of domestic violence is too narrow and does 
not capture all forms of domestic violence; 

not  all  acts  of  domestic  violence  are  criminalised,  e.g.,  our  law  does  not 
capture  psychological  harm  and  economic  abuse  as  offences  and  do  not 
provide sufficiently for aggravating circumstances; 

the criminal justice response is not very effective and specialised expertise for 
handling of such cases is lacking; 

the  protection  given  to  victims  is  somewhat  deficient  and  the  risk  of  re-
victimisation is rather high; 

redress and reparation for victims is lacking; 

the  monitoring  and  evaluation  system  is  not  strong  enough  to  deliver  the 
appropriate response to this societal problem, and 

(vii) 

lack  of  multi-sectoral  approach  and  commitment  from  stakeholders  in 
providing both intervention and prevention strategies. 

Insofar as the scale and severity of the problem, I would like to inform the House that 
for the years 2014 and 2015 (from January to September) a total number of 3,571 and 2,604 
cases were registered respectively through the 6 Family Support Bureaux of my Ministry.  

Moreover, figures available from the Annual Report of the Judiciary for the year 2014 

indicate the following –  

Cases under the Protection from Domestic Violence Act 1997 

at the District Courts - 2011-2014 

2011  

2012 

2013 

2014 

1612 cases 

1544 cases 

1805 cases 

1895 cases 

 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  in  the  face  of  this  “fléau  social”,  my  Ministry  has  put  in  place 
various programmes and projects pertaining to family welfare, namely – 

(a) 

strengthening values for family life; 

49 

shared faith belief; 

pre-marital counselling; 

marriage enrichment; 

inter-generation relationship; 

zero tolerance clubs; 

victim empowerment and abuser rehabilitation, and  

Domestic Violence Information System.  

 
(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

(f) 

(g) 

(h) 

Additionally,  following  consultations  with  stakeholders,  my  Ministry  has  already  initiated 
actions  to  implement  recommendations  of  the  Domingue  Report  and  to  bring  further 
amendments to the Protection from Domestic Violence Act. My Ministry is also reinforcing 
its  structures  for  the  protective  and  support  services  to  victims  of  family  violence.    In 
addition, my Ministry will set up a Coordinating Body to monitor implementation of multi-
sectoral collaboration and recommend policy measures to address family violence.  

Moreover, in an endeavour to safeguard the families whose members have to oscillate 
between  their  family  and  professional  commitments,  my  Ministry  is  in  the  process  of 
developing a Balancing Work and Family Life Programme.  

The issue of violence in the family ranks high on the agenda of this Government. In 
this context, as announced in the Government Programme 2015-2019, a National Coalition 
against  Domestic  Violence  Committee  has  been  set  up  under  the  aegis  of  the  Prime 
Minister’s office. Various meetings have been held and the report thereof is in the process of 
finalisation.  Once  approved,  the  recommendations  will  be  implemented  by  various 
stakeholders to address this issue.  

I also wish to inform the House that the most recent study on the extent, nature and 
cost of domestic violence to the Mauritian economy dates back to 2010. However, given the 
new trends and challenges being faced by the Mauritian families … 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Minister, I am sorry to interrupt.  Will your answer be 

much longer? 

Mrs Perraud: No!  My Ministry is in the process of seeking consultancy services to 
conduct a fresh study to assess the well-being of families in the Republic of Mauritius. That 
in-depth study will, inter alia, identify weaknesses susceptible to jeopardise the prevention of 

 

50 

violence in the family and will also indicate the scale and severity of the problem. The study 
will enable reinforcement and consolidation of policy measures with the collaboration of all 
concerned stakeholders. 

Thank you. 

Mr Leopold: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, would the hon. Minister agree with me that 
women and children are the most vulnerable victims when it comes to family violence? On 
top  of  that,  they  are  the  ones  who  will  need  to  get  out  of  their  house  and  they  become 
homeless  and  they  go  to  refuge.  Will  the  hon.  Minister  inform  the  House  whether  she  is 
coming with new legislation so as to toughen the law and to protect all those victims and to 
make their perpetrators get out of their house instead of the women and children, so that the 
women and the children stay in their house and the perpetrators get out so that the children 
and the women do not get homeless? 

Mrs Perraud: Yes, in line with the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on 
the report on Reinforcement of Framework for Protection from Domestic Violence, initiatives 
are being taken to bring further amendments in the PDVA and amendment in the Criminal 
Code. 

Mr Ganoo: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in terms of remedial measures as suggested in 
the  question,  the  hon.  Minister  has  talked  about  sensitisation  of  the  perpetrators  of  the 
violence,  may  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  if  she  would  consider,  when  revising  the  law,  what 
takes place in other countries, for example, in the United States that whenever a Protection 
Order  is  issued,  the  husband  is  formally  ordered  to  also  attend  classes  and  courses  of 
sensibilisation which can yield positive results? 

Mrs Perraud: When we will work on the amendments, we will take this on board. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Next Question, hon. Jhuboo! 

 

ST BRANDON ISLANDS - FISHING LICENCES 

(No. B/769) Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and  Outer  Islands 
whether, in regard to the St Brandon Islands, he will state the - 

(a)  

number  of  fishing  licences  granted  therefor,  indicating  the  names  of  the 
companies granted therewith; 

 
(b)  

(c)  

51 

status of the fish reserves thereat, and  

policy of Government in relation to the fragile eco-system prevailing thereat, 
indicating the measures taken for the preservation thereof, if any. 

Mr Koonjoo: Mr Deputy Speaker Sir, as regard to part (a) of the question, as at date 

13 licenses have been issued to 7 companies, namely - 

i. 

ii. 

iii. 

iv. 

v. 

vi. 

Raphael Fishing Co Ltd; 

Djasazee; 

Babul and Sons Fishing Co Ltd; 

Hassen Taher Seafoods Ltd; 

Med Fishing Cooperative Society Ltd; 

Sea Lord Fishing Company, and 

vii.  Ocean Catch Ltd. 

With respect to part (b), there is, at present, no fishing reserve or fish reserve in the 

waters of St. Brandon.  

With regard to part (c), the policy of this Government is the sustainable management 

 
of the fisheries resources and associated ecosystems. 

 

i. 

ii. 

iii. 

iv. 

v. 

vi. 

In this context, the following measures are being adopted in St. Brandon - 

limited entry and licensing system are in place for all fishing operations; 

allocation of catch quota to companies; 

all fishing boats and vessels report to the Fisheries Monitoring Centre and the 
National Coast Guard through the Vessel Monitoring System;  

all safety and security measures are undertaken by the vessel operator; 

use of selected gear for fishing activities in the inshore waters of St. Brandon, 
and 

regular inspections are carried out by enforcement officers to ensure that all 
conditions specified in the fishing licence are adhered to. 

52 

 
Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  a  new  Fisheries  and  Aquaculture  Bill  is  being  finalised, 
which  will  provide  for  better  management  of  the  ecosystem  in  the  Maritime  Zone  of 
Mauritius including St. Brandon. 

Furthermore, catching of marine turtles, mammals and berried lobsters in the waters 
of  St.  Brandon  are  not  authorized.  Besides,  a  ban  on  fishing  of  sea  cucumbers  is  in  place 
since 2009 and will be in operation till February 2016. 

Additionally, visits to St. Brandon are restricted. A quota of 200 persons per year has 
been imposed in respect of foreign nationals, subject to clearance from the Prime Minister’s 
Office.  

Moreover, a set of conditions applies for pleasure craft operators and tourists in order 
to ensure least disruption of the ecosystem of the Island. These conditions, inter-alia, include 
- 

a. 

b. 

avoidance of spillage of fuel and oil, and 

prevention of damage to the plants and animals species found on the island. 

Mr Bérenger: The question relates to St Brandon. Can I ask the hon. Minister, there 
was a problem concerning the lease, the present leaseholders had argued in Court that their 
lease was eternal, there was a dispute. Has this lease issue been settled? 

Mr  Koonjoo:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  this  has  been  amicably  settled  between  the 

Government of Mauritius and the people who are asking for the lease.  

Mr Bérenger: As far as sea cucumbers are concerned, can I know whether – because 
I am given to understand at one point that it had been completely exploited and therefore a 
ban was put by the previous Government -  the ban has been enforced? Is it still enforced and 
what is the situation? Has there been an improvement in the population of sea cucumbers? 

Mr Koonjoo: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, there is a ban on the sea cucumbers and I said 
it will last till February next year. The ban was imposed and the Leader of the Opposition is 
perfectly  right  to  say  that  there  was  some  pillage  de  sea  cucumbers  (barbaras)  in  those 
regions.  The  ban  has  been  staying  there.  We  are  working  on  whether  to  lift  up  the  ban 
completely or to lift up partially because there is a big demand for the sea cucumbers not only 
in Mauritius but all around the world. Its price is very high and it is very good for certain 
people  – sa pa pu toi sa, pu Navin sa! 

(Interruptions) 

 

53 

Yes,  we  are  working  upon  that  and  we  will  come  soon  with  whether  we  are  going  to  lift 
completely the ban or partially. There was an abuse, but, for the time being, I can assure the 
House that everything is in order and perfect. 

Mr Jhuboo: Thank you Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. The Native Terrestrial Biodiversity 
and National Parks Bill  was adopted a few weeks ago and mention was made that special 
reserves - an islet of utmost ecological importance would be created, protected and preserved. 
Does the hon. Minister think that it is high time that we come with a proper legislation to 
declare the archipelago of St Brandon as a Marine Protected Sanctuary? 

Mr Koonjoo: I know there is some problem there Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, and I have 
got news that there are places where the environment is very bad because of the mischief of 
some fishermen working there. I am planning, perhaps in a couple of weeks, to go there and 
see visually, as I went to Agaléga, how things stand and I can assure… 

I am not taking the sea cucumbers as such! 

(Interruptions) 

We will see for ourselves how things stand and come back and naturally we will take 

proper actions. 

 

LE MORNE VILLAGE - FOOTBALL GROUND  

(No. B/770) Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister  of  Youth  and  Sports  whether,  in  regard  to  Le  Morne  Village,  he  will  state  if 
consideration is being given for the construction of another football ground to be provided 
with the necessary amenities and, if so, indicate the -  

(a)  

(b) 

estimated cost thereof, and  

expected start and completion dates thereof. 

The Minister of Arts and Culture (Mr S. Baboo): Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with 

you permission, I shall reply to this question.  

I am informed by the District Council of Black River that there is no football ground 
at Le Morne and one plot of land has temporarily been put at the disposal of the inhabitants of 
the region by Societé Sitnot Le Morne Brabant for use as a football ground.  

54 

 
I am further informed that a request was made in August 2009 by the Council to the 
Ministry of Housing and Lands for the vesting of a plot of State land at Le Morne for the 
construction of a football ground. Since the proposed football ground falls within the buffer 
zone of Le Morne Cultural Landscape whereat construction is not allowed according to the 
Planning Policy Guidance, the request was not favourably considered.  

The  Ministry  has  subsequently  requested  the  Ministry  of  Housing  and  Lands  to 
identify another plot of State land in the region of Le Morne for the construction of a football 
ground and it has been informed that a plot of State land of an approximate extent of 2A20 
has been identified at La Prairie for this project.  The Le Morne Heritage Fund, which has 
been consulted, has raised no objection to the site.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, once the procedures for the vesting of the plot of State land 
identified  La  Prairie  would  be  finalised  by  the  Ministry  of  Housing  and  Lands,  after 
confirming that the site is suitable to be used as a football ground, the cost estimate would be 
worked out for the development of the plot of land into a football ground. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Rutnah! 

 

NATIONAL ASSEMBLY – LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION – DOCUMENT LAID  

(No.  B/771)  Mr  S.  Rutnah  (Third  Member  for  Piton  &  Rivière  du  Rempart) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to 
the document tabled by the hon. Leader of the Opposition in the National Assembly on 22 
September  2015,  purportedly  being  the  Management  Account  of  the  Central  Electricity 
Board, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Board, information as to if an 
inquiry  has  been  carried  out  to  ascertain  the  provenance  thereof  and,  if  so,  indicate  the 
outcome thereof. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo): Mr Deputy Speaker, I am informed by the CEB that its Board, after taking 
cognizance of a copy of the document which purported to be the Management Account of the 
CEB for the period January to May 2015, has directed that an enquiry be conducted.  The 
Board of Enquiry has been set up and is investigating into the matter. 

I am further informed that the CEB has also reported the matter to the Central CID. 

55 

 
Mr Rutnah:  Can the hon. Vice-Prime Minister state to the House whether at this 
stage of the enquiry, the hon. Leader of the Opposition’s assistance or cooperation has been 
sought in order to further the enquiry? 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Rutnah! 

Mr Collendavelloo:  I am not aware…   

The Deputy Speaker:  Let me just remind the hon. Member that the conduct or the 
character of a hon. Member of this Assembly, the hon. Leader of the Opposition cannot be 
questioned.  It has to be brought through a motion. 

Mr Rutnah:  In due course, I will move with a motion.  

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed:  Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  On the same issue, I have been 
doing some reading recently and I have come across a very interesting piece of ouvrage - if I 
may  call  it  that  way  -  that  talks  of  freedom  of  information  and  that  was  the  electoral 
manifesto  of  Alliance  Lepep.    How  does  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister,  therefore  -  that  is 
what I would like to ask him - reconcile that he has gone to the Central CID as opposed to the 
freedom  of  information,  proposal  that  he  stood  so  proudly  and  took  a  photograph  while 
presenting the electoral manifesto?  So, how does he reconcile one with the other? 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Vice-Prime Minister, you don’t have to answer.  It is not 

relevant to the question! 

Hon. Uteem! 

(Interruptions) 

 

PAILLES - TREATMENT PLANT PROJECT  

(No.  B/772)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in 
regard to the Treatment Plant Project at Pailles, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain 
from the Central Water Authority, information as to the – 

(a) 

costs thereof, indicating the amount of variation costs; 

 
(b) 

(c) 

56 

date on which it will become operational, and  

if  an  inquiry  has  been  carried  out  thereinto  and,  if  so,  indicate  the  outcome 
thereof. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo): Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the hon. Member may wish to refer to my replies 
to PQ B/334 of 28 April 2015 and PQ B/147 of 03 March 2015 respectively. 

With  regard  to  part  (a),  I  am  informed  by  the  Central  Water  Authority  that  the 
contract amount for the Pailles Water Treatment Plant is Rs725,814,684.41 inclusive of VAT.  
A  Variation  Order  of  Rs961,651.20  has  been  issued  for  laying  of  pipelines  within  the 
compound  and  will  be  met  from  contingencies  and  therefore  within  the  approved  contract 
amount.  

As  regard  part  (b),  the  Water  Treatment  Plant  was  supposed  to  have  become 

operational in May 2015, but following structural defects, operations were suspended. 

In June 2015, an independent expert, Aurecon from South Africa, appointed by the 
Central  Water  Authority,  carried  out  an  assessment  and  his  recommendations  have  been 
implemented by the Contractor, at no additional cost. 

I am informed that operations have resumed on 08 October with a daily production of 

10,000 m3 and will operate at full capacity of 80,000 m3 by the end of this week. 

I am also informed that the Central Water Authority Board has obtained legal advice 
on the findings of the independent expert with regard to prejudice caused to the CWA by the 
consultant and contractor and has decided to claim damages. 

The Central Water Authority will submit the expert’s report and the legal advice to 

the Procurement Policy Office. 

Mr Uteem:  May I ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister whether advice has been sought 
from the State Law Office as to the action and quantum of damages to be claimed from the 
contractor  and  the  consultant  with  respect  to  this  project  because  that  was  reported  in  the 
press? 

Mr Collendavelloo:  Well, no.  The State Law Office is not the legal advisor of the 
Central Water Authority.  Its legal advisor is Mr Rishi Pursem, a Senior Counsel and he is the 
one who has given that legal advice, which I understand the Board is seriously attending to. 

57 

 
Mr Uteem:  The hon. Vice-Prime Minister, in a press conference on 30 June, stated 
that  he  had  referred  the  case  for  investigation  by  ICAC.    That  was  in  relation  to  the 
circumstances  under  which  the  contract  was  allocated;  there  was  a  tender,  then  it  was 
annulled by IRP and then there was an emergency procurement.  Answering to a question – I 
am reading from the press release – the hon. Vice Prime Minister is supposedly quoted as 
having stated that the matter has been referred to ICAC for enquiry.  So, may I know from the 
hon. Vice-Prime Minister whether this is a correct statement of fact and what is the outcome 
of the enquiry? 

Mr Collendavelloo:  There is a distinction.  I did not refer the matter to ICAC and I 
did  not  order  any  such  reference,  but  the  Ministry  had,  independently  of  me,  referred  the 
matter to ICAC and I don’t know which date it was.  I believe it could have been very earlier 
on these days, but I did not do so. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed:  Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  In reply to my question B/417 
earlier this year, the hon. Vice-Prime Minister stated that when the work would have been 
completed  -  that  was  supposed  to  be  in  April  of  this  year  -  water  supply  will  move  from 
30,000 m3 per day to 80,000 m3 per day, and now we hear that it is 10,000 m3. Is that right?  
Way below what it was before on the one hand.  And my second question, if I may, is the 
quality of the water had all jeopardised with what is going on right now? 

Mr Collendavelloo:  Two questions!  First of all, yes it is true that originally the first 
gush of water was going to be 30,000 m3, but now after having seen these defects and the 
remedial defects, the technicians, I suppose, have felt it better to start with 10,000 m3, but the 
maximum of 80,000 m3 being reached later.  As to the quality of the water, I understand that 
regular tests are being performed and nothing untoward has been reported to me up to now, 
but  I  shall  certainly  take  this  one  up  and  try  and  ascertain  from  CWA  whether  they  are 
following up with these water tests? 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:    Thank  you,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  The  hon.  Vice  Prime  Minister 
mentioned that action may be taken against the contractor and the consultant. Following the 
report of Aurecon in which the South African expert criticises the consultant, may  I know 
from  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  what  is  the  total  amount  that  has  been  paid  to  the 
Consultant on this project?  

58 

 
Mr Collendavelloo:  If the hon. Member comes with a question, I will certainly be 
able to do this. I don’t believe that this would be available immediately. I know it offhand, 
but I would not want to dare an answer now. 

The Deputy Speaker: Next question, hon. Uteem!  

 

APOLLO BRAMWELL HOSPITAL - ACQUISITION 

(No.  B/773)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the 
Apollo Bramwell Hospital, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain information as to the 
– 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

funds that have been used for the acquisition thereof;  

procedures that have been followed for the acquisition thereof;  

monthly income and expenditure thereof since the acquisition thereof to date, 
and  

(d) 

intended use thereof.  

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):  Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  parts  (a)  and  (b)  of  the  question,  I  am 
informed that the Apollo Bramwell Hospital has not yet been acquired and accordingly there 
has been no transfer of funds.  

The NIC Healthcare Ltd, a subsidiary of the National Insurance Co. Ltd, invited an 
Expression of  Interest (EOI) on 11 September  2015 following which 25 submissions were 
received. Subsequently, all those who responded to the Expression of Interest were invited to 
submit their proposals. They were given the options to make an outright purchase, to enter 
into a management agreement or management contract/equity participation. 

I am informed that at the closing date of 19 October 2015, 12 bidders have submitted 

their proposals. These proposals are currently being evaluated by the Transaction Adviser. 

Regarding parts (c) and (d), the questions do not arise as the process of acquisition has 

not yet been completed. 

Mr  Uteem:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  understand  fully  that  the  hon.  Vice-Prime 
Minister  is  not  the  Minister  in  charge  of  this  file.  But,  if  I  can  refer  the  hon.  Vice-Prime 

 

59 

Minister to what was said in this House, on 01 September 2015, answering to a PNQ by the 
hon. Leader of the Opposition, the hon. Minister Bhadain stated and I quote – 

“I am informed by the FSC that the hospital operations and assets have been 
transferred to the National Insurance Co. Ltd. and NIC Healthcare Limited on 
25 August 2015 by the Special Administrators.” 

And  now,  is  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  telling  us  that  whatever  hon.  Minister  Bhadain 
stated, on 01 September, is not correct and there has not been any transfer of any asset from 
the  Apollo  Bramwell  Hospital  to  National  Insurance  Company  (NIC)  or  any  other 
companies? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  This  is  not  what  I  am  saying.  What  I  am  saying  is  that  NIC 
Healthcare  Ltd.  has  invited  an  Expression  of  Interest.  I  am  afraid  I  would  not  be  able  to 
enlighten you more than that, at this stage, Mr Deputy Speaker. 

Mr Uteem: Surely, the hon. Vice-Prime Minister will have a note in his file, saying at 
what price was the asset which belonged to the BAI Group, was transferred to the National 
Insurance Company which does not belong to the BAI Group which belongs to the State. So, 
surely,  there  must  have  been  a  transfer  and  consideration  paid.  I  understand  it  was  Rs1.2 
billion plus R1.00. 

Mr Collendavelloo: No, I am afraid I don’t have that information. I am sorry! 

Mr  Bérenger:  The  question  related  also  to  monthly  income  and  expenditure.  I  am 
given  to  understand  that  pending  a  decision  being  taken  concerning  the  exercise  of  taking 
over or whatever, that the Minister of Finance has said that the State, Government will foot 
whatever  deficit  there  is  monthly.  So,  can  I  know,  last  month,  the  month  before,  how  is 
Apollo Bramwell Hospital doing? I am given to understand that there is massive loss every 
month, that is being taken charge of by Government or the SIC which is the same thing. Do 
we have the figure of, therefore, the comparison, as asked in the question, monthly income 
and expenditure at Apollo Bramwell Hospital? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Well, the question was ‘monthly income and expenditure thereof 

since the acquisition’. Well, please! Come! 

(Interruptions) 

It is another play on words. This is the question ‘since the acquisition’. There has been no 
acquisition. Therefore, I don’t have the figures for a question which has not been asked. 

60 

 
Mr Uteem: I can’t understand. You just mentioned that there was an acquisition, but 
the price has not been paid yet. That is what hon. Bhadain stated National Insurance Co. has 
acquired  it.  So,  may  I  ask  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister,  on  03  September  2015,  the  hon. 
Minister of Finance, in an interview, stated that he is in discussion at Pierre and Marie Curie 
University so that the hospital would be used henceforth for the formation of doctors and that 
this Apollo Bramwell Hospital will become and I quote – 

“A charitable trust”. 

So, do I take it now that this idea of a charitable trust and university is all thrown out of the 
window? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Well, I am sure the hon. Miniser of Finance would be glad to 

enlighten you. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker Next question, hon. Barbier! 

 

FLIC EN FLAC - PRIVATE CLINIC - EIA LICENCE  

 (No.  B/774)  Mr  J.  C.  Barbier  (Fifth  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and  Beach 
Management whether he will state if his Ministry is presently processing an application for 
the issue of an Environment Impact Assessment licence in relation to a private clinic in Flic 
en Flac and, if so, indicate – 

(a) 

(b) 

the name of the entity having submitted the said application, and 

if the said clinic has already started operation and, if so, indicate 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

the date of coming into operation thereof; 

the distance of the nearest residence adjacent thereto and 

if  it  is  equipped  with  a  standby  generator  and,  if  so,  indicate  if  it 
conforms with the standard applicable norms. 

Mr Dayal: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I wish to inform the House that there is no EIA 
application which is being processed by my Ministry presently with regard to a private clinic 
at Flic en Flac. 

 
Mr Barbier: May I know from the hon. Minister whether there has been any file for 

61 

request for a clinic in the region which has been processed recently? 

Mr Dayal: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, negative. 

The Deputy Speaker: Next question, hon. Bhagwan! 

 

ISLET NATIONAL PARK – CONSERVATION & UPGRADING 

(No.  B/775)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security whether, in regard to the islets located 
around Mauritius, he will state the number of the islets constituting the Islet National Park, 
indicating the – 

(a) 

(b) 

names, location and extent thereof, and 

actions  initiated  for  the  conservation  and  upgrading  thereof,  in  view  of  the 
deplorable state of the environment prevailing thereat. 

Mr Seeruttun: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am informed that there are 49 islets around 
Mauritius which are located at various distances from the mainland. Most of these islets are 
located along the north, east and south eastern coastal regions of Mauritius. Some islets are 
quite large and some are very tiny. 

 Out of these 49 islets, eight have been proclaimed as National Park and are under the 
control  of  the  National  Parks  and  Conservation  Service  of  my  Ministry.  These  eight  islet 
national parks are: Ile d’Ambre, Pigeon Rock, Ile aux Fouquets, Ile aux Vacoas, Ile aux Fous, 
Rocher des Oiseaux, Ile aux Flamants, and Ile aux Oiseaux. 

Furthermore,  seven  islets  are  nature  reserves  and  are  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the 
Forestry Service of my Ministry. These seven nature reserves are: Ilot Gabriel, Flat Island, 
Round Island, Gunner’s Quoin, Ile aux Serpents, Ile aux Aigrettes, and Ilot Marianne. 

The remaining islets are under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Housing and Lands. 

I am tabling the information on the extent and location of the Islet national parks and 

nature reserves under the control of my Ministry. 

As  regards  part  (b)  of  the  question,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  wish  to  inform  the 
House  that  most  of  the  islet  national  parks  and  nature  reserves  are  important  for  their 
biodiversity as they harbour endemic species of fauna and flora. Some islets support large 

 

62 

colonies of seabirds and endemic reptiles. Conservation management is carried out jointly by 
the NPCS and the Forestry Service in collaboration with the Mauritian Wildife Foundation.  

Some islets are easily accessible and are open to the public for leisure and recreational 
purposes.  These  are  Flat  Island,  Gabriel  Island,  Ile  d’Ambre,  Ile  aux  Fouquets,  Ile  aux 
Vacoas, and Ilot Marianne. Cleaning and maintenance are regularly carried out by both the 
NPCS and the Forestry Service.  

The other islets are either closed nature reserves and access is restricted or they are 

too far and not easily accessible. 

As the House is aware, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, Ilot Gabriel was formerly leased to a 
private company which restricted access to visitors. The lease agreement was terminated in 
February,  this  year,  for  non-compliance  with  the  lease  conditions  and  the  islet  is  being 
restored  presently.  I  carried  out  a  site  visit  on  the  islet  recently  and  I  am  satisfied  of  the 
progress of rehabilitation works. 

As regards Flat Island, it was also leased in the past and the lessee had sublet the islet 
to  a  third  party  who  has  entered  a  case  in  Court  against    Government.  My  Ministry  is 
awaiting the final outcome of the Court case to take back full possession of the islet for its 
restoration. The National Coast Guard has a permanent post on Flat Island and carries out 
regular security patrol.  

I am considering the possibility of setting up a permanent post on either Flat Island or 

Gabriel Island for the proper control and monitoring of activities on these islands. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  whether  he  has  had  information 
concerning l’île aux Bernaches? It is a very populat islet in the North which is used by people 
in the region on many occasions.  If the deplorable state of l’Ile aux Bernaches is not within 
his responsibility, whether he can discuss with his colleague, the Minister of Housing and 
Lands so that l’île aux Bernaches be put back in its normal condition? 

Mr Seeruttun: Mr Deputy Speaker, Ile aux Bernaches falls under the responsibility 

of the Ministry of Housing and Lands. So, it is not under my Ministry. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  with  regard  to  Flat  Island,  can  the  hon. 
Minister  inform  the  House,  who  is  the  person,  which  is  the  company  with  whom  the 
Government  had  a  dispute  and  whether,  at  a  period  of  time,  that  islet  was  vested  to  the 
Tourism Authority? 

63 

 
Mr  Seeruttun:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  from  the  information  I  have,  the  lease  was 
granted  to  a  company  called  Discover  Mauritius  which  was  further  sublet  to  another 
company.  

Mr Bhagwan: Can the hon. Minister inform the House whether Discover Mauritius 
was  one  of  the  satellites  of  the  Ministry  of  Tourism  then  and  whether  the  Minister  is 
considering that it is high time to rapidly take possession of that island which is at a strategy 
position? 

Mr  Seeruttun:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  like  I  just  mentioned  in  my  reply,  that 
company which sublet the island has put a case in Court and we are awaiting the outcome of 
the court case to know what to do with that. 

Mr Deputy Speaker: A last one! 

Mr  Bhagwan:  But,  pending  the  court  case,  can  the  Minister  inform  the  House 
whether order will be put on Flat Island? From what we gather, Flat Island is in a deplorable 
state - jusqu’a phare zot ine coquin. 

Mr Seeruttun: In fact, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we do have teams of the National 
Parks and Conservation Service and the Forestry Department which go there every fortnight 
to carry out restoration works. In the meantime, we have even put a signboard there to inform 
the visitors that this place is under our jurisdiction. 

The Deputy Speaker: Next question, hon. Uteem! 

 

VALLÉE PITOT – LANDSLIDE - RISKS  

(No.  B/776)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and 
Beach Management whether, in regard to the risks of landslide in the region of Vallée Pitot, 
he will state the – 

(a) 

(b) 

number of inhabitants concerned therewith, and  

actions taken in relation thereto, if any. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun): Mr 

Deputy Speaker, Sir, with your permission, I will reply to this question. 

64 

 
The landslide prone area in the region of Vallée Pitot is about 80 m long and 100 m 
wide along Canal Anglais. In fact, following heavy rainfall in February 2013, a solid mass of 
soil from the mountain area moved down the canal. This damaged and obstructed the canal 
over a length of about 20 metres. 

With regard to part (a), the number of families affected by the landslide at Vallée Pitot 

as at date is 18. 

As  regards  part  (b),  the  Ministry  benefited  from  the  expert  advice  of  the  Japan 
International Cooperation Agency, which undertook a study on “Landslide Management in 
the  Republic  of  Mauritius”.  The  study  confirmed  that  Vallée  Pitot  has  become  one  of  the 
most critical landslides prone as well as flood prone sites in Mauritius. 

In  order  to  mitigate  both  problems  of  flooding  and  landslide,  JICA  recommended 
several countermeasures, which are being implemented by the Ministry. The bed slope of the 
canal has been readjusted to ensure proper drainage and an existing earthwork cut-off drain 
upstream of the landslide area has been cleaned and opened up. 

In addition to the above, the Ministry appointed a local contractor for the drilling of 
boreholes,  installation  of  monitoring  equipment  and  the  monitoring  and  maintenance  of 
landslide devices at Vallée Pitot. The monitoring equipment is linked to an automatic siren 
system for alerting the inhabitants and the authorities on the actual landslide situation. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am also informed that the site is equally closely monitored 
by the National Emergency Operations Command in consultation with the City Council of 
Port Louis, the Police and the Mauritius Fire and Rescue Services. The NEOC has installed 
simple  rain  gauges  in  the  dwellings  of  the  inhabitants  to  monitor  rainfall  in  the  region. 
Simulation exercises have been carried out to sensitise the inhabitants on the safety measures 
to be taken in the case of emergency and with a view to improve the preparedness of the 18 
families concerned. 

Mr  Uteem:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  mentioned  the 
report of Japan International Cooperation Agency, which was tabled in October by the hon. 
Minister Dayal. May I know from the hon. Vice-Prime Minister whether in this report any 
recommendation has been made to moving the people living in this region to another region 
and,  if  this  is  the  case,  what  action  has  his  Ministry  taken  for  the  relocation  of  these 
inhabitants? 

65 

 
Mr  Soodhun:  There  has  been  a  request  for  the  moving  of  these  18  families. 
According to my information, the number of additional families who have been affected is 
10.  Out of the 18, research has been carried out by the Ministry of Housing and Lands and it 
has revealed that 17 were built on the site lease; they have a lease according to the law. We 
have been able to find eight families affected by this landslide. It was proposed to relocate to 
Mgr Leen Avenue at Bell Village. However, now we are identifying the land so that we can 
transfer all these people. But, eight out of 18 have already been identified. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed: May I ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister when the drain clearing was 
undertaken?  Between  the  first  movement  in  January  of  this  year  and  last  month,  the  land 
moved again and it was quite dangerous. I was there and I met the Japanese expert as well. 
My question is as follows: whether, after the drain has been cleaned, there was movement 
again. 

Mr Soodhun: I think yes. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. In his reply, the hon. Vice-
Prime  Minister  mentioned  Canal  Anglais.  Is  he  aware  that  Canal  Anglais  forms  part  of 
Constituency No.3? Since more than a year, the Canal Anglais has been severely damaged 
and  major  repairs  are  urgent.  I  myself  have  raised  this  issue  several  times  at  adjournment 
time.  Each time there is heavy rainfall, it leaks out in the houses of inhabitants living there. 
Therefore, can I request the hon. Vice-Prime Minister to urgently look into the matter so as to 
remedy the situation? 

Mr Soodhun: I thank the hon. Member. I am aware about it as Minister of Housing 
and Lands, and we are doing needful to transfer all the 18 families. We are supposed to move 
very close to Canal Anglais, but the fact that the Ring Road is coming very fast, we have to 
move because due to the Ring Road… 

(Interruptions) 

there is a canal. Once there will be heavy rain the canal is going to affect all the people. So, 
we have already taken the decision to move all the 18 families at Canal Anglais. 

The Deputy Speaker: A last supplementary, hon. Uteem! 

66 

 
Mr Uteem: Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. There have already been damaged 
houses; there has already been one dog which was killed during the landslide. Now that the 
hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  is  very  much  aware  of  the  problem  and  the  risk  to  these  18 
families, can we have a timeframe as to when his Ministry – because that would fall under the 
Ministry of Housing and Lands –is thinking about coming forward with this relocation plan? 

Mr Soodhun: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, this problem exists since 2013. I agree with 
the hon. Member that we have to do something.  It is not because this exists since 2013 that 
we have to do nothing. As mentioned, we are doing something. We have already identified 
eight, but I think that for the 10 we will have no problem. We are working on a global basis 
for all the squatters in Port Louis.  So, I am going to include these 10.  I am going to look 
after it. 

The Deputy Speaker: Next question, hon. Mohamed! 

 

CIVIL SERVICE FAMILY PROTECTION SCHEME - LEGISLATION 

(No.  B/777)  Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms  whether,  in 
regard to the Civil Service Family Protection Scheme Act, he will state if consideration will 
be given for proposed amendments to be introduced thereto in order to enable the surviving 
spouses of public officers who have only contracted religious marriage therewith to benefit 
thereunder and, if not, why not. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo): Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the proposal contained in the question is deserving 
of the most serious consideration. I shall see whether we can put up a technical committee, 
but  I  will  need  the  substantive  Minister  to  be  present  so  as  to  look  into  all  aspects  of  the 
matter. 

Mr Mohamed: I thank the hon. Minister for his answer. 

The Deputy Speaker: Next question, hon. Jhugroo! 

 

 

 

 

67 

WIFI HOTSPOTS – PUBLIC PLACES 

 (No.  B/778)  Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 
Reforms, Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the 
internet, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Mauritius Telecom, information 
as to, since January 2015 to date, the – 

 (a) 

number of – 

(i) 

(ii) 

public  places  having  been  provided  with  WIFI  hotspots  to  allow 
members of the public to have free access thereto, and  

households  having  been  given  access  to  high  speed  services  thereof, 
and  

(b) 

actions taken to reduce the price thereof.  

(Vide reply to PQ No. B/766) 

 

WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY – RECRUITMENT 

(No. B/779) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to 
the  Wastewater  Management  Authority,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain 
therefrom,  a  list  of  the  employees  recruited  thereat,  since  July  2005  to  December  2014, 
indicating in each case the - 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

post occupied; 

mode of recruitment; 

qualifications held, and  

terms and conditions of appointment, including the salaries and other benefits 
drawn and if the employment is on a contractual or permanent basis. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):  With  your  permission,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  am  tabling  the 
information. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Jhugroo! 

68 

 
Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Vice-Prime Minister inform the House what procedures 
have  been  carried  out  for  the  recruitment  of  engineers  at  the  Wastewater  Management 
Authority? 

Mr Collendavelloo: For engineers, I see that there was external advert. What I will 
do is to purely and simply table for all the grades, the manner in which the procedures were 
followed, so that we will not need to waste a lot of time on this. But for civil engineers, it was 
an external advert in 2005; for the training engineers, all this was through external advert. 

I am tabling the information. 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Can  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  whether  engineers  are  involved 

during the commissioning of works carried out by contractors? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Yes, they are at the time of commissioning. There are engineers 
employed by the Wastewater Management Authority, whose main duty is to follow-up with 
the work of the consultants to see whether there is accurate performance of the contract. That 
doesn’t mean that this is satisfactory - don’t read in my answer something which I have not 
said. 

 Mr Jhugroo: Is hon. Vice-Prime Minister aware that during the commissioning of 
works carried out at Quatre Bornes and at SSR road, there have been several complaints with 
regard to defects? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Yes, I am aware of this. I have instructed the Officer-in-Charge 

to look into it. 

The Deputy Speaker: Next question hon. Jhugroo! 

 

WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY - LEGAL ADVISERS 

(No. B/780) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to 
the  Wastewater  Management  Authority,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain 
therefrom,  information  as  to  the  names  of  the  legal  advisers  whose  services  have  been 
retained thereat, since July 2005 to December 2014, indicating in each case, the total amount 
of fees paid out thereto. 

69 

 
The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):  With  your  permission,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  am  tabling  the 
information. 

The Deputy Speaker: Next question, hon. Jhugroo! 

 

BASIC RETIREMENT PENSION - OVERPAYMENT 

(No. B/781)  Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions whether, in 
regard to the Basic Retirement Pension, she will state the measures that are taken to avoid the 
overpayment  thereof  when  the  beneficiaries  thereof  pass  away  or  during  the  prolonged 
absences thereof from the country. 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: I wish to inform the House that overpayment of pensions 
has  been  occurring  since  1976.  The  amount  representing  overpayment  is,  therefore,  a 
cumulative figure. Overpayment usually occurs in circumstances where the Ministry is not 
notified on time of the death of beneficiaries or of their departures overseas for more than six 
months.   In such circumstances, the Basic Retirement Pension continues to be credited into 
the  bank  accounts  of  the  beneficiaries  and  their  heirs  or  proxies  continue  to  encash  the 
benefits. 

 Although, it is a legal requirement for beneficiaries or their relatives in case of death 
or departure overseas to notify the Ministry of these changes,  yet, in practice, most of the 
time, they do not notify the Ministry and as such payment continues to be effected in their 
favour. This was the reason why when I assume duty, I forthwith instructed that a reminder 
be introduced in the award notice to the effect that beneficiaries should immediately notify 
the Ministry of any changes in circumstances affecting their eligibility for the pension.  

It is to be highlighted that once overpayment is detected, payment of the benefit is 
immediately  stopped.  For  overpayments  that  have  already  occurred,  a  ledger  account  is 
opened in the name of the beneficiary and is updated each time refund is made. In case of 
non-refund, an enquiry is conducted by the Special Investigation Unit of the Ministry. After 
enquiry, the Special Investigation Unit then recommends the line of action to be initiated to 
recover  the  overpayment  amount  and  the  beneficiaries’  bank  and  relatives  are  notified 
accordingly. 

70 

 
As  the  above  situation  is  viewed  with  serious  concern  and  has  been  the  subject  of 
many  audit  queries  in  the  past,  I  have,  since  I  took  office,  taken  the  following  additional 
measures to prevent overpayment of pension – 

(i) 

(ii) 

exchange  of  information  between  the  Ministry  and  the  Civil  Status  Office 
pertaining  to  death  of  beneficiaries  was  previously  being  done  manually. 
However, since the beginning of 2015, an electronic system has been put in 
place to ensure that information on death cases are obtained online on every 
working day. On receipt of the daily updated list, the Ministry takes immediate 
action to stop payment of benefits in appropriate circumstances, and 

the Passport and Immigration Office provides the Benefit Unit of the Ministry 
with  information  about  beneficiaries  who  are  above  60  years  and  who  have 
been outside of Mauritius for more than six months on a monthly basis. Upon 
receipt of this information, a matching exercise is effected by the IT Unit of 
the Ministry to immediately stop payment in favour of all beneficiaries who 
have been outside of Mauritius for more than six months. 

 Mr Bérenger:  May I ask the hon. Minister, for us, Members of Parliament, to have 
an idea, l’ordre de grandeur, what amount of overpayment takes place every year and what 
amount is recouped every year? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: According to the National Audit Report, in 2013, there has 
been  an  overpayment  of  Rs26.5  m.  and,  in  2014,  to  Rs22.6  m.  with  regard  to  the  Basic 
Retirement Pension only. We recouped about Rs10 m. yearly. 

Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Minister inform the House whether the actual IT system is 

effective to detect any error with regard to overpayments? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Well, the IT system currently being used for the processing 
of pension payment is outdated and it produces errors which result in overpayments. That is 
why,  with  a  view  to  eliminating  overpayments,  there  is  an  urgent  need  to  revamp  the  IT 
system.    In  that  regard  we  are  coming  with  an  updated  system.  Relevant  tender  document 
have  already  been  finalised  by  the  Ministry  and  the  bidding  exercise  is  expected  to  start 
shortly. 

Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Minister inform the House what mechanism has been put 

in place to recover the overpayments which occurred since year 1980? 

71 

 
Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Well,  some  cases  are  referred  to  the  Commissioner  of 
Police for an enquiry to be conducted. We are awaiting the outcome from the Commissioner 
of Police. Proper actions will be initiated. 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Can  the  hon.  Minister  state  whether  any  enquiry  has  been  made  to 

ascertain improper conduct which could have assisted in the continuing claim of BRP? 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  We  already  have  the  audit  report  and  at  the  level  of  my 
Ministry, we have the Internal Control Unit. The audit report itself is a comprehensive report. 
I have not felt the need to have another enquiry. You will agree with me, hon. Member, what 
is important is action. So, we are taking appropriate actions to try to reduce overpayments 
which have been occurring for the past years. 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Can  the  hon.  Minister  inform  the  House  whether  there  is  an  online 

system with the PIO to verify the departures and arrivals of beneficiaries of State pensions? 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  The  exchange  of  information  with  the  Passport  and 
Immigration Office is still being done manually. As from this year, necessary action has been 
initiated by my Ministry for an electronic system to be put in place so that information can be 
obtained  in  a  more  systematic  and  timely  manner.    I  do  hope  that  shortly    the  electronic 
system will be operational. 

 

MBC - ZEE MULTIMEDIA (MAURICE) LTD - PUBLICITY RATES 

(No.  B/782)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms, 
Minister of Technology, Communicati on and Innovation whether, in regard to the agreement 
signed between the Zee TV/Mauritius and the Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation in relation 
to the profit sharing on the Espaces Publicitaires, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain 
from the Corporation, information as to the - 

(a)  

(b)  

(c)  

(d)  

date of the signature thereof;  

terms and conditions thereof, including the duration thereof;  

name of the person who negotiated same on behalf of the   Corporation, and  

benefits derived therefrom. 

72 

 
The Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade 
(Mr E. Sinatambou): Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am informed by the Mauritius Broadcasting 
Corporation (MBC) that in 2012, it had contracted two (2) agreements with Zee Multimedia 
(Maurice) Ltd for the broadcast of two TV Serials, namely – 

Chotti Bahu, and 
Sa Re Ga Ma Pa Lil Champs.  

(1) 
(2) 
In  both  cases,  I  am  informed  that  there  was  no  profit  sharing  for  ‘Espaces 
Publicitaires’. On the contrary, Zee Multimedia (Maurice) Ltd had to pay to the MBC a fixed 
sum  of  Rs3,000  per  episode.  In  return,  in  connection  with  Chotti  Bahu,  Zee  Multimedia 
(Maurice)  Ltd  benefitted  from  a  discount  in  publicity  rates,  i.e.,  the  company  paid  for 
publicity  at  a  much  lower  rate  of  Rs625  per  spot  instead  of  Rs2,490  and  this  up  to  a 
maximum of Rs10,000 per episode. In connection with Sa Re Ga Ma Pa Lil Champs, Zee 
Multimedia (Maurice) Ltd agreed to pay Rs1,350 instead of Rs8,100 for publicity for the first 
two months followed by a fixed fee of Rs15,000 per slot.  

The  agreements  for  the  TV  Serials  Chotti  Bahu  and  Sa  Re  Ga  Ma  Pa  Lil  Champs 
were signed on 12 June and 17 August 2012, respectively by the former Director Genera, Mr 
Dan Callikan, who personally negotiated the contracts. The agreement in respect of Chotti 
Bahu has been terminated on 31 October 2014 for the purpose of renegotiating the publicity 
rates while the contract of Sa Re Ga Ma Pa Lil Champs expired in December 2013.  

As regards the last part of the question, I am informed that the total benefit derived by 
the MBC from the two agreements amounts to Rs3,462,662.50 (VAT Inclusive) as follows – 

(i) 
(ii) 

Chotti Bahu  
:   Rs2,492,350.00 
Sa Re Ga Ma Pa Lil Champs  :   Rs970,312.50. 

 

NTC - SEMI-LOW FLOOR BUSES - PROCUREMENT 

(No.  B/783)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
procurement of 100 semi-low floor buses, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from 
the National Transport Corporation, information as to –  

(a)   who prepared the specifications therefor;  

 
(b)  

73 

the  date  the  bid  therefor  was  launched  and  the  dates  on  which  bids  were 
received, and 

(c)  

if the contract has been awarded and, if so, indicate – 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 

the name of the successful bidder therefor; 
the contract value thereof, and 
 if any representation has been received following the award of the bid 
and, if so, indicate by whom and where matters stand. 

 

(Withdrawn) 

SMART CITIES - AGRICULTURAL LAND  CONVERSION 

(No. B/784) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the 
Smart  Cities,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  Smart  Cities  Mauritius, 
information as to the total area of agricultural land that will be converted therefor, indicating 
their  grade  as  agricultural  land  and  the  impact  the  conversion  thereof  will  have  on  the 
sustainability of the agricultural sector in terms of food security and energy production from 
bagasse. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo): Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, based on the recommendations of the Smart City 
Scheme  Technical  Committee,  the  Board  of  Investment  has,  to  date,  issued  Letters  of 
Comfort  to  promoters  of  seven  Smart  City  projects.  There  are  10  other  projects  in  the 
pipeline, including the Highlands Smart City and the Riche Terre Smart City (Jinfei).  

Out of those seven Smart City projects issued with a Letter of Comfort, three would 
not involve agricultural land whilst 1,530 Arpents of agricultural land are found within the 
proposed project boundaries of the four other projects. In addition, the Highlands Smart City 
project  would  be  implemented,  in  phases,  on  some  2,180  Arpents  of  sugarcane  land.  The 
grade of agricultural land ranges from moderately suitable to highly suitable for cultivation of 
sugarcane or food crops. 

I  am  further  informed  that,  except  for  the  Riche  Terre  project  where  the  land  was 
previously under food crops and already converted in the past, all other Smart Cities projects 

 

74 

concern  lands  devoted  to  sugarcane  plantation.  The  impact  on  food  security  with  the 
implementation of Smart Cities would therefore be minimal.  

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  even  if  all  the  applications  for  land  conversion  permits 
relating  to  those  seven  projects  and  the  Highlands  Smart  City  are  approved,  reduction  in 
sugar  production  would  be  limited  to  some  9,380  tonnes,  that  is,  only  2.3%  of  our  total 
annual sugar production. Production of bagasse would also be reduced by a commensurate 
percentage.  

I wish to add the following points – 

•  First, a substantial proportion of those agricultural lands had already 

been granted with a land conversion permit, prior to 18 June 2015, that 
is, before the coming into force of the Smart City Scheme.  

•  Secondly, even if there was no Smart City Scheme, part of the land 

would, in any case, have been converted for ‘morcellements’ or other 
development projects. 

Thus, the impact of the introduction of the Smart City Scheme on food security and 
energy production from bagasse would be minimal. On the contrary, together with the Smart 
Agriculture  and  Bio-Farming  Scheme,  it  would  contribute  to  the  promotion  of  green  and 
renewable energy and sustainability of the agricultural sector. 

Mr Mahomed: If I heard the hon. Vice-Prime Minister correctly, the amount of land 
is in excess of 1,000 acres, is that right? 1,500 acres of agricultural land will be converted 
into Smart Cities and the area of sugarcane land is currently about 30,000 to 40,000 hectares. 
So, that represents a huge percentage insofar as area of land is concerned. Well, will that not 
impact  on  –  I  know  you  mentioned  minimal  in  terms  of  energy  production  -  bagasse 
production and also on ethanol production given that Government has fixed a target of 35% 
renewable energy by 2025 and that the current percentage of electricity being produced from 
bagasse is 14%, the more so the Smart Cities will also consume electricity?  Thank you. 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  That  is  a  very  clever  mixing  of  issues  so  that  my  Ministry  is 
brought in in that question. Yes, there will be reduction, of course. Bagasse, as I have said, I 
gave the figures last time, has fallen down by some 200,000 tons. It is going to fall down 
again.  

With regard to energy production, we all know we are going to have new methods of 
energy production. For agriculture, there will be new techniques linked to renewable energy 

 

75 

like greenhouses with solar photovoltaic on the roofs. All these techniques will come and, 
hopefully, compensate the loss of agricultural land. 

Mr  Mohamed:  On  the  issue  of  all  the  agricultural  lands  that  will  have  to  be 
converted, letting aside the issue of the VAT and the fiscal issues from the MRA, would the 
figures be correct?  Could the hon. Vice-Prime Minister tell us that as far as land conversion 
is concerned itself some Rs6 billion at a minimum will be what the State will not be making 
just because of this whole project, some Rs6 billion, let alone the VAT exemption and the 
eight years’ exemption as far as tax is concerned? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Of course, there will be lots of revenue, but I would prefer to 
have the substantive Minister answering to a substantive question on this, before  I venture 
into this. I appreciate your humility. 

 

RING ROAD PROJECT - BOULEVARD VICTORIA - VIADUCT   

(No.  B/785)  Mr  C.  Osman  Mahomed  (Third  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  & 
Port Louis Central) asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, 
in regard to the proposed construction of an elevated viaduct along Boulevard Victoria as part 
of the Phase II of the Ring Road Project, he will state if consultations have been held with the 
inhabitants and those responsible for the places of worship located in the said region to secure 
the views thereof in relation thereto and, if so, indicate the outcome thereof. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun): Mr 
Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  would  like  to  thank  the  hon.  Member  for  the  pertinent  question.  I 
would give a very comprehensive answer. After the answer, I will have no supplementary. 

As mentioned in the reply of PQ B/625 on 06 October 2015, Government will embark 
on a vast Road Decongestion Programme (RDP) as from July 2016. The Ring Road Phase 2 
and Ring Road Phase 3 from part of the RDP.  

I am informed by the RDA that the Ring Road Phase 2 will be an approximately 3.9 
km long single carriageway.  It will link the end of the existing Ring Road Phase 1 at Les 
Guibies, through an approximately 1.2 km long tunnel across the Quoin Bluff Mountain to 
the centre of the capital on Volcy Pougnet Street at Tranquebar and on Boulevard Victoria at 
Champ de Mars. 

76 

 
Along with the Ring Road Phase 1, which is expected to be completed in March 2016, 
this project will provide a strategic alternative access that would allow traffic to enter and exit 
Port Louis and alleviate traffic congestion along Motorways M1 and M2 as well as within the 
city itself. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  am  informed  by  the  RDA  that  the  alignment  with  the 
viaduct above Boulevard Victoria will avoid the outer edge of Vallée Pitot which would have 
otherwise  high  negative  social  impacts  and  would  present  geotechnical  challenges.  The 
viaduct will start near the end of Ring Road Phase 2 at Champ de Mars by means of an access 
ramp and ends near the junction of Military Road. It will be approximately 1.1 km long and 
11 m wide with a two-lane 7.0 m wide single carriageway and 1.5 m wide shoulder on each 
side and it will be supported on piers which will be constructed within the existing central 
verge. A barrier shall be constructed on each side of the viaduct to attenuate noise and air 
pollution.  

I am further informed that the RDA is in the process of launching a RFP to hire the 
services of a Consultant to review the concepts of Ring Road Phase 2 and Ring Road Phase 3 
projects and to prepare the bidding documents. 

As regards the consultations with the inhabitants, I have to inform the House that, in 
line with the Terms of Reference, the Consultant will be required, amongst others, to carry 
out an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment. They have not put MPs, I have MPs - 
all MPs concerned, all stakeholders, including inhabitants and those responsible for places of 
worship  located  in  the  region  shall  be  invited  to  participate  in  the  process  and  share  their 
views  on  the  impact  of  the  projects.    It  is  expected  that  the  Consultant  will  start  his 
assignment in February  2016.  The total cost of the project is  estimated at Rs5 billion for 
Ring Road Phase 2 and Rs2.9 billion for Ring Road Phase 3. Thank you Mr Deputy Speaker. 

Mr  Mahomed:  So,  I  understand  that,  in  terms  of  process,  the  Consultant  will  be 

recruited first and then consultation will be conducted; is that right? 

Mr Soodhun:  That’s what I have said.  I have already answered. 

Mr Mahomed:  But how about if consultation does not turn out to be positive? 

Mr Soodhun:  As I mentioned – I’ll read it again: ‘I have to inform the House that, in 
line with the Terms of Reference, the Consultant will be required, amongst others, to carry 
out an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment.’ He is going to have contact with all the 
people. There were no MPs, I have put MPs. The MPs also are concerned. 

 
The Deputy Speaker:  Hon Uteem! 

77 

Mr Uteem:  Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  Before the Consultant is retained 
and before he is asked to do the Environment and Social Impact Assessment, surely, at the 
level  of  the  Ministry,  someone  must  have  taken  a  decision  that  there  is  going  to  be  this 
flyover crossing Boulevard Victoria, where may I remind the hon. Vice-Prime Minister that 
there is a Kovil; there is a Mandir and there is a Mosque.  So, has a pre-feasibility study been 
carried out internally to assess the negative impact which such a flyover will have on all those 
religious places along that stripe?  

Mr Soodhun:  As I mentioned, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, before starting, I am 100% 
sure that there has been a feasibility study. I can assure the hon. Member because we are not 
doing as the former Government comme un aveugle.  We always take into consideration all 
the existing and this is not for us to disturb the existing or religious institutions.  It is in the 
interest of the country and it is in the interest of les citoyens de Port Louis. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan:  Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  May I know from the hon. Vice-
Prime Minister - if I heard him right, he said that the Ring Road Phase 2 will be a single lane 
traffic - whether this is compatible with the congestion?  The tunnel will be a double lane, 
will  end  up  on  a  single  lane  and  the  viaduct  also,  if  I  heard  him  correctly,  is  single  lane 
traffic.  Will that not create more congestion in the future? 

Mr Soodhun:  According to my information, I think that the consultant has taken all 
these issues into consideration due to the fact of what had happened in the past. We are not 
going to make the same mistake.  This is very important.  

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Mahomed, last supplementary! 

(Interruptions) 

Silence! Hon. Mahomed, please! 

Mr Mahomed:  Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. I do reckon that the Vice-Prime 

Minister is not the substantive Minister, so I am not going to… 

(Interruptions) 

 

78 

Insofar as residents are concerned, when the Ring Road Phase 2 will approach the Military 
Road,  which  is  quite  narrow  and  at  some  point  in  time  highly  densely  inhabited,  will  the 
inhabitants there be affected at all by this alignment?  Will they need to be moved? 

Mr  Soodhun:  We  are  not  going  to  have  any  development  at  the  detriment  of  the 

inhabitants of the region.  It should be in the interest of the inhabitants. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Next question. Hon. Mahomed! 

 

NOISE POLLUTION – VEHICLES - CONTRAVENTION 

(No. B/786) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and 
Beach  Management  whether,  in  regard  to  noise  pollution,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the 
House, obtain from the Police de l’Environnement, information as to if – 

(a) 

(b) 

the sound level meters that were procured under the Maurice Ile Durable Fund 
in 2013 are being used for the control thereof, and  
number of vehicles in respect of which contraventions have been booked 
therefor, since January 2015 to date, indicating the – 
(i) 
(ii) 

regions with the highest number of contraventions, and  
percentage thereof which had their waste pipe and sound control 
system modified, indicating the actions taken in relation thereto. 

Mr  Dayal:    Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  with  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I  am 
advised  that  no  sound  level  meters  were  procured  by  my  Ministry  under  the  Maurice  Ile 
Durable Fund in 2013.   

However, I wish to inform the House that funds from my Ministry were utilised for 
the acquisition of 10 sound level meters which were procured by the Police Department in 
October 2011 for the enforcement of Road traffic (Control of Vehicle Emissions) Regulations 
2002  for  noise  emanating  from  auto/motorcycles  by  the  authorities  concerned,  namely  the 
Police Department, the Police de l’Environnement and the National Transport Authority.   

Following  several  tests  carried  out,  it  was  ascertained  that  the  sound  level  meters 
cannot be used to measure the noise level on auto/motorcycles with modified silencers as no 
proper  reading  could  be  obtained.  However,  contraventions  are  being  established  under 
section  83  of  the  Road  Traffic  Act  (Construction  and  Use  of  Vehicles)  Regulations  2010 

 

79 

which is based on the excessive noise perceived by the ears of the officers establishing the 
contravention and upon verification of exhaust pipe, that is, if the vehicle has been fitted with 
an extension or the silencer has been altered of the motorcycles. 

I wish to inform the House that these regulations provide that- 

 “(3)   No person shall – 

(a)  

(b)  

fit on the exhaust pipe of a motor vehicle any extension or other device 
likely to cause excessive or unusual noise; or  

alter the silencer in such a way that the noise caused by the escape of 
the exhaust gases is made greater by the alteration.” 

The same legislation also provides that any person who contravenes this section of the 

law, shall commit an offence and may be liable to a fine not exceeding Rs10,000.   

With  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  1047  riders  using  auto/motorcycles  with 

modified silencers have been booked from January 2015 to date.   

As  regards  part  (b)  (i)  of  the  question,  the  regions  with  the  highest  number  of 

contraventions established are Port Louis and the northern region. 

As regards part (b) (ii) of the question, all the 1047 contraventions established were 

due to modified silencers. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I would also like to inform the House that my Ministry has 

also initiated the following actions - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

an awareness campaign was undertaken through radio programmes to sensitise 
the public on the provisions of the law and associated fines related to noise 
pollution caused by motorcycles; 

training has been given to the regular Police at the Police Training School on 
the enforcement of the provisions of this piece of legislation to enable the 
whole Police Force to take firm actions against contraveners in the future; 

the strength of the Police de l’Environnement has been increased by 15 
additional officers to reinforce enforcement of environmental laws and the 
total strengh is now 42, and 

 
(iv) 

80 

the Commissioner of Police has been approached with a view to providing 
stiffer penalties including seizure of auto motorcycles. Today itself, a reminder 
has been sent on this issue. 

Mr Ameer Meea: This issue of noise pollution, I, myself, have canvassed it several 
times in this House during the years, and this year itself I came with a PQ on the same issue. 
It is really shocking what I have just heard from the hon. Minister that sound meters cannot 
be  used.  This  answer  was  given  to  me  back  in  January  and  now  we  are  in  October,  this 
problem  of  noise  pollution  is  aggravating  day  by  day  and  nothing  is  being  done  by  your 
Ministry. The hon. Minister promised une opération coup de poing last time. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea, please sit down!   

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Ameer Meea, a question is to seek information, not to give an opinion. Well, I will not 
accept the question. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, my point is that nothing is being done to 
remedy the situation. If there are no proper sound meters, you should purchase proper sound 
meters now and not wait for one year. You also said that you approached the Commissioner 
of Police… 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea, again! 

(Interruptions) 

No! You are expressing your opinion on a question.  

(Interruptions) 

Please sit down when I am on my feet! I have just ruled it out of order. Hon. Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed: The hon. Minister has provided a very comprehensive answer which I 
believe I will need to go through again. May I just ask at source level - garages that modify 
motorcycles to this end, what is the policy of the Government on this? 

Mr Dayal: A very good question, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. We are taking very bold 
actions.  I  have  already  given  directives  and  I  stated  in  this  House  itself  that  in  case  of 
contraventions at an unacceptable level, we are going to seize the auto motorcyles. Seizure 
will be the solution.  

81 

 
Now, concerning your particular question, we are going to investigate. We have the 
means to investigate where it is being done and we are going to see - because we are un État 
de droit – how best we can enforce the law in that direction. But, I must tell the hon. Member 
one thing, that we are in a system where we have to make budget provisions so that we can 
procure equipment. We cannot do it like this out of the blue. 

Mr Bérenger: We have been told that l’action coup de poing, we are acting and so 
on. Can I know, since the beginning of the year, how many convictions there have been for 
that offence? 

Mr Dayal: Contraventions I said, 1047. 

(Interruptions) 

I said for contraventions and convictions, we will have to go for investigation and this takes 
time. 

Mr Bhagwan: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, as rightly stated by the hon.  Leader of the 
Opposition, there is no conviction as at today. The Police de l’Environnement by itself won’t 
be  able  to  attend  this  very  acute  problem?  So,  can  the  hon.  Minister  inform  the  House 
whether  he  has  discussed  with  the  Commissioner  of  Police  to  have  the  support  of  all  the 
Divisions of the Police, the Traffic Division so that, at least, we must not rely on the Police 
de l’Environnement by itself? 

Mr  Dayal:  I  just  answered.  I  stated  that  we  are  seeking  the  support  of  the  whole 

Police Force today with this issue. 

Mr Baloomoody: The hon. Minister could not answer to the question put by the hon. 
Leader of the Opposition as to how many convictions there have been. Is the hon. Minister 
aware that there will be no convictions whatsoever until and unless we have that meter? You 
cannot convict somebody just by the ear of a Police Officer. So, can I know from the hon. 
Minister when he intends to acquire that meter? 

Mr Dayal: This is why I stated that because of the intricacies of the issue, we will 
have to procure additional equipment, but we need a budget for it. I must say it very openly 
that the last Government did not make even a functional budget. Therefore, how can… 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Order! 

 
Mr Dayal: So, we are making budget allocations and procuring additional equipment. 

82 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr  Dayal:  Now,  to  answer  to  the  question  of  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition 
which the hon. Member raised, I stated that investigation is on. Now, we have got various 
means  of  ascertaining  certain  facts  and  we  have  got  equipment  on  board  right  now. 
Therefore, it is a question of investigation and the Police is responsible for that. 

The Deputy Speaker:  A last supplementary question, hon. Ganoo! 

Mr Ganoo: Can I ask the hon. Minister if he could confirm the fact that this whole 
situation  is  at  it  is  because  the  last  time  when  these  sound  level  meters  were  ordered,  the 
order  was  wrongly  done  in  view  of  the  fact  that  there  was  no  consultation  between  the 
different Ministries, the  NTA, the Ministry of Environment and so on.   That is why these 
sound level meters have not been able to be used to book the contraveners.  Can I ask him the 
next  time  the  order  is  made  to  see  to  it  that  the  proper  order  is  made  after  consultations 
between all the different Ministries and Departments? 

Mr Dayal: I fully appreciate the observation of the hon. Member. I would add that I 
stated that the equipment was purchased in 2011 when I was not a Minister. Therefore, it is 
very clear who took the decision, so, I can’t be blamed for that. 

(Interruptions) 

The second thing is that I fully take on board … 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mahomed! 

Mr  Dayal:  I  fully  take  on  board  the  suggestion  of  hon.  Ganoo  that  in  the  next 

procurement exercise, we will take all parties on board. 

The Deputy Speaker: Next question, hon. Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed: I just want to add that if those sound meters…. 

The Deputy Speaker: Sorry, I said next question! 

 
Mr Mahomed: Okay! Thank you. 

83 

 

ISLAMIC CULTURAL CENTRE  - UMRAH 2015 - VISA 

(No. B/787) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in regard 
to the Umrah 2015, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Islamic Cultural 
Centre, information as to if the visas issued by the Saudi Authorities therefor are subject to 
charges and, if so, indicate the – 

rate thereof, and 
final rate thereof charged to the pilgrims by the organisers thereof. 

(a) 
(b) 
The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun): Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir, first of all, I wish to inform the House that the Islamic Cultural Centre 
has not been monitoring Umrah Pilgrimage up to now and is not intervening in the issue of 
visas for Umrah. 

I  am  given  to  understand  that  the  pilgrims  going  for  Umrah  made  their  own 
arrangements  to  obtain  their  visas  from  Saudi  Embassy  in  South  Africa  through  the  travel 
agents or Umrah organisers. 

In  reply  to  the  question  of  the  hon.  Member,  I  have  been  informed  that  the  Saudi 

Authorities do not charge any amount for the issue of Umrah visa. 

Regarding  part  (b)  of  the  question,  the  pilgrims  can  only  obtain  visa  by  applying 
through the registered agent with the kingdom of Saudi Arabia who is in turn go through their 
counterparts for processing of visas through an IT system approved by the Saudi Authorities. 
The pilgrims pay a service fee to the agents involved who make the necessary arrangements 
to obtain their visas from South Africa. There is no fixed fee payable and the amount charged 
is  not  the  same  from  one  agent  to  another.  I  have  been  given  to  understand  that  the  fee 
charged  include  courier  charges,  local  agency  fees  and  fees  payable  to  their  officially 
registered  counterpart  in  South  Africa.  The  pilgrims  are  free  to  choose  their  agents  or 
organiser and must ensure the amount payable before submitting their passports to them. 

I am informed that the final fee payable is in the range of Rs3,000 to Rs4,000 except 

for the month of Ramadan when the fees claimed range between Rs6,000 to Rs7,500. 

84 

 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I have now been made aware and I am asking the ICC to 
look into the organisation of Umrah and the cost of visas and to ensure that there is no abuse 
of the system and that the fees charged are fair and reasonable. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed: I thank the hon. Vice-Prime Minister for his answer. May we expect 

this to be applicable to the next Umrah batch which will leave soon? 

Mr Soodhun: In fact, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am taking Umrah as a whole, even 
for  the  airfare.  I  am  having  the  negotiation  with  the  Emirates  Airline  to  reduce  the  price, 
before it was Rs42,000, and I am also taking into consideration the organisations which are 
charging the fees excessively. I can assure the House because I was not aware, since I have 
been appointed as the Minister responsible for Hajj affairs, I am now going to take the Umrah 
affair also. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. Under the Islamic Cultural Centre 
Trust  Act  the  ICC  has  been  given  the  statutory  duty  of  not  only  organising  the  Hajj 
pilgrimage,  but  also  the  Umrah  pilgrimage.  So,  may  I  know  from  the  hon.  Vice-Prime 
Minister in what ways would the ICC get involved in the delivery of these Umrah visas? Is 
there going to be an agreement between the ICC and the authorities in Saudi? I mean how 
does  he  intend  to  implement  what  he  has  just  mentioned  about  putting  an  order  in  the 
distribution of visas for Umrah? 

Mr Soodhun: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I understand the point of my hon. friend. But, 
I  am  not  in  a  position  to  answer  this  question  because  I  am  going  to  have  a  meeting  on 
Thursday next with the ICC to look after all this. But, I agree with all my hon. friends that 
there is an abuse on it and we have to stop it. It is now to stop. 

The Deputy Speaker: Last supplementary to hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. The hon. Vice-Prime Minister 
mentioned the price of air ticket for Umrah and I thank him to have raised this matter in this 
House. The price of Umrah air ticket is Rs40,000 for a six hour flight whereas Emirates is in 
a  situation  of  monopoly  for  Umrah  passengers.  When  you  see  flights  to  Europe  are 
sometimes Rs25,000 to Rs30,000 for a 12 hour flight. Therefore, can  I  ask the hon. Vice-

 

85 

Prime Minister to use his good office and his personal contacts in Dubai and the Emirates 
Airline so as to reduce this sum of Rs40,000 which, for me, is exorbitant? 

Mr Soodhun: In fact, with the blessing of all the hon. Members maybe, because in 
the case of Hajj we have been able to reduce the price and I am sure that I am going to take 
the matter next Sunday with Sheikh Ahmed bin Saeed Al Maktoum, the owner of Emirates 
Airline and I am going to discuss the price. I am sure I am going to inform my friends when I 
am going to have the meeting. Thank you. 

The Deputy Speaker: Time is over! The Table has been advised that Parliamentary 

Question No. B/793 has been withdrawn. 

 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10 (2) 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I beg to move that all the business 
on today’s Order Paper be exempted from provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun) rose 

and seconded.  

Question put and agreed to. 

 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER 

(4.13 p.m.) 

DISABLED PERSONS – WHEELCHAIRS  

The  Minister  of  Social  Security,  National  Solidarity  and  Reform  Institutions 
(Mrs  F.  Jeewa-Daureeawoo):  I  wish  to  respond  to  the  matter  raised  in  relation  to 
wheelchairs by hon. Dr. Sorefan, Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix at adjournment 
time at the sitting of 13 October 2015. 

It  is  the  policy  of  the  Ministry  of  Social  Security,  National  Solidarity  and  Reform 
Institutions to issue wheelchairs to needy and disabled persons on request under the Social 
Aid Programme. Procurement exercise for the current year’s requirements started in January 
2015.  Tenders  were  launched  on  03  April  2015  through  open  advertised  bidding  after 

 

86 

clearing the technical specifications with the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life. At the 
closing  date  on  08  May  2015,  four  bids  were  received.  However,  the  Departmental  Bid 
Evaluation Committee found none of the bids to be responsive to the tender requirements.  
Either the prices quoted were much higher than the estimated cost or they were not compliant 
with the technical specifications. Consequently, the tender exercise had to be cancelled. 

A new bidding exercise is now being initiated. It is expected that the said exercise will 
be  completed  by  the  end  of  this  year  and  the  next  consignment  of  wheelchairs  may  be 
received by February 2016. 

However,  in  the  meantime,  in  order  to  alleviate  the  hardship  faced  by  the  severely 
mobility impaired persons, the Ministry is issuing to them commode wheelchairs in lieu of 
ordinary wheelchairs. I wish to point out that commode wheelchairs are multi-functional as 
compared to ordinary ones.  

I do hope that my answer has enlightened the hon. Member. Thank you. 

 

PUBLIC BILLS 

Third Reading 

On  motion  made  and  seconded,  the  Supplementary  Appropriation  (2014)  Bill  (No. 

XVII of 2015) was read the third time and passed. 

THE NATIONAL FLAG BILL 

(No. XV of 2015) 

Order for Second Reading read.  

(4.16 p.m.) 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with your permission, I move that 

the National Flag Bill be read a second time.  

The main object of the Bill is to provide for the better protection of the National Flag 
by regulating its use. The display of the National Flag with inappropriate specifications and 
any behaviour which dishonours it will be made an offence under this legislation. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, a National Flag is undoubtedly the most important symbol of 
a country and is a visual representation of its identity and people. It is a priceless possession 
that represents the sovereignty of a State and is flown with pride during national events and 
official ceremonies. It should, therefore, be respected and honoured for what it represents. 

87 

 
On the historic day of 12 March 1968 at noon, at the Champ de Mars, the Union Jack, 
symbol  of  the  British  presence  in  Mauritius,  was  brought  down  and  replaced  by  our  four 
colours striped flag. This was a unique moment being given that we did not have any flag 
representing the country before. 

The accession of Mauritius to the status of Republic on 12 March 1992 completed this 
process  of  independence  and  self-determination.  The  Flag  of  the  Republic  of  Mauritius  is 
now  proudly  flown  at  the  seats  of  the  United  Nations,  the  Commonwealth  Secretariat  and 
other international and regional institutions to which Mauritius is a member. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  each  of  the  four  colours  of  the  Flag,  namely,  red,  blue, 

yellow and green has been given a meaning as a legacy to our future generations –  

RED  

-    representing the struggle for freedom and independence;  

BLUE  

-  

representing  the  Indian  Ocean  in  the  middle  of  which  Mauritius  is 
situated;  

YELLOW  -  

representing the new light of independence shining over the island, and  

GREEN 

-  

representing the agriculture of Mauritius and its colour throughout the 
12 months of the year. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, to fly the National flag with respect is a sign of patriotism 
and a positive affirmation of loyalty. It is around this very strong symbol of the country that 
our children gather each year to sing the national anthem.  

The ceremonies around the flag awake their patriotic fibre and instil into them a deep 

sense of civism, which are the corner stones for building a united and peaceful society. 

The  public  dishonouring  of  the  flag  is,  therefore,  regarded  as  an  extreme  form  of 
dissent  in  most  countries  and  is  punished  accordingly.    This  should  likewise  apply  to  our 
young  nation.    Such  acts  of  dishonour  cannot  be  condoned  and  left  unpunished.  
Unfortunately,  our  present  legislation  does  not  address  this  issue  and  it  is  high  time  that 
appropriate actions be taken to ensure that our national flag is given the respect it deserves. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, there are two facts that have come to our knowledge, which 

have prompted us to introduce this Bill during this session itself. 

Firstly,  we  have  been  informed  that  there  has  been  in  a  recent  past  cases  of  the 
national  flag  flying  on  some  public  and  private  buildings  during  official  functions,  which 

 

88 

were not in accordance with the official colour codes as defined by the Mauritius Standards 
Bureau. 

Secondly,  we  have  also  been  apprised  that  there  have  been  some  instances  where 

individuals have shown disrespect to our flag. 

In fact, clause 18A of the Civil Code provides that – 

“Any person who brings a Flag of Mauritius or of any other State into hatred 
or ridicule shall commit an offence and shall on conviction be liable to a fine 
not exceeding Rs10,000 or to a term of imprisonment not exceeding 2 years”. 

However, this clause cannot be enforced, as our National Flag is neither defined in the said 
Code nor in any other piece of legislation. It is clear, therefore, that there is a loophole in our 
law that needs to be addressed. 

I  am  sure  that  the  House  will  agree  that  any  reprehensible  behaviour  towards  our 
National  Flag  cannot  be  tolerated  at  a  time  when  the  Republic  of  Mauritius  is  going  to 
celebrate its 50th Anniversary as a nation and 26th Anniversary as a Republic in a few years to 
come, more precisely in 2018. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, let me now highlight some of the provisions of the proposed 

Bill. 

Clause 4 provides for the regulation of the national colours, the symbolic meaning of 

each colour and the related length and width of the National Flag. 

In clause 5 of the Bill, provision is made for the protection of the National Flag as 
well as the flag of any other State. It proposes that the national flag shall be considered as a 
symbol of the Government and the people of Mauritius and no person shall be allowed to 
bring it into hatred, ridicule or dishonour by, inter alia, burning or mutilating it, by placing 
another emblem or exhibiting any other item on it. 

Any person who contravenes clauses 4 and 5 of the Bill shall commit an offence and 
shall  be  liable  to  a  fine  not  exceeding  Rs100,000  and  to  imprisonment  for  a  term  not 
exceeding  two  years.    In  addition  to  the  penalty  imposed,  any  material  used  for  the 
commission of the offence shall be forfeited. 

Clause 6 of the Bill provides for the making of regulations with regard to the colour 
codes, sizes and dimensions of the National Flag without departing from the general design 

 

89 

as specified in clause 6(1). The flexibility given in the regulations makes it possible for the 
colour codes to be updated whenever the technology related to colour is innovated. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am sure that Members of the House will agree with me that 
such a piece of legislation is long overdue. There is need to regulate the use of our National 
Flag, which symbolises our unique identity as a nation. 

With these words, I commend the National Flag Bill to the House. 

Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun) rose 

and seconded. 

At this stage, Madam Speaker took the Chair 

 

(4.24 p.m.) 

Mr R. Uteem (First Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis Central): Madam 
Speaker,  it  is  quite  amazing  that  we  have  had  to  wait  for  almost  half  a  decade  after  our 
independence for there to be a law setting out what our national flag is, what its colours are, 
and what their meaning is. Almost half a decade after the Union Jack Flag was replaced by 
our quadricolour. 

Yes, half a century, not a decade. 

(Interruptions) 

The  flag  was  recorded  at  the  College  of  Arms  in  London  on  09  January  1968,  but 
never made its way to our statute until today. In 1991, the Public Gathering Act amended the 
Criminal  Code  to  introduce  the  offence  of  bringing  the  flag  of  Mauritius  into  hatred  or 
ridicule.  But  even  in  that  piece  of  legislation  in  1991,  we  did  not  define  what  the  flag  of 
Mauritius was.  Instead,  under section 181A  (2)  of the Criminal Code, it is provided  and  I 
quote – 

“Where in any criminal proceedings, any question arises whether or not a flag 
is the flag of Mauritius or that of any other State, a certificate issued by or 
under  the  authority  of  the  Prime  Minister  stating  any  fact  relating  to  the 
question shall be conclusive evidence of that flag.” 

 

90 

So, even in 1991, instead of actually legislating what the flag of Mauritius is, there was a 
provision that it is the Prime Minister’s Office that is going to issue a certificate to certify 
conclusively whether a flag is that of Mauritius or not. This was certainly not a satisfactory 
state of affairs. The more so as section 4 (2) of the Bill rightly points out – 

“The national flag shall be the symbol of the Government and the people of 
Mauritius.” 

So, to the extent that it clarifies what the national flag is, this Bill is most welcome.  

Madam  Speaker,  I  have  to  confess  that  I  have  not  been  able  to  ascertain  with  any 
degree  of  certainty  the  exact  origin  of  our  national  flag.    As  I  mentioned  before,  the 
description of our national flag was not in the Mauritius Independence Order 1968, it was not 
in our Constitution and it was not even in the UK Mauritius Independence Act of 1968.  So, 
what 
interesting  website, 
www.flagmakers.co.uk,  which  sets  out  a  brief  history  of  all  national  flags  in  the  world, 
including Mauritius. 

I  came  across  a  very 

it,  and 

I  did 

is 

to  Google 

According to that site, the first flag that was flown in Mauritius was in 1638 and it 
was the red, white, blue horizontal tricolour flag of the Dutch East India Company.  That was 
during the Dutch colonisation era.  No mention on this site is made of the flag of Mauritius in 
the days where the Arabs discovered it and named it Dina Robin.  Equally, no mention was 
made of whether the Portuguese flag flew in the sky of Mauritius when Mauritius was known 
as Cirne or one of the islands of the Mascarene. When the island was colonised by the French 
and known as Ile de France, the Standard of the King of France was adopted as the official 
flag.  Then came the French revolution and our flag became the French tricolour. 

When the British took control in 1810, our flag was changed to a traditional British 
Blue Ensign with the coat of arms at the centre right. The coat of arms was a shield quartered 
with a ship, three palm trees, a key and a white star. This coat of arms was changed in 1906 
with the addition of a dodo and a deer holding the shield. 

In 1968, we adopted the four-banded horizontal flag. 

It is quite rare, Madam Speaker, for a country to have four equal bands in flag. The only other 
country which has a flag which has those four bands is that of Central African Republic. So, 
why  have  we  chosen  red,  blue,  yellow  and  green?  Part  2  of  the  First  Schedule  to  the  Bill 
provides a symbolic meaning of the national colours. This may be so, but I have not come 
across any explanation as to these colours in the history of Mauritius’ books  - which I have  

 

91 

consulted  -  dealing  with  the  independence  era.  The  more  plausible  explanation,  Madam 
Speaker, is that given by DK, Ultimate Pocket Flags of the World, and I quote – 

“The flag  was designed  by 
independence 
a 
the coat of arms».  

and 

is 

the  College  of  Arms 
simple 

statement of 

the colours 

in Britain  prior 

to 
found in 

But, of course, Madam Speaker, we don’t have any issue attributing the symbolic meaning to 
each colour as is stated in Part 2 of the First Schedule. But if we look at the coat of arms, 
there is already in the first quadrant a yellow ship with a blue background, next to it you have 
the three green palm trees in the yellow background, at the bottom you have a red key with a 
yellow background and in the last quadrant you have a star with a blue background. So, the 
four colours of our national flag were already on that coat of arms which, as I have stated, 
Madam Speaker, was adopted as far back as 1906. 

Madam Speaker, the Bill which provides for the colours of the National Flag does not 
mention the shade of the colour. The hon. Ag. Prime Minister did mention that one of the 
problems faced recently was that people were flying flags of different colours which were not 
the standardised colours; there were many shades. Section 6 (2) (a) of the Bill provides that 
the Prime Minister may by regulation provide for the colour codes corresponding to colours 
of the national flag. In fact, Madam Speaker, the Mauritius Standards Bureau did not wait for 
the  regulation,  it  embarked  on  a  project  to  develop  a  specification  for  the  national  flag 
covering the essential requirement, including its colours. Their findings were published in the 
first issue by the Mauritius Standards Bureau, known as Standards Watch. The first issue was 
in  October  2008  and,  the  Mauritius  Standards  Bureau  used  a  specific  Pantone  Matching 
System  (PMS)  which  is  a  standardised  colour  reproduction  system  and  is  widely  used  to 
describe  the  colours  of  the  flag.  So,  each  colour  red,  blue,  yellow,  green  was  allocated  a 
specific PMS code. So, already this is provided by the Mauritius Standards Bureau. In fact, 
the Bureau concluded, and I quote, Madam Speaker – 

“The Bureau has allocated MS 1 (the first of its series of Mauritian Standards) 
to show respect and reverence to the National Flag”.  

So, this has been done by the Mauritius Standards Bureau. Now, we only need the regulation 
to make that applicable, so much, Madam Speaker, for the description of our National Flag.  

With your permission, Madam Speaker, I will now turn to the main object of the Bill 

which is, and I quote –  

92 

 
“(...)  to  provide for  the better  protection of  the national  flag  of  Mauritius  by 
regulating its use.” 

As I mentioned at the beginning of my intervention, Madam Speaker, Section 101A of the 
Criminal Code already makes it an offence for any person to hold up to or bring into hatred or 
ridicule the flag of Mauritius or of any other State.  

The  sentence  for  such  an  offence  was  initially  a  fine  not  exceeding  Rs2,000  and  a 
term of imprisonment not exceeding two years. Then the law was subsequently amended, the 
maximum  fine  was  increased  from  Rs2,000  to  Rs100,000  and  the  maximum  term  of 
imprisonment was changed from two years to five years. 

Now, Section 5(2) of the Bill goes back to keep the maximum fine of Rs100,000, but 
reduces the term of imprisonment from five years to two years and we have not heard any 
explanation as to why this has been increased and then reduced now again.  

Madam  Speaker,  before  coming  to  the  new  offences  being  created  by  this  Bill,  I 
would like to draw the attention of the Government to Section 5(1) (c) - unfortunately, the 
hon.  Ag.  Prime  Minister  is  leaving;  this  is  something  quite  important  -  which  creates  an 
offence to place any emblem, any marking on the national flag. I can see the rational why we 
would like to not desecrate the flag by prohibiting the addition of any symbol or anything on 
the flag. But we need to carve out, Madam Speaker, the placing of our coat of arms and, in 
particular, the coat of arms used by the President of the Republic.  

Hon.  Members  may  be  aware  that  the  coat  of  arms  used  by  the  President  of  the 
Republic  is  very  much  what  is  on  top  of  where  Madam  Speaker  is  sitting,  which  is  the 
emblem, and then, at the bottom of the coat of arms, there are the initials ‘RM’, Republic of 
Mauritius. This is the emblem which the President of the Republic uses. And most of the time 
on the flag in a correspondence, on official documentation, the Presidency uses this coat of 
arms and then, at the background, there is the flag of Mauritius. So, this is perhaps something 
that we need to carve out, the use of the addition of a coat of arms of Mauritius to the flag 
because, right now, it would seem to be  under Section 5 (1) (c) and become an offence.  

Madam Speaker, this Bill makes it an offence to desecrate, dishonour, burn, mutilate 
or  otherwise  destroy  our  national  flag  or  the  flag  of  any  other  State.  Madam  Speaker,  our 
national  flag,  as  rightly  spelled  out  under  Section  4  (2)  of  the  Bill  is  the  symbol  of  the 
Government and, more importantly, the symbol of the people of Mauritius. It is our national 
pride,  it  is  what  binds  us  together  and  it  is  a  matter  of  pride  for  all  Mauritians  to  see  our 

 

93 

national flag, whether in Mauritius or abroad.  How proud we are, Madam Speaker, when on 
TV  or  live,  we  see  that  one  of  our  sportsman  has  won  a  medal  and  the  national  flag  is 
floating!  We have seen it in the Olympic Games and in other Games. Unfortunately, during 
the last Jeux des Iles de l’Océan Indien we were deprived of that tradition – but this is not the 
occasion to deal with that issue, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker, our national flag symbolises values which goes beyond the symbolic 
meaning of the national colours that are set out in Part 2 of the First Schedule. It represents 
our territorial integrity; it is a reminder of where we come from and what we stand for. It 
symbolises unity, ‘Enn sel nation, enn sel lepep.’ And these are values, Madam Speaker, that 
are worth fighting for, values that are worth dying for. So, we welcome, Madam Speaker, the 
addition of the new offences to the extent that the intention is to better protect our flag.  

However, Madam Speaker, we need to strike the right balance between, on the one 
hand,  the  need  to  preserve  the  sanctity  and  respect  for  our  national  flag  and,  on  the  other 
hand, the freedom of expression which is enshrined in Articles 3 and 12 of our Constitution. 
This balancing Act has been the subject matter of many judicial pronouncements in several 
countries  and  not  unsurprisingly,  Madam  Speaker,  there  is  no  right  or  wrong  answer. 
Different countries have reacted differently when trying to strike the right balance between 
preserving the honour of their flags and preserving the right of freedom of speech of their 
citizen. 

Probably,  the  most  extreme  example  is  in  the  United  States.  The  United  States 
Supreme  Court,  on  not  less  than  three  occasions,  has  ruled  that  the  law  criminalising  the 
burning  of  the  US  flag  in  a  demonstration  was  anti-constitutional,  in  violation  of  the  first 
amendment which protects freedom of speech.  In Texas v. Johnson, the accused had burned 
an American flag during a demonstration to protest against the policies of the administration.  
The Supreme Court, for the first time, stated that it was unconstitutional to criminalise the 
burning of the US flag. 

In the United States v. Eichman, the most recent decision on this matter in the United 

States, the Supreme Court held, and I quote –  

 “We are aware that desecration of the flag is deeply offensive to many, but 
punishing  desecration  of  the  flag  dilutes  the  very  freedom  that  makes  this 
emblem so revered, and worth revering.” 

 

94 

But I have to add, Madam Speaker, that the United States is quite isolated in this position that 
it has taken by, you know, leaning completely on the side of freedom of speech, freedom of 
expression,  freedom  of  opinion  which  is  guaranteed  by  the  first  amendment  to  the  US 
Constitution. 

Most countries in the world, be it China, Algeria, India, Iraq or even Finland, France 
and Germany, have specific laws which punish flag desecration. And in those countries like 
in England which doesn’t have specific laws, such acts may be prosecuted under disorderly 
conduct  or  arson.  But,  of  course,  human  right  activists,  in  all  these  countries,  quite 
understandably, militate against the use of such law. This is perfectly understandable because 
people who desecrate a national flag often do so to protest against a conduct of Government 
of the day which they consider to be at odds with what is a free, open and tolerant society. To 
quote  one  of  these  militants  who  warned  against  the  danger  of  the  State  using  the  law  to 
oppress protesters - 

“Respect is earned; it cannot be imposed.” 

Madam Speaker, most of the countries which punish flag desecration or burning, do 
so when the offence is committed in public. However, this Bill, unfortunately, does not make 
any distinction between an act committed in public and an act committed within the privacy 
of one’s own home. To take an extreme example, Madam Speaker, a person who burns the 
national flag in his yard because it is old and stained, or for any reason, may be caught by this 
Act. So too can a textile factory which is disposing of extra flags which it prepared.  Every 
year,  hundreds  of  paper  flags  representing  our  national  flag  are  destroyed  after  the 
Independence Day celebrations. Surely, the intention of this Bill, Madam Speaker, is not to 
punish these types of situations. Surely, it is not to punish those persons who do so without, 
in  any  way  -  who  burn  the  flag,  dispose  of  the  flag  -  meaning  or  intending  to  offend  the 
national flag. But, unfortunately, Madam Speaker, they may very well be caught by section 5 
(1) (b) of the Bill which states, and I quote – 

“No person shall, without lawful authority, burn, mutilate or otherwise destroy 
or damage the national flag or the flag of any other State.” 
The  clause  provides  that  it  is  only  an  offence  if  the  act  of  burning,  destroying, 
damaging  is  done  without  lawful  authority.  This  will  surely  cover  instances  where 
Government authorises the destruction of flags or the disposal of flags. 

 
But, again, Madam Speaker, I don’t think that, without lawful authority, would cover 

95 

those instances of people who, in the privacy of their home, dispose of the flag.  

This anomaly, Madam Speaker, in my opinion, could have been very easily cured by 
better drafting this clause by a simple addition after the words ‘without lawful authority’, the 
following words ‘or without any reasonable justification’ so that the burden will then shift on 
the person who has burned or destroyed the flag, to come and say that he did not intend to 
burn it because he was angry against the flag, but he did so because he wanted to dispose of it 
in an orderly manner. 

Madam Speaker, this Bill does not only protect our national flag, but it also makes it 
an offence to desecrate or burn a flag of another State. This provision, in a different form, 
was  already  there  in  section  101  (a)  of  the  Criminal  Code  which  prohibited  turning  into 
ridicule a foreign flag. 

The rationale, of course, is that we should not offend our friendly countries and in 
this respect Mauritius is not unique.  There are several other countries also which make it an 
offence to burn foreign flags, for example, in Japan and in Denmark. However, there may be 
many unintended consequences, Madam Speaker.  

It is not uncommon, Madam Speaker, for demonstrators to protest against the policy 
of a foreign State and to get carried away in demonstration and to burn national foreign flags. 
This has happened in the past in Mauritius.  This has happened in apartheid days. This has 
happened in oppression. So, today, this will become an offence. So, if there is a dictator, a 
tyrant who oppresses his people, who wages war against his neighbours, who kills innocents 
and we, Mauritians, take to the street, to demonstrate against this tyrant, against this dictator, 
if carried away someone in the crowd, decides to burn the foreign flag which represents the 
authority of that tyrant, that dictator, henceforth that would become an offence.   

The question will probably be raised, Madam Speaker, if such a case comes before the 
Supreme Court as to whether this is a justifiable restriction on our freedom of expression if 
we were to – and we are talking not about the national flag; for the national flag, I am very 
confident  that  there  is  nothing  anti-constitutional  in  what  we  are  doing  today,  but  when  it 
comes to foreign flag, the Supreme Court will have probably to weigh again this balancing 
act between protecting the foreign flag and protecting our constitutional right for freedom of 
speech. 

 
So, Madam Speaker, again, as I said, on this side of the House, we welcome this Bill 

96 

subject to the reservation that I have made. 

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Dayal. 

 

(4.46 p.m.) 

The Minister of Environment, Sustainable Development and Disaster and Beach 
Management  (Mr  R.  Dayal):  Madam  Speaker,  at  the  very  outset,  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth has to be wholeheartedly congratulated for coming up with 
this Bill which was long overdue given the overriding importance of a national flag in the 
history of a nation. He was the stalwart of the struggle for independence and took an active 
part in the constitutional conference in UK. It is highly symbolical that he is behind this Bill. 

A flag, in the life of a nation, has got overriding importance and significance in terms 
of symbolism and patriotism.  Why symbolism? Because a flag radiates a whole spectrum of 
ideas, philosophies and feelings in terms of a rolling point as an epitome of national identity, 
its vital importance to trigger a sense of patriotism belonging, it infuses the blood and sinews 
for noble pursuits in the Altar of our Motherland.  

Just by the sight of the flag, the heart is invigorated; the mind vibrates to lucky ideals 
for  the  general  good,  irrespective  of  selfless  motives  and  petty  gains  embracing  altruistic 
pursuits for the cause of national unity.  It has a beauty of its own that can only be measured 
through dreams to nurture what Mother Earth has gifted to all living entities throughout the 
State  of  Mauritius.    It  has  got  a  sacred  aura  of  its  own  in  terms  of  solidarity  and  service. 
Solidarity  with  the  weaker  elements  of  our  society  and  service  by  the  side  of  the  less 
fortunate with whom we are called upon to live and work with the common objective of glory 
to the Motherland.   

It is a common link between man and land, the heart and the mind having the bonding 

power of humanism that transcends all the barriers of blood and differences. 

The national flag is of all things close to us, the symbol of our motherland, bereft of 
any political linkages and connotations that we must learn and care at the cost of even the 
highest sacrifice. 

97 

 
Therefore, the national flag has to be viewed as a multipronged entity as enshrined in 
our national anthem with the sweetness of beauty and fragrance. Traditions bring us together, 
as one people and one nation for peace, justice and liberty for ever and ever in time and space 
and for posterity. No wonder that the most ultimate draping for all heroes and great statesmen 
and all deserving sons of the land is to be honoured at the ultimate moment of life with the 
serenity and peace that the national flag carries. 

The  national  flag  has  to  be  protected  at  all  costs  and  given  and  showered  in  an 
unlimited fashion. The best we have in ourselves in terms of respect and admiration to be 
animated with lofty ideals, altruism, love and compassion, encompassing the philosophy of 
true citizenship.  

It  has  to  be  highlighted  that  it  is  the  sacred  duty  of  all  guardians  of  peace  to  be 
considerably vigilant to. Equally important is the duty of all men in uniform to spare no effort 
in making sure that the flag is respected and guaranteed in special place of choice wherever it 
is  in  keeping  with  the  ceremonial  decorum  that  befits  a  nation  worthy  of  acclaim.  At  all 
times, it is anchored in democratic traditions to safeguard the rights and liberties of one and 
all who thrive under its chatra chaya meaning under its aura and shade. 

Our society has the prime responsibility, while respecting and protecting the national 
flag with our hearts and minds, to prevent the erosion of ethics and values likely to impact on 
the credible image of the flag of Mauritius. The national flag epitomises the Coat of Arms 
anchored in the motto Stella Clavisque Maris Indici, Star and Key of the Indian Ocean with 
the Dodo and the sambur deer each supporting our sugarcane erect proper with green leaves. 
Heraldry has it, with the four colours of the national flag all our special significance, in our 
case:  red  for  the  struggle  for  freedom  and  Independence;  blue  the  Indian  Ocean  in  which 
Mauritius  is  located,  yellow  as  the  new  light  of  Independence  shining  over  the  island  and 
green represents the agriculture of Mauritius and its colour through the 12 months of the year. 

Although  the  national  flag  was  unfurled  on  12  March  1968  for  the  first  time 
coinciding  with  the  Dandi  March  of  Mahatma  Gandhi  who  through  his  triad  of  patriotic 
endeavours, inspired from the African Continent and Mauritius in 1901, namely Swaraj true 
freedom for self-realisation.  

The Satya Graha, the past for good governance where truth prevails, and nonviolence 
sheltered  in  the  ultimate  power  to  face  humiliation  with  sweat  and  tears  to  achieve  the 
ultimate victory of our injustice in all forms. It is good for us to understand the ramification 

 

98 

of the national flag at all moments of life of our nation whether it is carried by the Special 
Mobile Force as the colours to welcome all privileged guests of the Republic of Mauritius or 
to  make  the  flag  touch  the  ground  for  the  highest  form  of  salute  to  the  dignitary  for  the 
general salute. The regimental colours are the rallying point of the Special Mobile Force and 
emanation of the Police Force signifying common purpose of loyalty. 

Mauritius decided to break off the umbilical link with Britain at the historic meeting 
of the Legislative Assembly held on 10 December 1991 when the Constitution of Mauritius 
was amended turning Mauritius into a republic. After 24 years of Independence, Mauritius 
obtained complete freedom from its former colonial masters. Here, I must underline that the 
Coat of Arms was then modified by our first President-to-be, Sir Veerasamy Ringadoo. Thus, 
the  Head  of  the  State  represented  by  our  Governor  General,  subsequently,  became  the 
President  of  the  Republic  of  Mauritius  with  the  Republic  flag  in  a  new  dimension  of  100 
inches by 48 inches (8’4’ x 4’). 

Protection of National Flag 

This Bill is to provide for better protection of the Flag of Mauritius as spelt out in 
section 5 subsection 1 with subsection (a) to (f) where, in clear terms, the whole ambit of the 
decorum and dignity of the National flag of Mauritius.  

In  all  countries  of  the  world,  irrespective  of  their  origin,  faith  and  belonging  to 
specific  political  system,  people  value  their  flag  as  a  symbol  of  patriotism  and  a  sense  of 
belonging. 

We are already aware of diplomatic incidents occurring because of the non-respect of 
a flag when it is being used contrary to establish protocols. Some countries even go as far as 
breaking diplomatic relationship because of certain reprehensible behaviour against the 
National flag. 

Madam  Speaker,  therefore,  a  legal  framework  for  the  protection  of  all  flags  is  of 

paramount importance brought at national and international levels. 

I would like, here, to place on record a document - 35 pages that I produced when I 
was Commissioner of Police on 27 April 1996. It was named ‘Flag Code’ and it was done 
with the approval of the Prime Minister. It spells out lot of pertinent details concerning our 
national flag. I only wish that, in the regulations that we are going to make, these details are 
reproduced,  for  example,  the  pledge.  It  is  very  important  to  know  that  we  have  to  make 
various pledges concerning our national flag and it is all there in terms of the wording what 

 

99 

should  be  done.  For  example,  flags  to  be  placed  on  motorcars,  whatever  flag  should  be 
placed, on aircraft. All these are spelt out very clearly in terms of size and for the appropriate 
ceremonial decorum. This is what I had to say about the national flag. 

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for half an hour. 

At 4.53 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 5.34 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

Madam Speaker: Hon Boissezon! 

Mr  E.  Boissezon  (Third  Member  for  La  Caverne  &  Phoenix):  Madame  la 
présidente, merci de me permettre de participer au débat relatif au projet de loi the National 
Flag Bill. 

Tout d’abord, je voudrais faire ressortir que la magie du drapeau national a encore fait 
un rassemblement. Après avoir écouté le discours de l’honorable Reza Uteem, je serais très 
bref parce que la préparation de mon discours était presque la copie conforme de ce qu’il a 
dit. 

A  la  fin  du  XVIII  siècle,  après  les  révolutions  américaines  et  françaises,  à  l’aube 
d’une nouvelle ère de la construction moderne de la nation, le drapeau devint un indicateur de 
nationalité. Avant les gens marchaient derrière le drapeau du roi. 

La valeur symbolique du drapeau national est indéniable et indiscutable dans l’ère de 
la  démocratie.  Le  drapeau  national  a  pris  encore  plus  d’ampleur  au  cours  de  la  première 
guerre mondiale et l’on commença à parler de mourir pour la patrie. 

Le drapeau fait partie intégrante de l’identité nationale.  Il  est le symbole de l’unité 
nationale car il représente, sans l’ombre d’un doute, toute la population, sans distinction de 
race, de langue, de croyance ou d’opinion, qu’il rassemble autour de son mât.  

Le drapeau national est le symbole même de la nation, de sa fierté et de sa capacité à 
rallier  la  population  dans  ses  cieux.  La  nation  est  d’abord  des  gens  nés  dans  une  même 
population.  La nation a  toujours semblé être un cadre naturel spontané pour la famille.  La 
nation, la patrie est une famille des familles. Quand un membre de la famille est en danger, 
les autres membres se regroupent pour lui porter main forte. Le drapeau national représente la 
mission de l’État. 

100 

 
Aujourd’hui,  à  l’aube  du  deuxième  miracle  économique,  la  nation  doit  garder  la 
mission patriotique qu’elle s’était investie en mars 1968. Symbolisée par la couleur jaune – 
represents  the  new  light  of  independence  -  c’est-à-dire  de  protéger,  de  défendre  les  droits, 
d’éduquer,  de  soigner  et  de  créer  l’environnement  soutenable  aux  développements 
économiques du pays.  

Le drapeau a une charge émotionnelle en celui qui n’a rien. La patrie, représentée par 
son drapeau, est son seul bien, mais aussi bien des jeunes, des vieux, des malades, car seule la 
nation  dispose  d’un  système  de  solidarité  permanent  entre  les  différentes  catégories  de  la 
société : jeunes/vieux, 
valides/malades, 
travailleurs/chômeurs. Le drapeau incarne le respect.  

célibataires/familles, 

riches/pauvres, 

Le drapeau national, qui fut hissé et déployé pour la première fois à Maurice en 1968,  
représente le symbole le plus respecté de la nation Mauricienne. Malheureusement, au cours 
de cette décennie, dans le passé dans certains états, le drapeau national a été profané et au 
grand dam des dirigeants de constater que de tels actes ne pouvaient être punis par manque de 
loi  adéquate.  J’ai  une  idée  d’un  pays  du  continent  Européen,  une  superpuissance  dont  le 
drapeau fut spolié et le ministre de l’Intérieur qui disait – 

« On  peut  penser  qu’il  y  a  déjà  dans  l’état  actuel  du  droit  des  moyens 
juridiques pour sanctionner un acte aussi intolérable contre la nation. Mais le 
droit actuel ne révèle qu’être lacunaire sur ce point. » 

En Inde, en 1971, le Parlement a voté le Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act 
parce  que  le  drapeau  avait  été  bafoué.  En  Amérique,  le  fameux  cas  créa  la  déception  des 
Américains et un journaliste déçu écrivait – 

“We  cannot  allow  our  proud  flag  and  our  proud  nation  to  be  ripped  apart 
piece by piece. Most Americans, myself among them, hate what Johnson did to 
the  flag.  From  the  cradle  we  are  taught  to  respect  it  as  a  symbol  of  our 
unprecedented form of democracy.” 

De ce côté, quand nous parlons du freedom of speech beaucoup a été dit en Amérique 
sur ce point et fait sans précédent, la cour, par une majorité de cinq contre quatre en faveur de 
Johnson  avait  donné  l’impression  que  l’Amérique  était  d’accord.  Mais  force  est  de 
reconnaître que le juge Anthony Kennedy écrivit ce jour – 

101 

 
“The hard fact is that sometimes we must make decisions we do not like. We 
make  them  because  they  are  right,  right  in  the  sense  that  the  law  and  the 
Constitution, as we see them, compel the result.” 

Kennedy dit encore –  

“And so great is our commitment to the process that, except in the rare case, 
we  do  not  pause  to  express  distaste  for  the  result,  perhaps  for  fear  of 
undermining a valued principle that dictates the decision. This is one of those 
rare cases.” 

Mais  nous  devons  soutenir  le  point.  Mais  aujourd’hui  nous  n’avons  pas  de  premier 
amendement dans notre Constitution, nous devons maintenir l’intégrité de notre drapeau. 

Même à l’île Maurice, pour le 45e anniversaire de l’indépendance, notre drapeau fut 
spolié par un des manifestants contre le projet charbon à Albion et on se souvient que sur le 
drapeau national on avait écrit « no to coal ». Malheureusement, comme l’honorable Uteem a 
dit,  vu  que  nous  n’avions  pas  de  description  de  notre  drapeau  national  on  n’a  pu  prendre 
aucune sanction contre lui.  

Je félicite le Premier ministre par intérim qui présente ce projet de loi. Il est temps, 
comme  l’indiquent  les  objectifs  du  projet  de  loi,  de  le  protéger  et  de  réglementer  son 
utilisation. Comme j’ai dit précédemment, le Mauricien  aime  et il est fier de son drapeau. 
Mais  quelquefois  nous  notons  une  mauvaise  utilisation  par  manque  d’un  protocole  et  des 
étiquettes régissant l’utilisation de ce drapeau. Nous notons bien souvent pendant la période 
précédant le 12 mars de chaque année un élan de patriotisme gagne la population et tout le 
monde  fait  flotter  le  drapeau.  Mais  c’est  un  peu  du  n’importe  quoi !  Il  est  temps  que  la 
population soit instruite sur l’utilisation du drapeau. 

Au Canada, en Australie et dans d’autres états encore il existe des codes d’éthiques 
quant  à  l’utilisation  du  drapeau.  À  Maurice,  nous  ne  sommes  pas  en  reste.  La  Mauritius 
Standard  Bureau  a  déjà  préparé  des  standards  concernant  les  couleurs  du  drapeau  et 
l’utilisation. Je parle ici du MS Code 11 de 2011 amendé en 2013 et d’un MS Code que peu 
de  personnes  connaissent,  le  MS  Code  2  de  2011.  Nous  pourrons  très  vite  préparer  les 
regulations qui sont mis dans la loi en utilisant le document présenté par l’honorable ministre 
Dayal et ce fameux MS Code. 

Je parlerai de la commercialisation du drapeau. Le drapeau mauricien ne devrait pas 
être  vendu  à  même  le  sol  par  les  hawkers.  Le  projet  de  loi  fait  mention  de  l’obtention 

 

102 

préalable  du  Premier  ministre  pour  la  vente  des  produits  portant  le  drapeau  national.  Il 
faudrait que le demandeur présente un échantillon du produit qu’il a l’intention de vendre et 
de soumettre son plan de distribution. 

Le  MS  Code  dont  j’ai  parlé  précédemment  fait  mention  que  tout  drapeau  doit  être 
étiqueté  et  je  pense  que  nous  devons,  dans  les  regulations  que  nous  allons  présenter, 
demander que tous les drapeaux soient étiquetés faisant mention du nom du producteur, de 
son adresse et du produit d’origine du drapeau. 

J’aurais un mot spécial concernant l’intervention de l’honorable Uteem concernant la 

section 5 (c) du projet de loi lui-même - 

“Alter  the  national  flag  by  placing  thereon  any  letter,  emblem  or 
representation or by any other manner whatsoever (…)” 

J’avais  noté  cette  variance  et  je  souhaite  que  le  Premier  ministre  par  intérim  nous  éclaire 
concernant le drapeau que la Présidente de la République utilise. Est-ce qu’il faudrait faire un 
changement  et  mettre  un  amendement  dans  ce  présent  projet  de  loi  ou  demander  à  la 
Présidente de changer son fanion ? 

Autre point que j’ai noté dans la section 5 (2) Protection of the National Flag, c’est 

qu’il y avait une réduction dans le terme d’emprisonnement.  

Auparavant, c’était cinq ans et aujourd’hui nous notons que c’est not exceeding two 
years. Mais je pense que cinq ans est un peu dur. Moi, je crois que le législateur qui a préparé 
ce document - je vois l’honorable Uteem qui sourit - et je pense qu’il serait d’accord avec 
moi qu’on peut laisser ces deux ans. 

Autre point que je note concernant ce projet de loi, c’est la section 4 –  

“No person shall commit an offence under subsection (1)(d) where that person 
is  a  minor  who,  in  good  faith  or  in  the  course  of  educational  or  social 
activities, represents as the national flag a flag which is not as described in 
section 4(1)”.  

Il faut faire attention. Quand on parle de mineurs, un mineur c’est quelqu’un qui a moins de 
18 ans. Aujourd’hui beaucoup de jeunes vont au collège et  étudient jusqu’à l’âge de 26 ans 
ou de 30 ans. Si dans le cours de son éducation et d’une activité sociale, il y a une infraction 
aux  réglementations  de  cette  présente  loi  -  je  pense  qu’il  faut  bien  voir  entre  minor  and 
somebody who is in the course of educational or social activities. 

103 

 
En parcourant la loi, je vois qu’on parle de regulations, du temps et de la manière de 
présenter le national flag. J’ai cru comprendre que dans beaucoup d’endroits, surtout dans les 
pays  étrangers,  que  le  national  flag  n’est  pas  bien  disposé.  Il  serait  temps  qu’on  fasse 
comprendre que ce MS code soit distribué dans toutes nos ambassades pour faire partager les 
principes, les règlements concernant le national flag de Maurice. 

Ceci dit, Madame la présidente, je dirais: vive notre quadricolore national! Vive l’Ile 

Maurice!  

Merci. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Ramful! 

 

(5.51 p.m.) 

Mr  D.  Ramful  (Third  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien):    Madam 
Speaker,  let  me  first  of  all  thank  the  hon.  Ag.  Prime  Minister  for  coming  before  this 
Assembly with this Bill. It is the first time that we are, in fact, giving legislative meaning to 
our national flag. I would be very brief and short as usual, Madam Speaker.  

Our  national  flag  introduced  back  on  the  12  March  1968  is  a  symbol  of  freedom. 
Freedom  of  our  people  from  slavery,  freedom  of  our  people  from  indentured  labour  and 
freedom from the grip of colonialism and bringing an end to foreign rules in our country. Our 
national flag also represents a symbol of patriotism. It represents unity, peace and harmony 
among our multi-cultural society and is, therefore, in my humble opinion, the most sacred 
thing that a nation can ever hold. It is, therefore, of utmost importance that we protect our 
national symbol and we regulate its proper use. To that end, I therefore, welcome this Bill as 
it seeks to consolidate the law on the protection of our national flag. However, I have a very 
few suggestions to make.  

As I have said, Madam Speaker, it is for the first time that we are giving statutory 
meaning to the colours of our national flag. When we give statutory meaning to anything, it 
has to be done with precision. It has to be explicit. As the hon. Ag. Prime Minister just said in 
his speech, himself, that we are leaving a legacy for our future generation. The meaning that 
we ascribe to the colours of our national flag, will remain in the statutory books. So, it needs 
to be precise. We should not be perceived as trying to obliterate the history of our nation. I 
am referring in particular to the symbolic meaning of the colours in the first schedule of the 

 

104 

Act. The colour red, it is not because I belong to a party which has got its political colour as 
well, but I have tried to look at the origin of the colours like my colleague hon. Uteem, I have 
not seen the origin of those colours. But I have read in Wikipedia - the official site - that the 
meaning  given  to  the  colour  red  represents  the  bloodshed  at  the  time  of  slavery  and 
colonisation.  

When we read the meaning as ascribed to it in the schedule, we see that red represents 
the  struggle  for  freedom  and  independence.  I  said  that  when  we  are  giving  legislative 
meaning to any word, it has to be done with precision, so as to prevent any confusion. Some 
people might think that the meaning of the colour is not that important, but those who know 
the history of our nation, would agree with me that we have ascribed the proper meaning to 
these colours.  

Now,  the  struggle  for  freedom  from  slavery  and  the  struggle  for  freedom  from 
colonialism are two separate historical events that have marked the history of our nation. It is, 
therefore, legitimate that we have to spell it out expressly in the definition of the colour red 
that it represents bloodshed at the time of slavery and colonisation, so that we prevent any 
confusion. 

I think if we leave it as it is, we would be defacing the course of history. I believe that 
we  owe  it  to  those  who  have  contributed  to  the  descendants  of  slaves  and  indentured 
labourers, we owe it to them that this should be reflected truly and clearly in the statute book. 

The second proposition that I wish to make is about section 5(1)(f), the first part and it 

reads as follows – 

“(1)   No person shall – 

(f)  

without the authorisation of the Prime Minister – 

(i)  

in  connection  with  any  business, 
advertising or any professional (…)” 

trade,  calling, 

I have no problem with these. 

“(…) or public activity, make use of the national flag.” 

So,  no  one  without  the  authorisation  of  the  Prime  Minister  can  make  use  of  the 
national flag for a public activity.  I find this very restrictive. First of all, no definition has 
been given to the wordings ‘public activity.’ Would that include for example, the celebration 

 

105 

of the Independence Day? Would that include, for example, if the Mauritian team is playing, 
am I entitled to display the national flag or do I need the authorisation of the Prime Minister?  

I see that there will be regulations that will be provided for the manner in which the 
national flag will be flown. I expect that there are some precisions that will be brought in as 
regards when, on which event we are allowed, as citizens of this country, to fly our national 
flag.  I say this because we should be very careful in not unjustly restricting the rights of the 
citizens to the extent that this infringes their freedom of expression under the Constitution. 

If I may refer the House to the United States, for example, in the case of the United 
States against Eichman, it was held that the law preventing the desecration of the US flag was 
unconstitutional  as  it  infringes  the  freedom  of  expression  as  guaranteed  under  their 
Constitution. My friend, hon. Uteem, has made reference to that.  In fact, in Germany as well, 
the  Federal  Constitutional  Court  has  held  that  the  federal  flag  did  not  have  constitutional 
value so as to take precedence over the fundamental basic right of freedom of expression. It 
was held that the flag desecration was legal provided that it did not endanger the continued 
existence of the nation itself. In India, the Flag Code initially prevented the use of the Indian 
flag by the citizens except on Independence Day and the Republic Day.  The Supreme Court 
of  India  held  that  the  Flag  Code  was  unreasonably  restrictive  as  it  infringes  the  right  to 
freedom  of  speech  and  expression  and  the  Court  recognised  the  right  of  every  citizen  to 
display the Indian flag. 

This is why I say we should not give restrictive meaning to the provisions.  As I have 
said, public activity has not been defined; in which way would a citizen be allowed to fly the 
national  flag.    My  pledge  to  the  Government  is  that  we  should  not  ascribe  a  restrictive 
meaning to the words. 

I would also agree with my friend, hon. Uteem, as regards the provisions of section 5, 
sub-section 1A, which provides for an offence if any person would bring into hatred the flag 
of any other State.  My question is this: if the Supreme Court of the United States has ruled 
that it is legal in America to burn the United States flag, if the German Supreme Court has 
ruled that it is legal in Germany to burn the German flag, so why here in Mauritius are we 
providing for this? 

I am sure in the days to come we might be faced with challenges before the Supreme 
Court. Then, there might be some debate about whether we should  give precedence to the 
freedom  of  expression  and  speech,  as  provided  and  our  Constitution,  or  we  should  give 

 

106 

precedence to the protection of a foreign flag. So, these are the few remarks that I wanted to 
make. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

 

(6.03 p.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Social  Security,  National  Solidarity  and  Reform  Institutions 
(Mrs F. Jeewa-Daureeawoo): Madam Speaker, our national flag is our identity, our pride; it 
reflects our ideal and it is a symbol of the history of Mauritius. If I can say, it is more than a 
mere signage.  It marks our loyalty to our dear country and it was recorded at the College of 
Arms in London on 09 January 1968. The national flag fluttering fearlessly at the top of a 
pole which stands majestically in the yard of the Government House, schools or courthouses 
denotes  our  patriotism.  I  would  dare  to  go  a  step  further  and  declare  that  over  time  our 
national flag has become much more than just a means of identification.  It symbolises the 
Mauritian values and the battles we have fought for the shaping of the Mauritian economy. 
Each colour of our national flag adds a layer to our history. 

Madam Speaker, let us pause and reflect on the four bands. I quote – 

‘Red represents the struggle for freedom and independence’. Unquote 

We  remember  here  the  determination  and  fervour  of  our  countrymen  who  freed  Mauritius 
from the British colonial system. 

“Blue represents the Indian Ocean in the middle of which Mauritius is situated”. 

This allowed us to rejoice in our strategic position in the world geography. We cannot only 
take great advantage of our position to enhance international trade, but we can also enjoy the 
richness of the marine resources. 

“Yellow represents the new light of independence”. 

We remember those who have struggled for many years to create a new sense of unity and 
above all to give a meaningful start for the Mauritian diversity. 

“Green represents the agriculture of Mauritius and its colour throughout the 
12 months of the year”. 

Now, this undoubtedly link us with our economic history and the different phases we 

have passed through; the Dutch occupation, our sugarcane estates and the transition periods. 

107 

 
I have invited hon. Members to ponder on the significance of each colour decorating 
our  national  flag  for  the  very  reason  that  we  should  instil  in  our  citizen’s  mind  that  a 
country’s flag is not merely a piece of coloured fabrics. It connotes the struggle of those who 
have defended our country and it stands for those who have suffered in their endeavour to 
protect our country’s honour. 

As has been rightly pointed out by hon. Uteem, our national flag is not mentioned or 
described in our Constitution. It is indeed unfortunate.  However, our Government has felt the 
need to come up with this piece of legislation to protect the physical integrity of the national 
flag.  It  is  very  important  that  when  a  person  ill-treats  our  national  flag,  the  justice  system 
should be prepared to mete out instantly the necessary sanction to ensure legal protection of 
the national flag. 

Now, let me come to section 181A of the Criminal Code Act 1838, which does make 
provision for the protection of our flag and that of any other State. Under this section of the 
law – 

“Any person who by any means or in any manner holds up to or brings into 
hatred  or  ridicule  the  flag  of  Mauritius  or  any  other  State  shall  commit  an 
offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding Rs100,000 and/or 
to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years”. 

However,  we  have  to  admit  that  it  does  not  quite  reflect  the  degree  of  respect  we  have 
towards our national flag. The law as it is does not explain to our fellow citizens the ‘raison 
d’être’ of our national flag and the dignity to be attached to our national flag. By proposing 
here to repeal section 181A of the Criminal Code Act 1838 and introducing this present Bill, 
we are, in fact, paving the way towards the promotion of respect for specifically our national 
flag. 

It was indeed high time that we had a full-fledged Act of Parliament which, not only 
makes  provision  for  the  respect  which  should  be  accorded  to  the  national  flag  by  every 
citizen but also provides in details the prohibitions placed on the use of our national flag. 

Let us have a look at clause 5 of the Bill.  Clause 5 of the Bill does expatiate on the 
various means by which a person can be prosecuted for an offence under this Bill. This was 
lacking in Section 181A of the Criminal Code Act 1838.  Now, each and every citizen will 
understand, in clear and simple terms, that the national flag is the visual symbolism of our 

 

108 

national identity on the national level as well as on the international front.  There is a legal 
obligation, not only a moral one, to protect our national flag in every circumstance.  

Let me now  come to clause 5(2) of the  Bill which has been highlighted by orators 
before me.  True it is, Madam Speaker, that clause 5(2) of the Bill appears to be somewhat 
more lenient in the provision of sentence than section 181A of the Criminal Code Act 1838. 
However,  I  do believe,  Madam Speaker, that there is  rationality in the  prescription of this 
lower, but equally strict sentence of imprisonment. I am of the view that with The National 
Flag Bill, every person will now be fully aware of his obligations towards the national flag 
and as such we do expect to see a drastic fall in the number of convictions for this offence as 
a whole.  

We  should  also  consider  that  the  Bill  does  make  provisions  for  the  making  of 
regulations to further provide for contravention by persons and related offences. In general, 
the very act of passing the Bill will convey the message to the citizens of Mauritius that the 
national flag is, indeed, the concern of all of us.  

Last  but  not  least,  the  Bill  also  makes  provisions  for  the  prohibition  on  the 
commercial  use  of  the  flag  for  any  commercial  purpose  unless  authorised  by  the  Prime 
Minister  and,  most  importantly,  the  Bill  brings  amendment  to  the  Copyright  Act  2014  to 
include the national flag in the definition of artistic, literary or scientific work protected as 
being  an  original,  intellectual  creation  in  the  artistic,  literary  or  scientific  domain.  This  is, 
indeed, a good move.  

With  these  words,  Madam  Speaker,  I  commend  and  thank  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, and the hon. Ag. Prime Minister for bringing forward the 
present  Bill  for  the  better  protection  of  our  Mauritian  patrimony.  Our  national  flag  is  our 
pride. 

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Mrs Jadoo-Jaunbocus! 

 

(6.12 p.m.) 

Mrs R. Jadoo-Jaunbocus (Second Member for  Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to address this House 
on such a material Bill that has come before this House.  

 
It is ironical that last week we talked about the languages of culture and this week we 

109 

talk about languages, languages of the country, of the nation, that is, the national flag.   

Indeed,  why  do  we  come  with  a  flag  law?  Historically,  flags  originate  as  military 
standards used as field signs.  That is the origin of flags.  The practice of flying flags indicate 
the country of origin, indicate the context of warfare and has emerged with such kind of flags 
in warfare, then we have gone on to maritime flags, introduced in the age of sail in the early 
17th century.  Then, with the emergence of nationalist sentiments in the 18th Century, there 
was the felt need, the expressed desire to display the national flags in the civilian context.  So, 
that is how flags have come about.   

It is also symbolic that yesterday we celebrated the 181 years since our ancestors set 
foot through the Aapravasi Ghat and climbed the stairs to come to Mauritius and, today, we 
are debating the Flag Bill which symbolises the ultimate freedom that these people came and 
fought for. In 1968, the British flag, the Union Jack - the symbol of the British presence in 
Mauritius since the 1810 - was brought down. History was unfurling then and in the place the 
Union Jack, what we have, is our quadricolore; a new chapter unfurling for the nation.  The 
fight for freedom has, indeed, succeeded.  

In this breath, I must congratulate the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, and the hon. Ag. Prime 
Minister to come with such a Bill before this House.  This shows the seriousness with which 
this Government considers patriotism and the need for a national identity through our flag 
because  the  national  flag  does  symbolise  any  country  indeed,  its  nationality  and  its 
patriotism.  

Traditionally,  the  national  flag  has,  in  fact,  often  but  not  always,  mentioned  or 
described in the country’s Constitution, then we have secondary laws or regulations which 
talked  more  in  details  about  these  flags.    They  described  the  flags  and  the  prescribed 
conditions and protocols attached to those flags, such as is the case in Germany, in Serbia, in 
the United States, etc.  

In  Mauritius,  our  four-band  was  adopted,  as  I  have  said,  on  12  March  and  was 
recorded at the College of Arms in London.  It was recorded then on 09 January 1968.  Since 
then, many decades, almost half a century has gone by and now  as we are stepping into a 
new era of economic development, as we are consolidating Mauritius as it is and preparing it 
for future generation, I again pay homage to the hon. Ag. Prime Minister for coming with 
such a law.   

 
When we look at such a Bill itself, as has been debated by those who have intervened 

110 

before me - in fact, most have been said and little has been left to say, Madam Speaker. 

There  has  been  reference  to  clause  5  mostly.    The  description  is  more  or  less 
straightforward and most people are ad idem with that in this House.  We don’t have me to 
dispute, safe for what hon. Ramful has said about the red colour.  We come to clause 5 (1) 
(b), (c), (d), (e) and (f); we find that at subsection (2), the penalty has been lessened to two 
years.  Now, the reasoning behind this, I am sure and I would urge the House to consider, 
why do we come and bring and inflict a penalty of five years - which is quite strong - when, 
in fact, what we are saying is love your nation, honour your nation, pay tribute to your nation, 
pay tribute to your nation through your flag, hoist the flag and pay respect to it.  So, at the 
end  of  the  day,  if  we  want  a  nation  who  believes  in  what  this  Government  is  doing,  who 
believes in the epitome, in the pinnacle of what the flag represents, then we do not really need 
such severe sentence to curb the desire to go and destroy that epitome, that symbol.   

That is one of the reasons that the legislators must have brought it down to two years 
but, simultaneously, coming with this Flag Bill to say that: “Yes, we should believe in this”. 
So, in effect, we are bringing about a new way of looking at the flag or rather strengthening 
the way of looking at the flag. 

I also notice in clause 7(1), the Copyright Act is being amended and, rightfully so, to 
encompass the national flag in the definition of artistic, literary or scientific work by adding 
the national flag, inserting it as a new paragraph.  The reason is that we are now moving with 
times.  In fact, the Copyright Act has been brought about by this House in the past to protect 
artists, to protect all kinds of productions, etc.   

So, what better than to give protection to our national emblem, especially when we 
come in an age where things are being readily  copied by technology and are being spread 
very quickly and can easily be altered. Therefore, we are about setting up to protect the whole 
world and what we do by this amendment is, in fact, protecting our own national flag, thus 
giving it even more symbolism when we do that and more value when we do that. 

The Criminal Code has already been debated about. Now, we look at  the amendment 
brought to the Merchant Shipping Act where, in fact, in effect what we are saying, what is 
being replaced is that, formerly, through the Merchant Shipping Act when a Mauritian ship 
would, upon a signal being made to it by any ship in the service of the Government or upon 
entering or leaving any foreign port or when entering and leaving a coach, in these occasions, 

 

111 

the Mauritian ship was required to hoist the national colours and now instead they are being 
required  to  hoist  the  flag.  So,  this  is,  in  effect,  a  major  amendment  brought  by  clause  7 
subsection (i), (ii) and (iii) which goes in line with the philosophy of the bringing about of the 
very National Flag Bill. 

As I am addressing the House on the national flag, it is very important that we talk 
about the protocol of hoisting a national flag. When we do some research, what I have been 
able to find is, firstly, the Flag Code - kindly pointed out to me by hon. Minister Dayal - the 
Flag  Code  that  the  Mauritius  Police  Force  in  1996,  under  the  prime  ministership  of  Sir 
Anerood Jugnauth, produced and what it did, the Flag Code was that it explained and put 
codified how the flag should be dealt with and it deals with the protocol of flag raising of a 
country. Again, the MS 12 of 2011, once more talks about the Flag Code of Mauritius. The 
basic principle is that where there is a great deal of protocol when we are dealing with the 
national flag and the proper display thereof. 

A general rule is that the national flag should be flown in the position of honour and 
not in an inferior position to any flag, though some countries where they have sovereigns they 
make  exception  for  the  royal  standards.  But  the  general  rule  is  typical  and  it  says  that 
whenever  the  national  flag  is  displayed  with  any  other  flag,  it  must  be  hoisted  first  and 
lowered last and if displayed with other national flags of other countries, then such flags must 
be  of  equal  size  and  must  be  flown  at  equal  height,  although  the  national  flag  of  the  host 
country should be flown in the position of honour. There are a number of other protocols that 
have to be observed. So much for protocols and, therefore, as I have said, I have found it in 
these two places and it is food for thought to consider, Madam Speaker, for this House. 

I shall end on the pledge that the Flag Code gives to the nation in hoisting the flag and 

it goes as follows – 

‘We pledge to make of  this nation of ours our family. To keep this land in 
trust for future generations, we pray before God and men for this republic to 
be a haven of freedom and harmony, compassion and caring.’ 

Let us put all this into action through our National Flag Bill. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

 

 

112 

 
(6.22 p.m.) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mahomed! 

Mr C. Osman Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South and Port Louis 
Central):  Madam  Speaker,  I  thank  you  for  giving  me  the  opportunity  to  speak  on  the 
National  Flag  Bill  which  seeks  to  provide  for  better  protection  of  the  national  flag  of 
Mauritius by regulating its use. 

I am speaking almost last. So, my speech has become slicker with each passing orator 

whom all I congratulate for their beautiful speeches. 

 Madam Speaker, our national flag, also known as the four bands or les quadricolores, 
was registered at the College of Arms in London on 09 January 1968. If our nation, by God’s 
grace,  endures  a  thousand  years,  the  12th  day  of  1968,  when  the  flag  was  first  flown  on 
Independence  Day  -  only  3  days  before  I  was  born  –  will  always  be  remembered  as  a 
milestone in Mauritius national progress. 

The  national  flag  belongs  to  the  nation  and  the  Father  of  the  nation  gave  forceful 

symbolical meaning to the flag – 

“Around thee we gather (…) in peace, justice and liberty”. 

The national flag is the torchbearer of the nation in all fora which we fly at full mast. 
It  symbolises  our  territorial  integrity.  I,  therefore,  commend  the  Government  for  coming 
forward  to  regulate  for  the  sake  of  enhanced  protection  of  a  national  symbol  for  over  the 
years there have been far too many mishaps in the way our national flag has been handled. 

I  for  one  recall  having  read  in  2010,  a  secondary  school,  through  the  national  flag 
upside down on  National Day.  In 2013, my office, together with the Ministry of Arts  and 
Culture organised a logo competition on Maurice Ile Durable which was the theme of the 
National Day that year. We had nearly a 100 entries and I had the chance to view all of them. 
I was so surprised to see how different the submissions were insofar as colour codes were 
concerned,  not  as  per  the  Pantone  Matching  System  under  which  the  colour  codes  are 
referenced. But, we finally chose a logo with the right code and that became the logo of the 
commission which I chaired. 

Sometimes you go to some functions and you see the same colour code problem and 
this  does  so  much  injustice  to  our  four  vibrant  colours.  So,  I  am  glad  to  read  that  under 
section  6  –  Regulations  –  in  particular  provide  for  the  colour  codes  corresponding  to  the 

 

113 

colours of the national flag. In there, the manner in which the flag is to be flown is covered as 
well. 

Madam Speaker, this Bill contains a very interesting and pertinent word and that is 
the word ‘desecration’. To desecrate means deface, damage or otherwise physically mistreat 
in any way that the perpetrator knows, will seriously offend one or more persons likely to 
observe  or  discover  his  action.  However,  the  word  ‘desecration’  might  be  open  to  various 
interpretations  concerning  the  uncertainty  of  the  context  of  desecration.  For  example, 
uncertainty might be over whether the term includes the wearing of the flag as a tattoo or 
flying the flag upside down - in the case of the school I mentioned just now - or wearing the 
flag as a cloth, as clothing, or indeed burying of the flag. 

Inasmuch as section 5 (1) (a) provides for the desecration of our national flag or the 

flag of any other State, I wonder how in the future the following situation will be dealt with. 

Only  last  month,  during  the  Conference  on  Palestine  organised  by  the  Ministry  of 
Tourism  –  hon.  Duval  was  there  –  a  woman  dressed  in  the  Palestinian  flag  caught  the 
attention of many. Now, how does the law treat this? She is wearing the flag of another State 
as cloth. In that same conference, the Palestinian Minister, Mrs Rula Ma’ayah, explained how 
ruthless  the  Israelis  were  to  the  point  of  even  massively  cutting  down  olive  trees  so  as  to 
deprive the Palestinians of a source of revenue and livelihood. Now, in that same function, 
should  people  decide  to  burn  the  flag  of  Israel,  is  that  considered  illegal  under  this  law, 
although authority must be sought under section 5 (1) (b), but on the spur of the moment, 
people could just react by burning the flag? So, is that considered illegal as from now? I am 
wondering whether the Government… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! Please, order! 

Mr Mahomed: So, I think it is time that we walk the talk on the subject of Palestine 
and Israel - the Ag. Prime Minister hon. Duval is here – just like the previous Government 
which had put a ban on the importation of products from Israel. So, I believe we have to take 
bold steps given the circumstances. 

But our liberties in this land of the free include the liberty to protest and to burn the 
flag  if  we  so  wish.  What  is  more  important  than  our  liberty  to  protest,  to  speak  out  for 
freedom or to take very pompously the preservation of a piece of cloth? What did slaves and 

 

114 

indentured labourers give their life for, if not to be symbolised in the flag? My  colleague, 
hon. Ramful, spoke about the meaning of the red colour just now.  

Madam Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, the national flag is a symbol of our territorial 
integrity and it is regrettable that the Government of Mauritius remained insensitive to the 
legitimate protest made by the Comoros following the diplomatic row in respect of the lining 
up  of  Mayotte  athletes  behind  the  flag  bearer  of  France  at  the  Indian  Ocean  Games.  It  is 
unfortunate that Mauritius did not take a bold stand despite clear violation of the rules of the 
games. Madam Speaker, Comoros is a loyal supporter of Mauritius in all fora and we always 
put up a common front on the sovereign issue.  

On a different note, section 6 (2) (c) provides for regulations as regards the manner to 
which the national flag is to be flown. Does this, for example, forbid or allow citizens to fly 
the flag from vehicles during National Day and from homes at any time during the year? I 
question! Flying the flag from vehicles on the day of Independence, for example? As regards 
the same regulations, may I suggest that it is only for official purposes one should be bound 
by these intricate provisions and only the Government that may ask for the flag to be lowered 
to half-mast in the event of the death of an important person or for national mourning and that 
no person is permitted to use the flag at any private funeral ceremony. 

Furthermore, let it be limited to the Government to be obliged to avoid displaying any 
flag that is damaged or dirty and that any worn out or damaged flag should be packed in a 
sealed, black or opaque trash bag before being disposed and not left visible in dustbins as a 
sign of respect.  

Madam  Speaker,  I  am  hoping  that,  under  this  enhanced  protection  of  our  flag  for 
Government  purposes,  our  youth  may  find  new  inspiration  for  liberty  in  Mauritius  and  as 
loyal citizens to enjoy that liberty by reviewing the work of the Government and protesting 
when protest is due as patriotic citizens with deep and equal pride of that all Mauritians to 
take steps in due protest that may even entail burning the flag, with due authority however, as 
per Section 5 (1) (b) of the Bill when they feel that their trust has been betrayed.  

I think my colleague, hon. Ramful, had touched about this issue earlier – burning of 
the Mauritian flag. So, I think we need to have a closer look at this. That, Madam Speaker, is 
a true test of whether we have become a mature democracy, defending the rights and liberties 
of our citizens. So, I hope the acting Prime Minister can touch on this in his summing-up or 
later during regulations. 

115 

 
I am here drawing a parallel between the decision that the US Supreme Court took in 
1969, just a year after our Independence, that burning of the US flag in protest, in that case it 
was against the Vietnam War, was not illegal as the Constitution allowed such freedom of 
speech  and  protest  as  an  integral  part  of  liberty.  So,  Madam  Speaker,  let  us  defend  our 
liberties of protest and let the objective of this law be confined at most to get in the colours of 
the flag right before burning it.  

To end, Madam Speaker, I say: national flag of Mauritius, may you continue to flow 
in the breeze and show glory in the wind whilst peace, justice and liberty are enjoyed in this 
land and the right of protest protected in our laws. But, let us, at least, get the colours of the 
flag right before we burn it in protest. That I believe should be the limit of this law for, I 
believe, Madam Speaker, that the flag of liberty that we won in 1968 should be above all else 
the most cherished symbol of our nation’s pride.  

God bless our flag, God bless our liberties and God bless Mauritius. Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ag. Prime Minister! 

 

(6.34 p.m.) 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, let me thank all the hon. Members who 
have intervened during this debate. I am happy that there is, once again, consensus on a Bill 
and on a need for legislation to better protect our national flag. 

Madam Speaker, this Bill was prepared in consultation with the relevant Ministries 
and  Departments  concerned  namely  the  Ministry  of  Industry,  Commerce  and  Consumer 
Protection,  the  MRA,  the  Government  Printing  Department  and  the  Mauritius  Standards 
Bureau.  Under  this  Bill,  Madam  Speaker,  three  major  components  of  the  flag:  the  colour, 
codes,  the  size  and  the  material  to  be  used  will  be  regulated  through  regulations.  We  will 
thus, Madam Speaker, have the flexibility in the future to adapt to any new technology that 
may arise with time. 

The required specifications for the mast flag, the desk flag, hand held flag and the car 
flag were already prepared as far back as 2011 by the Mauritius Standards Bureau. However, 
nothing  came  of  it  until  the  hon.  Prime  Minister  took  office,  he  gave  instructions  in 
December  2014.  He  gave  instructions  so  that  matters  be  expedited  and  that  this  Bill  be 
presented  to  Parliament.  Government  wishes  to  avoid  any  recurrence  of  the  issues  I 

 

116 

mentioned during my Second Reading concerning misuse of the flag, disrespect of the flag 
and inappropriate colours being used. We find this to be unacceptable in a civilised society 
and  acts  which  must  be  criminalised,  at  least,  so  far  as  disrespect  to  our  national  flag  is 
concerned.  

The issue raised by hon. Members regarding the use of a logo or any other emblem on 
the national flag, Madam Speaker, will not be allowed under this new legislation. So, there 
will be no logo or anything else printed on the national flag by anyone because Government 
feels there cannot be two or three types of national flags. There should just be one national 
flag without any logo or emblem thereon. So, Government will not accommodate any special 
request with regard to this, Madam Speaker, because the whole point of this Bill is to better 
protect the national flag. 

As regards the question of contravention, there was, of course, as we know and as it 
was stated, 5 years provision for custodial sentence in the previous provision but it was not 
applicable as there had not been codification of the flag so it only existed on paper and could 
not be prosecuted in practice. We feel, Madam Speaker, that the 2-year custodial sentence 
being provided for and/or the fine is sufficient to start with. Let us see how it goes. We feel 
that in the place of nothing that we had for 40 years or so, now we have the 2-year custodial 
sentence and the fine. We will go along with that for the moment, Madam Speaker. So, it is 
being reduced but, as I mentioned, it was not effective anyway. 

Madam Speaker, several Members have raised the issue of the freedom of expression 
which we, of course, fully conquer with on this side of the House, but we feel that this cannot 
be at the expense of either our national flag or other nations’ national flags. We are providing 
in this Bill protection for our national flag and surely, we would not want our national flag to 
be  badly  treated  overseas.  We  feel,  therefore,  that  we  should  extend  the  same  courtesy  to 
other nations. It is like as if you protect your own house against burning but you can go and 
burn that of your neighbours’. This is not right! So, we feel that we should provide the same 
protection to everyone, all the countries in the United Nations at least.  

Now, as far as the issue of unusable flags that need to be destroyed by individuals or 
factories  or  whatever  in  the  normal  course  of  affairs  is  concerned,  regulations  that  are 
provided for in this Bill will be made so as to be more explicit. Obviously, we do not want to 
catch  bona  fide  destruction  of  these  flags,  those  which  are  no  longer  usable  or  have  been 
damaged in some way.   

117 

 
Similarly, Madam Speaker, as far as public activity is concerned - it is public activity 
like you have a public meeting or you have something like that and using the national flag.  
The public activity, as I am being told, is not putting a flag on your house or a flag on your 
car; that is private, not public.  Public activity is using in a sort of public function and that 
will also, most probably, be provided for by way of regulations as the need arises. 

We  are  also  taking  note  of  the  point  made  by  hon.  Boissezon  concerning  the  need 
maybe to have some sort of indication on the flag as to the manufacturer’s name.  I do not 
know how practical that can be, but I have taken note of that suggestion. 

Madam speaker, I would like to thank all the hon. Members who have participated in 
this debate.  I think I have dealt with most of the points raised.  I, therefore, commend the Bill 
once more to the House. 

Thank you. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Bill read a second time and committed. 

 

COMMITTEE STAGE 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

The National Flag Bill (No. XV of 2015) was considered and agreed to. 

On  the  Assembly  resuming  with  Madam  Speaker  in  the  Chair,  Madam  Speaker 

reported accordingly. 

Third Reading 

On motion made and seconded, the National Flag Bill (No. XV of 2015) was read the 

third time and passed. 

 

Second Reading 

THE PUBLIC HOLIDAYS (AMENDMENT)  

BILL (NO. XIV OF 2015) 

Order for second reading read.  

 
The  Ag.  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  with  your  permission,  I  move  that  the 

118 

Public Holidays (Amendment) Bill (No. XIV of 2015) be read a second time.  

The main object of the Bill, Madam Speaker, is to bring specific amendments to the 
Public Holidays Act to incorporate the dates of celebration of public holidays which are not 
of a religious character as well as to accommodate the requests from some religious bodies to 
observe certain specific religious public holidays on an alternate basis. 

Madam Speaker, the Public Holidays Act dates as far back as 1968 when about 20 
days  were  being  declared  public  holidays.  The  objectives,  amongst  others,  were  to  build 
cohesion among all the components of the Mauritian society and to ensure harmony in our 
multi-cultural  and  multi-ethnic  country.  The  Act  has  subsequently  been  amended  in  1983, 
1987 and 1991, bringing the number of public holidays to 13 whilst maintaining the social 
balance  which  makes  our  reputation  as  a  peaceful  country  respectful  of  the  rights  of  its 
people.  

However, over the years, additional public holidays have been celebrated each year by 

way of proclamation and which have not been reflected in the Public Holidays Act. 

Madam Speaker, section 3 of the Public Holidays Act specifies in the Schedule to the 
Act, 13 days to be observed as public holidays each year.  Accordingly, every year, the dates 
for  the  celebration  of  these  public  holidays  which  are  of  a  religious  character  are  fixed  in 
accordance with the Act and after consultations with the different religious bodies. 

However,  following  Government  decisions  in  2001  and  2002,  the  first  of  February 
and  second  of  November  were  declared  public  holidays  to  commemorate  the  Abolition  of 
Slavery and the Arrival of Indentured Labourers in Mauritius, respectively; bringing the total 
number of public holidays observed in Mauritius to 15 days. These two public holidays have 
up to now been declared by way of proclamation and have not yet been incorporated in the 
Schedule to the Act.  

Therefore,  in  addition  to  the  Public  Holidays  listed  in  the  Schedule  to  the  Public 
Holidays Act, the list of the public holidays published annually, have, over the  years, also 
included 1st February to mark the “Abolition of Slavery”, and 2nd November to commemorate 
the “Arrival of Indentured Labourers” in Mauritius, respectively. 

Madam Speaker, given the national importance of these two landmark events in the 
history of Mauritius, it is felt opportune that these two days be also included in the Schedule 

 

119 

to the Act once and for all so as to remain for posterity and remind our future generations of 
the significance of these two commemorative dates.   

Madam Speaker, the House is also aware that every year, either the “Assumption of 
the Blessed Virgin Mary” or “All Saints Day” is being alternately observed as public holiday 
in Mauritius.   

This follows a decision taken by the then Government in 1998, at the request of the 

Christian Authorities.  

Moreover, this year, a request has been received from the Mauritius Tamil Temples 
Federation for either Tamizh Puttaandu, that is, Varusha Pirappu or Thaipoosam Cavadee to 
be declared public holiday on an alternate basis.   

Accordingly,  the  Federation  has  proposed  that  Tamizh  Puttaandu  which  would  be 

celebrated on 14 April 2016, be declared public holiday.  

This  request  is  similar  to  the  arrangement  made  with  the  Christian  Authorities  and 

would be strictly on an alternate basis as provided in the Amendment Bill.  

Madam Speaker, this Amendment Bill which is before the House, provides at clause 
(3) for the repeal and replacement of section 3 of the Public Holidays Act which comprise an 
amended First Schedule, listing 13 out of the 15 public holidays to be observed every year, 
including the first of February to commemorate the Abolition of Slavery; and the second of 
November to commemorate the Arrival of Indentured Labourers in Mauritius. 

The  new  section  3  also  provides  for  a  new  Second  Schedule  specifying  the  2 

remaining public holidays to be observed on an alternate basis every year.  

Accordingly, the amendments at clause 3(2) and clause 3(3) of the Bill now include 
either the day of celebration of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary or All Saints Day 
to  be  declared  Public  Holiday  in  one  year  on  an  alternate  basis;  and  either  the  day  of 
celebration  of  Varusha  Pirappu,  that  is,  Tamizh  Puttaandu  or  Thaipoosam  Cavadee  to  be 
declared Public Holiday in one year, on an alternate basis as from 2016.  

The amendment at clause (4) of the Bill provides for the insertion of a new section 7A 
after section 7, to allow the Minister to make regulations as he thinks fit for the purposes of 
the  Act  and  to  amend  the  Schedules.  This  is  a  general  clause  which  is  contained  in  many 
pieces of legislation to build flexibility in administering the law. 

120 

 
The  amendment  at  Clause  5,  allows  for  the  repeal  and  replacement  of  the  First 
Schedule to the Act and Clause 6 provides for the amendment of the Principal Act to add a 
Second Schedule. It is to be highlighted Madam Speaker, that the objective of this Bill is not 
to increase the total number of public holidays in a year. In fact, the proposed changes do not 
have  any  consequential  bearing  on  the  number,  but  rather  we  are  proceeding  with 
amendments which were long overdue whilst taking into consideration the additional request 
from the Mauritius Tamil Temples Federation since 2006.  

Nevertheless, the enactment of this amended Bill, will eliminate the need to declare 
any public holiday by way of proclamation. Once allowing for changes at the new Section 
7A, if circumstances so require. The Act would come into operation as from 01 January 2016.  

With these words, I commend the Public Holidays (Amendment) Bill to the House.  

Thank you Madam Speaker. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun) rose 

and seconded. 

 

(6.50 p.m.) 

Mr Bérenger: As the Ag. Prime Minister has said but without making that clear, the 
Bill before the House neither decreases nor increases the number of public holidays. It does 
two things, puts into the law two public holidays that were already not in the law, but through 
proclamations for a number of years had been with us. The 1st of February, the cut off date 
for the abolition of slavery had been with us for quite a while when Government voted into 
power  in  2000,  the  MMM/MSM  Government  decided  that  something  must  be  done 
concerning the arrival of indentured labourers and the situation was not that easy because the 
1st  of  February  is  a  cut  off  day,  it  is  a  clear  date,  but  indentured  labourers  came  over  a 
number of years and there is no clear cut off point concerning indentured labour. Therefore 
the  2000  and  2005  Government  requested  me  as  then  Deputy  Prime  Minister  to  chair  a 
Committee of historians, to make recommendations to Government how to celebrate whereas 
we were already celebrating on the 1st of February the abolition of slavery, how to celebrate 
the contribution of indentured labourers to the development of Mauritius. We sat, we worked, 
we came with the recommendation that was agreed upon by the then Government and since 
then the 2nd November was decreed a public holiday also. I am very proud to have been given 
the opportunity of playing that role, of working with historians and coming with a proposal 

 

121 

that was unanimously accepted and therefore for years now the 1st of February and the 2nd of 
November have been with us as public holidays and now what we are doing is putting it in 
the law itself. There is no polemic around that, there is no controversy around that, but it is a 
good thing that we put that in the law itself. 

The second thing which this Bill does is to provide for alternate public holidays in the 
case  of  Catholic  community  and  the  Tamil  community.  In  the  case  of  the  Catholic 
community, I understand that there also there is no controversy. The Catholic authorities are 
not only agreeable, but have proposed that as the Bill says, there should be an alternate public 
holiday and there is no controversy. In the case of the Tamil community, I have heard the Ag. 
Prime Minister say that, in fact, it is at the request of the Mauritius Tamil Temples Federation 
that again the law is going to provide for either Cavadee or Varusha Pirappu to be a public 
holiday. There is a controversy around that.  Let us not hide the fact that it does not carry 
unanimity, there is a problem. But being given what the hon. Ag. Prime Minister has said that 
it is at the request of the Mauritius Tamil Temples Federation that this is being adopted, I 
won’t say more, we can’t be plus royaliste que le roi.  

There  had  been  a  request  that  there  should  be  some  form  of  consultation,  of 
referendum  amongst the components of the whole country. No one has  formerly proposed 
that and being given that it is being put on record today that it is the Mauritius Tamil Temples 
Federation that made that request, I leave it at this stage Madam Speaker. Therefore, except 
for this controversy in the case of the Tamil Community, there is no real controversy on the 
Bill  generally,  but  I  don’t  understand  that  an  amendment  is  going  to  be  proposed  by  hon. 
Shakeel Mohamed from what has been circulated. I am going to say a few words and then I 
will speak at Committee Stage if and when the amendment itself is moved.  

I’ll just say our reaction at this point. As I have said, the Bill that is before us proposes 
neither an increase nor decrease in the number of public holidays. The amendment that has 
been  circulated  proposes  an  increase  in  the  number  of  public  holidays.  If  that  is  to  be 
considered  or  granted,  the  question  arises  -  which  additional  public  holidays?  It  is  a  very 
delicate issue and it is an issue that has been handled and that should be handled now and in 
the future with extreme care, with great care, Madam Speaker.  

In the amendment that has been circulated, it is proposed that Easter Monday - in the 
case  of  the  Catholic  community  -  should  become  a  public  holiday.  It  needs  careful 
consideration because the Bill that is before us says that on an alternate basis, Assumption of 

 

122 

the Blessed of Virgin Mary or All Saints Day will be alternate public holidays. Not as the 
amendment proposes Easter Monday.  Therefore, there is need to consider carefully to get the 
reaction of Catholic authorities before we move forward with such a decision. The same thing 
in the case of the proposals is for three additional public holidays: Easter Monday, Eid al-
Adha,  Qurbani  and  Holi.  But  of  course  we  live  in  Mauritius,  in  the  case  of  the  Tamil 
Community, we are in the Bill proposing that on an alternative basis it will be either Varusha 
Pirrapu or Cavadee. Well, of course, if we propose an increase in the number of other public 
holidays and we don’t make any move then, we are asking for trouble. Therefore, it is a very 
tricky amendment proposal, we are not against it, but I suggest and understand  - as the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister is not here - we are going to postpone debate, that will give us time to 
reflect. I see no! I understand that we are postponing debates? Therefore we will have time to 
consider ... 

No, you should have gone like that, not like that! 

(Interruptions) 

Therefore, I make a formal proposal.  If Government is agreeable to increasing the number of 
public  holidays  -  we  are  not  against.    There  are  tricky  issues,  as  I  have  just  pointed  out  -  
therefore, the way forward, I move, would be through a Select Committee set up by the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister himself and that Select Committee would, as in the past on such issues, 
listen to the religious authorities concerned, to everybody that has something to say. 

Therefore,  we  will  have  time  between  now  and  the  time  hon.  Shakeel  Mohamed 
speaks. We will see what stage we have reached, whether the amendment is moved.  In the 
meantime, I would request the Government to consider the proposal that, if Government is 
agreeable to increasing the number of public holidays, the way forward is through a Select 
Committee of the House. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

 

(6.59 p.m.) 

The Ag. Prime Minister: On a point of personal explanation, I would like to make it 
very  clear  that  I  did  not  say:  “Government  was  in  favour  of  extending  public  holidays  by 
another three”.  It is not controversial.  In fact, I can tell you right now that Government is not 

 

123 

in  favour  of  the  amendment  being  proposed  and  is  not  in  favour  of  any  extension  in  the 
number of public holidays. 

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, I move that the debate be now adjourned. 

Mr Gayan rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Debate adjourned accordingly. 

 

ADJOURNMENT 

The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that this Assembly do now 

adjourn to Tuesday 10 November 2015 at 11.30 a.m. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun) rose 

and seconded. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned. 

At 6.58 p.m. the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Tuesday 10 November 2015 

at 11.30 a.m. 

 

WRITTEN ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

RIVIÈRE DES ANGUILLES - GROS RUISSEAU - POLLUTION 

(No. B/788) Mr M. Gobin (First Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and  Beach 
Management whether, in regard to the place called Gros Ruisseau, situated in the village of 
Rivière des Anguilles, he will state the remedial measures that are being envisaged, if any, to 
address the pollution problem prevailing thereat. 

Reply: As per record of my Ministry, in August 2011, the then Grand Port/Savanne 
District Council convened my Ministry, along with other stakeholders, for a joint site visit at 
Gros Ruisseau with respect to littering and dumping under the Gros Ruisseau bridge. This 
site was subsequently cleaned and a ‘No dumping’ sign was also placed by the Grand Port/ 
Savanne District Council. Since then, no complaints have been recorded at my Ministry.  

124 

 
An urgent joint site visit effected by officers of my Ministry, together with officers of 
Police  de  l’Environnement  and  Savanne  District  Council  last  week  at  Gros  Ruisseau, 
revealed that domestic waste were dumped on the reserves of the canal “Gros Ruisseau” both 
upstream and downstream along a stretch of about 5 m.  In this regard, the Savanne District 
Council was immediately requested to clean the site and I am informed that the river bank is 
now cleaned. 

The Rivière des Anguilles Police Station and the Police de l’Environnement have also 
been  requested  to  effect  regular  patrols  at  the  subject  site  and  initiate  enforcement  actions 
against contraveners. 

 

LA FLORA BOIS CHERI ROAD – SPEED LIMIT 

(No. B/789) Mr M. Gobin (First Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the La 
Flora Bois Cheri Road, he will state if consideration will be given for the taking of measures 
to prevent speeding along same. 

Reply:    I  am  aware  of  the  problems  along  La  Flora  Bois  Cheri  Road.  In  fact, 
following occurrence of many accidents along the stretch of the road between the signalised 
junction at La Flora and Bois Cheri, various road safety measures have been taken as follows 
- 

•  A speed limit of 60 km/h is already affixed on this particular road with effect from 

02 April 2015. 

•  Pelican crossing, traffic lights and road humps have already been implemented by 
the  Traffic  Management  and  Road  Safety  Unit  since  October  2012  to  deter 
speeding and to enhance safety along this road. 

I have also been informed that a survey was carried out in the year 2014 along the La 
Flora Bois Cheri Road for the implementation of a speed camera thereat.  However, due to 
space constraint, no place could be identified for the installation of such an equipment. 

The  Police  has,  therefore,  been  requested  to  carry  out  frequent  speed  checks  along 

that road and in the adjoining villages in order to deter speeding. 

 

 

125 

BATIMARAIS & CAMP DIABLE  

- “PARRAINAGE” CONCEPT - IMPLEMENTATION 

(No. B/790) Mr M. Gobin (First Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the proposed 
implementation of the innovative concept of “parrainage” for the villages of Batimarais and 
of Camp Diable, in Constituency No. 13, Rivière des Anguilles and Souillac, he will state 
where matters stand. 

Reply:  I  wish  to  re-assure  the  hon.  Member  that  the  EDC  Batimarais,  Rivière  des 
Anguilles and EDC Camp Diable are among the 38 priority pockets of poverty that will be 
taken care of under the Parrainage project, to be implemented by Lovebridge Ltd.  

Lovebridge  Ltd  has  been  duly  incorporated  barely  three  weeks  and  it  has  already 
initiated  the  process  of  recruiting  social  workers  and  district  coordinators.  It  is  also 
establishing  its  operational  procedures  and  financing  arrangements  and  finalising  with 
participating companies on the pockets of poverty that each will adopt.   

The House will appreciate that we are making solid progress on the implementation of 

the ‘Parrainage’ project. 

 

BAGATELLE WATER FILTRATION PLANT - IMPLEMENTATION 

(No.  B/792)  Mr  B.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in 
regard to the proposed implementation of the Bagatelle Water Filtration Plant, he will, for the 
benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Central  Water  Authority,  information  as  to  where 
matters stand. 

Reply: I am informed by the Central Water Authority that the procurement exercise 
for the Bagatelle treatment plant has been suspended as the Supreme Court has granted an 
injunction  order  at  the  request  of  one  aggrieved  bidder  prohibiting  the  Central  Water 
Authority from awarding the contract to the selected bidder.  

I am further informed that the matter is still before the Supreme Court. 

 

 

 

126 

CEB – TECHNICAL STAFF – MISSION OVERSEAS 

(No.  B/793)  Mr  B.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in 
regard  to  the  official  mission  undertaken  by  the  technical  staff  of  the  Central  Electricity 
Board in Europe over the period 03 to 16 October 2015 he will, for the benefit of the House, 
obtain from the Board, information as to the – 

(a) 

(b) 

composition  of  the  delegation  thereof,  indicating  the  qualifications  held  by 
each member thereof, and  
purpose thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

GRAND BOIS CREMATORIUM - UPGRADING 

(No.  B/794)  Mr  B.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac)  asked  the  Minister  of  Local  Government  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Grand  Bois 
Crematorium, he will state if consideration will be given for the upgrading thereof and, if so, 
when and, if not, why not. 

Reply:  I am informed by the District Council of Savanne that there are two cremation 
pyres, one covered and one uncovered at the Grand Bois cremation ground.  The shelter of 
the covered pyre was pulled down on 29 September 2015 for safety reason. 

In this context, the Ministry has conveyed approval on 14 October 2015 to the District 
Council of Savanne for the upgrading of the cremation ground at Grand Bois.  Pending the 
construction of a new shelter, the existing uncovered pyre will be upgraded by the in-house 
labour of the Council, for use by the inhabitants of the region.  These woks will start on 16 
November 2015 and will be completed around 30 November 2015 and are expected to cost 
around Rs50,000.  

 

MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND QUALITY OF LIFE – DRUGS - PROCUREMENT 

(No. B/795) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the procurement of 

 

127 

drugs by his Ministry, he will state the measures that have been taken to ensure that the drugs 
procured are of standard and acceptable quality. 

Reply:  I  wish to inform the House that the Ministry of  Health  and Quality of  Life 
procures medicines through a bidding process as provided for in the Public Procurement Act 
2006. 

As per the tender requirements, all suppliers/bidders must at time of submitting tender 
documents produce evidence to the effect that the products which they intend to supply meet 
the required quality standard.  Bids must be supported by certificate of Good Manufacturing 
Practice (GMP) and Certificate of Pharmaceutical Products (CoPP) issued by the Regulatory 
Authority  of  the  country  of  origin  in  order  to  ensure  that  the  products  selected  during 
evaluation are of the required efficacy and safety. 

The  Certificate  of  Pharmaceutical  Products  (CoPP)  which  is  in  the  format 
recommended  by  the  World  Health  Organisation  (WHO)  establishes  the  status  of  the 
Pharmaceutical Product and of the applicant for the certificate in the exporting country.  It is 
for  a  single  product  only.    It  also  states  that  the  facility  and  product  comply  with  good 
manufacturing  practice  and  regular  inspections.    This  document  is  also  called  a  WHO 
certificate. 

According  to  established  guidelines  by  the  WHO,  Good  Manufacturing  Practice 
(GMP)  is  a  system  for  ensuring  that  products  are  consistently  produced  and  controlled 
according to quality standards. 

The GMP covers all aspects of production from the starting materials, premises and 

equipment to the training and personal hygiene of staff. 

The  GMP  certificate  indicates  that  the  manufacturing  plant  complies  with  the 

established WHO good manufacturing practice guidelines. 

These  two  documents  are  required  for  pharmaceutical  products  moving  in  the 

international commerce as recommended by the WHO. 

Each consignment of medicines received in stores is compulsorily accompanied by a 
batch analysis certificate from the Quality Control Department of the company certifying that 
the products have passed all the tests of quality. 

The official standards used in the procurement of drugs are the British Pharmacopoeia 

(BP), the United States Pharmacopoeia (USP) and the European Pharmacopoeia (EU). 

 

128 

Furthermore, the Ministry carries regular random sampling on consignments received 
at  Central  Supplies  Division  and  sends  samples  to  be  analysed  both  at  the  Government 
Analyst Division and to QUANTI LAB, a level 3 private lab that is Mauritas accredited. 

The Ministry of Health and Quality of Life has taken a host of measures to ensure that 

the drugs procured are of acceptable standard and quality namely- 

(a)  With  regard  to  critical  drugs,  the  Ministry  only  considers  drugs  that  are 
registered with the drug regulatory authority of a country of the EU zone or 
with  the  Australian  Therapeutic  Goods  Administration  (Australian  TGA), 
South African Medicines Regulatory Authority (South African MRA) or the 
United States Food and Drugs Administration (US FDA). 

(b) 

For  non-critical  drugs,  the  Ministry  considers  drugs  from  Pharmaceutical 
Inspection  Convention  and  Pharmaceutical  Inspection  Cooperation  scheme 
(jointly  referred  to  as  PIC/S)  countries,  from  Gulf  Cooperation  Council  and 
also  suppliers  from  India  and  Bangladesh  whose  manufacturing  sites  have 
been inspected by a regulatory authority in the EU zone and who appear on the 
EUDRA GMP database.   

(c)  All  consignments  received  at  the  CSD  are  inspected  by  Pharmacists  before 

acceptance. 

(d) 

(e) 

The  Ministry  requests  regular  feedback  from  user  departments  on  issues 
regarding quality of drugs during the weekly Drug Monitoring Committee that 
is held at the Central Supplies Division. 

The  Ministry  does  supplier  rating  and  the  rating  is  considered  during 
evaluation.   

 

BLUE LAGOON & SHANDRANI HOTEL – TAXI STANDS 

(No. B/796) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
proposed setting up of taxi stands for the taxis attached to the Blue Lagoon Hotel in Blue Bay 
and to the Shandrani Hotel in Le Chaland, he will state where matters stand. 

129 

 
Reply: I am informed by the NTA that the taxi stand along Pointe d’Esny, Blue Bay 
near Blue Lagoon Beach Hotel consisting of seven slots has already been proclaimed in 2006 
and is operational.  

As regards taxis operating at Shandrani Hotel, I am informed that the area occupied 
by taxis is of an approximate extent of 728.71m2 and forms part of a larger plot of land vested 
in the Prime Minister’s Office for the construction of a Police Training School.  

The  Ministry  of  Housing  and  Lands  is  considering  the  possibility  to  regularize  the 

present location of the taxi stand after consultation with the Prime Minister’s Office.  

 

BUS INDUSTRY EMPLOYEES WELFARE FUND – LOANS & GRANTS  

(No. B/797) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the Bus 
Industry Employees Welfare Fund, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, 
information as to the – 

(a)  

(b)  

amount of money available in the General Fund thereof, and  

terms and conditions of the loans granted to the bus employees, indicating if 
consideration will be given for changes to be brought thereto in order to better 
benefit the bus employees. 

Reply:  I  am  informed  by  the  Bus  Industry  Employees  Welfare  Fund  that  as  at  31 

December 2014, the General Fund amounted to Rs55.3 m. 

 As  regards  part  (b)  of  the  question,  annually  a  budget  of  Rs7.1m.  is  allocated  for 
loans  and  grants  although  contribution  of  employees  and  bus  operators  is  less  than  this 
amount.   

The terms and conditions of loans granted to bus employees vary according to each 

type of loan. I am tabling a copy of the terms and conditions of all types of loans. 

I  am  further  informed  that  the  Board  at  its  meeting  held  on  21  September  2015 
approved  that  amount  earmarked  for  loans  and  grants  be  increased  to  Rs10,  780,000.  The 
increase will be effective as from January 2016. 

 

 

 

130 

MBC - TELEVISION LICENCE FEE 

(No. B/798) Mr A. Ganoo  (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms,  Minister  of 
Technology,  Communication  and  Innovation  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Television  Licence 
Fee,  he  will  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Mauritius  Broadcasting 
Corporation, information as to  - 

(a)  

(b)  

the total amount thereof collected for each of the years 2013 to date, and  

state if consideration will be given for the non-levying thereof on the - 

(i)  

subscribers of MyT, and  

(ii)  

persons who are on the social register. 

Reply:  With  regards  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  the  MBC  has 
collected  fees  reaching  a  total  amount  of  Rs388,650,619.75  in  2013,  Rs537,476,412.94  in 
2014 and Rs465,301,344.51 from January 2015 to 30 October 2015. 

The House may wish to note that the previous Government decided to impose a 50% 
increase in the TV licence fee as from August 2013. In spite of this increase, the MBC has 
accumulated  an  outstanding  debt  of  around  1  billion  rupees.  Such  a  precarious  financial 
situation has been caused by mismanagement and an obvious overstaffing which has reached 
some 800 persons. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, I wish to inform the House that Section 3 of 
the Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation (Collection of Licence Fees) Act stipulates that every 
person  who  is  liable  to  pay  an  electricity  bill  for  domestic  consumption  must  pay  the 
Television licence fee unless he does not possess a TV set. 

In  other  words  every  person  holding  a  TV  set  is  liable  to  pay  the  TV  licence  fee 

irrespective of the fact that he may be a subscriber of MyT or not. 

Furthermore, Section 4 of the same Act provides that all hotels, restaurants, café and 
other  business  establishments  shall  pay  the  TV  licence  fee  for  TV  sets  found  on  their 
premises.   

I am informed that there are some 9450 families on the Social Register.  Under the 
First Schedule of the MBC (Collection of Licence Fees) Act, domestic consumers with an 
electricity consumption of not more than a total of 396 KW hours in a year pay only Rs20 as 

 

131 

monthly Television Licence Fee as compared to Rs150 for other domestic consumers.  I am 
pleased  to  inform  the  House  that  according  to  MBC  records  there  are  more  than  20,000 
households who fall in this category and pay only Rs20 as monthly TV licence fee.  

 

TAMARIN & PETITE RIVIERE NOIRE - SALT PANS - CLOSURE 

(No. B/799) Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection whether, in regard to the salt pans 
found at Tamarin and at Petite Rivière Noire, he will state if Government has been informed 
of the closure thereof and, if so, indicate – 

(a)  

(b)  

if it has agreed thereto and if it is proposing to come up with a rescue plan 
therefor in a bid to preserve the national heritage that they represent, and  

the number of employees that have been made redundant as a result thereof 
and the quantum of compensation that have been paid out thereto. 

Reply: I am informed that there are three saltpans in the district of Black River. Two 

are found in Tamarin and one in Petite Rivière Noire. 

With regard to part (a)  of the question,  I am informed by the Ministry  of Arts and 
Culture that the salt pans are not listed as national heritage, but they bear historical value. I 
am further informed that the Black River District Council has granted an Outline planning 
permission to Mont Calme Ltd for a development project at Les Salines Tamarin. 

On 25 May and 2 July 2015, site visits were effected by the National Heritage Fund 
with representatives of the Black River District Council and the promoter. It was noted that 
the proposed development project was in line  with the planning policy  of the Black River 
District Council.  

Subsequently, 

the  National  Heritage  Fund  Board  has  made 

the  following 

recommendations to the Black River District Council -  

(i) 

to  consider  increasing  the  number  of  stone  ponds  for  preservation  and 
integrate them in the project; 

(ii)  maintain and reinstate the stone ponds in their original state and not to tamper 

with them, and 
to harmonise the project with the environment. 

(iii) 

132 

 
With regard to the closure of the salt pans found in Tamarin and Petite Rivière Noire, 
I am informed by the Ministry of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training that 
Mont  Calme  of  Tamarin  and  Société  RPA  De  Ravel  of  Petite  Rivière  Noire  have  given 
written  notice  to  that  Ministry  of  their  intention  to  reduce  their  workforce.  On  21  August 
2015, Mont Calme gave notice of the termination of employment to 19 of its 25 workers for 
21  September  2015  on  grounds  of  economic  conditions.  Société  RPA  De  Ravel  of  Petite 
Rivière  Noire  gave  such  a  notice  on  14  August  2015  to  14  out  of  its  16  workers  for  15 
September 2015 on the same grounds of economic conditions. 

I am further informed that the thirty-three (33) workers who have been laid off have 
registered cases of unjustified termination of employment at the Bambous Labour Office and 
the cases are being dealt with by the Ministry of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment 
and Training. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, as already mentioned, 33 workers have been 

made redundant. The employers have proposed to pay to the redundant workers -  

(a) 
(b) 
(c) 

 an End of Year Bonus on a pro-rata basis ; 
 refund of outstanding Annual Leave, and 
compensation as follows -  

i. 

ii. 

iii. 

6  days  wages  for  each  12  months  employment  for  those  workers 
reckoning one year and up to 12 years service; 
10  days  wages  for  each  12  months  employment  for  those  workers 
reckoning 12 years service and up to 20 years service; and 
15  days  wages  for  each  12  months  employment  for  those  workers 
reckoning more than 20 years service.  

However,  no  payment  has  been  effected  so  far  as  the  workers  are  contesting  the 
reasons for the termination of employment. A meeting was held on 30 October 2015 at the 
Ministry of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training with representatives of 
the  employers  and  employees  including  Trade  Unionists  as  well  as  a  representative  of  my 
Ministry. The employers have stated that they are not prepared to reconsider the decision to 
reduce the workforce. In the light of this stand, the trade union has requested that negotiations 
be  held  with  a  view  to  enhancing  the  amount  of  compensation  initially  proposed  by  the 
employers. Another meeting has been scheduled for 09 November 2015. 

 
I  wish  to  assure  the  hon.  Member  that  the  Ministries  concerned  will  explore  all 
avenues so that a satisfactory agreement is reached between the employers and the workers.  

133 

 

MINISTRIES & PARASTATAL BODIES – TELEPHONE BILLS 

(No. B/800) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Ministries, 
Government Departments and Parastatal bodies, he will state the measures that have been or 
will be taken to reduce the monthly telephone costs thereof, indicating if – 

(a)  

(b)  

dormant telephone lines and telephone lines with rental only will be cancelled 
to avoid the payment of monthly rental fees and surcharges, and  

instructions  will  be  given  thereto  for  the  installation  of  GSM  gateways  for 
mobile  phones  to  their  existing  PABX  telephone  systems  with  a  view  to 
reducing  the  monthly  telephone  costs  when  calling  to  a  mobile  service 
provider. 

Reply: Indeed, there is room for reducing public expenditure on telephone bills, the more 

so with new technologies and new systems available now.     

Under  the  provisions  of  the  Financial  Management  Manual,  Accounting  Officers  of 
Ministries/Departments  are  responsible  for  the  management  of  funds  under  their  respective 
budgets as appropriated by the National Assembly. In this respect, this Ministry initiated a survey 
on telephone lines in Ministries and Departments in 2013 and Accounting Officers were requested 
to do the needful regarding disconnection of some 250 dormant telephones and unused telephones 
lines identified. 

We  are  now  carrying  out  a  fresh  exercise  to  review  the  progress  achieved  and  take 

remedial actions, where necessary.   

With regards to part (b) of the question, I am informed that some Ministries have already 
made  the  shift  from  analogue  to  digital  PABX  that  can  be  enhanced  with  GSM  gateways  for 
supporting mobile phone calls. 

I am further informed that the Ministry of Technology, Communication and Innovation is 
also currently working on a pilot project for the setting up of Voice Over IP facilities. Voice Over 
IP is a system which allows telephony to operate on the internet at practically no recurrent cost.   

134 

 
Additionally, some Ministries/Departments are already making use of Skype and Viber or 
similar applications through the Internet for video conferencing and making phone calls including 
international  calls  at  no  additional  cost.  This  Ministry  is  also  proposing  to  advise  officers 
proceeding on overseas missions to use such applications, wherever possible, for making phone 
calls instead of resorting to normal phone calls which lead to high charges on account of roaming 
costs.  

 

TERRE ROUGE-VERDUN LINK ROAD PROJECT – CONSULTANTS - REPORTS 

(No. B/801) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Terre 
Rouge-Verdun  Link  Road  Project,  he  will  state  the  recommendations  of  all  the  reports 
submitted  by  all  the  consultants  appointed  in  relation  thereto  since  the  start  of  the 
implementation  thereof  to  date,  indicating  the  names  of  the  qualified  engineers  who 
interpreted the findings thereof, if any. 

Reply:  I  have  to  inform  the  House  that  as  a  consequence  of  the  rapid  economic 
development of Mauritius during the past decades, as far back as in 1994, it was decided to 
build a new corridor by-passing the capital city of Port Louis. 

Originally, in 1994, Lux Consult S.A. was appointed for the detailed engineering and 
preparation of bidding documents for the construction of Malenga-Crève Coeur Road.  The 
assignment was completed in August 1998.  Due to financial constraints, the project was not 
pursued.   

I am informed by the RDA, that in view of the high cost of the original alignment, 
following a bidding exercise launched in February 2005, the highway authority appointed the 
Bureau Central d’Etudes d’Outre Mer (BCEOM) for the review of the design and supervision 
of the Malenga-Crève Coeur Road in March 2005. 

In  its  inception  report,  the  Consultant  recommended  that  the  project  should  be 
reviewed and should take into consideration future developments in the region of Moka and 
the  Ebène  Cybercity  Project.    Such  approach  would  provide  an  alternative  access  to  the 
development  at  Ebène,  and  a  link  from  the  North  to  the  East  and  to  Plaines  Wilhems, 
resulting not only in relieving traffic on the Motorways M1 and M2 between Phoenix and 
Terre Rouge but also catering for the future development in the Moka area. 

135 

 
In this connection, the Consultant has identified a new alignment from Terre Rouge to 
Verdun through Ripailles which could also be connected to the new interchange at Trianon 
and eventually with B6 Road at Quartier Militaire. 

Consequently,  on  03  February  2010,  the  RDA  appointed  BCEOM  (with  GIBB 
(Mtius)  Ltd as sub-Consultant), now known as EGIS-BCEOM  International, the award  for 
the design and supervision of the Terre Rouge-Verdun Link Road. 

The implementation of the project itself started on 18 February 2010 with Contractor 

JV Colas Maurice/Madagascar and the works were completed on 30 November 2013. 

During  the  implementation  of  the  project,  several  reports  were  produced  by  geo-

technical experts, appointed by Consultants EGIS/BCEOM, as follows - 

(i) 

(ii) 

Mr  Pierre  Plotto  carried  out  a  review  of  cut  slope  in  June  2010  following 
borehole investigations.  He also undertook an assessment of landslides with 
recommendation for remedial measures in December 2011,  

Another expert, namely, Mr Fabienne Dermenonville carried out the following 
- 

• 

• 

• 

• 

an assessment of landslides and definition of remedial works in May 
2012; 

a follow-up of remedial works in December 2012; 

a  further  assessment  of  landslides  was  done  and  a  programme  of 
geotechnical investigation was defined in February 2013, and 

a  design  of  remedial  measures  based  on  coring  and  laboratory  tests 
results was carried out in May/June 2013. 

I  am  further  informed  by  the  RDA  that  in  November  2012,  Mr  Fournet,  an 
Independent Engineer was appointed by RDA for an audit report on the project.  In the report, 
he highlighted the shortcomings of EGIS in relation to the design and contract management. 

As  the  House  is  aware,  following  the  observation  of  cracks  on  the  Terre-Rouge 
Verdun  Link  Road  on  18  January  2015,  the  services  of  Experts  of  the  Japan  International 
Cooperation Agency (JICA) (who were already providing technical assistance to the Ministry 
of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  in  regard  to  the  monitoring  of  landslides  in 

 

136 

Mauritius)  were  informally  solicited.    Thereafter,  the  RDA  and  the  Police  collectively 
decided to close the road to traffic from both sides as from 21 January 2015. 

From  their  preliminary  observations,  the  JICA  experts  attributed  the  cause  of  the 
cracks to accumulation of excessive water following the heavy rainfall as the main cause of 
the cracks and settlements. The Consultant of COLAS, Contractor for the road works, also 
identified the same cause.   

In  February  2015,  it  was  observed  that  the  embankment  failure  was  continuing  to 
subside despite the fact that the water level had receded.   Consequently, on 2 March 2015, 
the  RDA  had  recourse  to  the  services  of  ARQ  (Pty)  Consulting  Engineers  Limited  to 
investigate, monitor, test, analyse and design the damaged section of the TRV  Link Road.  
The assignment lasted from 8 April to 30 September 2015. 

I am informed that the services of ARQ (Pty) Ltd have also been retained by the RDA 
for  the  evaluation  of  cuts  between  Ripailles  and  Valton  roundabout  and  an  assessment  of 
section of the Terre Rouge-Verdun Link Road which collapsed in June 2015.  The project 
started on 01 September 2015 and is expected to be completed by December 2015.   

As  regards  the  “Treatment  of  Landslides  and  Remaining  Road  Works  on  the 
Southbound  Carriageway  at  Ripailles”  project,  the  RDA  has  hired  geotechnical  expertise 
from GETS to reassess the design made by EGIS-BCEOM International jointly with ARQ 
(Pty) Ltd. 

According to information obtained from the RDA, with the exception of the report of 
ARQ (Pty) Ltd, the Consultant hired by the RDA to investigate, monitor, test, analyse and 
design the damaged section of the TRV Link Road, all the reports that have been received so 
far have been interpreted by the Resident Engineers deployed by EGIS/BCEOM during the 
implementation of the project viz Jean Carbonel, Jean Louis Lepaysan and André Vistasoa.  
The Resident Engineers were assisted by Deputy Resident Engineers Messrs Laurent Graille, 
Pierre Martinez, Martial Remacle and Lucky Rakotosoa. 

Concerning  the  recommendations  formulated  in  the  reports  of  the  Consultants  I 
mentioned above, these are of highly technical nature and voluminous.  I am tabling a copy of 
each of the reports for consultation. 

 

 

 

 

137 

GRNW & PORT LOUIS WEST - POCKETS OF POVERTY  

(No.  B/802)  Mrs  D.  Selvon  (Second  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked the Minister of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment whether, in regard to 
the  poor  and  vulnerable  persons  residing  in  “poches  de  pauvreté”  in  Constituency  No.  1, 
Grand  River  North  West  and  Port  Louis  West,  he  will  state  the  measures  taken  by  his 
Ministry in relation thereto as at to date. 

Reply:  The  National  Empowerment  Foundation  collects  and  compiles  data  on  a 

district wise basis and not according to Constituency.  

The pockets of poverty falling within that Constituency are Débarcadère and Bain des 
Dames in the district of Port Louis, Guibies, Camp Chapelon and Cite St Louis fall within the 
district of Moka whereas Cite Richelieu falls within the district of Black River. 

Following the new Government policy that all beneficiaries should now be eligible 
under the Social Register of Mauritius (SRM), the Foundation proceeded with the registration 
of  its  beneficiaries  and  the  exercise  is  nearing  completion.  The  SRM  database,  which  will 
provide the needs of the individual members of vulnerable households, will be of paramount 
importance for the implementation of the Marshall Plan and the “parrainage” concept.  

The  following  interventions  have  been  carried  out  by  the  National  Empowerment 

Foundation in these pockets of poverty - 

District 

Pockets of 
poverty 

Interventions 

Port Louis  Débarcadère 

(i)  460 children of Débarcadère and Bain des Dames 
were provided with school materials for academic 
year 2015 

(ii)  12  and  18  beneficiaries  were  provided  with 
concrete housing units  with corrugated iron sheet 
roof  and  corrugated  iron  sheet  housing  units 
respectively in 2014 

(iii)  a  Multipurpose  Centre  with  a  Learning  Corner 
was set up in March 2014 at Débarcadère for the 
benefit of some 500 beneficiaries of the region  

 

138 

(iv)  some  25  children  participated  in  recreational 
activities  organized  by  the  Foundation  on    a 
yearly basis 

(i)  9  and  18  beneficiaries  were  provided  with 
concrete housing units with corrugated iron sheet 
roof  and  corrugated  iron  sheet  housing  units 
respectively from 2010 to date  

(ii)   some 30 needy children attended remedial classes 

 

Bain des Dames 

in 2013 and 2014; 

(iii)  some  25  children  participated  in  recreational 
activities organized by the Foundation on a yearly 
basis 

(iv)  a  job  fair  was  organized  at  La  Tour  Koenig  in 

2013 and was attended by some 950 persons 

(i)  5  families  were  provided  with  corrugated  iron 
sheet  housing  units  from  2010  to  date  (  1  in 
Guibies,  2  in  each  Camp  Chapelon  and  Cite  St 
Louis) 

(ii)  355  needy children received school materials for 

academic year 2015 

(iii)  20 children attended remedial classes in 2014 

(iv)  30  children  participated  in  recreational  activities 

on a yearly basis 

(v)  25 adults and 20 children participated in life skills 

training in 2013 

(vi)  50  beneficiaries  were  sensitised  on  substance 

abuse  

Moka 

Pailles region 
(Guibies, Camp 
Chapelon and 
Cite St Louis) 

Black River  Richelieu 
(covering 

(i)  300  children 

received  school  materials 

for 

academic year 2015 

 

Montee S, Allée 
Tamarin) 

139 

(ii)  2  and  21  families  were  provided  with  concrete 
housing unit with corrugated iron sheet roof and 
corrugated  iron  sheet  housing  units  respectively 
from 2010 to date 

(iii)  support under the “Upgrading of Houses” Scheme 

was provided to one beneficiary  in 2014 

(iv)    30  young  children  attended  the  junior  life  skills 

training course in 2013 

(iv)  75  adults  and  children  were  sensitized  on 

substance abuse in 2015 

(v)  54  needy  children  aged  3  to  6  years  received 
support  under  the  “School  Feeding”  programme  
from 2012 to 2014 

(vi)  a job fair attended by some 200 persons was held 

in Richelieu in 2011  

The  Foundation  provided  training  opportunities  to  some  130  beneficiaries  from  the 
regions  of  Débarcadère,  Bain  des  Dames,  Pailles  and  Richelieu  in  2013  and  2014.  19 
beneficiaries from these regions benefitted from placement opportunities in 2013 and 2014. 

 

GROS CAILLOUX - INTEGRATED SOCIAL HOUSING PROJECT 

 (No. B/804) Mr G. Lepoigneur (Fifth Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment whether, in regard to 
the construction of social housing units at Cité Betel, in Petite Rivière, he will state when the 
housing units will be delivered, indicating if a – 

(a)  

(b)  

list of the beneficiaries thereof has been drawn and, if so, table copy thereof, 
and 

survey of the social housing needs in the area has been carried out and, if so, 
indicate the outcome thereof. 

140 

 
Reply:  It  is  assumed  that  the  hon.  Member  is  referring  to  the  Integrated  Social 
Housing  project  being  implemented  by  the  National  Empowerment  Foundation  at  Gros 
Cailloux. 

Following  the  reply  made  to  PQ  B/286  in  April  2015,  the  contract  with  T  and  T 
Construction Ltd was determined on 31 July 2015 by the MHC Ltd and a new tender was 
launched on 07 October 2015 for completion of all outstanding works. Hence, the housing 
units have not been delivered. 

The closing date of the new tender is 03 November 2015. Upon award of the contract, 
the works are expected to be executed over a period not exceeding 60 days as per the bidding 
document. 

With regard to part (a) of the question, a previous list of prospective beneficiaries was 
compiled  in  2014.  However,  in  view  of  the  new  government  policy  that  all  beneficiaries 
should now be eligible under the Social Register of Mauritius, a fresh list of SRM eligible 
beneficiaries is being compiled.  

Concerning part (b) of the question, the SRM database, which is in its final stage, will 

provide a complete profiling of all eligible beneficiaries including social housing needs.  

 

BEAU BASSIN & PETITE RIVIERE – CIS SCHEME - APPLICATIONS 

(No. B/805) Mr G. Lepoigneur (Fifth Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment whether, in regard to 
the Scheme for the supply of iron sheets and wood for construction purposes, he will state if 
his  Ministry  is  in  presence  of  applications  thereunder  submitted  by  inhabitants  of 
Constituency No. 20, Beau Bassin and Petite Rivière and, if so, indicate where matters stand 
in relation thereto. 

Reply:  The  regions  of  Beau  Bassin  and  Petite  Rivière  contain  3  and  2  pockets  of 
poverty respectively which are within the Constituency No 20.These pockets of poverty are 
Verger Bissembar, Residence Barkly and Chebel which fall within the region of Beau Bassin, 
Gros Cailloux and Petite Rivière Village in Petite Rivière. 

The  National  Empowerment  Foundation  has  informed  that  it  has  received  16 
applications for the CIS Scheme, of which 5 have so far been found eligible under the Social 
Register of Mauritius.  These applications are being processed.  

 

141 

 

INDIAN OCEAN ISLAND GAMES 2019 - ORGANISING COMMITTEE 

(No. B/806) Mr G. Lepoigneur (Fifth Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the Indian Ocean Island Games 
2019,  he  will  state  when  the  organising  committee  therefor  will  be  set  up,  indicating  the 
procedure that will be followed for the selection of the members that will serve thereon. 

Reply: The Charter of the Indian Ocean Islands Games provides for the creation of a 
Games Organising Committee within six months from the date of the closing ceremony of the 
previous edition. 

Given that the Conseil International des Jeux (CIJ), has entrusted the organisation of 
the  next  edition  to  Mauritius  only  two  weeks  ago,  my  Ministry  is  presently  having 
consultations with the Mauritius Olympic Committee for the setting up of the said committee. 

I wish to inform the House that there are no established procedures for the selection of 

members of the Organising Committee in the Games Charter. 

However, the Honourable Member may rest assured that all persons who would be 
called upon to form part of the Organising Committee, will be of the appropriate calibre and 
will have the required expertise to serve the Committee. 

 

MRA – TAXES – REMISSIONS & WRITE-OFF 

(No. B/807) Mr D. Sesungkur (First Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) 
asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the taxes, he 
will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Mauritius Revenue Authority, information 
as  to  the  total  amount  of  revenue  which  has  been  lost  through  remissions  and  write-offs 
thereof, over the period 2005 to 31 December 2014, indicating – 

(a)  

(b)  

the reasons therefor in each case, and  

if he will table copy of the cases in respect of which the remission and write-
off has been granted. 

Reply: I am informed by the Mauritius Revenue Authority that the information on the 
total amount of remissions and write-off over the period 2005 to 31 December 2014 is being 
compiled and same will be tabled at the earliest. 

 
Regarding parts (a) and (b) of the question, I am advised that it will not be legally in 

142 

order to disclose individual tax payer information. 

COURT CASES – CONCLUSION – AVERAGE TIME 

(No.  B/808)  Mr  D.  Sesungkur  (First  Member  for  Montagne  Blanche  &  GRSE) 
asked  the  Attorney-General  whether,  in  regard  to  court  cases/litigations,  he  will,  for  the 
benefit of the House, obtain information as to the average time taken for a case/litigation to 
be  concluded  before  the  District  Courts,  the  Intermediate  Court  and  the  Supreme  Court 
respectively, indicating – 

(a)  

if an assessment has been made of the reasons accounting for the time taken 
therefor, and  

(b)  

the remedial measures taken in relation thereto. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS - PHARMACOLOGICAL TREATMENT 

(No.  B/809)  Mr  S.  Rutnah  (Third  Member  for  Piton  &  Rivière  du  Rempart) 
asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to Rheumatoid Arthritis, 
he will state the number of patients known to be suffering therefrom, indicating – 

(a)  

(b)  

the age group thereof, and  

the  pharmacological  treatment  available  therefor  in  the  public  health  care 
institutions, indicating  

(i)  

(ii)  

the number of patients thereof who do not respond thereto, and  

if consideration will be given for the use of Mabtheraj (Rituximab) to 
the patients thereof who do not respond thereto. 

Reply: I am informed that Rheumatoid Arthritis is a chronic inflammatory disorder 

which typically affects small joints of a person’s hands and feet.  

With regard to part (a) of the question,  I am informed that it affects mostly people 

aged 40 and above and women are more likely to develop this disease.   

Records available in respect of patients admitted in public hospitals from January to 

June 2015 are as follows - 

 

Age Group 

0 up to 18 

18 up to 39 

40 up to 59 

60 and above 

143 

No. of patients 

admitted  

nil 

4 

10 

14 

With regard to part (b) of the question, treatment is provided on the basis of severity 
of  the  disease  condition.  As  at  now,  there  is  no  cure  for  Rheumatoid  Arthritis  but  only 
treatment  to  relieve  patients  from  pain  and  to  slow  down  the  progression  of  the  disease.  
Presently, the following drugs are available in public hospitals - 

(i) 

Non-Steroidal  Anti-inflammatory  drugs  such  as  Ibuprofen,  Diclofenac, 
Indomethacin; 
Glucocortico steroids such as Prednisolone, Methyl Predinisolone;  

(ii) 
(iii)  Conventional Disease Modifying Anti-Rheumatic Drugs (cDMARDs) such as 

Methotrexate, Salazopyrine, Azathioprine and Hydroxychloroquine, and 

(iv)  Biological Therapy such as Rituximab. 

I  am  informed  that  four  patients  are  presently  on  Rituximab  as  they  have  not 

responded to other treatment.  

 

CANAL DAYOT & SABLE-NOIR – FLOOD – WATER DRAINAGE PROJECTS 

(No. A/19) Mr P. Armance (First Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the Minister of Environment, Sustainable Development and Disaster and Beach Management 
whether, in regard to Canal Dayot and Sable-Noir, he will state – 

(a)   where matters stand as to the remedial actions taken to prevent the recurrence 

of floods which recently affected the regions thereof, and  

(b)  

if an emergency plan has been worked out therefor and, if so, indicate if the 
inhabitants thereof have been informed in relation thereto. 

 
Reply:  The  National  Development  Unit  (NDU)  is  implementing  water  drainage 

144 

projects at Canal Dayot and Sable Noir with a view to preventing flooding at those areas. 

The Rt. hon. Prime Minister replied to a Parliamentary Question (PQ B/206) on 31 
March 2015 where he pointed out that the National Development Unit (NDU) had informed 
that the water drainage project at Canot Dayot, has been completed except for a part of the 
canal which could not be enlarged due to one of the owners having obtained a Court Stop 
Order regarding the enlargement of the canal over a stretch of about 75 metres. 

This non-enlargement of the canal is preventing the free flow of water during heavy 
rainfall and causing flooding.  NDU can take remedial action only when the Court case is 
disposed of. 

There is also a proposal for the extension of the existing bridge along the main road of 

Canal Dayot.  The NDU is liaising with the Road Development Authority on this issue. 

As  regards  Sable  Noir,  the  NDU  has  informed  that  the  water  drainage  project  has 
been completed and the NDU Zonal Contractor has undertaken the construction of a bridge to 
connect  the  existing  road  to  Sable  Noir  Beach.    The  works  have  been  completed  on  15 
September 2015.  Moreover, the NDU has already sought the necessary clearances from the 
Ministry of Housing and Lands for the construction of a new road from the new bridge to 
Sable Noir Beach.  Works will be considered in the next financial year upon all clearances 
being obtained. 

Regarding part (b) of the question, emergency planning has been made in the National 
Disaster  Scheme  (NDS)  2015  Edition  under  the  Port  Louis  Flood  Response  Plan.  This 
document  defines  the  roles  and  responsibilities  of  all  stakeholders  as  well  as  the  actions 
required  in  the  event  of  a  heavy  rainfall  and/or  flashfloods  in  the  region  of  Port  Louis 
including the regions of Canal Dayot and Sable Noir. 

During  heavy  rainfall,  the  National  Disaster  Risk  Reduction  Management  Centre 
(NDRRMC)  is  assisted  by  the  police  to  visually  assess  the  flow  of  storm  water  at  Canal 
Dayot and Sable Noir. Liaison is also maintained with some designated local inhabitants to 
have real time feedback of the situation prevailing thereat. In addition, troops of the Special 
Mobile  Force  and  Special  Support  Unit  are  pre-positioned  during  heavy  rainfall  events  at 
these two places for quick intervention. Evacuation of the inhabitants has been planned at the 
Cite Vallijee Community Centre, the Cite Vallijee Government and Grand River North West 
Primary schools in case of flooding. 

145 

 
Details  of  the  Port  Louis  Flood  Response  Plan  will  shortly  be  disseminated  to  the 
inhabitants of Canal Dayot and Sable Noir through drills and simulation exercises by the City 
Council of Port Louis in collaboration with the NDRRMC. In the meantime, the NDRRMC 
has already interacted with the inhabitants of Canal Dayot and Sable Noir and the latter have 
been informed of the measures taken by Government for their safety. 

 

PUBLIC BEACHES - SABLE NOIRE  & LA POINTE 

(No. A/20) Mr P. Armance (First Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the Minister of Environment, Sustainable Development and Disaster and Beach Management 
whether, in regard to the public beaches found between Sable Noire and La Pointe, at Pointe 
aux Sable, he will state where matters stand as to the proposed upgrading thereof. 

Reply: With regard to the upgrading of the public beaches between Sable Noire and 
La  Pointe,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  the  Beach  Authority  had  already  undertaken 
several works as follows - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

repair of defective and damaged lighting systems were effected at Sable Noire 
public beach in March 2015; 

provision was made for a new lighting system with underground network at 
Pointe aux Sables public beach (Martello Tower) in February 2015; and 

beach protection works were undertaken on the main public beach at Pointe 
aux Sables in 2011, and maintenance of these works is being undertaken by 
the Beach Authority such as beach refill and pest control, amongst others. 

Furthermore,  the  Beach  Authority  would  undertake  additional  works  during  this 

financial year as follows - 

(i) 

(ii) 

the construction of a new toilet block at Pointe aux Sables public beach (near 
Fisheries Post and Training Centre); and 

repair of defective and damaged lighting system at Pointe aux Sables public 
beach (La Pointe), which would include provision of other amenities such as 
benches and fireplaces. 

 

 

 

146 

FEDERATION OF BODY BUILDERS ASSOCIATION  

- CERTIFICATE OF RECOGNITION 

(No. A/21) Mr P. Armance (First Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 

the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to bodybuilding, he will state – 

(a)  

(b)  

(c)  

if his Ministry has suspended the Certificate of Recognition of the Federation 
of Body Builders Association  

the activities for the promotion thereof organized by the Federation of Body 
Builders Association and by the New Body Builders Federation for the period 
2012 to 2015, respectively, and  

if  his  Ministry  will  consider  referring  the  matter  to  the  Ombudsperson  for 
Sports  to  clarify  the  situation  between  the  Federation  of  Body  Builders 
Association and the New Body Builders Federation. 

Reply:  The  recognition  of  the  Federation  of  Body  Builders  Association  has  been 
suspended by the Ministry since 25 August 2014 under section 11 6(b) of the Sports Act 2013 
as the Federation is not in compliance with the Act with regard to the required number of 
regions  and  clubs  enrolled  with  it.    Besides,  there  have  been  continuous  internal  conflicts 
within the Federation since 2012. All efforts made by the Ministry to settle the dispute have 
up to now been fruitless. No settlement had also been possible in spite of the intervention of 
the  International  Body  Builders  Federation  which  delegated  Dr.  Adel  Fahim  El  Sayed,  to 
Mauritius with a view to conciliating the conflicting parties and to organising fresh election 
of the Managing Committee. 

The  Ministry  had,  therefore,  no  alternative  than  to  suspend  the  recognition  of  the 

Federation. 

As regards part (b) of  the question, in view of the ongoing internal conflicts at the 
level  of  the  Federation  and  the  suspension  of  its  recognition,  no  financial  assistance  was 
being  provided  to  the  Federation.  However,  with  a  view  to  ensuring  that  athletes  are  not 
penalised, assistance has been provided to them on request. 

The Ministry has also never prevented the Federation of Body Builders Association 
and  the  New  Body  Builders  Federation  to  organise  the  activities.  Both  Federations  have 
participated in numerous competitions organised both locally and abroad. 

147 

 
As regards part (c) of the question, in accordance with section 42 of the Sports Act 
2013 it is the onus of any aggrieved party to appeal to the Ombudsperson for Sports again the 
decision  of  any  sports  Organisations.  Consequently,  it  is  up  to  the  Federation  to  refer  the 
matter to the Ombudsperson for Sports. 

