No. 40 of 2015 

 

1 

 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

 

TUESDAY 17 NOVEMBER 2015 

 

 

 

 

 
 

2 

CONTENTS 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

PAPERS LAID 

QUESTIONS (Oral) 

MOTION 

STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS 

BILLS (Public) 

ADJOURNMENT 

QUESTIONS (Written) 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 
KCMG, QC  
Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 
GCSK  
Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 
Communications 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon. Ivan Leslie Collendavelloo, GCSK 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 
Utilities 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 
Sinatambou 
Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 
Perraud 
Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 

Integration 

and  Economic 

of 
Minister 
Empowerment 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 
International Trade 
Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 
Family Welfare 
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance, 
Institutional  Reforms,  Minister 
Technology, 
Communication and Innovation 
Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 

of 

 

Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM, 
QPM 
Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 
Cheong, MSK 
Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 

4 

Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 
Institutions 
Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands 
Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 
Disaster and Beach Management  
Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms 

Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and 
Training 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Gopall, Mr Navin (Temporary Transfer to 
RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 40 of 2015 

 

Sitting of 17 November 2015 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 
 

 

7 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

PARIS – VICTIMS TERRORIST ATTACKS - TRIBUTE 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I stand to make this statement to the House 
with  deep  sorrow,  grief  and  a  sentiment  of  revolt,  in  the  face  of  serious  setbacks  for 
humanity. 

Indeed,  Friday  13  November  2015  will  go  down  as  one  of  the  darkest  days  in  the 
recent history as Paris, “Ville de Lumière”, was attacked by terrorists, sending a shock wave 
all over the world with the death of at least 129 innocent victims and many casualties. These 
attacks are the worst acts of violence in France since the Second World War and the worst 
terrorist strikes in Europe in a decade. 

The  chosen  targets,  namely  Cafés,  Concert  Hall  and  the  French  National  Stadium, 
venues where people converge, were hit with highly coordinated terror strikes that aimed the 
very  foundation  of  our  shared  values  such  as  rule  of  law,  liberty,  equality,  fraternity  and 
democracy. 

On Saturday 14 November, I sent a letter of condolence to the French President, His 
Excellency  Mr  François  Hollande,  in  my  name  and  on  behalf  of  the  Government  and  the 
people  of  the  Republic  of  Mauritius,  to  express  our  deepest  sympathy  and  support  to  the 
Government and people of France and also to the families of the victims of these cowardly 
acts. 

In view of our historical linkages, cultural affinities and special relations with France, 
the tricentenary of which we are celebrating this year, I also declared two days mourning as a 
gesture of solidarity and the national flag was accordingly lowered at half-mast on all public 
buildings. 

Yesterday,  I  called  personally  on  the  Ambassador  of  the  Republic  of  France  to 
reiterate my personal and the nation’s solidarity  towards the French nation and to sign the 
condolence book. 

The Republic of Mauritius stands alongside with France in these trying moments. We 
are all with the French people, and we share the world’s indignation with regard to terrorism 
and its consequences for humanity. 

 

8 

Mauritius unreservedly condemns terrorism in all its forms and remains committed to 

extend full support to the international community to combat terror. 

Mauritius,  as  you  are  aware,  is  a  party  to  the  Arms  Trade  Treaty,  the  International 
Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings and the International Convention for 
the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  strongly  believe  that  the  time  is  ripe  for  the  international 
community to start serious work on a Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism, 
so  that  a  global  strategy  could  be  devised  to  combat  terrorism  and  all  those  who  actively 
pursue the “Politics of Fear and Extremism”. 

There is, in fact, urgency for an effective global coalition to that effect.  
There should be no delay in implementing the UN recommendation for stronger and 
deeper partnerships between global and regional organisations to promote international peace 
and security. 

At the same time, there is need for an international commitment to do away with the 

flagrant injustices that belittle the human race and fuel so much hatred. 

Mauritius calls on the international community to put in even greater efforts to ensure 

that a peaceful solution be found in conflict ridden regions of the world. 

These are new challenges which have to be faced with strength and determination if 

we want to preserve peace and our cherished values. 

Madam Speaker, while I call on each of our citizens to condemn acts of terror, I also 
appeal  to  the  population  to  show  magnanimity  in  the  face  of  human  sufferings  and  to 
demonstrate a profound attachment to the values that make us a peaceful and civilised nation. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

The  Leader  of  the  Opposition  (Mr  P.  Bérenger):  Madam  Speaker,  je  me  joins  à 
tout  ce  que  vient  de  dire  le  Premier  ministre  de  l’île  Maurice,  ancienne  île  de  France.  Je 
souhaite  exprimer  à  nouveau  ma  solidarité  totale  et  fraternelle  avec  le  président  de  la 
République  française  et  le  peuple  de  France.  Je n’ai  aucun  doute,  Madam  Speaker,  que  la 
France  sortira  plus  grande  encore  des  événements  terribles  de  vendredi  dernier  et  des 
épreuves que la France traverse depuis ces événements. 

Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port  Louis  East): 
Madam Speaker, I join the Rt. hon. Prime Minister in those words expressed as well as the 

 

9 

hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  with  regard  to  the  events  that  occurred  last  week  in  the 
Republic of France. Let me quote une citation d’Albert Einstein qui dit que - 

« Le  monde  ne  sera  pas  détruit  par  ceux  qui  font  le  mal,  mais  par  ceux  qui  les 
regardent sans rien faire. » 

I  totally  agree  with  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  when  he  has  made  a  call  for  the  right 
measures and the right conventions to be adopted at international level, et il est vrai que nous 
ne devons plus être les témoins passifs d’une barbarie sans cesse renouvelée. From January 
to 13 November of 2015, there have been 289 terrorist attacks worldwide and, in the month 
of November 2013 alone, Madam Speaker, there have been 243 deaths related to terrorism. 
So, for those issues, I believe that we also show our solidarity to the people of France and 
also to all those who are suffering from those ignominious acts. 

Thank you very much. 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, if I may moi aussi ajouter mes paroles 
aux mots de solidarité exprimés par le Premier ministre, le chef de l’opposition et le député 
Mohamed, pour dire qu’en cette année où nous célébrons 300 ans d’amitié et d’étroits liens 
avec la France, le peuple mauricien est choqué, le peuple mauricien est consterné par ce qui 
se passe en France, et bien sûr, le gouvernement mauricien, comme l’a exprimé le Premier 
ministre, se tient absolument et résolument solidaire du peuple français et du gouvernement 
français dans ces moments difficiles. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo): Madam Speaker,  I wish to join my voice to the chorus of sympathy and 
condolences which have been expressed in the House.  The sense of shock which we have 
felt with these terrorist attacks has been felt throughout the country and, indeed, there will be 
a candlelight vigil this week in Rose Hill to convey our condolences to the French population, 
the French Government and the French people in general. 

Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River): May I, Madam Speaker. 
Je voudrais, de ce côté de la Chambre, nous associer pleinement et sans réserve à cet élan de 
solidarité  et  de  sympathie  qui  s’est  manifesté  au  niveau  de  toute  la  planète  à  l’égard  des 
victimes,  de  leurs  familles,  du  peuple  et  du  gouvernement  français  après  de  tels  actes  de 
barbarie.  Madame  la  présidente,  prions  que  de  tels  actes  de  terrorisme  cessent  de  plonger 
l’humanité tout entière dans des moments aussi douloureux et pénibles. 

 

Merci. 

10 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Members, I associate myself with the sympathy and support 
expressed by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, the hon. Leader of the Opposition and other hon. 
Members to the Government and people of France and also to the families of the victims of 
the attacks in Paris on Friday last. 

I will convey the tribute paid by the House to the President of l’Assemblée nationale 

of the Republic of France. 

May  I  now  invite  hon.  Members  to  stand  in  silence  for  one  minute  as  a  mark  of 

respect to the memory of the departed. 

(Members observed a minute of silence) 

PAPERS LAID 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table –  

 
A.    Ministry of Finance and Economic Development - 

The Annual Report 2014 of the Civil Service Family Protection Scheme 
Board. 

B.    Ministry of  Local Government  – 

 

The  Annual  Report  2014  and  the  Report  of  the  Director  of  Audit  on  the 
Financial Statements of the Statutory Bodies Family Protection Fund for the 
year ended 31 December 2014. 
 

C.    Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection  – 

The  Rodrigues  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Price  of  Taxable  and           
Non-Taxable Goods) (Amendment No. 29) Regulations 2015. (Government 
Notice No. 221 of 2015) 

ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL (NO. XXIX OF 2015) & GOOD 

GOVERNANCE AND INTEGRITY REPORTING BILL (NO. XXX OF 2015) – 

AMENDMENT 

 

11 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger)  (by Private Notice)  asked the Rt. 
hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 
National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Constitution  (Amendment)  Bill  (No. 
XXIX of 2015) and the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill (No. XXX of 2015), 
he will state if –  

(a) 

Government still proposes to amend the Constitution to introduce therein the 
concept  of  confiscation  without  a  definition  thereof  and,  if  so,  indicate 
whether  amendments  to  the  Constitution  (Amendment)  Bill  (No.  XXIX  of 
2015) will be proposed; 

(b) 

he  will  circulate  the  amendments  to  the  Good  Governance  and  Integrity 
Reporting Bill (No. XXX of 2015) as being proposed by Government, and  

(c) 

Government still intends to introduce a new Declaration of Assets Bill. 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, with a view to promoting a culture of integrity 
and  good  governance  in  the  country,  a  number  of  measures  have  been  outlined  in  the 
Government  Programme  2015-2019.  We  are  today  proceeding  with  the  amendment  of  the 
Asset Recovery Act and will shortly introduce the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting 
Bill  as  well  as  the  Declaration  of  Assets  Bill  as  part  of  a  wider  spectrum  of  institutional 
reforms.  It will be recalled that good governance is a prerequisite in achieving meaningful 
change  and  we  have  in  that  regard,  pledged  for  a  more  just,  transparent  and  accountable 
society based on the precepts of good governance and at the same time zero tolerance against 
fraud, corruption and other malpractices. 

Since  the  setting  up  of  a  Ministry  with  specific  mandate  for  the  subject  of  good 
governance,  reviews  have  been  conducted  on  major  contracts  awarded  by  the  previous 
Government as well as on decisions involving State-owned companies and parastatal bodies, 
resulting in the termination of such contracts and consequential savings for the country.  Such 
reviews  are  ongoing  and  will  continue  to  be  conducted  in  the  public  interest.    Besides 
numerous  requests  for  reviews,  the  Ministry  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 
Institutional Reforms is also heavily solicited by the public, public sector entities and other 
organisations to enquire into a host of issues of public interest. 

Madam Speaker, the House will appreciate that most of the malpractices and acts of 
corruption which have been uncovered during the last decade could have been avoided had 
there  been  a  proper  framework  for  the  reporting  of  such  acts.    Also,  we  should  take  into 

 

12 

consideration  that  for  reporting  of  such  acts  there  should  be  a  conducive  environment 
whereby the person making the report has the comfort of being adequately protected by the 
State against retaliation whilst at the same time preventing people from abusing the system by 
making frivolous and vexatious allegations.   

With a view to addressing the deficiencies in the current legislative framework and at 
the  same  time  stimulating  performance  in  public  and  private  sector  organisations  through 
effective reporting and other processes, it is proposed to introduce the Good Governance and 
Integrity Reporting Bill, the objects of which will be to - 

(i) 

(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 

encourage  and  foster  a  culture  of  integrity  and  good  governance  in  the 
Republic of Mauritius; 
stimulate integrity reporting in the public and private sectors; 
encourage positive reports of acts of good governance; 
disclose and deter malpractices and recover unexplained wealth, and  
protect  and  reward  persons  making  genuine  disclosures  and  reports  of 
malpractices. 

Madam Speaker, with a view to achieving a wide consensus, the Minister of Financial 
Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms  opened  up  public  debates  and 
encouraged a participative approach on the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill.  
This process is ongoing.  A number of valid proposals have been made and at the same time 
clarifications  have  been  provided  on  the  clauses  of  the  Bill  mostly  those  dealing  with  the 
issue of unexplained wealth orders and the confiscation of property.   

Madam  Speaker,  the  House  will  recall  that  in  October  1986  the  Constitution  was 
amended to provide for the taking of property “by way of penalty for breach of the law or 
forfeiture in consequence of a breach of the law or in consequence of the inability of a drug 
trafficker or a person who has enriched himself by fraudulent and/or corrupt means to show 
that he has acquired the property by lawful means”. 

In my address to the House I stated as follows - 
“We  are,  therefore,  amending  the  Constitution  in  order  to  have  full  authority  to 
confiscate  the  wealth  of  drug-traffickers.    There  is  no  doubt  that  we  will  seek  to 
confiscate only their ill-gotten wealth.  Whatever they have rightfully earned will be 
theirs to enjoy.  But whatever they will be unable to show as having been acquired by 
lawful means will be confiscated. 
In  order  that  there  may  be  no  doubt  about  the  legality  of  what  we  have  already 
embarked upon, we have to amend the Constitution.  In the absence of an amendment, 

13 

 
doubts  will  continue  to  linger  about  whether  it  is  reasonable  or  justifiable  to 
confiscate wealth in a democratic society. 
I, for my part, do not believe for a moment that democracy will in any manner stand 
diminished by this amendment.  Democracy cannot extend to freedom to drug others 
to death, and to stand by and laugh heartily in the warmth of ill-gotten gains while 
others die in pain and agony. 
The amendment simply lays down the authority for the confiscatory action which we 
are proposing and which is very much favoured by all right-minded persons.” 
Madam Speaker, the underlying objective of the amendment to the Constitution is to 
provide for non-conviction based recovery of assets.  In 2012, the Asset Recovery Act was 
proclaimed and the Explanatory Memorandum to the Asset Recovery Bill provided that the 
aim of the Bill was to provide “for conviction based and non-conviction based recovery of 
assets”. 

The  Asset  Recovery  Act  already  introduced  in  Mauritian  law  the  concept  of  a  non-
conviction  based  recovery  of  assets.    The  proposed  amendments  constitute  an  important 
addition in the arsenal of the State to track down and recover ill-gotten gains.   

In order to better understand the rational for providing for confiscation in the manner 
we are providing in the  Constitution it would be useful to quote  from the report of  Booz-
Allen-Hamilton  under  the  Comparative  Evaluation  of  Unexplained  Wealth  Order  Heading, 
and I quote - 

“The  importance  of  confiscating  proceeds  of  crime  has  long  been  recognised  as  an 
effective tool in disrupting the activities of organised crime.  The underlying reason is 
that  profit  or  financial  gain  is  the  main  motive  for  criminals  to  engage  in  criminal 
activities.    This  profit  is  used  to  fund  lavish  lifestyles,  as  well  as  invest  in  future 
criminal activities.  Indeed, in removing the profit motive is considered to act both as a 
preventive and a deterrent to criminals by diminishing their capacity to invest in future 
criminal  activities.    The  strategy  of  hitting  criminals  where  it  hurts  most,  “their 
pockets”,  is  regarded  as  an  effective  strategy  by  law  enforcement  agencies  for 
organised  crime.    While  organised  crime  has  shown  resilience  and  a  high  level  of 
adaptability  to  other  law  enforcement  strategies,  removal  or  reduction  of  assets  is 
considered  to  have  an  impact  on  their  operations.    Thus,  confiscation  of  criminal 
proceeds is embraced by many countries through conviction and non-conviction based 
confiscation mechanisms.” 

14 

 
Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  Government  maintains  its 
proposal to amend the Constitution to avoid any lingering doubt about the constitutionality of 
the Unexplained Wealth Order. We are introducing the Constitution (Amendment) Bill (No. 
XXIX of 2015) which was introduced in the National Assembly on 27 October 2015. 

Madam Speaker, the Constitution is a living document and the provisions have to be 
given a purposive interpretation.  Following the consultation exercise which has taken place 
during  the  last  three  weeks,  Government  has  been  attentive  to  the  views  and  proposals  of 
stakeholders  and  Government  is  considering  the  proposals.    It  is  only  after  a  thorough 
analysis thereof that any decision for the amendment of the Bill would be taken. 

Madam  Speaker,  in  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  pursuant  to  the  consultation 
exercise,  the  proposals  and  suggestions  made  by  stakeholders  are  being  considered.    A 
number  of  proposed  amendments  have  been  publicly  announced  and  should  further 
amendments be considered to be necessary, these will be looked into. 

Madam  Speaker,  in  regard  to  part  (c)  of  the  question,  as  the  House  is  aware, 

paragraph 248 of the Government Programme 2015-2019 provides that – 

“Government  will  eradicate  fraud,  corruption,  malpractices  and  irregularities  in  all 
aspects of public life and restore our national values.  To this end, a new Declaration 
of Assets Act for MPs and high ranking public officers will be enacted”.  

My Office has already started working on the implementation of the above measure. 
In this context, a Committee, under the chairmanship of the Secretary to Cabinet and Head of 
the Civil Service and comprising, the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Financial Services, 
Good Governance and Institutional Reforms, the Solicitor-General, the Director-General of 
the ICAC, the Secretary for Home Affairs, and the Senior Chief Executive, Ministry of Civil 
Service  and  Administrative  Reforms,  examined  numerous  issues  in  connection  with  the 
subject matter, inter alia – 

(i) 

(ii) 

whether the definition of “assets” in the new law should be widened; 

who else should be required to declare his assets, apart from Members of the 
National  Assembly,  the  Members  of  the  Rodrigues  Regional  Assembly  and 
Councillors of Municipal City, Municipal Town and District Councils; 

(iii)  who should be the depository of the Declarations; 

 
(iv)  whether the information contained in declarations of assets should be open to 

15 

the public, and 

(v) 

whether the present penalties for breach of the Act should be toughened. 

In the course of its deliberations, the Committee also considered the draft Declaration 
of Assets Bill proposed in April 2012 by the former Parliamentary Committee on the ICAC 
and has also drawn from international experience in assets declaration, as published in reports 
from the OECD and the World Bank. 

Madam Speaker, Government was apprised of the findings of the Committee on 16 
October last and has decided to set up a Ministerial Committee to look into the proposals and 
to make recommendations, as appropriate.  The Committee comprises - 

(i) 

(ii) 

the hon. Vice-Prime Minister and Minister of Energy and Public Utilities; 

the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development; 

(iii) 

the hon. Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport; 

(iv) 

the hon. Minister of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and 
Scientific Research; 

(v) 

the hon. Minister of Health and Quality of Life; 

(vi) 

the hon. Attorney-General, and 

(vii) 

the  hon.  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 
Reforms. 

Madam  Speaker,  once  the  Ministerial  Committee  finalises  its  recommendations, 
instructions  will  be  conveyed  to  the  Attorney-General’s  Office  for  the  drafting  of  the 
Declaration of Assets Bill. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to give the assurance to this House and the population at large 
that  the  proposed  amendment  to  the  Constitution  aims  specifically  at  tracking  massive 
unexplained wealth accumulated by people through illicit dealings and on the back of honest 
and hardworking people. 

I  strongly  condemn  the  attitude  of  the  Leader  of  the  Opposition  who  instead  of 
keeping to his numerous speeches where he, in fact, made plea in favour of firm legislation to 
deal with unexplained wealth, is today trying to play politics on such a vital issue. 

16 

 
I  tell  the  Leader  of  the  Opposition  to  be  honest  towards  himself  and  to  try  to 
understand the relevance of the proposed amendments instead of indulging in demagogy to 
create confusion in the minds of the population. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please, no comments! 

(Interruptions) 

Order, please! 

The Prime Minister: I say, once more, that only dishonest and ill-intended persons 

have to fear the proposed legislation. 

Madam Speaker, we are sweeping clean this country and are setting new foundations 

to fight corruption, illicit dealings and dishonest practices. 

(Interruptions) 

My Government and myself will not, in any way whatsoever, fail in our duty towards the 
nation to build a country based on transparency, good governance and integrity. 

We fail to understand why people who have been shouting all the time that corruption 
is  rife  and  nothing  is  being  done,  dare  to  challenge  us  when  we  are  taking  the  bull  by  its 
horns.  I wonder what they are afraid of! 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger: I shall, of course, ignore the last part with the élucubrations and the 
allegations that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has deemed fit to come out with. I was going to 
say  that  what  I  heard  on  the  first  part  of  my  question,  that  is,  the  amendment  to  the 
Constitution of Mauritius, the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, presented by the hon. Prime 
Minister, Government remains open to amendments to the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, if 
I heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister correctly and this is the right attitude. Therefore, can I 
suggest to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, he has himself referred to amendments in the past to 
section 8 of the Constitution - Protection from Deprivation of Property. Indeed, there have 
been  exceptions,  but  will  he  agree  with  me  that  when  there  have  been  exceptions,  for 
example  ,  in  subsection  (4)  of  the  Constitution,  Protection  from  Deprivation  of  Property, 
section 8, subsection (4), in every case, the Constitution has been made to read – 

17 

 
“Nothing  contained  in  or  done  under  the  authority  of  any  law  shall  be  held  to  be 
inconsistent  with  or  in  contravention  of  subsection  (1)  -  that  is,  Protection  from 
Deprivation of Property (…) - except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, 
the  thing  done  under  its  authority  is  shown  not  to  be  reasonably  justifiable  in  a 
democratic society.” 

Therefore, can I put the question to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister: will he agree with me that 
there is absolutely no reason not to include that at the end of the Constitution (Amendment) 
Bill being circulated by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister? Therefore, will that be considered? It 
already  is  in  other  sections  that  it  should  be  added  to  the  section  being  proposed  to  the 
Constitution (Amendment) Bill. 

The Prime Minister: It is being already in the law. I don’t see any need for it to be in 

the Constitution. 

Mr Bérenger: I also heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister say some amendments have 
already  been  made  public.  We  have  not  received  any  written  copy.  Again,  if  I  heard  him 
correctly, he said that further amendments, this time to the Good Governance and Integrity 
Reporting  Bill,  will  be  considered.    Can  I  make  the  request  that  the  amendments  already 
proposed and any amendment to come should be circulated in writing so that we can study 
the details of the language used in those amendments? 

The Prime Minister: We will consider this. 

Mr Bérenger: Therefore, pending receiving a written copy of these amendments, I 
leave it there. On the last part of my question, I am a bit disturbed - that is, a new Declaration 
of Assets Act, I heard the Prime Minister say it is forthcoming but, omitting to repeat what 
was  in  Government’s  programme,  that  is,  may  I  be  allowed  to  remind  the  House,  Madam 
Speaker,  that  it  is  said “combattre  la  fraude”  sous  la  section  les  douze  priorités  des  trois 
premiers mois au gouvernement. I quote –  

« Combattre la fraude et la corruption : la ‘Declaration of Assets Act’ sera amendée 
pour inclure les propriétés acquises sous des prête-noms et la publication de toutes 
les informations dans la Gazette du gouvernement. » 

I am quite disturbed that I have not heard the hon. Prime Minister confirm that yes, in the 
new  Declaration  of  Assets  Act,  the  declaration  of  assets  will  be  made  public  through  the 
Government Gazette, as was provided for in the Electoral Programme. 

 
The Prime Minister: It seems as we have already started debating the Bill, all these 

18 

matters will be raised when the debates will take place. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has 
stated  very  publicly  of  his  wish  to  clean  the  country  and  come  up  with  a  policy  of 
transparency, could he consider the possibility of doing two things: one, of ensuring that the 
proposal that has been  made to clean up the  country also  covers the period as far back as 
Independence time because he has the majority… 

May I continue… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Now, please, order! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Mohamed:  Now  I  understand  who  is  scared!  Now  I  see  who  is  scared!  My 

question is very simple, two things, very simple things… 

 (Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, please don’t interrupt! 

Mr Mohamed: I do not know why, Madam Speaker, they seem to be agitated each 

time when I say that… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No, ask your question! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Shakeel Mohamed, please proceed and ask your question! 

Mr  Mohamed:  I  am  trying  to,  precisely,  and  I  thank  you  for  your  help.  So,  the 
question is, if I may be allowed, there are two things: to show that there is no political agenda 
- which I am not saying there is - but, to assure us and the country at large that there is no 

 

19 

political agenda, consider amending the law in such a way or make proposals in such a way 
as to cover as far back as 1968 and, as in other jurisdictions - every other jurisdiction where 
this issue is really taken at heart within this day and age - that it is an independent body such 
as  a  body  which  has  constitutional  protection  and  independence  that  is  created  in  order  to 
wield this investigative and power to seize and confiscate.  

Madam Speaker: Okay! 

Mr Mohamed: Two issues, simple! 

The Prime Minister: This is rubbish! 

(Interruptions) 

This is what I call demagogy!  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The hon. Prime Minister in justifying this 
Act talks about gains acquired through unlawful means; he talks about proceeds of crime. In 
order  to  reassure  the  public  that  wealth  that  has  been  acquired  through  lawful  means  but 
which cannot be, for any reason, or do not have to be explained because of passage of time 
the evidence has gone missing or whatever, would the hon. Prime Minister consider in the 
amendments  to  replace  the  concept  of  ‘unexplained  wealth’  with  the  concept  of  ‘illicit 
enrichment’ so that there is an element of unlawful gain in the element of the confiscation? 

The Prime Minister: Well, the whole idea behind this law is to track unlawful gains, 
illicit money. All the time people have been insinuating, talking about Sun Trust. Well, like 
any  other  party,  MSM  got  contributions  and  this  can  be  checked.  All  the  money  as 
contributions, the MSM had an account in the Mauritius Commercial Bank Ltd.  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order!  

The  Prime  Minister:  All  the  money  was  deposited  there  and  all  transactions  on 
behalf of MSM, the building Sun Trust, all transactions were paid by means of cheques. This 
can be… 

(Interruptions) 

 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah! 

20 

Mr Rutnah: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Given the nature of Constitution itself is 
dynamic, the last amendment of section 8 of the Constitution was made in 1986 whereas from 
1968 when the Constitution was written there were no amendments until 1986… 

Madam Speaker: What is your question?  

(Interruptions) 

Mr Rutnah: Can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister confirm that henceforth, since 1968 and 
1986 respectively onwards, crime has sophisticated to such a level and corruption to such a 
level that it is now imperative… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah, can I just interrupt you and ask you… 

Please, order! I am on my feet!  

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Rutnah, please come straight to your question because we are short of time! Please! 

Mr Rutnah: It is now, Madam Speaker, imperative to bring amendment to section 8 

of the Constitution to combat corruption in this country and bring morality into society. 

(Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister: I fully agree, Madam Speaker, and this is exactly what we are 

doing! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr Bérenger: I did not hear the Rt. hon. Prime Minister contradict me when I said 
that  I  had  heard  him  say  that  Government  remains  open  to  any  reasonable  required 
amendment to the Constitution (Amendment) Bill and when I said that I heard him say that 
there  might  very  well  be  further  amendments  apart  from  the  three  that  have  already  been 

 

21 

mentioned in the Press, but not circulated. Can I, therefore, insist so that the whole country, 
but  the  Opposition  can  do  its  work  on  this  very  serious  issue  which  raises  constitutional 
matters  that,  as  soon  as  amendments  are  ready,  they  be  circulated  in  writing  and  not  at 
Committee  Stage  as  it  is  usually  the  case?  When  we  reach  Committee  Stage  then 
amendments are circulated, that these amendments as agreed by Government be circulated as 
soon as agreed upon. 

The Prime Minister: We will follow the normal procedure which is always followed 

in such cases. 

Madam Speaker: Was that your last question, hon. Leader of the Opposition?  

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Leader of the Opposition, I am just asking whether that was your last question! 

Mr Bérenger: Yes, I understand that we are following normal procedures. 

Madam Speaker: Okay! 

(Interruptions) 

Okay! So, hon. Members the Table has been advised that Parliamentary Question No. B/944 
in regard to the  Bassin Football Ground presently under construction and addressed to the 
hon.  Minister  of  Youth  and  Sports  will  be  replied  by  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  time 
permitting. Hon. Ameer Meea! 

TOURISTS - VICTIMS - CRIMINAL OFFENCES 

(No.  B/876)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  criminal 
offences,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Commissioner  of  Police, 
information as to the number of reported cases thereof in which tourists have been victims, 
since January 2015 to date. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that  from  January  to  11  November  2015,  261  cases  of  criminal  offences  in  which  tourists 
have been victims have been reported to the Police. 31 persons have so far been arrested.  

 
Out of the 261 cases, there are -  

22 

• 
• 
• 
• 

244 cases of larceny which mostly are committed inside the hotels; 
10 cases of embezzlement; 
2 cases of indecent act, and  
5 cases of other types of offences. 

Madam Speaker, I am further informed by the Commissioner of Police that - 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

17 accused have been sentenced by Court in 13 of the cases;  
2 cases have been dismissed;  
3 cases are awaiting Court decision;   
44 cases have been filed because the accused are unknown;  
In 12 cases the DPP has advised no further action, and  
187 cases are still under enquiry by the Police.  

Madam Speaker, such anti-patriotic behaviour towards our tourism industry, which is 
an important pillar of our economy, is unacceptable. As Prime Minister of this country, I am 
not going to tolerate that a few evil minds damage the reputation of Mauritius as a safe tourist 
destination.   

The Ministry of Tourism and External Communications and the Police have already 

 
taken several measures to curb down criminal offences against tourists. 

 
However,  I  am  of  the  view  that  the  measures  should  be  further  strengthened  and  I 
have  requested  the  Commissioner  of  Police  to  come  up,  in  consultation  with  the  other 
concerned authorities, with more stringent measures in order to avoid any criminal offences 
against tourists.  

 
I would also urge owners of hotels, apartments or villas to strengthen security within 
their  premises  with  a  view  to  reducing  the  risk  of  larcenies  and  other  offences  committed 
against tourists. 

Finally, I intend to bring amendments to legislation in order to set stringent standards 

 
for private security agencies. 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, quite disturbing figures have been provided by the 
Rt. hon. Prime Minister, hundreds of cases have occurred, aggressions, crimes against tourists 
since  the  beginning  of  the  year  and  if  I  heard  him  correctly,  only  17  people  have  been 

 

23 

convicted  in  Court  for  all  these  hundreds  of  cases.  Can  I  know  from  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister  whether  the  main  problem  remains  that  we  are  dealing  with  tourists,  that  these 
people come here and then they return home, so when the case comes to Court, they do not 
turn up, they are not around? This has been the stumbling block for years. Can I know from 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether new ideas are coming forward, how do we tackle that 
and whether there is need for emergency Court proceedings? But we must find a solution. 
This is the heart of the problem. Will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree with me? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I understand that there is a fast track, but still - I said it in 
my answer - I am not satisfied that all steps are being taken because this should be reduced 
considerably. I do not say it is going to be eliminated because such larcenies, for example, do 
take place in many countries, but not to that extent. Therefore, I have already spoken to the 
Commissioner  of  Police.  We  are  going  to  take  steps.  I  wonder  whether  when  people  are 
caught they should not cut off their hands. 

Mr  Mohamed:  The  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  has  just  said  something  which  is  -  I 
won’t use that word. Could the Rt. hon. Prime Minister explain to us - earlier on he said that 
there  are  40  or  so  people  whose  cases  have  been  filed,  and  I  use  his  words:  “because  the 
accused are unknown”. How could a case have been lodged against an accused and later on 
filed if he is not known? This is the question. I mean how could you file a case against an 
accused because he is not known and at the time of lodging it we know who the accused was? 
How come we do not know him afterwards? 

Madam Speaker: Okay, the hon. Member has made his point! 

The Prime Minister:  The hon. Member is confused. I never said … 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Mohamed, please! 

The Prime Minister:  There are two different cases. Cases where no accused parties 
are found and cases where accused parties are found; cases which are referred to DPP and 
DPP ultimately found that there should be no action taken, they are filed. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Jhugroo! 

LOTTOTECH - PROFIT 

24 

 
(No. B/877) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Lottotech, he will, for 
the benefit of the House, obtain from the Gambling Regulatory Authority, information as to, 
since its coming into operation to date, the total amount of – 

(a)   money -  

gambled; 
paid to winners;  
paid to Government in terms of taxes, and  
unclaimed by winners, and  

(i)  
(ii)  
(iii)  
(iv)  
profit made. 

(b)  
The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  Lottotech  became  the  Operator  of  the 
Mauritius National Lottery which is officially known as Loterie Nationale, on 16 April, 2009 
and the Company started its operations at the end of October 2009.  

With regard to part (a) (i) to (iv), the information is as follows - 

(i)  

(ii) 

 

(iii) 

(iv)  

total amount of money 
gambled  

total amount of money paid 
to winners 

 

total amount of money paid 
to Government in terms of 
taxes 

 

 

total amount of money 
unclaimed by winners and 
paid to the National 
Solidarity Fund  

:  around Rs15.5 billion 

:  around Rs8 billion 

 

 

: 

around Rs3.7 billion, and 

:  Rs272,380,062 

 
As regards part (b) of the question, I am informed that the total profit after tax earned 

 
by Lottotech stands at about Rs436,947,403, as at September 2015.  

25 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Rughoobur! 

INDIA-AFRICA SUMMIT - RECOMMENDATIONS 

(No. B/878) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  India-Africa  Summit 
held in New Delhi in October 2015, he will state the – 

(a)   measures taken at the level of his Office to ensure the close monitoring of the 

(b)  

recommendations and commitments taken by Mauritius thereat and  
expected impact thereof on the existing and emerging sectors of the Mauritian 
economy. 

The  Prime  Minister:    Madam  Speaker,  with  your  permission,  I  shall  reply  to 
Parliamentary Question B/878 and Parliamentary Question B/883 together as they relate to 
the same issue.  

As the House is aware, following an invitation extended to me by His Excellency Mr 
Narendra Modi, Prime Minister of India, I attended the Third India-Africa Forum Summit 
held in New Delhi on 29 October 2015.   

I was accompanied by Senior Officials from my office and of the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade. The hon. Minister of Foreign Affairs, 
Regional Integration and International Trade did not form part of the Mauritian delegation as 
he had to attend the 15th Ministerial Meeting of the Indian Ocean Rim Association held in 
Padang, Indonesia.   

I wish to inform the House that the hon. Minister was represented by the Secretary for 

Foreign Affairs and another Senior Officer from his Ministry.   

The Summit was inter alia attended by fifty-four African countries, represented by 
Kings  of  Morocco  and  Swaziland,  thirty-five  Heads  of  State  and  Government,  six  Vice-
Presidents and some thirty-eight Ministers. Forty-one Heads of delegation including myself 
addressed the meeting.   

26 

 
My  message  focused  on  India-Africa  relationship,  the  special  relations  binding 
Mauritius to India and the transformation of Mauritius as a regional investment and business 
hub, thus making Mauritius the natural investment gateway between India and Africa.   

The Summit adopted two Outcome documents laying down the basis for cooperation 
between India and Africa for the next five years, namely the Delhi Declaration 2015 and the 
India-Africa Framework for Strategic Cooperation.   

The core political message of the Delhi Declaration remains the need for an urgent 
reform  of  the  United  Nations  including  the  Security  Council  to  make  it  more  regionally 
representative  and  democratic,  the  active  participation  of  the  Indian  diaspora  across  the 
African  continent,  respect  for  the  sovereignty  and  territorial  integrity  of  States,  the 
condemnation of terrorism and any  direct or indirect support to terrorist groups, the fight 
against drugs and illicit proliferation of small arms and light weapons and access to quality 
and affordable medicines amongst others. 

In  the  margins  of  the  Summit,  I  had  a  number  of  meetings,  including  bilateral 
meetings  with  His  Excellency  Mr  Narendra  Modi,  Prime  Minister  of  India  and  His 
Excellency  Mr  John  Dramani  Mahama,  President  of  Ghana,  the  Federation  of  the  Indian 
Chambers of Commerce and Industry and the Confederation of Indian Industry, the Indian 
Business  Community  of  the  PHD  Chamber  of  Commerce,  the  Chairpersons  and  Chief 
Executive Officers of major Indian conglomerates namely Godrej Group, Bajaj Corporation, 
Hinduja Group, and Mahindra Group.  I also met film producers, Events and Entertainment 
Management Association and All India Industry Association amongst others.   

Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  the  meeting  with  His  Excellency 
Mr Modi was held in a very cordial atmosphere.  I had fruitful discussions on the following 
main issues - 

a) 
b) 
c) 

The India Mauritius Double Taxation Avoidance Convention; 
The Comprehensive Economic Cooperation and Partnership Agreement; 
The Overseas Citizen of India Card, especially the eligibility criteria for 
Mauritians of Indian Origin, and 
Visa Reciprocity for Mauritian Nationals. 

d) 
I  am  confident  that  my  requests  have  been  positively  heard  by  the  Indian  Prime 

Minister. 

27 

 
During my visit, I also launched on 30 October 2015, the Board of Investment India 
Office, located within the premises of the Mauritius High Commission in New Delhi.  This 
Office, which was long overdue, would be the first point of contact for the Indian business 
community and would showcase and promote all the economic sectors of Mauritius.   

My  intervention  at  the  Summit  and  my  bilateral  meeting  with  His  Excellency  Mr 
Modi, Prime Minister of India and the other meetings with the business community included 
a number of important issues which are being followed up by the Board of investment and 
other relevant authorities.   

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (b) of the question, as I mentioned earlier, I also 
met  with  major  conglomerates  in  Mumbai  and  Delhi,  in  various  sectors  such  as  ICT, 
manufacturing,  logistics,  hospitality  and  services.  These  conglomerates  have  shown 
enthusiastic  interests  in  doing  business  and  investing  in  Mauritius.  As  such,  the  expected 
foreign  investment  and  skills  that  would  flow  when  these  firms  expand  their  footprint  in 
Mauritius would boost both the existing and emerging sectors of the Mauritian economy.   

The Board of Investment is facilitating such investments accordingly, and is liaising 

with the conglomerates on a regular basis. 

Additionally, the two outcomes documents collectively approved at the Summit make 
reference  to  the  promotion  of  cooperation  for  the  development  of  Ocean/Blue  Economy, 
with special emphasis on collaboration in developing sustainable fisheries, combating illegal 
and unregulated fishing, management of marine resources, conducting hydrography surveys.  
They also focused on exploring non-marine resources, disaster risk reduction and developing 
renewable energy. 

Such  a  commitment,  Madam  Speaker,  would  enable  us  to  leverage  on  one  of  our 
largest asset base, which is our Exclusive Maritime Economic Zone, to develop our Ocean 
industry. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, I wish to end by noting that my participation at the India-
Africa Summit and my various meetings aimed at consolidating further, the economic links 
between Africa, India and Mauritius, and we have succeeded in this endeavour.   

Mr Rughoobur: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for 
the answer. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister mentioned about the series of initiatives taken to 
attract FDI from India, setting up of the Office of the Board of Investment. May I also request 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to please look into the Delhi declaration where there is this issue 
of the setting up of Duty Free Tariff Preference Scheme by India? May I request the Rt. hon. 

 

28 

Prime Minister in line with the decision of the Government to attract FDI, to also request the 
BOI to look into the whole possibility of studying the opportunities that this setting up of the 
Duty Free Tariff Preference Scheme by India would bring to the local Mauritian Economy, 
for the private sector and the SMEs as well.  

The Prime Minister: We will look into that. 

Mr Bérenger: The Rt. hon. Prime Minister made reference to his meeting with the 
hon.  Prime  Minister  Modi,  Prime  Minister  of  India  on  the  Double  Taxation  Avoidance 
Convention and then immediately after when he reached Bombay (Mumbai), he made a very 
categorical statement that no section of our Double Taxation Avoidance Convention would 
be amended and we know that this is the heart of the matter. The Minutes of Proceedings 
signed  by  the  Financial  Secretary  of  Mauritius  provide  that  section  13  of  that  Convention 
which says that the Capital Gains Tax will be taxed in Mauritius where it is zero rated, has 
been changed and that amendment proposed says that the Capital Gains Tax will be taxed in 
India as from 2017. Now, this is the major section. Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
whether  he  has  obtained  reassurance  that  this  section,  Clause  13  of  our  Double  Taxation 
Avoidance Convention will not be amended as per the signed Minutes of Proceedings? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I have never stated that this will not be amended and that 
the hon. Prime Minister has promised that it is not going to be amended. All that I said is that 
I made a plea - I put forward the reasons why it should not be amended and I said that I hope 
- I reminded the hon. Prime Minister of what he has stated when he was here on his visit, that 
he will do nothing that may harm the interest of Mauritius. So, I pray that he looks into the 
matter again, that two sections should not be touched at all, 13 and 11. Well, he has promised 
he is going to look into that and now as it is said in our jargon: “la boule est dans son camp”. 
We wait.  

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger: I did not hear the Rt. hon. Prime Minister make reference to something 
which Mr Modi proposed formally, officially, at this India-Africa Summit meeting, that is, 
that India will promote solar alliance, an alliance of more than 100 countries that are strong, 
of the South, of course, on this side of l’Equateur that are strong on the sun, on solar power, 
that he is going in Paris at the forthcoming Environment Summit, India is going to propose 
formally the setting up of such an alliance. Have we already said yes to India? Has this been 
discussed between our Prime Minister and Prime Minister Modi when they met? 

 
The Prime Minister: I have not discussed about this question. 

29 

Mr Mohamed: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is in relation to the question that I put, 
P.Q. No. B/883, which the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has decided to answer together since this 
is  related  to  the  same  issue.  The  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  has  said  that  the  reason  -  if  I 
understood  him  correctly  -  that  the  hon.  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  could  not  attend  the 
India-Africa Forum Summit of 2015 was because he was in Indonesia at the Indian Ocean 
Rim Conference for the Council of Ministers meeting. From my verification, the Council of 
Ministers meeting of the Indian Ocean Rim in Padang, Indonesia took place between the 20 
to 23 of October whereas the India-Africa Summit took place between the 26 to the 29 of 
October.  

So, at no time did those two meetings in any way criss-cross. Since the hon. Minister 
clearly was not and could not have been busy at the Indian Ocean Rim Conference between 
the 26th and the 29th at the time when the India-Africa Summit was being organised, he could 
not have been there since there was no more any IOR Summit, could he, therefore, explain 
why was it so difficult to get his Minister of Foreign Affairs… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Ask your question! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed: If Members listen, they will get it! Could he, therefore, explain why 
was  it  so  difficult  to  ask  his  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 
International Trade to attend the India-Africa Summit when he was not in Indonesia? 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Shakeel  Mohamed,  ask  your  question!  You  don’t  have  to 

make a statement. 

(Interruptions) 

Don’t  make  comments,  please!  You  have  asked  your  question,  that’s  it!  You  don’t  make 
comments! 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, since he had to go to that meeting, I took the 
decision that he should go there, and since I was going to India for that conference, there was 
no need for any Minister to accompany me. 

Madam Speaker: Next question! Hon. Rughoobur! 

(Interruptions) 

 

CAP MALHEUREUX - POLICE STATION 

 

30 

(No. B/879) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to Cap Malheureux, he will, for 
the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Commissioner  of  Police,  information  as  to  if  a 
survey has been carried out over the past four months, to assess the need for a Police station 
thereat and, if not, why not. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I wish to refer the hon. Member to the reply I 
made  to  Parliamentary  Question  No.  B/153  wherein  I  had  stated  that  I  will  ask  the 
Commissioner of Police to have a second look at the request made by the inhabitants of Cap 
Malheureux for the setting up of a Police Station in the region. 

 I am informed by the Commissioner of Police that Cap Malheureux does not meet the 

requirements for the setting up of a full-fledged Police Station for the following reasons - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

it covers an area of 9 square kms only; 

the population consists of only about 5,000 inhabitants; 

the number of cases reported to Police for the region over the period January 
to 11 November 2015 is 516, out of which 328 are mostly family disputes, 18 
cases of criminal offences, 52 contraventions and 118 cases of misdemeanour; 

it is adequately policed by Grand’Baie, Grand Gaube and Goodlands Police 
Stations, supported by the Emergency Response Service, Divisional Support 
Unit, Criminal Investigation Department, Anti-Drug and Smuggling Unit, 
Police du Tourisme and National Coast Guard, and 

(v) 

it is a fishing village which has recently started to develop into a touristic 
village without major commercial and entertainment activities. 

Madam Speaker, in view thereof, the Commissioner of Police has again advised that, 
for  the  time  being,  there  is  no  need  for  a  Police  Station  in  Cap  Malheureux.    The 
Commissioner of Police will continue to monitor the law and order situation to ensure safety 
and security of the population there. 

AIR MAURITIUS LTD & SINGAPORE CHANGI AIRPORT- AGREEMENT 

(No.  B/880)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for 

 

31 

Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Agreement  signed 
between  Air  Mauritius  Ltd.  and  the  Singapore  Changi  Airport  to  create  an  air  corridor 
between Mauritius and Singapore, he will - 

table copy thereof, and  
state the expected impact thereof on Air Mauritius Ltd. 

(a) 
(b) 
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, the Agreement signed between Air Mauritius 
Ltd and the Singapore Changi Airport, on 14 October 2015, is part of the Government’s plan 
to  enhance  connectivity  between  Africa  and  Asia  through  Mauritius,  as  announced  in  my 
Economic  Mission  Statement.  Mauritius  will  thus  become  a  gateway  to  Asia  through 
Singapore for the islands of the Indian Ocean and countries of eastern and southern Africa. 

The terms and conditions embodied in the Agreement are commercially sensitive and 
of a confidential nature between the two commercial bodies and as such cannot be disclosed. 

This ‘Air Corridor’ offers an exceptional opportunity for growth for Air Mauritius as 
it taps into the tremendous potential of traffic between Asia/South East Asia and Africa. The 
increase  of  frequencies  into  Singapore  will  dovetail  with  the  Regional  Airline  Project  Air 
Mauritius Ltd is currently pursuing and will provide new opportunities to various sectors of 
the Mauritian economy. 

What  I  can  say,  at  this  stage,  is  that  the  impact  on  Air  Mauritius  Ltd  will  be  very 
positive. Given that Singapore Changi Airport is the seventh largest international airport in 
terms of passenger and air cargo traffic, this Agreement will allow the development of both 
passenger  and  cargo  traffic  between  Singapore  and  Mauritius  as  well  as  between 
Africa/Indian Ocean countries and Asia/South East Asia, using Mauritius and Singapore as 
hubs. 

In this respect, I would like to inform the House that, on the west side of the corridor, 
Mauritius  has  already  signed  Memoranda  of  Understanding/Bilateral  Air  Services 
Agreements with the following countries in Africa: Botswana, Comoros, Republic of Congo, 
Egypt,  Ethiopia,  Kenya,  Madagascar,  Malawi,  Mozambique,  Nigeria,  Rwanda,  Seychelles, 
South  Africa,  Swaziland,  Tanzania,  Uganda,  Zambia  and  Zimbabwe.  On  the  east  side, 
Mauritius already has Memoranda of Understanding and Bilateral Air Services Agreements 
with  the  following  countries:  China,  Hong  Kong,  Indonesia,  Malaysia,  Thailand  and 
Vietnam. Further, Mauritius is in the process of finalising a Memorandum of Understanding 

 

32 

with Japan with a view to allowing Air Mauritius to extend its network coverage in Asia by 
code sharing with its partner airlines to market points in Japan. 

Madam Speaker, I need to point out, here, that it is not only Air Mauritius Ltd that 
stands to gain but the country as a whole.  I repeat, this is a Mauritius Project and belongs to 
the  Nation  as  a  whole.  This  forceful  move  will,  through  the  multiplier  effect,  have  an 
enormous impact on the other sectors of the economy and will promote trade, business and 
economic development, thereby catapulting Mauritius to the next stage of growth. Through 
the promotion of international trade and business in the region, it will work towards turning 
Mauritius into a robust regional hub. 

The Steering Committee set up to implement this Air Corridor Project is already at 

work to turn this project into reality. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  May  I  know  from  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister - I understand the Rt. hon. Prime Minister does not want to table the Agreement - 
whether Singapore Airlines, under this Agreement, has taken any commitment to route all its 
passengers through Mauritius to Africa, being given that Singapore Airlines already operate 
direct flights to several jurisdictions in Africa? 

The Prime Minister: We are already having discussions with Singapore Airlines. 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, the air corridor is a very laudable initiative, but it needs 
to be backed by finance, and we need to have more aircrafts and leases. So, in that respect, 
may  I  know  from  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  whether  the  Government  has  taken  any 
additional  commitments towards  Air  Mauritius  or  under  this  Agreement  to  make  sure  that 
there are sufficient aircrafts that will service the leg Mauritius to Africa? 

The Prime Minister: Well, we will have to wait whether the need will arise, and we 

are naturally prepared to lease more aircrafts. 

TROU AUX CERFS - WEATHER RADAR SYSTEM 

(No.  B/881)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the project for the purchase 

 

33 

and installation of a new weather radar at Trou aux Cerfs, he will state where matters stand as 
to the implementation thereof, including the - 
date of commissioning thereof;  
construction of a new building for the housing thereof;  
training of the personnel for the use thereof, and  
final cost thereof. 

(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  the  project  for  the  procurement  and 
installation of a new Meteorological Radar System at Trou aux Cerfs is being partly financed 
through a Non-refundable Grant from the Government of Japan. 

In regard to part (a) of the question, according to the preliminary programme of work 
established by the Japanese authorities, the project is now expected to be completed by the 
end of 2017. 

Concerning  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  by  the  Director  of  the  Mauritius 
Meteorological  Services  that  the  old  building  which  housed  the  former  Radar  at  Trou  aux 
Cerfs has already been pulled down and the site is now ready for the construction of the new 
building  for  the  installation  of  the  new  Radar  System.    The  necessary  clearances  for  the 
construction of new building have been obtained and the Japanese side is now finalising the 
tender procedures for the selection of the contractor.  I am informed that works may start in 
the second semester of 2016. 

In  regard  to  part  (c)  of  the  question,  I  am  further  informed  by  the  Director  of  the 
Mauritius  Meteorological  Services  that  his  Department  has  already  recruited  a  pool  of  ten 
additional  Meteorological  Telecommunications  Technicians  who  will  undergo  specialised 
training  in  the  operations  of  the  new  Radar  System.    So  far,  two  of  the  Technicians  have 
already received training in Radar Meteorology overseas.   

In addition, the Telecommunications Engineer in post at the Mauritius Meteorological 
Services  has  benefitted  from  a  two-week  intensive  overseas  training  in  the  practical 
operations of the Doppler Radar System.   

Madam  Speaker,  in  regard  to  the  last  part  of  the  question,  the  Agreement  signed 
between the Japan International Cooperation Agency and the Government of the Republic of 
Mauritius on 10 June 2013 provided for a Non-refundable Grant of one billion seventy-nine 

 

34 

million Japanese Yen  to the Government of Mauritius, for the implementation of the Radar 
Project. 

In December 2013, the Japanese authorities revised the quantum of the Grant element 
to one billion one hundred and fifty million Japanese Yen to take into account the exchange 
rate fluctuations.   

In July this year, the quantum of the Grant element was further revised by the Japanese 
side to one billion three hundred and forty million Japanese Yen  in view of the fact that the 
price for the acquisition of the new Radar System had increased compared to what had been 
initially foreseen by the Japanese experts. 

The total amount of the Non-refundable Grant to be made available by  the Japanese 
authorities  to  Mauritius  for  the  implementation  of  the  Radar  Project  now  stands  at  around 
Rs387 m..  This amount has only been approved in the Japanese Budget in June this year. 

In addition, in the 2015/2016 and 2016/2017 Budget of the Mauritius Meteorological 
Services, provisions to the tune of Rs270 m. and Rs250 m. respectively, have been made to 
cater for expenses not covered under the Grant element for the procurement and installation 
of the new Radar System. 

Madam Speaker, it is premature at this stage to provide an indication of the final cost of 

the Project. 

Mr Bérenger: I heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister  - if I heard him correctly  - say that 
this  is  a  grant  and  we  are  grateful  to  Japan  for  giving  us  this  grant,  but  it  is  a  major 
development  that  will  be  with  us  for  decades  to  come,  not  years.    Now,  we  have  ample 
confidence  in  our  Japanese  friends,  but  do  we  have  expertise  -  the  Director  of  the 
Meteorological Services - and, if not, are we – although grateful to Japan – asking the United 
Nations and other organisations to advise us whether the choice of equipment that is being 
made is what is required for Mauritius? 

The Prime Minister:  Well, I can’t answer  this question.  If a question is put, we will 

try to get the information.  

Madam Speaker: The Prime Minister’s Question Time is over!  I suspend the sitting 

for one and a half hours.  

 
At 12.54 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

35 

On resuming at 2.36 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Members,  the  Table  has  been  advised  that  PQ  B/886 
addressed to the hon. Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport, will be replied by 
the  hon.  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 
Research.  PQ  B/920,  in  regard  to  lighting  segments  of  the  street  lighting  systems  on  the 
highways addressed to the hon. Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport, will be 
replied by  Dr. the hon. Minister of  Local Government. PQ B/921, in regard to the pulling 
down of houses containing asbestos addressed to the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of 
Housing  and  Lands,  will  be  replied  by  the  hon.  Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable 
Development and Disaster and Beach Management. PQ B/927, in regard to river reserves at 
Rivière du Poste addressed to the hon. Minister of Environment, Sustainable Development 
and Disaster and Beach Management, will be replied by the hon. Minister of Agro-Industry 
and Food Security. PQ B/941, with regard to compensation to be paid to fishermen in the Port 
Area  addressed  to  the  hon.  Minister  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands, will be replied by the hon. Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of 
Tourism and External Communications. PQs B/901 and B/915 have been withdrawn.  

Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

MINISTRIES & GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS – STATE LAND – PROJECTS 

EARMARKED 

(No. B/885) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in regard to the plots of 
State land vested in the Ministries and Government Departments, he will state – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

the number and extent thereof which have not been developed as at to date, 
indicating in each case, the project earmarked for implementation thereat and 
the project value thereof; 

if the database in respect thereof is up to date, and 

the mechanism put in place, if any, to ensure productive vesting of State land. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun): 
Madam Speaker, the information sought for at part (a) of the question is being compiled and 
will be placed in the Library of the National Assembly as soon as the exercise is completed. 

36 

 
In  respect  of  part  (b),  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  my  Ministry  is  presently 
working  on  the  creation  of  a  Digital  State  Land  Register  in  line  with  the  New  Policy 
Framework on allocation of State land, which will capture all information regarding the status 
of the project for which land has been vested. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (c) of the question, I wish to inform the House 
that  my  Ministry  ensures  that  confirmation  is  obtained  from  the  relevant  Ministries  and 
Departments to the effect that – 

(i) 

(ii) 

funds are available for implementation of the project, and 

the timeframe of the execution of the project is clearly specified. 

The Ministry also ensures whether survey and planning views are favourable to the proposed 
project.  

Failure to implement the project within the given timeframe will entail retrieval of the 

land which may be vested for other projects. 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Thank  you,  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister.  For  the  past  10  years,  Madam 
Speaker, the Government had disbursed about Rs2.2 billion for acquisition of land. Several 
plots of land acquired on or prior to  year 2010  have remained undeveloped. Will the hon. 
Vice-Prime Minister see to it that the Ministry does the needful to develop the land so vested 
and to ensure the follow-up by his Ministry? As the hon. Vice-Prime Minister has said this 
will be compiled. That gives us an idea that there is no database… 

Madam Speaker: Okay hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan: …and that the Vice-Prime Minister should look into it for when we do 

ask the question we get the answer very promptly. 

Mr Soodhun: Very good suggestion from the hon. Member. 

I will take cognizance of that. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Okay, next question hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

GOVERNMENT SCHOOLS – INFRASTRUCTURE - MAINTENANCE 

37 

 
(No. B/886) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
maintenance  of  the  infrastructure  and  of  the  buildings  found  on  the  premises  of  the 
Government Schools, he will state – 

(a)  

if his Ministry has developed a strategy therefor and, if so, give details thereof, 
and  

(b)  

how the monitoring thereof is carried out. 

The  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 
Scientific  Research  (Mrs  L.  D.  Dookun-Luchoomun):  Madam  Speaker,  with  your 
permission, I will answer this question. 

With  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  every  year  a  priority  list  of  infrastructural 
works to be effected in all schools is drawn up by my Ministry in consultation with the school 
community.  

In fact, the maintenance of infrastructure and of the buildings found on the premises 
of Government schools is an ongoing exercise. The implementation of the project identified 
is normally carried out in a phase manner depending upon the urgency of the works to be 
undertaken and also on the availability of funds. 

A  first  level  of  maintenance  work  is  carried  out  at  zonal  level.  The  schools  are 
presently clustered in four different zones and each zone possesses a  maintenance unit which 
carries out maintenance works in all Government Primary and Secondary Schools throughout 
the year. 

For maintenance works of higher complexity which cannot be undertaken by zones, 
they  are  undertaken  either  through  the  District  Contractors  appointed  by  the  Ministry  of 
Public Infrastructure and Land Transport or by contractors following a tendering exercise. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed that monitoring and supervision 
of the projects are carried out by engineers and technical officers posted to my Ministry as 
well as engineers and architects of the Ministry of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport. 

I  am  also  informed  that  regular  meetings  are  held  on  site  and  progress  monitored 

accordingly. 

 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

38 

Dr. Sorefan: Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister will agree with me that many of our 
infrastructure in the schools are in a terrible state and, as the hon. Minister is promoting Nine-
Year Schooling, which will be on, I hope, very soon… 

Madam Speaker: Yes, ask your question! 

Dr. Sorefan: Will the hon. Minister see to it that the quality of learning environment 
and infrastructure be of good standard with no leakage of roof, well painted buildings and 
good electrical set up for the Nine-Year Schooling to have a good start? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: We will certainly look into the matter and make sure that 

the environment in the school is conducive to learning. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ameer Meea! 

PLAINE VERTE – GYMNASIUM & MULTIPURPOSE COMPLEX - 

CONSTRUCTION 

(No.  B/887)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port Louis East) asked the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the proposed 
construction of infrastructures in Plaine Verte, Port Louis, he will state – 

(a)   where matters stand as to the proposed construction of a new Gymnasium on 

the premises of the Concorde Garden, Plaine Verte, and  

(b)  

for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Municipal Council of Port Louis, 
information as to where matters stand as to the proposed construction of a new 
Multipurpose Complex at Renaissance, Plaine Verte, indicating – 

(i)  

the amount of money earmarked therefor, and  

(ii)  

if fresh bids have been launched therefor and, if not, why not. 

Dr. Husnoo: Madam Speaker, first of all, let it be on record that I had wished at all 
costs to provide the communities living in Plaine Verte and the surrounding areas with the 
best social and sports infrastructure facilities. I had therefore proposed the site of Concorde 
Garden for this project. I was about to prepare the concept plan for the project and to mobilise 
the necessary funds for its execution. 

39 

 
Madam  Speaker,  let  it  be  again  on  record  that  some  community  leaders  have 
expressed objection to this project so much so that I am suspending for the time being the 
execution  of  this  project.  I  am  pursuing  further  consultations  with  all  stakeholders  of  the 
region because I am fully convinced that this project will be in the interest of the inhabitants 
of the area and its surroundings. 

With  regard  to  the  new  multipurpose  complex  at  Renaissance,  the  project  was 
intended to accommodate a food court, ADSU Office and a renovated taxi stand. Public bids 
were invited on 09 June 2014 and the closing date was fixed for 11 August 2014. Only one 
offer  was  received  -  Island  Civil  &  Mechanical  Consulting  Ltd.  The  Bid  Evaluation 
Committee in its report of 03 September 2014 did not recommend the award as the only bid 
received was not responsive. On 03 September 2014, the Executive Committee recommended 
that  new  tenders  be  invited  for  the  same  project.  On  08  October  2014,  the  Executive 
Committee further recommended the appointment of a consultant for the project. There was 
no development in the project until the Municipal Elections of 2015. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that,  at  a  Council  meeting  held  on  30  July  2015, 
Council  has  opted  for  alternate  projects  instead  of  a  new  Multipurpose  Complex  at Plaine 
Verte. The amount of Rs15 m. earmarked for the project has therefore been reallocated for 
new projects as follows –  

• 
• 
• 

construction of a Chapel at La Tour Koenig – Rs7m.; 
minor upgrading works at Plaine Verte – Rs2 m.; 
other projects (yet to be identified by the Council) – Rs6 m. 

Madam Speaker, I am still convinced that the inhabitants of Plaine Verte, Vallée Pitot 
and  the  surrounding  areas  are  all  deserving  of  upgraded  sports  facilities.  I  will  therefore 
continue canvassing opinion and seek support for the project at Concorde Garden. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  shocked  to  hear  that  the  project  of 
constructing a multipurpose complex at Renaissance has been cancelled. May I remind the 
hon.  Minister  that,  in  the  area  of  La  Rue  Magon  and  Camp  Yoloff, there  are  no  sports 
facilities for people living in this surrounding region and the Municipality of Port Louis in 
December  2013  had  already  earmarked  Rs15  m.  for  this  project.  May  I  know  what  is  the 
exact reason why this project has been cancelled by the Municipality of Port Louis? 

40 

 
Dr. Husnoo: As I mentioned, Madam Speaker, I was told that the Municipal Council 
had decided to review the whole project. That is the answer that was given. As I mentioned, 
the Rs15 m. has been earmarked for different places like La Tour Koenig and other places. 

Mr Ameer Meea: In relation to part (a) of the question, I am glad to hear from the 
Minister that the project has been put on hold. May I suggest to the hon. Minister not to use 
the Plaine Verte public garden, as this is the only green space that we have in Port Louis? 
This is the longest garden that we have in Mauritius starting from Renaissance to to finish 
Rue Magon. Can he consider an alternative site for this project and remind the House that this 
project  also  did  not  get  the  approval  of  the  Municipal  Councillors  of  l’Alliance  Lepep  as 
well? 

Madam Speaker: Okay! 

Dr. Husnoo: Madam Speaker, I am a bit surprised to hear that. At one time, the hon. 

Member is telling me not to use part of the garden… 

(Interruptions) 

Now,  listen,  can  I  answer,  please?  But,  at  the  same  time,  he  is  asking  me  why  the  initial 
project at Renaissance was not done. That is part of the same garden.  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea, allow the Minister to reply! You have had the 

leeway to ask your question! 

Dr. Husnoo: So, I am a bit surprised. That is number one and, secondly, if the hon. 
Member has any good suggestion, a place which is centrally situated where women can go 
and do the exercise as well, if he has any alternative place, I am prepared to listen. I am open 
to any suggestion. 

Mr Mohamed: Madam Speaker, I am just trying to maybe clarify matters for the hon. 

Minister. First of all, I thank him for his answer. There are two parts to the question … 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, ask your question! 

41 

 
Mr Mohamed: Could the hon. Minister consider - since he has suggested to make 
suggestions to my hon. friend - land that is available in Camp Yoloff? There is land available 
in  Camp  Yoloff  and  the  compulsory  acquisition,  I  am  sure,  would  meet  the  generous  and 
kind-hearted man, who is the hon. Minister of Housing and Lands.  

(Interruptions) 

He  could  then  also  use  the  other  generous  and  kind-hearted  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development for the benefit of the inhabitants. That is only a suggestion. 

Dr. Husnoo: Madam Speaker, yes, I know there is land at Camp Yoloff.  But I would 
like to make it clear that, firstly, the place I was trying to get that Sports Centre is between 
circonscriptions No. 2 et No. 3 because in Plaine Verte we have about 500 people who are 
taking methadone and in Vallée Pitot we have about 250 people who are taking methadone.  
So, I was trying to do it in a place where the inhabitants of both constituencies can enjoy this 
facility. This is what I was trying to do. As the hon. Member is aware, nowadays, apart from 
these 750 people taking methadone, we have a lot of young people taking synthetic drugs. 
Recently, the hon. Member knows how many people have passed  away in Plaine Verte in 
relation to drug addiction. So, what I am trying to do is trying to find a place which is fairly 
central so that people can enjoy. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: I have not finished with this one. 

Madam Speaker: No, next question, please! 

Mr Ameer Meea: This same question! 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: But, Madam Speaker … 

Madam Speaker: Your next Parliamentary Question! 

Mr Ameer Meea: No, but I have not finished with this one. 

 
Madam Speaker:  Hon. Ameer Meea, please sit down!  I have said several times that 

42 

… 

(Interruptions) 

This is my ruling!  I have to be fair to everybody.  All those who have asked questions should 
have the right for the questions to come.  I have said next question, hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Speaker, this is totally unfair.  I have been allowed to ask 

only one … 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  No argument, I have said.  This is my ruling. 

Mr Ameer Meea:  This is totally unfair. 

DEVELOPMENT BANK OF MAURITIUS – RESTRUCTURISATION 
(No.  B/888)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development    whether,  in 
regard  to  the  Development  Bank  of  Mauritius  Ltd.,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House, 
obtain therefrom, information as to – 

(a)  

the number of employees thereof - 
(i)  

whose employment have been terminated over the period January 2015 
to date, and  
in post as at to date, and  

(ii)  

(b)   where matters stand in relation to the proposed restructuring thereof. 
Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Madam  Speaker,  in  my  reply  to  PQ  B/114  of  03  March 

2015, I spelled out the various attempts to restructure the DBM. 

In March 2012, the World Bank recommended the orderly closure of the DBM or the 
setting up of a MSE Bank with the good loans of DBM.  In March 2013, Cabinet approved 
Deloitte’s recommendation for the setting up of an MSME Bank with a strategic partner.  The 
Small  Industries  Development  Bank  of  India  (SIDBI)  was  selected  as  the  best  option.  
However,  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  rejected  the  request  of  SIDBI  to  inject  funds  in  the 
DBM. 

In the meantime, the DBM continued to register heavy losses. 

 
In 2013, the DBM lost Rs177 m. and last year total losses amounted to Rs477 m.  In 

43 

fact, total losses for the past 4 years amounted to Rs1.4 billion. 

In spite of the building pressure to close down the Bank and with a view to preserving 
employment,  I  requested  DBM  to  come  forward  with  a  new  restructuring  plan  on  a  new 
mission and new vision basis. 

Madam Speaker, as regards part (a) of the question, I am happy to inform the House 
that  there  has  been  no  termination  of  employment  over  the  period  January  2015  to-date.  
Currently there are 206 employees on the permanent establishment of the DBM. 

As regards part (b) of the question, I am informed that the Board of DBM is expected 
to finalise its new restructuring plan by early January 2016.  The DBM Board is also looking 
into the possibility of acting as a Debt Recovery Agency for our public sector institutions. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea!  No question! Yes, hon. Uteem! 
Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister for Small and Medium Enterprises, 
when answering the question a few months ago, said exactly the same thing - that the new 
Board of DBM is going to consider the future of DBM. It has been more than nine months 
now since that statement was made and still we do not have any indication as to where DBM 
is going. So, what is the Board doing for all these months? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: I wish not to agree with the hon. Member. In fact, the new 
Board of the DBM has been putting order in the house. I just said that the bank lost Rs487 m. 
last year and we are planning to break even in 2016, which involves a lot of work. Secondly, 
I was in a position where we had to decide whether we close down the institution or we keep 
it going.  Then, in the name of employment, keeping employment there, I said let us try to 
find a solution. So, I gave instructions to the DBM to work out a new vision, a new mission 
and to come forward with a formal proposal in January. I must say that this request was put to 
them some three to four months back - not nine months back - and  I am satisfied that the 
Board is now on the right path and that in January DBM will have a restructuring plan which 
might allow Government to save the bank. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Jhugroo! 

MAURITIUS PRIDE - SALE 

(No. B/889)  Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and  Outer 

 

44 

Islands  whether, in regard to the Mauritius Pride, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain 
from the Mauritius Shipping Corporation Limited, information as to the - 

(a)  
(b)  

(c)  

date of purchase and purchase price thereof;  
number of times it underwent repairs, indicating in each case -  
(i)  
which entity/contractor carried out the repair works, and  
(ii)  
the total cost of repairs, and  
date of sale thereof, indicating the - 
(i)  
(ii)  

mode of sale thereof, and  
selling price thereof. 

Mr  Koonjoo:    Madam  Speaker,    regarding  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I  have  been 
informed by the Mauritius Shipping Corporation Limited that the M/V Mauritius Pride was 
purchased by the Government of Mauritius on 19 July 1990 at the price of Rs309 m. 

Regarding  part  (b)  of  the  question,  the  M/V  Mauritius  Pride  underwent  the  dry-
docking  and  major  repairs  every  two  years  to  renew  its  passenger  certificate  and  other 
surveys to ensure its compliance with IMO, that is, International Maritime Organisation rules 
and  regulations.    Since  1990,  the  M/V  Mauritius  Pride  underwent  dry-docking  and  major 
repairs for 11 times and the different contractors were Taylor Smith, Elgin Brown & Hamer 
(Pty) Ltd, Chantier Naval de l’Ocean Indien (CNOI) and Dormac (Pty) Ltd. 

As  per  MSCL  available  records,  the  total  cost  of  dry-docking  and  major  repairs 

incurred and the awarded contractors since 2004 onwards were as follows – 

Contractor 
Chantier Naval de l’Ocean Indien (CNOI) 

Total dry-docking and 
Major repairs (Rs) 
13.6 m. 

Elgin Brown & Hamer (Pty) Ltd (South Africa) 

25.2 m. 

Elgin Brown & Hamer (Pty) Ltd 

Dormac  (Pty) Ltd (South Africa) 

Elgin Brown & Hamer (Pty) Ltd 

34.5 m. 

36.1 m. 

55.2 m. paid out of the 
invoice figure of 70.2 m. 

Year 
2004 

2006 

2008 

2010 

2012 

 

Information regarding cost of repairs prior to 2004 is not available at the MSCL. 

45 

 
Mr Koonjoo:  As far as part (c) of the question is concerned, a sale notice of MV 
Mauritius  Pride  was  issued  on  09  July  2014  and  was  published  in  four  local  newspapers 
including Consulates/Embassies through the Parent Ministry and the deadline for submission 
of offers was fixed on 11 August 2014.  

The MSCL Board at its special meeting held on 13 August 2014 approved the sale of 
M/V  Mauritius  Pride  to  RJ  Maritime  Consultancy  Limited  being  the  highest  bidder  at  the 
quoted price of USD 1,080,000. net of any brokerage commission and the transaction was 
effected on 01 September 2014.  

Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Minister inform the House whether he is satisfied with the 

course of action taken by mccl regarding the sale of MV Mauritius Pride? 

Mr Koonjoo: Not at all, Madam Speaker. 

Mr  Leopold:  I  would  like  to  ask  the  hon.  Minister  where  matters  stand  with  the 
replacement of Mauritius Pride and, as he may know, the contract for MV Anna is over now. 
How is he coping with that? 

Mr  Koonjoo:  As  far  as  MV  Anna  is  concerned,  Madam  Speaker,  the  contract  has 

been renewed for another three months and the last date was 12 November. 

Madam Speaker: No cross-talking please. Address the Chair. 

Mr Koonjoo: So, we have three months and, in the meantime, we are planning to find 

another vessel.  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan: The hon. Minister has given a list where the Mauritius Pride was dry- 
dock. Is the hon. Minister aware that the Mauritius Pride was dry-dock in Singapore?  Can he 
look into it?  Because there was no tender. I did ask a question two years ago and there was 
some wrong doing at that time. Will the hon. Minister see to it what happened when it went 
to dry dock in Singapore? 

Mr Koonjoo: I will definitely look into it, Madam Speaker. 

Mr Jhugroo: Being given that the Minister, in his reply, said that he is not satisfied 
with the sale of MV Mauritius Pride, will he consider sending this request to the Minister of 

 

46 

Financial Services,  Good Governance  and  Institutional Reforms to carry a Financial Audit 
with regard to the sales? 

Mr Koonjoo: Yes. Madam Speaker, the request has already been made in the past 
and we are waiting for a reaction from the Ministry of Financial Services, Good Governance 
and Institutional Reforms. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Jhugroo! 

MAURITIUS SHIPPING CORPORATION - RECRUITMENT  

 (No. B/890) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and  Outer 
Islands  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Mauritius  Shipping  Corporation  Limited,  he  will,  for  the 
benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  therefrom,  a  list  of  the  employees  recruited  thereat  over  the 
period July 2005 to December 2014, indicating in each case the – 

(a) 

post occupied;  

(b)   mode of recruitment;  

(c)  

qualifications held and;  

(d)  

terms and conditions of employment, including the -  

(i)  

salary and other benefits drawn, and  

(ii)  

if the employment is on contractual or permanent basis. 

Mr Koonjoo: Madam Speaker, the Mauritius Shipping Corporation Limited is a State 
Owned Private Limited Company. It is governed by the Companies Act of 2001 and has a 
board  of  Directors  comprising  10  Directors  including  a  Chairman  appointed  by  the 
shareholders. I wish to inform the House that the Mauritius Shipping Corporation Limited is 
currently undergoing a restructuring exercise and that the release of confidential and sensitive 
information may jeopardise the exercise. Although cautions related to internal affairs of the 
State owned companies should not be answered in a spirit of transparency and for the benefit 
of  the  House,  I  am  nevertheless  providing  the  following  information  submitted  by  the 
Mauritius Shipping Corporation Limited - 

(a) 

Since July 2005, 31 recruitments have been carried out by the Company; 

 
(b) 

47 

Recruitments have been as follows – 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

three  officers  at  Senior  Technical  Positions  have  been  recruited 
through head hunting due to scarcity areas; 

sea  drivers  living  in  the  vicinity  of  the  former  Chairpersons  whose 
contracts have not been renewed;  

nine  posts  have  been  filled  either  through  advertisement  or  list  of 
employees  provided  by  the  Ministry  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations, 
Employment and Training, and 

(iv) 

16 persons have been recruited for minor grade post on a casual basis 
and thereafter confirm on a permanent basis. 

As regards part (c) and (d) of the question, information is being compiled and will be 

tabled in the National Assembly as soon as practically possible. 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Can  the  hon.  Minister  confirm  to  the  House  whether  most  of  the 

recruits come from the constituency of the former Minister? 

Mr Koonjoo: This is a fact, Madam Speaker, and I have already mentioned this in 

Parliament some time back. 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Can  the  hon.  Minister  confirm  to  the  House  whether  most  of  the 
recruits have not the required qualifications and, if so, can the hon. Minister consider sending 
this to the Minister of Good Governance for enquiry? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Koonjoo: This is another truth, Madam Speaker. Most of the people employed 
don’t even have a CPE and it is shocking to know that the people without any certificate are 
drawing  a  salary  of  about  more  than  Rs20,000  and  some  people  who  simply  have  SC 
Certificates are drawing a salary of about Rs75,000 to Rs100,000. So, I am looking forward 
when the restructuring will be done and we will definitely look into it. As I have said, we 
have already sent the file to my good friend, the hon. Minister of Good Governance, we let 
him finish with the big problems first of all and he will take our turn. 

Madam Speaker: Last question, hon. Jhugroo! 

 

 Order please! 

48 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Can  the  hon.  Minister  confirm  whether  one  Mr  D.  K.,  the  Chief 
Manager of MSC, who is the brother in law of the former Minister, has got five automatic 
promotions since his recruitment despite his frequent absences from his office? 

Mr Koonjoo: Yes, Madam Speaker. I think that was the trend in the last Government. 

MAURITIUS SHIPPING CORPORATION - MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS - 

CONTRACT 

 (No. B/891) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the    Minister  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and  Outer 
Islands  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Mauritius  Shipping  Corporation  Limited,  he  will,  for  the 
benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, a list of the medical practitioners whose services have 
been retained thereat, indicating in each case the –  

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

mode of selection thereof;  

date of retention of services;  

duration thereof, and  

total amount of money paid out thereto, giving a breakdown thereof. 

Mr Koonjoo: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Mauritius Shipping Corporation 
Limited that it keeps a pool of medical practitioners and sea farers for which they are selected 
for  short  term  contracts  on  a  needs  basis.  Their  monthly  salaries  range  from  Rs35,000  to 
Rs55,000 per month depending on experience and availability. Prior to the year 2014, hiring 
of medical practitioners and seafarers was outsourced to Renaissance Maritime Ltée.  

I am making arrangement for a copy of the list of medical practitioners with relevant 

details to be tabled.  

Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Minister inform the House what criterion is being used for 

the recruitment of these doctors? 

 
Mr Koonjoo: I have just replied, Madam Speaker. As such, I don’t see that there was 

49 

any advertisement for recruitment of these medical practitioners. 

Mr Jhugroo: Being given that we have many qualified doctors who are unemployed, 
can the hon. Minister give the chance to the doctors who are unemployed to be recruited by 
MSCL? 

Mr Koonjoo: I will look into that matter, Madam Speaker. 

FLIC-EN-FLAC - NOISE POLLUTION - COMPLAINTS 

(No. B/892) Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management 
whether, in regard to Flic-en-Flac and to the vicinity thereof, he will - 

(a) 

(b) 

for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Police  de  l’environnement, 
information  as  to  the  number  of  reported  complaints  of  noise  pollution 
emanating from bungalows mostly found within the residential areas thereof 
and  from  private  clubs  thereat,  since  January  2015  to  date,  indicating  the 
outcome thereof, including the number of - 
(i) 
(ii) 
state  if  remedial  measures  will  be  taken  in  relation  thereto,  including 
considering  a  review  of  the  prescribed  standards  for  noise  emission  as  are 
required to preserve and maintain public health and environment. 

contraventions booked, and 
fines issued, and  

Mr Dayal: Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed that 
23 complaints have been received for noise pollution against bungalows and one against a 
private club from January 2015 to date. The number of contraventions established to date is 
41. These 41 cases are still under enquiry and, as such, no one has yet been prosecuted. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (b) of the question, noise monitoring is regularly 
effected  during  weekends  by  the  Ministry  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life,  which  is  the 
enforcing agency, and the Police de l’environnement. Moreover, since October 2015, special 
operations  targeting  restaurants,  nightclubs  and  bungalows  in  Flic-en-Flac  are  being 
organised  by  the  Divisional  Commander  of  Western  Division,  involving  the  Police  de 
l’environnement,  the  Special  Support  Unit,  the  Emergency  Response  Unit,  the  Police  du 
tourisme, the Western DSU and the local Police from 22 00 hours to 06 00 hours on Fridays, 
Saturdays and Sundays. 

 

50 

Madam Speaker, standards for noise level were based on the guidelines of the World 

Health Organisation (WHO) and promulgated in 1997. 

In the context of the review of the Environment Protection Act (EPA), my Ministry 
has just carried out wide consultations with all relevant stakeholders, and the issue of revising 
the standards was not raised. 

However, should there be any change in the guidelines of the WHO, amendments will 
be made accordingly to prevent community annoyance in order to maintain public health and 
the environment. 

Madam Speaker,  I  would also like to inform the House that amendments are being 
made to the EPA to provide for fixed penalty of Rs5,000 for playing music above permissible 
limit and making or causing noise which constitute a nuisance. 

Mr Jhuboo: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the hon. Minister for his answer. I 
am  glad  to  hear  that  he  is  introducing  a  Rs5,000  penalty.    But  being  given  that  these 
bungalows are registered at the Tourism Authority, so they hold a trade licence, could the 
hon.  Minister  consider  more  severe  and  drastic  measures  such  as  cancelling  the  trading 
licence in cases of repeated offences? 

Mr Dayal: That can be considered. 
Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

BANK OF MAURITIUS - FORMER GOVERNOR – OVERSEAS MISSIONS 

(No. B/893) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to Mr M. B., former 
Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the 
Bank,  information  as  to  the  number  of  official  missions  he  undertook  during  his  terms  of 
office, indicating in each case the cost thereof. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, I am advised that, under section 3(3) of the 
Bank  of  Mauritius  Act  of  2004,  it  would  not  be  appropriate  to  disclose  the  information 
requested. 

MAURITIUS FREEPORT DEVELOPMENT - QUAY - OIL SPILL 

(No.  B/894)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External 
Communications whether, in regard to the oil spill which occurred on or about Tuesday 22 
October 2015 at the Quay of the Mauritius Freeport Development, he will, for the benefit of 
the House, obtain from the Mauritius Ports Authority, information as to - 

 
(a) 

51 

if  an  inquiry  has  been  carried  out  thereinto  and,  if  so,  indicate  the  outcome 
thereof, and  
the measures that will be taken to prevent the recurrence thereof. 

 (b) 
The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, in regard to part (a) of the question, I 
am informed by the Director General, Mauritius Ports Authority, that on 22 October 2015, at 
about 06 53 hours, the Port Emergency Services Controlled Room was informed that small 
patches of fuel oil were observed near the Mauritius Freeport Development Quay located at 
Latanier River.  The Assistant Port Master immediately activated the Port Louis Harbour Oil 
Spill Response Plan.  The team of Port Emergency Services of the Mauritius Ports Authority 
was promptly mobilised and the fuel oil was circumscribed using barrier booms to prevent its 
migration.  The oil spill was cleared using sorbent pads and dispersant. 

 I am also informed that an enquiry was carried out by a team from the Mauritius Ports 
Authority, led by the Assistant Port Master, to identify the cause of the spill and to situate 
responsibility.  The enquiry revealed that the spill emanated from a pipeline in a bunker pit 
belonging  to  Messrs  Indian  Oil  and  located  at  the  Mauritius  Freeport  Development  Quay.  
The leakage came from a small hole on the vertical pipeline below the Mauritius Freeport 
Development Quay.  Some provisional caulking had been put in place to mitigate the spilling 
of any residual fuel oil in the pipeline, and at the same time the pipeline was emptied ashore 
by using cisterns owned by Messrs Indian Oil. 

 I  would  like  to  inform  the  House,  in  line  with  the  polluter  pays  principle,  the 
Mauritius Ports Authority would pass on the costs for removing and eliminating the polluting 
substance  to  Messrs  Indian  Oil.    These  include  cost  of  material,  equipment  and  human 
resources mobilised. 

Madam  Speaker,  as  regards  part  (b)  of  the  question,  the  Director  General  of  the 
Mauritius Ports Authority has informed that Messrs Indian Oil has been instructed not to use 
this  fuel  oil  pipeline  for  future  bunkering  activities,  until  further  notice.    Furthermore,  the 
company  has  been  requested  to  carry  out  a  thorough  examination  of  the  entire  fuel  oil 
pipeline running from the company’s depot up to the Mauritius Freeport Development quay.  
This examination would have to take on board the following - 

• 
• 

a thickness test along the entire pipeline, and 
a hydrostatic pressure test to identify any other potential leaks on the pipeline. 

 The Mauritius Ports Authority will authorise the use of the fuel oil pipeline after the 

above tests have been carried out and relevant remedial works are undertaken. 

 

52 

Madam Speaker, in view of preventing the recurrence of oil spill, the Mauritius Ports 
Authority has requested the four oil companies to carry out a survey of all pipelines running 
in  the  port  area.    Their  reports  are  awaited.    In  addition,  the  Mauritius  Ports  Authority 
technicians have started a physical inspection of all the petroleum pipelines running under the 
quays. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Can I ask the hon. Minister whether there is an emergency plan if 
ever there is a disaster,  which  I hope never happens here in Mauritius?  But if ever it did 
happen, do we have an emergency plan to deal with such type of catastrophe? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Yes, Madam Speaker, I just mentioned that there is the 

Oil Spill Response Plan which was activated. 

FINANCIAL SERVICES - OMBUDSPERSON 

(No.  B/895)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
protection  of  borrowers  and  the  rationalization  of  charges  imposed  by  banks  and  other 
financial  institutions,  he  will  state  if  an  Ombudsperson  for  Financial  Institutions  has  been 
appointed, as announced in the 2014-2015 Budget Speech, indicating the compatibility of the 
said Ombudsperson in relation to the responsibility of the Bank of Mauritius. 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, in order to protect consumers of financial 
services products, a consultative document has already been prepared for the setting up of an 
Office  of  the  Ombudsperson  for  Financial  Services.    The  consultative  document  has  been 
submitted to the Bank of Mauritius and the Financial Services Commission for their views. 

The document provides that the Ombudsperson for Financial Services shall deal with 
complaints made by consumers of financial services, covering both banking and non-banking 
sectors. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that the Banking Act and the Financial 
Services  Act  already  provide  for  consumers  of  financial  services  to  make  their  complaints 
against financial institutions to their respective regulators. 

The proposed legislation provides that, when complainants do not obtain satisfaction 
from the regulatory bodies, they may file their complaints to the Ombudsperson for redress. 
The Ombudsperson, in such circumstances, may convene the financial institution concerned 
or the relevant regulatory body, before making any award. It is clear that the Ombudsperson 
will  deal  with  individual  grievances  of  the  public  against  financial  institutions  rather  than 

 

53 

interfering  in  the  regulatory  functions  of  the  Central  Bank  and  the  Financial  Services 
Commission. 

SMART CITIES - LAND CONVERSION 

(No.  B/896)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 
asked the Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security whether, in regard to the Smart Cities, 
he will state the extent of agricultural, of forests and of reserves land that will need to be 
converted for the implementation thereof. 

Mr  Seeruttun:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  the  Board  of  Investment  has 
received as at to date 17 proposals for implementation of Smart City Projects. According to 
records available at my Ministry, out of the 17 promoters, seven had already been granted 
Land Conversion Permits for large plots of agricultural lands prior to 18 June 2015, that is, 
well before the Smart City Scheme was introduced. 

The total area of agricultural lands for which Land Conversion Permits was issued to 
the said seven promoters by my Ministry is estimated at 2,781 arpents, of which conversion 
permits were granted after 18 June 2015 for only 99 arpents.  However, at this stage, there 
are  no  clear  indications  as  to  whether  these  promoters  intend  to  use  all  lands  issued  with 
conversion permits for implementation of Smart City Projects per se or they would need to 
secure conversion permits on other agricultural lands for the stated purpose. 

Further,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  my  Ministry  has  so  far  received  one 
application for land conversion specifically in respect of the Smart City project which was 
filed by the Omnicane Limited for a land area of 7.36 arpents.   

In the absence of new applications for land conversion from prospective promoters, I 
am, therefore, not in a position to give reliable estimates of extent of agricultural lands that 
will need to be converted for the implementation of Smart City projects.  

Madam Speaker, I would also invite the hon. Member to refer to the reply which the 
hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development made to PQ B/784 at the sitting of 03 
November 2015 dealing with the same subject matter and where additional information has 
already been given. 

Madam Speaker:  Yes, hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The hon. Minister just mentioned that he is 
not in a position to give the amount of land that has been converted for the implementation of 
the Smart City projects.  May I know from the hon. Minister, bearing in mind the policy of 

 

54 

agriculture  and  food  security,  whether  at  his  Ministry  or  at  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development they have targeted an aggregate amount of land that would be used 
for Smart City and not beyond that amount?  So, if already earmarked, what would be the 
maximum amount of agricultural land that would be allowed to be converted? 

Mr Seeruttun:  Madam Speaker, I must say, at this stage, I am not in a position to give 
that  information,  given  that  we  have  not  received,  as  yet,  those  applications  for  land 
conversion.  But  probably  in  the  months  or  years  to  come,  as  we  get  the  proposals  at  our 
Ministry, we will be in a better position to provide that kind of information. 

Mr Jahangeer:  Madam Speaker, can the hon. Minister confirm if geotechnical studies 
have  been  carried  out  for  deposit  of  groundwater  before  granting  these  lands  in  view  of 
scarcity of water? 

Mr Seeruttun:  With regard to water problem on land where there are boreholes that 
are exploited at the level of the Ministry of Public Utilities - they deal with that issue - and 
whenever there are requests made for any land conversion, the representative of that Ministry 
has  to  give  the  clearance  whether  we  should  go  ahead  or  not  with  a  particular  land 
conversion. So, we do have members of that particular Ministry who sit on the committee to 
provide any clarifications or clearances once any such application is made. 

STATE LAND DEVELOPMENT COMPANY – UNIVERSITIES -CONSTRUCTION  

(No. B/897) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 
Research whether, in regard to the project for the construction of universities, he will, for the 
benefit of the House, obtain from the State Land Development Company Ltd., information as 
to- 

(a) 

the amount of funds invested therein as at to date, indicating the - 

(i) 

names of the consultants and of the selected contractors therefor, and  

(ii) 

expected completion dates thereof, and  

(b)  

if  the  Company  is  exempted  from  the  application  of  the  provisions  of  the 
Public Procurement Act. 

55 

 
Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that,  in  2011, 
Government took the decision to decentralised the Tertiary Education infrastructure with the 
setting up of university campuses at Pamplemousses, Montagne Blanche and Réduit. 

In  this  context,  a  Special  Purpose  Vehicle,  the  Knowledge  Parks  Ltd  (KPL)  was 
created  on  15  May  2013,  to  own  and  manage  the  three  campuses.  The  State  Land 
Development Co Ltd (SLDC) was appointed as the Project Implementing Agency. 

As regards part (a) of the question, a total amount of Rs476.3 m. has been invested in 

the construction of the campuses which have reached near completion. 

As regards part (a) (i), the Contractors working on the project are - 
(1) 

(2) 

Hyvec  Partners  Co.  Ltd  for  the  construction  of  Montagne  Blanche  Campus 
and Pamplemousses Campus; 
Ramloll  Bhooshan Renovation & Building Ltd for the construction of Réduit 
Campus, and 
Luxconsult (Mtius) Ltd for Consultancy and Design Services 

(3) 
As regards part (a) (ii), the expected completion date of the projects at the three sites 

is December 2015. 

As regards part (b), I am informed that SLDC does not fall under the purview of the 
Public  Procurement  Act  (PPA).  However,  for  this  project,  the  employer  is  the  Knowledge 
Parks  Ltd  which  does  fall  under  the  PPA,  and  consequently,  I  am  informed  that  all 
procurement exercises had been carried out through the Central Procurement Board (CPB). 

Mr Rughoobur:   With regard to the budgetary problem that we are having these days 
with the University of Mauritius, may we  know from the hon. Minister, even if these projects 
are not her doing, whether there has been a forecast of what are the resources in terms of 
manpower and finances that will be required for implementing these projects in the months 
and years to come? 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:    Madam  Speaker,  the  question  relates  to  the  Knowledge 
Park of Mauritius and, as far as these three campuses are concerned, the funds are available 
for the completion of this project. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Rughoobur! 

COMESA & SADC COUNTRIES - EXPORTS 

(No. B/898) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked the Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives whether, in regard to the small 
and medium enterprises, he will – 

 
(a) 

56 

for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Small  and  Medium  Enterprise 
Development Authority, information as to the total value of the exports thereof 
to the COMESA and to the SADC countries for the years ending December 
2013, 2014 and as at to date respectively, and  

(b) 

state the initiatives taken and the support provided to promote such exports. 

Mr Bholah: Madam Speaker, I am informed that - 

(i) 

(ii) 

the total estimated domestic exports of SMEs to the COMESA countries are 
679 million rupees for the year ending 2013, 667 million rupees for the year 
2014, and 270 million rupees for the period January to June, this year, and 
the total estimated domestic exports of SMEs to the SADC countries are 918 
million rupees for the year ending 2013, 878 million rupees for the year 2014, 
and 392 million rupees for the period January to June, this year. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (b) of the question, with a view to promoting the 
exports of SMEs products to the COMESA and SADC countries, my Ministry, through the 
SMEDA, provides financial support to eligible enterprises to participate in international fairs, 
buyers/sellers meetings, contact promotion programmes, and technology fairs held in those 
African countries. Thus, eligible SMEs benefit from a grant to the tune of Rs200,000 per year 
under  the  Participation  in  International  Fairs  SME  Refund  Scheme  that  aims  at  providing 
support to export-oriented SMEs to expand their share of the overseas market and to diversify 
into new markets. The grant covers the costs of stand, air tickets and hotel accommodation of 
the participants. This year, a number of 111 SMEs have benefited from financial assistance 
under this scheme. 

I  am  also  informed  that  13  companies  in  the  fields  of  textile  and  apparel,  agro-
industry  sector,  and  other  manufacturing  sector  have  participated  in  Contact  Promotion 
Programmes held in Kenya and South Africa.  

Madam  Speaker,  my  Ministry  also  works  in  close  collaboration  with  Enterprise 
Mauritius  with  a  view  to  promoting  exports  of  SME’s  products  to  COMESA  and  SADC 
countries.  

Thus, with the support of Enterprise Mauritius, a number of SMEs have participated 
this year in the Southern African International Trade Exhibition in Johannesburg, the South 

 

57 

African International Trade Fair in Cape Town, La Foire Internationale de Madagascar, and 
the Kenya International Trade Fair.  

Moreover, as part of its support to making SMEs become export-oriented, SMEDA 
conducts training programmes on import and export procedures. These programmes aim at 
increasing  awareness  of  the  SMEs  on,  amongst  others,  trade  barriers,  trade  agreements, 
regional  cooperation  and  trade,  and  legal  aspects  of  importing  and  exporting  of  goods  or 
products. For this year only, to date, a number of 76 SMEs have followed the course ‘Import 
and Export Procedures’. Similarly, Enterprise Mauritius has, during the course of the year, 
organised a ‘Go Export Training Programme’ with the objective of familiarising SMEs with 
the  procedures  and  processes  involved  in  international  trade  to  enable  them  to  become 
successful exporters. 60 SMEs have thus benefited from such training programmes offered by 
Enterprise Mauritius. 

Madam Speaker, in line with the coherent and concerted approach adopted at the level 
of my Ministry for the development of SMEs, the House may wish to know that, this week, 
we are organising a workshop on Building Export Capacity for SMEs in the African Markets 
in collaboration with all stakeholders.  

This workshop aims at imparting to owners and managers of SMEs the  procedures 
and processes for the export of their products to Africa and the region, to find solutions to the 
identified problems for access to especially the African markets, and to make them aware of 
the potentials that those markets may offer for their growth. 

My  Ministry  is  benefiting  from  the  assistance  of  the  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs, 
Regional Integration and International Trade, the Trade Division of the Ministry of Industry 
and  Commerce,  the  Mauritius  Chamber  of  Commerce  and  Industry,  Enterprise  Mauritius, 
Mauritius Revenue Authority and the Freight Academy in that initiative. 

Last but not least, we are in the process of commissioning a study for the development 
of a 10-year Master Plan for the SME sector. The development process will include, amongst 
others, an evaulation of the current trade support institutions for SMEs and the formulation of 
an export strategy for the sector. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  assure  the  hon.  Member  and  the  House  that  my  Ministry,  in 
consultation with all stakeholders, as I mentioned earlier, is taking all necessary actions for 
furthering the growth of SMEs and for the development of export-oriented SMEs. 

58 

 
Mr  Rughoobur:  I  have  noted  from  the  reply  of  the  hon.  Minister  that  exports  to 
Africa have fallen from 878 million to almost 392 million. I have got two questions: if the 
hon. Minister might enlighten the House as to the reason why this drastic fall from 878 to 
392, and, secondly, whether the collaboration that the SMEs had with Enterprise Mauritius is 
still  on.  Because  from  the  wetsite  of  Enterprise  Mauritius,  I  see  that  they  are  promoting 
business in Turkey, Germany, Australia and Czech until  June 2016, but no sign of anything  
in Africa with the SMEs. 

Mr Bholah: It is a fact that, compared to 2013, the figures for 2014 have decreased. I 
don’t have the exact answer. Maybe it is what has been going on on the international scene as 
well. With regard to SMEs export, I have enumerated a list of measures that will, I believe, 
be fruitful and will be targeted towards increasing our exports towards the African countries. 

MAUBANK - OPERATIONAL 

(No. B/899) Mr K. Ramano (Third Member for Belle Rose & Quatre Bornes) 

asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the 
launching of the MauBank, he will state the – 

(a) 

(b) 

amount of nontoxic assets brought in by the National Commercial Bank and 
the Mauritius Post Co-operative Bank Ltd. respectively, and 
composition of the – 
(i) 
(ii)  Management Committee thereof. 

Board, and 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  Madam  Speaker,  as  announced  earlier,  the  process  of 
merging the National Commercial Bank (NCB) and the Mauritius Post and Cooperative Bank 
Ltd (MPCB) has started and the new MauBank Ltd. will be operational in the first week of 
January 2016.  

In the meantime, an exercise is being carried out for the transfer of the performing 
loans and the deposit liabilities of both banks to the new MauBank Ltd.  I am informed that 
the final amount of assets and liabilities to be transferred would be known by the end of this 
year. However, I wish to inform the House that Government had to inject fresh equity capital 
to ensure that the banks could carry out their normal banking activities. 

Madam Speaker, the merger of those two banks is the major challenge because both 
the  MPCB  and  the  ex-Bramer  were,  in  the  past,  not  managed  according  to  good  banking 
practices and without elements of good corporate governance and transparency. The country 

 

59 

is  now  aware  of  the  consequences  of  such  reckless  banking  practices.  Government  has 
safeguarded  the  interest  of  all  the  depositors  and  secured  the  employment  of  around  700 
employees and the interest of other stakeholders of the two banks. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (b) of the question, the composition of the Board 
of MauBank Ltd will be constituted in due course. In the meantime, the MPCB and the NCB 
will  continue  to  operate  under  their  existing  Boards.  The  Management  Committee  of 
MauBank Ltd. will be set up once the Board of MauBank Ltd. is constituted. 

Mr Bérenger: When the hon. Minister gave the figure, he made some nasty noises 
with his microphone. Can we have the information how much money has been injected into 
or is going to be injected into the MauBank, the figure which he quoted? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, we have already injected a total of Rs1.7 
billion in both banks and we will inject Rs2 billion more, bringing the total to Rs3.7 billion.  
That would be our participation to ensure that the MauBank starts on a fresh foot and deliver 
the goods that it should. 

Mr Ramano: Gérard Lincoln, l’administrateur de l’ex-Bramer Bank a rendu public la 
liste  des  toxic  assets  and  toxic  loans  de  l’ex-Bramer  Bank.  Est-ce  que  le  ministre  est  en 
mesure de nous dire si ce même responsable de l’ex-Bramer Bank ou les responsables de la 
Mauritius Post and Cooperative Bank, qui sont responsables des toxic loans and toxic assets, 
seront les mêmes responsables du MauBank? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: It is clear that in the process of setting up the new bank, we 
cannot dispose of all the management of both banks. The most toxic Managers have gone. So, 
we are left now with the Chairman of the Maubank who is Mr Said Lalloo, an outstanding 
gentleman, and the new Board will be made up of professionals mostly. So, to the question of 
the hon. Member whether we are keeping a large number of those who have been responsible 
for those losses, I say no. Most of the top management is going or will leave. 

Mr Uteem: Following on from the question of the hon Leader of the Opposition, can 
we have the breakdown, out of the amount injected, how much was injected into MPCB and 
how much has been injected into Bramer Bank? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Well, I have a figure. A total of Rs700 m. has been injected 

in National Commercial Bank and a total of Rs1.53 billion has been injected in MPCB. 

60 

 
Dr. Sorefan: Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister said that 700 jobs will remain secure 
for MauBank. We have two banks, the NCB and MPCB in Quatre Bornes - I am sure, there 
will  be  only  one  bank  in  Quatre  Bornes,  not  two?  Will  the  staff  of  the  two  banks  be  in 
MauBank in Quatre Bornes? I am sure there are other places also where we have two entities 
that will be merged. How does he reconcile that the 700 jobs will be secured? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: The question is pertinent. In fact, out of the various branches 
of  both  banks  where  there  are  two  branches  in  villages/cities,  one  will  be  specialised  in 
SMEs. This is why we said that there will be 10 branches of MauBank that will allocate its 
resources specifically to SMEs activities. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ramano, next question! 

MARSHALL PLAN - POVERTY ALLEVIATION – FUNDS  

(No.  B/900)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 
asked the Minister of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment whether, in regard to 
the Marshall Plan for Poverty Alleviation, he will state the – 

(a) 
(b) 
(c) 

overall costs and timeframe set for the elaboration thereof; 
expected number of families who will be concerned therewith; 
financing aspect thereof, taking into consideration eventual input of funds 
from the Corporate Social Responsibility, and 
complementary aspect thereof with the Love Bridge Project. 

(d) 
Mr Roopun: Madam Speaker, the total cost for the elaboration of the Marshall Plan 
on  poverty  alleviation  amounts  to  USD85,000.  The  Ministry  has  contributed  a  sum  of 
USD30,000, while the remaining amount is being funded by UNDP.  The projected duration 
of  the  assignment  is  six  months  and  the  plan  is  expected  to  be  submitted  by  the  end  of 
December. 

The terms of reference, inter alia, provide for the experts to submit costed proposals 
together with multi-year plans for the implementation of the proposed recommendations of 
the  said  plan.  The  Marshall  Plan  will  also  identify  all  potential  sources  of  financing  from 
Government, the private sector or otherwise. 

Madam Speaker, it will be premature, at this stage, to give details about the expected 
number  of  families  concerned,  the  financial  aspect,  as  well  as  the  involvement  of  Love 
Bridge Project therein. 

 
Mr Ramano: Madame la présidente, est-ce que le ministre peut nous dire s’il y a une 

61 

coordination entre son ministère et le Board du Love Bridge Project ? 

Mr Roopun : Madam Speaker, the concept of CSR Funding is under the aegis of the 
Ministry of Finance. My Minisry has got a representative who sits on the CSR Committee 
through which the Love Bridge project is looked into. 

(Interruptions) 

There is still a CSR Committee where a representative of my Ministry sits. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ramano! 

Mr  Ramano:  Le  Board  du  Love  Bridge  Project  est  constitué  de  M.  Makoon,                        

M.  Mayer,  M.  Pradeep  Dursun  etc.,  mais  il  n’y  a  aucun  représentant  du  ministère  de 
l’Intégration sociale.  

Mr Roopun: There are, Madam Speaker: one representative from my Ministry and 

also one representative from the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development. 

Mr Ramano: Dans le document qui a été soumis par le ministre des Finances, il n’y a 

aucun représentant du ministère de l’Intégration sociale. 

Mr Roopun: I may confirm that there is one actually. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo! 

Mr Ganoo: The hon. Minister talked about the experts who are preparing the plan. 
Can  the  hon.  Minister  inform  the  House  who  are  these  experts  and  how  they  have  been 
enlisted to come and support the Ministry? 

Mr  Roopun:  In  fact,  for  the  elaboration  of  the  Marshall  Plan,  we  have  had  the 
support of UNDP who appointed five experts in different sectors, and the UNDP also enlisted 
the support of one local consultant. All the experts have been selected by UNDP. 

Mr  Ramano:  Madame  la  présidente,  avec  l’existence  du  NEF,  du  Love  Bridge 
Project, du NGO Trust Fund, est-ce qu’il n’y a pas lieu d’avoir une seule entité pour gérer 
toute cette question de la pauvreté? 

Mr  Roopun:  All  these  aspects  will  be  taken  care  of  and  looked  into  within  the 

Marshall Plan. 

 

62 

MINISTRY OF SOCIAL SECURITY, NATIONAL SOLIDARITY AND REFORM 

INSTITUTIONS - MS A. B. - TRANSPORT FACILITIES 

 (No.  B/901)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions 
whether, in regard to one Ms A. B., a visually impaired person and intern under the Service to 
Mauritius  Programme  posted  in  her  Ministry  since  March  2013,  she  will  state  why  the 
transport facilities which had been granted thereto since her date of appointment thereat has 
been discontinued with effect from February 2015. 

(Withdrawn) 

BAI & CO. – DIRECTORS & OFFICERS INSURANCE COVER - CLAIM 

(No.  B/902)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 
Reforms, Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the 
insurance cover for the directors and the officers of the former BAI & Co., he will, for the 
benefit of the House, obtain from the Financial Services Commission, information as to if any 
claim has been made thereunder and, if not, why not. 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Financial Services Commission 
that the Special Administrator appointed under section 110 of the  Insurance Act 2005 has 
already  entered  a  claim  to  recover  Rs1.2  billion  by  way  of  Plaint  with  Summons  against 
Mauritius Union Assurance Limited, in relation to the directors and officers liabilities cover 
taken by BAI Co. (Mtius) Ltd and its related entities. 

The  Plaint  is  returnable  before  the  Commercial  Division  of  the  Supreme  Court  on 

November 16, which is yesterday.  

Madam Speaker, as the matter is sub judice, it will be prejudicial to the case before 

the Supreme Court to provide any further detail at this stage. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Can I know from the hon. Minister of Good 
Governance whether, before lodging the claim against the insurers, any claim has been made 
against the directors and the officers to repay whatever amount is due to the companies? 

63 

 
Mr Bhadain: Yes, I am informed by the FSC, Madam Speaker, that there has been a 
réclamation which has been made by the Special Administrator against the directors prior to 
entering the Plaint with Summons.  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: The Plaint with Summons, Madam Speaker, refers to the main culprit as 
being  Mr  Dawood  Rawat  and  acting  through  Mr  Taher.  Yet,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Good 
Governance  in  this  House  has  mentioned  that,  as  far  back  as  2009,  there  was  a  serious 
misappropriation  of  funds  going  on  and  he  cited  the  report  from  KPMG.  So,  in  these 
circumstances, may I know from the hon. Minister of Good Governance why has there not 
been any action taken to date against the then CEO, Mr Beebeejaun? Is it because he has viré 
mam in the meantime? 

Mr Bhadain: Well, I am not aware whether he has viré mam or not, but I certainly do 
know that Mr Saleem Beebeejaun is co-defendant number ten in the Plaint with Summons 
which has been issued. 

(Interruptions) 

Well, the Special Administrator has included him as a co-defendant in the case as well, viré 
or no viré mam! 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Thank you. Is the hon. Minister aware - and this is from the Plaint with 
Summons  -  that  there  is  an  exclusion  clause  in  the  insurance  policy  excluding  deliberate 
dishonest  or  deliberate  fraudulent  act  or  abuse  of  powers  by  the  directors?  In  these 
circumstances, does he consider it fit that, on the one hand, this Government, itself, has gone 
on and talked at length about the alleged fraudulent and dishonest act of directors and today 
they are going to say that there is no dishonest act in order to get the insurance cover? 

Mr  Bhadain:  Madam  Speaker,  this  is  an  action  which  has  been  brought  by  the 
Special Administrator of BAI Co. (Mtius) Ltd. and the role of the Special Administrator is to 
recover as much money as possible to be able… 

(Interruptions) 

 

64 

to repay the victims of the Super Cash Back Gold Ponzi scheme. So, during that recovery 
process, it has been identified that these directors had somehow decided to cover themselves 
with an insurance cover, which was contracted from Mauritius Union Assurance Limited. It 
is only logical that the Special Administrator tries every possible avenue to recover money so 
that these victims can be repaid. 

Now, on the other hand, the Police, the Central  CID  and the  ICAC are  doing their 
work  on  the  criminal  front  to  establish  a  case  as  to  the  fraudulent  acts,  the  Ponzi  scheme 
which has been perpetrated by these people and they will be brought to task. I have no doubt 
about that. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem, next question! 

PUBLIC BEACHES – TUCKSHOPS - RENT 

(No.  B/903)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and 
Beach  Management  whether,  in  regard  to  the  bidding  exercise  for  the  renting  of  the 
tuckshops found at Albion, Pereybere and other public beaches respectively, he will, for the 
benefit of the House, obtain from the Beach Authority, information as to where matters stand. 

Mr Dayal: Madam Speaker, I am informed that a bidding exercise for the renting of 
vacant  tuckshops  at  Albion  and  Pereybere  public  beaches  was  launched  through  open 
advertisement on 29 May 2015.  

However, the said bidding exercise was cancelled following a decision taken by the 

Board of the Beach Authority on 17 September 2015 -  

(i) 

(ii) 

henceforth, to allocate, one tuckshop per bidder per region to be in line with 
the policy of democratization of the economy, and 
not to go ahead with the renting of tuckshops found on Albion public beach in 
view of complete upliftment works being undertaken presently in the context 
of the implementation of the Blue Flag Programme by the Ministry of Tourism 
and External Communications.  

As such, fresh bidding exercise through open advertisement in the press was launched 
on  22  October  2015  for  renting  of  vacant  tuckshops  at  Pereybere  public  beach  only  with 
closing date fixed by 24 November 2015 with revised specifications. Thank you. 

 
Mr  Uteem:  Madam  Speaker,  on  30  October  2015,  the  Beach  Authority  wrote  to 

65 

bidders and stated, and I quote –  

“The above bidding exercise has been cancelled; the bid has been re-launched with 

new specifications.” 

May I know from the hon. Minister what are these new specifications? 

Mr Dayal: If I have a substantive question on this one, I will answer. 

Mr  Uteem:  I  can  tell  the  hon.  Minister  because  I  have  both  tenders  and  they  are 
identical! So, is it not the case that the only reason why this exercise has been cancelled is 
because the highest bidder was not one of their people? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Dayal: Madam Speaker, I have already answered the question! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Uteem: Can, at least, the hon. Minister ask the Minister of Good Governance to 
look into the operation of the Beach Authority to make sure that there was nothing improper 
in the cancellation of this tender? 

Mr Dayal: I will look into it. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leopold! 

INDIAN OCEAN ISLAND GAMES 2019 – RODRIGUES – SPORTING EVENTS 

(No. B/904) Mr J. Leopold (Second Member for Rodrigues) asked the Minister of 
Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the forthcoming Indian Ocean Island Games 2019 to 
be  held  in  Mauritius,  he  will  state  the  number  of  sporting  events  that  will  be  held  in 
Rodrigues, indicating if Judo will form part thereof. 

66 

 
Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, I have to inform the House that the list of sports 
to  form  part  of  the  forthcoming  Indian  Ocean  Islands  Games  will  be  determined  by  the 
International Games Council (CIG) after proposals made by the host country. 

The next meeting of the International Games Council (CIG) is scheduled for February 

2016. We shall wait for same before proceeding further. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leopold! 

Mr Leopold: With regard to these games, I think it is very good if we can plan ahead 
so  that  there  is  no  hassle.  As  you  might  know,  Madam  Speaker,  everybody  is  saying  that 
Rodrigues  is  the  breeding  ground  for  high  performance  athletes.  We  have  organized  three 
major  events  in  Rodrigues,  so  we  have  the  experience.  We  have  a  swimming  pool  in 
Rodrigues  with  international  Olympic  norms,  which  we  don’t  have  in  Mauritius.  Can  the 
Minister inform the House whether he will involve swimming games in Rodrigues? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Madam  Speaker,  as  I  said,  we  need  to  wait  for  February  2016, 
then we will proceed further. Definitely, Rodrigues will be part of the organising team, but 
which event will be held in Rodrigues I cannot answer now. We will definitely have events in 
Rodrigues. 

RODRIGUES - SEISMIC ACTIVITIES 

(No. B/905) Mr J. Leopold (Second Member for Rodrigues) asked the Minister of 
Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management  whether,  in 
regard to the recent repeated seismic activities which occurred at sea near Rodrigues, he will 
state the actions taken in relation thereto, giving details thereof. 

Mr Dayal: Madam Speaker, earthquakes occurring at the sea in the mid-Indian Ocean 
ridge located at a distance greater than 300 kms to the east of Rodrigues represent a low risk 
to the island of Rodrigues with no threat of generating tsunami waves.  

I  am,  however,  informed  that  the  National  Disaster  Risk  Reduction  Management 
Centre together with the Mauritius Meteorological Services and other regional international 
agencies  responsible  for  seismic  activities  have  closely  monitored  the  situation  with  the 
Authorities in Rodrigues for any eventual new seismic activity. Earthquakes in the region are 
monitored by the MMS, which is mandated to inform all authorities concerned.  

All  preliminary  precautions  were  initiated  as  per  the  Earthquake  and  Tsunami 
Schemes  of  the  Natural  Disaster  Scheme  (NDS)  2015,  which  had  been  released  recently. 

 

67 

Accordingly, all first response disaster management agencies were requested to be on alert 
for  any  prompt  deployment.  Furthermore,  all  authorities  concerned  were  ready  to  activate 
their Contingency Plans and Standard Operating Procedures. Press communiqués were issued 
on the same day to reassure and inform the public on any development of the situation. The 
Disaster Risk Reduction Committee of Rodrigues which has been trained to take appropriate 
actions met on the same day and initiated actions as per the Earthquake Protocols.  

Members of the House may also wish to note that a tide gauge has been installed at 
Port Mathurin to monitor changes in the sea level and in case of high waves likely to threaten 
the island, an early warning system to alert the population is already in place. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that once I was in possession of all the 
relevant information, I held a Press Conference on 22 October itself to reassure the public 
especially in Rodrigues. 

Mr Leopold:  I would like to ask the hon. Minister whether the Republic of Mauritius 
is fully equipped for the monitoring of earthquakes, whether he has an emergency framework 
for that and whether he will organise any pre-training programme in regard to earthquakes. 

Mr  Dayal:  Training  programmes  have  been  organised  as  far  as  Rodrigues  is 
concerned, and as to whether we have the full potential to deal with earthquakes, I would say 
“no” at this stage because we are waiting for the Doppler radar to come. In the meantime, we 
are  cooperating  and  collaborating  with  Reunion  Island  and  also  with  regional  and 
international  agencies  to  give  us  the  appropriate  feedback  for  the  initiation  of  appropriate 
actions in a timely manner. 

Mr Leopold: At the level of the Ministry of Environment, Sustainable Development 
and Disaster and Beach Management, is the hon. Minister doing any research to determine 
why we are having frequent seismic actions in the vicinity of Rodrigues? 

Mr Dayal: We have had a survey carried out by authorities from Reunion Island on 
this issue. We have a report, and I have already submitted a request to seek the possibility of 
having research through the numerous authorities to the PMO. 

FOOTBALL ACADEMY – SETTING UP 

(No.  B/906)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Youth  and  Sports  whether,  in  regard  to  the  setting  up  of  a  Football 
Academy,  as announced by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister in his Speech during the National 
Sports Award 2014, he will state where matters stand.  

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Madam  Speaker,  I  would  like  to  refer  the  hon.  Member  to  the 
reply I made to PQ B/164 wherein I informed the House that consultations on the setting up 

 

68 

of the Football Academy in Mauritius are still ongoing with several Football Academies or 
well-known Soccer Clubs. Proposals are still being received from other well-known foreign 
academies and clubs. 

Madam Speaker, all these efforts are being undertaken with a view to ensuring that 
the  Academy  that  would  be  set  up  would  be  of  the  required  standard  and  would  lay  the 
foundation  for  the  revival  of  the  football  at  all  levels.  However,  we  need  to  examine  all 
proposals carefully before proceedings since we do have financial implications as well.  

Besides,  as  I  have  already  informed  the  House,  that  all  écoles  de  foot,  Centres 
Techniques  Régionaux  et  Centre  Technique  National  François  Blaquart  are  already 
operational since August this year.  

The House may also wish to be informed that I am also coming up with Regulations 
to  give  a  legal  framework  to  the  operation  of  academies  of  team  sports  in  Mauritius. 
Regulations have already been transmitted to the State Law Office for vetting. 

Mr  Quirin:  En  effet,  Madame  la  présidente,  j’avais  adressé  une  question 
pratiquement identique à l’honorable ministre il y a huit mois de cela. Et là, je constate que 
dans sa réponse les  choses n’ont pas beaucoup  bougé et que son ministère  est toujours au 
stade de consultation. Peut-on savoir, de façon à ce que cela ne passe pas pour un bluff, est-ce 
que le ministre peut déposer copies des correspondances échangées avec les clubs concernés, 
à l’époque, il avait cité West Ham, Celtic et Bastia. Peut-on savoir si ces clubs sont toujours 
partants ou bien il y en a d’autres ou bien c’est simplement quelque chose qui a figuré dans le 
discours-programme  et  repris  par  l’honorable  Premier  ministre  lors  du  sports  awards 
dernier ? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Madam  Speaker,  this  Government  is  not  a  bluff.    This 
Government means business.  We have got many correspondences from many teams.  We 
need to examine everything. We need to meet them.  At the time I am talking in this House, I 
have got clubs coming from France today itself to meet me tomorrow morning.  So, we need 
to examine everything. 

Mr  Quirin:  Madame  la  présidente,  le  ministre  vient  d’affirmer  qu’il  y  a  des 
correspondances  qui  ont  été  échangées  et  qui  sont  en  sa  possession.  Peut-il,  de  ce  fait, 
déposer  ces  copies  sur  la  table  de  l’Assemblée,  afin  que  les  membres  puissent  prendre 
connaissance ? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, I think the hon. Member will agree with me that 

it is not correct to give information from other clubs; to make it public.   

(Interruptions) 

 

69 

I think it is not rubbish, we are talking about football. 
(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Jhugroo! 

(Interruptions) 
Hon. Jhugroo, please, you are interrupting the House! 
(Interruptions) 

Hon. Shakeel Mohamed, please!  

(Interruptions) 

Please proceed, hon. Minister of Youth and Sports. Order in the House, please! 

CENTRE TECHNIQUE NATIONAL DE FOOTBALL FRANÇOIS BLAQUART - 

OPERATION 

(No.  B/907)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to Centre Technique National de 
Football François Blaquart, he will state if same is fully operational and, if so, indicate the - 

(a)  
(b)  

age group and respective coaches thereof, and  
if weekly training sessions are held thereat and,  if so, indicate the days  and 
time thereof and, if not why not. 

Mr Sawmynaden:  Madam Speaker,  I would like to refer the hon. Member to the 
reply that I made to the PQ B/396 where I informed the House, among others, that the Centre 
Technique  National  de  Football  François  Blaquart  is  operational  as  from  beginning  of 
August this year. 

Madam Speaker: Can we have some order in the House, please!  The hon. Minister 

is replying to his Parliamentary Question. 

Mr Sawmynaden: As regards parts (a) and (b) of the question, I am circulating the 

information requested for. 

Mr  Quirin:  Madame  la  présidente,  le  ministre  peut-il  confirmer  que  le  Centre 

Technique National de Football François Blaquart fonctionne à plein régime?  

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Madam  Speaker,  le  Centre  Technique  National  de  Football 
François  Blaquart  is  functioning,  but  we  should  take  into  account  that,  for  the  last  six  or 
seven years, there was no activity at all.  We started from scratch. 

(Interruptions) 

 
Mr Quirin: Madame la présidente, … 

70 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Jhugroo, please! 
Mr  Quirin:  L’honorable  ministre  devrait  aller  s’enquérir  pour  voir  à  l’époque  qui 
sont  ceux  qui  avaient  fermé  le  Centre  Technique  National  de  Football  François  Blaquart. 
Malheureusement, s’il le savait, il n’aurait pas affirmé ce qu’il vient de dire. 

Madam Speaker: Your question, please! 
Mr Quirin: Ma question, Madame la présidente: puisque le ministre dit que le centre 
fonctionne,  peut-on  savoir  s’il  y  a  un  comité  de  direction  et,  si  tel  est  le  cas,  qui  est  la 
personne à la tête de ce comité et les personnes formant partie de ce comité ? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Madame  la  présidente,  le  centre  a  été  rouvert  au  mois  d’août. 
C’est  maintenant  que  tout  est  mis  en  place,  et  les  élèves  commencent  à  intégrer  le  centre 
national pour pouvoir exercer la pratique du football. 
(Interruptions) 

Il n’y a pas de comité de gestion. Pour l’instant, le ministère… 

Madam Speaker: No interruptions, please! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Have you finished, hon. Minister?  

Mr Sawmynaden:  Actually, it is run by officers of my Ministry. 
Mr Quirin: Madame la présidente, peut-on savoir aussi s’il existe une commission 
technique qui travaille sur le projet de formation, incluant les membres de la MFA et aussi les 
entraîneurs du centre? Est-ce que cette commission existe et, si tel est le cas, de nous dire qui 
en est le responsable ? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, I have just answered that at the moment there is 
no  comité  de  gestion,  parce  que  ce  sont  les  officiers  de  mon  ministère  qui  s’occupent  du 
centre pour le relancer. La MFA, avec tous les soucis qu’ils ont eus au niveau de la FIFA, 
devait le faire depuis le mois de janvier - on est entré que pour le bien du foot -, mais la MFA 
va entrer après que tous les problèmes soient réglés. 

ENTENTE SPORTIVE DE GOODLANDS & THE GOODLANDS YOUNG STARS 

VOLLEYBALL CLUBS - RECOGNITION 

71 

 
(No.  B/908)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Youth  and  Sports  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Entente  Sportive  de 
Goodlands and the Goodlands Young Stars Volleyball Clubs, he will – 

(a)  

for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Association  Mauricienne  de 
Volleyball,  information  as  to  if  they  have  participated  in  the  National 
Volleyball Championship Division 1 which was held recently, and  

(b)  

state if they are recognized by his Ministry. 

Mr Sawmynaden: I am informed by the Association mauricienne de volleyball that 
Entente Sportive de Goodlands has not participated in the National Volleyball Championship 
Division 1 in 2015 as it is not affiliated to the  Federation. As for Goodlands Young Stars 
Volleyball  Club,  its  men’s  team  has  participated  in  the  National  Volleyball  Championship 
Division 2 while its women’s team played in the National Volleyball Championship Division 
1.  

I am further informed that Goodlands Young Stars Volleyball Club is affiliated to the 

Association mauricienne de volleyball for many years.  

As regards part (b) of the question, my Ministry does not recognise Entente Sportive 

de Goodlands, as it has already been deregistered by the Registrar of Associations.  

An application for recognition from Goodlands Young Stars Volleyball Club has only 
been received on 03 November 2015 at the level of my Ministry. The application is still being 
processed. 

Mr Quirin: Madame la présidente, selon la section 11 du Sports Act, tout club doit 
avoir la reconnaissance du ministère avant d’aller vers le Registrar et éventuellement vers la 
fédération  concernée.  J’ai  en  ma  possession  une  copie  d’une  correspondance  adressée  à 
Madame  Christelle  Parsooramen  par  le  Registrar  of  Associations  qui  avait  sollicité  le 
Registrar afin d’avoir certaines informations précises concernant ces deux clubs qui, comme 
je l’affirme dans ma question, avait participé à certains championnats, et d’après la réponse 
du Registrar, les deux clubs en question ne sont plus reconnus par le Registrar. De ce fait, le 
ministre peut-il nous dire - vu ce qui est stipulé dans le Sports Act de 2013 - comment se fait-
il qu’un club, en particulier le Goodlands Youngstars, qui a participé à un championnat de 
volleyball  au  niveau  national,  qui  n’est  plus  reconnu  par  le  Registrar,  qui  je  suppose  n’a 

 

72 

même pas reçu la reconnaissance de son ministère, a été reconnu par la fédération ? Quelle 
est la responsabilité de la fédération et son ministère dans toute cette affaire ? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, this club has been recognised since 2008 and, as 
per the federation, once they have given recognition, they never received any correspondence 
stating that the registration of Goodlands Youngstars Volleyball Club was struck off in 2013. 
So,  for  them,  there  was  no  issue  until  they  received  a  correspondence  from  another  club 
stating  that  their  affiliation  was  struck  off.  It  is  just  now  that  my  Ministry  received  that 
correspondence. 

Mr Quirin: J’aimerais que le ministre nous précise si la section 11 du Sports Act, qui 
fait  référence  au  certificat  de  reconnaissance,  est  toujours  appliquée,  et  si  tous  les  clubs 
doivent passer par son ministère avant d’aller vers le Registrar et éventuellement vers leurs 
fédérations respectives. 

Mr Sawmynaden: Yes, I confirm the law is still the same.  But, as you know, there 
were so many anomalies in the Sports Act that the Ministry has become lenient and let the 
sports continue.  Otherwise, all of them should have closed down. 

TOURISM INDUSTRY - FOREIGNERS - EMPLOYMENT 

(No.  B/909)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked 
the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism,  Leisure  and  External 
Communications whether, in regard to the foreigners employed in the tourism industry, he 
will give an updated list thereof, indicating in each case the - 

(a)  

post held;  

(b)  

name of the employing establishment, and  

(c)  

duration of the contract of employment. 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister  Madam  Speaker,  the  information  sought  has  been 
requested  from  the  competent  Authorities,  namely  the  Ministry  of  Labour,  Industrial 
Relations, Employment and Training and the Board of Investment and will, upon receipt, be 
placed in the Library of the National Assembly. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to inform the House that since 
July 2015, a Ministerial Committee has been set up under my Chair to look into the issue of 

 

73 

employment  of  expatriates.  The  main  task  of  the  Ministerial  Committee  is  to  devise  an 
appropriate policy with a view to encouraging the employment of expatriates in scarcity and 
priority fields whilst leaving other areas where sufficient trained labour is available to locals. 
As a starting point, we have caused the list of scarcity areas and parameters in the Tourism 
and  Hospitality  Industry  as  well  as  construction  sectors  to  be  reviewed  so  as  to  unlock 
employment prospects for local job seekers. 

As a result of representations received from some quarters, the list of scarcity areas in 
the  Tourism  and  Hospitality  sector  is  being  further  reviewed,  in  consultation  with 
stakeholders,  whereby  a  new  set  of  guidelines  governing  the  issue  of  work  permits  and 
occupation permits will be established to ensure a clear rule-based approach to this matter. 

Madam Speaker, the employment of expatriates is being closely monitored. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Has  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister  received  representations  regarding 
discrimination, even racial discrimination against qualified Mauritians for employment in the 
tourism industry, not only at managerial level, but also at high management level? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: I don’t recall receiving any specific complaint, Madam 
Speaker, but I will look into it. But the view of Government in the tourism sector, Madam 
Speaker, is that there is room for encouraging  Mauritius talent to grow at all levels of the 
industry and that the attitude of employers varies from hotel group to hotel group, from hotel 
to hotel. Some are very  good, some are less  good, and the point of the whole policy is to 
encourage  those  who  are  not  sufficiently  giving  training  and  formation,  etcetera,  to 
Mauritians who are able to rise, encourage them to have a proper training policy so that these 
people can rise to their potential. 

Mr Bhagwan: One last supplementary question. Can the hon. Deputy Prime Minister 
inform the House whether he has a case where one qualified Mauritian is at the head of one 
of the major five-star hotels or even whether there has been an increase in the number during 
the past years? 

The Deputy Prime Minister Whether four-star, five-star, Madam Speaker, there are 
some hotel groups which have very few foreign expatriates. Others have 3 or 4 or 5 %. So, 
we are looking at it. I don’t want to take into any particular case. We are looking into that and 
we are genuine in that we want Mauritians to have better scope within the tourism industry 
because they have the potential and also, Madam Speaker, to encourage wages to rise because 

 

74 

the whole point of Government also is to encourage prosperity within the labour force, and 
that is also the policy of Government. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Can  the  hon.  Deputy  Prime  Minister  check  and  inform  the  House 
whether certain hotels have given permits to recruit gardeners? I want the hon. Deputy Prime 
Minister to check and inform the House. This is a very specialised job, but we have many 
well  qualified  Mauritians  working  in  the  sugar  sector  and  they  could  have  obtained 
employment in the hotel sector. Can the hon. Deputy Prime Minister check and see whether 
this is true?  At least, Mauritians could be given priority. 

The Deputy Prime Minister We have now a list of priority sectors and I can assure 
you there are not gardeners on there. A number of issues will be looked at, including the total 
ratio of foreigners to Mauritians. Personally, we would not be in favour of just gardeners, but 
anything that can be done by Mauritians should be done by Mauritians in priority. 

Madam  Speaker:  The  Table  has  been  advised  that  the  following  PQs  have  been 

withdrawn. PQ No. B/913, B/933, B/934, B/935, B/936, B/937, B/938 and B/939.  

AIR MAURITIUS LTD - GUARANTEED LOANS 

(No.  B/910)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  whether,  in  regard  to  Air 
Mauritius  Ltd.,  he  will  state  the  number  of  loans  guaranteed  by  Government  thereto, 
indicating in each case, the – 

(a)  

quantum thereof  

(b)  

date on which the loan was guaranteed, and  

(c)  

terms and conditions of the guarantee.  

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, in view of the fact that the hon. Member 
has  not  specified  the  period  for  which  information  is  being  sought,  it  will  be  difficult  to 
provide an answer. However, I am informed that over the period 2001 to 2010, Government 
has guaranteed 17 loans of Air Mauritius Ltd, amounting to some Rs12.7 billion. As at to 
date, all these loans have been repaid by Air Mauritius Ltd.  

I am tabling the list of loans guaranteed by Government along with all the details. 

75 

 
Mr  Bhagwan:  Can  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  whether,  within  the  past  years, 
Government has guaranteed loans to Air Mauritius for hedging purposes, the guarantee, and 
the amount? 

Mr  Lutchmeenaraidoo:  I  cannot  give  the  information.  I  am  only  circulating  the 

loans which have been guaranteed by Government. 

MINISTRY OF YOUTH & SPORTS - MR R. M - EMPLOYMENT 

(No.  B/911)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 

asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to Mr R. M., he will – 

(a)  

state the capacity in which he has been employed in his Ministry, indicating 
the;  

(i)  

date of employment and;  

(ii)  

terms and conditions of employment thereof and;  

(b)  

for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Mauritius  Sports  Council, 
information as to if he has been appointed member thereof and, if so, indicate;  

(i)  

since when, and  

(ii)  

the quantum of the fees payable thereto. 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Madam  Speaker,  Mr  R.  M.  has  been  employed  as  Adviser  on 
Public Relations Matters in my Ministry with effect from 11 May 2015. He is employed on a 
yearly contract basis.   

He is being paid a monthly basic salary of Rs19,025.  

He is entitled to travelling allowance and gratuity according to regulations in force. So 
far, as leave entitlement is concerned, he is not eligible for the first year of contract. In the 
event of renewal of his contract, he will be eligible for a leave as per regulations in force. 

As regards to part (b) of the question, R. M. has been appointed as Board member of 
the Mauritius Sports Council with effect from 20 March 2015 for a period of two years. He is 
being paid an allowance of Rs850 per sitting plus Rs220 as travelling, in accordance with 
regulations in force. 

 

76 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Can  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  whether,  prior  recruiting  that 

person, he has had Police clearance through the Prime Minister’s Office? 

Mr Sawmynaden: All clearance has been obtained, and I can assure the hon. Member 

that he has no Police case. 

Mr Bhagwan: Can the hon. Minister then confirm whether that person was arrested 
on 12 December 2013 and was detained at Moka Detention Centre for assault on Police and 
was released on bail on 11 February? 

Mr Sawmynaden: As far as I know, that person has not been convicted, but I think 

the hon. Member is well aware because he was a member of the MMM at that time. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhagwan: I am not asking whether he was a member of MMM. I am asking the 

hon. Minister whether that person, who is an adviser … 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Can we have some order, please? 

(Interruptions) 

Order, please! 

Mr Bhagwan: I am asking my question, and I don’t know why the hon. Minister is so 

excited. I know he is a good friend of his. 

(Interruptions) 

I know he is a good friend of his!  But my question is: how can the Government - I am going 
to ask him the question through the Prime Minister - employ somebody who is on bail, who 
has assaulted Police, as an adviser to the Minister? 

Mr Sawmynaden: The information is completely wrong. That person is not on bail 
and there is la présomption d’innocence.  He has not even been convicted. Il a été acquitté en 
cour. 

(Interruptions) 

 

77 

MINISTRY OF HEALTH & QUALITY OF LIFE - RETIRED DOCTORS - 

EMPLOYMENT 

(No.  B/912)  Mr  M.  Hurreeram  (First  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine 
Magnien) asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the doctors 
who have retired from the public service, he will state the number thereof who are presently 
reemployed  in  the  public  service,  indicating  in  each  case,  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the 
contract. 

Mr  Gayan:  Madam  Speaker,  there  are  eight  doctors  and  17  specialists  who  have 
retired from the service and who have been reemployed. The information regarding the terms 
and conditions of their contract is being tabled. 

Mr  Hurreeram:  Madam  Speaker,  will  the  hon.  Minister  consider  eventually  to 

replace those retired doctors, whose contract is coming to an end, by young graduates? 

Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, it is the policy of the Ministry to ensure that, as far as 
possible, new doctors are recruited.  But there are some areas where we still need specialists, 
and this is why these people have been reemployed. 

FLIC EN FLAC - PRIVATE CLINIC - OPERATION 

(No.  B/913)  Mr  J.  C.  Barbier  (Fifth  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and  Beach 
Management whether, in regard to a private clinic actually operating in the region of Flic en 
Flac, he will state the - 

(a) 

(b) 
(c) 

date  on  which  the  application  for  the  issue  of  an  Environment  Impact 
Assessment licence in relation thereto was received at his Ministry, indicating 
the date of issue thereof; 
date of coming into operation thereof, and 
distance of the - 
(i) 
(ii) 

building housing same to the nearest residence, and 
standby  generator, 
is  compliant  with 
recommendations and regulations applicable therefor in each case. 

indicating 

if 

it 

the 

(Withdrawn) 

RING ROAD PROJECT - REPORT PROGRESS 

(No.  B/914)  Mr  J.  C.  Barbier  (Fifth  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the Ring 
Road Project, he will state if it is ongoing and, if so, give details and report progress thereof. 

 

78 

Mr Bodha: The reply to this question, Madam Speaker, is in the affirmative. With 

regard to the status of the project, I am informed as follows - 

• 

• 

• 

The contract for Phase 1 of the project was awarded to Joint Venture Rehm-
Grinaker-Colas on 03 November 2009 and  was  practically  completed on 31 
January 2013 with a further one-year defects liability period. 
During  a  pre-final  visit  effected  from  20  to  24  January  2014  (within  the 
defects  liability  period)  the  Consultant,  Arab  Consulting  Engineers  (ACE), 
notified the contractor, Joint Venture Rehm-Grinaker-Colas, of defects noted 
during the preceding one-year period, namely - 

(a) 

(b) 

eight cracks and settlement observed over a stretch of about 75 m of 
road in a high fill zone supported by a reinforced earth retaining wall, 
which collapsed; 
a longitudinal thin crack, about 25 m long, noted in the asphalt of the 
road  at  the  end  of  Zone  4,  and  that  crack  was  repaired  by  Rehm-
Grinaker-Colas in November 2013 by redoing the top wearing course. 
However, this repair was not accepted by the RDA and the consultant, 
and new repair works were designed by ARQ. 

The remedial works are 38% complete till date and are expected to be fully 
completed  by  31  March  2016.  The  scheduled  completion  date  has  been 
extended on several occasions due to delays on account of exceptionally rainy 
period  from  December  2014,  breakdown  of  unique  equipment  on  site  and 
unavailability of equipment in this region, and poor contractor’s planning has 
also contributed to the delay to some extent. 

Madam  Speaker,  as  regards  Phase  2  and  Phase  3  of  the  Ring  Road  Project,  I  am 
informed  that  the  RDA  is  in  the  process  of  launching  a  request  for  proposals  to  hire  the 
services of a Consultant to propose the concept designs for the Ring Road Phase 2, that is, the 
tunnel, and that of the Ring Road Phase 3 projects, and to prepare the bidding documents. 
The consultant will, in addition, amongst other services, assist the RDA in the procurement 
process  and  carry  out  project  management  and  supervision  of  the  works.    It  is  expected, 
Madam Speaker, that the consultant will start his assignment in February 2016, and the total 
cost of the project is estimated at Rs5 billion for the Phase 2, that is, the tunnel, and Rs2.9 
billion for Ring Road Phase 3. 

 

79 

Mr Barbier: Madam Speaker, I think now the hon. Minister has got all information to 
establish who are the culprits for all these wrongdoings which we have witnessed throughout 
the region of Pailles and even Verdun. Will the hon. Minister now see to it that these same 
contractors, these same consultants are not taken on board for future projects, for road works? 
Mr Bodha: The hon. Member is right. We know what has been the cause of failures 
for the Ring Road and the failures at the Terre Rouge-Verdun. The most important factor, I 
think, is that there has been no preliminary testing before the design. I am also convinced that 
the RDA did not do the supervision works that they should have done. So, we are going to 
take all this in perspective. I am also more and more convinced that the figures which have 
been presented by Maynard as regards the cost of the infrastructural works for the tunnel and 
the viaduct have been highly exaggerated. I am convinced that we can build the tunnel and 
the viaduct for less than what has been so far. 

Mr Mohamed: Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister has spoken about the issue of the 
Ring Road and Phase 3, if I am not mistaken, as well.  Could he inform the House if, at any 
stage,  there  has  been  any  consultation  with  the  inhabitants  living  on  the  road  called 
Boulevard  Victoria  in  Vallée  Pitot?    When  did  those  consultations  take  place  in  order  to 
explain to them, following what was said by the hon. Minister Soodhun who was replacing 
him  last  time  week,  if  I  am  not  mistaken,  that  there  would  be  an  elevated  sort  of  viaduct 
carrying this highway across Boulevard Victoria, which would clearly, therefore, pass before 
houses of individuals? When have these consultations… 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, we have understood your question. Please, allow 

the hon. Minister to reply. 

Mr Bodha: The social aspect as regards the squatters has been taken care of by … 

(Interruptions) 

the  Vice-Prime  Minister.  We  have  also  realigned  the  road  in  such  a  manner  that  we  have 
saved the problem of another 70 squatters because we have changed the alignment. 

As regards the viaduct, one of the assignments of the consultant will be, in fact, to 

work out a design which will be accepted by the people along that Victoria Boulevard. 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Madam  Speaker,  may  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  whether  he  is 
aware that, with regard to Ring Road Phase 1, recently it has been reported that new cracks 
have appeared further down the road?  We did raise the question before.  We had the crack 
going  down  and  that  was  vertical,  but  we  never  talked  about  the  longitudinal  crack 
underneath, going through the Ring Road. I think that studies have not been done there and 
that’s why we see cracks appearing. Will the hon. Minister look into it? 

 

80 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan, we have understood your question! 

Dr. Sorefan:  Will the hon. Minister look into it? 

Mr Bodha:  We are going to do a complete check of the reinforced up walls over the 
whole project. I think, I, myself, have mentioned that we have some cracks at the end of the 
Ring Road Phase  I, that is, when we reach the  mountain.  We have  asked them to do the 
complete test from Soreze to the end of the mountain and the testing is still going on.  Works 
will have to be done in such a manner that they are going to be final works before we start the 
tunnel. 

Mr Bérenger: One question! There have been sanctions against some high officers at 
the  RDA.    The  hon.  Minister,  himself,  has  been  very  critical  of  the  RDA,  and  yet,  it  is 
confirmed that we are going ahead.  First time, building a tunnel, estimating it at this stage at 
Rs5 billion.  Now, is the RDA equipped?  We have seen in this case that both the consultants 
and the contractors have failed the country.  Is the RDA, now, equipped to go into this major 
first time tunnel job? 

Mr Bodha: Not at all! I don’t think that the RDA is equipped with the works we are 
going  to  do  for  the  first  time,  that  is,  the  viaduct,  the  tunnel  and  grade  separators  at  two 
levels.  In fact, we are working on re-engineering totally the management of the RDA and the 
management of the project, and to see that we have value for money and the best quality of 
works.  In fact, I had the opportunity in Korea to visit a tunnel and the way it has been done.  
We will have to have the best expertise at the RDA and the best consultants, so that we have 
the best design and we can start the work.  Also, we will have to see to it that there is no 
variation in costs, which has been one of the weaknesses in the last projects. 

Madam Speaker:  Last question, hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Jhugroo:  With regard to the several cracks found in the Ring Road Phase I, can 
the hon. Minister inform the House whether any enquiry had been carried out and, if so, can 
we know which enquiry and what is the outcome thereof? 

Mr Bodha:  The testing is still on.  The enquiry will lead to what we all know about the 
Ring  Road  Phase  I,  that  is,  the  proper  preliminary  tests;  geomorphological  tests  were  not 
done before the design was made. 

(Interruptions) 

 

81 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Jhugroo, no question from a sitting position, please! 

(Interruptions) 

PUBLIC SERVICE – RECRUITMENT 

(No.  B/915)  Mr  G.  Oree  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  North  &  Montagne 
Longue) asked the Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms whether, in regard 
to recruitment in the public service, he is aware that many schemes of service as presently 
prescribed are not compliant with a previous Cabinet decision and subsequent Circular dated 
22 November 2012 to the effect that only the highest qualification prescribed in the schemes 
of service be considered therefor and, if so, indicate if he will take up the matter with the 
Ministries,  Departments,  Public  Service  Commission,  Disciplined  Forces  Service 
Commission and the Local Government Service Commission for the said schemes of service 
to be amended in order to be compliant with the said decision. 

(Withdrawn) 

CITÉ ATLEE - MULTIPURPOSE COMPLEX - CONSTRUCTION 

(No. B/916) Ms M. Sewocksingh (Third Member for Curepipe & Midlands) asked 
the  Minister  of  Local  Government  whether,  in  regard  to  the  proposed  construction  of  a 
Multipurpose Complex at Cité Atlee, he will state where matters stand. 

Dr.  Husnoo:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  a  works  order  was  issued  on  06 
October  2014  by  the  National  Development  Unit  to  Super  Builders  Co.  Ltd.  for  the 
construction  of  a  Multipurpose  Complex  at  Cité  Atlee,  which  comprises  a  gymnasium, 
computer room, badminton court, kitchen and changing room. The project did not kick start 
in view of the General Election held in December 2014. 

I am informed that since  the project had not started by April 2015, it was decided to 
cancel the works order, the more so as the contract was not in order. It is to be noted that the 
scope of works granted to Super Builders Co. Ltd. pertains to building works, whereas the 
contractor was for all intents and purposes the zonal contractor for roads and drains.  

I am informed that the project is not on the list of projects to be implemented in the 
current  financial  year  and  that  it  will  be  taken  on  board  during  the  next  financial  year 
depending on availability of funds. 

 

82 

Mrs  Sewocksingh:    I  would  like  to  thank  the  hon.  Minister  for  the  answer,  Madam 
Speaker.  The hon. Minister just informed the House that, unfortunately, this project will not 
go forward for the time being. Madam Speaker, as we all know, Residence Atlee… 

Madam Speaker:  Put your question! 

Mrs Sewocksingh:…is a landmark.  So, I would like to know from the hon. Minister 
if, by the next budget, he will kindly put this project into the priority side so that we can come 
forward with this. 

Dr. Husnoo:  Madam Speaker, as I mentioned, this project was going to be carried out 
under NDU.  So, obviously we will have to send the request to NDU for the next financial 
year. 

Mr  Jhugroo:    Can  the  hon.  Minister  in  inform  the  House  for  which  reasons  the 

working order had been cancelled? 

Dr.  Husnoo:  The  working  order  was  cancelled,  firstly,  because  of  the  election  and, 
secondly, there was a problem about the contractor.  This work pertained to building work 
whereas  the  contractor,  Super  Builders  Co.  Ltd.,  was  for  all  intents  and  purposes  a  zonal 
contractor for drains and roads, not for building purposes. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Sewocksingh! 

CITÉ LA BRASSERIE – FOOTBALL PITCH - CONSTRUCTION 

(No. B/917) Ms M. Sewocksingh (Third Member for Curepipe & Midlands) asked 
the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in regard to State land, he 
will state if he has received a request from the National Development Unit for the vesting of a 
portion thereof situated at Cité La Brasserie for the purpose of constructing a football pitch 
and, if so, indicate where matters stand. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun): 
Madam  Speaker,  in  March  2015,  my  Ministry  received  a  request  from  the  National 
Development Unit of the Prime Minister’s Office for the vesting of a plot of State land at La 
Brasserie for the purpose of construction of a football ground.  

 

83 

The  request  of  the  National  Development  Unit  has  been  examined  and  the  Planning 
Division of my Ministry has proposed that an extent of 2 arpents 47 perches of State land be 
vested in the National Development Unit for a football ground. 

I have the honour and privilege to inform the hon. Member that immediate action has 

been initiated for the vesting of the land to the National Development Unit. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Sewocksingh! 

Ms Sewocksingh:  I wish to thank the hon. Vice-Prime Minister for that. 

DUBREUIL PRIMARY GOVERNMENT SCHOOL – PASS RATE 

(No. B/918) Ms M. Sewocksingh (Third Member for Curepipe & Midlands) asked 
the Minister of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific Research 
whether, in regard to the Dubreuil Primary Government School, she will state – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

the percentage pass rate thereat over the past five years at the level of Standard 
IV, Standard V and Certificate Primary Education Examinations respectively;  

the  schedule  and  reports  of  inspections  visits  thereat,  particularly,  regarding 
the level of attendance of the teachers posted thereat, and  

if any survey has recently been carried out to assess the state of the buildings 
and of the infrastructure found on the premises thereof and, if so, indicate – 

(i) 

when, and  

(ii) 

the outcome thereof. 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question 
relating  to  pass  rates  at  Standard  IV,  Standard  V  and  Certificate  of  Primary  Education 
Examinations  at  Dubreuil  Government  School,  over  the  past  5  years,  I  am  tabling  the 
information that has been compiled. The CPE pass rate stood at 50% in 2010 and has reached 
a peak of 74.07% in 2013. Last year, it was  57.14%.  However, for Std. IV, Std. V, the pass 
rate reached a peak level of 81.1% and 72% in 2014.  

84 

 
Regarding  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  the  School  Inspectors  and 
Supervisors of the Zone Directorate of my Ministry have been effecting monthly visits at the 
school  as  from  the  beginning  of  the  academic  year  2015  for  both  pedagogical  and 
administrative issues.  The report shows that attendance rate of teachers, for both the General 
Purpose and Oriental Languages, which ranges from 80 to 98% for 2015, are satisfactory.  

Madam Speaker, as for part (c) of the question, surveys on the infrastructural state of 
schools  are  carried  out  annually  and  a  list  of  infrastructural  works  to  be  undertaken 
subsequently identified and prioritised.  

I  wish  to  highlight  that  minor  projects  are  continuously  being  effected  by  the 
maintenance  team  of  the  Zone  Directorate  at  the  Dubreuil  Govt.  School.    Moreover, 
construction  of  additional  classrooms  and  conversion  of  existing  classrooms  into  a  pre-
primary unit were carried out and completed in 2014.  I am further informed that since the 
physical state of building is sound, no new major infrastructural project has been identified 
thereat for this year. However, any request with regard to infrastructural issues which will be 
received at the level of my Ministry will be given due consideration.   

CEB – TECHNICAL STAFF - OVERSEAS MISSIONS 

(No. B/919) Mr B. Jahangeer (Third Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to 
the  official  mission  undertaken  by  the  technical  staff  of  the  Central  Electricity  Board  in 
Europe from 03 to 16 October 2015, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the 
Board, information as to the – 

(a) 

composition  of  the  delegation  thereof  and  the  qualification  of  each  member 
thereof, and  

(b) 

purpose thereof. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo): Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Central Electricity Board that a team 
carried out a study visit in France from 03 to 16 October 2015.  

It consisted of – 

• 

Mr Shamsheer Mukoon, Production Manager 

 

• 
• 
• 

85 

Mr Asil Lotun, Engineer, Nicolay Power Station 
Mr Bernard Seblin, Engineer, Fort Victoria Power Station 
Mr A. A. H. Damree, Board Member 

I am tabling the information on their qualifications. 

With  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  the  team  visited  two  Combined  Cycle  Gas 
Turbine plants, one Open Cycle Gas Turbine plant and a LNG Terminal under construction. 
The  purpose  of  the  visit  was  to  follow  developments  in  the  design,  operation  and 
maintenance associated with such technology. 

Mr  Jahangeer:  Madam  Speaker,  can  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  explain  how  a 

member of the CEB Board and a non-technical member attended a technical mission? 

Mr Collendavelloo: It was decided by the Board that this member should accompany 

the delegation and there is absolutely nothing wrong with this. 

Madam Speaker:   Hon. Jahangeer, next question!  You have  got  a supplementary 

question? 

Mr  Jahangeer:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  tabling  the  result  of  a  public  bid  opening 

concerning the Expression of Interest for combined cycle gas turbine. 

Mr Collendavelloo: Well, I am very sorry, on a point of order.  How can the hon. 

Member do that? 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jahangeer, please confirm whether your question is related to 

part (b) of the Parliamentary Question.  Or is it something else? 

Mr Jahangeer: Yes, indeed, Madam. The mission was to… 

(Interruptions) 

Sorry! 

Madam Speaker: Ask your question, please! 

Mr Jahangeer: Part (b). 

Madam Speaker: Ask your question! 

(Interruptions) 

86 

 
Mr Jahangeer: Is the hon. Vice-Prime Minister aware that there is a serious breach 
of the PPA Act and the FIDIC condition and the CEB Act, that a consulting firm in the name 
of Électricité de France (EDF) organised this visit and was also a bidder in the same bid that 
I am tabling? This is a serious breach in international norm for tendering. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jahangeer … 

Mr Collendavelloo: Can I answer? 

Madam Speaker: Do you wish to answer? Okay! 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  This  day  is  the  international  rubbish  day  because  that  is  the 

greatest rubbish I have ever heard, even greater than what I heard this morning. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jahangeer, next question! 

(Interruptions) 

Well, I am sorry; you did not catch my eye. Hon. Uteem, if you have a supplementary, I will 
allow you. 

Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  Can  I  know  from  the  hon.  Vice-Prime 
Minister whether the visit in Europe and the site visited by these gentlemen from the CEB 
related to Électricité de France? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Yes, of course. The presentation was by EDF.  Then, there was a 
presentation on financial and technical aspects of supply and utilisation of LNG, following a 
study carried out by EDF.  The presentation… 

(Interruptions) 

Please, let me carry on! Then, there was a presentation of a project ‘Octopus’ currently being 
developed in Chile and there was visit of the Dunkirk LNG terminal and several other visits.  

Now, with regard to Mr Damree, he had been delegated by the Board of Directors to 
form part of the mission as his independent views would benefit the Board and were, indeed, 
of great quality. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  who  paid  for  the  visit? 
Was it paid by the supplier of the gas turbine or by the CEB and, if it is by the CEB, how 
much has been the total cost of this official mission? 

Mr Collendavelloo: I would need notice for that. I don’t know. 

 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Jahangeer, next question! 

87 

HIGHWAYS – STREET LIGHTING SYSTEM 

(No.  B/920)  Mr  B.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard 
to  the  highways,  he  will  state  the  lighting  segments  of  the  street  lighting  systems  thereat 
which are presently defective. 

The Minister of Local Government (Dr. A. Husnoo): Madam Speaker, with your 

permission, I shall reply to this question. 

Based on the information submitted by the local authorities, the main cause for the 
defective segments of the street lighting network on the highway is the loss of underground 
street lighting cables. 

I am accordingly tabling the information requested for regarding the segments of the 

highways where the street lighting network is defective. 

With a view to ensuring a better management and maintenance of the street lighting 
network across the island, the Government is working on the setting up of a National Unit 
which would be responsible for the financing, installation, management and maintenance of 
the street lighting networks for the motorways across the island.  In the meantime, the local 
authorities would explore the possibility of making use of the resources available at their end 
to carry out necessary repairs to restore street lighting on the segments which are affected. 

Mr Jahangeer: Is the hon. Minister aware that for the past seven years, the segment 

of Plaine Magnien has been in the dark and it is a danger to all drivers’ safety? 

Dr. Husnoo: Yes, as I mentioned, there is a problem. The local authorities are looking 
into it. There is some problem, as I mentioned, about the theft of underground cables and they 
are going to sort it out. In the long term, I think, we will need a national unit to take care of 
the whole motorway system in Mauritius. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jahangeer, next question! 

BATIMARAIS – HOUSES – ASBESTOS 

(No.  B/921)  Mr  B.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in regard 

 

88 

to the proposed pulling down of houses containing asbestos, especially in Batimarais, he will 
state where matters stand. 

The Minister of Environment, Sustainable Development and Disaster and Beach 
Management (Mr R. Dayal): Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that the Ministry 
of Housing and Lands had identified 64 houses containing asbestos materials which were in a 
depleted state during a previous survey carried out some years back. However, according to 
records, no action was initiated or taken. 

My  Ministry  has  now  set  up  a  High-Level  Technical  Committee  to  look  into  the 
problems and make recommendations for implementation. The Technical Committee tasked a 
survey team to carry out site visits at the housing units made up of asbestos materials. The 
team has already surveyed the 64 houses identified by the Ministry of Housing and Lands 
located at Triolet, Grand Gaube, Petit Raffray, Pamplemousses, Montagne Longue, Amaury, 
Lallmatie, Argy, Olivia, St. Julien d’Hotman, Camp Diable, Benares (Batimarais), Surinam, 
Bel  Ombre,  l’Embrazure,  La  Rosa,  Riche  en  Eau,  Old  Grand  Port,  La  Chaux,  Verdun, 
l’Agrément, Telfair and La Ferme. 

The survey has already been carried out and it revealed that four units out of the 64 
were  untraceable;  29  units  are  occupied;  24  are  unoccupied,  and  seven  have  already  been 
dismantled and the asbestos materials carted away.  

It  was  also  estimated  that  the  60  housing  units  surveyed  contained  about  64  m3  of 

asbestos materials. 

With regard to Batimarais, there are some 10 units that contain asbestos materials, out 

of which five are unoccupied.  

The High-Level Technical Committee has recommended that priority of consideration 
for the pulling down of the houses be given to the unoccupied housing units. For occupied 
housing units, a Plan of Work has been drawn up enumerating the activities that need to be 
carried out for the removal and disposal of asbestos materials as follows – 

consent forms to be signed by owners of the houses; 

(i) 
(ii)  medical examination to be conducted for all personnel of SMF and other 

(iii) 

relevant authorities to be involved in the operation; 
awareness and training of officers involved in the exercise by the Ministry of 
Health and Quality of Life, Ministry of Labour and Industrial Relations and 

 

89 

the Occupational Health & Safety Unit from the Ministry of Civil Service and 
Administrative Reforms; 
placing of enclosures around the houses prior to the dismantling exercise; 
procurement of personal protective equipment, and 
SMF to dismantle the houses. 

(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
This is what is on. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Jahangeer! On this question B/921, do you have any 

supplementary?  Because time is almost over. 

Mr Jahangeer: I got the answer. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leopold has a question.  I’ll allow him. 

Mr  Leopold:  May  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  how  and  where  he  will  dispose  such 

noxious substances? 

Mr Dayal: We have a scheme at La Chaumière. We have identified a site. As a matter 
of principle, we can even dig and put it inside, there is no risk. But the problem is we have 
identified a site at La Chaumière where we are taking all hazardous materials. As asbestos is 
hazardous material, we have a site identified where we are putting all hazardous materials at 
La Chaumière. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Ganoo! 

Mr Ganoo: With regard to the answer that the hon. Minister gave, the crux of this 
matter of pulling down asbestos houses is a question of funding. Is the Ministry envisaging to 
subsidise the occupiers of these houses?  Because the question of demolition is one problem.  
But then, who will be rebuilding these houses? 

Mr Dayal: The issue of dismantling is two-fold. First, we are studying the possibility 
of having the SMF involved and, at the same time, we are also studying the possibility of 
having  contractors to those jobs under the supervision of the SMF provided they have the 
skills  and  equipment.  Second,  we  are  in  the  process  of  finalising  how  we  are  going  to 
reconstruct houses, where we are going to reconstruct, and what will be the modalities. That 
will be taken care of by my colleague, the Vice-Prime Minister, hon. Showkutally Soodhun. 

Madam Speaker: Time is over!  

MOTION 

 

90 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10 (2) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move that all the business on today’s Order 

Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded.  

Question put and agreed to. 

STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS 

(4.42 p.m.) 

LAND RESEARCH AND MEDIATION UNIT – SETTING UP 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  my  statement  relates  to  the 
recommendations  of  the  Ministerial  Committee  set  up  in  February  2015,  under  my 
Chairmanship,  to  review  the  recommendations  of  the  Truth  and  Justice  Commission.  The 
Ministerial Committee has recommended amongst others the setting up once again of a Land 
Research and Mediation Unit previously called Land Research and Mediation Commission, 
which  will  be  responsible  to  investigate  and  advise  complainants  on  the  cases  of  land 
dispossession mentioned in the report of the Truth and Justice Commission. 

I am pleased to inform the House that the Land Research and Mediation Unit has been 
set up and is now situated at the 6th Floor, Baroda Building, Sir William Newton Street, Port 
Louis. The Unit comprises – 

• 

• 

• 
• 

Mr  Mahmad  Rehan  Mandary,  former  Deputy  Chief  Surveyor,  Head  of  the 
Unit; 
Mrs  How  Man  Yoon  Koo  Yuk  Cheong,  retired  Deputy  Registrar,  Registrar 
General’s Office; 
Mr Hunchun Gahesh, Attorney, on a part-time basis, and 
Mr A. A. Andoo, Land Surveyor, seconded by the Ministry of Housing and 
Lands on a part-time basis. 

The Unit has started work yesterday, 16 November. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  have  previously  informed  the  House  in  reply  to  parliamentary 
questions  that  the  previous  Land  Research  and  Monitoring  Commission  had  carried  out 
research on the 224 cases of dispossession of land mentioned in the report of the Truth and 
Justice  Commission.  It  has  submitted  an  interim  report  in  April  2015.  In  this  report,  it  is 

 

91 

mentioned that there are 42 cases, that is, 27 in Mauritius and 15 in Rodrigues, where there is 
sufficient evidence of dispossession of land.  

Upon  recommendation  of  the  Ministerial  Committee,  these  42  cases  of  alleged 
dispossession  identified in  the  report  of  Mr  Mandary  have  been  submitted  to the Attorney 
General’s Office for advice and the way forward. I understand that the Solicitor General has 
set up a team of two lawyers to study same and to tender legal advice.  

Given the legal difficulties involved, the new Land Research and Mediation Unit will 

give priority in the first instance to mediation between all the parties concerned. 

There are, Madam Speaker, 91 remaining cases which require further investigation in 
addition to 131 cases mentioned in the report of the Truth and Justice Commission which had 
not been investigated on account of late submission of requests. These cases will all now be 
investigated by the Land Research and Mediation Unit.  

The setting up of this Unit is a positive step to help those who have been dispossessed 
of their properties to have the necessary advice and assistance in their quest to recoup back 
their  land.  Those  who  have  been  victims  of  dispossession  of  land  and  whose  cases  are 
mentioned in the report of the Truth and Justice Commission can therefore now contact the 
Land Research and Mediation Unit. 

Madam Speaker, the Ministerial Committee continues to review the recommendations 
contained in the report. The Ministry of Arts and Culture is looking for land at Le Morne to 
construct the Museum of Slavery. The Ministry is also purchasing exhibits to be exposed in 
the  Museum.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Ministry  of  Social  Integration  and  Economic 
Empowerment is addressing the issue of economic empowerment of descendants of slaves 
and indentured labourers in the Marshall Plan which is under preparation. 

PUBLIC HEALTH INSTITUTIONS - NATIONAL IDENTITY CARD 
The  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  (Mr  A.  Gayan):  Madam  Speaker,  I 

wish to make a statement on the use of the National Identity Card in public hospitals. 

Over  the  past  weeks,  queries  have  been  raised  and  also  hon.  Dr.  Joomaye  asked  a 
parliamentary question as to whether it is mandatory for patients to produce their National 
Identity Card while attending public health institutions. I wish to bring certain clarifications 
and enlighten this House on the matter. 

Since  many  years,  notices  have  been  affixed  in  registration  areas  of  public  health 
institutions asking patients to bring along their National Identity Card for identification and 
medical follow-up purposes. The casualty card has a designated space to record the national 

 

92 

identity  card  number.  However,  this  requirement  is  not  strictly  followed  at  the  level  of 
hospitals and is also not adhered to by patients. 

Henceforth,  all  the  information  requested  on  the  casualty  card  must  be  submitted 
relating to the particulars of the patients namely: the surname, other names, address, sex, age, 
marital status, telephone number, National Identity Card number, next of kin (for minors). I 
am tabling a copy of the casualty card. 

There have been problems regarding identity of patients. For example, at the Brown 
Sequard Hospital, in the past, patients have been left after false names and wrong addresses 
were given by those accompanying them. At present, the National Identity Card is required 
by the hospital authorities in the following cases –  

(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 

issuing a notification of birth to a woman who has delivered a new-born baby; 
issuing a medical certificate or a certificate of attendance; 
issuing a certificate of cause of death, and 
when relatives come to collect discharged patients at Brown Sequard Mental 
Health Care Centre. 

In order to further modernise the health service, my Ministry is embarking on the e-
health  project,  which  will  provide  a  health  history  en  temps  réel  of  all  patients  attending 
public health institutions. In this connection, the production of the National Identity Card by 
patients  while  attending  public  health  institutions  is  necessary.  The  National  Identity  Card 
will be used as the unique identifier. This project will reduce duplication of services, wastage 
of pharmaceutical products and waiting time for consultation. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that an assessment carried out shows that 
around 5,000 foreigners, including expatriate workers, attended public hospitals in the month 
of  September  2015  alone.  With  the  increasing  healthcare  costs  and  in  order  to  ensure  the 
continued  sustainability  of  the  free  health  services,  it  is  high  time  to  review  the  policy 
regarding  access  to  public  health  services  for  foreigners.  Expatriate  workers  who  are 
contributing  to  the  National  Pensions  Fund  will  not  be  affected.  Foreigners  will  have  to 
produce  their  passports,  which  will  be  used  as  a  unique  identification  document.  I  am 
informed  that  amendments  have  been  brought  to  the  Economic  and  Financial  Measures 
(Miscellaneous  Provisions)  Act 2015  to  enable  the  Passport  and  Immigration  Office  to 
generate an identification number for all foreigners over the long run. 

Allow me to mention that for this current financial year the budget of my Ministry is 
Rs9.7  billion,  out  of  which  the  sum  of  Rs8.1  billion  is  spent  on  hospital  services,  which 

 

93 

represents 84% of the budget. I also wish to inform the House, just for indication, that the 
cost of attendance for basic treatment per patient is approximately Rs400 and it may go up to 
more than Rs800 if tests and further investigations are required. The cost of hospitalisation 
per day per patient is Rs2,400. A CT scan and an MRI in the public sector cost approximately 
Rs1,900 and Rs4,300 respectively. The cost of a caesarean section is around Rs19,000. Cost 
per bed in the Intensive Care Unit is around Rs8,500 per day. As far as specialised medical 
services are concerned, a cardiac surgery costs over Rs155,000. 

Therefore,  it  is  imperative  for  my  Ministry  to  use  the  National  Identity  Card  for 
identification and entitlement purposes as we have universal healthcare. My Ministry relies 
on the understanding and collaboration of patients regarding the presentation of the National 
Identity  Card  with  a  view  to  facilitating  healthcare  delivery  and  optimising  hospital 
resources. 

I  wish  to  emphasise  that  patients  requiring  emergency  care  and  treatment  at  the 
Accident  and  Emergency  Department  will  not  be  denied  services  in  case  they  are  not  in 
possession  of  their  National  Identity  Card.  However,  for  non-urgent  and  routine  cases 
attending other departments of public health institutions patients will be required to preserve 
their National Identity Card. 

As the House is already aware, Madam Speaker, service providers in various sectors 
of the Mauritian economy request users to produce their National Identity Card in order to 
have access to the services and there is full compliance. 

I trust that this will help in understanding of the rationale of the use and relevance of 

their National Identity Card at the hospitals and other health institutions. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker:  I suspend the sitting for half an hour. 

At 4.50 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 5.53 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair 

PUBLIC BILLS 

Second Reading 

THE PUBLIC HOLIDAYS (AMENDMENT) BILL 

(No. XIV of 2015) 

 

94 

Order  read  for  resuming  adjourned  debate  on  the  Second  Reading  of  the  Public 

Holidays (Amendment) Bill (No. XIV of 2015). 

Question again proposed. 

The Minister of Youth and Sports (Mr Y. Sawmynaden):  Madam Speaker, it is 
with  great  honour  and  deep  sense  of  patriotism  that  I  intervene  on  the  Amendment  Bill 
presented by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth.  

We  should  not  forget  that  during  his  previous  mandate  as  Prime  Minister  he  had 
already proposed to legislate on the matter. Actually, the Bill provides for public holidays for 
the  Abolition  of  Slavery,  the  Arrival  of  Indentured  Labourers  and  alternate  calendar  for 
Blessed Virgin Mary and All Saints Day. These changes result from various representations 
made by different constituent elements of the Mauritian population.  

First  of  all,  I  would  like  to  say  that  this  Government,  fully  aware  of  the  fact  that 
Mauritius  is  a  land  of  settlement,  seeks  to  do  justice  to  our  historical  background  when  it 
legislates the Abolition of Slavery and the Arrival of Indentured Labourers as two dates for 
remembrance.  

Mauritius owes a lot to both categories of settlers who have given their sweat for the 
development of some kind of society here, and slavery being one of the harshest experiences 
of human exploitation which the world has known. We are duty bound to honour the memory 
of all those who have contributed to the development of this country.  

In  addition  to  the  Memorial  at  Le  Morne,  we  hope  that  the  endeavour  of  slaves  is 
being granted today also a fitting “devoir de mémoire”. For the indentured labourers, let us 
not forget that indentured was a worldwide phenomenon which started in the 19th century in 
the  wake  of  the  abolition  of  slavery.  It  was  initiated  by  the  British  in  Mauritius  and  was 
considered as an experiment. After the abolition of slavery, the British brought labourers to 
work  in  the  fields  and  most  of  them  came  from  India.    Indentured  involved  the  mass 
migration  of  workers  from  India,  China,  Africa  and  South  East  Asia  to  labour-importing 
colonies. Many people do not realise that Mauritius was the first country which had recourse 
to indentured labour. 

Madame la présidente, alors que le chaos règne dans d’autres pays où la cohabitation 
entre  diverses  ethnies  débouche  sur  des  guerres  et  font  des  milliers  de  victimes  innocents, 
notre pays, lui, la nation arc-en-ciel, est cité en exemple partout ailleurs. L’exemple d’unité 

 

95 

dans la diversité, la capacité de respecter l’autre et de travailler main dans la main avec les 
autres  communautés.  Ce  sont  là  les  ingrédients  du  miracle  mauricien.  Ce  projet 
d’amendement est un pas de plus pour la paix sociale qui a été le socle sur lequel nous avons 
édifié la prospérité de l’île Maurice.  

Avoir  un  jour  férié  pour  chaque  célébration  aurait  été  certes  bénéfique  à  toutes  les 
cultures, mais vous le savez mieux que quiconque - ce gouvernement responsable - que cela 
représente un coût et un impact sur l’économie mauricienne.  

Voilà pourquoi l’alternance est la solution la plus juste. On se rappelle il y a quelques 
mois  la  MTTF  avait  fait  une  demande  pour  que  Cavadee  et  Varusha  Pirappu  soient  jours 
fériés en alternance, mais le nouveau Board en a décidé autrement. Alors, le Premier ministre 
vient avec l’amendement déjà circulé, et avant de conclure, je tiens à féliciter et à remercier le 
Premier ministre pour ce projet de loi. 

Merci. 

(5.57 p.m.) 

Mr S. Mohamed (First Member for Port Louis & Port Louis East):  In fact, on the 
first  list,  I  was  supposed  to  address  on  the  eighth  position  and  I  guess  there  has  been  a 
change. 

Madam Speaker, I have read with a lot of interest history when it comes to issues of 
public holidays. A lot of  youngsters, a lot of Mauritian citizens, a lot of people, including 
myself,  were  totally  unaware  of  what  exactly  was  the  situation  during  colonial  days,  what 
exactly was the situation during those days with regard to public holidays, how things have 
evolved,  how  the  element  of  a  public  holiday,  the  recognition  of  each  community  in 
Mauritius having the right, as enshrined in our Constitution, to practice their own religion, 
but also to celebrate such holidays that have, through time, become national public holidays. 
It  shows  how  we  have,  together  as  one  nation,  managed  to  take  pieces  from  various 
continents,  wherever  we  come  from,  and  bring  it  together.  We  have  harnessed  energy  to 
really come a very long way ever since prior to independence until 2015. 

I  have  had  a  lot  of  pleasure  going  through  Hansard  as  far  back  as  1957,  Madam 
Speaker. And it is with pride, just as the previous orator, the hon. Minister for Youth and 
Sports, also with pride addressed this august Assembly on this particular piece of legislation, 

 

96 

that I refer to a document of 1957. In 1957, late Sir Abdool Razack Mohamed, in a Private 
Member’s Motion, came up with the following motion. 

He said he begged to move the motion standing in his name ‘that this Council is of the 
opinion that the Muslim and Hindu festival days, numbering eight in all for each community, 
be considered and declared public holidays, to allow Muslims and Hindus of this colony to 
celebrate their religious festivals in the same way and with the same facility as enjoyed by the 
Christian brother.’ 

He goes on – 

“(...) that the days for the Muslims would be Eid Ul Fitr, Eid Ul Doha, the 10th day of 
Muharram and the prophet’s day.” 

The 12th day of Rabi Ul Awal, as I read in Hansard. Four days for the Muslim community 
was what he provided for in his motion. 

But  he  went  further.    The  same  motion,  as  he  was  then  in  debates  No.  8  of  05 
November 1957, Sir Abdul Razack Mohamed came up with the second part of his motion 
which talked about the four holidays for the Hindu community. Sankranti is what he argued 
for, he also argued for Holi, which is precisely part of the amendment I am coming forward 
with today, and he also argued for Deepavali and the last but not least, a lot of people have 
not  even  realised  that  this  forms  part  of  history,  it  is  he  who  came  with  the  motion  that 
Cavadee should be a national public holiday. Because before those days, none of those eight 
holidays that I have just mentioned were public holidays. This is history, and he explained in 
those days.  The funny thing, Madam Speaker, is whatever he explained in 1957 seems to be 
the case today, and sometimes I ask myself, yes, we have evolved, we have progressed as a 
nation, our country has progressed indeed, be it economically or financially, infrastructurally, 
but then again there are certain issues that occurred in 1957 - that he made reference to in his 
motion - that still exist today.  

Allow me to explain and to refer to what he said in those days. He explained why he 

came up with that motion.  He says, I quote –  

“There  have  been  occasions,  Sir,  when  Heads  of  Departments  have  refused 
permission to be off duty on those days to persons belonging to the Hindu or Muslim 

97 

 
communities  on  the  grounds  that  their  presence  was  required  in  the  office  and 
therefore whatever may happen they could not be allowed to absent themselves”.  

He  goes  on  to  talk  about  another  event  that  indeed  occurred  in  1957  and  keeps 
occurring today. A school refusing the right to a student to absent himself for the celebration 
of Bakreet, Eid Ul Doha, and the letter that was written in 1957 is same of what is written 
today.  The letter reads, I quote –  

“Dear parent, I write to say that I am unable to give permissions to pupils to absent 
themselves  from  the  examination.  I  have  told  the  pupils  many  weeks  ago  that 
examinations would begin (...)” 

But the last sentence is important, in which she says –  

“I must point out that these are the half-yearly examinations and of great importance 
and count towards promotion and prizes”.  

He  goes on to  explain when he was informed  of that, and people knew they  could 
make exceptions, they  could not then  celebrate those religious holidays  of importance. He 
goes on to explain after this motion was seconded by Mr Koenig in those days, in 1957. He 
goes on to explain why it was important to come up with those holidays. He talks about how 
people have to live together in peace and harmony, how it is important to recognise those 
important holidays. We may come from various continents, but we have not come up empty-
handed. We have come with part of who we are, our DNA lives on those cultural heritages, 
our  religion,  to  celebrate  those  holidays,  and  this  is  precisely,  Madam  Speaker,  what 
Government and successive governments have allowed people to do across the years, even 
pre-independence and post-independence.  

I move on to another time, the time of 1968, 11 June.  Hansard described us, at the 
Public Holidays Bill No. 18 of 1968, how Sir Veerasamy Ringadoo - he was not knighted in 
those days, but hon. Ringadoo - because the hon. Prime Minister - funnily enough - was not 
present,  stood  up  and  presented  the  Bill  in  place  of  the  hon.  Prime  Minister,  just  as  hon. 
Duval presented the Bill in place of the Rt. hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth who was not here. 

So, history repeats itself where in 1968, after independence, hon. Ringadoo in those 
days said how the fervour of independence was now over and, therefore, they have waited for 
the fervour independence to be over and they’ve talked about a Committee that was set up in 

 

98 

order to review the number of public holidays and it was important to bring it down, and the 
excuse of the justification, depending the way we look at it, the justification for the reduction 
in  the  number  of  public  holidays,  Madam  Speaker,  in  1968,  was  precisely  the  need  for 
economic progress, the need for the population  to work, the need to increase productivity.  
That was what was put forward in 1968, but lo and behold in 1972 - I see the hon. Leader of 
the Opposition smiling, but that is history and we cannot really change what happened.  

At one point in 1968, there was a move by the then government to bring down the 
number of public holidays, but all of a sudden in 1972, I find a move on the part of the then 
Prime Minister to increase the number of holidays. Of course, a lot of people then said this is 
not right, you are increasing the number of holidays, and this will not help the country as far 
as economic progress goes, as far as increasing productivity goes. But in those days, in 1972, 
the then Prime Minister maintained his position and he said that it was important not to leave 
out communities, but to bring them in, bring all other communities and to ensure that every 
one of them does not feel left out.  

So, I have started from the days, Madam Speaker, of 1957, and yes, I am proud that I 
happen  to  be  the  grandson  of  the  person,  hon.  Mohamed,  who  came  forward  with  those 
motions, and I am proud that he did that in the name of national unity; holidays, including 
Cavadee, Holi, Deepavali and all the other holidays I have just mentioned.  

Now, we have reached 1972 and it is another story altogether.  But things evolve, and 
it was not only those two times or three times that the public holidays issue was debated in 
the Assembly. We go now to 1982, in 1983 actually, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, as he was 
then and is now, came up with the Public Holidays (Amendment) Bill, and when I read the 
Hansard as to what was said by the hon. Prime Minister then in 1983, I may quote, he said -  

“The present list of 23 public holidays has been reviewed at various times in the past 
as the necessity of making a reduction in the number of public holidays has been felt 
since quite a long time. The primary reason for the necessity of such a reduction is 
that we are in Mauritius presently faced with serious economic difficulties and that 
every effort should be made by one and all for the economic recovery of the country”.  

So, once again, just as in 1968, there was this move in order to ensure that there was a 
reduction.  And reduction there was as from 1983!  But there was one issue that remained 
pending, which was addressed by the then hon. Leader of the Opposition who is the Leader of 

 

99 

the  Opposition  today,  but  the  fact  remains  that  history  is  so  interesting.    History  is  so 
interesting when I read what were the issues that were raised by the then hon. Leader of the 
Opposition.    The  issues  were  about  a  reduction.  If  there  is  in  any  way  a  reduction  in  the 
number  of  public  holidays  in  the  interest  of  the  nation  to  increase  productivity  and  to  get 
Mauritius to get up to work and to ensure that economically we could do better, there was the 
necessity,  therefore,  -  because  that  was  what  was  brought  up  during  consultations  -  to 
compensate workers, and that was the issue that was brought about.  

On the issue of having to compensate workers, there was a proposal that was defended 
very strenuously by the then hon. Prime Minister: that there was going to be what we call a 
special leave, a holiday for all those workers who had to go to attend, for example, Eid al-
Adha or Holi; that they could still take time off and they would be granted that time off. 

When  going  through  this  piece  of  legislation  of  1983,  I  read  the  very,  very  good 
intervention and remarks by now the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, hon. Collendavelloo, who, in 
those days, was also speaking with intent, as he is now, and who also was raising his hands in 
all directions, I guess, in those days, as he is doing now.  That was a very interesting speech, 
which I admire, which hon. Collendavelloo then made. 

(Interruptions) 

I am saying congratulations for the speech I read of 1983. So, now that I am congratulating 
you, you may smile. And what I read in that Bill, Madam Speaker, is the following.  Hon. 
Collendavelloo,  in  1983,  came  with  an  interesting  issue.  He  made  this  House  recall  what 
exactly were the lacuna that he found in the Bill, because there was a risk in those days that, 
even if someone decided that he did not want to take advantage of that holiday and did not 
want to go, there was the issue of maybe he was not going to be paid.  At some stage, hon. 
Collendavelloo  went  as  far  to  say  yes,  the  MMM  was  for  a  reduction  in  the  number  of 
holidays - was for a reduction. But, hon. Collendavelloo, in a matter of speaking - if I use and 
I  try  to  be  diplomatic  about  it  -  tried  to  tell  the  then  Prime  Minister  that  he  should  do 
everything, but not do it in the workers’ back. And he was right, because he was drawing the 
attention of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister then that it was necessary - and to use the words that 
he  was  using  then  when  he  talked  about  the  causal  relationship  between  leave  and  public 
holidays - to compensate the reduction in public holidays by a certain number of days which 
are called here special leave. He said - 

100 

 
“Let us not quarrel about the words. It is clear that both Government and Opposition 
have once again agreed on one principle, that is, that public holidays form part of the 
acquired  rights  of  the  workers  of  this  country  and  that  the  acquired  rights  of  the 
workers  of  this  country,  just  as  the  rights  of  everyone  in  this  country,  cannot  be 
removed without just compensation.” 

And he goes on to say, as I explained, that nothing should be done in the back of the workers. 
He said -  

“I am, therefore, saying that, by all means, let us reduce public holidays, by all means, 
let us to do so, by all means, public holidays are excessive in Mauritius.” 

And he goes on – 

“We agree with that principle and we are going to vote for the principle embodied in 
the Bill, but let not that be done on the backs of the workers.” 

Because he was of the view, in those days, that what was being done by the Government led 
by the Rt. hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth was at least dangerous, and he wanted clarification; that 
it  was  being  done  on  the  back  of  workers.  But  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  came  in  the 
summing-up and said no, he is ensuring that amendments be brought at Committee Stage and 
people could take on those holidays for Bakr-Eid, for Holi and all those other days that were 
reduced but were important religious festivals. 

At  least,  the  intention  of  the  legislator  in  those  days,  as  led  by  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister, the Leader of the House then, Leader of the House today, was that he believed in 
the importance that those public holidays should be celebrated. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
believed  and  showed,  through  his  intervention  in  Hansard,  that  it  was  necessary  to  bring 
together the importance of economic development, productivity, but it was also important not 
let go the issue of celebrating a public holiday of religious importance. So, he came up with 
this issue of calling special leave. 

But, in 1987, there was another piece of amendment that was brought to that law, the 
Public Holidays (Amendment) Bill, and that is when those two days were purely and simply 
struck off the list. That compensation that hon. Collendavelloo thought should be made to the 
workers,  should  be  given  to  the  people  of  Mauritius  in  compensation  for  taking  away  the 
number  of  holidays  that  were  reduced,  since  we  are  reducing  it,  hon.  Collendavelloo  then 

 

101 

stood up in Opposition, proudly, and I agree with what he said: compensation was required. 
The  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  also  said  that  he  believed  in  it  and  he  brought  the  necessary 
amendments  to  ensure  that  it  was  there,  but  in  1987,  it  was  simply  obliterated  by  an 
amendment. 

What was the justification? I am not going to play party politics on this, but there was 
a justification. The justification brought about and mentioned by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
then  was  that  it  seemed  as  though  whenever  everyone  was  taking  those  holidays,  it  was 
tantamount to the same thing that everyone was on holiday and it affected the economy. So, 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister in 1987 said – 

“We should not go on with the special leave it. We have to delete it from our books.  
Workers should not be allowed any more to take those special leaves and we should 
contend ourselves with what we have, which is a reduction without compensation”  

A reduction without compensation! I am all for the compensation, but ever since 1987 that 
compensation was not there anymore. 

(Interruptions) 

That  has  nothing  to  do  with  that.  I  have  learned  that  it  has  nothing  to  do  with  what  hon. 
Benydin just said, because I learned my trade from him when he was a trade unionist.  He 
was right in showing me that workers have to be protected, and I am sure he still believes in 
that. I am sure that he still believes in that principle that we should not do anything on the 
workers’ back. 

What I am trying to get at here is that hon. Collendavelloo at one point in time said 
certain things, which I believed, and now what I am calling out for, Madam Speaker, is for 
the same hon. Collendavelloo, who stood up in 1987 and came up with this very valid remark 
that those workers should be compensated.  I was not a Member of Parliament; I was only 
leaving in those days for my studies to the United Kingdom.  The Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
was on the same aircraft as I was and showed me the way and helped me on that day when I 
was leaving Mauritius in 1987. 

But what hon. Collendavelloo said in those days was right, and what I am calling out 
for today is a very simple thing. At one point in time, we heard from various quarters, be it 
from  the  Labour  Party  in  1968,  be  it  from  the  MSM,  the  PMSD  and  the  Labour  Party 

 

102 

Government  of  1983,  that  there  was  a  need  to  bring  down  the  number  of  public  holidays, 
supported in a Ministerial Committee that was set up in 1982. Why? For economic reasons.  
But,  in  1987,  the  economic  reason  was  no  longer  there  because  we  were  doing  very  well 
economically. And this is precisely what was said by hon. Collendavelloo in his speech in 
1987.  He said that the reason for removing those days, which act as a compensation, is not 
there anymore. The reason for reducing is not there anymore because in 1983, yes, we were 
not doing well economically and we had to stand up together as one nation and try to rise up, 
but in 1987 that was not there anymore.  But, in spite of that, it was removed. 

It is an opportunity today; it is not a question of whether we are reducing the number 
of holidays or not.  But the fact remains ever since 1987.  As I said, the issues raised in 1957 
still exist today. What are those issues? I have seen, and many of you must have seen, that in 
the private sector there are people who cannot go and celebrate certain important religious 
holidays simply because they are not allowed in law to do so. Just as in 1957, hon. Mohamed 
then said: you cannot accept a situation where we need the permission of our employer in 
order to go and celebrate a religious festival. 

The fact is it applied in 1957. In 1987, it started applying again.  The only time when 
this  did  not  apply  was  between  1983  and  1987  through  the  amendments  brought  by  Sir 
Anerood Jugnauth as Prime Minister.  

So,  ever  since  1987  until  today,  if  someone  wants  to  celebrate  Holi,  he  wants  to 
celebrate  any  other  festivals  such  as  Eid  Al  Doha  or  any  other  religious  festival  that  is  of 
importance to him, he cannot do so unless he obtains the authorisation of his employer.  I am 
not in any way laying the blame at the feet of this Government at all.  No, it is not a blame 
game!  It is a fact that this is the situation today, and what I am asking and pleading for is that 
we should address this.  Unfortunately, the Deputy Prime Minister, hon. X. L. Duval, at the 
last occasion, said that Government is not interested at all to increase the number of public 
holidays.  But what I believe the hon. Leader of the Opposition did, he showed wisdom in his 
proposal.  He said “ïf”, following the amendment I proposed myself, there was any way of 
even  considering  it,  he  thought  that  a  Select  Committee  would  be  the  wise  thing  to  do 
because it is a very sensitive issue. 

Madam Speaker, my plea to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is as follows: that, ever since 
1987, there are people who, time and time again, have not been able to go and celebrate a 
very important religious holiday because their employers have not allowed them to do so. In 

 

103 

each and every Member’s constituency there are people who have not been able to celebrate 
religious holidays, because the law, as it is today, does not allow them to do so. And that 
special leave that existed in 1983 until 1987 does not exist anymore!  

My plea to you, today, hon. Members of the majority, is that, we, together, can - yes - 
bring a correction to that lacuna.  Do we not want people of all communities to be able to 
celebrate  their  religious  holidays?    Is  this  a  way  of  coming  together  and  recognising  the 
importance of one another’s culture?  Isn’t this a way of recognising that this does not bring 
the country  apart, but brings it together  as one nation? And if we  are just for  a second to 
recognise the importance of that, my plea to the hon. Members of Government is to consider 
the proposal of the hon. Leader of the Opposition to set up a select committee in order for us 
to look at it again.  

I am all for one concept - and I would say it -, which is to let each community have a 
national holiday and no more than one national holiday for each community.  No one should 
be left out.  No one! Aucune composante de la société mauricienne arc-en-ciel, like we all 
love saying, should in any way feel that they are not part of cet arc-en-ciel.  I am all for a 
national holiday for each community, but I am all for a religious or cultural holiday, which 
will  not  be  a  public  holiday,  but  which  will  be  only  a  possibility  for  each  community  to 
celebrate an additional one, but the country keeps on working. 

So, there is a possibility of a re-think, re-looking at the whole process, and this is the 
opportunity because out there people feel aggrieved, Madam Speaker. People feel aggrieved! 
Had people not felt aggrieved, I would not have come with any proposal for an amendment. 
What I am saying is this is an opportunity, here, for us to try to bring the country together and 
to correct - let me call it so - une anomalie.  Une anomalie à laquelle, peut-être, on n’a pas 
pensé en 1987. Une anomalie qui, de ce fait, entre 1987 et 2015, Madame la présidente, crée 
une situation où plusieurs personnes de différentes communautés ne peuvent pas célébrer des 
fêtes religieuses d’importance. La constitution peut dire que  you have the right to practice 
your own religion, but they cannot. Just imagine a person who has to stay at work during a 
holiday that is important to him! Why not put our minds together and do it? Because what we 
are proposing here, Madam Speaker, does not address le problème fondamental. Le problème 
fondamental is that we have an opportunity to address it. I believe that it would be sad for us 
not to take that opportunity, Madame la présidente.  It would be sad for us to say, ‘Let’s do 
this and then later on we’ll see it’.  Because a lot of people have been saying ‘later on’ ever 

 

104 

since 1987! Ever since 1987, many, many  years have gone by and nothing has been done. 
Can you imagine that, in the US, the President recently declared ‘Divali’ as a public holiday!  

Yes! Go to the internet! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Go to the internet! It is now! Can you imagine the argument of productivity is always put 
forward!  I have come across many articles in order to research la correlation - si jamais il y 
en a - entre the number of public holidays and  productivity, because  a lot of people, ever 
since  1968,  even  1957,  have  said  that  when  you  increase  the  number  of  public  holidays, 
productivity goes down.  But nowhere have I ever come across a report prepared in Mauritius 
that  shows  this  is  factually  how  many  rupees  and  how  many  cents,  we,  as  a  country,  are 
losing  because  of  public  holidays.  What  we  do  is  to  always  rely  on  what  the  Mauritius 
Employers’  Federation  tell  us.    The  Mauritius  Employers’  Federation  prepares  a  list  of 
documents and says, “Well, we are losing money”.  But is that true? I fail to see it because I 
have come across a newspaper report in ‘The Guardian’, dated Friday 05 June 2015. And the 
article is called ‘The French take more holidays and work less; but does it matter?’  In that 
article  -  and  I  verified  the  figures  -  the  author  goes  on  to  say  that  the  French  worker,  on 
average, works 1,500 hours per year. 

The  French  worker,  Madam  Speaker,  works  on  average  about  1,500  hours  per  year.  
Among  OECD  members,  only  employees  of  the  Netherlands,  Germany,  Norway  and 
Denmark work fewer hours than the French.  However, the number of hours of work tells 
only a partial story.  At the other end of the OECD rankings, Madam Speaker, workers in 
Greece clock more than 2,000 hours a year on the job.  In terms of productivity, the Greeks - 
according to the figures of the OECD - work 500 hours a year more than the French or the 
Germans  or  the  Dutch  or  the  Norwegians  or  the  Danish.  The  Greeks  work  minimum  500 
hours more a year! Does it mean that the Greeks are more productive?  Of course, not!  Facts 
and  figures  and  history  have  shown  that  the  Greeks  are  not  more  productive  because  they 
work more than the French. 

I  have  come  towards  another  article  that  is  written  by  Mr  James  Doren,  August  08, 
2013.  China, the most productive emerging economy on earth, a prime example with regard 
to this correlation at all of public holidays, number of days off and productivity!  China has 

 

105 

more mandated public holidays than any other country in the world. Workers in the People’s 
Republic  of  China  get  a  staggering  total  of  28  days  of  national  public  holidays  a  year, 
according to this article.  

Productivity  per  capita  may  be  much  higher  in  the  United  States  where  there  are, 
contrary  to  popular  belief,  absolutely  no  national  holidays  in  the  true  sense,  not  even 
Christmas and 04 July, but productivity growth is way behind China. Why is it that China has 
more days off and more public holidays than the United States of America, but China has 
higher productivity, as opposed to United States of America with no holidays whatsoever, but 
productivity is down? 

(Interruptions) 

The hon. Minister of Good Governance believes that the whole equation is about the number 
of people who work. We are talking about productivity per head; we are not talking about the 
number of people who work. We are talking about the productivity per unit… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

Mr Mohamed: …as though, this article supported by the OECD in the measurement 
of productivity does not make any sense, as though what I am saying here and the OECD are 
just inventing those facts. And the hon. Minister of Good Governance is totally against what 
they say. It is his right! But I believe what the OECD is saying is precise. What it says here 
as… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please, don’t make comments which are not required! Please! We 

are losing the time of the House. Please continue! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed: This is what I am doing. 

But you should follow. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 
Madam  Speaker:  No  cross-talking,  please!  Hon.  Mohamed,  please  continue  with 

106 

your speech! 

Mr Mohamed: I am trying to adopt an attitude which is not conflictual in any way, 
and this is what I have done. I am trying to say, please, to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, to 
listen to my arguments and to consider the possibility of changing the law and addressing this 
anomaly where people cannot celebrate important holidays, where this compensation I was 
given in 1983 no longer exists. 

I  am  trying  to  establish,  Madam  Speaker,  that  the  argument  that  more  holidays 
decreases productivity does not hold because the figures of the OECD show clearly that in 
certain  countries  where  they  work  less,  productivity  is  more.  There  are  other  means  of 
ensuring  economic  productivity.  What  means,  we  have  to  sit  down  with  human  resource 
experts to try to address each sector how do we increase and improve productivity. It would 
be very simplistic to say, “Well, it is only because of public holidays that productivity has 
gone down.” That would not make any sense whatsoever. I am reading one last article here 
that has also referred to the number of holidays around the world.  The United Kingdom has 
paid  vacation  days  around  the  world  of  28;  France:  25;  Greece:  25;  Germany:  20;  United 
States:  zero  paid  vacation.    Zero!  And  the  OECD  goes  on  to  say  -  and  the  ILO  -  when 
measuring productivity, the country that comes the last is the United States of America with 
no  paid  vacation  as  opposed  to  the  United  Kingdom,  France,  Greece,  Germany,  Japan, 
Mexico and China. 

(Interruptions) 

So, what I am trying to say here is that this has nothing to do; they don’t have paid vacation. 
The debate is not about having paid vacation. The debate is about giving the option and the 
possibility to those people to celebrate those holidays. 

It precisely brings me to the reason why I have circulated an amendment. I am out 
here to find a solution. People have come to see me and said there are certain holidays that 
not  only  are  important  religiously,  there  are  certain  holidays  that  are  important  also  for 
opening  our  country  towards  the  interest  the  tourists  show  to  certain  festivals,  cultural 
tourism. 

I  remember  I  celebrated  Holi  when  I  was  a  kid.  I  remember  the  beautiful  colours 
being thrown around.  I remember the exchange of smiles, the exchange of beautiful gifts. I 
remember those days when I was still a kid, 8 years old. Today, Holi is not celebrated with 

 

107 

the same fervour, simply because it is not a national holiday. If it were a national holiday, as 
it was in the late 70s, as it was in the early 80s, things would have been different. 

When  I  talk  about  Easter  Monday,  people  say,  “Well,  why  do  you  want  Easter 
Monday?”  Logical! As it stands, today, Madam  Speaker, Easter is not a day that is in the 
middle of a week. That’s logical, it is celebrated on Sunday. Many countries in the world, as 
far  as  even  Malaysia  and  Singapore,  provide  for  Easter  Holiday,  Monday.  Why?  Because 
when you look at the situation in Mauritius, the fact remains; let’s look at the facts and look 
at the figures.  How many brothers and sisters celebrating Easter on Sunday take time off on 
Monday? So, the fact is: does it, in any way, change the reality of things? No! Because, in 
any way, they are taking time off on that Monday. They are taking that time off. So, in what 
way would it, in any way, take productivity down if they were to have time off on Easter 
Monday? 

When we come to Eid-ud-Duha, it’s the same thing. Everyone knows the importance 
of that religious festival to the Muslim community. Everyone knows the importance of the 
sacrifice of Abraham for the Muslim community. As it stands, today, there are many who 
cannot celebrate the sacrifice of Abraham within the Muslim community because they do not 
have time off from their employers. If certain Members of this august Assembly believe that 
time off should be obtained as a matter of right, that is not true.  In 1983, hon. Collendavelloo 
said it. You cannot obtain time off simplement parce qu’on demande, you have to wait for it 
to be given, and if you are not taking it, it is refunded. 

What I am saying, today, here, Madam Speaker, is that when people want to celebrate 
religious festivals, amongst others, be it Holi, bit it Easter Monday or be it the celebration of 
Eid-ud-Duha, you do not want to be paid a salary on that day. You can forego the salary, but 
you want to be able to be with your family, you want to be able to celebrate that holiday. So, 
what I would like to ask the Government to do through those proposals is very simple. Maybe 
it would not be the best solution, but there is a possibility of re-thinking this whole project of 
giving  the  possibility  to  people  to  celebrate  those  holidays,  which  they  don’t  have  the 
possibility today. If one person cannot celebrate any one religious holiday that is important to 
him because his employer does not allow him to do so, it is a Cardinal tragedy, and this is 
what I am trying to get at.  It is not a game of politics, Madam Speaker. 

What  I  am  simply  requesting,  in  the  name  of  national  unity,  is  in  order  to  bring 
together the need for a country to rise as a nation and to be economically stronger, what we 

 

108 

should do is put up that Select Committee that has been requested by the hon. Leader of the 
Opposition, which is a language of wisdom.  We put it together. We put our minds together, 
just as they did in 1968, just as they did in 1982. Do it again! So many years have passed by.  
Let’s do it again, let’s sit down, let’s analyse it, and let’s see! Maybe, there are possibilities 
that could be put forward that I myself do not have the secret to. I do not know, maybe others 
could help and bring solutions to this debate, but in the absence of any will on the part of 
Government  to  come  forward  with  that  solution  of  a  Select  Committee,  people  will  say, 
“Well, obviously, we are going to vote against this amendment that you are going to move 
for.” Vote against it, this is the right of every single Member. But what I am asking for here 
is, instead of me, I would want us to go for the Select Committee. If the Government wants to 
vote  against  this  law,  do  it,  but  it  would  be  a  chance  that  we  have  missed  out.  We  have 
missed out an opportunity to put our minds together on an issue of national importance. 

Thank you very much. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Gayan! 

(6.39 p.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  (Mr  A.  Gayan):  Madam  Speaker,  I 

have been listening for the last 30 minutes to the… 

(Interruptions) 

No, about this particular tragedy, Cardinal tragedy which the hon. Member has mentioned, 
about the Mauritians are not able to get time off to celebrate those very important holidays. 
But for the last five years, Madam Speaker, where was he? He was in Government! 

How come? 

And he was Minister of Labour! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Minister of Labour!  And how come in 2015, it dawns upon him that there is such an injustice 
being caused to employees? What was he doing when he was Minister of Labour? What did 
he do when his party was in power for the last 10 years? What did they do? And, today, they 

 

109 

come as though they pontificate in this House, as though they are God’s gift to the English 
language! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr  Gayan:  Madam  Speaker,  what  this  Bill  simply  does  is  to  incorporate  in  the 
Schedule two holidays which had been proclaimed otherwise. This is all that it does, but I am 
happy to say that when we come to this House, Madam Speaker, we have a duty to be honest 
to history… 

(Interruptions) 

and honest to everything. I don’t want to speak about arms trafficking…  

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Shakeel  Mohamed,  you  had  the  opportunity  to  intervene! 

Now it is his time, allow him to intervene. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Gayan: Yes, I don’t want to speak about arms trafficking! Madam Speaker… 

(Interruptions) 

I also have done some reading before addressing this House on this Bill. It is true what he 
said, that - and I am sure the Rt. hon. Prime Minister will be aware of this - before 1953, only 
the  Christians  were  entitled  to  public  holidays.  No  Hindus,  no  Muslims  were  allowed  any 
public holidays and it was thanks to the work of Mr Sookdeo Bissoondoyal… 

(Interruptions) 

and also Sir Abdool Razack Mohamed. 

(Interruptions) 

But  I think it is a mistake in this House just to pass over the contribution of Mr Sookdeo 
Bissoondoyal in this fight for justice for the Hindus and the Muslims. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah, please, you will have time to intervene! 

 

110 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Gayan:  Madam  Speaker,  let  me  quote  the  exact  words  of  Sir  Abdool  Razack 
Mohamed in 1972 in this House on the Public Holidays Bill, and he said: “Sir, much has been 
said by various orators concerning the question which is at present before us regarding the 
increase of holidays. This just reminds me that there was a time when holidays were granted 
to communities other than the Muslim and the Hindu ones”.  

It was only after 1953 that my friend who just spoke before me and the friend who 

spoke before him was Mr Sookdeo Bissoondoyal:  

“(…)  and  I  both  joined  hands  together.  We  fought  for  our  rights  with  the 
result  that  we  were  fortunate  in  getting  holidays  to  celebrate  our  festivals. 
When  I  say  ‘our’  I  mean  Hindu  and  Muslim.  Before  1953,  Sir,  I  had  been 
trying for years and years but I never succeeded. It was only after 1953 when 
there were enough people in the then Council to vote for the Motion that we 
succeeded with the result that today our communities are happy.” 

So, it was a long fight. It was a long colonial fight, but this is why I think that when hon. 
Mohamed speaks about history he should give the full picture. 

(Interruptions) 

In fact, I quoted the exact words of Sir Abdool Razack Mohamed. But he, himself, recognises 
the  contribution  of  Mr  Sookdeo  Bissoondoyal,  and  I  think  it  is  important  that  for  this 
debate… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, please do not interrupt the hon. Minister! You had 

all your time to intervene.  Please allow him to intervene now! 

Order, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Gayan:  Madam  Speaker,  we  are  a  multiracial  society.  It  is  always  a  problem 
when we talk about which public holiday should go to which communities. It is the debate 
which  has  been  going  on  since  1968  when  Mauritius  became  independent.  It  may  help, 
especially for the young Members of the House who may not know what went on then. It is 
important that I read a few extracts from what happened in 1968. In fact, hon. Mohamed is 

 

111 

right.  It was Mr Ringadoo who moved the Bill in 1968. And do  you know who rose and 
seconded the Bill? Mr Jugnauth!  

(Interruptions) 

the  stakeholders,  Government  and  other  people,  and 

It was a debate that took place after a committee had been set up of religious authorities, of 
all 
the 
recommendations  were  made  that  the  Bill  was  presented  to  the  House  and  the  Bill  was 
debated. 

it  was  only  after 

I  am  sure  that  hon.  Mohamed  would  be  interested  in  knowing  what  his  father  said 
then.  His  father,  Mr  Yousuf  Mohamed,  a  good  friend  of  mine,  was  quoting  from  La  Vie 
Catholique   – La Vie Catholique has a very wide circulation. I read the following –  

“Tout le monde se réjouira de la réduction du nombre de congés publics, leur 
prolifération était devenue indécente.” 

And Mr Mohamed is quoting with approval of La Vie Catholique. 

“Seulement, peut-être certains se demanderont-ils si la répartition a été bien 
faite. Après réflexion, nous pensons que oui, les fêtes choisies ne pouvaient 
pas  ne  pas  l’être,  le  1  janvier,  le  12  mars,  le  1  mai  étaient  indispensables. 
Quant aux fêtes religieuses et traditionnelles, il n’est évidemment pas possible 
de  donner  un  nombre  qui  soit  exactement  proportionnel  à  l’importance 
numérique de chaque communauté, mais la répartition des trois fêtes pour les 
Hindous, deux pour les Chrétiens, deux pour les Musulmans et une pour les 
Chinois semble raisonnable. Nous aurions, donc, tort de nous plaindre, même 
si nous avons dû sacrifier quelques fêtes traditionnelles. » 

And Mr Mohamed goes on to say –  

“This article goes on approving this list of public holidays which has been set 
up by the committee of responsible people, and this article mentions, among 
other words, this conception of sacrifice.” 

It was in that spirit of sacrifice that the list of public holidays was decided on in 1968. It 
was  the  then  Labour  Government  of  Sir  Seewoosagur  Ramgoolam  who  presented  that 
Bill.  Unfortunately,  Madam  Speaker,  in  between  1968  and  1972  there  was  the  sugar 
boom and, with the sugar boom, Chessworth came – I think it was Sedgwick or one of 
the Salary Commissioners… 

 

112 

(Interruptions) 

Lots of increases in salaries were given to everybody and people thought that the boom was 
going to be with us forever and ever, and then we know what happened. After every boom 
there was bust and it was during that boom in  1972 - because the elections were about to 
come! It is important that we bear history in mind. In 1972… 

Yes!  

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Non! The last elections were in 1967, and normally there should have been elections in 1972. 
Normally!  Then  the  coalition  comes!  In  1972,  Sir  Seewoosagur  Ramgoolam  presents  an 
amendment to the Bill, and I quote –  

“I  know  Sir,  there  has  been  some  criticism  and  controversy  about  this  Bill  in  the 
public  and  maybe  that  Members  of  this  Assembly  are  still  labouring  under  some 
misunderstanding on the purpose of the enactment that Government thought proper to 
present to the House.” 

 It was election looming in the head! First of all, years ago, the number of public holidays 
were 16, eventually it increased to much more than that, and later on when a committee was 
appointed to look into it, it would reduce the number of holidays to 11.  

Maybe  it  is  good  that  we  remember  that  there  was  a  time  when  we  had  about  30 

holidays and if a holiday fell on a Sunday, the Monday following was also a holiday. 

 So,  it  was  the  situation  which  had  to  be  addressed,  but,  unfortunately,  in  1972, 
instead of building on the good work done in 1968, the trend was reversed and there was an 
increase  of  12  public  holidays!  It  went  from  11  to  23  public  holidays  and  that  was  the 
beginning of the economic decline. That is why, in 1982, drastic measures had to be taken to 
reduce the number of holidays again. 

I  will  invite  all  my  colleagues  to  read  that  debate  because  there  are  lots  of  things 

which are said, words like ‘bourgeoisie’, and Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam said –  

 “We are aware of the difficulties that we may have in front of us but I would like to 
point out that so far criticisms of this Bill have come from a class of people which 
have always opposed progress and reform in this country.  

113 

 
They are the leisured class and they think nobody else has the right to enjoy a leisured 
life.  It is the purpose of this Government to create a society which everybody has all 
that  the  Government  in  a  country  can  offer.    The  bourgeoisie  in  this  country  must 
understand that life has changed for everybody, not for themselves only.  Therefore, I 
recommend (…)” 

That  was  in  1972,  the  boom.  The  mood  had  changed.    But  he  did  not  realise  that  he  was 
preparing  the  downfall  of  the  country  because  within  a  couple  of  years,  we  had  70,000 
unemployed people.  We had two devaluations.  Then, there was the first 60-0 with the Rt. 
hon.  Prime  Minister  and  the  hon.  Leader  of  Opposition  leading  the  fight  with  Harish 
Boodhoo.  That is history.  This is the legacy of the Labour Party.  

Unfortunately,  today,  we  see  the  same  thing  happening.  But  let  me  say  that  hon. 
Yousouf Mohamed did not speak on that Bill in 1972. From my notes, I do not see anything 
that he said.  But, Madam Speaker, the debate at that time was very acrimonious.  When Sir 
Seewoosagur Ramgoolam spoke of the bourgeoisie, Mr Lesage mentioned this –  I am just 
saying this so as to understand what was happening in the House at that time – and I quote – 

« Il y aura aussi la question de loisir, c’est cela qui m’effraie». 

Because this is going against birth control.  

«Ce gouvernement qui se dit justement : or, un relâchement de birth control risque de 
provoquer un problème démographique (…)» 

I do not need to comment on that.   

 (Interruptions) 

This was the kind of rhetoric that was being used in the House during that time.  And then we 
come to 1983. 

(Interruptions) 

In 1983, after the 60-0, the break-up of the Government, then, the Bill comes to amend the 
number of holidays and it was Rt. hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth who brought the Bill to the 
House.  Of  course,  hon.  Mohamed  has  quoted  extensively  from  what  hon.  Collendavelloo 
said. 

 

Yes, in the debate!   

114 

(Interruptions) 

But the crux of the argument of the Members of the Opposition, including the hon. Leader of 
the Opposition and hon. Cuttaree and everybody who spoke on the Bill, was with regard to 
compensation and not with regard to the number of public holidays. Everybody agreed that 
the number of public holidays had to be reduced.  

In fact, there had been a Ministerial Committee in 1982 which had worked on it and 
decided that we needed to get the economy back on track and it had to be done. And this is 
exactly what happened.  

Let me finish on this one, Madam Speaker.   Hon. Mohamed, third Member for La 
Caverne and Phoenix - there again, we have come to a time when the Opposition is now the 
present Opposition - who was with the Labour Party, is now with the MSM Government and 
the Labour Party in power, and this is what happened in the House. I quote hon. Mohamed - 

“Mr Speaker, we are talking about trade unions, increasing the power of trade unions. 
I am not against, but we also have to take into consideration that in this country, a few 
years ago, we have had trade unions used and abused by a political negotiator (…)” 

I wonder who that is! 

“It is dangerous to have a trade union built up for the purpose of the politics of one 
man or one party and we have witnessed that sort of situation before. I am talking of 
1979  when  strikes  were  actually  truly  illegal  and  where  trade  unions  and  workers 
were used for the political ambition of a certain person, for the political hunger of a 
certain person. With the result that in spite of warning given by the then Minister of 
Labour (…)” 

Your humble servant who was hon. Mohamed - it seems to run in the family - Minister of 
Labour all the time. 

“(…) no one was allowed by this man, thirsty for power to take heed of that warning 
and the net result was that we have many persons who have lost their jobs, two bus 
companies closed their doors”.  

 

115 

And  then  he  goes  on,  and  then  there  is  something  else.  But  then,  let  me  come  to  what 
concerns our Bill. He fights with the hon. Leader of the Opposition about what went on in 
1979, but I am going to pass over that because it is not relevant to the Bill today. I would like 
to say one thing more before I end.  That is not how I end, but hon. Mohamed ending. I quote 
– 

“It is regrettable that we have to go to the process of reducing the number of public 
holidays.  It  is  regrettable,  but  this  is  being  done  in  the  context  of  our  present 
economic  difficulties.  I  realise  it.  I  feel  very  bad  about  that.  After  having  gone 
through a great deal of ordeals in the colonial days, especially before independence to 
obtain  that  all  the  festivals  of  various  communities  should  be  public  holidays,  the 
main festivals today. It is a very sad thing indeed. I realise that it is going to be Eid-
Ul-Fitr. We won’t have Yaum-Un-Nabi, it was the last public holiday”.   

Yaum-Un-Nabi is the day on which the birth of a holy prophet is celebrated.  This was the 
preference of his dad, hon. Mohamed in 1983. 

(Interruptions) 

But anyway! I am just going through this, Madam Speaker, to show that this kind of debate, 
which  had  taken  place  in  the  past  regarding  the  public  holidays,  will  always  be  a  matter 
where people can have different views. But hon. Mohamed also said one thing in 1983 and in 
1968 as well. He said it because some of the Members of the Opposition were saying: why 
should Rodrigues, which is 98% Christian, have a public holiday for the Muslims or for the 
Hindus? Why should they celebrate that?  And hon. Mohamed said after 1968, we need to 
build this Mauritian nation.  He said: when it is Eid, people come from various communities 
to say: ‘Eid Mubarak’ to me. And it happens today.  

The process of public holidays which is celebrated by everybody is a building block 
for the nation. And he was right in saying that. What we are trying to do in this Bill, Madam 
Speaker,  is  to  show  that  there  is  a  balance  that  needs  to  be  struck  between  the  national 
priorities and private preferences. I was looking at what has happened in Uttar Pradesh two 
days ago.  Uttar Pradesh is a State of India. 

(Interruptions) 

 

116 

In  Uttar  Pradesh,  the  UP  Government  has  declared  a  holiday  on  17  November,  on  the 
occasion  of  Chhath  Puja.  With  this,  the  total  number  of  public  holidays  in  the  State  has 
touched 40. One of the highest in the country! This year, the Samajwadi Party, which is the 
party  in  power  in  Uttar  Pradesh,  is  thinking  of  including  as  public  holidays  the  birth 
anniversary of former Prime Minister Chandrashekhar, Mahrana Pratap, Maharishi Kashyap 
and Maharishi Jayanti, Hazrat Ajmeri Garib Nawaj, Karpoori Thakur and lots of other things.  
So, if we do not have a limit on public holidays, this is a rot that will inevitably happen. 

I am all for a system where we have public holidays which are celebrated as national 
public  holidays,  and  this  is  important  for  nation-building.  In  fact,  I  was  listening  to  hon. 
Mohamed - one can sense that this debate will be carried out in the public - saying that we 
have not accepted his amendment or even the proposal for a Select Committee.  

He  is  very  clever,  he  has  included  in  his  amendment  Ougadi,  Eid,  Holi  and  Easter 
Monday. This is pure demagogy, and let me quote what the Rt. hon. Prime Minister said in 
1983 when he was summing up the debate. He said – 

“Mr Speaker, all the speeches from the Opposition on this Bill which I have heard and 
listened with close attention cannot be described any less as demagogical”.  

We have not moved from 1983 to 2015, and this is why Madam Speaker, the amendment 
being  proposed  by  hon.  Mohamed  cannot  be  accepted,  because  it  is  pure  demagogy.  We 
cannot in this House play politics with the economy and with the national interest. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Gayan, the hon. Member has the right to put an amendment. 
You  have  the  right  to  have  your  opinion,  but  please  refrain  from  saying  that  this  is 
demagogical. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, I take your point, but I was just reading from Hansard 
of 20 December 1983 what the Rt. hon. Prime Minister said. And I say it again.  After he had 
listened  with  attention  to  whatever  the  Opposition  had  said,  he  described  them  as 
demagogical. 

(Interruptions) 

 
Madam  Speaker:  No  cross-talking,  please,  we  will  lose  the  time  of  the  House. 

117 

Please! 

Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, I don’t want to take any more time of the House, but let 
me say that this particular debate is fruitful. It is fruitful because we need, as a nation, to live 
in harmony with all the communities, we are a multiracial society, we need to understand the 
festivals  of  other  communities  and  we  need  to  live  as  a  Mauritian  whether  we  are  hindu, 
muslim, christian or whatever, when it comes to public holidays, these public holidays are 
our  public  holidays  and  there  should  be  public  holidays  for  everybody.  I  thank  you  very 
much. 

(7.02 p.m.) 

Mr A. Ganoo (First Member from Savanne & Black River): Thank you, Madam 
Speaker. As we have seen, Madam Speaker, and as we have heard, the objective of this Bill is 
two-fold.  Firstly, the purpose of the Bill is to provide for the commemoration of the abolition 
of  slavery  and  the  arrival  of  indentured  labourers.  In  fact,  we  are,  through  this  Bill, 
regularising a situation with regard to the abolition of slavery and the arrival of indentured 
labourers.  

In  fact,  Madam  Speaker,  I  have  a  copy  with  me  of  the  two  proclamations  that  the 
President  of  the  Republic  then,  Mr  Cassam  Uteem,  in  2001,  Proclamation  01  of  2001, 
whereby  the  then  President  of  our  Republic  proclaimed  01  February  2001  to  be  a  public 
holiday.  I  have  with  me  also  a  second  proclamation  which  has  been  published  in  the 
Government Gazette dated 18 August 2001, whereby His Excellency Mr Cassam Uteem, then 
President of the Republic, proclaimed Friday 02 November 2001 to be a public holiday. This, 
as  we  all  know,  to  commemorate  the  arrival  of  indentured  labour.  So,  these  were  the  two 
proclamations  issued  by  the  President  then,  and  we  are  today  correcting  a  situation  -  by 
including in the Public Holidays Act these two public holidays - which was not done in the 
past, and we are bringing the necessary amendments in the law to enable in the future by way 
of regulations to proclaim public holidays.  

The  initial  objective  of  this  Bill,  as  we  have  heard,  is  to  offer  a  solution.    An 
amendment has been circulated today, Madam Speaker, which comes and amend the Second 
Schedule as proposed in the Bill today, but be that as it may, in fact, we are today also - by 
way of this Bill which is being proposed and the amendment which has just been circulated - 

 

118 

proposing  a  solution  to  one  component  of  our  society,  to  the  Catholics.    In  fact,  the 
amendment does not now apply to the celebration of Thaipoosam Cavadee which was in the 
initial Bill, but which has been removed today by the amendment just circulated.  

So,  therefore,  the  new  amendment  is  only  proposing  that  the  day  of  celebration  of 
assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary or all Saints Day be a public holiday next year and 
the issue with regard to the tamil community has been removed, Madam Speaker, by way of 
this proposed amendment. There will be no alternative public holiday in year 2016 as far as 
the tamil community is concerned, from what I can understand from the new amendment that 
has been circulated today in this House. So, in fact, these are the two objectives of the Bill, 
Madam Speaker; one to regularise the situation with regard to 01 February and 02 November 
and, secondly, this question of alternative public holiday for the catholics in this country and 
this alternate public holiday proposed to the tamil community, but by way of the amendment 
proposed today, it is no more the case.  

Madam Speaker, I do not want to repeat what my friend, hon. Mohamed, and hon. 
Minister Gayan had done to go back in history. It was, of course, an interesting exposé by 
both Members of what took place in our society, in our country, during the last decades. But 
suffice it to say, Madam Speaker, because I have done some reading as well, I have gone to 
Hansard as well, and as pointed out by both the orators before me, firstly, it was not only the 
case  for  Mauritius  that  the  national  holidays,  at  that  time,  in  the  1950s,  were  almost 
exclusively in recognition of Christian religious festivities. In fact, it was the case in all the 
ex-colonies, Madam Speaker, the national holidays then were almost exclusively, as I said, in 
recognition of Christian religious festivities because this was the religion of our colonisers. 
So, it is logical that it was like that. In fact, the only public holiday besides these religious 
festivities in those days in the colonies was the Queen’s birthday.  

So, be it, Madam Speaker, with the passage of time, things have evolved and when I 
was reading Hansard also, it was not only interesting from the historical perspective, but it 
was also saddening, Madam Speaker, when we go through these debates and, for example, 
hon. Gayan just  gave an example of one Member in the Opposition of  that time who was 
saying that public holidays for such and such community should not apply to the Rodriguans 
because  95%  of  Rodriguans  belong  to  such  and  such  religious  denomination  or  in  other 
debates during those days, when discussing about public holidays, one Member was saying 
this component of the hindu community deserved a specific public holiday to commemorate 

 

119 

such and such religious festival. What I mean to say, Madam Speaker, is that, in fact, we had 
to go through these days.  This was the evolution of our society when, in this very House, the 
debates  were  sometimes  acrimonious,  “communal”  or  “communalistic”,  whatever 
qualification we can give to it, but this is part of our history. 

But let us be happy today, Madam Speaker, that we are in a plural society and, during 
the course of all these decades that have flown by, there has been a plethora of policies which 
have been put up by different governments to consolidate our national unity. Measures of a 
cultural, linguistic, religious dimension have been initiated to consolidate our nation building 
process. 

In  this  plethora  of  policies,  a  key  policy  initiative  of  all  governments  has  been 
precisely to give national recognition to, and celebrate our plural, multi-ethnic, multicultural 
nature of our society by making cultural festivities and religious events national holidays, and 
this has been a positive step, Madam Speaker. With the passage of time, many of the ethnic, 
cultural, religious holidays have even been embraced by a large majority of our citizens, and 
it is now, for example, very normal to see the various ethnic groups participate in the cultural 
activities  of  each  other.  Christmas,  for  example,  even  Diwali,  Madam  Speaker,  and 
Thaipoosam  Cavadee  also  are  celebrated  not  only  by  the  particular  ethnic  or  specific 
component which use to celebrate it. 

Today, things have evolved and rightly so, and this national recognition of ethnic and 
cultural diversity has cultivated, over time, a sense of national unity.  And besides national 
recognition and besides  all these measures that  have been taken by different  governments, 
national  recognition  of  the  freedom  from  slavery,  the  arrival  of  indentured  labourers,  the 
struggle  of  the  workers  which  has  been  celebrated  on  01  May  in  our  country,  our 
independence, Madam Speaker, have also been symbolic and emotional markers, helping to 
build our national identity. 

So, Madam Speaker, the Public Holidays (Amendment) Bill which is before us today, 
as my different colleagues have said before me, has been before this House on five occasions, 
and we were just given the dates: 1968, 1972, 1983, 1987, 1991.  I will not repeat what has 
been said before me.  At one time, there were 16 public holidays, reduced to 11, increased 
back to 23. All this was done at some time in the name of the imperatives of our diverse and 
plural  society.    As  hon.  Gayan  reminded  us,  in  1982,  there  was  a  Ministerial  Committee 
which  approved  a  list  of  13  national  public  holidays  and  the  principle  of  two  optional 

 

120 

holidays and, in December 1983, the Public Holidays (Amendment) Bill was amended to that 
effect, that is, to reduce the number of public holidays, after a consensus was reached in the 
House, Madam Speaker. 

So,  I  don’t  want  to  go  back  into  les  méandres  de  l’histoire,  Madam  Speaker,  but 
suffice it to say that we have reached a consensus in this country. Of course, no community is 
hundred per cent satisfied. Each community would have liked to have another public holiday. 
This is normal. In the Hansard, I can’t remember who said it, I think it was the former former 
Prime Minister or it was hon. Sir Veerasamy Ringadoo who talked about the grumblings of 
the different communities because we can never be satisfied. But what I want to say, Madam 
Speaker, the situation has been stabilised; a new order has been established in this country as 
far as public holidays. For years now, there has been a give and take, ‘sacrifice’, as the word 
was used in the Hansard, a mutual understanding, and this has been generally accepted in the 
country, save, of course, for some communities who are still complaining strongly for such 
and such day to become a public holiday like the Tamil community who has been strenuously 
campaigning  that  the  Varusha  Pirappu  becomes  a  public  holiday,  Madam  Speaker.  But, 
generally, a new order has been established in our society. We have struck the right balance, I 
think, and we must thank all other previous politicians of this country who have helped to do 
that,  those  who  were  before  us  and  those  who  are  still  in  this  House;  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister, the hon. Leader of the Opposition who were in this Ministerial Committee of 1982, 
and the law was adopted in 1983, Madam Speaker, to come up with 13 public holidays, as far 
as I remember. 

This is why, Madam Speaker, the amendments of hon. Shakeel Mohamed should be 
viewed with a lot of caution. I do not endorse.  I will not use the same word that hon. Gayan 
has used, but by proposing to increase the number of public holidays like the hon. Member 
has done - he has circulated his amendment - he is just dishing out public holidays to three 
communities; the Easter Monday for the Catholics, day of celebration of Eid al-Adha for the 
Muslim community, day of celebration of Holi for the Hindu community. He is just dishing 
out  public  holidays  to  three  important  communities  of  our  country,  but  this  proposal  is 
fraught  with  difficulties.  Why  not  dishing  out  to  the  Tamil  community?  They  have  been 
asking for Varusha Pirappu for so long. So, what about the Tamil component who have been 
claiming  a  public  holiday  for  so  long  for  their  New  Year?  This  is  a  long-standing  request 
from our brothers and sisters of the Tamil community. This is why I say we must be very 
careful. We cannot just fiddle and we must refrain from opening the Pandora’s Box. 

 

121 

Madam Speaker, this is my point of view on this Bill, but before I sit down, I just 
want to draw the attention of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to a major flaw in this Bill. It is a 
major flaw. In the Schedule, we see the number of public holidays, and the public holidays 
are  spelt  out.    But  I  think  there  is  one  which  has  been  missed  out  by  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister.  I  am  not  proposing  the  increase  of  a  public  holiday,  but  Number  4  is  Day  of 
celebration of Independence Day on 12 March.  But we are a Republic also. I think it should 
have been ‘Day of celebration of the Republic and Independence Day’. In 1991, we amended 
the Constitution to make our country a Republic and we were so proud of it. And there are 
four major events in the history of this country: the Abolition of Slavery, which is a public 
holiday today, the Arrival of Indentured Labourers, which is a public holiday today, thirdly, 
Independence, which is a public holiday today, and the final accession of Mauritius to the 
state  of  Republic  was  the  fourth  landmark  in  our  society.  In  1991,  the  Constitution  was 
amended, and I remember I was a Member of Cabinet in those days; I was the AG in those 
days.    The  hon.  Prime  Minister,  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  decided  in  Cabinet.  I 
remember  that  clearly,  as  if  it  was  yesterday,  that  we  should  not  choose  another  day  for 
Republic Day, we should coincide Independence Day and Republic Day. That is why we kept 
12th of March to be not only the Independence Day, but also Republic Day. So, I think this 
is… 

(Interruptions) 

Yes.  So,  I  think  we  should  correct  that  error,  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister.    I  am  sure,  during 
Committee  Stage,  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  can  just  amend  the  Schedule  by  adding  the 
word ‘Republic’.  So, it should read ‘Day of celebration of Republic and Independence Day’.  
This  question  of  public  holidays,  Madam  Speaker,  is  a  complex  issue  which  has  not  only 
destabilised at one time our country, but also many other countries.   

Banks, 

Eid-ul-Fitr, 

Gandhi 

Madam  Speaker,  in  India,  you  know  how  many  public  holidays  there  are?  I  am  not 
talking about the States.  Hon. Gayan mentioned 40 public holidays in one State, but I am 
mentioning Central Government.  There are seven! They are Republic Day, Annual Closing 
of 
Jayanti, 
Dussehra or Vijayadashami and Christmas Day.  Seven Indian public holidays in a country 
with so much cultural diversity and huge as India!  This is why, Madam Speaker, to end, the 
only appeal and the only  spirit that we should adopt when discussing about such complex 
issues  and  sensible  issues  as  the  Public  Holidays  Bill,  is  to  be  very  serein  and  patriotic 

Day,  Mahatma 

Independence 

 

122 

because l’une des grandes bases de notre réussite dans notre République de Maurice a été, 
sans  doute,  Madame 
la  présidente,  notre  capacité  collective  d’évoluer  dans  un 
environnement de paix et d’harmonie sociale.  

When we look at what just happened in France, Madam Speaker, all of us, I am sure, 

are very grateful that we are born in this small plot of land which is called Mauritius.  

Notre  ambition  de  construire  et  d’affirmer  notre  sens  d’appartenance  à  une  nation, 
Madame la présidente, doit continuer à nous guider.  Il nous faut sans relâche, Madame la 
présidente, dénoncer ceux, qui, à chaque occasion, succombent à la tentation de déstabiliser 
notre  cohésion  et  harmonie  sociale.  Il  nous  incombe,  Madame  la  présidente,  de  rester 
toujours animés par des valeurs républicaines, afin de continuer à bâtir une nation autour 
des valeurs universelles.  I have done.  

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

(7.23 p.m.) 

Mr  R.  Rampertab  (Second  Member  for  Flacq  &  Bon  Accueil):  Madam  Speaker, 
allow me to thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for bringing the Public Holidays (Amendment) 
Bill to this House. I have listened to all our hon. Members who have just made their speech 
before  me  and  the  summary  they  made  on  the  debates  that  were  held  in  this  House  many 
years back. They were very interesting, very informative, and I have learned a lot only the 
last few hours. 

Madam Speaker, after a micro survey I conducted myself with different age groups in 
my  district,  I  surprisingly  found  out  that  not  many  people  realise  and  know  that  a  public 
holiday is a holiday generally established by law and usually a non-working day during the 
year. However, as we know, Madam Speaker, they do vary by country and may vary by year 
also. Normally, in Mauritius, the public holidays are generally days of celebrations like the 
anniversary  of  a  significant  historical  event,  like  the  Abolition  of  the  Slavery,  like  our 
Independence  Day  or  can  be  a  religious  celebration,  for  example,  Christmas,  Eid-ul-Fitr, 
Cavadee, Divali, which we all celebrate as one nation.  

Madam Speaker, as we live in a multicultural society having different religions which 
co-exist in harmony, I can proudly say that there are not many countries in this world where 
so many  people from  different religions live  as  one community, and  everyone - no matter 

 

123 

what  religion  they  belong  to  in  this  country  -  can  freely  express  his  opinion  without  any 
hindrance. 

 Madam  Speaker,  I    have  to  congratulate  this  Government  for  sorting  out  this  issue 
which was long overdue. I am sure that several bodies have had the opportunities to voice out 
their  preferences  after  consultation  with  the  Members.    I  do  respect  the  demand  of  the 
different communities with regard to the requests they have made to decree their festival days 
to be a public holidays.  This brings me, Madam Speaker, to the amendments proposed by 
hon. Shakeel Mohamed, requesting that Easter Monday, day of celebration of Eid Al-Adha 
and day of celebration of Holi be included in the list of public holidays. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  am  confident  that,  at  Committee  Stage,  this  House  will  give  due 
regard to the above proposals and take the appropriate decision after having studied the pros 
and cons.  Madam Speaker, it would have been idealistic if we could have a public holiday 
for each and every important religious festival of the various religious communities in this 
country but, unfortunately, realistically, a choice has to be made so as not to disrupt la bonne 
marche du pays, be it as regards to the economy or education and even public services. 

To  conclude,  Madam  Speaker,  I  welcome  the  inclusion  of  section  7(a),  whereby  the 
Bill entrusts powers to the Minister to make such regulations as he thinks fit and amend the 
Schedule  as  deemed  necessary.  This,  once  again,  proves  the  sense  of  democracy  of  this 
Government by allowing a certainly leeway to the Minister to respond to the wishes of the 
population. Madam Speaker, after all, this is ‘l’Alliance Lepep’, pour le peuple. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Baloomoody! 

(7.27 p.m.) 

Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West): Thank you, 
Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, for all those who have spoken before me, the objects of 
this Bill are very clear. It has, in fact, two main objectives. Firstly, to render a public holiday 
the  Abolition  of  Slavery  and  the  Arrival  of  Indentured  Labourers.    In  fact,  we  have  been 
practising  these  two  days  as  public  holidays  following  the  decision  taken  by  the  then 
MMM/MSM Government in 2002 and, today, we are having it in the Schedule as a public 
holiday. 

 

124 

With regard to the second one, is either the day of celebration of Assumption of the 
Blessed Virgin Mary or All Saints Day be public holiday in the alternative. And this again 
has been the practice since 1998; following an agreement with the Church, of course, it has 
been  going  on  smoothly  since  1998.    But  the  only  addition  in  that  Bill  was  either  the 
celebration of Thaipoosam Cavadee or Tamizh Puttaaṇṭu (Varusha Pirappu) to be observed 
on the alternative - that was in the original Bill.   

On  the  day  when  the  hon.  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  that  is,  03  November  2015,  was 
addressing the House, was presenting that Bill at Second Reading, he said that we are coming 
to this amendment following a request received from the Mauritius Tamil Temple Federation.  
And this was when the  hon. Deputy Prime Minister spoke to this House on 03 November 
2015, and when the hon. Leader of the Opposition was addressing the House after the hon. 
Deputy  Prime  Minister,  he  rightly  pointed  out  that  we  don’t  have  any  problems  with  the 
others, except with this one where there were some controversies outside.  In fact, there were 
because of lack of communication. It is unfortunate that, on this issue, there has been much 
confusion in the community, lack of communication, and decision has been taken  au petit 
bonheur.  Let me be clear.  

We know, from a letter addressed to parliamentarians yesterday from the Federation, 
that well before 03 November there have been representations made to the Prime Minister’s 
Office, saying that the majority of the community don’t want that alternate between Cavadee 
and Varusha Pirappu. There has even been a meeting with the Chief Adviser of the Rt. hon. 
Prime  Minister.  But,  unfortunately,  when  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister  was  addressing  the 
House,  he  seemed  not  to  be  aware  of  this  communication  between  the  Prime  Minister’s 
Office and the meeting  which there has been in the Adviser’s Office. And what is  worse! 
There  were  two  issues  which  were  canvassed  by  the  Government  vis-à-vis  the  Tamil 
community. One: this was one of the themes of the campaign during the municipal elections, 
especially in certain areas.  Those who said it know what I am talking about.  They promised 
the Tamil community, because Cavadee next year will be on a Sunday, that Varusha Pirappu 
will  be  made  a  public  holiday.  This  was  the  only  issue,  which  apparently  the  Tamil 
community agreed. There was no Board. 

My good friend, the Minister of Youth and Sports, said that there was a change of 
Board.  There  was  never  a  Board  meeting.  There  was  never  consultation  with  the  Board. 
Probably, with one or two Members of the Executive, but the majority of the Executive were 

 

125 

not aware that Government intends to come forward with the law having alternate Varusha 
Pirappu  and  Cavadee  as  a  public  holiday.  So,  following  that  confusion,  there  has  been 
representations made yesterday and now we are back to square one. 

There  is  an  amendment  today.  Let  us  look  at  the  amendment!  What  does  the 

amendment say? Originally, section 3, subsection (3) of the Bill says –  

“3. 

Public holidays 

(3) 

In the year 2016 –  

(a) 

(b) 

the day of celebration of Tamizh Puttaandu (Varusha Pirappu); 
and 

the day of celebration of Assumption of the Blessed Virgin 
Mary,  

shall be observed as public holidays.” 

That was in the original. 

Now,  today,  Government  is  circulating  an  amendment  which  deletes  the  original 
section  3,  which  was  supposed  to  proclaim  Varusha  Pirappu  and  Assumption  of  Blessed 
Virgin Mary public holiday next year; we delete this section and we put a new section which 
is only that in the year 2016 the day of celebration of Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary 
shall be observed as public holiday, which means - and I hope the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
will clarify the matter - that next year Varusha Pirappu will not be a public holiday. Am I 
right? As per the amendment circulated, it won’t be a public holiday. And this is contrary to 
the promise made by Government on several occasions. Although Ministers were supposed 
not to address religious ceremonies, we know every time they are there and, especially, vis-à-
vis  the  Tamil  community,  they  have  informed  the  community  that  next  year,  because 
Cavadee is a Sunday, it will be a public holiday, and even more than that. 

(Interruptions) 

For the election and every time they are in the activities where the community is present. 

Government goes even further, Cabinet decision le 12 juin 2015. Cabinet has taken 
note of the list of public holidays for the year 2016 and, amongst the list, we have Tamizh 
Puttaandu (Varusha Pirappu) Thursday le 14 avril. So, by bringing this amendment, they are 

 

126 

creating more confusion. Which day will be a public holiday next year? Varusha Pirappu will 
be a public holiday? 

(Interruptions) 

No! But then, Government is going back on its decision. It is a Cabinet decision which they 
have canvassed all throughout, especially during the municipal election for this community in 
a specific area. Hon. Gayan knows what I am saying. Hon. Collendavelloo knows what I am 
saying. Many people know what I am saying. They have used this as an electoral bribe and, 
today, after taking decision, you are informing… 

(Interruptions) 

Sorry, hon. Prime Minister! 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody, address the Chair, please! 

Mr Baloomoody: Yes. 

No, no. Sorry! Anyway!  

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

So, we have it today that Government is going against its own Cabinet decision, is 
going against all that it has promised to the people, especially the Tamil community for next 
year - not for the alternate, for next year - which shows clearly that because now there has 
been  a  change,  the  community  does  not  want  that  alternative,  Government  has  decided  to 
penalise them with regard to the promise it has made to that community. 

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Prime Minister! 

 (7.36 p.m.) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I thank the hon. Members for their valuable 
contribution  -  and  also  invaluable  -  and  suggestions  with  regard  to  the  Public  Holidays 
(Amendment) Bill. 

As already stated by hon. Duval on 03 November 2015 during the Second Reading 
Speech, Government is  not in favour of any increase in the number of  public holidays,  as 
expressed in certain quarters. In fact, the objectives of this Amendment Bill are to incorporate 

 

127 

the  dates  of  celebration  of  public  holidays  which  are  not  of  a  religious  character  and  give 
legal status to the celebration of Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary or All Saints Day on 
an alternate basis. 

Let me reasure the House that, at no point in time, this Government came up or would 
come  up  with  a  proposal  to  increase  the  number  of  public  holidays  as  this  would  be  in 
contradiction  with  our  quest  for  social  and  religious  harmony.  The  hon.  Leader  of  the 
Opposition also agrees that increasing the number of public holidays is a sensitive matter and 
would need careful consideration. 

Now,  coming  back  to  the  various  interventions  on  the  Bill,  I  have  made  a  lot  of 
reflection to come up with an agreed formula acceptable to all religious communities so as to 
maintain the right balance between our economic imperatives and social fabric. 

Madam Speaker, in the past, requests to observe Easter Monday as a public holiday 
had not been acceded to by the then Government. Besides, any change in public holidays is 
made following consultations with the relevant religious authorities. 

Madam Speaker, I have listened with special attention to the beautiful intervention of 
hon. Mohamed and I congratulate him for the homework he did on the past proceedings of 
the National Assembly on public holidays. However, I wish to remind him that the objects of 
the  Amendment  Bill  are  not  to  reduce  the  number  of  public  holidays.  Instead,  since 
2001/2002,  two  additional  holidays  have  been  granted  for  commemorating  abolition  of 
slavery and the arrival of indentured labourers. 

I  also wish to point out that leave entitlement is a legal  right of workers who may 
avail of such leave and stay at home to enjoy festivals of their choice over and above those 
which are already declared public holidays. 

Hon. Mohamed has, by speaking so lengthily on the issue, demonstrated that it is a 
complex  and  sensitive  issue  which  has  been  discussed  in  this  Assembly  umpteenth  times. 
Hon. Mohamed has taken the example of other countries to show that the number of public 
holidays does not have a direct incidence on output and productivity. However, Mauritius has 
its own specificity and cannot be compared outright to other countries. Reviewing the list will 
create expectation which may not be warranted. 

Madam  Speaker,  my  Government  had  previously  agreed  on  a  formula  for  the 
celebration of Thaipoosam Cavadee and Tamizh Puttaandu (Varusha Pirappu) on an alternate 

 

128 

basis  to  accommodate  the  request  from  the  Mauritius  Tamil  Temples  Federation.  It  was  a 
request  from  the  Tamil  Temples  Federation  and  not  an  invention  of  mine.  However,  the 
newly constituted Executive Committee has reconsidered the recommendations made by the 
previous Committee and is no longer agreeable, and is requesting more time to hold further 
consultations with the Tamil community. 

However,  such  type  of  request  dates  as  far  back  as  2006  and  ample  time  was, 
therefore,  available  for  a  consensus.  Therefore,  we  are  no  longer  coming  up  with  this 
particular amendment. My Government will no longer entertain any such request for change 
in the future.  

Madam  Speaker,  the  amendments  proposed  by  hon.  Shakeel  Mohamed  for  Easter 
Monday and Eid-Ul-Adha to be added to the list of public holidays cannot be considered for 
the following reasons –  

(i) 
(ii) 

there should be no consequential increase in the number of public holidays; 
to  ensure  the  ethnic  balance,  promote  fairness  and  equity,  Government  has, 
through  the  years,  maintained  the  same  ratio  of  public  holidays  for  each 
community.  As  such,  the  proposal  of  the  hon.  Member  would  not  be 
appropriate, as the request is not in line with the objects of the Amendment 
Bill.  Moreover,  it  may  give  rise  to  a  spiral  of  expectations  and  result  into 
social and cultural imbalances. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  Schedule  to  the  Public  Holidays  Act  1968  provides  for  the 
celebration  of  only  13  public  holidays.  With  the  addition  of  the  commemoration  of  the 
Abolition of Slavery and the Arrival of Indentured Labourers, Mauritius is since 2002 already 
celebrating 15 public holidays.  

It is also noted that in line with section 7 of the Act, special public holidays may be 

declared to cater for special or exceptional circumstances. 

As a small economy, Mauritius needs maintain to the strict minimum the number of 
non-working days and cannot afford to further increase the number of public holidays. This 
could  undermine  our  competitiveness,  as  we  are  called  upon  to  operate  within  a  highly 
competitive and globalised digital market which requires constant interactions and businesses 
overseas.  

 
Thus, as a responsible Government, we have to strike the right balance and adding 

129 

other public holidays to the list would be irrational. 

Without  further  ado,  Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  thank  hon.  Members  for  their 

suggestions and for their interest and commitment for the betterment of the country.  

I have circulated amendments, which I will move during Committee Stage, and I will 
move  another  further  amendment,  which  has  not  been  circulated,  to  add  ‘Republic’  after 
‘Independence’. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, before we move to Committee Stage, we had a Bill 
before  the  House.  The  hon.  Prime  Minister  circulated  amendments  and  now  additional 
amendments are being circulated. So, I plead that we need, at least, a break, so that we go and 
compare the latest amendments to those circulated earlier on!  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, I understand that the amendment 
which is being circulated relates to the word ‘Republic’ which will be added to the Schedule. 

Mr  Bérenger:  So,  you  are  not  going  to  allow  for  a  break  for  us  to  study  the 

amendments that are submitted now? 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: It is only the word ‘Republic’ which has been proposed by hon. 

Ganoo. It is only this amendment which is being circulated, if I understand. 

 (Interruptions) 

That is the only one. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Bill read a second time and committed. 

COMMITTEE STAGE 

 

130 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

THE PUBLIC HOLIDAYS (AMENDMENT) BILL 

(NO. XIV OF 2015) 

Clauses 1- 2 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 3 (Section 3 of principal Act repealed and replaced) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stands part of the Bill.” 

 

The Prime Minister: Madam Chairperson, I move for the following amendment -  

(a) in clause 3, in the proposed section 3 –  

 (i) 
 (ii) 

in subsection (2), by deleting the words “items 1 and 2 of”; 
by deleting subsection (3) and replacing it by the following subsection 
–  

 (3) 

In the year 2016, the day of celebration of Assumption 

of the Blessed Virgin Mary shall be observed as public holiday. 

Mr  Bérenger:  I  don’t  think  we  can  take  the  amendment  to  clause  3  that  is  being 

proposed. I am going to talk about the three linked amendments at Committee Stage.  

Madam Speaker, the point has been made - and I am glad that hon. Duval is back - 
that,  in  the  course  of  the  municipal  elections,  a  firm  promise  was  made  to  the  Tamil 
community that next year the Tamil New Year would be a public holiday because Cavadee 
falls on a Sunday. This was promised. This was a solemn promise. And, when hon. Duval 
presented the Bill, he was categorical and, rightly so, he repeated that Tamil New Year next 
year would be a public holiday and then he said, after next year, there would be alternative 
public holidays in the Tamil Community: one  year for Cavadee and the other  year for the 
Tamil New Year. He reacted to something I had said to say that this was being done at the 
request of the Mauritius Tamil Temples Federation. Now, the amendment which the Rt. hon. 
Prime  Minister  is  proposing  kills  this  promise  that  next  year  Varusha  Pirappu  would  be  a 
public holiday and, in contradiction to what hon. Duval has said presenting the Bill! Why?  

I listened carefully to the Prime Minister.  The Prime Minister has tried to explain that 
there has been a change in Committee. No!  There has been a change in the attitude expressed 
by the Chairperson or the Secretary of the Mauritius Tamil Temples Federation.  There has 
been no change factually.  There has been no change in the Committee composition; call it 
Board, call it Committee, there has been no change.  There has been a change, and I warned 

 

131 

the  hon.  Prime  Minister  -  unfortunately,  he  was  not  here,  but  hon.  Duval  is  back.    You 
remembered what I said!  I said that there is trouble out there on this proposal to alternate as 
from - not next year - the year after.  I said there is trouble outside.  And then I said: I cannot 
be  plus  royaliste  que  le roi,  being  given  that  the  Mauritius  Tamil  Temples  Federation  has 
made that request.   

In  the  meantime,  they  have  changed  their  attitude.  You  can  say  they  are  wrong  to 
have changed their attitude, but it is most unfair.  As a result of a change in attitude of the 
Mauritius Tamil Temples Federation, it is most unfair. I would say it is even provocative to 
kill the promise made that next year Varusha Pirappu would be a public holiday. It is unfair! 
Totally unfair! You are breaking an electoral promise which you made. I repeat, it is even 
provocative.  So,  why  not  keep  your  word?  Why  not  make,  next  year,  Varusha  Pirappu  a 
public holiday and then we come back to what has been in force until now, that is, Cavadee? 

(Interruptions) 

What I am saying is the simple truth. I see the Prime Minister reacting. 

 (Interruptions) 

It is the simple truth that  you promised, and the Tamil Community was fully agreeable to 
next year Varusha Pirappu being a public holiday. So, my appeal is: keep your word, amend 
the amendment to the Bill, so that next year Varusha Pirappu is a public holiday, and then we 
go back to what prevailed until this amendment.  

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker … 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger: I think the normal practice is for the Opposition, and then the Prime 

Minister speaks on all. 

The Prime Minister:  I did not know he was going to speak. 

Mr  Mohamed:  On  the  same  issue,  Madam  Chairperson.  It  is  true  that,  as  we  have 
heard this whole debate from the very outset, and hon. Duval - if I am not mistaken, if my 
memory  serves  me  correctly  -  and  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  and  the  hon.  Prime 
Minister said these are very sensitive issues.  It is a secret to no one that, at some stage, I 
agree with the hon. Leader of the Opposition that there were promises made. 

 

I am aware of it. 

132 

 (Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The Chairperson:  Please don’t get excited! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Members, please!  I am on my feet.  Hon. Members, please don’t get excited.  Allow the 
debates to go on calmly. 

Mr Mohamed:  Now, if we want to establish – I mean it is very easy to shot me down 

and I will keep quiet and sit down.  But the fact remains that you cannot … 

(Interruptions) 

The Chairperson:  Order! 

Mr Mohamed: … use your numbers and  your  voices to cover the truth, a Cabinet 
decision that has clearly said that this will be indeed, in 2016, a public holiday.  How do you 
rub off that truth?  So, in the light of what was decided in such an institution as the Cabinet, 
please in the light of this promise - you can come up with all types of words - that was made 
during election campaign, which is a fact -  When hon. Baloomoody said that earlier on, hon. 
Gayan seemed to be recognising those promises that were made and he kept very quiet.  So, 
in the light of those promises … 

 (Interruptions) 

Mr Gayan: Madam Chairperson, on a point of order.  I would like to know on what 

hon. Mohamed is basing himself to say that I am recognising whatever is said. 

The Chairperson:  Hon. Minister, this is a point of personal explanation.   

Mr Mohamed:  So, in the light of that - just to try to bring tension down and it is 
getting late,  I  am sure everyone would like to be calm and happy  and  go home - we also 
plead, we join the hon. Leader of the Opposition to say: let us stick to that promise.  And we 
ask  Government  to  come  back  to  the  original  proposal  that  next  year,  it  be  indeed,  as 
promised in the Cabinet decision as well, a public holiday. 

133 

 
The Prime Minister:  Madam Chairperson, I can assure the House that I never, never 
in the campaign for the elections, be it for general election or be it for municipal elections, 
never promised anybody that we are going to change the holiday for the Tamil.  Never!  My 
other colleagues also are assuring me that this was never used in the campaign.  Now, be it 
whatever it was. 

(Interruptions) 

Never mind about Cabinet.  Why do you worry about Cabinet? 

The Chairperson:  Hon. Mohamed, you will have time to intervene. 

(Interruptions) 

The  Prime  Minister:  You  think  Cabinet  decision  cannot  be  changed.    Why  I  am 
coming with this amendment is because, previously, there was pressure on us to bring this 
change.  Now, since we have brought this Bill into this House, it is the other way round.  The 
Tamil Temples Federation has written letters to me - I have got the letters here - and other 
organisations also, saying that they do not want this.  What do I do?  That is why I say they 
are not serious people.  They do not know what they want.  They want consensus from their 
own people.  They had so much time to do it before, they have not done it.  Now, they are 
going to do it, and I am going to sit down and wait for them.  That is why I say, so long I will 
be here, there will not be any change.  We are going to stick to what it is now. 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 3, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clauses 4 to 7 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

First Schedule 

Motion made and question proposed “that the First Schedule stand part of the Bill.” 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Chairperson, I move for an amendment as circulated - 

“(b) 

in the proposed First Schedule – 

(i) 

(ii) 

in  item  4,  by  deleting  the  words  “Independence  Day”  and 
replacing them by the words “Independence Day and Republic 
Day”; 
by adding the following new item –  

 

134 

14. 

Day of celebration of Thaipoosam Cavadee” 

Mr Mohamed:  Madam Chairperson, I had circulated … 

The Chairperson:  Can I know on which amendment you are intervening? 

Mr Mohamed:  In fact, I had circulated one amendment.  Having listened to the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister and the vociferations of all  those surrounding him and the attitude of 
Government,  I  will  no  longer  insist  on  this  amendment,  since  Government  is  totally 
uncollaborative. 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

First Schedule, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Second Schedule 

Motion  made  and  question  proposed  “that  the  Second  Schedule  stand  part  of  the 

Bill.” 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Chairperson, I move for the following amendment - 

“(c) 

in  the  proposed  Second  Schedule,  by  deleting  items  1  and  2  and  replacing 
them by the following item –  

Day of celebration of Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary or All 
Saints Day” 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Second Schedule, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

The title and enacting clause were agreed to. 

The Bill, as amended, was agreed to. 

On the Assembly resuming with Madam Speaker in the Chair, Madam Speaker 

reported accordingly. 

Third Reading 

On motion made and seconded, the Public  Holidays  (Amendment) Bill  (No. XIV of 

2015) was read the third time and passed. 

Second Reading 

THE ASSET RECOVERY (AMENDMENT)  

 

135 

BILL (NO. XXXI OF 2015) 

Order for second reading read.  
The Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms, 
Minister  of  Technology,  Communication  and  Innovation  (Mr  S.  Bhadain):  Madam 
speaker, I move that the Asset Recovery (Amendment) Bill (No. XXXI of 2015) be read a 
second time. 

Madam Speaker, the proposed Bill is part of a wider series of reforms being brought 
by this Government to create an enduring base for economic integrity in our system which 
will also include the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill and amendments to the 
Declaration of Assets Act. 

The Asset Recovery Act was proclaimed on 01 February 2012 with the objective of 
providing for conviction based and non-conviction based confiscation of assets. It provided 
that the Director of Public Prosecutions was the Enforcement Authority for the purposes of 
the Asset Recovery Act. At that time there was no retroactivity provided for and the onus or 
burden of proof was on the Enforcement Authority. 

Madam Speaker, in the light of the experience gathered by the Enforcement Authority 
since  the  proclamation  of  the  Act  and  in  view  of  certain  problems  encountered  in  its 
implementation, the DPP made representations for amendments to be brought to make the 
Asset Recovery Act workable. 

These amendments included, inter alia -  
• 

• 

firstly, making the law retroactive, empowering the Enforcement Authority to 
confiscate  or  recover  assets  for  a  period  going  back  10  years  from  the 
commencement of the Act (10 years, Madam Speaker, not as far back as 1968 
or 1982); 
secondly,  removing  the  onus  of  proof  on  the  Enforcement  Authority  and 
reversing  the  burden  of  proof  in  cases  of  criminal  based  seizure  and 
confiscation on the person being investigated, and 
thirdly, emphasising the standard of proof being the ‘balance of probabilities’. 
• 
Madam Speaker, in effect, the DPP is the Enforcement Officer who is responsible for 
an investigation under the Asset Recovery Act and it is the DPP himself, who subsequently 
decides whether to prosecute the person or not.  

Madam Speaker,  acting  as both  judge  and party goes against the basic  principle of 
natural justice of ‘Nemo judex in causa sua’ - no-one should be a judge in his own cause. 

 

136 

Under section 72 of the Constitution, the DPP has discretionary powers to initiate, to take 
over and discontinue criminal proceedings, whilst at the same time he also has his own team 
of forensic investigators, and law enforcement agents working for him. Moreover, the DPP is 
also empowered to conduct civil recovery in cases of non-conviction based asset forfeiture 
under this Act. 

More  importantly,  Madam  Speaker,  as  Enforcement  Authority,  the  DPP  can  under 
section  48  of  the  Asset  Recovery  Act,  by  written  notice,  require  a  financial  institution  to 
provide such customer information as it may have relating to a person specified in the notice, 
in  such  manner  and  at  such  time  as  he  may  require,  where  he  has  reasonable  grounds  to 
suspect that –  

(a) 

(b) 

any property in the possession or under the control of a person is proceeds, 
instrumentality or terrorist property or the person has derived a benefit from 
any unlawful activity;  
the customer information is likely to be of substantial value to an application 
or an investigation, and  
it is in the public interest that the customer information should be provided. 

(c) 
These  are  the  powers  of  the  DPP  under  the  Asset  Recovery  Act  as  Enforcement 
Officer.  Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  rightly  identified  the 
controversial issues arising in late 2013 as reported in Le Mauricien of 30 September 2013, 
and I quote - 

« Tout le monde a fait fausse route sur cette question.  Le DPP qui connaît la valeur 
de  ses  fonctions  n’a  pas  objecté,  l’Attorney  General,  principal  conseiller  du 
gouvernement,  n’a  pas  attiré  son  attention  concernant  ce  viol  de  la  Constitution. 
L’opposition a également fait fausse route bien que son erreur de jugement découle 
du  fait  qu’elle  avait  été  informée  que  le  gouvernement  britannique  avait  lui  aussi 
dissout le poste Assets Recovery Commissionner et était sous l’impression que cette 
responsabilité avait été confiée au DPP. » 
Also in l’Express of 07 October 2013, and I quote - 
“Le DPP est une institution clé qui doit être au-dessus de tout, ne pas être mêlée à 
aucune polémique ….Il ne lui revient pas de jouer l’Asset Recovery Commissioner, de 
récupérer  l’argent  des  trafiquants.  Il  y  aura  inévitablement  toutes  sortes  de 
polémiques  et  de  conflits  d’intérêts…Le  DPP  pourrait  se  retrouver  mêlé  à  des 
questions politiques.” 
The hon. Leader of the Opposition also referred to – 

 
“une dénaturalisation du rôle du DPP” 

137 

(Interruptions) 

That is what is said on the newspaper. That is what is written in the newspaper. 

Madam Speaker, despite the issues raised by the hon. Leader of the Opposition, the 
previous  government  chose  to  ignore  his  concerns  even  though  they  were  contracting  an 
alliance with him in 2014 to create a Second Republic of Mauritius.  

Madam Speaker, this Government has decided to pay heed to these proposals as part 
of  the  overall  reforms  which  are  now  being  brought  to  create  an  equitable,  fair  and  just 
society.  

The  British  Model  is  being  followed  as  the  National  Crime  Intelligence  Service 
(NCIS), the then UK Financial Intelligence Unit, merged with the Asset Recovery Agency to 
co-exist under the Serious Organised Crime Agency (SOCA) which has now been subsumed 
under  the  UK  National  Crime  Agency  (NCA).  Madam  Speaker,  similar  structures  exist  in 
Cyprus, where the MOKAS operates both the Intelligence Unit and also the Asset Recovery 
functions. Also, in the Channel Islands, more precisely in Jersey, the Joint Financial Crime 
Unit operates in exactly the same manner.  

Madam Speaker, this is the essence of the proposed Bill, to create the required level 
of synergy by merging the Asset Recovery Unit with the Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU) as 
an Asset Recovery Investigation Division (ARID). 

Madam Speaker, the DPP himself stated in a communiqué dated 02 March 2015, and 

I quote - 

“The office of the Director of Public Prosecutions has never expressed any reservation 
with  the  decision  of  Cabinet  to  transfer  the  Asset  Recovery  Unit  to  the  Financial 
Intelligence Unit. This is an administrative decision within the powers of Government 
to change by way of legislation.”  
The  present  Bill,  Madam  Speaker,  proposes  to  amend  the  Asset  Recovery  Act  to 
provide that the Enforcement Authority shall, instead of the DPP, be the FIU,  which shall 
take over the functions and powers conferred on the DPP by virtue of the Asset Recovery Act 
by following the British Model. We are segregating the role of the prosecutor from that of the 
investigator.  

Madam Speaker, in order to be fully effective the Asset Recovery Office has to work 
closely with other institutions concerned with the fight against money laundering. Existing 
cooperation between the FIU and the Asset Recovery Unit provided for under section 10(2) 

 

138 

of the Financial Intelligent Anti-Money Laundering Act and 59(2) of the Asset Recovery Act 
will now be strengthened. 

This cooperation which  was undertaken by way  of official correspondence was not 
conducive to real time, two-way information sharing. The real risk of dissipation of assets 
which prevailed will now be reduced under the new structure. 

Madam  Speaker,  section  9(4)  of  the  Financial  Intelligence  and  Anti-Money 

Laundering Act 2002 guarantees the independence of the FIU.  

Madam  Speaker,  section  9(4)  of  the  Financial  Intelligence  and  Anti-Money 
Laundering  Act  2002  guarantees  the  independence  of  the  FIU.  The  FIU  has  no  power  to 
charge or prosecute suspects, which means that any application for a restraining order will be 
made  independently  from  any  other  criminal  procedure.  This  segregation  between  the 
criminal  process  and  the  asset  recovery  process  will  lead  to  a  greater  protection  for  the 
ordinary  citizen,  as  these  powers  will  not  rest  in  the  hands  of  the  same  person,  thus 
eliminating the risk of arbitrary restraining orders and any potential for abuse. 

Madam Speaker, the FIU is also much better equipped to identify criminal assets, due 
to  its  powers  under  the  Financial  Intelligence  and  Anti-Money  Laundering  Act.  In  this 
context, the Police, the ICAC and the Asset Recovery Unit regularly solicit the assistance of 
the FIU to trace criminal assets. 

Madam  Speaker,  in  addition,  Confiscation  Orders,  under  section  17  of  the  Asset 
Recovery Act, can only follow a conviction for a criminal offence by a Court of law. There 
is, therefore, no risk of any political control or interference.  

Regarding civil based recovery, when applying for a Restriction Order under section 
27, the FIU will still have to satisfy the Judge that there are reasonable grounds to believe that 
the property concerned is proceeds of crime, an instrumentality or terrorist property. 

The  Recovery  Order  under  the  Civil  Asset  Recovery  regime  can  only  be  obtained 
after  a  Judge  is  satisfied  on  the  balance  of  probabilities  that  the  property  concerned  is 
proceeds of crime, an instrumentality or terrorist property. 

It is important to note that, in applying for all these orders, evidence will have to be 
provided to the Judge in the form of affidavits. It is, therefore, not possible for the FIU to 
misuse these powers. 

Madam Speaker, this Government will leave no stone unturned to uphold the rule of 
law. What our country needs is a prosecution service which is fearless and protective of its 
independence and impartiality, which is free of political control and direction that will be a 
bulwark for freedom and liberty. 

 

139 

(Interruptions) 

What  we  need,  what  this  country  needs!  We  also  need  a  conducive  legal  framework  to 
consolidate the foundations of our democracy and to safeguard individual liberties. 

With the proposed amendments, the prosecution service will certainly be in a much 

more comfortable position to fully discharge its functions under the Constitution. 

Madam Speaker, there is also a very rough calculation which  I  have made, just by 
looking at the drug situation in Mauritius, with all the synthetic drugs and everything which is 
being sold today.  If you take any of the constituencies in Mauritius, you have on average 
about 2,000 drugs users.  You multiply by 20  and that’s about 40,000.  And if everybody 
spends Rs500 a day buying drugs, you are talking about Rs20 m. a day, and if you multiply 
Rs20 m. a day, over 365 days, imagine how many billions of rupees you are talking about. 

I have checked, since the Asset Recovery Unit came into existence.  Of course, it was 
in 2011 that the House here voted the Bill, which became an Act.  Then, it was proclaimed in 
February  2012,  and  the  law  was  amended;  major  amendments  were  brought  in  November 
2012.  What  were  those  major  amendments?  Retroactivity.  So,  when  the  law  was  passed 
before this House, there was no retroactive effect. But, then, nine months later, they  came 
back and they said ‘now we want to make it retroactive ten years’.  And they did! Everybody 
voted. The Bar Council did not find anything wrong. Then, after some time, they decided that 
the burden of proof had to be reversed.  

So,  the  onus  of  proof  was  on  the  person,  the  citizen.  Again,  the  House  voted, 
unanimously.  Then,  of  course,  we  have  had  the  issue  of  balance  of  probabilities  and  all 
applications before the Judge.   It is said in the law, in the amendments, that they must be 
considered to be civil proceedings, and they are judged on the balance of probabilities. That’s 
the standard of proof. It is all there in the amendments.  But what did the Asset Recovery 
Unit do from 2012 to 2015? I have just given an example of how much money is floating 
around when we are talking about drug consumption in Mauritius. I have asked to get a copy 
of the Annual Report of the Asset Recovery Unit and how much money they have recovered 
over these years. At the end of the day… 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah! Allow the hon. Minister to… 

(Interruptions) 

Don’t lose the time of the House! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

140 

Mr  Bhadain:  And  it  is  only  this  morning  that  I  was  given  a  copy  of  the  Annual 
Report, which by law had to be tabled by the hon. Attorney General 30 days after the date 
that the accounts had been audited. It had to be tabled before this House. It has never been 
done, Madam Speaker. Never! 

Yes. But, let me speak! So, when we look at those figures,… 

(Interruptions) 

Well, you voted the rubbish! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhadain, please, sit down. Everybody will have the time to 

intervene. So, when you are making your intervention,… 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Bhadain, I am talking to you! When you are making your intervention, please, address 
the Chair. 

Mr Bhadain: Yes, Madam Speaker. So, just by looking at the figures, only Rs9 m. 

have been recovered in those three years. Que R 9 millions! 

(Interruptions) 

This is what the Asset Recovery Unit has done. Now, if you look at 2015, between 
January  to  June,  zero  has  been  recovered,  and  if  you  look  at  June  to  now,  it  is  Rs1  m. 
something. So, this is the performance of the Asset Recovery Unit and this is why it has to 
change.  This  situation  has  to  change.  This  Government  means  business.  This  Government 
wants to drive results, and we are going to bring these results because that is what we have 
promised  to  the  people  and  this  is  what  is  going  to  happen  with  the  reforms  that  we  are 
bringing forward. 

Now, with regard to the specific sections of the proposed Bill, Madam Speaker, clause 
3 amends section 2 of the Asset Recovery Act (i.e. the Interpretation Section) to, inter alia, 
delete  the  definition  of  “Investigative  Agency”  and  add  new  definitions  for  the  “Asset 
Recovery  Investigative  Division”  or  “ARID”  and  “Director”  meaning  the  Director  of  the 
FIU. 

Clause  4  amends  section  4  of  the  Act,  which  relates  to  the  establishment  of  the 

Enforcement Authority and replaces “Director for Public Prosecutions” by “FIU”. 

Clause 5 pertains to amendments being brought to section 5 - 
(i) 

Reference  to  Investigative  Agency  in  the  section  is  replaced  by  Asset 
Recovery Investigative Division or ARID. 

 
(ii) 

141 

Section 5(1) of the Act, which provides for an Investigative Agency within the 
Office of the DPP, is deleted and now replaced by ARID being set up within 
the FIU with law enforcement agents as the Secretary to the Cabinet or, as the 
case may be, the controlling body of a statutory corporation, may designate.  It 
further  specifies  that  the  Director  of  the  FIU  shall  designate  the  Chief 
Investigating Officer from one of the said agents. 

(iii)  A new subsection is inserted to provide for the Director of the FIU to consult 
with,  and  seek  assistance  from,  persons  in  Mauritius  concerned  with 
combating  money  laundering,  including  law  officers,  the  Police  and  other 
Government  agencies  and  such  persons  representing  banks,  financial 
institutions,  cash  dealers  and  members  of  the  relevant  professions  or 
occupations. 

Madam Speaker, in line with the foregoing, clause 6 amends section 7 of the Act and 
replaces “Enforcement Authority” by the Director of the FIU while clause 7 amends section 
43 and replaces “Investigative Agency” by “ARID”. Clause  8  for  its  part  amends  section  59 
relating to co-operation agreements which the Director may enter into with a “public body” 
such that he is provided with such information required for the exercise of his functions and 
powers under the Act.  The definition of “public body” is amended by deleting “FIU”. 

Clause 9 repeals section 66 pertaining to the transitional provision. 
Clause 10 provides for consequential amendments to the following Acts - 
(i) 

The  Financial  Intelligence  and  Anti-Money  Laundering  Act  is  amended  to 
provide for the establishment of the Asset Recovery Investigation Division as 
part  of  the  Financial  Intelligence  Unit.    Accordingly,  in  the  definition  of 
“investigatory  authorities”,  the  words  “Enforcement  Authority”  are  replaced 
by “ARID”.  New definitions are added for “ARID” and for “officer”, which 
includes  a  director,  an  employee,  an  agent,  a  legal  representative  and,  in 
relation to the powers of the ARID under the Asset Recovery Act, includes the 
Chief Investigating Officer. 
The  Finance  and  Audit  (Recovered  Assets  Fund)  Regulations  2014  are 
amended, in regulation 3(1) (a), by deleting the words “Public Prosecutions” 
and replacing them by the words “the Financial Intelligence Unit”. 

(ii)  

Clause 11 pertains to transitional provisions, among which - 

 
(i) 

142 

The Chief Investigating Officer and every law enforcement agent forming part 
of  the  Investigative  Agency  before  the  commencement  of  this  Act  shall  be 
transferred to the ARID on terms and conditions which are not less favourable. 
They will also be offered the option of resuming their previous employment.  
The assets and funds of the former organisation shall vest in the FIU.  

(ii) 
(iii)  All  rights,  obligations  and  liabilities  subsisting  in  favour  of  or  against  the 
former  organisation  shall  continue  to  exist  under  the  same  terms  and 
conditions in favour of or against the FIU.  

(iv)  Any  matter  which  is  pending  before  the  Dangerous  Drugs  Commissioner 
under  the  Dangerous  Drugs  Act  shall  be  dealt  with  by  the  Enforcement 
Authority. 

Madam Speaker, the previous regime has been too tolerant towards financial crime 
and corruption, to the extent that they have promoted a culture of impunity and dishonesty 
which has seriously fractured the fundamental values of our society. We need to have a zero 
tolerance  policy  towards  such  a  culture  of  dishonesty,  which  has  prevailed  during  the  last 
decade, and we need to restore those values, those principles and that culture of hard work, of 
discipline and also of integrity, in short, good governance!    

Our  mission  is  to  provide  the  appropriate  framework  to  uphold  Mauritius  as  a 
jurisdiction truly compliant with the rule of law. The Bill before the House today creates this 
platform, Madam Speaker. 

With these words, I commend the Bill to the House. 

Mr Bholah rose and seconded. 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, I move that the debate be now adjourned. 

Mr Uteem rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Debate adjourned accordingly. 

ADJOURNMENT 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  that  this  Assembly  do  now 

adjourn to Tuesday 24 November 2015 at 11.30 a.m. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned. 

 
At 8.21 p.m. the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Tuesday 24 November 2015 

143 

at 11.30 a.m. 

WRITTEN ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

POLICE FORCE – CAPITAL FUNDING AND EXPENDITURE 

(No. B/882) Mr D. Sesungkur (First Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Mauritius Police Force, 
he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, for period 01 
January 2010 to December 2014, information as to – 

(a) 

(b) 
(c) 

the amount of capital funding and expenditure incurred in terms of armaments, 
technological and/or other equipment, and vehicles; 
the total number of Police Officers constituting same, and 
if an assessment has been made of the effectiveness thereof in the light of the 
levels of expenditure incurred in relation thereto and of the crime rates. 

Reply:  In  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question  on the  capital  funding  and  expenditure 
incurred in terms of armaments, technological and/or other equipment and vehicles for the 
years 2010 to 2014, I am tabling the information. 

In regard to part (b) of the question, I have to inform the hon. Member that it would 
be difficult to apportion the total number of Police Officers among armaments, technological 
equipment and vehicles, since one Police Officer is called upon to do various Police duties.  
Also the total budget allocation of the Police Department is not made based on these items 
only. 

The budgeted provision of these items represents around 24% of the total budget of 

the Mauritius Police Force. 

In regard to part (c) of the question, I am informed that a periodic assessment is made 
on the cost effectiveness of those expenditures, not only in terms of crime rates, but also in 
terms  of  the  maintenance  of  law  and  order,  maritime  security  and  preservation  of  public 
peace, and providing quality policing service. 

For  instance,  Police  vehicles  are  not  only  used  for  the  detection  and  prevention  of 
crimes, but also to attend promptly to requests from members of the public and attending to 
other emergencies such as road accidents, cases of attempted suicide and public disturbances. 

144 

 
I am, therefore, informed by the Commissioner of Police that it is difficult to make an 
accurate assessment of the effectiveness of expenditure incurred and its incidence on crime 
reduction. 

INDIA-AFRICA SUMMIT – DELEGATION 

(No.  B/883)  Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis East) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister 
for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the delegation which he 
led to New Delhi, India, to attend the recent India-Africa Summit, he will state the reasons 
why the hon. Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade was 
not party thereto. 

(Vide P.Q. No. B/878) 

CRIMINAL CASES – SURETIES – REFUND 

(No. B/884) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 
Rodrigues  and National  Development Unit whether, in regard to the individuals who have 
deposited  money  as  sureties  for  suspects  in  criminal  cases,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the 
House, obtain from the Master and Registrar, information as to the number thereof who have 
not been refunded same as at to date, in spite of the fact that the said criminal cases are over, 
indicating the reasons therefor in each case. 

Reply: I wish to refer the hon. Member to the reply made to Parliamentary Question 
B/62 at the sitting of 24 February 2015 wherein I informed the House of the various instances 
that may lead to delays in refunding money deposited as security by a surety. 

I  am  informed  by  the  Master  and  Registrar  that  since  01  April  2015,  a  series  of 
measures, including the introduction of a Surety Book, have been put in place to enable easy 
retrieval of files in all cases where deposits have been made so as to expedite refund of such 
money. 

As regards the outstanding cases, the Master and Registrar has indicated that an audit 
trail has to be carried out in all the registries of the different Courts with a view to retrieving, 
amongst others, information pertaining to – 

(i) 

(ii) 

provisional charges which have been struck out or transferred to other Courts; 

formal charges lodged in all jurisdictions, and 

(iii) 

appeal cases following convictions and acquittal. 

 
Thereafter, the office of the Master and Registrar will be in a position to compile the 

145 

information requested by the hon. Member. 

TROU KANAKA - TOURISTIC SITE 

(No.  B/922)  Mr  B.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the Trou Kanaka, he 
will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the District Council of Savanne, information as 
to if it is in presence of a request for the conversion thereof into a touristic sector and, if so, 
indicate where matters stand.  

Reply:  I am informed by  the  District Council of Savanne that no request has been 

received for the conversion of the region of Trou Kanaka into a tourist site. 

NINE YEAR SCHOOLING REFORM PROJECT – PREVOCATIONAL 

EDUCATION - TEACHERS 

(No. B/923) Mrs M. C. Monty (Third Member for Port Louis North & Montagne 
Longue)  asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 
Scientific Research whether, in regard to future changes in the education system and as far as 
the Nine Year Schooling is concerned, she will state the impact thereof on the teachers in the 
prevocational department of the private secondary schools. 

Reply: The Nine Year Schooling reform programme provides for the phasing out of the 

Prevocational Education both in public and private secondary school subsectors.  

However, provision will be made for learners requiring additional support to follow a 
4-year cycle at Lower Secondary (Grades 7 to 9) and a special class with a reduced class size 
will  be  reserved  in  secondary  school  where  students  in  the  extended  cycle  will  follow  the 
same core curriculum as those in the regular three-cycle, but the pedagogy will be adapted to 
their specific needs. Such flexibility in the curriculum at Lower Secondary will ensure that 
students of different abilities and aptitudes can learn at a differentiated pace and develop the 
essential competencies (basic education). 

I  wish  to  reassure  the  House  that  all  teachers  involved  in  the  prevocational  classes 
would be taken on board in the new reform programme and their services would be utilised 
for teaching and for provision of support in the adaptation of the curriculum, the production 
of learning materials for the students of the extended 4-year cycle, as well as for remediation. 

Appropriate training will be provided through the MIE, as may be required. 

PRIMARY SCHOOLS – STANDARD IV ASSESSMENT 

146 

 
(No. B/924) Mrs M. C. Monty (Third Member for Port Louis North & Montagne 
Longue)  asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 
Scientific Research whether, in regard to the Standard IV at the primary level, she will state 
the  body  responsible  for  the  setting  of  the  examination  papers  for  the  recent  end  of  year 
examinations therefor, indicating why there has been a mismatch between the examination 
questions and the syllabus therefor.  

Reply: The recent Standard  IV  assessment has  been organised under the Mauritius 
Examinations Syndicate (MES), which had enlisted the services of paper setters, moderators 
and  resource  persons  from  among  the  Primary  School  Inspectors  and  Asian  Language 
Supervisors of Ministry. 

Question papers for the Standard IV assessment were prepared by the panel members 

under the guidance of the Resource Persons appointed by the MES.  

I  have  indeed  been  informed  that  representation  has  been  received  regarding  one 
question  in  the  Science  Paper,  to  the  effect  that  a  word  which  is  not  mentioned  in  the 
Standard textbooks has been used in the questionnaire.  Normally, pupils are taught to the 
text, and paper setters refrain from using vocabulary that is not mentioned in the textbook.   

I wish to inform the House that necessary arrangements have been made at the level 
of the schools to adjust the marking exercise for Question 4B of the Science Question Paper. 
However, I have instructed that, henceforth, norms and parameters governing paper 

setting and moderation be strictly complied with to avoid recurrence of same. 

MONTAGNE LONGUE HOSPITAL – MEDICATION - DISPENSING 

(No. B/925) Mrs M. C. Monty (Third Member for Port Louis North & Montagne 
Longue) asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the Montagne 
Longue Hospital, he will state if he is aware that patients who attend thereto for treatment at 
night are required to attend the Dr Jeetoo Hospital to be dispensed with medication and, if so, 
indicate –  
(a) 
(b)  

the reasons therefor and;  
if  remedial  actions  will  be  taken  for  the  patients  to  be  dispensed  with 
medication at the Montagne Longue Hospital itself.  

Reply: Long Mountain hospital operates on a 24-hour basis, but pharmacy services 
are provided from 8.00 hours to 20.00 hours. This is due to the low patient attendance after 
20.00 hours.  

I am informed that patients attending Long Mountain Hospital after 20.00 hours are 
not requested to collect  medication at Dr. A. G. Jeetoo Hospital.  They  are  given the first 

 

147 

doses of drugs at the Casualty Department of the hospital itself and they are advised to collect 
same on the next day as from 8.00 hours at the pharmacy of Long Mountain Hospital. 

JAWAHARLAL NEHRU HOSPITAL - ANGIOGRAPHY/ANGIOPLASTY 

UNIT  

(No. B/926) Mr M. Gobin (First Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the proposed setting up 
of  a  full-fledge  Angiography/Angioplasty  Unit  at  the  Jawaharlal  Nehru  Hospital  in  Rose 
Belle, he will state where matters stand. 

Reply:  It is not proposed to set up a full-fledged Angiography/Angioplasty Unit at 

Jawaharlal Nehru Hospital in Rose Belle for the following reasons - 

(i) 
(ii) 

(iii) 

presently, there are 10-15 new cases for angiography weekly; 
these  cases  are  presently  being  carried  out  at  Victoria  and  Dr.  A.  G.  Jeetoo 
Hospitals, and 
our Cardiovascular Strategy for Mauritius, worked out with the collaboration 
of international experts and all Consultants-in-Charge of Cardiology in 2012, 
recommended that two cardiac tertiary centres would be sufficient to serve the 
whole  island.   Presently,  we  have  three  cardiac  tertiary  centres.    Hence,  the 
need  for  a  new  full-fledged  Angiography/Angioplasty  Unit  at  Jawaharlal 
Nehru Hospital does not arise. 

 CAMP SIAJEE, RIVIÈRE DU POSTE – RIVER RESERVE - ACCESS 
(No. B/927) Mr M. Gobin (First Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and  Beach 
Management whether, in regard to the river reserves at Camp Siajee, in Rivière du Poste, he 
will  state  if  he  has  received  a  petition  from  the  inhabitants  living  in  the  vicinity  thereof 
regarding alleged – 

(a)  

(b)  

illegal  occupation  and  cultivation  of  land  forming  part  of  the  river  reserves 
situated thereat and  
prevention of access of the public to the river for religious purposes, indicating 
the actions taken by his Ministry in relation thereto. 

Reply  (Minister  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security):  I  shall  reply  to  this 
Parliamentary  Question,  as  the  Forestry  Service  of  my  Ministry  is  responsible  for  the 
management of river reserves in accordance with the Forests and Reserves Act of 1983. 

I have received a petition dated 28 October 2015 from the inhabitants of Camp Siajee, 
Rivière du Poste, wherein complaints have been made to the effect that access to the river 

 

148 

reserve has been blocked by the owner of a plot of land in the vicinity, the river reserve has 
been illegally occupied, trees have been felled and other crops cultivated thereon. They are 
requesting  that  the  access  be  opened  unconditionally  to  the  public,  that  possibility  be 
explored  to  declare  the  existing  road  public  and  also  to  consider  the  seizure  and  re-
afforestation of the reserve land. 

The Conservator of Forests was requested to carry out an enquiry into the complaints 

made and he has advised me as follows - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 
(iv) 

(v) 

(vi) 
(vii) 

(viii) 

the access to the reserve of Rivière du Poste is through a private land owned 
by a company called Foret Rive de BKG Ltee; 
the river reserve which is 16 metres long does not form part of the property of 
the company; 
the company is using the property for vegetables cultivation; 
no cultivation is being undertaken on the river reserve and no trees  have been 
felled; 
the land is fenced along the main road and consists of an access through the 
fence which is closed by way of a wire at a height of one metre; 
there is no fence along the river reserve; 
at a distance of about  38 metres from one extreme of the property stands  a 
shrine commonly known as a ' kalimaye' through which access to the river is 
possible, and 
there has been no breach of the Forests and Reserves Act on the part  of the 
company.  

I  am  further  advised  by  the  Food  and  Agricultural  Research  and  Extension  Unit 
(FAREI) that the land owned by the company is presently under tomato cultivation and the 
river reserve is not being cultivated by the land owner. According to the land owner, people 
have  in  the  past  used  the  private  access  to  the  river  for  picnics  and  have  left  all  sorts  of 
wastes, thus causing environmental pollution. 

The  Ministry  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and  Beach 
Management has informed my Ministry that there is no environmental nuisance within the 
reserve of Rivière du Poste, that the river is clean, and no littering has been observed. 

It would appear that the main contention of the inhabitants of Camp Siajee is that they 
should have access at any cost to the river reserve through the land privately owned by Foret 
Rive de BKG Ltee. My Ministry cannot legally force the landowner to open this access to the 

 

149 

public. However, the petitioners will be advised to approach the relevant authorities for the 
creation of a new access to the river reserve near the Kalimaye. 

GRAND BOIS – MEDICLINIC 

(No. B/928) Mr M. Gobin (First Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether he will state if consideration will be 
given for the construction of a mediclinic at Grand Bois on a plot of land situated next to the 
Grand Bois Police Station, and, if so, indicate the time frame set out for the implementation 
thereof and, if not, why not. 

Reply:  The  village  of  Grand  Bois  has  already  a  Community  Health  Centre  which 
caters for a population of about 13,000 inhabitants and covers the catchment areas of Bois 
Cheri, Camp Bananes,  Grand Bassin,  La  Flora  and part of Nouvelle France. The Regional 
Jawaharlall Nehru Hospital is situated some 10 km from Grand Bois and can be reached in 
about  15  minutes  by  bus  from  the  above  localities.  The  average  yearly  attendance  at  the 
Grand Bois Community Health Centre is 36,615, that is, an average of 100 daily.  

It  will  not  be  cost  effective  to  have  a  Mediclinic  at  Grand  Bois,  in  view  of  the 
relatively low yearly attendance as compared to the other mediclinics and the proximity of 
the existing Community Health Centre to the Jawaharlall Nehru Hospital. 

However, it is envisaged to construct a new Community Health Centre  at Grand Bois 
on  the  plot  of  land  situated  next  to  the  Grand  Bois  Police  Station  vested  in  my  Ministry.  
Added  services  such  as  Dental  Clinic  and  Specialist  sessions,  namely  Gynaecology, 
Paediatrics, Diabetology and Psychiatry would also be provided at the CHC.   

SOUILLAC - COURT HOUSE 

(No. B/929) Mr M. Gobin (First Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked the Attorney-General whether, in regard to the Court House situated at Souillac, he will 
state if consideration will be given for the construction a full-fledge Court House thereat and, 
if  so,  indicate  the  timeframe  set  out  for  the  implementation  thereof  and,  if  not,  why  not, 
indicating if measures will be taken for the restoration of the present building housing same 
for the intended purpose thereof. 

Reply:  As  stated  at  paragraph  158  of  the  Government  Programme  2015-2019, 
“Reforms  will  be  brought  to  the  judiciary  to  expedite  determination  of  court  cases  and 
improve services to the public.” 

Further, paragraph 163 of the Government Programme 2015-2019 reads, “All District 
Court premises will be reviewed and upgraded to ensure better services to all stakeholders 
since the bulk of court cases are dealt with at this level.” 

 
Government,  in  line  with  its  Programme,  will  ensure  that  judicial  officers,  law 

150 

practitioners and members of the public have access to well-equipped courts. 

The  Master  and  Registrar  has  informed  my  Office  that  the  construction  of  a  New 
Court  House  at  Savanne  is  not  being  contemplated  since  the  Judiciary  does  not  have  the 
funds and the experts required to implement such a project. 

The  Master  and  Registrar  has  also  informed  my  Office  that  the  Judiciary  has 
encountered  many  difficulties  for  the  removal  of  debris  of  the  old  District  Court  building 
following its destruction by fire in October 2011.  The National Heritage Fund has ever since 
then objected to the rubble being carted away although the old building was not listed as a 
historical monument.  The Judiciary initially intended to restore the building if funds were 
allocated in that respect, and provided that experts were appointed to supervise the project. 

(b) 

The Master and Registrar has further informed my Office that – 
(a) 

the  Judiciary’s  budget  for  the  financial  year  July  2015  to  June  2016  is  10 
million  rupees  (most  of  which  has  been  earmarked  in  respect  of  re-roofing 
works  at  Grand  Port  District  Court).    These  funds  are  insufficient  for  the 
upgrading of courts infrastructure across the island; 
the main difficulty encountered with regard to the upgrading of its buildings is 
that  the  Judiciary  is  dependent  on  the  Ministry  of  Public  Infrastructure  and 
Land  Transport  and  the  Energy  Services  Division  to  assist  in  the  timely 
realisation of all its building projects.   In order to carry out its projects, the 
Judiciary  will  require  dedicated  units/cells  within  the  relevant  Government 
departments,  as  well  as  additional  funds  to  ensure  that  all  building  projects 
regarding the Judiciary can be implemented within reasonable delays. 

In  addition  to  the  specific  issue  of  the  District  Court  of  Savanne,  my  Office  has 

requested the Master and Registrar to provide inputs on – 

(a) 

(b) 

the infrastructural needs of the Judiciary at District Court level and generally, 
and 
budgetary  issues,  including  constraints,  if  any,  for  the  upgrading  of  court 
infrastructure. 

The Master and Registrar has provided comprehensive information to my Office in 
relation to the needs of the Judiciary in terms of budget and infrastructure and the matter will 
be  raised  with  the  hon.  Prime  Minister  to  ensure  that  adequate  support  is  given  to  the 
Judiciary to assist it in carrying out its vital functions for our democracy. 

STATE OWNED COMPANIES - HEDGING OPERATIONS 

151 

 
(No. B/930) Mr D. Sesungkur (First Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) 
asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the hedging 
strategies,  he  will  state  if  his  Ministry  is  consulted  by  State  owned  companies  before 
embarking  therefor  and,  if  so,  indicate  if  the  services  of  international  specialists  or 
consultants have been enlisted by his Ministry for advice in connection therewith and if so, 
indicate the total cost incurred for consultancy, professional and/or other fees paid in relation 
thereto over the period January 2009 to 31 December 2014. 

Reply:  I  am  informed  that  it  was  not  the  practice  in  the  past  for  State  Owned 

Companies (SOC) to consult my Ministry before engaging in hedging activities. 

Decision on hedging at the level of the State Owned Companies was usually taken by 

their Board of Directors and sometimes at their management level. 

For instance, I am informed that Air Mauritius Ltd. adopts hedging strategies as part 
of its risk management framework. Its risk management manual prescribes for a minimum of 
30% and a maximum of 70% of exposure to be hedged. 

The services of Lazard & Co, an international firm of specialist, were contracted from 
2009 to 31 Dec 2014 and the total consultancy fee paid over the period amounted to EUR 
929,183. 

With the bad experience of hedging and its adverse impact on the financial situation 
of the Public Sector Bodies, a study will be commissioned to work out a strategy, guidelines 
and a framework within which the Public Sector Bodies can undertake hedging operations in 
the future. 

MAURICE ILE DURABLE - PROJECTS 

(No. B/931) Mr D. Sesungkur (First Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and  Beach 
Management whether, in regard to the Maurice Ile Durable, he will state the – 

(a) 
(b) 

commencement date thereof;  
names of the key officers thereof, indicating in each case, the remunerations 
drawn as at 31 December 2014;  
total amount of expenditure incurred in relation thereto as at to date, and 
assessment made by his Ministry as to the effectiveness thereof. 

(c) 
(d) 
Reply:  I  am  informed  that  a  Steering  Committee  comprising  representatives  of 
various Ministries, the Academia and International Development partners was set up within 
the Prime Minister’s Office on 04 September 2009 to better coordinate the MID Initiative. 

152 

 
On  15  July  2011,  the  Steering  Committee  was  converted  into  a  MID  Commission 
operating under the aegis of the Prime Minister’s Office. The Commission was headed by an 
Executive  Chairman,  Mr  Osman  Mahomed,  a  Project  Coordinator,  Mr  Sunil  Dowarkasing 
who was also Senior Adviser, and two officers seconded from the Ministry of Finance and 
Economic Development.   

The main responsibility of the MID Commission was to ensure the finalisation of an 

Action Plan on MID and its timely implementation.  

The  Executive  Chairman  was  on  temporary  transfer  to  the  Prime  Minister’s  Office 
from the Ministry of Public Infrastructure, Land Transport and Shipping where he held the 
post of Project Manager (Civil Engineering). In addition to his normal salary, he also drew 
the following - 

Allowance 

  Rs91,500 a month 

Entertainment Allowance 

  Rs6,820 a month 

Car Benefit 

Petrol Allowance 

Driver’s Allowance 

Passage Benefit 

  An official car from the pool 

  Rs19,680 a month 

  Rs8,480 a month 

 

Two  return  air  tickets  (Mauritius-London-
Mauritius) yearly in business class 

Telephone 

  Mobile  phone  value  of  which  did  not 
exceed  Rs10,000  and  free  calls  up  to  a 
ceiling of Rs2,000 monthly 
The Senior Advisor/Project Coordinator was being paid the following - 

Salary 

Period of Contract 

Car Benefit 

  Rs102,000 a month 

  One year renewable 

  An official car from the pool 

Driver’s Allowance 

  Rs8,400 a month 

Petrol Allowance 

Passage Benefit 

Gratuity 

  Rs11,300 a month 

 

 

5% of annual salary 

Two  months’  salary  on  completion  of  12 

 

Telephone 

 

153 

months’ satisfactory service 

  Mobile  phone  value  of  which  did  not 
exceed  Rs10,000  and  free  calls  up  to  a 
ceiling of Rs2,000 monthly. 

The  Lead  Analyst  and  Analyst  were  on  secondment  and  drew  their  normal  salary, 

which was paid by the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development.  

With  regard  to  part  (c)  of  the  question,  the  expenditure  incurred  by  the  MID 

Commission were as follows - 

Year 

2011 

2012 

2013 

2014 

 

Expenditure (Rs) 

420,720 

1,568,183 

3,298,131 

5,537,026 

With regard to part (d) of the question, a decision was taken by the Prime Minister’s 
Office in January 2015 to dissolve the MID Commission because of duplication of work and 
allow my Ministry and other line Ministries to implement MID projects falling under their 
respective responsibilities. For example, my Ministry, in addition to coordinating sustainable 
development  initiatives,  is  implementing  three  MID  projects  –  the  Solar  Water  Heater 
Scheme,  the  Rainwater  Harvesting  Scheme  and  the  Compost  Scheme.  The  Ministry  of 
Tourism  and  External  Communications  is  implementing  the  Eco-tourism  for  Businesses 
Project; the Ministry of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, Shipping and Outer 
Islands is implementing the Sustainable Fisheries Management Project, and the Ministry of 
Industry  and  Commerce  is  implementing  the  Resource  Efficient  and  Cleaner  Production 
Programme. 

GOVERNMENT OF MAURITUS – INVESTMENT PROJECTS - FUNDS  
(No. B/932) Mr D. Sesungkur (First Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) 
asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the funds 
borrowed by Government over the period 2005 to December 2014, he will state the major 
projects financed therefrom and – 

(a) 

table the details as to where the funds have been applied, and  

 
(b) 

154 

indicate  if  an  assessment  has  been  made  of  the  cost  effectiveness  thereof, 
indicating if they were good value for money and of urgent national priority.  

Reply:  With  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  the  information  requested  is  being 

compiled and will be tabled in due course. 

Concerning  part  (b)  indicating  whether  an  assessment  has  been  made  of  the  cost 
effectiveness  and  whether  there  were  good  value  for  money,  it  will  be  difficult  for  me  to 
pronounce  thereon.    For  example,  for  the  multi-billion  SSR  International  Airport  no 
international tendering exercise was carried out. This was the biggest investment project by 
the previous Government.  

Another  example  is  the  Bagatelle  Dam  project  for  which  the  initial  project  value  of 

Rs3.2 billion has almost doubled and the project is still not yet completed.   

CUREPIPE – CASINO – RENOVATION WORKS 

(No. B/933) Mr S. Mohamed (First Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port Louis 
East) asked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the 
Casino at Curepipe, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Casinos de Maurice, 
information as to if quotations were received for drywall partition, doors and other related 
renovation works to be carried out thereat and, if so, indicate- 

(a) 
(b) 

the name of the selected subcontractors therefor, and 
which firm submitted report on quotations, evaluation and recommendations 
for award of contract thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

MINISTER OF FINANCIAL SERVICES, GOOD GOVERNANCE AND 
INSTITUTIONAL REFORMS, MINISTER OF TECHNOLOGY, 

COMMUNICATION AND INNOVATION - ST PETERSBURG – MISSION 
(No. B/934) Mr S. Mohamed (First Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port Louis 
East) asked the Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms, 
Minister  of  Technology,  Communication  and  Innovation  whether,  in  regard  to  his  recent 
official mission in St Petersburg, he will state the- 

(a) 
(b) 

composition of the delegation thereof, and  
outcome of the meeting thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

155 

MBC PROGRAMMES - MINISTRY OF FINANCIAL SERVICES, GOOD 

GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL REFORMS, MINISTRY OF 

TECHNOLOGY, COMMUNICATION AND INNOVATION - PARTICIPATION 

(No. B/935) Mr S. Mohamed (First Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port Louis 
East) asked the Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms, 
Minister  of  Technology,  Communication  and  Innovation  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
programmes of the Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation in which he participated, he will, for 
the benefit of the House, obtain from the Corporation, information as to the amount of money 
spent for the production thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

MAURITIUS, RODRIGUES & AGALEGA - “POCHES DE PAUVRETE” 

(No. B/936) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Minister of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment whether, in regard to 
the  “poches  de  pauvreté”,  he  will  state  if  his  Ministry  has  carried  out  a  survey  for  the 
identification thereof in mainland Mauritius, Rodrigues and Agalega and, if so –  

(a)  

(b)  

(c)  

table  a  list  of  the  places  which  have  been  so  identified  and  the  number  of 
families involved; 
indicate  the  benchmark  definition  of  poverty  that  has  been  accepted  by  his 
Ministry and that has been used to carry out the survey, and  
indicate  if  his  Ministry  has  a  holistic  results-oriented  and  cost  effective 
strategy for the reduction of poverty and, if so, give details thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

POVERTY - INTERDEPARTMENTAL COMMITTEE 

(No. B/937) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Minister of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment whether, in regard to 
poverty, he will state if he will consider establishing an interdepartmental committee to deal 
therewith in a more holistic results-oriented and cost effective manner and, if so, when. 

(Withdrawn) 

PUBLIC PRIMARY EDUCATION – TEACHERS & STUDENT 

POPULATION 

(No. B/938)  Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 
Research whether, in regard to public primary education, she will state - 

(a)  

the total number of – 

 

156 

(i)   primary school teachers employed by her Ministry, and  
(ii)   the student population thereof 

(b)  

(c)  

if there has been a substantial decrease in the admission of pupils in Standard I 
compared with the intake in the 1980’s;  
the ratio of pupil/teacher –  

(i)   presently, and  
(ii)   in the 1980’s 

(d)  

(f)  

the number of primary schools closed over the past five years due to lack of 
adequate school population, and  
if  any  plan  for  a  more  effective  and  efficient  use  of  the  teachers  employed 
therein has been worked out. 

(Withdrawn) 

PUBLIC EXPENDITURE 

(No. B/939) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  whether,  in  regard  to  public 
expenditure, he will state the - 

(a)  
(b)  

(c)  
(d)  

education; 
health; 
social security, and  
public administration 

current spending thereof as a percentage of our Gross Domestic Product; 
percentage of our current public expenditure that is allocated to – 
(i)  
(ii)  
(iii)  
(iv)  
estimated fiscal deficit for financial year 2015/2016, and  
amount which has already been spent from the capital budget as at to date for 
financial  year  2015/2016,  indicating  if  the  total  sum  voted  for  capital 
expenditure will be absorbed by the end of this financial year and, if not, why 
not. 

(Withdrawn) 

PAILLES - NURSERY/KINDERGARTEN  

(No. B/940) Mrs M. D. Selvon (Second Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked the Minister of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment whether, in regard to 
the proposed construction of a nursery/kindergarten at School Lane, Pailles, which has been 
promised for about 28 families, he will state the proposed start and completion dates for the 
carrying out of the works thereof. 

157 

 
Reply:  As  per  records  available  at  the  Ministry  and  at  the  National  Empowerment 
Foundation,  there  have  been  no  requests  for  the  construction  of  a  nursery/kindergarten  at 
School Lane, Pailles. 

However, a non-governmental organization had been operating a day care centre in a 
rented  private  building  in  the  region  from  2009  to  2013.  It  ceased  its  operations  due  to 
financial constraints. On 02 September 2015, it solicited the help of Government for the re-
opening of a day care centre, as it had identified some 28 children of the locality.  

A meeting chaired by the hon. Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms 
and  Member  of  Parliament  of  the  region  was  held  on  09  September  2015  with  the  non-
governmental  organization  in  the  presence  of  relevant  stakeholders,  including  the  Ministry 
with a view to exploring ways and means for the re-opening of the day care centre. 

In the meantime, the Ministry has requested for a list of the 28 children with a view to 
determining their eligibility under the Social Register of Mauritius. This exercise is ongoing. 
Once  the  eligibility  of  the  children  under  the  Social  Register  of  Mauritius  is 
determined, the non-governmental organization, with the support of the Ministry, will be able 
to enlist the collaboration of the private companies in the region who have shown interest to 
finance the operations of the day care centre under their CSR Programme. 

MINISTRY OF EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES, TERTIARY 

EDUCATION AND SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH - LORRIES & VANS - BID 
(No. B/942) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 
Research whether, in regard to the recent bid launched for the provision of lorries and of vans 
for her Ministry, she will state the - 

(a) 

(b)  

respective bid value thereof, and  
name of the successful bidder therefor, and 

names of the bidders therefor, indicating the - 
(i) 
(ii)   
reasons why her Ministry has decided to disregard the recommendations of the 
Independent Review Panel in allocating the contract. 

Reply: I am informed that in March 2015, four bidders responded to the invitation for 
bids  for  the  provision  of  Taxi  Lorries/Vans  to  Zonal  Directorates  1-4  on  an  ‘as  and  when 
required’ basis. Their names and quoted prices are being tabled. 
The name of the successful Bidder is Sanjeev Bhurosy. 

 

158 

As regards part (b) of the question, I am informed that an unsuccessful bidder, namely 
Ramphul  Enterprises  Ltd,  had  filed  an  application  for  Review  at  the  Independent  Review 
Panel  (IRP).  I  am  informed  that  at  evaluation  stage,  Ramphul  Enterprises  was  found  non-
compliant to specifications with regard to gross weight of vehicles. 

IRP  had  recommended  the  annulment  of  the  contract  to  Sanjeev  Bhurosy  and  the 
review of Ministry’s decision for an award to Ramphul Enterprises Ltd. It is to be noted that 
for a bidder to be substantially responsive, he should be compliant to both eligibility criteria 
of participation as well as the specifications. However, IRP stated that Ramphul Enterprises 
Ltd,  which  was  compliant  to  the  eligibility  criteria  for  participation,  had  been  improperly 
eliminated.  Yet,  it  is  not  on  this  basis  that  Ramphul  Enterprises  Ltd  was  eliminated,  but 
instead on the fact that it did not meet the specifications. 

On 17 August 2015, following the IRP decision, the Ministry’s comments were sent 
to the State Law Office for its advice. On 14 September 2015, the latter recommended the 
Ministry to seek information from Ramphul Enterprises Ltd, as per the IRP decision, as to 
whether it has vehicles as per items 8 and 9 of the specifications in the Bidding Document. 

Information was accordingly sought from Ramphul Enterprises. It is to be noted that, 
as per the specifications, the bidder is required to provide 12 taxi lorries/vans at a time. On 21 
September  2015,  Ramphul  Enterprises  Ltd  submitted  12  Registration  Books.  Same  were 
verified by NTA. Eight vehicles were found non-compliant with the taxi vehicle and weight 
requirements  as  follows:  six  did  not  have  the  ‘A’  Carriers  Licence  to  operate  as  Taxi 
Vehicles, one was not of the required weight, and one did not have both the required licence 
and  weight.  On  22  September  2015,  this  information  was  sent  to  State  Law  Office  for  its 
advice. 

State Law Office responded on 09 October 2015 and requested the Ministry to seek 
the  same  information  anew.  On  13  October  2015,  Ramphul  Enterprises  Ltd  resubmitted 
another  set  of  12  Registration  Books  with  the  required  ‘A’  Carrier’s  Licences.  It  is  to  be 
noted that five of them still do not meet the requirement of weight and age as follows: two are 
not of the required weight and three are above 12 years old. As per specifications, vehicles 
should not be older than 12 years. 

As  per  the  legal  advice  tendered  on  16  October  2015  by  State  Law  Office,  the 

implementation of the IRP decision has the following implications: 

(i) 

an annulment of the existing contract of the contractor which was found to be 
compliant may entail damages, and 

 

(ii) 

159 

in the event the contract is not awarded to the applicant in the IRP case, he 
may as well claim damages. 

I am advised that we are in a situation whereby on one hand the existing contractor is 
a compliant bidder whereas on the other hand, in spite of the recommendation of IRP for a 
review of a decision by the Ministry in favour of Ramphul Enterprises Ltd, the latter is again 
not found non-compliant after re-submission of documents. 

Further advice is being sought from the State Law Office as to whether in spite of the 
aggrieved  bidder  not  meeting  the  specifications  of  the  bidding  documents,  the  Ministry 
should invariably implement the recommendation of IRP. 

At this stage as matters stand, no final decision has yet been taken. 

BAIN DES DAMES - TANK FARM & COMBINED CYCLE POWER 

PLANT PROJECT 

(No. B/943) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to 
the new Tank Farm and combined Cycle Power Plant Project to be implemented at Bain des 
Dames, he will state if consultations have been held with the inhabitants living in the vicinity 
thereof and, if so, when and, if not, why not. 

Reply: As I stated in my reply to the PNQ on 03 November 2015, I shall reply only 
with regard to the Tank Farm, as the CEB is still in the process of appointing a consultant for 
the Combined Cycle Gas Turbine.  These two projects are distinct from each other. 

 I  am  informed  by  the  Central  Electricity  Board  that  the  Consultant  –  VYYAASS 
Consulting Engineer Ltd – appointed in 2013 to carry out the EIA study, had two consultation 
meetings  on  31  January  2013  and  21  March  2013  with  the  representatives  of  fishing 
community and several inhabitants of Bain des Dames. 

BASSIN – FOOTBALL GROUND – CONSTRUCTION 

(No. B/944) Mr E. S. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River) asked 
the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the Bassin Football ground presently 
under construction, he will report progress thereof. 

Reply  (The  Prime  Minister):  I  would  like  to  refer  to  the  reply  I  made  to 
Parliamentary  Question  B/122  of  03  March  2015,  wherein  I  informed  the  House  that  the 
contractor for this project was Super Builders Co. Ltd.  The contractual start and completion 
dates  for  the  project  were  12  September  2014  and  11  March  2015  respectively.    I  then 
informed that there had been a delay in the original completion date due to bad weather and 
the end of year closure.  The project was then expected to be completed by end April 2015. 

160 

 
However, I am now informed by the NDU that the works are still ongoing in view of 
technical problems encountered on site, and the project is now expected to be completed by 
the end of January 2016 at the latest. 

The problems pertain to the provision of French drains. With a view to identify the 
required remedial measures, additional site investigations have had to be carried out by the 
contractor.    The  results  have  shown  that  the  ground  has  a  relatively  high  rock  content. 
Consequently,  the  initial  design  of  the  French  drains  has  had  to  be  modified  in  order  to 
minimise  the  risk  of  eventual  water  accumulation  on  the  pitch.    The  modifications  to  the 
French drains entail additional works and cost.  The initial Works Order value is likely to be 
exceeded. 

It is to be noted that in the present project, there is no provision for retaining wall and 
fencing.    Consequently,  had  the  NDU  completed  the  project  in  April  2015,  the  football 
ground would not have been fully operational. 

This is another concrete example of the state of affairs that had prevailed at the NDU 
previously.    No  proper  surveys  and  project  planning  were  carried  prior  to  Works  Orders 
being issued. 

Procedures are under way for the fencing of the football ground and the erection of 

the retaining wall.  

 

