 

 

 

No. 24 of 2016 

1 

 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

(UNREVISED) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

 

WEDNESDAY 10 AUGUST 2016 

 

 

 

 

2 

 

CONTENTS 

 

 

MOTION 

BILL (Public) 

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

 

3 

THE CABINET 

 

(Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

 
Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 
KCMG, QC  
Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 
GCSK  
Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Hon.  Ivan  Leslie  Collendavelloo,  GCSK, 
SC 
Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK 

 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 
Communications 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 
Utilities 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 
International Trade 
 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha, GCSK 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan, SC 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 
Sinatambou 
Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 
Perraud 
Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain, GCSK 

of 
Minister 
Empowerment 
Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation  

Integration 

and  Economic 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 
Family Welfare 
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 
Institutional Reforms  

 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

 
Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 
Cheong, MSK 

Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 

4 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 
Institutions 
Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands 
 
Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms, 
Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 
Disaster and Beach Management 
Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and 
Training 

 

 

 

 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Gopall, Mr Navin  

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 24 of 2016 

 

Sitting of 10 August 2016 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 

 

 

7 

 
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, I put my Private Notice Question to the hon. Minister 
of Finance and Economic Development because he is responsible for the Highlands SLDC 
Project.  I  have  been  informed  that  the  question  would  be  answered  by  the  still  Minister 
Bhadain. I am, therefore, not putting my question. 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10(2) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move that all the business on today’s Order 

Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

PUBLIC BILL 

Second Reading 

THE APPROPRIATION (2016-2017) BILL 2016 (No. XVII of 2016) 

Order  read  for  resuming  adjourned  debate  on  the  Appropriation  (2016-2017)  Bill 

2016 (No. XVII of 2016). 

Question again proposed. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Ramano! 

(11.33 a.m.) 

Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes):  Madame  la 
présidente,  pour  mon  discours  sur  le  budget,  je  souhaite  l’aborder  en  trois  parties.  Une 
première  partie  sur  un  survol  économique  du  pays  avec  ses  défis,  en  deuxième  partie  la 
situation  au  niveau  de  l’importation  des  véhicules  et  en  troisième  partie  une  analyse  du 
secteur immobilier tel que présenté dans le budget. 

Madam Speaker, the 2016-207 Budget is a marked improvement on previous budgets 
of this Government as well as the last three budgets of the previous Government, essentially 
because  it  meets  the  aspirations  of  the  common  man.  The  populism  of  this  Budget  in  the 
circumstances has generated a wave of appreciation and transformed the mood of the nation 
from the ordinary citizens through the politicians to the business community. Time, however, 
will tell whether this suffice to the people. 

8 

 
I, accordingly, wish to offer my congratulations on this aspect of feel good factor to 
the new Minister of Finance and Economic Development, especially in comparison with the 
previous Budget presented by his predecessor, which was nothing less than red deceptions. It 
is precisely because the previous budgets were so subpar that people find this present Budget 
a much satisfactory one, so much the better for the country. 

I wish to take up Strategy VII on the quality of life. We are talking essentially of the 

material aspect of life in terms of accessibility to essential services. 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

Order, please! 

I have said… 

Hon. Bhagwan! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 (Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Bhagwan, I am addressing myself to you! Hon. Bhagwan and hon. Baloomoody! 

Can we have some order, please! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Order! Hon. Bhadain! Please, don’t give any reply to any provocative remarks! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Bhagwan and hon. Baloomoody, please, can we have some calm in the House. Please, 
continue hon. Ramano! 

Mr Ramano: Madam Speaker, I wish to take up Strategy VII on the quality of life. 
We are talking essentially of the material aspect of life in terms of accessibility to essential 
services. Here was an opportunity for Mauritius to bring… 

(Interruptions) 

 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhadain, please! I have said that making provocative remarks 

9 

is very indecorous for the House. 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Bhagwan, I think now there is some calm in the House! Please, allow the hon. Member 
to proceed with his speech calmly! 

Mr Ramano: Madam Speaker, I wish to take up Strategy VII on the quality of life. 
We are talking essentially of the material aspect of life in terms of accessibility to essential 
services. Here was an opportunity for Mauritius to bring in a new concept of measurement of 
the quality of life which is much more objective than we have done traditionally. 

The King of Bhutan has introduced a new measure which has been adopted by the UN 
which is the ‘Gross National Happiness’; which is an improvement over conventional GDP. 
At the level of the UN and many institutes in advanced countries are presently working on it. 
I suggest the hon. Minister to have a look to this concept and give some thought and discuss 
it  with  the  Office  of  Statistics  Mauritius.  Indeed,  there  already  exists  a  World  Happiness 
Report  that  measures  the  quality  of  life  and  sustainable  development  which  also  includes 
psychological surveys and ethics. 

The  investment  in  the  water  supply  of  an  amount  of  Rs3.4  billion  is  a  laudable 
initiative. Ensuring water 24-hour will be beneficial both to the CWA and the consumers. In 
practice, it is when there are cuts, there are wastes for people tend to fill their containers with 
water from the tap and they have not used it, they throw it away and fill the containers again. 
The  problem  with  the  water  supply  in  certain  areas  is  with  waste  water  utilisation.  Waste 
water has no separate meter. Not all water used enters the sewerage pipes. 

However,  users  in  places  like  Quatre  Bornes  are  charged  on  the  basis  of  the 
consumption of water. If someone does a little gardening, keeps the yard clean and tidy or 
washes  his/her  car,  he/she  is  charged  on  the  basis  of  water  consumed.  This  is  unfair  and 
defies all logic. Gardening for one’s personal consumption goes beyond the use of water for 
watering plants. It is an excellent hobby and an excellent form of relaxation. 

A look at the statistics of non-communicable diseases reveals a rise in cancer. Madam 
Speaker, the need to adopt a comprehensive approach cannot be better argued. I urge the hon. 
Minister  to  address  the  problem  of  charging  sewerage  fees  on  the  consumption  of  water 
usage. The bills have to be separate. Consumers should pay what they have used on different 
metering. It is an anomaly that has to be corrected at the earliest. 

10 

 
 Law  and  order  is  an  important  factor  in  any  economy  and  it  creates  an  enabling 
environment  for  increased  production.  Strengthening  the  Police  Force  is  good.  However, 
improving  the  quality  of  the  service  would  be  better.  The  ratio  of  Police  Officers  to  the 
population is already one of the highest. Simply recruiting more Police Officers will not, by 
itself, improve or help to maintain law and order. There is an optimum size. I believe we are 
on the other side of the point of maximum efficiency. 

The quality of Police service matters most. There are lots of things that can be done to 
improve quality and expedite matters. A visit in any Police Station to record a complaint or 
make a statement regarding an accident takes long hours because the Police Officers are often 
not properly trained to record the details and descriptions. These could have been formalised 
using  digital  technology  to  describe  locations  and  many  details  could  have  been  readily 
available. For instance, a link with the NTA could easily supply all the details about a car, 
saving  the  Police  Officer  unnecessary  time.  Officers  need  training  to  be  conversant  in 
reflecting  what has happened. The language employed by  recording Police Officers leaves 
much to be desired. It is in this area that we need to be focused. It is in this area that the 
population will feel greater respect and offer cooperation to the Police. 

I have no doubt, Madam Speaker, maintaining law and order will be less costly and 
more efficient if the Officers are better trained, not just physically, but also academically. In 
this respect, the provision of modern vehicles and equipment is well appreciated, but could be 
supplemented by more CCTV. We need to introduce new technology to improve safety and 
reduce cost.  

Creating space in law and order infrastructure is equally a laudable initiative for the 
space to operate in some Police Stations is nothing less than appalling and does not reflect a 
modern Mauritius. 

On the other hand, as regards the provision for road safety and related infrastructure, 
it is seemingly inadequate. The nation deserves much more than the Rs316 m. earmarked. 
Here  was  an  opportunity  for  the  hon.  Minister  to  transform  the  landscape.  Restoration 
economics is a new field and the hon. Minister could have transformed the lives of ordinary 
citizens  with  massive  investment  perhaps  up  to  1  per  cent  of  GDP  about  Rs4.4  billion 
bringing total public investment to 4.2 of GDP, creating jobs and pushing the growth rate and 
simultaneously alleviating poverty while building the wealth stock of the nation.  

11 

 
Here was an opportunity to transform the City Centre of Port Louis and give life to 
the surrounding ghettos. Here was an opportunity to transform, for example, Vacoas/Phoenix 
from a rural town into a real genuine town. Here was an opportunity to implement a plan of 
gentrification of some of the less fortuned peripheries of Rose Hill, Port Louis and Curepipe. 
Madam Speaker, gentrification is a trend in urban neighbourhoods which results in increased 
property values and the displacing of lower income families and small businesses into better 
endowed  places  through  an  upgrading  of  housing  conditions  and  other  infrastructure 
accessibilities. 

Sizeable investment, we have – 

revived the ailing construction sector; 

• 
•  enhanced the quality of life, and 
•  upgraded the whole of Mauritius. 

This is how major cities were transformed during the post-World War II period in Europe, the 
US,  Japan  and  Canada.  Such  transformations  will  have  given  tremendous  boost  to  the 
economy and perhaps returned to a better period in the past. This is why, Madam Speaker, I 
am quite disappointed and sad as I think the Minister had a golden opportunity here to leave 
his imprints. 

My  comments  on  environment  follow,  more  or  less,  the  same  logic.  A  little 
satisfaction because, at least, some problems are addressed but the investment earmarked, the 
magnitude  of  the  work  to  be  accomplished  and  the  vision  for  a  clean,  green  and  tidy 
environment  is  too  little  in  the  circumstance  of  modest  growth,  high  unemployment,  too 
many people risking to become poor and the general impoverishment of the middle income. 
We are trapped in middle income and we need to get out and right on a fast sustainable trail. 

The health sector needs to be revamped. We spend Rs10.9 m. the question is whether 
people are satisfied, whether Government is satisfied and whether as a nation we get value for 
money. It is no secret that this sector hits the headlines with so many controversies. Are we 
measuring the quality of services disposed in the health services? Are the taxpayers able to 
ensure  the  cost  effectiveness  of  each  rupee  spent?  Has  the  Ministry  carried  out  any  cost 
effectiveness  study?  All  we  hear  that  toilet  facilities  are  in  existence  even  in  brand  new 
hospitals. Providing funds is good but we have reached a stage of our development that we 
need to account for every rupee spent, every patient treated, every prescription served. 

12 

 
Madam  Speaker,  I  agree  with  the  hon.  Minister  we  need  to  modernise  the  health 
system.  Here  is  another  key  area  where  we  can  rapidly  introduce  digital  technology  from 
administration to surgery. I know that the e-service is in the pipeline but, however, I need to 
stress  that,  for  some  services,  in  order  to  avoid  wastage  it  is  time  to  introduce  a  dose  of 
market  forces  on  criterion  of  affordability  to  achieve  greater  efficiency,  reduce  waste  and 
promote greater accountability. 

While  this  will  reduce  Government  costs  it  will  also  empower  patients  to  demand 
their rights. Many people expected the introduction of a National Health Insurance Scheme. It 
had been announced some weeks or months back but, the National Health Insurance Scheme 
has not been mentioned up to now. It is time we start it. Many patients would prefer privacy, 
personalised treatment and better accommodation.  

We must dare. We must modernise. We cannot, as policymakers, restrict ourselves to 
populist policies. We have to build solid bases to strengthen resilience. While maintaining the 
welfare system and coming to the rescue of the vulnerable, we need to be efficient to better 
serve the nation. The Budget merely presents a shopping list without any vision and dishes 
out money without seeking to ensure the effectiveness of each rupee spent. As custodian of 
taxpayers’  money,  we  have  a  moral  duty  to  ensure  the  money  spent  brings  in  a  stream  of 
benefits that will enhance our happiness. 

The  social  measures  have  generally  been  well  received  even  by  the  most  ardent 
critics.  The  merit  of  these  social  measures  has  gained  general  support,  brought  in  an 
optimistic mood. This is quite important. However, social measures are short term, an ad hoc 
expedient. The country expects permanent solutions and income on which they can plan for 
their future and the future of their children. I would not have much problem if we were just 
gaining  time  pending  that  investment  and  project  implementations  generate  a  stream  of 
benefits such as  a decent income and permanent jobs. This is the biggest weakness of the 
Budget. Investment remains roughly low at 17.8 per cent of GDP. If private investment keeps 
falling, an interventionist Government should step in to raise investment.  

On many issues, the Minister has been quite daring. Surprisingly, in the area where he 
ought to have shown courage and imagination, I think there has been some deception at this 
level. There is every reason that growth will be low and quality of productive jobs uncertain. 
If  the  Budget  has  focused  on  policies  and  appears  to  have  neglected  the  economic 
fundamentals, those are not enough in the Budget to trigger the economy and create sufficient 

 

13 

number of productive jobs. While the social policies are much appreciated, what the country 
needs is growth and jobs. The amount of investment provided in the Budget is inadequate to 
generate the number of quality jobs needed at this juncture of the economy. We need more 
investment to exploit the potential of Mauritius. Mauritius needs at least 22 to 25 per cent of 
investment as a share of GDP in order to ensure more than 4 per cent growth to absorb the 
rising unemployment and change the track to reach a high income economy. If we fail to do 
so we will be trapped in the middle income bracket and various countries surely could pass 
us.  

We had a choice to choose the right policies; we, unfortunately, sacrificed policies to 
stimulate growth. It is the foundation of today that will shape the history of future generations 
on the basis of figures supplied in the Budget. It appears we have not made the best choice. 
We needed massive investment to create a big bang but we chose a play safe approach. 

Public investment is low, private investment is equally low.  In Mauritius there is a 
synergy between public and private investments. If public investment was sufficiently high 
this would have surely triggered private investment. As a percentage between 5 to 9 per cent, 
it is likely that the private sector would have responded positively. The fact that it is only 3.2 
per cent is likely to send the wrong signal to the private sector. 

Madam Speaker, the Budget is well packaged with measures that give the impression 
that  everything  is  working  well.  On  the  labour  market,  it  states  that  21,600  persons  are 
looking for a job and will be taken out of the unemployment register.  

It immediately sends a sign of relief and creates an atmosphere of great expectation. 
The  first  effect  is  quite  significant  especially  if  we  are  listening  rather  than  studying.  The 
measures do not provide long-term solutions. They are ad-hoc, short-term expedient serving a 
different goal rather than serving the people itself. A significant number consists of training 
or placement, earning a meagre stipend which will have marginal impact on growth. These 
are short-term measures.  

The  nation,  after  20  months,  expects  permanent  and  durable  jobs.  The  other  7,200 
jobs are old jobs in the public sector whilst they will have a positive social impact for sure; 
the economic impact is going to be onerous to the Budget unless matched by a more than 
proportionate job creation in the private sector to raise output.  

14 

 
I must, however, recognise the efforts of the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development. The fact remains, Madam Speaker, the strategy chosen makes a lot of noise, 
but it is more likely to be an empty vessel. The nation was expecting to give a good push in 
promising sectors like the digital economy, the ocean economy, restoration economy, tourism 
or pharmaceutical and construction. Admittedly, some of these sectors are mentioned with 
little concrete examples and linkages of how these sectors can be developed rapidly with a 
big bound to reap an early harvest and take the country out of the middle income trap. 

The tourism sector is doing fairly well and we must mobilise all resources to ride on 
the crest of the wave and regain dynamism and seize the opportunity to blaze new trails and 
sustain its long-term development.  I am happy to hear for some returning residents of their 
marked improvement in the services of Air Mauritius.  

I  am  happy  too  that  the  Balance  Sheet  of  Air  Mauritius  is  looking  better.    The 
intention to achieve greater integration of tourism development with a growing aspiration of 
our own population for more leisure activities is a welcomed initiative.  

It is also nice to hear the efforts to enhance marketing; the Gulf regions, Scandinavian 
countries and Eastern Europe.  In the same vein, in an effort to diversify further the market 
for tourism, it is time to study creating a Portuguese axe as part of the African strategy and air 
corridor initiatives which will connect Mauritius to Brazil with stopovers in Mozambique and 
Angola. Another study could focus on an extension of the air service to the Republic of South 
Korea. This initiative should be linked with a concept of duty-free and the air service could 
make provision for electronic cargo. 

The tourism industry should build an important databank to monitor the effectiveness 
of  policies,  the  contributions  of  market,  the  sensitiveness  of  income  and  airfare.  Madam 
Speaker, the need for economic intelligence in the tourism sector is very pertinent. It is the 
one  sector  that  creates  for  workers  at  different  levels  from  gardeners  and  cleaners  to 
managing directors, accountants, specialist like scuba divers. Enforcement and monitoring of 
safety measures are vital. Unfortunately, even though we are known as an important tourist 
destination, we do not have an important tourism intelligence to carry  out serious analysis 
and econometric studies. The tourism sector is a very volatile sector. Too often, when things 
go wrong, hotel industry has accused the airline industry and vice versa. 

15 

 
With good studies, it is easier to improve policy measures, shift from one market to 
the other. If we want to become a high-income country, it is time we start thinking like small 
big countries like New Zealand, Hong Kong, Singapore, Ireland or even Iceland. We do not 
have to reinvent the wheel. We can learn from them, emulate them and replicate their success 
stories  by  exploiting  domestic  talents.  Too  often,  we  tend  to  think  that  we  are  the  best  in 
tourism and we become complacent. We are not the centre of the world for tourism and we 
need to keep improving and growing. This is why we need to integrate the tourism industry 
with  the  rest  of  the  economy,  with  agriculture  by  supplying  the  tourist  industry  as  much 
goods for consumption, with the ocean economy with transport and cultural activities. While 
I appreciate the initiatives for setting up an aquarium-museum, I deplore that it is vague. No 
funds are earmarked and not much information has transpired on these two projects which 
can reappear in another Budget. 

The ocean economy is one that holds great potential, but it is sadly underexploited. 
Successive  Governments  tend  to  pay  lip  service  to  it.  In  this  Budget,  the  focus  is  on 
aquaculture.  Notwithstanding  that  aquaculture  has  to  be  exploited,  it  would  be  a  gross 
oversimplification to confound aquaculture with ocean economy. Aquaculture is at the lowest 
spectrum  of  technology.  It  provides  jobs  to  lower-income  bracket  and  is  often  a  labour-
intensive  activity.  The  current  unemployment  situation  is  an  artificial  situation  created  by 
successive Governments because of wrong policies, poor vision and opaque practices. If we 
aspire to become a high-income country, then we need to make the transition rapidly to a 
high-tech  economy.  We  need  to  think  today  of  digital  economy  and  robotisation  for 
developing the ocean economy and remunerate workers with high income. What do we see in 
this  section  on  ocean  economy?  Some  31  sites  identified  for  aquaculture;  setting  up  of 
common facilities on land for aquaculture and fish processing.  

All these projects are essentially low value-added. What is generally called dirty jobs 
which are thought with the danger of never taking off because we simply  do not have the 
required  number  of  people  to  work  at  this  level.  So,  we  should  not  sell  dreams  that  are 
unlikely to materialise. A look at the statistics shows that many unemployed are women and 
young graduates or workers in their fifties who have lost their jobs. With low income, the 
high seas and the dirty characteristics of the job, will these jobs attract these workers? True, 
they  are  also  unskilled,  semi-literate  workers  looking  for  a  job,  but  are  they  in  sufficient 
numbers to sustain a full-fledged ocean economy. I am not saying that we should not go for 
aquaculture, but we need to strike the right balance on aquaculture and the ocean economy. 

16 

 
We need to be more biased in favour of high-tech ocean economy, resolutely linked to 
energy generation, the pharmaceutical industry, mining, the tourism industry, giving rise to 
manufacturing of tools and equipment to serve the exploitation of the ocean economy and the 
evolution  of  an  ocean  culture  including  aquatic  sports.  There  is  only  sentence  one  in 
paragraph  119,  talking  with  a  conclusion  of  two  studies  without  giving  any  details  on  the 
feasibility of ocean waves and offshore wind for energy production. This is quite revealing to 
the important the Government attributes to energy and the ocean. It gives the impression of 
grouping  in  the  dark  without  a  sense  of  direction.  We  have  been  talking  seriously  of  the 
ocean economy since more than a decade, yet we do not have a Master Plan, we do not have 
a White Paper, we do not have basic statistics. We do not have a proper budget. A look at the 
various OECD papers can provide a good start for an organised and scientific exploitation. 
This is our future and we definitely need to step up efforts to exploit its potential, create high-
value jobs and turn it into sustainable growth pillar. 

Madam  Speaker,  we  are  facing  a  major  problem  which  will  adversely  affect  the 
labour market and our living style. We need to take decisions and sadly we should say that 
the Budget has overlooked this problem. Other countries like Germany and Japan have faced 
this  problem.  This  problem  will  affect  the  recruitment  of  teachers,  the  number  of  people 
available for work, our pattern of consumption, our fiscal policy, our retirement policy force 
us to transform the nature of our economic structure. We may have to consider reviewing our 
pension structure and our reproduction capacity as a nation. 

We need to review our gender relations. The country needs more babies as said by the 
hon. Minister of Health and Quality of Life, but still the Budget is silent as to incentives to be 
given to families eventually. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  note  certain  inconsistencies  between  official  Government  policy 
measures and the implementing agencies. For instance, in the budget, last year, Government, 
in light of the demographic situation and the need to bring in new talents, launched an appeal 
through  the  Mauritius  Diaspora  Concept  to  help  develop  the  country.  However,  Mauritian 
nationals  are  often  discriminated  against  and  implementation  agency  ignores  Government 
policies. I can give an example to substantiate my analysis. The Mauritius Housing Company, 
for instance, gives only 10 years to refund the loan while demanding six-month of instalment 
in an account with the Mauritius Housing. While being discriminatory, it is far from sound 

 

17 

economics.  More  importantly  they  violate  a  Government  policy.  I  would  appeal  to  the 
Minister to rectify situation. Government agencies have to implement Government Policies. 

The Budget gives credit for the drop in the price of fuel gas, LPG, for the household. 
This  should  have  been  lowered  long  before  given  the  drop  in  the  world  market  price. 
Actually,  the  household  was  denied  this  fall  in  prices  and  the  budget  nearly  corrects  an 
injustice.  

Madame la présidente, l’endettement des ménages représente plus de 25% du crédit 
total du secteur privé.  Lors des débats budgétaires de l’année dernière, dans mon intervention 
sur le budget, j’ai fait la remarque que tout l’arsenal des mesures pour combattre la mentalité 
zougadère aura une portée limitée sans une responsabilisation des Mauriciens en général et 
des opérateurs dans le monde du jeu. J’avais proposé un Gambling Responsibility Act comme 
cela existe dans plusieurs pays. Et ce Gambling Responsibility Act préconise, entre autres, des 
mesures strictes, par exemple, à la limite des paris, la limite des crédits que les maisons des 
jeux donnent aux joueurs, le bannissement même de certains joueurs des gambling houses ou 
même  le  self-exclusion  des  joueurs  comme  mesures  de  réhabilitation.  Ce  sont  autant  de 
mesures qui peuvent être prévues dans une telle loi. Il est temps de légiférer pour protéger les 
Mauriciens de leur vulnérabilité aux jeux.   

Il appartient au gouvernement de venir de l’avant avec une étude approfondie avec un 
échantillonnage honnête de la population et d’analyser les retombées du jeu sur la vie de la 
famille  mauricienne.  Je  constate  avec  satisfaction  que  dans  le  présent  budget,  le 
gouvernement  a  prévu  un  Responsible  Gambling  and  Capacity  Building  Fund.  Qu’on  ne 
s’arrête  pas  à  ce  niveau  du  fund  tel  quel!    Qu’on  vienne  de  l’avant  avec  ce  Responsible 
Gambling Act pour qu’on puisse une fois pour tout responsabiliser les Mauriciens et aussi les 
opérateurs en ce qui concerne le jeu.   

Madame la présidente, j’aborde ici la deuxième partie et je serai bref là-dessus en ce 
qui concerne l’importation des véhicules.  C’est une des mesures phares qui a été énoncée 
dans  le  présent  budget.    Madame  la  présidente,  le  gouvernement  a  baissé  la  taxe  sur 
l’importation de certains véhicules dans le but de donner la chance à nos citoyens de pouvoir 
aspirer à posséder une voiture de meilleure qualité et se fait augmenter la qualité de vie des 
Mauriciens.  Nous  en  sommes  satisfaits.  Néanmoins,  je  constate  que  la  mesure  de  geler  le 
rabais  ou  impôt  sur  les  émissions  de  monoxyde  de  carbone  -  c’est  ce  qu’on  appelle  CO2 
Emmision  Rebate  Levy  -  fait  dans  le  sens  contraire  par  rapport  à  la  philosophie  de  faire 

 

18 

baisser les prix devant les prix de vente de certains véhicules. En plus, comme dirait l’anglais 
‘adding insult to injury’, l’île Maurice a signé les traités pour faire baisser notre émission de 
carbone, la taxe carbone et comme on a signé le traité et convention pour enlever les taxes sur 
plusieurs produits, on a aussi signifié notre intention de diminuer notre taxe carbone. N’est-il 
pas  là  une  occasion  ratée  ou  pire  un  mauvais  signal  au  pays,  à  l’environnement  et  à  la 
communauté internationale.  

Permettez-moi,  Madame  la  présidente,  de  faire  un  calcul  rapide  pour  être  plus 
explicite.  Une  petite  voiture  très  prisée  de  1300  cc  a  une  émission  moyenne  de  119  g  par 
kilomètre. Cette voiture paye un excise duty de 55% et bénéficie un rabais sur la taxe carbone 
entre R 41,650 et R 119,000.  La même chose pour un hybride. Le rabais varie entre R 30,000 
et R 90,000.  Maintenant, avec un rabais de 5% sur l’excise duty pour les moteurs entre 1000 
et  1600  cc  et  le  gel  de  rabais  de  la  taxe  carbone,  je  comprends  mal  comment  cette  même 
voiture va se vendre moins chère. De ce fait cette voiture est appelée à une majoration de R 
30,000 à R 100,000. On est loin de la démocratisation de l’économie pour le peuple en ce qui 
concerne le confort, l’amélioration de vie pour la possibilité qui est donnée aux Mauriciens 
de posséder une voiture de meilleure qualité. 

En contrepartie, je comprends la démarche de l’honorable ministre des Finances de 
geler cette compensation de la taxe carbone pour des raisons opérationnelles. Mais en même 
temps ce n’est pas le rôle des honorables élus de trouver des solutions aux problématiques et 
non pas appliquer une politique de l’autruche et dire qu’on va geler des mesures et on verra 
par la suite. 

À  mon  humble  avis,  Madame  la  présidente,  ce  secteur  rencontre  beaucoup  de 
problèmes  pour  la  bonne  et  simple  raison  que  l’importation  des  véhicules  reste  trop 
accessible. Les importateurs sont obligés par la loi d’avoir une garantie bancaire de pas moins 
de R 4 millions pour exercer sans compter un showroom et autres infrastructures. Et en plus 
ils  sont  obligés  de  donner  des  garanties  d’un  minimum  de  six  mois.  En  même  temps  un 
individu lambda peut aussi importer un véhicule à son nom contre un dépôt de seulement R 
200,000 et rien de plus. Cela donne la liberté aux importateurs véreux et malhonnêtes pour ne 
pas dire des concessionnaires marrons et cela donne aussi lieu à toutes sortes de maldonne et 
on sait très bien le nombre de consommateurs qui se sont faits arnaquer par ces importateurs 
marrons. 

19 

 
Je propose qu’on redéfinisse ce secteur de l’importation des véhicules et, à priori, il 
faut réglementer pour que les concessionnaires puissent s’enregistrer au niveau du ministère 
de  Commerce  et  réduire  d’une  façon  plus  professionnelle  dans  un  souci  de  protection  de 
consommateurs. 

C’est  la  seule  façon  de  protéger  nos  consommateurs  et  aussi  cette  industrie.  Si  le 
gouvernement a à cœur ces citoyens, je propose de remettre le rabais ou la taxe carbone et 
que  le  ministère  concerné  mette  en  place  un  High  Powered  Committee  pour  régler  ce 
problème dans un bref délai.  On a déjà des organisations indépendantes et des réputations 
internationales qui se sont déjà implantées à Maurice et je suis sûr qu’elles peuvent apporter 
leur contribution à ce niveau. 

Madame la présidente, j’aborde ici le volet de l’immobilier. C’est la dernière partie de 
mon intervention et je pense que le ministre des Finances a mis un accent particulier en ce qui 
concerne l’immobilier. Et il a prévu pas mal d’incentives en ce qui concerne les exemptions 
de duties, de taxes, et je pense que c’est un côté révolutionnaire du budget qui mérite d’être 
précisé et aussi d’être salué.  

Toutefois  j’aurais  souhaité  faire  quelques  commentaires  et  là  j’aurais  souhaité  que 
l’honorable  ministre,  et  si  les  techniciens  du  ministère  des  Finances  sont  présents,  qu’ils 
peuvent prendre note et aussi apporter des explications et éventuellement, si besoin est, à mon 
humble  avis,  il  y  a  quelques  corrections  à  faire  en  ce  qui  concerne  quelques  aspects 
techniques.  

Madame  la  présidente,  après  l’abolition  du  concept  de  first  time  buyer  en  2006,  le 
concept a été réintroduit en 2010 par l’honorable Pravind Jugnauth, lui-même. Le budget de 
2006, il faut le dire, a été relativement injuste vis-à-vis de la classe moyenne. Le budget de 
2010 de l’honorable Pravind Jugnauth a rétabli cette injustice, je dirais, vis-à-vis de la classe 
moyenne. Il faut le reconnaître, avec le prix de l’immobilier, qui a une tendance ascendante et 
les  charges  bancaires,  le  jeune  salarié,  le  jeune  couple,  éprouve  beaucoup  de  difficultés  à 
financer leur acquisition. Je l’ai souligné l’année dernière, le seuil de prix pour bénéficier du 
first time buyer ne reflétait pas la réalité du marché. Aujourd’hui, le prix considéré est de R 2 
millions pour les terrains vagues  et R 6 millions pour les immeubles bâtis, comme stipulé 
dans le présent budget. Je dois reconnaître que cela est en phase avec la réalité du marché. 

20 

 
Madame la présidente, je souhaite toutefois que l’honorable ministre nous éclaire sur 
un premier point. A l’état actuel des choses, il existe une aberration de la loi qui dit que les 
acquisitions faites par les first time buyers sont taxables à un taux uniforme de 5%, si le prix 
des terrains vagues ne dépasse pas R 1,500,000 et le prix des immeubles bâtis ne dépasse pas 
les R 4 millions. Ainsi, si le prix de vente, valeur du jour, est à R 1,500,000.1, l’acheteur paie 
la taxe sur un montant total de R 1,500,000.1 Et je pense que cela est tout à fait unfair. Cela 
constituait  une  aberration  du  secteur,  une  aberration  de 
les  opérateurs.  Et 
malheureusement,  l’ancien  ministre  des  Finances  n’a  pas  compris  ou  n’a  pas  voulu 
comprendre. 

tous 

Au paragraphe 318 du présent budget, le bon sens a prévalu, mais j’aurais souhaité 
avoir une confirmation du ministre quand même, où il est précisé que le first time buyer “will 
now  be  allowed  to  buy  bare  residential  land  free  of  registration  duty,  on  the  first 
Rs2 million”. Je présume, avec cette précision, que l’acheteur sera exempté sur les premiers 
R 2 millions, et normalement paiera les 5% sur la différence du prix. Si tel est le cas, je pense 
que la correction nécessaire a été faite dans ce présent budget. Toutefois, je constate qu’il y a 
une autre aberration, et qui mérite d’être précisée, au paragraphe 317 pour les acquisitions des 
new houses et new apartments. Donc, il est mentionné que du 01 septembre 2016 au 30 juin 
2020,  for  an  amount  not  exceeding  Rs6  million  the  purchaser  will  be  eligible  to  full 
exemption.  

A  la  lecture  du  texte,  tel  qu’il  est  mentionné  dans  la  loi,  si  le  prix  dépasse  R  6 
millions,  par  exemple,  R  6  millions  et  une  roupie,  là,  pour  ce  cas  de  figure,  le  purchaser 
paiera 5% sur le montant total et non pas sur le montant excédant les R 6 millions. J’aurais 
souhaité  que  M.  le  ministre  précise  sa  position  en  ce  qui  concerne  cet  aspect  des  choses. 
Pourquoi cette différence, et non pas aligner le même principe d’exemption pour les terrains 
vagues tout comme les immeubles bâtis en ce qui concerne le paiement, en ce qui concerne 
l’exemption de la taxe jusqu’à R 6 millions et le paiement de 5% des frais d’enregistrement 
pour l’excédent de R 6 millions ? 

Autre point à considérer pour l’acquisition des terrains vagues, pourquoi avoir imposé 
une limite de 20 perches de terrain vague, Madame la présidente, et non pas laisser ouvert la 
superficie ? Il faut se rendre à l’évidence que le prix à la perche du terrain varie d’une région 
à autre. De toutes les façons, la personne ne sera exemptée que sur les premiers R 2 millions. 
Donc, la question de 20 perches ne se pose pas. Il faut aussi prendre en considération que, 

 

21 

très  souvent,  plusieurs  personnes  qui  sont  des  first  time  buyers  achètent  conjointement,  et 
ensuite procède au partage. Et là, avec cette limite de 20 perches, cela constitue un obstacle 
majeur à des first time buyers qui souhaitent acquérir des biens pour la première fois. 

Madame la présidente, j’accueille favorablement l’élimination de la limite d’âge pour 
bénéficier du first time buyer. Cela fait partie de la culture de la classe moyenne mauricienne 
de financer des acquisitions de leurs enfants, mêmes mineurs. Madame la présidente, j’aurais 
souhaité  que  le  ministre  éclaircisse  toutefois  sa  position  en  ce  qui  concerne  le  paragraphe 
319 : ‘a person who did not own a residential property as at 29 July 2016 will also qualify 
for exemptions.’ Ce que j’aurais souhaité savoir : est-ce que le ministre  peut nous rassurer 
qu’une personne qui a hérite d’un bien ou qui a acheté un bien ou encore a bénéficié d’un 
first time buyer dans le passé, mais qui a été forcé, par contrainte financière, de vendre son 
bien  ou  a  fait  l’objet  d’une  saisie  avant  le  29  juillet  2016,  sera  toujours  éligible  pour 
l’exemption du registration duty ? 

Madame  la  présidente,  je  demanderai  au  ministre  de  reconsidérer  le  cas  des  époux 
divorcés.  Je  parle  un  peu  dans  la  pratique  des  choses,  mais  ce  sont  des  cas  de  figure  qui 
méritent considération si on veut que le principe de first time buyer puisse avoir les effets 
qu’on souhaite sur la classe moyenne surtout, Madame la présidente. En ce qui concerne le 
cas des époux divorcés, comme avant 2006, le ministre des Finances actuel, qui avait aussi 
présenté le budget de 2005, avait considéré le cas des époux divorcés. Très souvent, après le 
divorce, il y a des ventes qui se font à l’amiable entre époux. 

Avant  ce  fameux  budget  de  2006,  tout  transfert  qui  se  faisait  entre  ex-époux  était 
exempté  de  la  taxe,  et  en  2006  on  a  éliminé  le  first  time  buyer,  on  aussi  éliminé  tous  ces 
incentives.  A  l’état  actuel  des  choses,  cette  transaction  est  taxable  à  5%,  c’est-à-dire,  côté 
vendeur 5%, et 5% côté acheteur, et très souvent ces mêmes époux sont appelés à payer la 
taxe une deuxième fois, alors qu’ils avaient payé la taxe lors de l’acquisition de ce même 
bien. Une telle transaction n’était pas taxable avant 2006. J’aurais souhaité que le ministre 
des  Finances  porte  une  attention  particulière  à  ce  cas  de  figure,  dont  il  est  très  bien  au 
courant, pour l’avoir présenté dans le budget avant 2006. Dans le cas de figure où les époux 
sont appelés à vendre le bien conjugal, il est tout à fait normal, logique et juste qu’ils puissent 
bénéficier  de  l’exemption  de  first  time  buyer  s’ils  souhaitent  acheter  un  nouveau  toit.  Et 
j’aurais  souhaité  que  cela  fasse  partie  intégrante  dans  le  présent  budget  pour  rétablir  cette 
forme d’injustice. 

22 

 
Dans ce même ordre d’idées, Madame la présidente, le ministre donne une attention 
particulière aux victimes du sale by levy dans le présent budget. Dans un souci de justice à 
ces victimes, il serait souhaitable que les victimes du sale by levy puissent bénéficier du first 
time buyer exemption, et ce, quelle que soit la date à laquelle leurs biens ont été vendus à la 
barre, et non pas seulement le 29 juillet. La question qui se pose : est-ce qu’une victime du 
sale by levy aura la possibilité de bénéficier de first time buyer ? Mon appel au ministre c’est 
aussi de considérer le fait de donner une attention particulière aux victimes du sale by levy, si 
leurs biens sont saisis après le 29 juillet 2016, qu’ils puissent toujours être considérés comme 
des first time buyers, dans un souci de leur permettre d’acquérir un toit. 

Avant  2006,  Madame  la  présidente,  le  ministre  des  Finances  d’alors,  l’honorable 
Pravind  Jugnauth,  prévoyait  un  régime  particulier  pour  l’acquisition  des  terrains  agricoles 
sous le Registration Duty Act,  le Land Duties and Taxes Act et aussi le Sugar Efficiency Act, 
et cela afin d’encourager la culture agricole. En 2006, avec le budget de rupture de la classe 
moyenne,  ce  régime  spécial  avait  disparu,  alors  que  pour  les  transferts  des  terrains  sous 
plantation de canne, par exemple, les transactions étaient exemptées de la taxe complètement 
ou bien avait un régime particulier. Ce serait souhaitable à l’état actuel des choses, où des 
incitatifs sont considérés pour les terrains sous culture, qu’un régime particulier soit prévu 
lors des transferts de ces mêmes terrains. 

Autre oubli dans ce budget, Madame la présidente, c’est le concept de société civile 
immobilière  d’attribution.  On  a  bien  mentionné  que  le  principe  de  first  time  buyer  est 
applicable pour les ventes à état futur d’achèvement, c’est-à-dire, dans le jargon mauricien, 
pour  les  ventes  qui  n’existent  qu’au  stade  de  plan,  mais  aucune  mention  n’est  faite  de  la 
société civile immobilière d’attribution, qui a été à la base de plusieurs projets immobiliers 
dans les années 80, 90, 2000. Même jusqu’au présent, il y a pas mal de projets immobiliers 
qui se font sous le principe de la société civile immobilière d’attribution. 

Depuis 2013, ce concept a été rendu très contraignant. On ne taxe plus selon le progrès des 
travaux  mais  bien  à  la  valeur  d’un  appartement  fini,  ce  qui  est  injuste.  Il  n’y  a  pas 
d’exemption  de  first  time  buyers  en  ce  qui  concerne  les  sociétés  civiles  immobilières 
d’attribution.  

Il faut aussi reconnaître  que des mesures  encourageantes ont été annoncées comme 
l’exemption  du  registration  duty  pour  les  loans  documents  ne  dépassant  pas  R  2  millions. 
Cela  va  dans  le  bon  sens.  Autre  mesure  encourageante,  Madame  la  présidente,  est  le 

 

23 

relèvement  du  plafond  des  projets  immobiliers  de  R  4  millions  à  R  6  millions  tout  en 
bénéficiant des exemptions du Land Transfer Tax et du Registration Duty.  Je suis sûr que les 
promoteurs prendront avantage de cela. 

Je  termine  là-dessus,  Madame,  tout  en  accueillant  le  projet  de  construction  de  pas 
moins de 800 lotissements pour les personnes dans la pauvreté absolue et 1,900 units pour les 
low-income  families,  je  dois  saluer  l’initiative  d’exempter  le  paiement  des  arriérages  des 
intérêts pour les emprunts contractés de la NHDC et du Mauritius Housing pour les ménages 
dont les revenus ne dépassent pas R 15,000. Le relèvement du remboursement de la VAT pour 
les  dépenses  de  R  500,000  au  lieu  de  R  300,000  est  aussi  à  saluer,  bien  que  le  seuil  soit 
toujours insuffisant. Lorsqu’on parle de ce cap de R 500 000, il faut se rendre à l’évidence 
qu’on parle ici d’une maison de 500 pieds carrés, ce qui ne reflète pas la réalité. 

Ceci dit, Madame la présidente, je vous remercie. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Fowdar! 

(12.24 p.m.) 

Mr  S.  Fowdar  (Third  Member  for  Grand’  Baie  &  Poudre  d’Or):  Thank  you, 
Madam Speaker, to allow me to intervene on this Budget 2016-2017. As the previous orators, 
I will not hesitate to congratulate the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development 
for his good Budget but, in particular, for giving special attention to the poor and the lower 
class of the population.  

Madam  Speaker,  the  fight  to  eradicate  poverty  is  not  a  small  one  and,  therefore,  I 
welcome the measures which the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development has 
announced in the Budget and also the country’s fight against poverty. 

Madam Speaker, let us be frank, this Budget upon its announcement has shown signs 
of  satisfaction  among  the  population  and  also  on  both  sides  of  the  House.  We  must 
acknowledge that since the general elections of 2014, expectation from this Government has 
been  really  very  high  and  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  has 
rightly  stated  in  the  Budget  Speech  that  the  current  economic,  the  domestic  and  global 
background, is fraught with tough challenges, adversity and uncertainty. Therefore, it is a fact 
that we are going through very tough economic times locally and internationally and it is not 
helping us at all to ease the misery of the population.  

24 

 
Madam  Speaker,  we  must  acknowledge  that  there  is  a  feel-good  factor  and  the 
problem is: how do we maintain the feel-good factor for the days, the months and the years to 
come? So, the measures announced in the Budget must be implemented so that the feel-good 
factor is maintained. Putting words into action is now what is required and the Minister of 
Finance and Economic Development has an enormous task of implementing his intentions. 
Without any doubt, Madam Speaker, this is not an easy phase of him. 

As we have seen the joy and happiness that this Budget has brought to the Members 
on  both  sides  of  the  House  and  also  the  population,  this  joy,  Madam  Speaker,  will  only 
crystallize when the measures are fully implemented and that we meet the targeted real GDP 
of 4.1 per cent by next year. 

Madam Speaker, I will not, obviously, waste the time of the House by repeating all 
the good things already mentioned by my friends, Members of Parliament, here. I will turn 
only on four or five issues which I think need to be mentioned.  

Madam Speaker, the first thing is people would watch what the Government will do 
after  announcement  of  the  measures  and  they  would  wish  to  see  all  the  measures  being 
implemented. It is important that the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development and all 
the Ministries make it a must that they religiously implement all the measures announced so 
that we come to this 4.1 per cent growth in GDP. 

It is an undeniable fact, Madam Speaker, that one of the fundamental components of 
economic  growth  is  investment  and  this  has  been  very  slow  these  days.  The  country  is  in 
urgent need of both local and foreign investments.  

I  am  sure  this  Government  will  take  and  is  taking  initiatives  to  create  the  right 
business environment that will motivate not only foreign investment but also give confidence 
to the local investors to carry on investing. Confidence, Madam Speaker, is the key word and 
it is very important that this Government instills confidence in both the households and also 
businesses. 

Madam Speaker, it is a fact that the FDI has suffered severely, falling from Rs18.5 
billion in 2014 to Rs9.6 billion in 2015 which, Madam Speaker, is a fall of almost 50 per 
cent. This is serious and something must be done quickly to rectify this situation. But, why 
Mauritius has witnessed such a fall in the FDI? Are we no longer attractive businesswise? Or 
has it become difficult to start a business in Mauritius due to the high level of bureaucracy? 

 

25 

Madam Speaker, I am sure that the problem of FDI lies more with the latter. There is simply 
too  much  bureaucracy  and,  this  again,  is  a  serious  problem  which  is  not  only  affecting  us 
locally but also internationally. 

I, therefore, welcome the measures announced by the hon. Minister of Finance and 
Economic Development in the Budget with regard to business facilitation, more specifically, 
the amendment he intends to bring with regard to the Investment Promotion Act.  

Madam Speaker, the Board of Investment is the engine that will drive investment and 
they need to be efficient,  independent and  work properly for the economic development of 
this  country.  Madam  Speaker,  we  can’t  leave  everything  in  the  hands  of  the  Board  of 
Investment. They need to be supervised. I am sure that we need to listen to what they say to 
investors. Are they telling them we need money? Are they telling them we need jobs? Or, are 
they  inciting  them,  creating,  and  motivating  them  to  get  them  to  invest  in  Mauritius?  So, 
Madam Speaker, the Board of Investment needs to be closely supervised because FDI is the 
driving force of our economy, hence making it easier for foreign investors and also faster for 
them to start business operation in Mauritius. It will all depend, Madam Speaker, on how fast 
the Board of Investment is able to issue permits and licenses that, in turn, will increase FDI, 
will  increase  economic  growth  and  will  allow  job  creation.  But,  we  all  know,  Madam 
Speaker, that the level of bureaucracy at the Board of Investment needs to be revisited and 
relooked into so that it does not hamper the good economic progress that we are expecting. 

Madam Speaker, last year, we witnessed one of the very difficult years for the SME 
sector. Although the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development sanctions Rs2 billion 
annually as loans to SMEs, the banks, the intermediary agents have struggled enormously to 
disburse funds to the SME potential investors.  

It is a fact, Madam Speaker, many similar economies have succeeded because they 
have  successfully  boosted  their  SME  sector  and,  today,  SMEs  form  a  fundamental  part  of 
their economies. Most economies today have been successful due to the SME sector.  

I would say 98% of most successful economies have establishments as SMEs, 65% of jobs 
have  been  created  by  the  SMEs  and  over  50%  of  the  GDP  contribution  comes  from  the 
SMEs. 

Therefore, the SME sector needs to be addressed very cautiously and aggressively as 
from  the  coming  fiscal  year.  Madam  Speaker,  the  SMEs  have  the  potential  to  contribute 

 

26 

substantially to the economy and they will provide a strong foundation for economic growth 
as  well  as  for  the  economic  development.  But  what  happened  last  year,  Madam  Speaker? 
Why  did  investors  struggle  so  hard  to  obtain  funding  from  the  banks  although  the 
Government had the willing to give funding through the banks? Why did the banks struggle 
so  hard?  Again,  Madam  Speaker,  it  is  a  high  level  of  bureaucracy  and  a  conservative 
approach adopted by the bank. The SME sector suffered because of that.  

I must add, Madam Speaker, that the banks and the disbursing institutions have been 
playing a safe game and they were not able to take any risk with regard to SMEs. This has 
made the life of potential SME entrepreneurs tougher and has, in turn, made the population, 
job creation, GDP growth and the development of our economy suffer also. 

Madam Speaker, we are faced with the problem of financing SMEs; firstly, existing 
SMEs and secondly, new SMEs. I have so many complaints from existing SMEs that they are 
unable  to  get  loans  because  they  have  made  losses  in  the  previous  years.  They  have  been 
struggling and they have got negative credit rating. If they are not given funding, they would 
not be able to catch up  with their business and they would not also be  able to repay their 
arrears. I would request the Minister of Finance and Economic Development to see how to 
tackle this problem of credit rating for those existing SMEs. They have got a negative MCIB 
and without this clearance, they won’t be able to get any loan to carry on with their business 
further.  

We  don’t  have  any  problem  with  the  new  SMEs  which  would  come  up  with  a 
feasibility plan, their business plan and the banks would be able to lend according to the plan 
they have submitted.  

Therefore,  once  again,  Madam  Speaker,  the  Government  will  have  to  pay  special 
attention to those SMEs with negative MCIB. Of course, I am not asking to create a sort of 
precedence that all people having negative MCIB will be given loans, but in order to boost up 
this sector, we need to find a solution. I do not know whether we can consolidate their loan, 
take their arrears and call it a new loan. Or I don’t know whether the Bank of Mauritius could 
intervene; explore the option of quantitative easing or open market operation to help banks to 
lend more. But there is a problem here and we need to address this problem to ease matters 
for the SMEs. 

27 

 
Madam Speaker, I would go on to the second point which is for me very important; it 
is the employment and job creation. Our greatest problem today is job creation. We need to 
create jobs and we need to create productive jobs. We cannot just create jobs like we did in 
the past - quatre jours à Paris - but we need to create jobs which would add value to the 
economy and which would increase the GDP.  

The filling of vacancies, the YEP Programme and the Skills Development Programme 
are but short-term solutions to unemployment. The public sector, we know, Madam Speaker, 
has been blamed for long. Many of those departments have been blamed for long for their 
inefficiency. Although we know that there are so many good people within the Civil Service 
who are delivering, who are sincere, and who are honest.  

So, the public sector needs to be looked into, have a reform. And in particular, those 
people that we are recruiting this year, they should be people with a new mindset coming into 
the  Civil  Service  to  deliver,  not  to  sit  and  be  paid  every  month.  For  too  long,  Madam 
Speaker, the Civil Service has been blamed for that. Therefore, it is extremely important. The 
7,200 people that we are recruiting in the Civil Service be made religiously, on a merit basis 
and  only  the  best  qualified  and  experienced  candidates  are  called  upon  to  take  the  jobs. 
Confidence must be instilled in the population that this is happening. They should not think 
that people are getting in through windows or through l’imposte into the job. We need to take 
good people, qualified people and the population has to know about this. They need to have 
confidence about it.  

Therefore,  I  make  an  appeal  to  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development and to the Government in general that the recruitment within the public sector 
be made - I know this is the case - in a transparent, opaque manner on the basis of merit. 

Madam Speaker, we must not also forget that we rely a lot on the private sector and a 
lot of incentives are being given to them for job creation. Madam Speaker, the tax rate that is 
applied in Mauritius, I think this is unique, 15% for long, and this is meant for them to create 
jobs through business expansion and to come up with new businesses. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  YEP  Programme  is  a  very  good  programme.  It  is  giving  the 
youth some sort of opportunity to work, to get some experience and to empower them. But, 
Madam  Speaker,  I  was  the  Minister  for  Training  at  some  time  and  we  had  this  Skills 
Development  Programme.  We  were  getting  people  recruited  for  training,  but  what  was 

 

28 

happening in fact, graduates were given clerical jobs. They were making tea and coffee just 
for the sake of filling, have some stipend, they were taken on board, but this must not happen, 
Madam Speaker.  

The YEP Programme must be effective and efficient. People taken on YEP should be 
given proper experience and they should come up after the term as somebody with power, 
with skills and somebody who could do something in life. So, they should be given proper 
experience  not  be  just  cased  in  some  places.  It  is  important  that  these  programmes  bring 
value to these people. It should not be made only as a measure to cool unemployed people.  

Therefore,  it  is  very  important,  Madam  Speaker,  that  the  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic  Development  has  a  say  when  these  placements  are  made  and  they  need  to 
supervise  and  see  whether  these  people  are  appropriately  placed  in  the  right  position.  For 
example, an Accountant must not be given a placement as an Engineer. They must be given a 
position as Accountant. 

Madam Speaker, previous orators have talked about skills mismatch and I want just to 
say  a  few  lines  about  it.  What  are  the  causes  of  skills  mismatch  in  Mauritius,  Madam 
Speaker? I will go to basically two reasons –  

(i) 

shrinking  industries,  closing  down  industries  and  also  the  emerging  sectors, 
new industries coming in the country, and  

(ii) 

also, more importantly, is a lack of proper career guidance. 

Madam Speaker, one of the reasons we are facing unemployment in this country is a 
lack  of  proper  career  guidance.  For  example,  we  have  recently  seen  and  we  have  all 
witnessed the crisis of doctors. Too many doctors and no jobs for them! So, this should not 
happen. We have to take steps that the students, at all levels, be it secondary level, tertiary 
level, they must be advised on the career guidance prospects. What are the jobs to come in 
five years’ time? What are the jobs to come in 10 years’ time? There must be a planning. I 
was thinking that the National Employment Agency would do that and would work on the 
career prospects of the youth and inform them.  

Therefore, it is very important, Madam Speaker, that career guidance to be revamped.  It is 
not only guiding people on how to do CVs; how to attend interviews, but also to guide them 

 

29 

on what subject they have to choose for their career with regard to university degrees or even 
to secondary education. 

Madam Speaker, the other issue I want to raise is taxation. We are all happy that there 
has  been  no  tax  increase.  We  also  acknowledge  that  the  threshold  has  been  increased  by 
Rs10,000.  Good  thing  for  those  individual  taxpayers.  We  also  know  that  the  next  year’s 
expenditure  will  be  Rs117.4  billion  and  we  are  expecting  only  Rs102.4  billion  as  income 
deriving from taxation. In fact, Madam Speaker, 83% of our income is derived from taxation. 
Therefore, it is very important. This is our main source of revenue. Taxation is a main source 
of revenue. Madam Speaker, I would like to stress on this point that corporate tax has been 
15% for too long and which applies for all types of businesses. Today, a business, making a 
profit  of  Rs50,000,  pays  15%  corporation  tax  and  also  a  business  earning  over  Rs100  m., 
Rs500 m., Rs1 billion; still pays 15% tax.  

Now, what is the intention here? The intention was, and I think is still, to give the 
private sector the difference as an incentive for business expansion, for new business to come 
and also for job creation. But is it happening, Madam Speaker? This is the big question! My 
colleagues, my friends accountants would agree with me. Do we have checks and balances 
whether the private sector is using the excess given to them in creating jobs, in increasing 
economic development, in increasing the wealth of this country?  I don’t think so, Madam 
Speaker! If a small portion of it is being reinvested, I think the majority is being used by them 
for perks and for their own benefits. 

So, Madam Speaker, what I would request to the hon. Minister Finance and Economic 
Development and to this Government is to relook into this issue and I am for a progressive 
tax  system.  If  you  earn  more,  you  pay  more.  That  would  apply  for  companies,  for 
corporations, not for individuals, but, at least, for corporations if they earn more - unless they 
invest, unless they prove, unless they can come with evidence of new investment, business 
expansion - they would have to pay the tax at an increased rate. Possibly we could use that 
money  for  SMEs.  We  could  give  this  as  loans  to  SMEs  to  develop  further  the  SME.  So, 
Madam  Speaker,  I  think  it  is  for  too  long  that  we  are  keeping  this  15%  unless  we  have 
evidence that the money have been reinvested. 

Madam Speaker, there is another thing, I mean, I came with a question to the Rt. hon. 
Prime  Minister  about  it.  It  is  the  State-owned  companies,  State-owned  enterprises.  State-
owned  enterprises  are  being  left  on  their  own  for  too  long  and  we  need  to  revisit  and 

 

30 

supervise them. They are the assets of the country and they belong to the Government. This is 
what I think they seem to forget that the parastatal bodies and the State-owned enterprises 
belong to the Government. And the assets, they are for the country, they are assets for the 
public. I mean most of the State-owned enterprises are providing services to the population 
and  in  most  countries  they  are  public  services  like  electricity,  water  supply.  So,  they  are 
important and they are very important for future economic development in this country.  

So,  what  I  am  saying  here,  Madam  Speaker,  these  State-owned  enterprises  must 
operate  efficiently,  transparently  and  in  an  accountable  manner  because  I  believe  many  of 
these enterprises, because they are left on their own, are doing whatever they think is best; 
although it may not be in the best interest of the country. So, State-owned enterprises must be 
relooked into. Now, the OECD, last year, published guidelines for State-owned enterprises. 
This was published in 2015, last year. It is an excellent document, Madam Speaker. I don’t 
know why this is not being put in practice in Mauritius; why this is not circulated to all those 
State-owned companies, parastatal bodies and every single line of it adhered to. I mean, all 
the OECD Member States are implementing this guideline. So, I would ask the hon. Minister 
of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms, I know he is working on 
a paper of good corporate governance, code of ethics but why not look into this OECD paper 
which was published last year and implement this into our State-owned companies.  

In all, Madam Speaker, you will see the guideline urges all these enterprises to be as 
accountable as possible. Just like the listed companies are accountable to the shareholders, in 
the same way these enterprises should be accountable to the public through the Government 
and through the Parliament. 

Madam  Speaker,  a  last  point  which  I  would  like  to  raise  is  my  favourite,  which  I 
didn’t see much in the Budget, it is innovation, research and development. Madam Speaker, I 
believe research and development and innovation is a saviour for developing countries. With 
the  coming  of  globalisation,  if  we  do  not  stress,  if  we  do  not  pay  attention  to  innovation, 
research and development then we are definitely going to lag behind. So, what do we need 
here, Madam Speaker, is to bring a setup proper for innovation, research and development. 
We need to bring a regulatory institutional framework within the innovative activities so that 
it takes place.   

Madam Speaker, reforms are needed to make public policy and regulatory framework 
more  conducive  for  innovation.  Government  must  play  a  more  direct  role  in  fostering 

 

31 

innovation. Public investment in science and basic research must be increased. Although it 
seems that implementing reform to foster innovation may prove difficult, but strong political 
will is needed here for innovation and research and development to happen.  

So, Madam Speaker, these were my points. I don’t want to repeat what has already 
been said by the other hon. Members of the House.  I don’t want to waste the time of the 
House. There are so many good things already said about the Budget. I am fully in agreement 
with  the  measures  announced  in  the  Budget  and  I  want  the  hon.    Minister  Finance  and 
Economic Development  and the Government in  general to implement. The Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister said last time, he wants to have a sort of monitoring committee. He wants to have an 
implementing committee to look into every single sentence announced in the Budget to be 
implemented so that next year when we stand up here to talk about the next year’s Budget, 
we should be very comfortable that whatever has been announced in this year’s Budget has 
been implemented. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker:  I suspend the sitting one and a half hours. 

At 12.55 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 2.34 p.m. with Madam Speaker in Chair. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun! 

The  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 
Scientific Research (Mrs. L. D. Dookun-Luchoomun):  Madam Speaker, I believe there is 
unanimity, both inside the House as well as outside among the population at large, that this 
Budget is a landmark one in that it has been able to identify critical issues and has been able 
to address them in an all-inclusive manner.   

Let  me  congratulate  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  for 

presenting a Budget that has secured the appreciation of the nation as a whole. 

In an international economic context that is riddled with uncertainties, hon. Pravind 
Jugnauth has been daring enough to come up with a Budget that will significantly consolidate 
our  social  fabric  and  accelerate  our  move  towards  modernisation,  and  I  am  sure,  Madam 
Speaker, the modernisation process underway will lead to rapid and robust economic growth 
in the future. 

32 

 
La relance économique, l’équité, le développement humain sont à la base même de ce 
budget présenté par le ministre des Finances et cela, Madame la présidente, ne peut se faire 
qu’à  travers  la  participation  de  tout  un  chacun,  l’accès  à  une  éducation  et  formation  de 
qualité, la création des emplois et surtout la justice sociale pour ceux se trouvant au bas de 
l’échelle.  Il  s’agissait  de  rétablir  l'équilibre  socio-économique  d’une  manière  réfléchie, 
pragmatique, réaliste et surtout intelligente. Et c’est là, Madame la présidente, que se situe 
l’impact  de  ce  budget  qui  jette  les  jalons  voulus  à  travers  ses  10  orientations  stratégiques 
clairement détaillées. Le pari est réussi. 

Madame la  présidente,  ce  budget  est  le  quatrième  budget  de  l’honorable  Pravind 
Jugnauth  and  on  retrouve  une  constante.  L’honorable  Pravind  Jugnauth  a,  à  travers  ces 
mesures dans  ces budgets successifs, toujours mis l’accent sur l’équité,  sur la nécessité de 
protéger  ceux  au  bas  de  l’échelle  et  de  les  donner  les  moyens  de  gravir  les  échelons.  Les 
manœuvres pour combattre la pauvreté sont clairement démontrés par des mesures suivantes - 

Premièrement : permettre à ce que toutes familles figurant sur le Social Register of 
Mauritius de toucher les allocations jusqu’à un seuil maximal de R 9,500 pour une famille 
ayant  trois  enfants.  Madame la  présidente,  personne  à  Maurice  ne  vivra  dans  la  pauvreté 
absolue.  This  is,  indeed,  a  major  initiative,  Madam  Speaker,  a  laudable  one,  indeed.  Cela 
coûtera à l’État un demi-milliard de roupies sur une période de deux ans à partir de décembre 
cette année-ci. 

Le  ministre  des  Finances  ne  s’est  pas  limité  uniquement  à  soutenir  les  vulnérables 
financièrement,  mais  il  vient  aussi  avec  toute  une  panoplie  de  mesures,  d’initiatives  pour 
encourager  ces  familles  de  briser  le  cycle  de  la  pauvreté  et  de  gravir  les  échelons.  A  titre 
d’exemple, la construction des logements sociaux sur les trois années à venir, les fonds d’un 
milliard de roupies pour la construction de 1,900 unités de logements sociaux sur 16 sites à 
travers  l’île  et  cela  sans  oublier  les  mesures  incitatives  telles  que  l’extension  du  seuil 
d’éligibilité à des salaires de R 20,000 mensuellement pour acquérir un logement social. 

L’honorable  Vice-Premier  ministre,  Showkutally  Soodhun,  l’a  si  bien  dit  hier.  La 
préoccupation de chaque mauricien demeure une éducation adéquate, un emploi pour pouvoir 
subvenir  aux  besoins  de  la  famille  et  un  toit.  Le  budget  donne  des  moyens  à  chaque 
mauricien de réaliser ses projets. 

Madame la présidente, le budget de Pravind Jugnauth le prouve. Notre ministre des 

Finances est un homme de cœur, qui démontre et courage et compassion. 

33 

 
Autres  initiatives  de  notre  ministre  des  Finances  que  nous  devons  louer  sont  les 
mesures  prises  pour  nos  enfants  ayant  des  handicaps  que  ce  soient  en  termes  de  pension 
à laquelle  ils  sont  maintenant  éligibles  ou  en  termes  des  augmentations  des  grants-in-aid 
allouées  au  Special  Education  Needs  and  NGOs.  J’en  reviendrai  plus  tard,  Madame la 
présidente. 

C’est la première fois qu’autant d’efforts sont déployés dans ce secteur. Madame la 
présidente, il est clair que l’éducation jouera un rôle prépondérant pour réaliser plusieurs des 
stratégies majeures préconisées dans le budget. En effet, que ce soit au niveau de l’innovation 
tant  recherchée  ou  de  la  numérisation  ou  encore  et  surtout  la  transformation  et  une 
amélioration  dans  la  qualité  de  vie  de  ceux  au  bas  de  l’échelle  économique,  l’éducation 
devient un fil conducteur pour mener à bien cette mission. Et j’en suis heureuse ! Heureuse et 
fière de former partie d’un gouvernement qui a, dès le début, misé sur une vision saine de 
l’éducation, une vision qui s’articule autour de quatre piliers majeurs. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to quickly spell out these - 

• 

• 

• 

• 

We want a system that guarantees that learners leaving our system, guarantees 
that they complete and hold their own against the best students in the world. 
We want an education and training system to be at the cost of evolution and to 
be so attractive as to enable the country to really emerge as a regional 
knowledge hub. 
We want an efficient, effective education and training system that can produce 
the skills and expertise to service those existing and emerging sectors of the 
economy. In short, to raise productivity for sustainable economic growth. 
And last, but certainly not least, we want to see our children emerging as 
socially and emotionally well-balanced individuals who would be able to 
operate as informed, empowered and responsible citizens who have the 
resilience to adapt to evolving environments. 

Madam  Speaker,  to  fulfill  this  vision,  we  must  deal  with  some  issues  that  have 
undermined the education system for quite some time now. We have to address the case of 
some of our children leaving schools, barely literate and numerate after six years of primary 
schooling. We must give its lettre de noblesse to the technical and vocational education and 
training and eliminate the stigma that has dogged it for too long. We must also ascertain that 
all our learners successfully complete the secondary schooling. They have to develop those 

 

34 

softened  foundational  skills  like  problem  solving,  critical  thinking,  communication  and 
collaborative work and such others that will stand them in good stead in their adult lives. 

Madam  Speaker,  we  all  know  that  low  standards  of  achievement  are  the  root  of 
unskilled labour and unemployment and rising inequality, and that is something our country 
can  ill  afford.  I  seize  today’s  platform,  Madam  Speaker,  as  an  opportunity  to  make  more 
explicit the educational reform and indicate how we intend to attain objectives set therein. 
But, for us, let me situate the context, both internationally and nationally. We have to see the 
educational reform against a background of the sustainable development goals that the world 
committed itself to in September last at the UN. 

Also, allow me to reiterate that the Nine-Year Schooling is an important component 
of  the  overall  systemic  reform  programme  and  that  the  reform  is  a  comprehensive  one 
encompassing  all  subsectors  right  from  preprimary  through  the  post-secondary  and  higher 
education and training. 

Madam Speaker, at this juncture, I need to open a parenthesis. I heard hon. Ramful 
proposing that the implementation of the Nine-Year Schooling Reform be postponed for  a 
later date. I heard him and I was surprised. Haven’t we waited for long enough? I mean so 
many of my predecessor Ministers had thought to embark on the mise en oeuvre of such a 
reform and then had to backpedal for a variety of reasons. There is no doubt that some of 
them were animated by the best of intentions. Some of them! Are we now to wait for longer? 
Can the country afford such a wait? Can our children who are being robbed of their childhood 
afford to wait any longer? Do we not owe it to them to create conditions whereby they grow 
and develop in a healthy environment where competition exists, yes, but where it is not une 
course effrénée? 

Madam Speaker, it is important to stress that we need our children to work hard, but 
we have to do away with the ferocious competition, the rat race, as some had called it in the 
past. No, Madam Speaker, we cannot wait any longer! The country cannot wait any longer! 
Our  children  cannot  wait  any  longer!  We  are  certainly  not  treating  our  children  as  guinea 
pigs,  hon.  Ramful!  Hon.  Ramul  has,  on  a  number  of  occasions,  stated  that  he  supports 
educational reform, but he should know that this reform is a well-thought one. 

We are, in fact, ensuring that our children, all of our children receive an inclusive and 
equitable quality education and this is far from being an  experimentation. This reform has 
been well reflected upon. The Nine-Year Continuous Basic Education Reform will transform 

 

35 

teaching and learning in the classroom and will inspire every child to succeed. Hon. Ramful 
stated that we  are treating our  children  as  guinea pigs. What the  Labour Party did was  an 
experiment  on  our  children.  Instead  of  moving  ahead  after  the  reform  was  brought  in  the 
years 2000-2005 by the former MSM/MMM Government, they exacerbated the competition 
by  introducing  the  ‘A  +’.  My  hon.  colleague  has  overlooked  a  fundamental  aspect  of  the 
Nine-Year Schooling Reform.  The transformation envisaged will provide all learners with a 
range of skills essential for ensuring both success in their future career and in their life. Nous 
le disons toujours il ne suffit guère de réussir dans la vie, il faut réussir sa vie.  

I know that the hon. Member means well. I know, by his own assertion that he is in 
favour of the reform. But, somewhere along the line, he has possibly missed out on a number 
of  things.  Thus,  I  do  not  subscribe  to  the  hon.  Member’s  averment  that  we  are  increasing 
pressure upon our children. Far from it! For too long, we have allowed the CPE to become a 
cut throat competitive examination. The CPE failures exist because of accumulated deficits in 
learning. This is what we are looking at and dealing with right from an early age, right from 
the pre-primary, in fact.  

Madam  Speaker,  let  me  explain  how.  In  the  pre-primary  sector  we  are  introducing 
new  pedagogies.  We  have  programs  like  the  digital  awakening  of  our  children  in  the  pre-
primary sector. We have introduced the Learner Development Profile with a view to ensuring 
a smooth transition between pre-primary and primary school. We want a level playing field to 
be there for all children and during the primary subsector. From Grade 1 itself early support 
and in time remedial education will be provided to close potential learning gaps.  

In this context, I am grateful to the Minister of Finance and Economic Development 
for facilitating the recruitment of 75 Support Teachers for remedial education in the primary 
subsector, but also for the recruitment of 340 Trainee Educators for holistic development of 
our children. 

Madam  Speaker,  teachers,  we  know,  are  the  most  important  within  school 
determinant of effective learning. We have already worked out a vast training programme for 
quality  teaching.  We  are  also  introducing  new  approaches  to  assessment.  We  are  no  more 
going to rely on one-off and end of year assessments alone to define achievement level of our 
children. School-based assessments and the adoption of a modular approach of assessment 
for history, geography and science will be introduced in the system. The intention is precisely 
that of alleviating some of the pressure from the current regime of high stakes testing.  

36 

 
Madam  Speaker,  we  are  coming  with  the  introduction  of  drama,  music,  arts, 
movement education to ensure the holistic development of our children. Let me state it loud 
and  clear:  any  reform  in  education  is  a  dynamic  process.  Education  itself  is  a  dynamic 
process and as the process is embarked upon there are inevitably new realities that crop up, 
new  demands  that  have  to  be  met  and  new  challenges  that  will  have  to  be  faced  and 
overcome. We can have the best-laid of all plans, but they are never carved in stone rather 
they must have inbuilt flexibility that will allow for unplanned elements to be taken on board. 

The NYS (Nine Year Schooling)  reform is so calibrated and it is absolutely out of 

question to postpone the reform. As the anonymous quote goes, Madam Speaker –  

“There is not enough darkness in all the world to put out the light of even one small 
candle” 

In fact, it is high time that the reform be implemented and the time is now. Procrastination 
carries the germ of non-action. Sad to say, this is precisely what has happened in the past. 
Something  I  definitely  will  avoid.  Besides,  we  are  already  far  gone  in  the  implementation 
process. The policy document on NYS is now going public, budget allocation to the tune of 
Rs580  m.  out  of  the  Rs2  billion  earmarked  has  already  been  made  for  the  first  year  of 
implementation.  Regulations  have  already  been  promulgated  last  year  to  provide  for  the 
introduction of the new PSAC assessment. The admission modalities to Grade 7 are known. 
The annual programme for first PSAC assessment to be conducted in 2017 has equally been 
published and they were vetted last year.  Amendments are being brought to the Education 
Act  to  provide  a  phased  implementation  of  the  Nine  Year  Schooling  Project  and  the 
transitional arrangements including inter alia the provision of regional scholarships. Madam 
Speaker, we mean business. 

The reform in education also places an emphasis upon learning environments that can 
become both exciting and a pleasant experience. Thanks to this Budget, to the Minister of 
Finance and Economic Development, for having provided the additional means to make that 
a reality through the development of 45 learning environments. 

Madam Speaker, there is universal agreement that this Budget places a high premium 
on social benefits and social reach and reflects a deep-seated concern for the well-being of 
all. The eradication of absolute poverty has been the mantra of this Government. We have 
always  believed  that  equity  should  be  the  driving  force  in  all  our  ventures  and,  Madam 

 

37 

Speaker, we have endeavoured in education and training to create the equity based conditions 
for improved learning outcomes.  

As a case in point, my Ministry has launched the ZEP 2 initiative in 2015. Let me 
inform  the  House  that  this  initiative  develops  intervention  actions  that  are  grounded  in 
neuroscientific principle in the area of learning and brain development. This is done through 
the  redesign  of  schools  so  that  they  can  confront  poverty  related  barriers  to  teaching  and 
learning. Research has proved that stress has a negative impact on educational outcomes so, 
to counter that impact we should build de-stressing learning environments. 

Madam Speaker, the following have been worked out as the pillars of the new ZEP 2 

strategy and action has already started on these –  

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

the implementation of continuous professional development programmes for 
the staff; 
creation of 45 learning environments to compensate for deficiencies of 
impoverished home environments; 
setting up of resource centres to produce pedagogical tools for implementation 
of the brain based pedagogy; 
implementation of the parental support programme through clubs des parents; 
the conduct of ongoing research to improve teaching. 

(iv) 
(v) 
Vous conviendrez, Madame la présidente, que ces actions cadrent parfaitement avec 
les objectifs d’une éducation inclusive. L’éducation reste la base de toute réussite et demeure 
la  réponse  à  la  pauvreté  et  à  l’exclusion.  Et  pour  une  meilleure  prise  en  charge  d’autres 
mesures telles que l’augmentation du meal allowance de 50 pourcent aux enfants fréquentant 
les écoles ZEP ne peuvent qu’être saluées.  

Madam Speaker, let me come to another very important equity driven measure in this 
Budget.  The  measures  announced  by  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development 
regarding  persons  suffering  from  disabilities  are  unprecedented.  They  leave  no  doubt  in 
anybody’s mind as to the commitment of this Government to bring more light and hope in the 
lives of these people. I need hardly stress that already a number of actions have been taken by 
my Ministry to provide a barrier free access to students with disabilities. Schools have been 
fitted with ramps, all new secondary schools have already been provided with adapted toilet 
facilities for the disabled, links have been made between building blocks with facilities like 
music room, library, science laboratory found on ground floor whenever necessary. Students 

 

38 

with disabilities are released earlier than other students. Carers are provided in mainstream 
primary and secondary schools to help students with special educational needs.  

We intend to further extend the above facilities to all our schools. Let me also confirm 
to  the  House  that  my  Ministry  will  come  up  with  a  Strategic  Paper  on  Special  Education 
Needs.  This  will  aim  at  inclusiveness  and  parity  where  access  to  available  facilities  and 
opportunities would be widespread hence, eliminating discrimination and stigmatization. As a 
case in point, my Ministry is operating more and more integrated units in primary schools 
across the island thereby avoiding these students the hardship of travelling long distances.  

I  do  agree  integrated  units  are  not  the  ideal  solution.  We  aim  at  mainstreaming  a 
maximum  number  of  children  with  disabilities.  But  there  will  always  be  extreme  cases  of 
severe  disabilities  that  cannot  be  accommodated  in  the  mainstream  classes.  On  the  other 
hand,  we  have  mainstream  students  with  physical  handicaps,  visual  and  other  mild 
impairments in our secondary schools.  

The  SEN  Resource  Development  Centres  are  operational  at  Ferney,  Plaine  des 
Papayes  and  Beau  Bassin  to  offer  one-stop  shop  services  by  professionals  such  as 
psychologists, therapists to students with special needs. Two new resource centres at Flacq 
and Rivière des Anguilles will become operational as from mid-August this year. 

Furthermore, all these students are provided with transport facilities to and from the 

resource centres through the van attached to each centre. 

I  am  pleased  to  inform  the  House  that  two  new  Resource  Centres  will  be 
operationalised  at  Gujadhur  Government  School  and  Rivière  des  Anguilles  Government 
School as from 16 August this year. Another two Resource Centres will be set up in Moka 
and Allée Brillant Government Schools during the financial year, so as to reach maximum 
children with disabilities. 

Madam  Speaker,  it  must  be  recognised  that  Special  Education  Needs  (SEN)  sector 
can  only  effectively  develop  through  the  active  participation  and  fruitful  collaboration  of 
NGOs. Allow me to seize this opportunity to pay tribute to the great work being done by all 
the 42 NGOs currently running 54 SEN Schools. This is why I am very, very thankful to the 
Minister of Finance who has been very sympathetic to our appeal and who has increased the 
amount of grant-in-aid to NGOs in the SEN sector by more than 50%, to Rs90 m. for the 
coming financial year. This measure can only boost the morale of all stakeholders to be more 

 

39 

motivated in their devotion to this noble cause. We will set up, at the Ministry, a Directorate 
for the Special Education Needs. 

The amendments to the Education Act mentioned earlier, will make provision for the 
registration of the SEN Schools as well as for the payment of the grant-in-aid. I must also 
welcome the new measure whereby, with a view to providing high learning opportunities and 
encouraging access to tertiary education for students with disabilities, a special scholarship 
scheme is to be launched. Five students with disabilities will not only be offered a special 
scholarship to pursue tertiary education locally, but will also benefit from a monthly stipend 
of Rs5,000 each. 

Madam Speaker, there are also a number of other measures that falls squarely within 
the ambit of equity in the field of education. I will not enumerate all of them, but here is one I 
need  to  highlight.  This  relates  to  the  clear  encouragement  given  to  children  from  the 
vulnerable  groups  to  persevere  in  their  studies.  Conversely,  the  greater  the  educational 
opportunities  provided,  the  stronger  the  likelihood  of  moving  up  the  poverty  trap  and 
climbing the rungs of the social ladder. In this context, the provision of cash awards for those 
successfully completing the nine year schooling, SC and HSC is a clear signal sent by this 
Budget, that those who persevered, those who are committed to moving ahead in life, will be 
given  the  necessary  lifeline  to  do  so.  I  have  always  said  it,  intelligence,  aptitudes  and 
potential are not geographically restricted nor are they class-related. Lack of economic means 
should,  therefore,  be  no  restrictive  or  restraining  factor.  This  has  been  the  predominant 
principle  at  the  heart  of  all  the  previous  budgets  presented  by  the  Minister  of  Finance,  a 
principle that has always motivated his actions and economic orientations. 

Madam Speaker, let me now come to another challenge we face in Mauritius. As a 
Small Island Developing State, with relatively limited resources, we are condemned to focus 
on areas that will improve national productivity and accelerate the growth of the economy. 
This is why I insisted earlier on all learners successfully completing secondary education, on 
the universalization of secondary education. In this context, the collaborative partnership of 
private providers of secondary education cannot be ignored. Obviously, the private secondary 
education sector will be called upon to evolve with the changes and transformations. Thus, 
additional  resources  have  been  provided  to  the PSSA to  enable  it to  deal  more  effectively 
with the challenges in the private secondary education sector. The organisation is thus going 

 

40 

to be empowered to conduct its own pedagogical inspection as well as career counselling, and 
provide psychological support to students. 

Madam Speaker, I will now move on to the higher education and training sector. But 
before doing so, Madam Speaker,  I cannot help  but go back to what has happened, to the 
blunders made by the previous Government; the blunders made by the previous Ministry of 
Tertiary Education, who was himself supposed to look at the interests of our students. We all 
know  about  the  D.Y.  Patil  and  EILM  saga.  How  many  students  have  gone  to  the  tertiary 
institution without a proper SC or HSC; some with no principal subjects at all? Today, they 
have in their hands degrees which have absolutely no value, degrees that will not allow them 
to get a job! When we think about it, it was done solely with the aim of filling up the coffers 
of those close to the Minister of Tertiary Education. It was meant to allow students in mass to 
enter their fake, bogus institutions, and this, Madam Speaker, was done at the expense of our 
Mauritian  children.  Parents  coming  from  very  poor  families  have  taken  loans,  have  gone 
through lots of difficulties to allow their children to go and get a degree; a degree that has got 
absolutely no value. 

Madam Speaker, higher education and training sector is the lifeblood of the social and 
economic development of our country for years to come, and so it has a key role to play in 
the development of a competitive productive human resource. Madam Speaker, TVET today 
is  universally  recognised  as  being  the  answer  to  youth  unemployment  in  the  world  today. 
Paradoxically, it is often subjected to the stigma of being associated with low achievers of the 
education system. It is also perceived as being a dead end, with limited career and articulation 
possibilities. There is another irony involved here. People’s mindset is such that they  give 
precedence  to  university  education  over  TVET  programmes,  despite  the  relatively  higher 
employability  that  TVET  represents.  Government  realises  that  we  need  to  increase  the 
attractiveness of TVET. We must provide opportunities for TVET trainees to be exposed to 
the latest technology and equipment to allow for better relevance, readiness and adaptability 
to the labour market. 

Best  practices  already  exist.  We  can  already  see  what  countries  like  Germany  and 
Singapore have effectively done to train their youth for future employability and given TVET 
its pride of place. We, Madam Speaker, are not going to reinvent the wheel. I cannot help 
reflecting on the fact that it was our Rt. hon. Prime Minister who has, far back as the early 
90s,  made  a  strong  case  for  technical  and  vocational  education  and  training.  He  was 

 

41 

farsighted enough to realise that the future for employability lay there although the term has 
yet not gained widespread currency. Such is the forward-looking capacity of great visionaries 
like our Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Madam Speaker. I am honoured to be the one who, guided 
by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister’s wisdom, has been given the mandate to realise this vision. 
This  is  why  I  welcome  the  provision  of  over  half  a  billion  rupees  for  the  TVET  sector, 
including general upgrading of the MITD Training Centres, the purchase of new tools and 
equipment,  the  professional  development  of  trainers  as  well  as  the  setting  up  of  a  model 
training centre at Petit Bel Air to cater for the training in the southern region. 

The training centre at Cote d’Or will also be upgraded and renovated into a model 
centre, which will offer a wider portfolio of programmes. We also propose to establish such 
model centres in other geographical zones in Rodrigues, and land has already been vested in 
my Ministry and procedures initiated for the implementation of the project. 

Madam  Speaker,  in  this  context,  allow  me  to  inform  the  House  that  technical 
assistance  has  been  sought  from  ITE  of  Singapore  to  build  the  capacity  of  MITD  trainers 
through  the  design  and  development  of  training  programmes,  including  training  of  trainer 
programmes. One benefit we already have in this sector is the collaboration of industry and 
the  private  sector.  Despite  of  the  mismatch  issue,  this  is  being  addressed  with  review  of 
courses  for  greater  relevance  as  well  as  skill-based  training  programmes  targeting  the 
unemployed. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  must  say  that  the  GTES  programme  has  been  helpful.    It  has 
allowed collaboration to be established between the private sector and our Tertiary Education 
Institutions  and  we  have  come  up  with  new  programmes  designed  especially  for  different 
groups of students, and these students will have the privilege and will be favoured at the end 
of  the  course  if  they  successfully  complete  it,  to  get  a  job  in  the  institutions  that  have 
designed the programmes. Government has insisted that the GTES programme will go on as 
long as we have the guarantee that students selected, and who have successfully completed 
the programme, would get a job in the institutions that had selected them. 

Madam Speaker, what I was saying is that, there is need for collaboration and that the 
mismatch issue, I hope, will be overcome. And we are having lots of consultations with the 
employers so that they collaborate further with our institutions. We have important plans for 
the TVET sector -  

 

42 

1.  we  intend  to  rebrand  the  TVET  sector  so  as  to  make  it  more  attractive  to  school 
leavers in pursuit of a career as highly skilled and highly paid workers in a globalised 
economy, and 

2.  very importantly, the creation of a Skills Development Authority is most welcome at 
this  stage  of  our  development.  There  is,  today,  a  need  to  redefine  the  roles  of  the 
different organisations responsible for TVET to adapt it to the present situation and 
to make it more efficient and effective. The Skills Development Authority will be a 
regulatory body with a dual function: the responsibility for quality assurance for the 
whole sector and the awarding body in respect of the qualifications for TVET.  It will 
further ensure that the qualifications delivered are clearly understood by one and all. 

Madam  Speaker,  at  this  juncture,  I  will  briefly  also  inform  the  House  that  three 
polytechnics will be operational at Réduit, Montagne Blanche, Pamplemouses and will run 
programmes in Middle Management, ICT and other ICT related fields at Réduit in Tourism 
and Hotel Management, including Cruise Tourism at Montagne Blanche and in healthcare for 
nurses, technicians and trained personnel in the medical field, especially in the maintenance 
of sophisticated medical equipment at Pamplemousses. 

We are actively engaged in discussions with Australia, New Zealand and Singapore 
for  vital  inputs,  programmatic  and  otherwise.  Allow  me  to  add  the  Waikato  Institute  of 
Technology from New Zealand will be fielding a scoping mission next week to evaluate and 
propose the scope of collaboration to be engaged in with our local polytechnics. 

It is also important to keep in view that the main objectives behind polytechnics will 
be to provide work to ready diploma holders of high quality to spearhead the development of 
the  country  into  a  knowledge-based  and  skills  driven  economy.  One  things  is  certain; 
tomorrow’s growth requires a fundamental rebalancing of our skills’ ecosystem if we want to 
participate in an intensely competitive and talent-based global economy. Skills are, indeed, 
the global currency of the 21st century.  

Planning for the future is vital.  Hence, my Ministry, in collaboration with the Human 
Resource Development Council, is coming up with a national Skills Development Strategy 
2017-2022.  The Strategy aims to get an ambitious trajectory for the next five years for skills 
development in Mauritius.  

43 

 
On the other hand, an Integrated Career Counselling System will be set up to bridge 
the information asymmetric between students and the industry for informed career choices.  
Again,  the  HRDC  will  utilise  intelligence  and  skills  requirements  to  proactively  address 
emerging skill gaps in new pose of development in tune with Vision 2030. 

Madam  Speaker,  none  of  us  present  in  this  House  can  gainsay  the  importance  of 
Tertiary education in the development and the generation, and dissemination of knowledge, 
aiming as we are, towards Mauritius becoming a major knowledge hub for the region.  

However, there are some challenges that have to be faced and that necessitate robust 
regulatory framework. In this context, I am pleased to announce that I will be introducing the 
High Education Bill in the National Assembly by December this year. The legislation is in 
the process of being drafted. We have received the support of an expert, a legal drafter from 
the Commonwealth Secretariat who has also taken time to discuss with the Heads of different 
Tertiary Education Institutions. 

Madam Speaker, let me share with you that the High Education Bill will focus, inter 
alia,  on  enhancing  quality  assurance;  improving  equity  and  fairness  in  the  funding  of  the 
system; creating a  climate conducive to research; improving the regulatory  function of the 
sector  and  enhancing  sector  governance;  optimising  programmatic  differentiations  and 
diversity as applicable to both public and private sectors. 

 Madam  Speaker,  let  me  come  to  another  vital  element  in  today’s  education  and 
training  set  up.    The  Budget  Speech  resonates  with  a  strong  signal  of  how  Mauritius  and 
Mauritians students must leapfrog into modernism. Key Strategy 4 identifies the necessity for 
the country towards the fully-fledged digital society. I am really appreciative of the fact that 
the funds have now been provided for a series of projects that can make the job possible. Let 
me take just two of these. 

In the first place, provision is being made for digital tablets and relevant education 
software  to  be  made  available  to  pupils  of  Grades  1  and  2  under  the  digital  learning 
programmes. In some quarters, I hear people saying: “why are we giving tablets to children? 
They are going to play with that. It is a toy.”  No, Madam Speaker! We need to make people 
realise that a tablet can be a major tool for learning. What we intend to do, Madam Speaker, 
is to encourage our children to concentrate on their learning and to do the right thing with a 
tablet. 

44 

 
Madam Speaker, let me set the context right. We are living at a time when familiarity 
with  ICT  has  become  commonplace,  a  part  of  the  learner’s  survival  kit.    Practically 
everything is being digitised and our children are growing up in an environment where they 
already occupy the place as digital natives.   

Madame  la  présidente,  les  enfants  de  deux  à  trois  ans  sont  maintenant  capables 
d’envoyer    leurs  photos  aux  grands-pères  et  grands-mères  par  E-mail.    Ils  sont  capables 
d’aller sur Skype, de discuter.   

We need to provide them with tools to allow them to evolve in this new technological 
era.    So,  ICT  is  growing  into  an  inescapable  tool  for  every  child  to  access  knowledge. 
Besides, it is important to consider the fact that we are introducing modular approach and the 
Rt.  hon.  Minister  is  right.  The  world  is  evolving,  we  need  to  evolve  to.  And  what  is  also 
important,  and  people  have  to  realise  it,  we  are  now  going  to  have  a  different  type  of 
assessment in Grades 5 and 6. We are coming with the modular assessment. We are thinking 
of having an assessment using technology and it is important to develop this familiarity with 
technology and it will certainly come in handy to all our pupils. Besides, it is also an equity 
issue. There are children who are favoured with a home environment, instrumental and giving 
them a head-start in education. Unfortunately, not every child is so favoured and we need, 
thus, to balance the tilted stairs.  The concerns for equity is thus at the heart of things. Let me 
allay another apprehension: schools will make provisions to store the tablets. They will not be 
carried home by the pupils. Rather, since they will contain the digital learning material, our 
pupils will not have to carry the heavy loads of printed material, as it is currently the case. 
The heavy bag, Bent Back Syndrome will have to be a thing of the past.  

As  for  the  dedicated  Faculty  of  Digital  Technology  and  ICT  Engineering  by 
University of Mauritius, currently named as Faculty of Digital Technologies and Innovations, 
the value added dimension is obvious. Firstly, it is in alignment with the Government’s vision 
to make of Mauritius a regional ICT hub.  

Secondly, it will help to attract more international students with the objective to make 

of University of Mauritius a nodal point for Tertiary IT Education in the region.  

Thirdly, it will help train more IT graduates to better support the growth of ICT sector 
and adapt matter to the changing ICT Industry requirements. The creation of this faculty will 
certainly trigger  high visibility of  IT resources  and activities available at the University of 

 

45 

Mauritius and boost up opportunities for collaboration with stakeholders at both national and 
international levels. 

Pour conclure, vous conviendrez que ce budget proposé par notre honorable ministre 
des Finances démontre clairement le désir profond de placer la barre très haut, afin que la 
République atteigne des niveaux de développement plus élevés.  Et, ce même ministre nous a 
donnés les moyens de le faire.  A titre d’exemple, la dotation budgétaire pour mon ministère a 
grimpé de R 14.8 milliards à R 16.1 milliards, un chiffre inédit. 

Nous avons effectivement toutes les raisons d’être optimistes quand on considère les 
différentes  mesures  qui  seront  mises  en  chantier,  le  Plan  Marshall,  une  meilleure  prise  en 
charge des enfants souffrant d’handicap, les allocations aux familles nécessiteuses, la baisse 
du  prix  du  gaz  ménager,  des  céréales,  entre  autres,  et  la  révision  des  critères  pour  un 
logement décent, pour ne citer que quelques-uns. 

Nous sommes, donc, animés par un espoir certain que la population sortira gagnante 
dans son ensemble. Le ‘feel good factor’ est bien présent et cela est grandement dû à notre 
grand argentier qui a présenté le quatrième budget de sa jeune carrière. Bravo à vous, M. le 
ministre ! 

Avec votre permission, Madame la présidente, je voudrai demander à mes collègues 
présents ici, au sein de cette auguste Assemblée, de mettre de côté nos différends et de faire 
preuve de patriotisme pour faire avancer la cause du pays, surtout la cause de nos enfants. Je 
parle là de la réforme. 

Dans le monde éducatif, nous avons certainement pris un peu de retard, il est grand 
temps qu’on arrive à le combler. Unissons nos efforts plutôt pour le plus grand bien de nos 
enfants. Nos enfants méritent amplement la conjugaison de nos efforts pour leur bien-être. 
J’emprunterai pour terminer, Madame la présidente, les paroles de l’écrivain James Grover 
Thurber – 

«Let us not look back in anger, nor forward in fear, but around us in awareness.” 

Merci à vous, Madame la Présidente. 

 (3.15 p.m.) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea ! 

46 

 
Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port  Louis 
East):  Madame  la  présidente,  la  présentation  d’un  budget  est  en  elle-même  un  exercice 
éminemment  solennel,  les  mesures  et  les  décisions,  qui  contiennent,  auront  une  incidence 
directe ou indirecte sur l’ensemble de la population, en général. 

Vu son caractère sérieux, il incombe à nous tous de faire preuve de responsabilité que 
chacun assume son rôle dans le respect de la démocratie parlementaire et que le pays en sorte 
gagnant. Mais quand même faut-il nous rappeler que ce gouvernement est arrivé au pouvoir 
grâce à une campagne savamment menée autour du slogan ‘Deuxième Miracle Économique’. 

Environ deux années après, on ne parle plus de ‘Deuxième Miracle Économique’. Les 
gens croyaient naïvement dans le tandem Sir Anerood Jugnauth/Lutchmeenaraidoo, mais on 
s’est trompé d’époque et nous en faisons le frais. 

Depuis  l’arrivée  de  ce  gouvernement,  on  a  noté  une  série  d’annonces,  des  Mega 
projets avec des investissements massifs des pays arabes, de l’Inde et de la Chine. Cela fait 
confusion.  Les  gens  n’y  croient  plus.  Il  nous  faut  plus  d’actions  concrètes  impliquant  la 
population. Et faut-il le dire qu’ils soient concernés par l’action du gouvernement par rapport 
à ces projets de prestige. Non seulement le gouvernement s’est trompé dans ses prévisions 
mais on a mené tout le monde en bateau. C’est inadmissible pour un gouvernement qui se 
veut responsable et qui veut être pris au sérieux! 

L’ancien  ministre  des  Finances  et  amateur  de  grandes  envolées  verbales,  qui  avait 
promis une croissance de 5.7% annuellement ou plus, n’est plus au commande. Il a été muté 
aux  affaires  étrangères  après  un  scandale  allégué  autour  des  transactions  bancaires  hors 
normes et depuis il joue profil bas. Des promesses non tenues et des priorités nouvellement 
découvertes et là, Madame la présidente, je voudrai revenir par rapport à ce qui s’est passé 
hier, ici-même, dans notre auguste Assemblée. Nous aussi, autant que le Premier ministre, 
nous étions choqués par les honoraires du Me. Trilochun. Laissez-moi rappeler à la Chambre, 
dans  le  manifeste  électoral  de  l’Alliance  Lepep,  mention  est  faite :  ‘Notre  contrat  de 
confiance avec la population’ en 12 commandements. Je vais citer le premier commandement 
– l’unique et le premier commandement – 

«Nous  gouvernerons  pour  le  peuple,  avec  le  peuple  et  dans  l’intérêt  de  toute  la 
nation, pas pour nous, ni pour un petit groupe d’amis, d’agents politiques, de copains 
ou de copines. » 

 

47 

Mais mention n’est pas faite par rapport à la famille. Donc, on a dit : copains, copines, amis, 
agents, mais la famille ne figure pas. 

Et là, Madame la présidente, laissez-moi revenir à une question débattue en septembre 
2015 posée par notre Chief Whip, mon ami, l’honorable Mahen Jhugroo, par rapport to ask 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, in regard to Mr Geoffrey Cox, he will state the assignments for 
which  his  services  were  retained  by  Government  over  the  period  July  2005  to  December 
2014. Et par rapport à ce qui a été déposé à la Chambre, sur une période de 10 ans, de 2005 à 
2014, une somme de R 14 millions a été payé à M. Geoffrey Cox, Q.C., sur 10 ans de travaux 
par rapport à 20 cases qu’on a pris ses services -  et là, M. Trilochun sur seulement un cas, là 
où l’ICTA est seulement l’arbitre entre la compagnie Emtel et la Mauritius Telecom, il a R 19 
millions d’honoraires, même pas Madame Claire Montgomery n’a fait mieux avec ses R 19 
millions. Donc, voilà un peu, Madame la présidente, le changement de régime par rapport au 
changement qu’on a eu à la tête du pays. Au fait, ils en font pire maintenant ! 

Madame  la  présidente,  mention  est  aussi  faite  dans  le  budget  par  rapport  au  projet 
Heritage City. J’ai eu parfaitement raison de m’opposer farouchement à ce projet. Je l’ai déjà 
dit ici-même et en dehors de cette Chambre.  Le projet a été qualifié par l’Économiste Pierre 
Dinan comme étant un éléphant blanc en devenir. Le projet de plus de R 30 milliards n’a pas 
sa raison d’être et pour des raisons évidentes. Le pays ne peut se permettre d’augmenter de 
manière vertigineuse ses dettes rien que pour laisser un héritage en béton et qui ne rapportera 
rien de positif à l’économie nationale. Pire, ce projet ne fera que de forcer la situation. Dans 
l’intérêt suprême du pays, le gouvernement aurait bien pu utiliser cette somme astronomique 
pour lancer des projets qui vont booster l’économie tout en créant des emplois. 

Le bien-être de la nation doit avoir la préséance sur la folie. Un pays souverain qui 
ambitionne de se devenir high income nation ne peut pas se permettre la construction de ce 
parlement,  se  fera  non  seulement  financer  par  un  pays  étranger,  mais  le  bâtiment  sera  la 
propriété  d’un  pays  étranger  auquel  le  gouvernement  devra payer  des  locations.  C’est 
comparable à une personne irresponsable qui délaisse sa maison dont il est propriétaire pour 
en devenir locataire. C’est une absurdité inacceptable, c’est un manque de dignité, de respect 
de soi.  

En transférant le centre administratif du pays à Ébène, Port Louis deviendra à coup 
sûr,  comme  je  l’ai  déjà  dit,  une  ville  morte.  Même  les  mesures  2016-2017  n’ont  pas  fait 

 

48 

provision des mesures concrètes pour sauver Port Louis de l’appauvrissement. Un parcours 
culturel ne pourra pas compenser même à 25% les pertes d’emplois directes et indirectes. 

L’ancien ministre des Finances, l’honorable Vishnu Lutchmeenaraidoo, avait annoncé 
que le développement portuaire va créer de l’emploi. Je me demande si ce n’est pas lettre 
morte quand tout indique que les négociations entre la MPA et Dubai Ports seront enlisées 
dans un cul-de-sac. Ce  projet piloté par le ministre de la  Bonne Gouvernance, l’honorable 
Roshi Bhadain, n’a pas été cousu de fil blanc.  

C’est l’opacité la plus complète sur le financement. Tantôt le Vice-Premier ministre, 
l’honorable  Soodhun  affirme  que  c’est  Dubai  qui  financera  le  projet,  tantôt  c’est  l’Arabie 
Saoudite.  

Tantôt c’est l’Arabie Saoudite. Au final dans le discours du budget on apprend que c’est de 
l’argent de l’Inde que ce projet verra le jour mais heureusement que c’est un mort-né !  

Pour que Sir Anerood Jugnauth puisse léguer un héritage ce gouvernement ose tendre 
la main aux pays étrangers pour endetter jusqu’à à la hauteur de R 30 milliards comme quoi 
la priorité nationale pour l’affaire de lance du mirage du deuxième miracle économique et de 
dire  que  cette  somme  colossale  aurait  bien  pu  être  utilisée  dans  des  développements 
économiques qui, d’une part, consolidera notre économie et d’autre part créera des emplois 
durables. C’est grave que le culte de personnalité soit privilégié au détriment des intérêts de 
la nation. En exprimant nos craintes ce n’est pas de la démagogie ou du populisme, on exige 
des explications, des éclaircissements afin de ne pas à rendre compte après quatre ans qu’on a 
fait fausse route parce que ce sera trop tard.  

Avant  de  songer  à  Heritage  City,  a-t-on  consulté  la  société  civile  ou  tous  ceux 
concernés directement ou indirectement par ce mégaprojet et son impact sur Port Louis et les 
Port Louisiens ? Un tel projet, s’il se matérialise, va profondément chambouler la capitale en 
bouleversant les quotidiens des habitants. Y a-t-il eu une étude sérieuse sur son impact sur le 
plan social et économique? Si une telle expérience échoue à mi-chemin qui en fera les frais ?  

En proposant de délocaliser l’Assemblée nationale, les ministères, le Prime Minister’s 
Office,  tous  ces  symboles  qui  font  de  Port  Louis  sa  raison  d’être  en  brandissant 
l’investissement de R 52 milliards pour  

 

 

49 

transformer  Port  Louis  en  un  Smart  City.  Madame  la  présidente,  c’est  jeter  la  poudre  aux 
yeux des Port Louisiens afin de mieux traficoter avec les biens publics, les joyaux historiques 
et le patrimoine pour faire de la place au mégaprojet du Heritage City et pour aménager des 
vested interests. On veut brader notre histoire, notre passé et notre fierté pour une affaire de 
gros  sous  et  voilà  la  philosophie  de  ce  gouvernement  pompeusement  et  trompeusement 
affabulé du titre gouvernement Lepep! 

C’est  un  fait  indéniable  que,  délocalisant  le  centre  névralgique  administratif,  Port 
Louis se réduira en une ville amorphe. Ainsi les perspectives d’emploi des citadins vont se 
rétrécir lamentablement. C’est connu qu’une ville administrative créée beaucoup d’emplois 
directs et indirects qui profitent à ces citadins qui n’arrivent pas à avoir un emploi dans le 
secteur public ou dans le secteur privé. C’est pour cette raison que Port Louis grouille de self 
employed. Certes la décision du gouvernement va appauvrir la majorité des 150 000 habitants 
de Port Louis et ce n’est pas un port modernisé qui pourra compenser les pertes d’emplois.  

On a parlé de 12 000 emplois déjà créés alors que les licenciements massifs ont été 
constatés. On a parlé d’une nation d’entrepreneurs alors que des jeunes ne savent plus où se 
donner la tête. Je redoute une grave crise sociale à Port Louis. Est-ce que c’est le deuxième 
coup  de  massue  du  MSM  aux  Port  Louisiens  après  les  avoir  privés  de  l’emploi  dans  la 
fonction  publique  dans  les  années  80?  Il  y  a  un  fort  risque  qu’on  s’achemine  vers 
l’appauvrissement  des  Port  Louisiens  et  ce  sera  un  héritage  macabre  que  laissera  ce 
gouvernement aux Port Louisiens.  

En  ce  faisant  ils  veulent  transformer  Port  Louis  en  un  Smart  City.  300,000  mètres 
carrés selon les ministères concernés vont être convertis en unités résidentielles. 8000 unités 
résidentielles! D’où sortiront ces 8000 familles pour venir habiter à Port Louis? Si la ville de 
Port Louis n’est plus une ville administrative qui voudra acheter un logement de R 6 millions 
à R 10 millions dans une ville morte voire comme le Newton Tower, le Chancery House ou le 
bâtiment  Anquetil ?  Est-ce  que  l'hôtel  du  gouvernement  et  le  Treasury  Building  vont  être 
transformés en musées ? Il faut nous expliquer comment dans les régions périphériques de la 
capitale telles que Plaine Verte, Vallée Pitot, Roche Bois, Cité La Cure, Cassis, Tranquebar et 
toutes  les  régions  périphériques,  les  gens  des  faubourgs  vont  être  partie  prenante  de  ces 
développements  fonciers ?  Comment  des  appartements  au  coût  de  R  6  millions  à  R  10 
millions vont les intéresser ? Comment les emplois vont être créés par milliers ? C’est encore 

 

50 

des  rêves  qu’on  veut  vendre.  Avant  les  élections  l’Alliance  Lepep  vendait  des  rêves, 
maintenant il les offre en cadeaux.  

Nous  avons  affaire  à  un  gouvernement  mystificateur.  On  vient  d’annoncer  la 
deuxième phase du Ring Road à coût de R 5 milliards pour décongestionner Port Louis. A 
quoi sert-il d’investir autant d’argent dans un projet alors que Port Louis ne sera plus le centre 
administratif  du  pays?  N’est-ce  pas  un  gaspillage  d’argent ?  Ce  gouvernement  pèche 
dangereusement pas incohérence et manque de vision. 

Ceci dit, Madame la présidente, allons passer  à  un autre événement qui  a vraiment 
secoué le pays et l’économie en général c’est le dossier de la BAI. C’est une autre saga qui se 
joue et on n’en finira jamais de le dire que tout le dossier a été mal géré. On n’a pas évalué 
les  risques  qu’une  telle  décision  comporte.  Maintenant  nous  vivons  avec  une  épée  de 
Damoclès sur la tête avec un procès par milliards en perspective. Avons-nous exploré toutes 
les aventures pour trouver une solution plus appropriée à cette affaire et la responsabilité de 
la FSC, de la FIU et du rôle des anciens ministres des Finances ? A-t-on pensé à tout cela ? 

Là,  Madame  la  présidente,  pour  pouvoir  payer  les  détenteurs  du  Super  Cash  Back 
Gold,  un  plan  été  conçu  de  façon  incroyable  pour  mobiliser  plusieurs  milliards  d’argent 
public  ou  quasi  public;  une  façon  indirecte  de  mettre  les  contribuables  à  contribution  à 
nouveau quand on sait que la Banque de Maurice a déjà déboursé R 5.5 milliards alors qu’il 
avait été plus d’une fois indiqué que l’argent public ne serait pas nécessaire pour régler les 
comptes!  

Passant  à  l’action,  une  proposition  d’achat  des  actions  de  la  NIC  a  été  faite  à  la 
SICOM.  Le  08  mars  2016,  les  responsables  de  la  SICOM  reçoivent  un  Information 
Memorandum validé par BDO, désormais dans toutes les sauces, sous forme de diaspora pour 
présenter l’opportunité d’investissement de 15% des actions de la NIC et de sa compagnie 
sœur la NIC General Insurance. Cet investissement est qualifié ‘d’offer you cannot refuse’ ! 

Là, Madame la présidente, la proposition très élevée de l’évaluation de R 5.6 milliards 
de la NIC, soit environ 66 % constitué de future businesses qui restent à être définis et à être 
concrétisés et que le business actuel c’est-à-dire les values in force ne représentent que 9% de 
l’évaluation totale. Une bonne partie du future business sur lequel compte la NIC va empiéter 
directement sur les plates-bandes de la SICOM et donc menacer sa propre rentabilité - donc, 
la propre rentabilité de la SICOM. 

51 

 
Madame  la  présidente,  comment  est-ce  qu’une  compagnie  qui  a  été  nouvellement 
formée, une année d’opération, peut être évaluée à R 5.6 milliards ? On ne connaît même pas 
les chiffres d’affaires ! On ne connaît même pas la profitabilité ! On ne connaît même pas le 
taux de dividende qui va être payé par la NIC et tout cela a été évalué à R 5.6 milliards ! 
Madame la présidente, là je me réfère à la capitalisation boursière de la compagnie Swan et 
du  Mauritius  Union  qui  est  cotée  en  bourse.  Donc  on  a  un  open  market  value  et  ces 
compagnies sont là depuis plus d’une cinquantaine d’années avec des proven track records 
en terme de profitabilité, en terme de dividende, en terme de capitalisation boursière et en 
terme de réserve de la compagnie. Ces compagnies ont été évaluées à R 2.5 milliards et R 3 
milliards. La NIC nouvellement créée a été évaluée par l’honorable ministre et ses advisers à 
R 5.6 milliards ! Et on ose parler de bonne gouvernance et de transparence ! 

Ici, dans cette Chambre, quand on a émis des questions par rapport à l’évaluation, qui 
a fait l’évaluation et de déposer une copie de ces évaluations, qu’est-ce qu’on nous dit? On 
nous dit qu’il y a Non-Disclosure Agreement. Tout ce qu’on demande par rapport à tout cela - 
on est en train de parler de  taxpayers’ money -  on dit qu’on doit prendre des legal advice 
avant de déposer tel ou tel document à l’Assemblée Nationale. Ce qu’il fallait faire, Madame 
la président, c’est une évaluation indépendante par la SICOM, par ses propres advisers et non 
pas par les advisers de l’honorable ministre Bhadain, après une due diligence complet.  Voilà, 
Madame la présidente, par rapport à la NIC et SICOM.  

En termes de bonne gouvernance et de transparence, là aussi, je dois dire qu’on est 
très  sélectif  par  rapport  à  ce  ministère  nouvellement  créé.  À  travers  des  questions 
Parlementaires par moi-même et d’autres collègues, j’ai évoqué la question de la FSC sur les 
recrutements  faites  par  la  FSC  depuis  décembre  2014  à  ce  jour  par  rapport  aux  postes 
occupés,  aux  qualifications,  à  leur  terms  and  conditions  of  appointment,  leur  salaire  etc  et 
qu’est-ce qu’on a comme réponse à toutes ces questions - 

« The  Financial  Services  Commission  has  been  requested  to  compile  the 
information  sought.  In  respect,  I  am  advised  by  the  Legal  Division  of  the 
Commission  who  will  decide  as  to  whether  the  information  sought  may  be 
released.”  

Madame la présidente, on est en train de parler de l’argent public, on est en train de parler de 
la FSC,  on est en train de parler d’un régulateur pour le secteur.  Quand on demande des 
questions  à  travers  des  questions  parlementaires,  qu’est-ce  qu’on  dit ?  On  doit  demander 

 

52 

legal advice. C’est cela qu’on appelle la bonne gouvernance sélective ! Dans certains cas il y 
a bonne gouvernance et dans d’autres cela ne s’applique pas. Et c’est la même chose pour le 
Financial Services Promotion Agency (FSPA). On a demandé qui a été recruté, the terms and 
conditions of appointment, salary, benefits drawn and on the number of overseas missions 
undertaken  indicating  in  each  case  the  countries  visited,  purpose,  duration,  composition 
comme le connaît très bien mon ami, l’honorable Jhugroo. Il est un peu fan et amateur de ces 
trucs de voyage. Mais quelle a été la réponse du ministre de la Bonne Gouvernance - 

« I  am  informed  by  this  Financial  Services  Promotion  Agency  that  the 
information  is  being  compiled  subject  to  certain  elements  for  which  legal 
advice has been sought and will be put in the Library of National Assembly in 
due course. » 

Encore une fois, legal advice has been sought, Madame la présidente ! 

On  peut  se  demander  aujourd’hui  pourquoi  la  FSC  n’a  pas  de  CEO.  Cela  va  faire 
bientôt deux ans que la FSC n’a pas de CEO. Pour une organisation comme la FSC, il n’y a 
pas de CEO parce que c’est le ministre …. 

(Interruptions) 

… lui-même et son adviser qui dirigent la FSC.  Ils sont en train de terroriser tout le monde. 
Allez demander à M. Kee Chong Li Kwong Wing qu’est-ce qui s’est passé quand il a refusé 
que la SBM achète les actions de la NIC. Vous pouvez lui demander quel document il a eu à 
son bureau par la FSC. Tout cela se passe dans notre République, ici, à l’île Maurice. Voilà 
donc, Madame la présidente, par rapport à la FSC. 

Madam  Speaker,  let  me  now  come  to  the  Double  Taxation  Avoidance  Agreement. 
The Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement has been signed between Mauritius and India in 
1983  and  has  been  the  backbone  of  the  global  business  services  since  1990.    This  sector 
contributes from 6% to 10% of the GDP.  With the amendments negotiated and agreed by our 
enlightened  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  it  is  inevitable  that  this  sector  will  suffer.  The 
reviewed terms of the treaty would, among others, allow India to impose capital gains tax on 
investment routed through Mauritius in two years’ time.   

India has offered Rs12.7 billion as a one-off grant which is unrelated to the revised 
treaty according to hon. Minister Bhadain.  But then, why would India give us this aid and 

 

53 

why, after having negotiated this treaty, we have got Rs12.7 billion? If this is a good deal, as 
we are given to believe, then why would India grant us any compensation?  This grant is, in 
effect, a trade-off against the relinquishment of the taxing rights in favour of India.  How will 
the  grant  of  Rs12.7  billion  from  India  be  spent?  We  have  the  details  in  the  Budget, 
notamment par rapport au financement du Heritage City et le Metro Express. 

Although  we  might  not  see  the  real  counter  effect  of  this  amendment  now,  it  will, 
however, impact this sector heavily in two years’ time when all the amendments will enter in 
full effect.  But what is being done to assist the financial sector against the loss of business 
and loss of jobs following the revised terms and conditions of Mauritius/India Treaty? They 
have no plan whatsoever.  The operators and people employed in this sector are being left to 
themselves to navigate into uncharted waters.  This money should have been injected back in 
the sector to revamp this key sector of our economy, a massive generator of employment for 
our  young  graduates.   It should have been primarily  and  foremost used  to compensate the 
foreseeable loss of jobs in this sector.   

If this sector is affected, it will inevitably lead to serious unemployment and a brain 
drain. Our talents will move to other jurisdictions to meet their career aspirations.  We should 
look at development of this sector from a human point of view. The funds should have been 
used to conduct more promotional initiatives targeted towards attracting African investment 
to  Mauritius.    But  as  some  of  my  learned  colleagues  of  the  House  have  enlightened  us, 
attracting African investment is easier said than done.  It is a challenging market.  Africa is 
not  one  jurisdiction,  but  a  number  of  countries  with  their  own  challenges  and  varying 
mindset.  We  should  identify  niche  markets,  sectors  and  products  and  not  just  real  estate 
projects and channel our efforts towards achieving that. 

Madam Speaker, the Government should have inspired itself from the course of action 
adopted following the termination of preferential pricing by the EU to the sugar sector.  The 
compensation was used to invest back in the sector itself, that is, in the sugar sector.  This has 
been worked out to be beneficial.  This compensation as it is really, should be geared towards 
the sector and not to other projects. We have had an experience with the sugar sector when 
we lost our preferential  prices with the European Union and with time,  we have seen that 
when this money has been invested in the sugar sector, this has been worked out to be a good 
thing which the precedent Government has done.  But for the financial sector, we are taking 
money  from  this  sector  to  invest  in  other  projects  which  are  not  related  and  which  won’t 

 

54 

create growth.  Just to remind the House, the financial and insurance sectors make up to 9% 
of GDP and employed over 13,400 people equivalent to around 2.3% of the total labour force 
in 2013 at that time and grew at around 9% up to now.    

Madame la présidente, voilà nos commentaires par rapport à la DTA et nos inquiétudes. 

Maintenant, laissez-moi venir sur un dossier qui me tient à cœur et qui est actualité, 
c’est bien sûr le dossier de la drogue. Comme vous savez, ce fléau est en train d’affecter l’île 
Maurice  tout  entière,  mais  aussi  ma  circonscription  avec  des  régions  de  la  Plaine  Verte  et 
Roche  Bois.  Madame  la  présidente,  ce  qu’il  nous  faut  par  rapport  à  ce  dossier,  c’est  un 
nouveau souffle contre le combat de la drogue. La toxicomanie persiste et là-dessus j’aurais 
bien  aimé  dire  que  la  drogue  est  un  fléau  qui  doit  être  placée  above  party  politics.  Mais, 
Madame la présidente, malheureusement l’attitude adoptée par l’honorable ministre Gayan et 
certains  -  je  dis  bien  certains  -  au  gouvernement  est  vraiment  regrettable.  Nos  travailleurs 
sociaux  engagés  semblent  prêcher  dans  le  désert.  Pire  que  l’indifférence,  il  y  a  de  la 
complaisance.  

Alors  que  la  drogue  fait  rage  parmi  la  jeunesse  et  dans  le  milieu  estudiantin,  nous 
avons  un  ministre  de  la  santé  qui  a  une  fâcheuse  habitude  et  qui  prend  un  malin  plaisir  à 
prendre tout le monde à contre-pied.  Il contredit les travailleurs sociaux connus dans leurs 
longs engagements sur les terrains. Enfermé dans sa tour d’ivoire, il est coupé de la réalité. 
La question qu’il devrait se poser: pourquoi les jeunes se droguent-ils?  Y a-t-il un manque 
cruel de moyens, de distractions à leur portée ou tout bonnement sont-ils angoissés face à leur 
avenir qui semble bouché.  Il a intérêt à se tourner vers ses collègues de l’éducation, de la 
jeunesse et des sports afin de solliciter leurs concours dans sa quête de solutions durables. 
Hélas, avec sa préférence pour la confrontation avec les ONGs tels que les centres Dr. Idriss 
Goomany Community Centre, il va sans doute y laisser des plumes.  

D’ailleurs, il a déjà laissé. Il n’est pas là!  J’ai de la peine pour tous ces parents qui 
pleurent leurs enfants victimes de la drogue synthétique. Car il faut le rappeler les nouvelles 
drogues synthétiques sont belles et bien présentes dans nos collèges et même dans certaines 
écoles primaires. Ce n’est pas nous, qui le disons, mais bien des parents, des écoliers, des 
collégiens eux-mêmes et même le personnel enseignant et non enseignant. Qu’il s’agit des 
Star  Schools  ou  des  établissements  scolaires  secondaires  modestes,  le  mal  est  partout.  Il  a 
étendu  ses  tentacules  tel  une  pieuvre  maléfique  n’ayant  qu’un  unique  but  de  faire  le  plus 
grand nombre de victimes.  

55 

 
Ils  sont  des  milliers  de  parents,  des  jeunes  adultes,  des  adolescents,  des  petits 
mauriciens à ne plus savoir à quel saint se vouer tant la menace des drogues synthétiques est 
présente  dans  leurs  environnements  immédiats.  Nombre  de  parents  se  tournent  vers  des 
travailleurs  sociaux,  des  membres  du  personnel  soignant  ou  des  forces  vives  dans  l’espoir 
d’un secours immédiat car la priorité de ces personnes est surtout d’obtenir une écoute, un 
espace de partage et un plan d’action définie tant pour le court terme que pour le long terme. 
On  ne  le  répétera  jamais  assez.  Si  on  veut  s’attaquer  au  fléau  des  nouvelles  drogues 
synthétiques,  il  faut  d’abord  et  surtout  une  volonté  politique,  un  leadership  affiché  et  une 
synergie multisectorielle. Les ressources humaines du secteur public et privé, sociétés civiles 
et  membres  du  public  doivent  tous  être  mis  à  contribution  pour  que  l’effet  des  actions  et 
surtout qui seront éventuellement prises aient une répercussion qualitative. 

Le problème  a déjà pris une ampleur trop importante pour que l’on se  permette de 
perdre  du  temps  à  discuter.  L’heure  est  à  l’action  prompte,  adéquate  et  ciblée  afin  que  la 
réponse soit efficace. Le mouvement antidrogue mène une croisade et ne bénéficie d’aucun 
soutien digne de ce nom de l’État. Au lieu d’utiliser la MBC/TV à des fins de propagande, on 
aurait dû la mettre au service de ceux qui militent au péril de leur vie contre tous ces fléaux 
qui gangrènent notre société telle que la drogue. 

Les  centres  de  désintoxication  doivent  être  mieux  équipés  avec  les  moyens  qui 
s’imposent  pour  être  plus  efficaces.  Qu’allons-nous  attendre?  Que  d’autres  jeunes  tombent 
comme des mouches ou des parents déjà ostensiblement affolés et paniqués, descendent dans 
les rues parce qu’ils n’envisagent nullement que cette année ils allaient enterrer leurs enfants. 
Quand  le  présent  gouvernement  dans  son  ensemble,  d’un  même  élan,  d’une  seule  voix, 
admettra-t-il que les mesures urgentes et concrètes doivent être rapidement prises et mises en 
application  pour  éviter  d’autres  fatalités  du  genre?    Devra-t-on  attendre  que  des  gosses 
viennent aussi s’allonger sur la liste des victimes. J’espère de tout cœur que le gouvernement 
dans son ensemble va se ressaisir sur ce dossier et accepte de faire face à la vérité. 

Madame  la  présidente,  du  côté  des  marchands  ambulants,  on  a  évoqué  des  grands 
projets à leur intention.  Ils sont restés le bec dans l’eau et  ce  gouvernement a mal  géré le 
problème des marchands ambulants à Port Louis.  J’admets qu’il fallait trouver une solution 
mais  la  façon  de  faire  est  inhumaine.  L’honorable  ministre  des  collectivités  locales  s’est 
contenté de libérer les trottoirs sans prendre en considération l’aspect humain, que ce soit à la 
rue Décaen ou à la gare du nord.  Tous les marchands se plaignent de leurs chiffres d’affaires 

 

56 

qui ont baissé de plus de 50%. Ce n'est pas une mince affaire pour tous ces gens qui sont au 
bas de l’échelle et qui s’appauvrissent définitivement …. 

 (Interruptions) 

…sans  compter  ces  marchands  de  rôtis,  dhall  pouris,  de  pains  fourrés  et  d’autres  gâteaux 
entre autres.  Ils ont été interdits d’opérer et sans, par conséquent, les reloger. Ces derniers 
dévalent  la  pente  vers  l’extrême  pauvreté.  Et  dire  que  l’honorable  ministre  des  finances  a 
annoncé  un  arsenal  de  mesures  pour  tirer  les  plus  démunis  de  l’extrême  pauvreté  et 
encourager les gens à se lancer dans l’entreprenariat. C’est un cruel paradoxe. Sans compter 
que l’honorable ministre des collectivités locales leur avait fait une promesse, dès qu’il a été 
nommé ministre, à l’effet qu’ils bénéficieront des véhicules hors taxes. 

(Interruptions) 

Voilà, Madame la présidente!  And adding insult to injury previously in this House, Madam 
Speaker, there has been  a PQ by myself whereby  it has been stated that there will be two 
projects at la gare du nord et Victoria Station. I quote from PQ B/374- 

“As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  Ministry  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  is 
currently working on the redevelopment of the Victoria and Immigration Square Bus 
Stations,  with  a  view  to  converting  these  two  sites  into  modern  bus  stations  with 
provisions of commercial/office block and parking. Both complexes at Victoria and 
Immigration Square will provide space for the hawkers” 

Madame la présidente, just give me the name of the private company that will invest 
in a bus station!  Just give me one, one private company which would engage itself in a PPP 
project to invest in a bus station! Hon. Adrien Duval is telling me: «Ena ».  I would like him 
to just give me the name of one company in his speech!  So, Madam la présidente…. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order ! 

Mr Ameer Meea :… c’est vraiment incroyable… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker :  Order ! 

 
Mr  Ameer  Meea :…  qu’on  traite  ce  dossier  avec  une  telle  légèreté,  Madame  la 

57 

présidente. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order ! 

Mr  Ameer  Meea :…Madame  la  présidente,  dans  son  discours  du  budget,  l’honorable 
ministre des finances a annoncé qu’un millier de marchands ambulants seront logés dans la 
proximité  de  la  gare  du  MétroExpress  à  Port  Louis.    C’est  bon  à  entendre  mais  quand  ce 
projet va-t-il se matérialiser? En attendant ils sont en train de s’appauvrir, mais on va quand 
même attendre l’honorable Duval pour prononcer son discours pour savoir quelle compagnie 
va investir dans cette station à la gare Victoria et à la gare du nord. 

Madame la présidente, par rapport au dossier law and order, le nombre de crimes et 
de  vols,  les  uns  les  plus  odieux  que  les  autres,  sont  autant  de  preuves  qu’on  assiste  à  une 
descente aux enfers. On veut bien croire que  la situation ira en s’améliorant mais la réalité 
des chiffres nous interpelle.  

Davantage de policiers fera l’affaire ou faut-il revoir notre panoplie de lois ? Il y aussi 

une recrudescence d’escroqueries. 

Par  rapport  aux  maisons  de  jeux,  au  gambling,  laissez-moi  dire  quelques  mots 
concernant cet autre fléau qui est en train de gangréner notre société.  Les Mauriciens sont 
bercés par le rêve et se tournent de plus en plus vers les jeux de hasard. Ce sont des millions 
de roupies qui changent de mains et il y a quelques veinards, mais il y a aussi des milliers de 
perdants. Aucune société ne peut se payer le luxe de voir des pères et des mères tomber dans 
le cercle infernal du gambling. Quand les parents qui sont censés être des role models cèdent 
à la tentation, c’est très grave. C’est le fondement de la cellule familiale qui est menacé. 

Qui a intérêt à ce que les Mauriciens deviennent des ‘zougadères’ ? Figurons-nous si 
toute l’île devient un grand casino, avec tout le monde s’affairant autour des tables de jeux ! 
Pourrons-nous  compter  sur  une  optimisation  de  nos  ressources  humaines  pour  relever  les 
multiples défis qui se profilent à l’horizon ? Qu’on se ressaisisse et que le bon sens prévaut ! 
Qu’on décourage le gambling! Ce qui m’amène à poser la question : est-ce qu’on a fait une 
étude sur l’impact social que cela est en train d’avoir sur notre société ? 

58 

 
L’année  dernière,  il  y  a  eu  l’annonce  en  grande  pompe  que  les  maisons  de  jeux 
allaient  être  délocalisées.  Mais,  malheureusement,  Madame  la  présidente,  c’est  resté  lettre 
morte.  Au  contraire,  il  y  a  un  plan  pour  un  grand  casino  au  Centre  de  conférence  de 
Grand’Baie.  Au  lieu  de  délocaliser,  au  lieu  décourager  le  gambling,  on  est  en  train 
maintenant de prévoir quelque chose de jamais vu ; un casino dans le Centre de conférence de 
Grand’Baie.  

Madame la présidente, par rapport à l’immobilier, sur le housing and lands dans le 
budget, mention est faite des critères pour que des personnes soient éligibles pour avoir un 
montant, afin qu’elles puissent couler leur dalle. Cela passe de R 10,000 à R 20,000. Mais, 
Madame la présidente, si on étudie bien le budget, le montant, la somme allouée pour cette 
compensation est restée la même, c’est-à-dire R 110 millions. La somme de R 110 millions a 
été budgétée/dépensée l’année dernière, et cette année-ci, c’est pareil. Donc, si on augmente 
la somme éligible de R 10,000 à R 20,000, il y aura plus de gens qui vont être éligibles à cette 
compensation. Donc, ce qui fait qu’avec le montant de R 110 millions qui est resté pareil, il y 
aura moins de bénéficiaires. 

Plus  loin,  les  amendements  seront  apportés  pour  permettre  aux  permanent  resident 
holders  d’acquérir  des  appartements.  Je  suis  personnellement  très  sceptique.  Il  faut  au 
préalable faire une étude sur les retombées. Nous verrons les prix grimper avec la spéculation 
au  détriment  des  Mauriciens  moyens  et  en  quête  d’un  appartement.  Il  y  a  une  certaine 
inquiétude face à l’arrivée des étrangers, et en grand nombre. Un organisme régulateur est 
nécessaire. Je crois qu’il faudra aussi faire attention pour éviter qu’il n’y ait une flambée des 
prix au détriment des Mauriciens. 

Madame la présidente, laissez-moi venir maintenant sur certains projets par rapport à 
ma circonscription. Dans son discours, l’honorable ministre des Administrations régionales a 
expliqué que son ministère va de l’avant avec la construction d’un mutipurpose complex. Il y 
avait a PQ en novembre 2015 à ce sujet, notamment PQ No. B/887 of 17 November 2015, 
and I quote – 

“Madam  Speaker,  let  it  be  again  on  record  that  some  community  leaders  have 
expressed objection to this project so much so that I am suspending for the time being 
the execution of this project. I am pursuing further consultations with all stakeholders 
of the region because I am fully convinced that this project will be in the interest of 
the inhabitants of the area and its surroundings.” 

59 

 
Madame la présidente, comme l’honorable ministre est au courant, il y a beaucoup de 
gens qui habitent la région ; même les conseillers municipaux de votre alliance.  Il  y  a des 
conseillers qui ont préféré ne pas assister aux conseils - prenant vote sur cet item - juste pour 
ne pas voter ce projet, mais il y a quand même un qui a voté contre ce projet, un conseiller 
municipal de l’Alliance Lepep, pour la bonne et simple raison qu’il faut préserver. Il faut à 
tout  prix  préserver  cet  espace,  sinon  les  générations  futures  vont  nous  blâmer ;  vont  vous 
blâmer plutôt. 

Gouverner  c’est  prévoir,  et  une  fois  que  cet  espace  vert  aura  disparu,  ce  sera  pour 
l’éternité, et cela ne va jamais revenir. Ce projet-là va à l’encontre de l’écologie. Mais quand 
même, Madame la présidente, il y a une solution à ce problème, et je suis sûr que l’honorable 
ministre est au courant que le Centre Idrice Goomany date de plus de 50/60 ans, et son état 
est en décrépitude. D’ici peu, on doit démolir le Centre  Idrice Goomany. Et ce projet que 
vous  avez  annoncé  se  trouve  à  quelques  mètres.  Au  lieu  de  prendre  un  jardin,  au  lieu  de 
prendre un espace vert, il faut transférer le projet là où se situe le Centre Idrice Goomany. On 
peut facilement y accommoder… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

Mr Ameer Meea: …mais il faut simplement un peu de jugeote, et puis … 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Minister, please! 

Mr Ameer Meea: … investir par rapport à ce projet-là. Donc, Madame la présidente, 
je ne sais pas ce qui s’est passé, parce qu’en novembre 2015, le ministre était contre ce projet. 
Il était d’accord, il l’a mis en veilleuse - j’ai cité le Hansard -, mais entre-temps je ne sais pas 
ce qui s’est passé. De toute façon, on va se rencontrer là-bas très bientôt. De toute façon, s’il 
arrive à venir dans la circonscription, il saura qu’est-ce qui va se passer par rapport à cet item. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

Mr Ameer Meea: Donc, Madame la présidente... 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

 
Mr Ameer Meea: …je réitère mon appel d’une façon… 

60 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Ameer Meea: Mahen, pas laisse mwa cause lor twa ! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Ameer Meea: To oser dire mwa mo pan vine ministre! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Now, I am asking you not to interrupt… 

(Interruptions) 

I am on my feet! 

Mr Ameer Meea: M. le Premier ministre, c’est un cri du cœur de votre Chief Whip. 
Au fait, l’intention était bonne, mais c’était adressé à vous, pour que vous puissiez le nommer 
ministre de l’Environnement. 

(Interruptions) 

Donc, aujourd’hui, Madame la présidente, je réitère mon appel d’une façon solennelle 
au  Premier  ministre,  que  le  gouvernement  puisse  revoir  ce  projet.  Je  ne  suis  pas  contre  le 
projet. Il faut juste délocaliser et préserver ce jardin. Il faut bien comprendre ; ce n’est pas 
trop compliqué à comprendre. 

Donc,  Madame  la  présidente,  en  ce  qui  concerne  Agaléga,  le  budget  prévoit  R  4 
millions pour l’achat des générateurs en vue d’assurer une fourniture continue de l’électricité. 
Comme vous le savez, Agaléga est rattaché à la circonscription No. 3, ma circonscription. 
Beaucoup  de  projets  ont  été  annoncés  pendant  ces  10  dernières  années  à  Agaléga,  mais 
réellement  et  concrètement,  rien  n’a  été  fait.  Avec  le  changement  de  gouvernement,  on 
croyait que les choses allaient changer, mais j’ai eu l’occasion, en compagnie de l’honorable 
Shakeel Mohamed, en 2012 ou 2013, de visiter Agaléga, et croyez-moi, les conditions de vie 

 

61 

de ces gens à Agaléga sont vraiment lamentables, et il faut faire quelque chose, il faut bouger 
rapidement. 

Maintenant, Madame la présidente, par rapport au stade St. François Xavier, laissez-
moi  rappeler  à  la  Chambre  que  le  stade  St.  François  Xavier,  qui  se  trouve  dans  la 
circonscription  No.  3,  est  un  des  stades  le  plus  utilisé,  le  plus  fréquenté,  mais  ce  stade, 
malheureusement,  n’est  pas  couvert,  et  il  n’y  a  pas  de  lighting.  Tous  les  matchs  qui  se 
tiennent au stade St. François Xavier doivent être terminés avant la tombée de la nuit. 

Laissez-moi rappeler à la Chambre qu’à Port Louis au niveau national il y a six équipes qui 
jouent sur le stade Saint François-Xavier –  

•  Le PAS Mate ; 

•  La Cure Waves ; 

•  Black Home 

Et au niveau national –  

•  La Cure Sylvestre ; 

•  Bolton ; 

•  ASPL 2000, who are the current champions of Mauritius. 

Donc, Madame la présidente, par rapport au stade Saint-François, je fais un vibrant appel au 
ministre des Finances afin que ce stade soit inclus dans la liste de ceux à être rénovés. 

Madame la présidente, je voudrais dire quelque chose par rapport au Public Accounts 
Committee mais je ne vais pas entrer dans les détails. Je vais laisser le soin au Chairman du 
Public  Accounts  Committee  mais  rapidement  pour  dire  que  the  mandate  of  the  Public 
Accounts Committee has not been changed for the 30 years and this no longer suits well the 
current public finance management. 

Madame la présidente, with regard to international practices for the Public Accounts 
Committee, we are really lagging behind and I must state to the House that all the previous 
Chairmen of the Public Accounts Committee have been agreeable and, Madam, maybe, I will 
tell my friend hon. Adrien Duval that even the previous Chairman, Xavier-Luc Duval, was 
agreeable for a reform of the Public Accounts Committee. He mentioned it in his report and 
even hon. Alan Ganoo was also for the reform. 

 
So, Madam Speaker, due to time constraint, I will conclude now…  

62 

Je continue alors!  

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Pour conclure, Madame la présidente, je voudrais rappeler à la Chambre les quelques 

promesses électorales, ô combien importantes et non tenues, non réalisées –  

•  combattre la fraude et la corruption; 
• 

la Declaration of Assets Act sera amendée pour inclure les propriétés acquises 
sous les prête-noms et la publication de toutes les informations dans la 
Government Gazette. On attend toujours! 
redonner à l’ICAC et à la police une indépendance opérationnelle et autoriser 
les policiers à se syndiquer. On attend toujours! 
introduire la télévision privée pour élargir l’espace démocratique. On attend 
toujours! 
réorganiser la MBC pour qu’elle puisse fonctionner comme une vraie 
radio/télévision publique. On attend toujours, Madame la présidente! 

• 

• 

• 

 

J’ai terminé, merci. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bodha! 

 (4.06 p.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  (Mr  N.  Bodha): 

Madam Speaker, I would like to congratulate all those who have already… 

… participated in the debate and… 

I would like to… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea, no interruption! 

63 

Mr  Bodha:  I  have  listened  to  all  those  who  have  participated  in  the  debate  and  I 
think that they have to be congratulated. They have delved into the Budget Speech and they 
have come with their criticisms, their proposals and they have done their duty to the House 
and to our democracy. Hon. Ameer Meea has painted a very deeply pessimistic vision of our 
country. I will do my best to paint a brighter future.  

Madam Speaker, I am going to take only two sentences from the Budget. One is –  

“It is a Budget that proposes powerful actions to deal with complex issues.” 

 

The second one is –  

“The background is indeed fraught with uncertainty, adversity and tough challenges, 
while the expectations are many and the aspirations are high.” 
Madam Speaker, hon. Ameer Meea mentioned a list of promises which we have not 
achieved so far. But, this Government has been in power for about 18 to 19 months and I am 
convinced that next year by this time when we will stand up we will have achieved most of 
the measures and poised for robust growth. 

Madam Speaker, what are the challenges? For 10 years we have been in the middle 
income group, what we call the ‘trap’: 3 per cent of growth, 7 to 8 per cent of unemployment, 
50 to 55 per cent of debt ratio to GDP. And, for the last 10 years we have been turning round 
and round. The challenge of the Minister of Finance and Economic Development was to be 
able to break away with this cycle. The challenge of this year is that we can break away and 
reach the psychological barrier of the 4 per cent growth of GDP. This is what is expected of 
us, Madam Speaker. 

You  know,  when  you  have  a  Budget,  Madam  Speaker,  you  have  two  types  of 
criticisms;  one  which  I  would  call  the  fundamentals,  the  principles,  the  strategies  that 
underlie this exercise and the other one is all the issues where you have criticisms levelled 
against the Government about a number of issues. I must say one thing: there has been not 
one single analysis of the fundamentals of this Budget! 

In fact, there has even been a consensus on this Budget that on its fundamentals, be it 

here in the House or among the stakeholders or outside, there is  

 

64 

unanimity as regards the fundamentals of the Budget. That is why we have recreated a feel-
good factor, Madam Speaker. 

Of course, it is time during  Budget Speech to have  a number of  criticisms about a 
number of issues which we have heard and this will continue. But, we have to go to the deep-
rooted issues and find solutions so that we reach the 4 per cent growth, Madam Speaker. 

The hon. Leader of the Opposition said: “Pas de relance. Ce n’est pas un budget de 

relance. »   

Je ne vais pas faire de commentaire. Le commentaire devrait venir avec des chiffres à la fin 
de l’année financière.  

The Leader of the Labour Party has said: “ène reclame” 

(Interruptions) 

But I will say this is not a trailer this is a blockbuster! 

(Interruptions) 

Because when we see the leadership on this side and the number of measures here and what 
can be achieved, and I will say what will be achieved as regards my Ministry, I am convinced 
that this is not a trailer, it is a blockbuster. 

Madam Speaker, I mentioned the middle income trap. What have we done when we 
see the economic history of our country?  For about two centuries, we have sold sugar, for the 
last 40 years, we have promoted sea and sun, new pillars. And, now, what we are promoting 
is State development, plus-value sur la terre. We need something else. We need to win the 
battle of innovation and the battle of intelligence. This is what the Budget is trying to achieve. 
To set up the new sectors, Madam Speaker. The issues are: innovation, intelligence, trying to 
bridge the possibility of two continents which are doing well Asia and Africa and to get out 
of this trap of the middle income, Madam Speaker. 

I had the chance to talk to Mr Chauhan who is the Bombay Stock Exchange Director. 
He said that 40 per cent of jobs in the next 10 years have not yet been defined. And, this is 
where our intelligence and our education system should lead to. These are issues relating to 
virtual reality. These are issues relating to the Internet of things and I hope that my colleague 

 

65 

will  address  this  issue.  These  are  job  sectors  where  our  education  system,  our  tertiary 
education system can find new opportunities.  

That is the way where we should lead Mauritius, Madam Speaker.  We have been at 
the Ébène City Tower.  At the beginning, the Labour Party said it was a white elephant. Then, 
we have seen that for the last 15 years, 15,000 people are working there.  Time has come to 
reach a second cycle, beyond the BPO, so that we are able to create the jobs that our educated 
young people would like to.  Madam Speaker, I will also say a word later on a number of 
things on innovation in the financial sector which has been mentioned in this Budget.   

Madam Speaker, we have a huge problem of a mismatch. There is the perception that 
in the public sector, you have security and non-accountability as regards to jobs. There is a 
perception  that  in  the  private  sector,  everything  is  precarious,  there  is  discrimination  and 
there are limited opportunities.  This is the job market today.  At the same time, we have a 
huge mismatch of 40,000 jobseekers and as many, or even more, foreign workers in such a 
manner  that  in  some  sectors,  if  you  do  not  have  the  foreign  workers,  those  sectors  cannot 
continue to thrive.  We are working on it to be able to see to it that we have the new jobs that 
we need.  

Madam Speaker, this perception that we should have a job in Government because of 
security  and  non-accountability;  the  perception  that  the  private  sector  is  precarious, 
discriminating,  has  limited  opportunities,  we  have  to  break  that  perception.    To  break  that 
perception, the private sector has a role to play and we have another huge mismatch, Madam 
Speaker, the banks are making super profits. You have huge amounts of liquidity, but, at the 
same time, you have enterprises and companies which are looking for credit and credit is not 
available.    So,  these  are  the  issues  that  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development had to address, Madam Speaker.  These are the challenges that we have to face. 

Madam Speaker, the BAI saga - of course, hon. Ameer Meea talked about it - it is 
something  which  relates  to  more  than  Rs40  billion.    It  relates  to  about  200,000  people 
involved at different categories.  Had we not done what we have done, it would have been a 
tsunami which would have flooded the whole country and the whole fabric of our economic 
and financial system would not have been able to sustain it. This Government would not have 
been  able  to  sustain  it.    No  Government  would  have  been  able  to  sustain  that  challenge, 
Madam  Speaker.    This  is  what  we  did.    The  hon.  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good 
Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 

 

66 

Development,  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  and  the  Cabinet  stood  up  to  that  particular 
challenge, Madam Speaker.  Can we do things that there were some few people who have not 
been able to have their shares?  They came demonstrated.  Imagine 200,000 people coming to 
the streets! We know what has happened in Trinidad & Tobago, Madam Speaker. We said 
that we will see to it that we have procedures; we will see to it that the job is done as it should 
be done in the different Ministries.   

Today, we are laying the foundation with this budget of a number of new pillars.  I 
would  like  just  to  answer  to  the  criticisms  about  the  Nine-Year  Schooling.  My  colleague, 
hon. Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun mentioned it. In 2001/2005 under the able leadership of the 
Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  and  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition,  we  built  more  than  40 
schools.  We had regionalised everything.  We came up with the star schools as six formers.  
What did they do, Madam Speaker?  Mr Gokhool was sitting here.  They destroyed this in 
one day.  They came with the 1,200 list with the A+.  This is what was done by the Labour 
Government in 2005, Madam Speaker.  

I will talk about the Metro Express later. The Light Rail Project dates back to 1995 
under the able leadership of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister. It cost Rs4 billion and the Minister 
was Mr Ramduth Jaddoo.  In 1995, everything had been done.  It cost Rs4 billion. You know 
what happened when the Labour Government came in 1995?  They destroyed the project! 

(Interruptions) 

We came back in 2000, with hon. Paul Bérenger and hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, and again 
we launched the project. I remember hon. Paul Bérenger going to the trade unions for bus 
workers to explain to them: ‘Don’t worry about the light rail because it is going to be totally, 
perfectly integrated with the bus system.  You are not going to lose your jobs.’ We had the 
World Bank working as a consultant from 2000 to 2005.  We lost in 2005.  What happened? 
Mr Bachoo was sitting here. From 2005 to 2010, they destroyed the project and they went on 
with the bus lane.  For five years!  You can go and see the number of PNQs and PQs.  For 
five years, he maintained that the bus transit system was the best system.   

We, the MSM, came back in 2010 with hon. Pravind Jugnauth.  We came to see the 
then Prime Minister, Dr. Ramgoolam and explained to him that for us - MSM - this project 
was the most important project. The then and now Minister of Finance started working on it.  
You know how much was it? It was Rs10 billion.  We left in 2011, Mr Bachoo continued 
with it.  You know what was the price in 2014?  Rs24.5 billion!  This was decided in the last 

 

67 

days of 2014 which was the year when nothing happened.  We know this. Everything was 
politicking. And it was Rs24.5 billion.  When we came back with the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, 
for financial situation, we said we cannot do it.  It had to be shelved because, at the same 
time,  we  had  a  decongestion  programme  of  Rs25  billion,  and  we  had  Rs75  billion  for  the 
aircrafts of Air Mauritius.  I do not know which country we would have been living in now, 
with Rs75 billion for the aircraft, Rs25 billion for the decongestion and Rs25 billion for the 
light rail.  This is what was the programme of the Labour Party and what was the programme 
of the Alliance then?  

I would like to say one thing, Madam Speaker.  The Opposition is more divided than 

ever and the Alliance is more united than ever around this Budget. 

Don’t worry, he is listening! 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

Mr Bodha: No! You feel it! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

I would like to say, Madam Speaker, that I am not going to delve on the fight against 
poverty  and  the  SMEs.  These  have  been  taken  by  most  of  my  colleagues  because  the 
Marshall Plan was a must for us.  It was a priority and it still is.  There was one amazing 
injustice.    We  had  many  poor  people.    We  were  not  able  to  deliver  to  each  family  who 
required some sort of social aid. Now, with the Marshall Plan, with what has been decided in 
this budget, we will have a mechanism on a family-to-family survey, which will see that we 
can  have  an  equation  to  solve  poverty  for  each  and  every  family.    I  will  leave  it;  my 
colleagues have spoken on it.  

Now, what we have to do is we have to achieve it. At the same time, for the SMEs. 
What is the problem with the SMEs? No credit! No market! Pas d’encadrement! And, on the 
other side, you have the banks having a lot of money.  This budget has given a new lease of 
life to the SMEs. This will become one of the pillars; it already is and it can be consolidated, 
Madam Speaker.  So, I am not going to talk about the poverty, about education or about the 

 

68 

SMEs.  Let me just say what we are going to do in my Ministry!  Then, I will come back to 
politics again.   

Madam Speaker, in fact, we do not have much to say about this budget, but we have, 
Madam Speaker, a lot to do.  It is a budget of action.  Saying, discussing and debating is over.  
It is over, Madam Speaker! 

What has to be done now is action.  We have to deliver. 

Yes!   

Non, non! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Let me continue! But to deliver we have to follow the procedures. We have to do it in such a 
manner  that  there  is  no  overrun.  There  is  no  loss  of  funds  by  billions.  As  I  said,  in  my 
Ministry, for five years they have spent Rs11 billion and Rs3 billions were overrun with two 
major  catastrophes:  one  in  Terre  Rouge/Verdun  and  one  in  Ring  Road  Phase  I,  Madam 
Speaker. What are we going to do? First of all, we are setting up an action plan which will 
cost us Rs200 m. right away. We are providing Rs100 m. for the construction of pavements, 
Rs80  m.  for  the  rehabilitation  works  for  hard  shoulder,  Rs56  m.  for  the  setting  up  of 
handrails,  Rs50  m.  to  restore  all  road  markings  and  signages  and  Rs30  m.  to  repair  the 
lighting on the motorways. This has to be done now in the next 4 to 5 months because this 
money  has  to  be  spent.  We  have  only  eight  months,  Madam  Speaker,  because  we  have 
already two months, because the Budget is going to be voted at the end of August. 

Second, the Terre Rouge/Verdun on the left lane when you go towards Ripailles, the 
Rs800 m. project where you had the four cuts is going to completed at the end of this year.  
We have four segments: D4, D5, D6, and D7.  We have already completed two of them.  The 
road has been opened.  We are completing the D6 and the D7 with the rock net by November 
and that road is going to be opened as soon as possible.  Then, Madam Speaker, we would 
have spent Rs800 m. without any overrun.  Without any overrun, Madam Speaker, and with 
good quality work!  You just have to go and see because we have done the tests that have to 

 

69 

be done.  Third, as regards to the embankment failure which has caused the closure of the 
road, the plans are ready.  The designs are ready.  The budget is ready.  We are going to start 
the  works  within  the  next  three  months,  Madam  Speaker.    This  is  for  the  Terre 
Rouge/Verdun. So, this is what we have to do and we are going to do it. 

Ring  Road,  Phase  I,  where  there  has  been  a  failure.    That  failure  is  two-third 
complete.  It is costing Rs150 m., but it is being paid by the contractor because we are within 
the defect liability period and we are going to finish the repairs of Ring Road Phase I by the 
end of December this year. 

Madam Speaker, as regard the road decongestion programme, we have reduced it to 
about Rs15 million.  The designs are ready.  We are going to use Korean technology which is 
internationally  recognised  for  the  technology  and  for  the  project  management  with  local 
companies and local labour. This is going to be in the months to come. We are going to start 
with Jumbo/Phoenix roundabout. The money is there, Rs1.5 billion.  The second one is going 
to be A1-M1.  This is starting again at the end at the end of this year. 

Madam Speaker, let me now speak of the Metro Express.  Where are we?  The Metro 
Express will start with the urban terminal at Ian Palach and will end up at the urban terminal 
of Victoria.  We are going to have a number of 19 stations.  The alignment is there.  What we 
are doing now, we are reassessing the project so that it is affordable and so that we can use 
the grant which has been given to us by India in the best manner.  In about 10 to 12 weeks, 
we  are  going  to  have  the  report  of  the  Singapore  Corporation  Enterprise  and  then,  from 
thereon we will move as regards the implementation of the project.  As you are aware, there 
is a budget of about Rs7.2 billion which has already been earmarked for this year  - there 
have been many questions about the land.  The land is being acquired.  All the lands on the 
alignment have already been acquired.  We can start the project as soon as possible.  So, we 
are going to just finalised it.   

Now, the urban complexes!  Hon. Ameer Meea is saying: “Give me the name of one 
company who would like to build a bus station”.  We are not building a bus station.  Close 
your  eyes!  We  are  not  building  a  bus  station!    We  are  building  an  urban  terminal  which 
means that it will be a place where passengers can alight and take the bus or the train.  We 
will have a food court.  We are going to have a mall.  We are going to have offices.  We are 
going to have 1000 parking places; 1000 stalls for the hawkers.  We are going to have offices 

 

70 

and there is the possibility that you can even have a business hotel at Victoria.  And then, we 
are going to cross over… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order! 

Mr  Bodha:    …the  highway  so  that  we  can  bridge  the  old  Port  Louis  and  the  new 
Caudan.  This is the idea. Madam Speaker, we are going to make a request for proposal in the 
month to come because we want the works to start as soon as we can.   

Now,  as  regards  the  decongestion  of  Port  Louis,  we  know  that  the  problem  of  the 

traffic is at Place d’Armes…  

(Interruptions) 

The problem of the traffic is at Place D’Armes because we have to stop the traffic coming 
northbound to enable everybody to enter at Place d’Armes.  We are no longer going to enter 
at Place d’Armes.  The entry from the South is going to be at Decan.  This is a Rs200 m-
project. The design is ready. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, we want to transform the country. We are builders.  The Rt. Hon. Prime 
Minister is builder. We want to build a future.  We want to build a brighter Mauritius, Madam 
Speaker.  I  have  talked  about  the  urban  terminals  and  the  urban  terminal  at  Victoria  is  7 
arpents  of  prime  land  Rs700  m.  worth.  We  are  going  to  give  it  as  a  lease  so  that  there  is 
investment from the private sector. We are going to renovate the stone building of the former 
RTLA and see to it  to have an urban terminal there. We are going to start again at Curepipe, 
Ian Palach because that is going to be the start of the Metro Express, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker, road safety:  this is a very important issue, but it is an issue for all of 
us.  We  have  a  National  Commission  chaired  by  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister.    We  have  a 
National Council for road safety chaired by my Ministry with all the stakeholders. We are 
involving all the NGOs. The Police are coming with a new squad of 40 traffic officers.  We 
call them the traffic enforcement squad on motorbikes which the training is going to start in 
the  weeks  to  come.    They  are  going  just  to  see  to  it  that  people  are  respecting  le 

 

 

71 

code de la route.  That is their job.  We are going to start with a number of moto-écoles. We 
launched a request for proposal: 8 in Mauritius and 1 in Rodrigues have been selected.  We 
are creating the trainers for the moto-écoles.  This is a very sensible matter.  We have known 
all  this,  there  are  young  people  who  are  riding  all  sorts  of  motor  bikes  and  they  are  just 
having  a  certain  number  of  problems  and  accidents  and  we  are  having  people  dying.    We 
should not accept this.  It will take time.  We have to be resilient.  We have to persevere to 
see to it that we can have results.  Here, I am going to ask everybody to give us their hand at 
all levels; the media, the stakeholders, the Police, all the  different Ministries and everybody 
so that we can achieve what has to be achieved because one accident is too many; one life 
lost is a tragedy.   

We  are  going  to  restructure  the  NTA.    It  spends  about  Rs1.3  billion  with  the  free 
transport.  It collects about Rs1.3 billion or Rs1.4 billion with the road tax. We have moved 
from millions to billions but the NTA has remained the same! I answered a question of hon. 
Oree. We have a study by PricewaterhouseCoopers to see to it that we spend this free travel 
money in the best manner to see to it that Government money is well spent and to see to it 
how we can integrate this with the Metro Express because we will have one national transport 
network involving all the buses and involving all the Metro Express.  

As regards the private fitness centres, I would like to thank the hon. Minister to see to 
it that we have maintained the fees as it is, but, at the same time we are providing a better and 
automated  service  and  I  have  given  a  guarantee  that  the  percentage  of  reject  will  not  be 
bigger than it is now, because we have done the test, it is going to be more or less the same 
thing. On the 16th of this month, NTA is going to carry out the tests, but with a technical 
assistance of the private fitness centres pending the law which is going to come in Parliament 
next week. It is going to be the First Reading of the law on Tuesday next. At the same time, I 
would like also to say as regards the road safety that we are coming with stricter penalties as 
regards speeding, as regards drinking and driving and as regards reckless driving, also, for 
example, hit and run. 

Madam Speaker, I have said a lot. Under this Budget, as I said, it is not at all about, I 
would  say,  debating,  it’s  about  doing.  We  have  to  do  it,  Madam  Speaker.  We  are  first  in 
Africa for a number of things. For example for business facilitation and when we rank, but 
we should go beyond this. 

 

72 

(Interruptions) 

I am going to talk about that, I say a word about that! 

We  have  to  go  beyond  this.  We  should  have  the  reform  of  our  institutions  as 

advocated by the hon. Minister of Finance. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed, please! 

Mr  Bodha:…because  we  need  the  stewardship  of  the  establishment.  If  the  public 
sector  is  not  going  to  deliver,  all  the  Ministers  -  I  know  that  my  colleagues,  PPS,  my 
colleagues, hon. Members and Ministries – they are hungry to delivery, but the establishment 
must  follow.  Often,  it  happens  that  somebody  comes,  he  wants  to  invest  billions  ad  what 
happens, he meets the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, he meets the Ministers and everybody and 
then he has to wait for two months for a Building and Land use Permit. This is where there is 
something  which  has  to  be  done  and  I  think  that  the  reform  on  the  institutions,  a  better 
stewardship of establishment, I am sure, will be able to cure some of our weaknesses and we 
can deliver better. 

Madam Speaker, nothing can be done without a culture of hard work. No country, no 
civilisation, no culture has succeeded if you don’t have a culture of hard work. If there is a 
symbol of hard work and resilience, it is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister who has delivered over 
years, Madam Speaker. This country needs hard work, meritocracy and sharing because we 
are  a  diverse  cultural  country.  That’s  the  only  solution  to  success,  Madam  Speaker!  We 
should have a society where each of us will share the fruits of economic and social progress. 

Madam Speaker, let me now say  a few words about politics and the alliance. Hon. 
Collendavelloo is not here. In 2000, he was sitting by my side here. It took him 10 years to 
move from here to here. This is politics! It took him 10 years, but in those 10 years he did not 
change. Le rêve militant, l’idéal militant continued. Now, he is doing his best at the service of 
the country, Madam Speaker. He is baring the beacon of hope to make things happen, all the 
dreams of the Militant family in the Opposition. The MMM has been in the Opposition for 
many, many years, Madam Speaker. He was the one who took the torch and came with an 
alliance in December 2014 to forge a new destiny for this country and many of them are my 
colleagues.  They followed him and they did the right thing, Madam Speaker. 

73 

 
As regards the PMSD, results are coming, we see the buoyancy of the tourism sector. 
We see the vibrancy of a new port development in Port Louis. We see also the new airport 
city where we are going to have new facilities, where you are going to have the free airport, 
because we have never thought about it. Everybody thought about the port, but they never 
thought of the airport as a free zone. This project is being implemented here. This project is 
being… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Shakeel  Mohamed,  you  will  have  the  time  to  intervene! 

Don’t interrupt the hon. Minister. 

Mr Bodha: This project, Madam Speaker, is being implemented and we are going to 
see the results. We are building one road to access the Airport City which is costing Rs600 
m., it is going to be finished in less than six months from now. That’s why I said we have to 
build. We are here to build, Madam Speaker. The Deputy Prime Minister is delivering… 

(Interruptions) 

I said you took 10 years to move from here to here, but you kept the dream of the Militant 
and you kept the ideals of the Militant. 

Madam Speaker, when it comes to results, the Deputy Prime Minister is one to deliver 
and he will deliver on the electoral reform. This is our pledge! He will deliver together with 
all the Members of this Committee on the electoral reform. This has been there for I don’t 
know how many years because we are coming with the new laws. The Attorney General – the 
other  day  we  met  on  the  amendment  to  the  Regional  Assembly  of  Rodrigues  Act  –  will 
deliver on the issue of the electoral reform, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker, everybody has congratulated the Minister of Finance. I will sum it 
up in two words: he is a man of character and accomplishment. He wants to herald a new era 
of development. I will say that we are entering a new era in Mauritian politics with him. 

Madam Speaker, we are opening a new chapter of our history. Sir Anerood Jugnauth 
is still here, but we are opening a new chapter of our history and I am proud to belong to the 
MSM. Madam Speaker, Sir Anerood Jugnauth has always been an ideal for me and I always 
say that we should never forget why we were elected in December 2014, how we came to 
power, why the people asked us to come to power and not Dr. Ramgoolam and the MMM. 

74 

 
Madam Speaker, today, as I said, we are on the threshold of a new era in Mauritian 
politics. We still need to inspire this nation. We still need to have faith in our future and if 
there is a man, a Leader who came back because Mauritius needed a champion for a cause, it 
was Sir Anerood Jugnauth in December 2014. And we still need him, Madam Speaker. I have 
always been inspired by his uncommon integrity, his quiet courage – la force tranquille, and 
his decisiveness. Madam Speaker, he is a man of trust. We also are, because we have trust 
and we trust, but when we give our trust sometimes to our own and they fail us, what do we 
do? 

We see what happened about this ICTA saga. We were shocked, we were dismayed. I 
was shocked, I was dismayed, Madam Speaker. Today, the more so, why? When we consider 
where we come from, when we consider what are our principles and what are our values. I 
have met the Chairperson of the RDA and he has informed me that the services of Trilochun 
Chambers as Legal Adviser will no longer be needed and the RDA is going to the SLO for 
legal advice. This was a decision I had to take and it will be taken. 

Madam Speaker, I am at the end of my speech. We know Madam Speaker… 

(Interruptions) 

 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

Mr Bodha: Moi, j’ai fait ce que j’avais à faire. 

We  are  nearing  the  end  of  the  second  year,  but,  Madam  Speaker,  we  have  the 
inspiration and the trust with this Budget, because inspiration and trust go with faith. Faith in 
our  people!  Faith  in  ourselves!  Faith  in  our  country  to  share  a  common  destiny,  Madam 
Speaker! This Budget has restored the faith of l’Alliance Lepep in itself. It has restored the 
faith in our alliance. It has restored our faith in our nation, in our destiny. And just for all, 
only for this, I would like to thank the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development 
for this Budget. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for half an hour. 

At 4.46 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 5.20 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Adrien Duval! 

75 

 
Mr A. Duval (First Member for Curepipe & Midlands): Madame la présidente, je 
vous  remercie  premièrement  pour  me  donner  la  parole.  Il  est  malheureux  que  l’honorable  
Ameer Meea ne soit pas là… 

(Interruptions) 

…mais pour répondre un peu aux questions qu’il a posées tout à l’heure, premièrement, je 
dois dire en tout cas que c’est facile de critiquer, la critique est facile mais c’est beaucoup 
moins facile de proposer de vraies propositions concrètes qui aident pour l’avancement du 
pays. Je croyais que personnellement il aurait fait beaucoup plus de propositions mais je dois 
dire que je suis resté sur ma faim. 

Secondement, vu qu’il m’a posé la question directement concernant les… 

…les bus terminals… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

…je  crois  que  le  ministre  des  Infrastructures  Publiques  a  bien  répondu  et  je  dois  dire  que 
nous  avons  un  plan  à  Curepipe ;  nous  avons  déjà  vu  le  masterplan,  mes  collègues  les 
honorables  Toussaint  et  Sewocksingh  et  moi-même.  C’est  un  plan  en  tout  cas  qui  est  très 
prometteur de convertir le centre de Curepipe, le centre de ville, les gares Jan Palach, nord et 
sud, en une gare moderne où on optimise l’espace. Nous avons les espaces de magasins, le 
cinéma, etc. et où nous donnons une autre dimension aux autos-gares de bus. Donc je crois 
que le ministre a très, très bien répondu.  

Une chose éloquente, c’est que la valeur du terrain, par exemple, à Curepipe pour Jan 
Palach, si je me souviens bien de ce que disait l’honorable ministre  Bodha, c’est évalué à 
hauteur de R 600 millions. Donc, vous pouvez comprendre que, autre un accord d’un PPI, 
autre un accord de partenariat public-privé ce sera difficile pour le secteur privé d’acquérir 
des  terrains  de  cette  valeur  et,  donc,  c’est  justement  le  modèle  parfait  pour  permettre  à  la 
modernisation  et  au  développement  des 
infrastructures  publiques  au  service  des 
consommateurs, au service des usagers et, bien sûr, pour en faire un commerce. 

J’aimerais aussi proposer - c’est dommage que le ministre ne soit pas là - sur la même 
ligne justement, vu qu’on m’a fait parler de ça, les bus shelters  dans le pays en général. Nous 

 

76 

avons en Inde ce que nous appelons les bus shelters. Nous avons un accord en Inde, un projet  
qui s’appelle - c’est bon que le ministre arrive – le Civic Bodies Public Private Partnership 
Plan qui se fait en Inde. Et ce plan est un accord, encore une fois, entre le privé et le public, 
où les espaces des bus shelters  sont louées aux compagnies privées sur une période de 20 
ans,  et  les  compagnies  privées  investissent,  modernisent,  erect  des  bus  shelters  et  puis 
utilisent  l’espace  pour  les  espaces  publicitaires.  C’est  très  profitable  pour  les  compagnies 
privées, bien sûr, mais c’est un win-win situation parce que les consommateurs sont lotis dans 
les bus shelters qui sont à l’abri de la pluie, dans les bus shelters high tech. Le secteur privé 
est  content  parce  que  nous  avons  des  espaces  publicitaires  et  le  gouvernement  est  content 
parce qu’il n’a pas besoin d’investir. 

Suite à la réponse du ministre la dernière fois pendant les questions parlementaires, 
j’avais noté que cela coûtait environ R 500,000 pour construire un bus shelter. Ce n’est pas 
beaucoup d’argent, et si on imagine sur une période de 20 ans ce sera grandement profitable 
au secteur privé.  

Laissez-moi maintenant lire mon discours. 

Madame la présidente, je me joins à tous ceux qui ont parlé avant moi pour féliciter 
l’honorable Pravind Jugnauth pour le budget 2016/2017. Le budget a été très bien accueilli de 
la part des mauriciens et ce pour de bonnes raisons. Mon bon ami, l’honorable Manish Gobin, 
parlait la dernière fois d’un feel-good factor que le budget a réussi à créer. C’est exactement 
ça. Il a très bien résumé l’atmosphère que nous ressentons dans le pays aujourd’hui. 

Le budget définit clairement les axes prioritaires dans le but d’atteindre l’objectif du 
gouvernement  pour  l’avenir.  L’objectif  lui-même  est  clair,  il  est  de  faire  progresser  notre 
statut de pays à revenu moyen actuel à un pays à haut revenu.  Les priorités pour atteindre cet 
objectif sont tout aussi claires. Il a d’ailleurs énuméré les 10 axes prioritaires de la politique 
gouvernementale dans son discours. 

Parmi  les  nombreuses  mesures,  je  trouve  remarquable  que  le  budget  ait  fait  la  part 
belle à ceux au bas de l’échelle. Le ministre des Finances a annoncé, avec force, des mesures 
concrètes pour en finir avec la pauvreté absolue ; par exemple, la hausse de l’allocation de vie 
aux familles pauvres, le ‘cash incentive’ pour les enfants des familles pauvres qui réussissent 
leurs examens, primaire et secondaire, et aussi, en donnant une seconde chance à la réussite 

 

77 

scolaire  pour  ces  enfants  de  familles  pauvres  qui  échouent  la  première  fois,  en  prenant  en 
charge les frais de seconde tentative aux examens. 

La  construction  des  maisons  pour  les  plus  pauvres,  l’augmentation  du  barème  à  R 
20,000 pour les maisons NHDC, l’abolition du barème pour ceux âgés au-dessous de 15 ans 
pour  les  allocations  aux  enfants  autrement  capables  sont  parmi  tant  d’autres  les  mesures 
fortes  de  ce  budget  pour  la  pauvreté.  Je  le  félicite  sincèrement,  car  le  ministre  a  réitéré  la 
volonté du gouvernement d’aider en priorité les plus vulnérables de notre société. 

Madame la présidente, plus d’une semaine d’interventions sur le thème du budget est 
passé ; beaucoup a été dit. J’aurais aimé parler bien sûr sur tous les axes du budget, mais vu 
mon  temps  de  parole  limité,  je  vais  me  concentrer  sur  les  sujets  qui  me  tiennent 
particulièrement à cœur. 

Pour  atteindre  l’objectif  fixé  du  budget  2016  ainsi  que  le  programme  du 
gouvernement, de profondes réformes doivent être impérativement entreprises pour y arriver. 
La  première,  Madame  la  présidente,  concerne  une  réforme  profonde  du  service  civil,  avec 
pour but de le transformer en un modèle pour notre région, et de le rendre plus efficace, plus 
transparent, et ceci, en créant une vraie culture de méritocratie dans notre service civil. La 
méritocratie, Madame la présidente, renforce la notion d’égalité, de compétence, et rejette la 
notion de promotion, par exemple, sur les principes d’ancienneté ou autres considérations. Il 
est un fait qu’un renforcement de la méritocratie au sein du service civil est bénéfique pour la 
croissance économique, aide à réduire la corruption, les passe-droits, faveurs aux proches, et 
aide  à  renforcer  nettement  la  confiance  des  investisseurs  dans  notre  économie  et,  bien 
entendu, améliore la qualité du service rendu au public, et son efficacité. En utilisant le terme 
de service civil, je vise évidemment aussi les corps paraétatiques et autres entités affiliées au 
gouvernement. Que voulons-nous dire par l’application de principe de méritocratie au sein de 
ces entités ? 

Premièrement, il s’agit d’appliquer ces principes au sein du recrutement. La procédure 
de  recrutement,  Madame  la  présidente,  doit  impérativement  être  améliorée.  L’étape  de 
l’entretien  d’embauche  n’est  pas  en  elle-même  assez  efficace  dans  ce  sens.  Nous  devons 
exiger des postulants de se soumettre à des examens d’entrée généraux pour s’assurer de leur 
compétence, ainsi qu’à des entretiens psychologiques pour évaluer leur état psychologique. 
Force est de constater que nous avons des cas au sein de notre fonction publique, surtout dans 
la force policière, qui donnent l’impression d’un manque de motivation et de compétence. Il 

 

78 

est  nécessaire  aussi  de  publier  les  résultats  de  ceux  qui  sont  recrutés,  par  souci  de 
transparence, et que les réponses des postulants aux examens soient mises à disponibilité du 
judicaire en cas de litige. Madame la présidente, la forme est aussi importante que le fond en 
termes d’application de principe de méritocratie, ceci, pour motiver les employés du service 
public.  Il  est  alors  important  de  donner  l’apparence  de  l’application  de  la  méritocratie  en 
pratique. 

Vous seriez étonnée d’apprendre que les études auprès des employés du service civil, 
faites  sur  52  pays,  montrent  que  la  perception  de  méritocratie  dans  le  recrutement  et  la 
promotion sont plus importantes en termes de facteur de motivation et d’efficacité au travail 
que le salaire, la stabilité d’emploi ou la sécurité d’emploi. Et je trouve ça éloquent ! Comme 
le disait si bien le grand juriste autrichien Kelsen - 

“Justice must not only be done, it must be seen to be done.” 

La perception est alors aussi importante que l’action. 

Il est important aussi d’avoir une indépendance totale des institutions de recrutement. 
Nous avons déjà le cadre légal adéquat qui assure l’indépendance des institutions comme la 
PSC, la LGSC et la DFSC. Il nous faut, à mon avis, créer une Parastatal Service Commission 
pour  prendre  en  charge  le  recrutement  du  personnel  dans  les  corps  parapublics  et  autres 
compagnies où le gouvernement est l’actionnaire majoritaire. 

Sur  la  même  ligne,  Madame  la  présidente,  la  promotion  dans  le  service  civil  est 
aujourd’hui basée sur l’ancienneté principalement. Et cela est à mon avis incompatible avec 
les principes de méritocratie qui, eux, mettent en avant la compétition, l’effort, le bon travail, 
le mérite, et prônent le choix de sélection ouvert à tous les échelons, en rejetant la pratique de 
recruter en interne uniquement. Il nous faut revoir le critère d’ancienneté en tant que critère 
déterminant  pour  la  promotion.  Cela  peut  se  faire  en  introduisant  des  indicateurs  clés  de 
performance,  qu’on  appelle  KPIs  en  anglais,  pour  chaque  scheme  of  duties  spécifique  à 
l’organisation ou au ministère, et pour permettre l’évaluation de la performance des employés 
et de juger les résultats de chaque département. Les critères de promotion doivent être basés 
sur ces indices de performance ainsi que sur les résultats d’examens de passage. 

Madame  la  présidente,  il  est  important  de  constamment  chercher  à  améliorer 
l’efficacité de notre service public. L’emphase doit être mise sur la formation professionnelle 
de façon continue des fonctionnaires. Il nous faut aussi encourager le feedback des citoyens 

 

79 

sur  le  service  public  et  des  agences  gouvernementales  pour  nous  permettre  d’identifier  les 
lacunes et de les améliorer. 

Cela est tout à fait compatible avec les mesures initiées en 2013 par le Deputy Prime 
Minister actuel, l’honorable Xavier Luc Duval, alors qu’il présentait son 3eme budget, pour 
faciliter l’accès au service du gouvernement par les citoyens à travers les E-services. Je me 
réjouis d’ailleurs que l’actuel ministre des Finances ait repris cette mesure, en les améliorant 
davantage avec l’annonce de 50 nouveaux services en ligne très bientôt. 

Il nous faut mettre la barre haut et aspirer à pouvoir offrir aux citoyens le maximum 
d’accès au service public, que ce soit en termes d’application de permis divers ou en termes 
de transparence, en publiant les divers projets, dépenses, recrutements, etc. 

Je tiens quand même à féliciter le gouvernement et le ministre de tutelle des TIC, car 
nous occupons aujourd’hui la première place en Afrique dans ce domaine, d’après le dernier 
classement des Nations Unies. Nous sommes cependant encore loin derrière mondialement ; 
à la 58eme place. 

Prenons l’exemple sur Singapore, qui eux, sont depuis plusieurs années, une référence 
mondiale  dans  le  domaine,  et  non  seulement  en  termes  d’E-services,  mais  aussi  en  termes 
d’efficacité  et  de  bon  fonctionnement  du  service  civil.  Et,  donc,  adoptons  les  meilleures 
pratiques établies ailleurs, qui ont prouvé leur efficacité, au bénéfice de notre pays. 

Deuxièmement,  Madame  la  présidente,  c’est  l’éducation.  Investir  dans  l’éducation 
veut dire investir dans le futur de notre pays. Cela est particulièrement valable à Maurice, où 
nous ne pouvons que compter sur notre capital humain par manque de ressources naturelles. 
Il est inquiétant de constater que nous avons aujourd’hui une population vieillissante, ce qui 
veut donc dire que notre seule ressource naturelle est en décroissance. La pérennité de notre 
modèle  actuel  de  ‘Welfare  State’  est  aujourd’hui  menacée.  Le  ministre  des  Finances  a 
parfaitement résumé la situation. Si on se projette 14 ans dans l’avenir, nous ne pourrons que 
compter  sur  la  moitié  des  personnes  qui  travaillent  aujourd’hui  pour  soutenir  le  même 
nombre de retraités. 

Le  niveau  d’éducation  et  la  formation  de  notre  capital  humain  seront  alors 
déterminants  à  l’avenir  pour  garantir  le  succès  économique  de  notre  pays.  Nous  devons 
rendre notre capital humain plus compétitif, davantage spécialisé, et beaucoup plus adapté au 
monde d’aujourd’hui et de demain. 

80 

 
La décroissance de notre capital humain est un fait. Il est préférable d’avoir peu de 
capital humain, mais disposant d’une formation de haut niveau à rémunération élevée, plutôt 
que  peu  de  capital  humain  non  spécialisé,  avec  un  bas  niveau  de  formation  et  de 
rémunération. La qualité de notre capital humain peut donc compenser à l’avenir la baisse de 
contribution due au fait de décroissance. 

Notre  système  éducatif  n’a  donc  pas  droit  à  l’erreur.  Le  Nine  Year  Schooling  est 
aujourd’hui indispensable pour remplacer un système qui est dépassé, avec un niveau d’échec 
au CPE avoisinant les 30%. 

L’expérience de l’école doit être une découverte de talents et de créativité pour nos 
enfants. Nous ne pouvons continuer d’encourager un système qui se focalise uniquement sur 
les prouesses académiques en ne développant pas assez les talents et traits de caractère requis 
pour  réussir  après  l’école.  Le  nine-year  schooling,  piloté  par  une  dame  très  capable, 
l’honorable Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun - qui n’est pas là - devra pouvoir corriger ceci.  
Je me réjouis d’ailleurs de son intervention avec l’introduction de l’Art, de la Musique et du 
Théâtre à l’école.  Je lui dis bravo ! 

L’éducation  est  un  axe  prioritaire  du  budget  2016.  D’ailleurs, l’expansion  du 
programme  de  distribution  de  tablettes,  qui  avait  était  introduit  en  2012  par  l’honorable 
Xavier-Luc Duval, et qui seront maintenant distribuées également aux élèves de la primaire 
est une mesure phare.  Je félicite l’honorable Pravind Jugnauth et je l’en remercie.  

Il  faut  cependant  s’assurer  que  les  applications  informatiques  pour  supporter 
l’utilisation de ces tablettes soient innovantes et  donnent une nouvelle dimension à l’école 
digitale pour optimiser au maximum l’utilisation des tablettes à l’école.  

Je  note  aussi,  avec  beaucoup  d’enthousiasme,  l’introduction  de  modules  de 
communication, de créativité et d’innovation au secondaire. Pourquoi ne pas aller plus loin  et 
introduire des classes de spécialisation dans l’informatique au secondaire, par exemple, des 
classes  de  coding,  de  conception  de  sites  web,  de  programme  informatique,  d’application 
mobile en tout cas les basics ? Car, saviez-vous, Madame la présidente, qu’aujourd’hui, nous 
avons plus de 3 milliards d’abonnés de l’internet dans le monde? L’internet, aujourd’hui, a 
pris  une  dimension  surréelle.    Saviez-vous  qu’en  Angleterre  l’internet  est  aujourd’hui  le 
second pilier de l’économie et contribue presqu’à hauteur de 12% au produit intérieur brut, et 
que  si  l’internet  était  un  pays,  elle  serait  la  5ème  économie  mondiale  en  termes  de  valeur 

 

81 

réelle devant l’Allemagne ? Là est notre avenir, Madame le présidente, nous nous asseyons 
aujourd’hui sur une mine d’or qui ne demande qu’à être exploitée. Nous avons le potentiel de 
développer ce secteur pour qu’il devienne le pilier le plus important de notre économie. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker :  Hon. Ameer Meea, didn’t you have the sufficient time to talk ! 

Mr Duval : And talked to say nothing ! 

(Interruptions) 

Il suffit de développer notre capital humain en ce sens et tout cela commence avant à l’école.  

Nous  pouvons  en  tandem  introduire  des  classes  d’entreprenariat  au  secondaire, 
demandant  aux  élèves  de  mettre  leurs  diverses  connaissances  des  mathématiques  et  de 
business studies en pratique. Les PMEs, comme vous le savez, sont les plus gros employeurs 
à Maurice. Et, là aussi, il y a un vrai potentiel de développer une nation d’entrepreneurs.  

De plus, Madame la présidente, le Career Guidance Service doit être réinventé pour 
mieux refléter les métiers émergents aujourd’hui en un service d’orientation professionnelle 
qui se charge de faire le travail de recherche nécessaire, d’agir auprès des élèves afin de les 
former au mieux pour les métiers de demain et les orienter vers ces opportunités.  

Le service d’orientation professionnelle doit aussi décourager les choix de carrières 
qui sont appelés à être saturées. Prenons, par exemple, le métier d’avocat ! Aujourd’hui, nous 
avons plus de 650 avocats au barreau.  Zavocats ! 

(Interruptions) 

Et les jeunes peinent à trouver du travail ! Le constat est pareil chez les jeunes médecins. 

(Interruptions) 

Les jeunes peinent à trouver du travail. Nous devons mieux planifier et mieux orienter 
nos jeunes vers les métiers d’avenir. Cela passe aussi par la formation des plus jeunes, surtout 
avec le nine-year schooling qui demandera aux élèves, dès la fin de la Forme 3, de faire un 
choix d’orientation scolaire.  

82 

 
Le  Career  Guidance  Service  doit  pouvoir  étudier  les  marchés  du  travail  au  niveau 
local,  au  niveau  régional  du  continent  Africain,  au  présent,  mais  aussi  d’anticiper  et  de  se 
projeter  dans  le  futur,  et  collaborer  pleinement  avec  les  acteurs  économiques  dans  cette 
démarche afin d’établir une mappe, de données récoltées, qui se sera accessible à tous.  

Le Career Guidance Service doit avoir accès aux élèves dès le primaire. Il doit aussi 
pouvoir mettre en place un partenariat avec le secteur privé pour ensuite placer les élèves en 
internat pour des périodes très courtes auprès des entreprises privées et publiques, afin de les 
introduire  au  marché  du  travail,  afin  de  bâtir  leur  valeur  de  travail  et  afin  de  les  faire 
découvrir  les  secteurs  prometteurs  émergents,  par  exemple,  les  services  financiers, 
l’ingénierie électronique, le tourisme, l’informatique, l’agriculture et l’entreprenariat.  

Le  service  d’orientation  de  carrière  sera  appelé  à  jouer  un  rôle  clé  dans  notre 
démarche  à  devenir  un  pays  à  haut  revenu.  Je  fais  un  appel  à  l’honorable  ministre  de 
l’Education  de  saisir  l’occasion  de  la  venue  du  nine-year  schooling  pour  réinventer  notre 
service d’orientation de carrière. Cela aidera aussi à résoudre le problème du chômage des 
jeunes à l’avenir. 

Troisièmement, Madame la présidente, le secteur informatique, comme je l’ai dit tout 
à l’heure, c’est une mine d’or qui ne demande qu’à être exploitée. Il est regrettable, je dois 
dire, que le Ebène accelerator, l’incubateur des PMEs dans le secteur de l’ICT à Ebène, est 
désormais fermé. Nous devons impérativement réactiver le projet et l’étendre sur toute l’île, 
dans  toutes  les  villes,  dans  toutes  les  circonscriptions,  afin  de  démocratiser  davantage  ce 
secteur de l’économie.  

L’incubateur servait à donner un espace et les outils nécessaires aux PMEs pour se 
lancer dans le secteur de l’ICT. Nous pouvons améliorer le concept afin d’apporter un soutien 
technique et des conseils en gestion d’entreprise, un soutien marketing, ainsi que l’accès au 
financement  avec  l’objectif  de  créer  le  maximum  d’opportunité  pour  ceux  qui  souhaitent 
émerger dans ce secteur, surtout pour nos jeunes mauriciens.   

L’ICT peut aussi nous aider à accroître le soutien du gouvernement à toutes les PMEs 
opérant  dans  tous  les  secteurs  de  l’économie,  sans  avoir  à  dépenser  des  sommes 
astronomiques. Par exemple, par la création de programme informatique offrant des solutions 
adaptées  aux  PMEs  pour  l’administration,  les  salaires,  les  prévisions  financières,  le 
marketing,  la  comptabilité,  l’organisation  de  commandes  et  de  stocks,  qui  sont  souvent 

 

83 

beaucoup trop chers et hors de portée de la plupart des PMEs. Cela peut paraître banal, mais 
cela a connu un grand succès ailleurs, par exemple, à Singapour, où le gouvernement offre ce 
genre  de  programme  gratuitement  aux  PMEs.  Cela  a  été  prouvé ;  ce  programme  aide  à 
diminuer les coûts, à augmenter la productivité et la  profitabilité des PMEs et à assurer leur 
pérennité et leur croissance. Alors, pourquoi pas à Maurice?  Je lance un appel à l’honorable 
ministre du secteur informatique. 

Sur  ce  même  registre,  l’honorable  Xavier-Luc  Duval  avait,  lors  de  son  mandat  de 
ministre des Finances, introduit une mesure phare pour rendre les PMEs plus compétitives 
localement,  mais  surtout  sur  le  marché  international  avec  la  création  des  sites  web 
gratuitement  par  le  gouvernement  pour  les  PMEs.  Car,  Madame  la  présidente,  le  monde, 
comme  vous  le  savez  bien,  est  un  village,  alors  pourquoi  se  concentrer  sur  la  localité 
uniquement lorsque nous pouvons être appelés à devenir visibles à l’international? Pourquoi 
se limiter au marché local, réduit et ne pas s’aventurer sur les marchés étrangers ? Je pense 
sincèrement que cette mesure devrait être réactualisée pour aider les PMEs à se rendre plus 
visibles.  

Quatrièmement, Madame la présidente, la situation de la drogue  à Maurice devient 

alarmante et doit être prise au sérieux. 

(Interruptions) 

Les jeunes sont parmi ceux les plus touchés et nous devons agir.  Le combat contre la drogue 
consiste à prévenir, punir et réhabiliter les usagers.  

Sur  le  volet  prévention, l’achat  des  drones  par  la  Police  est  une  excellente  mesure. 
C’est un début pour la Force policière dans l’utilisation de drones pour combattre le trafic des 
drogues. Il faut équiper davantage la Force policière dans ce combat. Les contrôles de notre 
territoire Océanique doit être renforcés.  L’achat de deux bateaux intercepteurs renforcera ce 
combat. Toutefois, il faudrait sérieusement penser à acheter des drones capables de parcourir 
de longues heures de vol à haute altitude, équipés de caméras longue portée, pouvant circuler 
dans  toute  notre  zone  économique  exclusive,  afin  d’identifier  et  de  suivre  les  bateaux 
suspects, ce qui permettront ensuite aux nouveaux bateaux de les intercepter. Cela permettra 
de  donner  une  nouvelle  dimension  à  la  lutte  contre  la  drogue  ainsi  que  contrôler  la  pêche 
illégale. Prenons, par exemple, Les Seychelles qui ont parmi leur arsenal plusieurs drones que 
nous appelons reaper. Ce sont les mêmes drones utilisés par l’armée Américaine. Ces drones 

 

84 

sont  capables  de  prouesses  technologiques  incroyables  à  la  pointe  de  la  modernité  pour  
contrôler  leurs  eaux  territoriales  et  pour  combattre  la  pêche  illégale.  Les  Seychelles, 
aujourd’hui, disposent de pas mal de drones comme ça. Donc, pourquoi pas Maurice.  

Nous devons aussi nous soucier davantage de la réhabilitation des consommateurs de 

drogue.  

L’hôpital Brown Sequard est aujourd’hui la seule institution gouvernementale, à ma 
connaissance en tout cas, qui se charge de la réhabilitation des usagers de drogue. Pourquoi 
ne pas construire un centre de réhabilitation additionnel dédié à la réhabilitation des drogués 
et  spécialisé  dans  le  traitement  des  jeunes  drogués  et  des  drogues  synthétiques  qui  sont 
aujourd’hui en tout cas source de beaucoup de tracas. Il faut aussi renforcer la collaboration 
et la coordination entre les ONG et le gouvernement autour du combat contre la drogue, un 
travail d’équipe, étroit et requis. 

Cinquièmement,  un  sujet  qui  me  tient  à  cœur,  Madame  la  présidente,  c’est 

l’environnement.  

Je souhaite partager avec vous un article paru dans Lexpress.fr sur l’environnement -  

“A  partir  de  lundi  8  aout,  la  planète  vivra  à  crédit.  Lundi,  l'humanité  a  consommé 
toutes les réserves que la Terre est supposée lui fournir pour l'année. Pendant plus de 
140  jours,  elle  va  vivre  à  crédit.”  Selon  les  calculs  de  l'ONG, Global  Footprint 
Network,  l'humanité  a  d'ores  et  déjà  consommé  toutes  les  ressources  dont  la  Terre 
disposait  et  qu'elle  peut  renouveler  en  12  mois.  Elle  a  nommé  ce  jour  l'"Earth 
overshoot day" (le jour du dépassement de la Terre), ce qui signifie que la population 
mondiale  a  besoin,  pour  vivre  jusqu'au  31  décembre  prochain,  des  ressources 
équivalant à 1,6 planète. Chaque année, l'organisation publie le même communiqué, 
avec une date différente”. 

Le constat est triste et réel, et Maurice n’est pas une exception. Nous devons agir maintenant 
avant qu’il ne soit trop tard. Madame la présidente, la génération à laquelle j’appartiens est la 
dernière à pouvoir renverser la courbe du changement climatique.  

La  protection  de  l’environnement  doit  être,  à  mon  avis,  un  des  axes  les  plus 

importants de l’action gouvernementale.  

Je suis favorable personnellement, par exemple, à la réintroduction de la taxe carbone 
sur  les  véhicules,  qui  doit  servir  à  encourager  l’achat  des  véhicules  à  faible  émission  de 

 

85 

carbone,  et  décourager  l’achat  des  véhicules  de  grosse  cylindrée  qui  ne  sont,  de  toutes les 
façons, pas indispensable à Maurice.  

Je  suis  favorable  à  tout  encouragement  et  à  tout  soutien  du  gouvernement  aux 
initiatives liées au développement des énergies renouvelables pour soulager notre dépendance 
aux énergies fossiles. Nous devons être plus actifs dans notre démarche pour accompagner le 
développement d’une réelle conscience environnementale et le mot ‘conscience’ est fort. Les 
smarts cities appelées à être construites doivent impérativement optimiser leur consommation 
d’énergie et créer elles-mêmes des énergies renouvelables, et cela doit, à mon avis, figurer 
dans les conditions d’obtention de permis. 

Je suis également favorable à mettre en place une réserve de protection d’espace de 
forêt, dédiée à la conservation et la reproduction de la faune et de la flore terrestre, qui doit 
être irréductible, et qui doit s’étendre sur une superficie – il est difficile pour moi de placer un 
chiffre, mais en tout  cas d’au moins 20% de toute la surface de notre île où la main  et le 
développement de l’homme est banni.  

Cela doit s’appliquer aussi à notre océan. Il est inconcevable que près de 75% de nos 
coraux  sont  aujourd’hui  morts.  Il  me  parait  personnellement  encore  plus  inconcevable  que 
nous  pratiquons  encore  la  pêche  dans  notre  lagon  à  ce  jour  sans  mesure  stricte,  avec  un 
laisser-aller. C’est, malheureusement, mon constat; j’ai été, moi-même, plusieurs fois témoin 
de  pêche  sauvage  à  la  senne,  hors  saison  qui,  malheureusement,  continue.  Nous  devons 
dédier  au  moins  30%  de  notre  lagon  à  des  réserves  marines  protégées  où  la  pêche  est 
absolument interdite.  

Pourquoi ne pas fusionner le Fisheries, la Coast Guard et la Beach Authority en une 
entité à pouvoir accru et doter d’effectif adéquat pour arrêter les pratiques qui détruisent notre 
patrimoine naturelle.  

Nous devons aussi protéger nos mangroves, nos coraux, nos embouchures de rivière 
pour  permettre  à  la  nature  de  se  reconstruire.  Nous  devons  aider  dans  cette  démarche,  en 
cultivant artificiellement les coraux à grandes échelles afin de les replanter dans nos lagons, 
et  cultiver  les  espèces  de  poissons  menacés  dans  des  cuves  afin  de  repeupler  notre  océan, 
l’exemple de l’Australie dans ce domaine doit être suivi. 

Il nous faut également en urgence mettre en place un plan d’urbanisme – et là je dois 
quand même souligner que l’honorable Ameer Meea avait raison sur ce point - pour toutes les 
collectivités locales afin d’intégrer nos espaces urbains à notre environnement avant qu’il ne 

 

86 

soit trop tard. Il faut ainsi intégrer plus d’espace vert dans les zones urbaines afin d’améliorer 
la qualité de l’air. Et nous sommes déjà en retard sur la question. 

Madame la présidente, nous devons à nos jeunes, à nos enfants, à nos petits enfants et aux 
générations  qui  vont  suivre,  de  protéger,  conserver  et  respecter  notre  environnement  afin 
qu’on  puisse  leur  transmettre  un  riche  patrimoine  naturel  au  lieu  de  les  condamner  à  un 
monde toxique. Cela doit être notre héritage à nous, ce gouvernement, cette Assemblée. 

Nous parlons justement d’héritage pour les jeunes, et cela m’emmène à mon dernier 

chapitre qui me tient à cœur, la place des jeunes dans notre société. 

Plus de la moitié de la population mondiale, comme vous le savez, est âgée de moins 
de 30 ans aujourd’hui.  La vie étant un cycle, nous serons tous appelés à passer le flambeau 
un  jour  ou  l’autre.  Créons  une  culture,  dès  maintenant,  d’écoute  et  de  consultation  et 
d’intégration des jeunes dans les affaires du pays et dans nos structures sociales. 

Je félicite le ministre des Finances qui a créé l’ouverture aux jeunes, je vous rappelle 
qu’il a trouvé juste et sage de consulter les jeunes dans la préparation de son budget. C’est 
une mesure fort louable et une leçon d’humilité qu’il nous donne.  

Continuons en cette démarche, et créons des espaces pour les jeunes les permettant de 
débattre,  d’amener  des  propositions  et  de  partager  le  point  de  vue  au  niveau  local  sur  la 
gestion de leur collectivité à travers des Youth Councils.  

Créons l’opportunité pour les jeunes de s’organiser en réseau, structurer de manière 
officielle, disposant d’une réelle influence sur les décisions qui les concernent, et faisons une 
place à la table des décideurs, à ces organisations afin que leurs points de vue puissent être 
entendus, par exemple, sur les affaires de l’éducation, du sport, de l’art et de la culture, du 
commerce, des technologies informatiques, parmi tant d’autres.  

C’est un moyen efficace de moderniser notre démocratie et de l’approfondir en créant 
l’ouverture vers les jeunes afin de corriger notre manque de représentativité des jeunes qui 
tombent sous le barème de 30 ans ici et dans les autres organes de décisions du pays. 

Madame la présidente, j’ai eu la chance, comme vous le savez bien,  de représenter 
notre parlement à la dernière assemblée général de l’Union Parlementaire Internationale, dont 
le thème cette année était centré sur l’inclusion des jeunes à la vie politique et aux décisions 
de leur pays. J’en suis retourné  grandi  et convaincu que notre pays ne peut que sortir lui-
même grandi dans une telle démarche. Les jeunes ont beaucoup à apporter sans aucun doute 

 

87 

sur  les  questions  du  pays,  ils  ont  beaucoup  à  dire  sur  le  développement,  sur  son 
développement  et  ont  le  droit  tout  à  fait  légitime  de  contribuer  à  ces  affaires.  Je  serais 
favorable  moi,  personnellement  en  tout  cas,  à  la  création  d’un  parlement  des  jeunes  qui 
pourra agir en tandem avec notre parlement et qui les permettra de débattre et proposer leurs 
idées, leurs points de vue aux lois que nous votons, bien sûr, un parlement sans pouvoir, un 
espace de discussion, le mot ‘parlement’ est le mot qui est servi, qui est utilisé en tout cas 
dans les autres pays et pour pouvoir, bien sûr, avoir leur avis sur les lois et les projets de lois 
que nous sommes appelés, nous,  à voter. 

Pour conclure, Madame la présidente, je vais parler de ma circonscription.  

La réouverture de l’usine de thé à Dubreuil est un soulagement pour les habitants de 
la localité qui retrouvent à nouveau un espoir et une opportunité d’emploi.  Je remercie le 
ministre des Finances pour cette excellente initiative. 

Je note toutefois aussi que le budget attribué à la municipalité a été réduit par 33% 
cette  année.  Je  dois  dire  que  cela  m’inquiète  des  retombées  de  cette  décision  tout  comme 
ceux de mes mandants et nous espérons que la municipalité sera apte à répondre aux besoins 
et  aux  attentes  légitimes  des  citoyens  de  la  ville  de  Curepipe  qui  le  méritent  amplement. 
J’espère aussi qu’il y a assez de fonds, bien sûr, pour maintenir les infrastructures et réaliser 
des projets pour améliorer les conditions de vie des Curepipiens qui ont été pendant plusieurs 
années délaissés. 

Je me joins à mes collègues, l’honorable Madame Malini Sewocksingh et l’honorable 
Stephane Toussaint dans leurs interventions.  Curepipe a effectivement beaucoup de talents et 
de  potentiel.  Je  lance  un  appel  au  gouvernement  pour  développer  des  infrastructures 
nécessaires à l’exploitation de ces talents. 

J’aimerai, par exemple, voir à Curepipe, la construction des SME parks pour donner 

un espace aux PMEs.  

J’aimerai, par exemple, voir à Curepipe, la construction de SME parks pour donner un 
espace aux PMEs; la construction de SME Incubators, j’en ai déjà parlé au ministre dans le 
secteur  de  l’ICT;  l’embellissement  des  infrastructures  sportives  et  de  nos  jardins;  la 
réouverture  du  conservatoire  de  Musique;  la  construction  d’une  piscine  prônée  par  Malini 
Sewocksingh… 

(Interruptions) 

 

88 

la construction d’un marché dédié à l’artisanat et à l’expression artistique locale et bien sûr la 
rénovation des routes à Curepipe et là je lance un appel à l’honorable Nando Bodha. C’est 
une source grandissante de frustration des Curepipiens du fait que les circuits du waste water 
soient en rénovation et que toutes les routes, la plupart en tout cas, sont aujourd’hui en piteux 
état. Il faut le dire. Donc si l’honorable ministre Bodha et bien sur le Vice-premier ministre 
pouvaient expédier le remplacement de ces tuyaux pour le bienfait des Curepipiens. 

J’aimerais  aussi  pour  Dubreuil,  Midlands,  Camp  Caval,  Robinson  des 
développements dans le domaine agricole surtout au niveau des jeunes. Je lance un appel au 
ministre Seeruttun pour son soutien dans cette démarche. 

Pour finir je remercie l’honorable Nando Bodha pour le Master Plan qu’il dessine à 
son ministère. Je pense que le plan, en tout cas, est un chef-d’œuvre, je dois le dire. Le projet 
est ambitieux. Le projet est grand. Contrairement à ce que l’honorable Ameer Meea dit, le 
projet est innovateur et sera pour le bienfait de tous les citoyens de la ville de Curepipe, pour 
l’économie,  pour  la  création  de  travail,  pour  la  création  d’espaces  de  Commerce,  pour  la 
modernisation  de  la  ville  et  nous  comptons  beaucoup  sur  ce  projet.  J’aimerais  dire  à 
l’honorable ministre des Infrastructures Publiques de continuer dans sa démarche et j’espère 
en tout cas qu’une fois que Curepipe a eu son projet toutes les autres grandes villes et les 
autres grands villages du pays puissent avoir de tels projets de rénovation. Madame, je vous 
remercie.                                                                                                

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

(5.55 p.m.) 

Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix): Thank you, Madam 
Speaker. Madam Speaker, first of all, let me congratulate hon. Pravind Jugnauth for being 
given  the  responsibility  as  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  and  also  for 
having presented the 2016-2017 Budget within a few weeks after his nomination. 

Madam Speaker, before I go to some sections of the Budget, I would like to point out 
that we have only 10 months for implementation, comme on dit en Creole sur la corde raide. 
What I also found missing in the Budget, there are many measures for which the timeframe 
of implementation is not mentioned. Madam Speaker, the world view is that any Government 
especially here, I am in Mauritius, the Mauritian Government of the day should make good 
its political promises.  

89 

 
Madam Speaker, people trust action more than words. I am sure Mauritians will agree 
with me that current trust is very low. The Prime Minister, Ministers, Members of Parliament, 
political  parties,  banking,  State-owned  institutions  are  all  subject  to  criticism.  Madam 
Speaker,  widening  inequality  is  ongoing.  Rich  people  are  getting  richer,  poor  people  are 
getting poorer. Madam Speaker, unemployment is high, growth is slow. Young people are 
left  behind.  Well,  the  above  are  great  challenges.  How  to  overcome  them?  The  answer  is 
delivering results and turn into action. How optimistic can we be in the next Budget 2016-
2017 to achieve results? Our GDP can hardly expand to 4 per cent.  

Madam  Speaker,  uncertainties  and  Brexit  will  hold  back  investment.  Weak 
investment with foreign disinvestment will lead to poor productivity. Mismatch, University 
degree  holders  with  job  availability,  is  common  talk  of  the  town.  Unemployment  among 
young age group is increasing.  

How  can  we  propose  the  young  generation  to  enjoy  a  better  life  and  better 
opportunities than their parents? If they do have a start, they start with debt and leave under 
the same roof of their parents which, with time, will find poverty hovering. This phenomenon 
will undoubtedly be overblown in proportion with increased young members in poverty club. 
This is a major problem that should be addressed urgently. Leaving this issue in a forgotten 
drawer will hurt the future generation and the society at large. Right decisions should always 
be the morning prayer of all politicians so as to gain the trust of people. 

The  Budget  presented  must  be  a  Budget  of  implementation  and  make  good  of  the 
promises. How far is this Government planning for the future so as to curtail unemployment 
due to rapid advancing industrial automation technology? We have seen it and witnessed how 
computerisation has minimised job availability. Artificial intelligence and robotics will have 
an impact on people who are employed that may  face redundancy taken up by computers. 
Losing  job  leads  to  loss  of  purchasing  power  which,  in  turn,  runs  the  risk  of  economic 
stagnation and a deflationary spiral. 

So,  how  not  to  fall  into  this  spiral  trap?  The  answer  is  fixing  our  education  which 
should be at the top of the list. We need educated people to cope for the future requirements. 
A society to function properly needs educated people who care for the need of others, who 
earn a decent wage, who care about our earth, who value the life of others, who can say if we 
can’t change the world, at least, we can save it for the future generation. All our children need 

 

90 

to be educated. There is a growing gap between the rich and the poor kids: college access, 
academic qualification graduation, employment, earnings, health and nonparticipation etc. 

To manage the gap we must realize that today’s students are not like those of the past 
decades. Many are from minorities, low income and from different cultures. Parents are not 
keen  to  visit  schools  because  of  their  own  school  experience.  Many  parents  are  illiterate. 
They can’t read to their kids. They are working most of the time even two jobs, not often at 
home, they are tired and stressed whereas the rich parents make it a duty to be home early 
and for dinner with the family, focus most of the time on one thing and practise a consistent 
morning routine.  

Institutions need to change together with the people within the institution rather than 
ask children to change. Educators should work together not in isolation as it is in our system. 
University  professors  should  work  with  college  teachers  and,  why  not  both  visit  primary 
institutions? Why  can’t  we have students and teachers  from higher educational institutions 
visiting  or  helping  lower  institutions  in  different  regions  and  have  teamwork,  creative 
projects? 

Madam  Speaker,  now,  I  will  go  through  the  sections  of  the  Budget.  I  have  some 
proposals  to  make  and  those  who  know  me,  by  nature  I  do  not  look  at  the  past,  I  look 
forward. I do not want to go into detail on the speech of hon. Bodha on the 2010 Budget, 
which he will remember very well, this is the past. Let us forge ahead. That’s my nature. I am 
going to make proposals to the Budget because I think there are some lacunae.  

Madam Speaker, in section 32, the hon. Minister has proposed the suspension of the 
payment of trade fees for licences of Rs5,000 and below, for a period of three years. I ask 
myself the question: why only for three years? The hon. Minister mentioned ‘uncertainties’ in 
his  speech  earlier.  Three  years  that  creates  uncertainties  among  those  licensees.  Why  not 
waive  it  for  good?  Why  three  years?  Let  us  get  rid  of  it  once  for  all!    No  licence  below 
Rs5,000!  This  will  create  a  feel-  good  factor  for  those  who  are  in  business  or  will  create 
businesses  in  the  future.  Not  those  who  come  in  two  years  and  create  a  business,  still 
uncertain as to whether in three years they will have to pay a licence. 

Madam Speaker, annexed to the Budget where classified trades are listed, I will ask 
the hon. Minister to consider waiving the licence fees paid by dealers in fishing accessories 
and other marine equipment to the tune of Rs10,000 paid to the District Council. This is the 

 

91 

only item in the town where they pay Rs5,000 and it is waived out as per the proposal of the 
Budget. The same item, if it is sold in the District Council area, they have to pay Rs10,000 
and it is not being waived. This will create a discrepancy because for the same business, they 
have to pay double compared to those working in the town. 

In the last Budget, we were told that people can choose to pay their licences for three 
years in one go. I am proposing the hon. Minister to look into it.  Those who have paid for the 
three years and now that we are waiving it as per the Budget, if Government can refund the 
one or two years’ payment which has already been done. 

Madam Speaker, section 46 talks about a special scheme for placement of 200 trainee 
engineers in the public sector bodies. This is a good move for those who have a degree, but 
what strategy this Government is adopting for future degree holders from the University of 
Mauritius and the University of Technology, Mauritius and others? Is there a plan to reduce 
the intake at University level? Has there been a study for future requirement of engineers? 
For the 200 engineers, do we have a time frame for the implementation? Will it be after the 
Budget that will be executed in one month? 

Section 48 talks about 7,200 vacancies and new posts in the civil service. Is there a 
mechanism  to  recruit  urgently  -  because  the  PSC  will  take  quite  some  time,  for  example, 
advertising, shortlisting, interviewing, etc. - and also a mechanism to minimise the perception 
of favouritism? We must not forget that we have only 10 months to implement this Budget. 
Madam Speaker, I am aware that under section 51, Government is setting up an umbrella, the 
National Employment Agency, but I honestly doubt the setting up of such an agency within 
these 10 months. Time flies very fast and I hope mine is not. By the time the agency is set up, 
with  all  the  criticisms  towards  staffing  -  we  know  how  Mauritius  is  -  the  recruitment  of 
21,000 youths, men and women will find themselves still waiting at the doorstep of the next 
Budget. 

Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister mentioned the problem of skills mismatch. How 
our  university  is  helping  in  formulating  a  study  so  that  in  the  future,  we  can  address  this 
suggestion  at  the  level  of  the  University  and  not  like  we  are  doing  now  at  the  level  of 
Government.  

Madam  Speaker,  regarding  diversifying  the  manufacturing  base,  mention  has  been 
made  about  mobile  oil  refinery  and  gold  business.  Are  we  aware  that  we  do  not  have 

 

92 

Chemical  Engineers  with  experience  to  work  in  those  businesses?  It  is  good  that  these 
businesses  are  coming  to  Mauritius,  but  I  do  not  think  it  will  create  jobs  for  Mauritian 
because those high-level industries will come with their experienced staff to do the job. We 
will get only minor cleaning jobs from them.  

Madam Speaker, section 92, which is being questioned several times, is to curb the 
excessive  use  of  specific  pesticides,  herbicides  etc.  The  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  has 
mentioned a levy of 15% which will be introduced. This measure, Madam Speaker, is not a 
deterrent to minimise the use of the above product. To me, this 15% is only to increase the 
revenue of the Government. Putting levy has never reduced the use of a product. What we 
must do is to introduce specific new products and regulate the importation.  

Madam Speaker, from a study in Mauritius, the percentage of fruits and vegetables 
containing pesticides have gone up, beyond the authorised limit, from 2.3% to 10% within 
four years. I am sure the hon. Minister of Agriculture is aware that in Mauritius, we do not 
have an institution to control the use of pesticides, insecticides and fertilisers. Planters abuse 
the use of the product so as to speed up their production and harvest. All they are interested in 
is  to  get  their  harvest  and  make  money.  We  all  know  the  adverse  effect  of  pesticides  on 
human  beings.  We  must  not  forget  that  the  excessive  use  of  these  products  also  has  a 
devastating effect not only on human beings, but also on earth worms.  

Those who know land, earth worms labourent les terrains.  And the excessive use of 
pesticides killed most of them and land became arid. So, we must come with a new product 
that is on the market and instead of putting 15% as levy, I would rather go 15% of subsidies 
to the product which has a broad spectrum – we call that pesticides – organic pesticides and 
insecticides are non-toxic; 100% biodegradable and environmentally friendly; safe for human 
and beneficial to insects like honeybee; effective over 600 species of pest. 

The  Ministry  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security  should  set  up  an  institution  to 
control this project coupled with section 93 where mention is made of quantitative restriction. 
So,  for  the  good  environment  and  low  risk  for  cancer  to  human,  the  hon.  Minister  should 
consider these organic insecticides and pesticides that we have and help them to use this by 
subsidising  instead  of  getting  money  from  them  so  that  it  goes  in  la  caissse  Consolidated 
Fund. 

93 

 
Madam  Speaker,  for  me,  the  best  part  of  this  Budget  Speech  is  section  103, 
concerning the reviewing of the Banking Act.  As you know, I came with several questions 
on the banks and the reviewing of the Banking Act for both Bank of Mauritius Act and the 
Banking Act itself.  A long list of measures has been mentioned, but it should also amend the 
laws to look into the powers of CEOs of banks and Central Bank.  For the Central Bank, it is 
the Governor.  The CEO should not be allowed to be concurrently CEO, Chairperson  and 
Adviser of the bank like the ex-CEO of the State Bank who, because of those three positions, 
he earned an average of Rs1 m. every three days, that is, about Rs350m. in three years and 
left Mauritius with a golden handshake of about Rs48 m.  

Amending the law should also include that CEO of Banks must be made accountable 
for  granting  loans  without  adequate  collaterals  like  we  have  seen  for  the  1.1  euro  loan; 
collateral was not as per the loan given.  The amendment should also include the CEO of the 
State Bank to be accountable for inefficiencies in implementation of projects for the bank. I 
have to mention some examples so that the hon. Members of Parliament can appreciate. For 
example, the Flamingo project which was planned to go alive in August 2013.  Up to now, no 
new system is in place. It has already cost the bank about Rs5 billions and more remain to be 
paid.  Three years gone by and no project!  I did mention this case in this august Assembly.  
The project was given to HP India without a tender exercise.  People have lost job at SBM 
because  of  this  project.    No  Mauritian  company  in  IT  is  benefiting  any  contract  on  this 
project. The whole project is managed from India, creating job in India for Indians. Nothing 
for Mauritians! And we must not forget we have Mauritian shareholders in the bank. What 
more! The IT software will always be the propriety of the HP India. 

The Bank of Mauritius Act should further be amended and include among what has 
already been proposed in the annex, that is, the amendment should consider issues like the 
power of the Governor on recruitment. Is the hon. Minister aware that the recruitment of the 
Chief Human Resource Manager has no proper qualification for the job?  And the Rt. hon. 
Prime  Minister  answered  to  my  PQ  on  this  issue  that  the  case  is  at  ICAC.    Is  this  House 
aware  that  the  Governor  has  recruited  two  persons,  on  very  juicy  contracts,  who  were  on 
VRS?  Is this House aware that close ones of directors are recruited without going through 
proper channel?  Presently, a lady will be recruited for the post of which she has no required 
qualification and everything is being tailored. The members of the panel have been chosen 
and she even knows the content of the interview question. The law should be amended so that 

 

94 

the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development is made aware of vacant post and 
the recruitment procedure and outcome. 

In  the  recent  past  the  Governor  has  recruited  an  Indian  fellow  who  is  the  son  of  a 
University  friend  of  his,  I  think,  when  they  were  studying  together.  There  was  no 
advertisement  for  the  post.    Mauritian  jobseekers  were  not  informed,  just  a  letter  of 
appointment sent to the son and he is enjoying a very good salary at the expense of Mauritian 
taxpayers. Has the Governor of the Central Bank a special right to be entitled to a full pension 
when we know that he has only 29 years of service. As far as I know, every employee should 
have 33½ years to be entitled to full pension.  

In  a  PQ  that  I  asked  on  26  April  2016,  I  made  some  suggestions  regarding  an 
amendment to the Banking Act so that an independent commission of banking should be set 
up;  introduction  of  a  criminal  sanction  for  reckless  misconduct  and  to  consider  a 
Parliamentary Commission on banking standards. I am hoping that the hon. Minister will take 
my proposition on board. Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister should also address the issue of 
excessive bank charges to client. There was a leaflet from the Bank of Mauritius for views, 
but up to now there is still nothing. I am sure the hon. Minister will look seriously in this 
matter. 

Now, about the parastatal financial institutions. Madam Speaker, the appropriate law 
should  be  amended  so  that  the  CEO  and  the  Directors  don’t  use  Company  Act  to  protect 
themselves.    It  should  be  made  clear  that  CEOs  should  be  answerable  to  the  Ministry 
concerned.  CEOs should not behave as if the institution is their property. Madam Speaker, 
the salary revision should be taken into consideration.  CEOs should not be paid to the tune of 
Rs1 m. per month when in Mauritius we have people getting less than Rs5,000 per month. 

Now, let me come on infrastructure.  The hon. Minister has talked on MetroExpress.  
The proposal of the mass transit system at that time, they were discussing huge amounts. The 
hon.  Minister  knows  how  I  was  criticising  the  Minister  concerned  at  that  time  of  that 
astronomical sum, but I see what the hon. Minister said today…. 

Madam  Speaker:    Hon.  Dr.  Sorefan,  don’t  address  yourself  to  the  hon.  Minister!  

You address yourself to the Chair! 

Dr. Sorefan:  Sorry! 

 
Madam  Speaker:  You  do  not  have  to  engage  into  a  conversation  with  the  hon. 

95 

Minister! 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Yes.  Sorry!    The  Minister  has  mentioned  that  we  have  to  see  the 
alignment, and the land has already been acquired. I asked a question about what we were 
going  to  do  with  the  land,  which  has  been  paid.  We  are  using  the  same  alignment,  with 
certain modification. With the Indian help to the tune of Rs7.2 billion, we are going ahead 
with the Metro Express. But, can we imagine, can we for a few seconds imagine that, had we 
gone with the past project of metro rail, without revising the amount at the beginning of the 
mandate of this Government, how Mauritius would look like? It would have been a chantier, 
people would have got jobs, and the world would have been different; Mauritius would have 
been different. Of course, revising it, because the money was Rs70 billion. 

Madam Speaker, now we have another studies coming from Singapore. They did the 
studies before. Now, they are coming with studies. I don’t know how many studies we have 
come with. Probably, now, if I come with a question, we have already paid around Rs400 m. 
for studies. 

The  hon.  Minister  said  at  section  177  that  this  project  will  kick  start  with  the 
construction of the Victoria Terminal under the BOT model. Here, I can say this project of 
Victoria in itself, without any problem like tendering allocation of contractors and other, as 
you are well aware, political agents vested interests, will take a minimum of three years. The 
Minister  of  Infrastructure  should  start  different  sites  for  the  Metro  Express.    For  example, 
various stations can be started concurrently. 

Section  182,  Road  Decongestion  Programme, 

the  Phoenix-Jumbo-Dowlut 
roundabouts  and  the  A1M1  Bridge,  with  the  assistance  of  the  Korean  Expressway 
Corporation,  we  want  to  know  what  kind  of  assistance  we  are  talking  about;  consulting, 
financing  and  construction.    To  a  PQ  from  me,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure 
replied that Korean Expressway Corporation is a Government-owned company. So, there was 
no need for tender. It is a Government-to-Government Agreement. If yes, what will be the 
financial contribution or loan from the Korean Government? Let’s hope this project does not 
have the same fate as other Government-to-Government projects like ID Cards and Bagatelle 
Dam. 

The next issue is about the tunnel project. We don’t hear anything about it. 

96 

 
Regarding the fitness centres, the Government must address the situation prevailing at 
the centres. Corruption is getting worse with Police officers in charge as examiners. We must 
look into it because people are complaining. 

Subsidising  the  fee  of  the  fitness  test  so  as  to  maintain  the  actual  fee  of  Rs400  is 
welcoming, but at the same time the Minister has not said what is the amount that they are 
forecasting to subsidise those companies. Rs200 for each car. If we have about 250,000 cars 
per year, that makes around Rs500 m. given as subsidy to the private sector. 

Regarding  the  Rs100  m.  for  the  construction  of  pavement,  it  would  be  more 
reasonable to construct drains at the same time where you are going to put pavement, as if 
killing  two  birds  with  one  stone,  although  I  am  quite  aware  of  the  setting  up  of  a  Land 
Drainage Authority. 

On the health section, Madam Speaker, I am surprised that there is no mention for the 
modernisation  of  Candos  Hospital.  It  is  still  a  colonial  remnant.  The  walls  inside  are 
appalling  and  renovation  won’t  help.  There  must  be  a  plan  to  construct  a  new  up-to-date 
hospital. Following my PQs on CT scan, I know tenders have been launched for the one at 
SRN Hospital. I am hoping that other hospitals also have their CT scan this year. 

Regarding recruitment of doctors, if I can say production of doctors locally. Are you 
aware  that  the  MoU  signed  between  the  SSR  and  Mauras  stipulates  ‘a  minimum  of  20 
students to be recruited for studies’, where it should have said that the idea was that it should 
read a  ‘maximum of 20’? The Minister should consider this. These words ‘minimum’ and 
‘maximum’  have  created  a  lot  of  problem  today  with  so  many  doctors  getting  qualified  – 
Mauritian doctors – and we have also Mauritians from abroad.  But the idea of having SSR 
and Mauras was a maximum of 20 students, so that they can get people from abroad to come 
and study. But this chap who started that is taking all the dollars in his bag and going to India, 
making a lot of money. And what more - probably, many new MPs don’t know - he charges 
all his fees in US currency. Mauritians have to pay in US dollars, so that he can take it in his 
bag and go back to India. 

Now, let me say a few words on the levy on cigarettes and alcohol. Most welcome! 
Probably, it is too low - because I don’t drink, I don’t smoke. But it is social evil - I am the 
Medical  Science  –  Madam  Speaker.    We  know  all  the  damages  it  causes.  So,  if  this 
Government and the previous government and the government before, before, before, keeps 

 

97 

charging taxes, good! But what I can’t accept is having a 15% levy on sugar.  Why 15% levy 
on sugar, mentioning NCD and diabetes? The Minister has said that we have about 250,000 
diabetes. To my information, it is one in five adult population that has diabetes and another 
one in five in the pipeline to become diabetic. 

Madam Speaker,  why have those children to pay  15% on the sugar they  consume? 
Why those who are not diabetic pay? It is difficult; you are diabetic you pay 15% on your 
sugar  like  the  smokers.  It  is  impossible.  Like  we  say,  putting  15%  or  any  levy  on  a 
commodity never reduces the use or decrease the use of sugar. The hon. Minister of Health 
should come and promote a healthy diet, and this will solve the problem. This is the attitude 
that has been adopted in Europe, in UK, and it is working, because we are not here for just 
treatment. 

Yesterday,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Health  said  that  the  cardiac  centre  in  2013  had 
attendances of 24,000; admissions were 3,000 something. The hon. Minister is very proud. 
For surgery in 2013, it is 1,219; in 2014, it goes up to 1,480; in 2015, it is 1,500. As if the 
more surgery we do in the future, the better we are. 

But it is the reverse! Science has shown if a country manages to get all its surgeries going 
down, be it cardiac surgeries, the graph should be down and not up.  And not telling that for 
cardiac surgery - Wow! - we are doing well, with so many! 

It is a bad sign that we are not succeeding! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker,  to  reduce  this  we  have  to  improve  our  lifestyle.  The  campaign 

should be on healthy diet, lifestyle and exercise, and then we will need less treatment. 

(Interruptions) 

The Minister has said we have to ensure that Mauritians get the treatment. 

(Interruptions) 

Well, you can say what you like! Look at me, and look at yourself! 

(Interruptions) 

 

98 

With a healthy diet and the exercise that I do at the age of 66, I am healthier than you are! 
Some people tend to get fatter because they do not look after their diet. 

Madam Speaker… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker,  I  won’t  be  long.    I  just  have  a  few  things  to  say.  Whether 
Government  goes  on  with  the  project  of  the  Heritage  City  or  not  is  not  of  my  concern; 
Government has all the information. But what I am saddened with is the way that someone, 
walking in the corridor, with 24 pages, said that the Bagatelle Dam has a risk of collapsing! 
That is what worries me. Those words have a devastating effect on Mauritius. 2,000 arpents! 
The value will go down; investors won’t come because an Adviser of the Government has 
said, without thinking, what this is all about. I am saddened with this because we are doing 
everything  to  get  investors  coming  in,  but,  at  the  same  time,  an  Adviser  comes  and  says 
things. Sans peur de le dire, he said.  I hope  Government will bring him to order. 

Madam Speaker, another issue that has cropped up last week is the Foot-and-Mouth 
disease. This is alarming! I told the hon. Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security to take 
care  because  the  World  Health  Organisation  will  start  talking  about  Mauritius  as  being 
incapable to prevent it and deal with it. We are managing by crisis, and Mauritius, very soon, 
will be on the international papers telling people that Rodrigues and Mauritius have got Foot-
and-Mouth disease. We must be careful of mismanagement here, and especially, the way they 
slaughter the animals, blood running on the floor without knowing that the viruses will be 
live for three years and can be blown up 10 miles away to affect others. His Advisers should 
really go deep in this, Madam Speaker. 

Regarding Brexit, I will say we don’t have to worry for the moment because there are 
another 3 to 4 years to come. Even London does not know what questions to ask and what are 
the answers.  

Madam  Speaker,  I  just  want  to  say  thank  you  to  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development. I made a proposal about the paying of duty on loan and he acceded 
to that request, bringing this Rs1 m. to Rs2 m. where  you don’t have to pay housing loan 
duty. You do not have to pay this 5 per cent which is most welcoming and I remember I did 

 

99 

mention  in  the  last  Budget  to  remove  the  10  cents  on  the  SMS  which was  put  by  the  ex-
Minister of Finance, hon. Xavier-Luc Duval. When I came and proposed that the 10 cents be 
removed, it was acceded to. That is my contribution.  

I thank you, Madam Speaker and all hon. Members. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. François! 

 (6.38 p.m.) 

Mr  J.  F.  François  (First  Member  for  Rodrigues):  Merci,  Madame  la  Présidente. 
Pour commencer, le 10 août 2010, j’étais ici dans cet auguste Assemblée, où je devais parler 
sur  le  budget  2010/2011,  pendant  que  mon  épouse  donnait  naissance  à  une  petite  fille  à 
Rodrigues. 

(Interruptions) 

A ce moment précis, je me demandais pourquoi je suis ici ? Et, c’est là, que j’ai compris, mon 
engagement pour le pays, la République, et mon peuple. 

Madame la présidente, lors de mon investiture, aussi bien que l’honorable Leopold, 
comme candidats de l’OPR, mon Leader Serge Clair avait lancé un appel de mobilisation de 
la grande famille de Rodrigues et de l’OPR afin de remporter les élections – 

« … car la présence de deux députés OPR, ici, à l’Assemblée nationale, va accentuer 
le développement de Rodrigues et son décollage comme un pays moderne. »  

Ceci était publié dans ‘Le Mauricien’ du 20 Octobre 2014. 

Madame la présidente, c’est dans cette ligne que s’inscrit mon discours sur le budget 
2016/2017. Au lendemain de la présentation du budget par l’honorable Pravind Jugnauth, j’ai 
reçu un appel téléphonique de ma mère de Rodrigues, pour me dire deux mots, simples, mais 
très profonds et sincères: “Budget Bon !”   

C’est une illustration de “ La Voix du Peuple” ! 

(Interruptions) 

Serge Clair, un vieux routier de la politique, a attribué une note de « 10 sur 10 » au 
ministre des Finances pour son budget. Madame la présidente, pour  ce  budget, de par son 
orientation  économique,  social  et  politique,  et  les  valeurs  qu’il  inspire,  je  l’ai  accordé  une 
nouvelle appellation : ‘PRAVINOMICS’. 

100 

 
Madame  la  présidente,  une  nation  doit  faire  des  choix  pour  l’avenir.  And  whilst 
scrutinizing the ten key strategies of this Budget, it is clear that the hon. Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development  is  aiming  at  promoting  good  economics,  promoting  growth, 
creating jobs and encouraging social inclusion, while working towards achieving sustainable 
development. Hon. Jugnauth has convincingly understood that “kan dimoune contan, pays ek 
société pou fer progres”. 

Madam  Speaker,  where  there  is  vision,  taking  bold  decision,  it  is  performance  that 
matters and excellence is the only acceptable standard. As rightly pointed out at paragraph 28 
of the Budget Speech, it is simply, and I quote – 

“Ushering a New Era of Development and also we are Making Mauritius a land of 
Opportunity for all especially our youngsters”. 

Madam Speaker, modernizing our Republic, however, can only be fully achieved by fostering 
a new culture of discipline through our nation and through hard work. Let us acknowledge all 
the  facilitation  role  of  Government  for  economic  development  through  an  entrepreneurial 
culture. We can say that our country is politically  and economically  stable, our banks  and 
institutions  provide  easy  money  for  business-making  and  entrepreneurship.  It  is  up  to  the 
citizens to take the necessary step and innovate. 

Coming to the Public Service Reform, Madam Speaker, our public service requires 
fast trackers public officers and that’s on all fronts, for a stronger implementation capacity of 
policies. Hon. Minister Bodha is right for his wishes in that direction. I think it is high time to 
introduce a Public Sector Bill as is the case in New Zealand, to empowering public officers, 
Chief  Executives  to  steward  the  public  service  system,  which  means  that  they  have  a 
responsibility to not only respond to Ministers’ immediate needs, but proactively identify and 
respond to the capability needs of future governments, in favour of the long-term interests for 
the country. 

Madam Speaker, green economy, greater use of renewable energy instead of imported 
oil  will  give  us  more  energy  security  for  the  future.  It  would  also  help  mitigate  climate 
change. My question is: are we on the right track in our Republic to reach the 35% target? In 
Rodrigues, we are very ambitious to moving towards 100% renewable energy by 2035.   

Madam Speaker, I welcome the provision of Rs15 m. in the budget from Australian 

Grant for a wave energy project in Rodrigues. That is going to be the first. 

101 

 
However, producing more renewable energy is not the ultimate solution. The priority 
today is to increase energy efficiency,  I think, as rightly reported by  Bertrand Piccard, the 
Swiss Pilot of Solar Impulse, the plane that travels around the world by using solely Solar 
Energy. In addition, popular support is one of the ingredients needed to spark true change for 
a cleaner future and political courage. Hon. Collendavelloo will certainly agree with me in 
that regard, political courage with regard to clean energy.  

Madam  speaker,  producing  clean  energy  faces  the  challenges  of  battery  storage.  I 
think, the Bardzour Energy and Storage Project from our friends at St Paul in Reunion Island, 
is  a  pretty  good  benchmark,  which,  I  visited  together  in  2015  together  with  hon. 
Lutchmenaraidoo. 

Madam  Speaker,  coming  to  digital  society  e-Parliament,  our  National  Assembly  is 
making  good  progress  towards  an  e-Parliament  for  more  openness,  transparency  and 
accountability through ICT, and soon, live broadcast of the proceedings of the House. I note 
the  provision  of  Rs100  m.  for  this  financial  year.    Our  National  Assembly  is  bound  to 
empower our people, in all their diversity, to be more engaged in public life by providing 
higher quality information and greater access to its documents and activities. 

Madam Speaker, given the increasing pervasiveness and power of social media such 
as Facebook, Twitter, Pinterest, YouTube and the rapid diffusion of mobile communication 
devices and applications throughout, our National Assembly needs to make use of these new 
technologies to reach out the citizens, especially the youths and collect their comments and 
opinions during the legislative process. Communicating with the young people today, must 
become  a  priority  for  our  Parliament.  This  will  establish  a  new  culture  of  openness  while 
preparing a new generation of future politicians as well. 

Moving on, Madam Speaker, in relation to land use planning, a New Rural and Urban 
Policy  for  Mauritius  is  important  to  achieve  the  goals  of  productivity,  sustainability  and 
liveability,  which  was  also  raised  by  hon.  Adrien  Duval  and  hon.  Ameer  Meea.  Madam 
Speaker,  we  can  benchmark  on  the  New  South  Wales,  Australian  model,  where  the  State 
Government has developed an urban design charter as a way of focusing efforts and signed 
by  both  public  and  private  sectors.  I  think  hon.  Adrien  Duval  also  made  reference  to  the 
Indian model, which is quite a good model.  I have looked at it as well. 

Madam Speaker, you will recall in this House that, on various technical Bills, I have 
raised concerns about the weaknesses of our Spatial and Planning Laws. As we move forward 

 

102 

with Smart projects, we certainly will face the consequences of our poor land use planning. In 
that  regard,  Madam  Speaker,  I  welcome  the  measure  to  revamp  the  Town  and  Country 
Planning Board into a modern National Planning Commission as well as the Review of our 
National Development Strategy, both for Rodrigues and Mauritius.  

Madam Speaker, talking about liveability, the substantial increase of casting of slab 
Grant by Rs10,000, ‘c’est enn grand soulagement pour les familles ki zot dale pe tombe lor 
zot”.  Rodrigues will also benefit from it as well. 

Concerning the Transport sector, Madam Speaker, as we move into this new era of 
development, there is need for a 21st century transport in Mauritius. The answer to it is the 
proposed Metro Express, which is a new approach of Transit Oriented Development (TOD), 
as qualified by the American Way. Rightly, ventilated by hon. Bodha, which, I believe, has 
delivered good music to the ears of hon. Toussaint and my colleagues from Curepipe. 

Madam Speaker, placing a priority on non-car transportation systems and networks, 
such as public transport, is an important step in achieving better productivity, sustainability 
and liveability projects.  

Coming to CAB/NDU, Madam Speaker, I endorse the many valuable proposals from 
my  colleague  PPS’s  with  regard  to  CAB  and  NDU.  I  think  hon.  Benydin  has  been 
instrumental  to  remind  us  of  our  responsibilities,  the  functionality  of  CAB,  role  of  public 
officers  in  CAB  towards  a  more  demanding  public  and  to  provide  rapid  response  and 
solutions. 

I  have  to  point  out  here,  that  the  official  launching  of  the  Customer  Charter,  the 
Procedure Manual for Capital Projects and the Tool Kit for the CAB in Rodrigues by the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister, is a real breakthrough for the provision of quality services at the level of 
Citizens Advice Bureaux.  

Madam  Speaker,  the  36th  CAB  of  our  Republic  has  been  recently  inaugurated  in 
Rodrigues on 09 July 2016 at Port Mathurin by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, to whom, I have 
to express my sincere gratitude.  

As  rightly  pointed  out  by  hon.  PPS  Rampertab,  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  has  in 
heart  Rodrigues’  development,  and  that  was  heartily  expressed  during  his  last  visit.  He 
declared in his speech that, I quote – 

“ Puisque mo content zot, mo ouler protège zotte et assure zot bien-être.”  

103 

 
Madam Speaker, NDU will realise the following land drainage and flooding problems 
mitigation  measures  projects  in  Rodrigues,  namely:  upgrading  of  drains  at  Petit  Gabriel, 
Lataniers, Port Mathurin (Phase 1), Allée Tamarin, construction of a bridge at Fond Baie aux 
Huitres  and  landscaping  work  at  St  Gabriel/PasJerome.    Tenders  for  the  above-mentioned 
projects are expected to be launched by the end of this month.  

Further,  the  priority  projects  list  for  the  next  financial  year,  are  as  follows: 
construction of bridge at Camp Du Roi, raising of Ford at Anse Ali, construction of storm 
water  drain  at  Rivière  Cocos,  construction  of  bridge  at  Pistache,  Port  Mathurin  (Phase  2), 
construction of bridge at Grand La Fouche Mangues and Port Sud Est. 

(Interruptions) 

Certainly, we will! 

Madam  Speaker,  today,  with  regard  to  climate  change,  I  am  more  determined  to 
engage as an environmentalist, which has been reinforced following my participation in COP 
21 in Paris in December 2015. I see my good friend, hon. Dayal laughing.  We were together 
defending  the  colour  of  Mauritius.    Thanks  to  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister.  Nicolas  Hulot 
nous  a  dit  que:  “Rodrigues  est  une  île  durable  où  l’homme  et  la  nature  sont  en  parfait 
équilibre.” C’est extraordinaire! 

(Interruptions) 

‘En parfait amour!’ 

As  at  to  date,  to  share  what  I  have  learned  from  Paris,  I  have  organised  3  major 

workshops in collaboration with key local stakeholders in Rodrigues, targeting - 

(i) 

all  the  presidents  and  environment  responsible  persons  of  the  100 
community villages of Rodrigues in collaboration with the Rodrigues 
Council of Social services; 

The equivalent of MACOSS here. 

(ii) 

(iii) 

the  Women  Entrepreneurs  of  Rodrigues  in  collaboration  with  the 
Deputy Chief Commissioner’s Office,  and 
the youth of Rodrigues, especially those engaged with SYAH, which 
means, SIDS Youth AIMS Hub, which is a youth-led NGO focused on 
advancing  and  implementing youth-led  sustainable  development in 
Small Island Developing States (SIDS) all around the world. 

 

104 

From a national perspective, I believe that each and every citizen of our Republic needs to 
sign a national pledge for environment to combat climate change. 

Madame  la  présidente,  permettez-moi  de  parler  spécifiquement  de  mon  pays  l’ile 
Rodrigues autonome, ce pays qui nourrit mon âme citoyenne, ce pays qui est mon équilibre, 
ce pays que je veux représenter dignement, ce pays qui me construit comme un homme, un 
patriote et un politicien au service du peuple, au service de République et surtout les jeunes 
sont mes aspirations. 

Rodrigues  a  tout  récemment  accueilli  l’honorable  Pravind  Jugnauth,  ministre  des 
Finances, lors d’une mission très symbolique, en préparation de ce présent budget. Madame 
la présidente, c’était une mission de fraternité, d’amitié, de sincérité pour écouter le peuple de 
Rodrigues  dans  le  dialogue.  Il  a  bien  compris  la  valeur  de  Rodrigues  au  sein  de  la 
République.  Les  priorités  de  nos  priorités  ont  été  entendues  et  prises  en  compte  dans  ce 
budget pour que Rodrigues avance assurément sur la route du progrès et du développement. 

La  population  de  Rodrigues  a  pris  bonne  note  des  dotations  budgétaires  pour 
Rodrigues:  R  4.4  milliards.  Madame  la  présidente,  la  population  de  Rodrigues  content  et 
satisfait!  Rodrigues  dit:  « Merci,  Pravind  Jugnauth  »  comme  si  bien  exprimé  dans  la  Vie 
Catholique du dimanche dernier et je crois qu’il mérite bien nos applaudissements. 

Rodrigues  est  en  route  vers  un  grand  chantier  de  développement  infrastructurel, 
comme énoncé dans le budget avec les projets de l’agrandissement de l’aéroport de Plaine 
Corail,  le  port,  le  câble  optique,  la  construction  des  maisons  sociales,  des  écoles 
communautaires et collèges, entre autres. 

105 

 
Madame  la  présidente,  à  Rodrigues,  nous  croyons  dans  la  bonne  gouvernance.  Je 
rassure  la  Chambre  que  les  dépenses  de  l’argent  de  l’Etat  sont  et  seront  faites  en  toute 
transparence,  dans  la  discipline,  sans  corruption,  sans  politique  de  petits  copains.  Cette 
transparence  et  cette  bonne  gouvernance  sont  aujourd’hui  les  garants  de  la  réussite  de 
l’autonomie de Rodrigues. 

Au  passage,  j’inviterai  la  population  de  Maurice  de  ne  pas  croire  aux  politiciens 
démagogues de Rodrigues. Ils voulaient déboulonner l’OPR et déstabiliser le gouvernement 
régional heureusement que mon collègue l’honorable Léopold et moi-même avons déjà fermé 
la parenthèse de ces partis en constante perte de vitesse.  

Now,  I  will  comment  on  a  few  specific  sectors  for  Rodrigues.  Madam  Speaker, 
yesterday, I listened carefully to the answers provided by hon. Seeruttun to the PNQ of the 
Leader of Opposition. I acknowledge their concerns for our National Bio and Food Security. 
It is a fact, the emergency animal disease, foot-and-mouth outbreak in Rodrigues, is shaking 
the whole country. This is a serious blow to our economy and farmers. Rodrigues is, in fact, a 
quarantine zone for its geographical isolation. Madam Speaker, I remain perplex as to what 
are  truly  the  root  causes  of  this  outbreak?  Madam  Speaker,  I  have  to  extend  my  heartfelt 
solidarity to the population of Rodrigues, the Chief Commissioner, Serge Clair and his team 
at the Commission for Agriculture, and the Police. I will humbly request the understanding of 
one and all in this difficult situation for Rodrigues, and not to make sensation to deepen our 
sufferings, “napa fer l’autre politik lor la”. 

I join the Chief Commissioner Serge Clair and the hon. Minister Seerruttun, to plead 
for strong and strict control all around the island and specifically at the two entry and exit 
points;  the  port  and  the  airport.    The  Chief  Commissioner,  Serge  Clair,  delivered,  this 
morning, a very emotional message to the whole population of Rodrigues, to all breeders to 
express his concern and the measures taken by the Executive Council to surely try to relieve 
our population and the breeders out there.  

I will humbly request hon. Seeruttun to join me for a mission to Rodrigues shortly to 
take stock of the reality, to meet stakeholders thereof and to substantiate any support from 
Central Government for a ‘plan de relance’ for breeders in Rodrigues. 

I  hope  that  the  measures  and  eradication  plans  on  this  foot-and-mouth  disease 
outbreak free Rodrigues at a quicker pace to guarantee our food security, a clean and safe 
agriculture and our bio-security as well. 

Madam  Speaker,  coming  to  our  tourism  industry,  it  is  doing  well  at  present.  The 
provision for Holiday Stimulus Package of Rs5,430 for a return air-ticket to Rodrigues is a 

 

106 

massive  boost.  I  am  thankful  that  following  representations  from  Rodrigues  and  myself 
towards  Air  Mauritius,  our  national  carrier  has  not  proceeded  with  the  one-piece  luggage 
policy  on  the  Rodrigues  route.  If  it  did  so,  that  would  have  been  an  ‘étranglement 
économique’ for Rodrigues.  Today, our national carrier recognises that the route Rodrigues-
Mauritius/Mauritius- Rodrigues is a domestic route and is not a highly commercial profitable 
route.  

Madame la présidente, le projet de l’agrandissement de l’aéroport avec l’extension de 
la piste sur pilotis sur la mer est un choix écologique et intelligent pour le développement de 
Rodrigues.  La  construction  sur  pilotis  sera  an  iconic  and  landmark  infrastructure  for 
Rodrigues. 

Au  niveau  de  l’OPR,  nous  sommes  très  soucieux  de  l’environnement,  c’est  une  des 
raisons  pour  lesquelles  on  ne  veut  pas  qu’il  y  ait  un  désastre  écologique  par  de  grosses 
excavations  dans  un  contexte  où  le  changement  climatique  nous  préoccupe  tous.  Le 
lancement de l’appel d’offres pour des études géotechniques pour le projet d’extension de la 
piste d'envol et d'atterrissage de Plaine Corail est en cours. 

Madam  Speaker,  budgetary  resources  to  the  IT  development  of  Rodrigues  is  crucial 
towards  the  innovative  potential  and  a  diversified  economy  for  Rodrigues  as  we  are 
embarking  in  this  new  digital  society  era.  I  know  that  the  bandwidth  project  through  an  
under-sea cable to Rodrigues is among key projects in the pipeline for Central Government. I 
am happy that the project will soon come to reality.  

Madam Speaker, through the various plans to combat poverty, there is a strong will 
today, as sufficiently canvassed by previous orators, to rubber the blame of vulnerable people 
trapped in the vicious circle of poverty. 

However, the hon. Minister of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment raised 
concerns  about  the  lack  of  the  monitoring  by  NEF  and  the  time  wasted  to  alleviate  and 
empower vulnerable people. Rodrigues has also suffered from these obstacles; there are 250 
cases pending with regard to social housing. 

Madam Speaker, potential beneficiaries of social housing from NEF in Rodrigues are 
finally relieved from the recent decision of the Ministry of Social Integration to set a new 
structure in collaboration with RRA to expedite matters in that direction.  

I  do  hope  that  the  new  housing  programme  for  Rodrigues,  through  the  provision  of 
Rs50 m., will include the upgrading or replacing of those unliveable near collapse “vieux cité 

 

délabré” all around the island. 

107 

Madam  Speaker,  another  major  decision  is  the  measure  to  eliminate  the  gross 
injustice inflicted upon our disabled persons below 15 years who were not eligible for Basic 
Invalidity Pensions (BIP). This will benefit around 175 children in Rodrigues as well.  

Gambling  is  creating  a  lot  of  harm  to  our  society  as  rightly  pointed  by                        

hon.  Ramano  this  morning.  In  the  case  of  Rodrigues,  it  is  especially  those  from  low  and 
middle income households.   

I am informed by the Commission of Social Security and Licensing in Rodrigues that 
they  have  made  a  formal  request  to  the  gambling  Authority  to  consider  not  to  renew  the 
gaming licence following plea from the Civil society, written complaints by ruined gamblers, 
women in distress, as their husband spend all their savings in Casino. I make a plea to Central 
Government to support this cause.  

Madam Speaker, with regard to our Police Service in Rodrigues, provisions has been 
made  for  Rs9  m.  for  equipment  for  NCG  Post, and  construction  of  two  new  buildings  for 
Police station at Petit Gabriel and Grande Montagne. 

The fight against common drugs such as cannabis must remain a top priority for the 
protection of our society. I will make a request that the Police make provision for 1 drone for 
Rodrigues being given the mountainous, sloppy terrain of Rodrigues. 

Madam Speaker, now, I will come as my final subject to a very important point, the 
organisation  of  the  Rodrigues  Regional  Assembly  Elections  of  2017,  where  provision  of 
Rs14 m. has been made in this Budget. 

This  election  will  be  a  landmark  election  for  Rodrigues,  to  allow  OPR  party  to 

continue leading Rodrigues forward.  

D’ailleurs, je souligne “pou éna gros surprise ”. 
Madame la présidente, la réforme électorale, par rapport à Rodrigues, a fait débat tant 
au  niveau  du  Parlement  ici  par  un  PNQ  du  Leader  de  l’Opposition  adressé  au  Premier 
ministre dans la presse et à Rodrigues. 

Madame  la  présidente,  permettez-moi  de  citer  un  quotidien  qui  a  rapporté  la 
déclaration d’une politicienne d’un parti politique de l’opposition Rodriguaise, je cite, « Nou 
pa pé konpran lanpresman», et “s’il n’y a pas un agenda caché derrière cette décision de 
réforme, «Pou ki pé pran Rodrigues », «Zordi kan pe vinn amand RRA Act, se enn komité 
ministeriel  ki  pou  drafté  li,  alor  ki  éna  dimunn  konpétan  ki  finn  partisip  dan  lotonomi 
Rodrig».  

Elle estime que procéder ainsi est une « grosse insulte» envers le peuple Rodriguais. 

108 

 
Non,  Madame  la  présidente,  les  insultes,  sont  ces  politiciens  eux-mêmes,  qui  ne 
regardent  qu’eux-mêmes  avec  leurs  nombreuses  frasques  lorsqu’ils  dirigeaient  Rodrigues 
sans vraiment penser au peuple.  

Permettez-moi, avant d’aller plus loin, de clarifier et réitérer quelques points.  
Madame  la  Présidente,  en  référant  au  Manifeste  Électorale  de  mon  parti  l’OPR  en 
2012 titré : “ OPR LE GRAND RETOUR: Espoir et Libération pour Consolider et Réussir 
l’Autonomie de Rodrigues”.  

Je dois rassurer la Chambre que nous avons été mandatés par le peuple de Rodrigues 

pour proposer des amendements au Rodrigues Regional Assembly Act. 

C’est clairement stipulé dans notre manifeste électoral à la page 11, point 23, je cite : 
Ensemble  nous  voulons  proposer  des  amendements  au  RRA  Act  afin  de  le  rendre  plus 
efficace. » 

Par la suite, pour officialiser ce vœu du peuple, cette proposition a été reprise dans le 
discours  quinquennal  2012  –  2017  du  Chef  Commissaire  de  Rodrigues,  Serge  Clair,  lu  le 
vendredi  30  mars  2012.  Et  le  paragraphe  13,  dit,  je  cite;  « les  principaux  thèmes  de  notre 
action gouvernementale se résument ainsi entre autres : proposer des amendements au RRA 
Act ». 

Madame la présidente, je précise de nouveau le peuple de Rodrigues a mandaté l’OPR 

pour proposer au gouvernement central des amendements et reforme au RRA Act. 

Je  souligne  que  le  gouvernement  central  depuis  2012  avait  envoyé  à  Rodrigues 
plusieurs missions pour discuter avec tous les partis politiques et la société civile sur ce sujet. 
La dernière, en la personne de l’Ex-Juge Sir Victor Glover, remonte en mai 2014 et en janvier 
2016. 

La  réforme  électorale  était  en  pleine  actualité  lors  du  13ème  anniversaire  de 
l’autonomie  de  Rodrigues  en  Octobre  2015,  d’ailleurs  seul  un  petit  parti  avec  10%  de 
l’électorat avait gardé le status quo et c’est eux qui aujourd’hui veulent faire plus de bruits. 

Madame la présidente, pour dissiper toute les appréhensions sur ce sujet, en attendant 
l’ébauche finale du Comité Ministériel comme répondu par le PM – il vient de mentionner 
l’honorable Bodha dans son discours - je réitère qu’à Rodrigues la majorité de la population 
ne veut plus de l’actuel système de proportionnel.  Je réitère, qu’il faut respecter les vœux et 
la volonté du peuple de Rodrigues  

Madam Speaker, concluding on this Rodrigues chapter,  I fully support the stand of 

Government towards our sovereignty over Chagos Archipelago. 

 

109 

Madam speaker, to conclude, the way forward is that another Mauritius is possible and 
that  we  can  achieve  together  hands  in  hands  through  a  new  culture  of  commitment  as  we 
move towards this new era of development. 

This Budget is the best tool to bring about the dream, “where the gap between the haves 
and the have-nots will be narrowed, where there is a sense of shared vision and destiny, a 
common commitment to opportunity and fairness, and social justice for all”  

Madam  speaker,  allow  me  on  a  final  note,  to  be  thankful  to  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister  for  his  guidance,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance,  the  Financial  Secretary  and  his 
Deputy  and  collaborators,  the  Senior  Adviser  and  my  colleagues  from  the  Rodrigues 
Regional  Assembly,  under  the  leadership  of  the  Chief  Commissioner,  Mr  Serge  Clair,  the 
staff of the NDU and the CAB office of Rodrigues. 

Madam Speaker, on this thankful note, I thank you for your kind attention. 

 (6.10 p.m.) 

Mr  E.  Jhuboo  (Third  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River):    Madame  la 
présidente, merci de me permettre d’intervenir sur le budget 2016.  Madame la Présidente, 
l’année dernière, j’ai conclu mon discours sur le budget 2016 sur la note suivante - 

« Nous sommes à l’aube de ce premier budget de l’Alliance  Lepep  critiqué dans le 
vide, n’a pas de sens, critiqué sans pouvoir comparer en ce qui a été promis et réalisé 
n’est pas productif. Nous le ferons donc en temps et lieu.  Chose promise, chose due, 
c’est l’heure du bilan. » 
 
Madame Speaker, this Government has been in power since December 2014. It has 
presented  to  the  nation  two  budgets  and  one  economic  statement,  there  has  been  three 
consecutive Finance Ministers and unfortunately the figures speak for themselves. 
 
Madam Speaker, all our major economic indicators are simultaneously in the red, save 
it for tourism.  Pour commercer, je voudrais saluer une avancée, on a enfin un ministre des 
Finances dédié à cette lourde tâche qui est celle de gérer notre économie face à la cacophonie 
qui  a  caractérisé  les  vingt  premiers  mois  de  l’Alliance  Lepep  et  qui  a  fait  tant  de  mal  à 
l’image de notre pays.  Il est temps que l’économie retrouve le centre de nos préoccupations. 
Le pays, Madame la présidente avait besoin de sérénité, le ministre des Finances a présenté 
son budget, mais est-ce vraiment un budget qui prépare une nouvelle ère de développement 
ou un exercice qui prépare la population à un évènement comme le ministre Bodha tentait de 
le rappeler a new era of Mauritian politics.  Une transition, tout dépend de la lecture de tout 
un chacun.  

110 

 
 
Pour  commencer,  le  budget  proposé  pour  l’année  financière  2015  n’a  pas  été  à  la 
hauteur.  Il a été un chapelet de bonnes intentions mais force est de constater que les remèdes 
proposés à l’économie sensée de déclencher et être le moteur d’un redémarrage économique 
n’ont  pas  été  au  rendez-vous  et  n’ont  pas  amené  les  résultats  escomptés. 
  Là, 
malheureusement, la différence entre l’astrologie et l’économie.   
 
trompé dans ses prédictions. 
Les faits sont les suivants – 

Le gouvernement a été constant, constant sur au moins une chose.  Il s’est toujours 

  à une croissance promise de 5.5% continue et soutenue, la croissance a été de moins 
de 4%. Dans le meilleur des cas et sans réforme structurelle significative, il va falloir 
encore  se  contenter  d’une  croissance  autour  de  4  %.  Attendons  de  voir  maintenant 
l’effet  de  Heritage  City  sur  la  croissance,  il  se  pourrait  qu’elle  soit  en  dessous  des 
4.1% préconisés ; 

•  à  la  promesse  de  la  création  de  20,000  et  25,000  emplois  par  année  seulement 
5,000  emplois  ont  été  créés  et  il  est  prévu  de  créer  seulement  2,200  emplois 
d’après Statistics Mauritius en 2016; 
l’investissement privé local est en chute libre, le FDI est à son niveau le plus bas; 
la dette publique a augmenté de R 23 milliards; 
la consommation est en berne; 
l’inflation, les réserves et la balance commerciale sont artificiellement soutenus dû 
à  la  baisse  du  fuel,  du  gaz,  du  charbon  et  des  commodités  sur  le  marché 
mondial. 

• 
• 
• 
• 

Le nouveau ministre des Finances vient de présenter un nouveau document intitulé ‘A 
New  Era  of  Development’.  Document  de  synthèse  censé  porter  notre  économie  dans  une 
nouvelle ère de développement tout comme celui présenté par ses prédécesseurs ‘Achieving 
Meaningful  Change’.  Ce  document  s’articule  autour  de  plusieurs  axes  notamment 
l’entreprenariat,  l’emploi,  l’innovation,  la  digitalisation,  la  facilitation  dans  les  affaires,  les 
infrastructures modernes, la qualité de vie, la lutte contre la pauvreté et les réformes dans le 
secteur public. 

Après des semaines de consultations, Madame la présidente, finalement la montagne 
aura accouché d’une souris! Je pensais sincèrement que le ministre des Finances aurait fait la 

 

111 

synthèse de ce que ce pays a besoin et aurait appliqué les remèdes qu’il faut à l’économie. 
Mais malheureusement c’est une occasion ratée. Je vais tenter de vous expliquer pourquoi. 

Pour commencer: l’entreprenariat.  Les mesures qui sont annoncées, entre autres, celle 
de réduire de R 5,000 les trade fees pour les 75,000 PME, huit ans de tax rebate pour les 
nouvelles et quatre ans pour les anciennes. Est-ce que ces mesures vont faire que ces PME 
vont  subitement  recruter?  Est-ce  qu’elles  vont  subitement  investir?  Est-ce  qu’elles  vont 
subitement se diversifier? Est-ce qu’elles vont subitement s’internationaliser? Est-ce que cela 
va déclencher une réelle croissance dans ce secteur?  

Ces  mesures  permettront  à  ces  entreprises  d’avoir  un  ballon  d’oxygène  pendant  un 
certain temps. Cependant, pour qu’elles soient percutantes, les PME ont besoin d’accès au 
crédit rapide. On a vu dans le précédent budget une allocation de R 10 milliards aux PME et, 
at the end of the day, c’est seulement R 4.5 millions qui ont été déboursés.  

Les PME ont besoin de nouveaux marchés locaux et régionaux. Elles ont besoin de 
chiffres d’affaires. Elles ont besoin de mesures d’accompagnement pour celles qui exportent. 
Elles  ont  besoin  de  visibilité  régionale.  Elles  ont  besoin  de  zones  dédiées  à  leurs  activités 
pour  plus  d’espace,  pour  gagner  en  productivité  et  en  stockage.  Madame  la  présidente,  on 
applique  une  mesure  généraliste  à  une  maladie  bien  spécifique.  Il  faut  des  mesures 
spécifiques,  des  micros  de  mesure  qui  vont  allumer  le  feu  de  la  croissance  et 
malheureusement il y en a aucune significative. 

Concernant  l’emploi.    Il  y  a  de  cela  un  an,  à  Goodlands,  le  Vice-premier  ministre, 

l’honorable Soodhun, faisait la déclaration suivante –  

« Dans un an chaque Mauricien aura deux emplois. » 

(Interruptions) 

La  dure  réalité,  Madame  la  présidente,  est  que,  sans  investissement,  il  n’y  aura  pas  de 
création  d’emplois.  La  recette  malheureusement  est  tristement  simple.  Pas  d’emploi  sans 
croissance, pas de croissance sans investissement. Le budget fait référence à la création de 
21,000  emplois  principalement  dans  le  secteur  public  et  notamment  sur  l’emploi  et  la 
formation des jeunes à travers le YEP Programme. 

112 

 
Pas de mention par ailleurs du chômage des jeunes diplômés ou du chômage féminin. 
J’aimerais faire référence à l’honorable Rutnah. Sur son analyse du dernier budget concernant 
l’emploi, l’honorable Rutnah faisait la déclaration suivante –  

“The  Budget  also  deals  with  education  at  all  levels,  of  the  polytechnic  in  order  to 
educate middle management to render our economy efficient. The project of the hotel 
industry and the MITD programme where people will be trained to become plumbers, 
electricians (…) les chambres des métiers (…) thousands of jobs will be created (…).” 

Pour  le  moment  les  chambres  de  métiers  on  n’a  pas  encore  vu  le  bout et  j’espère  que  ça 
viendra rapidement. 

Autre point, Madame, en ce qu’il s’agit du CSR. Que ce soit le privé ou les ONGs, 
tous sont dans le flou. Quand on fait l’historique des CSR, il y a 10 ans de cela le ministère de 
L’Intégration  sociale  avait  été  mis  en  place.  C’était  un  partenariat  privé-public.  Le  public 
mettait les guidelines en place et le CSR se structurait et implémentait les différents projets 
de lutte contre l’exclusion et contre la pauvreté. Ces grosses entreprises se sont structurées 
avec un personnel qualifié. Elles ont effectué un travail de fond, ont acquis une connaissance,  
maîtrisé  un  savoir-faire  dans  la  lutte  contre  l’exclusion  et  la  pauvreté.  C’était  un  vrai 
partenariat public-privé avec des lacunes mais cela fonctionnait.  

Dans  le  budget  2015,  on  privatise  totalement  le  CSR.  Comme  l’honorable  ministre 
des Affaires étrangères le disait, c’est l’argent du privé et il fait ce qu’il veut avec. Plus de 
guidelines!  Love  Bridge  Project!  Alors  que  c’était  à  l’origine  un  partenariat  public-privé, 
c’est ensuite devenu totalement privatisé et maintenant on revient à une  étatisation, c’est-à-
dire que le ministère des finances prélève une taxe, la CSR taxe, le plan Marshall est placé 
sous l’égide du ministère de l’Intégration sociale. Donc on étatise la lutte contre l’extrême 
pauvreté. On fait table rase de tout ce travail que les associations ont faites, tout le travail de 
ces  grosses sociétés qui  se sont structurées et ont mis en place des  CSR  departments avec 
CSR managers. Je pense fondamentalement que c’est une erreur.  

Concernant le secteur manufacturier, il y a 40 % de réduction sur le fret et c’est bien. 
En sachant le cours mondial des shipping costs on peut aussi baisser de 50%.  Le Monitoring 
Committee est venu avec une baisse du taux d’intérêt et la baisse de la roupie de 10% a donné 
un peu d’oxygène au secteur. Mais, Madame, rien sur la productivité de nos entreprises, rien 
sur  la  productivité  de  nos  employés  alors  qu’elles  auraient  dû  être  au  centre  de  nos 

 

113 

préoccupations. Il faut inculquer à nos travailleurs que pour gagner plus il faut travailler plus 
et n’en est pas fait mention n’est pas faite dans ce budget. 

Le précédent budget, Madame, faisait mention, and I quote – 

“The Government will promote the development of the fashion industry and organize 
regular and seasonal fashion shows both in Mauritius and abroad. That would make 
known  internationally  the  Made  in  Mauritius  brand  for  greater  acceptance  of  our 
products in new and emerging markets.” 

Rien n’a été fait sur ce sujet ! Mais le plus grave… 

(Interruptions) 

Le plus grave. il y a quelques semaines un jeune et talentueux designer Mauricien qui gagne 
un  prix  au  Fashion  Design  de  Dubaï,  est  sélectionné  pour  aller  participer  au  New  York 
Fashion  Show  et  on  lui  refuse  une  aide!  On  lui  refuse  une  assistance.  Voilà  encore  des 
incohérences. Les intentions sont bonnes mais derrière rien n’est mis en place pour que ces 
intentions se transforment en action et c’est le contraire qui est souvent fait. 

Concernant l’agriculture je sais que le ministre a beaucoup à faire ces derniers temps. 
Il  y  a  eu  des  avancées  pour  les  planteurs  de  cannes  et  l’utilisation  du  SIFB  mais  il  n’y  a 
toujours pas de schéma directeur vers l’autosuffisance. Madame la présidente, l’agriculture 
biologique  il  faut  bien  comprendre  une  chose,  nous  ne  faisons  pas  pour  le  moment  de 
l’agriculture  biologique  à  Maurice,  nous  faisons  de  l’agriculture  raisonnée.  L’agriculture 
biologique  entend  que  toute  utilisation  d’insecticides  et  de  pesticides  soient  banned  de 
l’agriculture.  Nous  faisons  aujourd’hui  de  l’agriculture  raisonnée  mais  pas  de  l’agriculture 
biologique. J’espère que nous allons sur la bonne voie. 

Concernant  les  financial  services,  Madame,  le  mal  est  déjà  fait.  Les  retombées  du 
DTA se feront sentir l’année prochaine. Ce que  je trouve choquant c’est que sur les R 12 
milliards de grants de l’Inde rien n’a été budgété pour nos entreprises, rien n’a été budgété 
pour  que  ces  entreprises  se  restructurent,  se  positionnent  et  explorent  le  marché  Africain. 
Aucune  mesure  d’accompagnement  pour 
locaux 
malheureusement.  L’honorable  ministre  Bodha  faisait  mention  dans  son  speech  entre  les 
fondamentaux et les mesures. Il y a un fondamental qui est simple que les mesures ne sont 
pas  suivies  derrière.  Les  banques  commerciales  sont  taxées  à  hauteur  de  25%  plus  2%  de 

fonds  de  private  equity 

les 

 

114 

CSR et cela fait 27% pour les marchés locaux. Elles sont taxées sur le floor à 3% donc elles 
ont tout intérêt à favoriser leur développement international que leur développement local.  

Donc, si on veut une expansion du secteur manufacturier, une expansion de nos SMEs 
sur  le  marché  local,  il  faut  absolument  regarder  la  taxation  des  banques.  C’est  un  point 
important. 

Quant  au  secteur  de  la  construction,  Madame  la  présidente,  et  l’ouverture  aux 
étrangers, le ministère des Finances a pu convaincre la frange la plus conservatrice et ouvrir 
le pays aux étrangers, et permettre l’acquisition d’appartements. Nous sommes en présence 
de deux grands flux migratoires, l’Afrique Sud et l’Europe, et il faut savoir capitaliser dessus. 

Je ne peux que saluer l’initiative de stopper le projet de Heritage City,  Madame la 
présidente.  Qu’on  le  doive  au  ministre  des  Finances  ou  à  M.  Sanspeur,  là  n’est  pas  la 
question. Ce qui est choquant dans ce projet, c’est la façon dont il a été géré. Ce projet, à 
quelques  jours  du  premier  coup  de  pioche,  c’est-à-dire,  en  août,  alors  que  tous  les 
parlementaires du côté de cette Chambre n’ont eu de cesse d’alerter le gouvernement sur la 
légèreté de ce projet - et des parlementaires de l’autre côté de la Chambre, mais eux, ils l’ont 
dit dans les couloirs de l’Assemblée plutôt que dans l’Assemblée elle-même -, a passé le test 
du High-Powered Committee.  

Ce projet a passé le test du Cabinet. On aurait pu penser que certains ministres allaient 
questionner certains éléments du dossier - l’honorable Bodha sur les accès routiers et les off-
site  works ;  l’honorable  Collendavelloo  sur  le  coût  de  l’investissement  que  représente  la 
CWA, ainsi que le CEB ; l’honorable Gungah sur les commerces, notamment à Bagatelle, à 
Jumbo, au Caudan, à Shoprite - en venant montrer au Conseil des ministres que le commerce 
est  difficile  en  ce  moment  et  que,  à  juste  titre,  investir  encore  dans  l’immobilier,  investir 
encore  dans  la  restauration,  investir  encore  dans  du  textile,  les  loyers  ne  suivraient  pas  et 
qu’aujourd’hui les loyers sont à la baisse. On aurait estimé que le ministre des Finances, lui-
même, à la lueur des informations qu’il doit avoir du BOI, à l’effet que les villas au-dessus 
d’un million de dollars ne se vendent pas tous les jours et que le marché est très contracté, et 
qui  plus  est  dans  les  régions  comme  l’Ouest  ou  le  Nord  où  le  marché  est  déjà  contracté, 
imaginez-vous maintenant des villas à Bagatelle ! Ce sera encore plus catastrophique. Rien ! 
Alors que le projet est déjà annoncé dans le budget, Madame la présidente, la ligne de crédit 
approuvée par un pays ami, le projet est gelé. C’est choquant! 

115 

 
Maintenant,  la  partie  immergée  de  l’iceberg.  Combien  a  déjà  été  dépensé  sur  ce 
projet, combien d’énergie et de temps ont été dépensés par les différents fonctionnaires, par 
les différents ministères ? Je pense que nous allons l’apprendre très rapidement, mais ce sera 
sûrement pour la pomme du contribuable encore une fois. En tout cas, je salue le fait que ce 
projet ait été finalement arrêté. 

Madame  la  présidente,  concernant  le  blue  economy  and  ocean  economy,  je  voulais 
juste  rebondir  sur  les  propos  du  ministre  Koonjoo.  Sur  les  sept  piliers  identifiés,  à  savoir 
l’exploration  minière,  le  fishing  and  seafood  processing  and  aquaculture,  le  deep  ocean 
application, les marine services, le seaport related activities, la marine renewable energy et 
l’ocean knowledge, très peu de choses dans ce budget, et surtout très peu de choses réalisées 
pendant l’année financière. 

Le ministre, dans son discours, fait référence à ses réalisations. The construction of 
the Blue Bay Marine Centre, which was inaugurated in 2016. En fait, c’est un projet déjà 
initié par l’ancien gouvernement et qui a été retardé par une injonction par certaines ONG. 
The  release  of  1.5  million  of  fish  fingerlings  pour  repeupler  les  lagons ;  cela  fait  plusieurs 
années que cette mesure a été implémentée. En cela, il n’y a rien de nouveau. 

Concernant les cages à poissons qu’on distribue aux coopératives, la vérité c’est que 
deux coopératives sur trois ont déjà fermé, et cela reste une production artisanale. La vérité 
est qu’on attend toujours le Fisheries and Marine Bill, en préparation depuis 2015. La vérité, 
Madame la présidente, est que sur le dossier du MV Benita, s’il n’avait pas été un cargo mais 
un tanker pétrolier, les conséquences et la situation auraient été apocalyptiques.  La vérité sur 
l’urban cooling system, c’est que le gouvernement a reçu une lettre du promoteur indiquant 
que, si le volume ne suit pas le projet, le projet risque de ne pas aller de l’avant. La vérité est 
qu’un acteur majeur dans le processing de poissons a préféré s’installer aux Seychelles plutôt 
qu’à Maurice. 

La  vérité  sur  le  port  de  pêche  est  que  le  promoteur  chinois  a  exprimé  de  sérieuses 
problématiques  quant  au  surcoût,  notamment  presque  40  %.  La  vérité  sur  la  mesure  289 
figurant  au  budget  de  2015  à  l’effet  que  Government  will  come  with  a  new  legislation  to 
preserve the fragile ecosystem of St Brandon est toujours dans les tiroirs, et les informations 
qui nous parviennent sur l’état écologique de St Brandon est que c’est simplement scandaleux 
et catastrophique. La vérité sur l’annonce du ministre in relation to the implementation of the 
closure of the octopus industry, c’est que cette mesure a commencé l’année dernière et a été 

 

116 

financée par une ONG dans la région du Sud-Ouest et que son ministère n’a été qu’un acteur 
passif. Madame la présidente, rien n’a bougé à part attribuer des barachois avec des projets 
farfelus, alors que ce secteur aurait pu devenir un des piliers de notre économie. À Hawaï, on 
fabrique des sprays nasaux, on produit des algues, on produit des produits cosmétiques, on 
génère de l’électricité, on fabrique de l’eau embouteillée. Madame la présidente, c’est une 
occasion ratée pour tout le secteur du blue economy. 

En conclusion, Madame la présidente, est-ce un budget qui pourra nous amener vers 
une autre ère de notre développement ? J’en doute fort, mais permettez-moi quand même de 
vous souhaiter bonne chance. 

Merci. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Henry! 

(7.29 p.m.) 

Mr T.  Henry  (Fourth  Member for Mahebourg &  Plaine Magnien):  Madame la 
présidente,  permettez-moi  tout  d’abord  de  féliciter  l’honorable  Pravind  Jugnauth  pour  son 
budget qui a su répondre aux attentes de la population et amener un feel good factor dans tout 
le  pays.  Les  petits  écoliers,  les  femmes,  les  personnes  âgées,  les  petites  et  moyennes 
entreprises,  ainsi  que  tous  ceux  qui  sont  au  bas  de  l’échelle,  tout  le  monde  s’y  retrouve, 
Madame la présidente. 

Je  voudrais  aussi  remercier  le  Premier  ministre,  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  pour  son 
leadership et toute son expérience, et qui a su guider l’équipe de l’Alliance Lepep depuis que 
le gouvernement est en place en décembre 2014. 

Madame la présidente, mon discours sera consacré à quatre volets -  

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 

les petites et moyennes entreprises ;  
la création d’emplois ;  
le social, et 
la NDU 

Tout  d’abord,  en  ce  qui  se  concerne  les  petites  et  moyennes  entreprises,  le  ministre  des 
Finances vient donner un grand boost pour permettre aux petits entrepreneurs de consolider 
leurs assises et de se préparer aux défis qui les attendent, afin de continuer d’apporter leur 
contribution  à  l’économie  de  notre  pays,  car  nous  savons  tous  que  quand  les  petites  et 
moyennes entreprises vont bien, c’est toute l’économie nationale qui va bien. Puisque leur 

 

117 

part dans la création de richesses ainsi que la création d’emplois est très importante, comme 
nous le savons tous, nous comptons beaucoup sur nos jeunes entrepreneurs pour amener de 
nouvelles idées révolutionnaires et un nouveau dynamisme, avec le savoir-faire reconnu de 
notre main-d’œuvre locale. 

Le ministre des Finances vient avec des mesures concrètes et motivantes. Je vais en 
nommer quelques-unes, mais je ne vais pas m’attarder sur toutes les mesures, car beaucoup 
de mes collègues ont en parlé avant moi. Je citerai donc la suspension du paiement des trade 
fees qui va concerner plus de 75,000 entreprises, et surtout l’exemption de la taxe pendant 
huit ans pour les nouvelles entreprises qui seront enregistrées à la SMEDA. Ceux qui font un 
turnover  de  moins  de  R  10  millions  auront  eux  une  exemption  de  quatre  ans.  Cela  va 
définitivement  leur  donner  un  sérieux  coup  de  pouce  et  soulager  beaucoup  de  ces  PME. 
Mieux que cela, les mesures budgétaires permettront même à de nombreuses PME de prendre 
un nouveau départ. 

Une  mesure  qui  attire  mon  attention,  c’est  la  construction  de  plusieurs  industrial 
parks.  Je  note  avec  plaisir  que  c’est  la  suite  logique  de  ce  que  le  Deputy  Prime  Minister, 
l’honorable Xavier-Luc Duval, avait lui-même commencé, et c’est en cela que nous voyons 
que  l’honorable  Pravind  Jugnauth  est  sur  la  même  longueur  d’onde  que  le  Deputy  Prime 
Minister. 

Et  sans  aucun  doute,  c’est  la  cohésion  qui  existe  entre  les  deux  leaders  qui  assurera  cette 
fameuse  nouvelle  ère  de  développement,  proposée  par  ce  budget.  Et  même  au-delà !  Une 
nouvelle ère pour notre pays !  

Pour en revenir au Small and Medium Enterprises Park, je note, avec satisfaction, la 
construction de plusieurs parcs, dont deux nouveaux à Plaine Magnien et Vuillemin. Cela va 
permettre  à  tous  ces  entrepreneurs  existants  ou  en  devenir,  de  pouvoir  se    délocaliser  et 
d’avoir un endroit adéquat pour travailler. Je pense surtout à tous ces entrepreneurs de ma 
circonscription, une région où les demandeurs d’emploi sont en grand nombre et qui pourront 
bénéficier de ces structures, car nous savons tous les conditions difficiles auxquelles certains 
entrepreneurs travaillent; dans leurs cours, dans un garage ou même ceux qui n’arrivent pas à 
décrocher un permis, faute de trouver un endroit adéquat pour exercer leur métiers.  

Ce qui m’amène en toute logique au deuxième volet de mon intervention, Madame la 
présidente. Il s’agit de la création d’emplois. Nous savons tous la pression qui existe dans le 

 

118 

monde du travail par rapport aux jeunes, mais aussi au moins jeunes qui sont à la recherche 
d’un emploi.  

J’accueille  favorablement  la  mesure  concernant  la  formation  technique  de  4,000 
personnes dans différents secteurs de notre économie, dont les TIC, l’hôtellerie, le tourisme 
en  général,  le  nursing,  les  métiers  paramédicaux  et  la  construction,  des  domaines  en  forte 
demande en main-d’œuvre. Nous savons tous que le chômage touche des nombreux jeunes 
diplômés qui n’ont pas la formation requise pour les domaines où il y a une forte demande, 
alors que les opportunités d’emploi sont dans les domaines où il y a peu de jeunes formés. 

Madame  la  présidente,  une  autre  mesure  qui  aidera  sûrement  à  redynamiser  la 
création  d’emploi,  c’est  celle  qui  prévoit  de  placer  dans  différents  postes  au  sein  de  la 
fonction publique plus de 200 apprentis ingénieurs qui n’arrivent pas à intégrer leur domaine, 
faute  d’expérience.  Et  aussi,  la  création  de  plus  de  2,000  emplois  à  travers  le  Youth 
Empowerment  Programme  qui  a  si  bien  marché  sous  l’égide  de  l’honorable  Xavier-Luc 
Duval, et qui est voué au même succès à n’en pas douter, sous l’honorable Pravind Jugnauth 
et de mon ami l’honorable Callichurn, le ministre du Travail. 

J’accueille aussi favorablement la mesure consistant à  remplir 7,200 postes vacants 
dans le service civil. Cette mesure devrait grandement améliorer la performance d’un certain 
nombre de nos organismes publics conformément à la Vision 2030, énoncé par l’honorable 
Premier ministre.  

Madame la présidente, au chapitre du social, je dirais que le budget de l’honorable 
Pravind Jugnauth est en lui-même un Plan Marshall, vu le nombre de mesures qu’il contient 
pour éradiquer la pauvreté, pour venir en aide aux plus démunis, donner un coup de pouce 
aux  plus  faibles  tout  en  limitant  l’assistanat  et  en  privilégiant  l’autonomisation.  C’est  une 
vision, une politique à laquelle nous, au PMSD, adhérons totalement et que nous soutenons 
pleinement  puisque  les  bases  du  ministère  de  l’Intégration  Sociale  ont  été  jetées  par 
l’honorable  Xavier-Luc  Duval  et  que  ce  gouvernement,  qui  est  extrêmement  sensible  au 
social, va tout mettre en œuvre pour éradiquer l’extrême pauvreté avec la collaboration de 
tout un chacun dans cette Chambre. C’est un grand défi à relever parce que la lutte contre la 
pauvreté est un vaste chantier, un combat permanent. Mais je n’ai aucun doute que l’équipe 
de  ‘l’Alliance  Lepep’,  dirigé  par  l’honorable  Premier  ministre,  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  le 
Deputy  Prime  Minister  et  du  Vice-Premier  ministre,  Ivan  Collendavelloo  et  les  autres 
dirigeants sauront relever ce défi avec courage et détermination. Yes, we can !  

119 

 
Madame  la  présidente,  j’aimerais  aborder  le  dernier  volet  de  mon  intervention  en 
élaborant sur la NDU. Comme vous le savez, la NDU a obtenu R 900 millions et je tiens à 
remercier l’honorable ministre des Finances pour la considération qu’il a eue pour la NDU 
pour nous permettre, mes collègues et moi, à répondre aux attentes de la population.  

Avec la restructuration des bureaux CAB, cela redonnera une nouvelle image de la 
NDU  afin  d’offrir  un  meilleur  service  et    de  meilleurs  conseils  au  public,  et  mieux  les 
canaliser vers les différentes institutions concernées, ce qui leur permettra de voir plus clair 
dans les démarches administratives et de trouver des solutions à ces problèmes immédiats.  

Avec ce budget, Madame la présidente, la NDU pourra remédier à un gros problème 
qui  a  affecté  la  circonscription  no.  12  cette  année.  C’est  celui  des  inondations  durant  les 
fortes  pluies  qui,  cette  année,  ont  touché  certains  endroits  comme  Mare  Tabac,  Cité  Paul 
Langlois  à  Plaine  Magnien,  Trois  Boutiques  et  Ville  Noire.  Ce  budget  va  aussi  nous 
permettre de procéder à l’installation d’un système d’éclairage pour le terrain de foot de Trois 
Boutiques, de Grand Bel Air et l’éclairage d’un terrain de volley à Camp Carol, sans oublier 
l’asphaltage et la construction de drains dans différents endroits de ma circonscription. Cela 
avec  le  soutien  indéfectible  de  mes  deux  collègues,    l’honorable  Mahen  Jhugroo  et  hon. 
Bobby Hurreeram. 

 (Interruptions) 

Et  là,  ces  deux  projets  qui  nous  tiennent  à  cœur,  mes  collègues  et  moi,  pour  notre 
circonscription, c’est la reconstruction de la jetée de la Mahebourg Waterfront.  Nous savons 
tous  que  la  régate  est  une  tradition  à  Mahebourg  et  c’est  quelque  chose  que  nous  voulons 
promouvoir à Maurice.  Aussi, tous les dimanches quand il y a des régates, il y a des milliers 
de  gens  qui  viennent  au  Waterfront  pour  regarder  ces  régates.  Donc,  nous  demandons  à 
l’autorité concernée de bien vouloir considérer ce projet.  

Le deuxième projet qui nous tient à cœur, mes collègues et moi, c’est la construction 
d’un gymnase à Beau Vallon.  Mon collègue, l’honorable ministre des Sports et moi, nous 
avons fait un site visit et il y a de la place parce que dans la circonscription, nous avons des 
équipes de volley-ball qui font de très belles performances au niveau régional et au niveau 
national, et surtout nous avons les Champions Maurice de basket, l’équipe des Flippers qui 
sont à Mahebourg, mais qui n’ont pas d’endroit pour s’entraîner en salle.  

(Interruptions) 

 

Champion de l’année dernière ! Alle vérifié !  

120 

(Interruptions) 

Ils ont participé même à un championnat d’Afrique de l’océan Indien. 

(Interruptions) 

Nous savons tous que les compétitions au niveau national se font indoor et nos  sportifs n’ont 
pas l’expérience indoor, car il n’y a pas de gymnase dans notre circonscription. J’espère que 
l’honorable ministre des Sports pourra prendre notre suggestion en considération. 

Madame la présidente, puisque nous avons parlé d’asphaltage des routes, j’aimerais 
apporter  quelques  éclaircissements  concernant  ma  présence  lors  d’une  manifestation  des 
habitants  du  morcellement  Black  Rock  dans  la  circonscription  no.14.    En  tant  que  PPS 
responsable  de  cette  circonscription,  j’ai  fait  mon  devoir  d’aller  à  la  rencontre  de  ces 
habitants,  mais  certains  ont  voulu  induire  le  public  en  erreur  en  faisant  croire  que  je 
participais à la manifestation. Cela n’a pas de sens, Madame la présidente, car cela voulait 
dire que je manifestais contre moi-même. Ce qui n’a aucun sens. Les habitants se plaignaient 
de la dégradation de la route principale du morcellement et je suis allé à leur rencontre afin de 
les  assurer  qu’un  survey  a  déjà  commencé  concernant  le  coût  et  l’envergure  du  travail  à 
accomplir  et  je  tiens  à  remercier  le  ministre  des  Finances  de  me  donner  les  moyens  de 
pouvoir concrétiser ce projet dont l’implémentation se fera en deux phases. La première ayant 
lieu  durant  l’année  financière  en  cours.  Et  j’ai  le  plaisir  d’annoncer  à  mon  collègue, 
l’honorable Alan Ganoo, que ce gouvernement… 

(Interruptions) 

Sorry!  Et  l’honorable  Georges  Lesjongard  que  ce  gouvernement  va  faire  pas  mal  de 
développement  dans  la  circonscription  14  en  ce  qu’il  s’agit  d’asphaltage  de  routes,  de 
construction  de  drains,  ainsi  que  l’infrastructure  sportive,  et  des  maisons  aussi.  Le  Vice-
Premier ministre, l’honorable Showkatally Soodhun a attiré mon attention. Et les habitants de 
cette  circonscription  peuvent  compter  sur  ce  gouvernement  pour  le  développement  de  leur 
région. 

Pour  conclure,  Madame  la  présidente,  je  voudrai  parler  sur  l’importance  de 
l’implémentation  des  mesures  budgétaires.  Comme  l’a  si  bien  fait  ressortir  le  Premier 
ministre, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, ainsi que d’autres collègues de ce côté de la Chambre, car 

 

121 

nous avons tous de grandes ambitions pour notre pays, pour nos enfants et nous ne pourrons 
les réaliser que si nous nous mettons résolument au travail en regardant devant nous. 

Le budget 2016-2017 nous a donné suffisamment d’outils, à nous de les utiliser à bon 
escient. A mon niveau, je prends l’engagement, Madame la présidente, de mettre en œuvre 
toutes  les  mesures  du  budget  qui  me  concernent  en  tant  que  député  du  No.  12,  PPS  des 
circonscriptions  12  et  14,  afin  de  réaliser  la  vision  du  gouvernement  et  de  satisfaire  les 
besoins de la population. Avec le soutien indéfectif de tous mes collègues du gouvernement, 
si chacun d’entre nous fait ce qu’il y a à faire à son niveau, avec le soutien de ses collègues 
ministres, PPS, députés, nous aurons relevé le défi de faire de l’île Maurice un pays meilleur. 

Pour  moi,  Madame  la  présidente,  l’esprit  d’équipe  qui  règne  au  sein  de  ce 
gouvernement  fait rougir certains et pâlir d’autres, car  cette  équipe  assurera l’avenir de ce 
pays  pendant  son  mandat  et  même  au-delà,  Madame  la  présidente.  Je  remercie  tous  mes 
collègues  pour  leur  attention  et  je  réitère  mes  félicitations  au  ministre  des  Finances, 
l’honorable Pravind Jugnauth, ainsi qu’au Premier ministre, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, au Deputy 
Prime Minister, l’honorable Xavier-Luc Duval, au Vice-Premier ministre, l’honorable Ivan 
Collendavelloo,  et  les  autres  dirigeants  pour  l’esprit  d’équipe  et  la  cohésion  -  l’honorable 
Soodhun, excusez-moi - dont ils font preuve afin de mener le pays à bon port sans se laisser 
distraire par les provocateurs et les oiseaux de mauvaise augure. 

Merci, Madame la présidente. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Lesjongard! 

Mr Lesjongard: Madam Speaker, I move that the debate be now adjourned. 

Mr Ganoo rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Debate adjourned accordingly. 

ADJOURNMENT 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move for the adjournment of the House to 

Thursday 11 August, 2016 at 11.30 a.m. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned. 

 

(7.48 p.m.) 

122 

MATTERS RAISED 

MEDICAL COUNCIL – RECOGNISED MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS 

Mr S. Rughoobur (Third Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or): Thank you, 

Madam Speaker, for allowing me to take the time of the House very briefly. 

Madam Speaker, I have a request for the hon. Minister of Health and Quality of Life. 
I  have  had  a  representation  from  a  few  parents  from  my  constituency  who  feel  very 
concerned with the decision of the Medical Council to finalise a close list of institutions that 
henceforth  will  be  the  only  one  recognised  by  the  Council  for  medical  studies  as  from 
January 2000 to 2017. 

I have noted that no institutions in Russia, Croisy and Roumania will henceforth be 
recognised,  but,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Anna  Medical  Council  in  Mauritius,  which  is 
registered as a local institution offering medical courses only in 2012, has been included in 
the list. 

On 20 October 2015, hon. Gayan, addressing Pre-Registration House Officers, during 
the launching of an induction course at the Rajiv Gandhi Science Centre, stated, and I quote – 

 “In Mauritius, unfortunately, we have an open system where anybody can go 
anywhere to study and this is where we have lots of problems in the quality of 
training health professionals.” 

 Madam Speaker, the issue is one of affordability for some parents, but also one of 
actually transparency. The only issue I find and which for me is the most important one is 
that relating to criteria used to finalise the closed list of institutions. 

I  have  been  referring  earlier  in  my  speech,  Madam  Speaker,  on  the  issue  of 
transparency and criteria that have been used by the Medical Council. I understand that the 
Medical Council is an independent body.  

However, I am making an appeal to the hon. Minister of Health and Quality of Life to 
please  look  into  possibilities  of  ensuring  that  the  criteria  for  finalising  the  closed  list  of 
institutions  recognised  by  the  Medical  Council  is  made  public  and  that  there  is  better 
consultation between professionals in the medical profession and, if need be, the closed list 
be reviewed in the interest of one and all. 

 
Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

123 

The Minister of Health and Quality of Life (Mr A. Gayan): Madam Speaker, let 
me  reassure  the  hon.  Member  that  the  Medical  Council  of  Mauritius  is  the  regulatory 
authority with regard to the practice of medicine in Mauritius and it is the Medical Council 
that has looked at the problems posed by our physicians graduating for all sorts of countries 
coming here and not having the same skills and competence and knowledge. So, the Medical 
Council decided that we need to have a closed list of institutions where our students can go to 
study  and  once  they  have  completed  their  studies  in  those  institutions  and  they  have  been 
eligible  to  practise  at  the  end  of  their  examinations  in  that  country,  then  they  would  be 
recognised by the Medical Council of Mauritius. 

This is not something that we are doing only in Mauritius. In fact, I was just looking 
at the Singapore Medical Council, for example. It says one of the criteria for provisional and 
conditional  registration  with  the  Singapore  Medical  Council  is  the  primary  qualifications 
from one of the following Medical Schools and it lists the medical schools and there are not 
many. It also says that doctors must have undergone the entire duration of the clinical training 
and  final  examinations  in  a  medical  school  listed  in  the  schedule  before  they  can  be 
considered for provisional or conditional registration in Singapore. This is precisely what the 
Medical Council is doing and the United States is the same. The United States, for example, 
has a list of recognised institutions all over the world and when someone has graduated in one 
of those institutions, comes and expresses the wish to practise in the United States, he still has 
to sit for yet another examination before he is given a licence to practise. 

Now, I can understand the concern of some parents whose children have already gone 
to  study  in  countries  where  the  institutions  where  they  are  studying  are  not  listed  in  the 
Medical  Council  list.  What  we  did  was  to  have  a  survey  and  we  had  notices  put  in  the 
newspapers  so  that  anybody,  studying  in  those  institutions,  would  contact  the  Medical 
Council so that we have a transitional period where those students will not be penalised. The 
new list will apply as from next year. It has to be done now so that adequate notice is given to 
those who want to go and study, but they have to go to study in those institutions. We have a 
transitional period for those who have already started their studies. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

 

124 

EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES COMMISSION – BOARD MEMBERS 

(7.53 p.m.) 

Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port  Louis  East): 
Thank you, Madam. There is a matter which has just been brought to my attention and most 
probably to a lot of the other hon. Members who are present. There is a matter that was called 
before the Equal Opportunities Commission yesterday and there is an important point of law 
that has been raised by a barrister appearing for one of the parties and namely that one of the 
members  of  the  Board  chosen  to  sit  on  that  particular  Board  of  the  Equal  Opportunities 
Commission does not comply as far as her years of practice are concerned at the Bar with the 
minimum requirement of 5 years but only holds 2 years, therefore, is disqualified to sit at the 
level of the Equal Opportunities Commission. 

If that is the case, there is the risk, Madam Speaker - that is why I direct my request to 
the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  -  that  the  whole  mechanism  of  the  Equal  Opportunities 
Commission would be affected, paralysed and this is not an exaggeration. I am of the view 
and my humble request is that we should not wait for this matter to be thrashed out on a point 
of law, argued and then a ruling delivered, maybe challenged at the Supreme Court and then 
you  have  a  whole  paralysis  of  the  system.  I  am  sure  this  has  never  been  the  intention  of 
Government of causing that. 

My request, therefore, is for the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to look into the matter. It is 
very simple; if this person has the experience she stays, if she does not comply with the law, 
she goes.  

(Interruptions) 

The person concerned, I did not want to mention her name here but if you so request, I will 
communicate it to you Prime Minister later on after the sitting not to, in any way, embarrass 
anyone. Thank you very much. 

The Prime Minister: Thank you, we will look into it. 

At 7.50 p.m., the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Thursday 11 August 2016 

at 11.30 a.m.  

 

