No. 06 of 2016 

 

1 

 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

(UNREVISED) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

 

TUESDAY 03 MAY 2016 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

2 

CONTENTS 

PAPERS LAID 

QUESTIONS (Oral) 

MOTION 

STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS  

PERSONAL EXPLANATION 

BILL (Public) 

ADJOURNMENT 

QUESTIONS (Written) 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

 

THE CABINET 

 
     (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

 
Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 
KCMG, QC  

Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 
GCSK  
Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

 
Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development, Minister 
for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 
Communications 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon.  Ivan  Leslie  Collendavelloo,  GCSK, 
SC 
Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 
Utilities 

 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

International Trade 
 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha, GCSK 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan, SC 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 
Sinatambou 
Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 
Perraud 

of 
Minister 
Empowerment 
Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation  

Integration 

and  Economic 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 
Family Welfare 

 

Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain, GCSK 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

 
Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 
Cheong, MSK 

Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 

4 

Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 
Institutional Reforms  
Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 
Institutions 
Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands 
 
Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms, 
Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 
Disaster and Beach Management 
Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and 
Training 

 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Gopall, Mr Navin (Temporary Transfer to 
RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 06 of 2016 

 

Sitting of 03 May 2016 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

7 

PAPERS LAID 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table – 
 

 
A.   Prime Minister’s Office ‒ 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

The Digest of Education Statistics 2014 

 
B.   Ministry  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 

Research ‒ 
The Annual Report 2014 of the Early Childhood Care and Education Authority. 

C.   Ministry of Health and Quality of Life ‒ 

The  Dental  Council  (Board  of  Examination)  Regulations  2016.  (Government  Notice  
No. 101 of 2016). 

D.   Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection ‒ 

(a)   The Rodrigues Consumer Protection (Control of Price of Taxable and Non-Taxable 
Goods)  (Amendment  No.  12)  Regulations  2016.  (Government  Notice  No.  102  of 
2016 

(b)   The Rodrigues Consumer Protection (Control of Price of Taxable and Non-Taxable 
Goods)  (Amendment  No.  13)  Regulations  2016.  (Government  Notice  No.  103  of 
2016 

 
E.   Ministry of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reform ‒ 

(a)   The  Securities  (Disclosure  Obligations  of  Reporting  Issuers)  (Amendment) 

Rules 2016. (Government Notice No. 104 of 2015) 

(b)   The Captive Insurance (Pure Captive Insurance Business) Rules 2016. (Government 

Notice No. 105 of 2016)  

F.   Ministry  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and  Outer 

Islands ‒ 
The  Fisheries  and  Marine  Resources  (Safety  and  Security  Measures  for  Fishermen  at 
Sea) Regulations 2016. (Government Notice No. 100  of 2016)  

 

 

8 

ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

BAI – ASSETS & LIABILITIES 

The  Leader  of  the  Opposition  (Mr  P.  Bérenger)  (by  Private  Notice)  asked  the 
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms  whether,    in 
regard to the post-BAI, he will state –  

(a) 

(b) 

the total insurance liabilities of the National Insurance Company Limited;  

the annual sums payable to the policy holders of the Super Cash Back Gold 
Scheme and of Bramer Asset Management, indicating the cash to be received 
therefor from the sale of shares in the National Insurance Company Limited 
and in Maubank Ltd.;  

(c) 

where matters stand concerning the –  

(i) 

(ii) 

Rs3.5 billion loan from the Bank of Mauritius;  

sale of the –  

A. Britam (Kenya) Ltd. shares;  

B. Apollo Bramwell Hospital Mauritius, and  

C. British American Exchange Co. Ltd., the representative of Western 

Union money transfer, and  

(d) 

the sums received from the sale of Iframac Ltd. and Courts Ltd.  

The Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms 
(Mr  S.  Bhadain):  Madam  Speaker,  on  04  April  2015,  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition 
rightly qualified the BAI Scandal as a “tremblement de terre financier” and stated that “les 
signes avant-coureurs étaient visibles depuis déjà quelque temps”. 

Madam Speaker, the hon.  Leader of the Opposition rang the alarm bells during his 
PNQ on 21 November 2013, referring to a Ponzi Pyramid Scheme and reiterated the concerns 
of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) with regard to BAI. He quoted paragraph 55 of the 
IMF report and stated, and I quote - 

“(...) it suggested that the Bank of Mauritius and the  FSC should carry  out what it 
called ‘war games’ in a prevision of a possible financial crisis.”  

9 

 
Madam  Speaker,  BAI  was  a  huge  fraud.  The  KPMG,  its  own  auditors,  not  only 
identified and detected the issues as far back as 2009 and 2010, but also reported to its Board 
of Directors and to its Audit Committee that it was insolvent and it had involved in major 
fraudulent  transactions  involving,  including  others,  the  round  tripping  transaction  of  Rs3.6 
billion from Banque des Mascareignes in order to window dress and to give an appearance of 
solvency. The ultimate holding company KLAD Investment, based in the Bahamas, was also 
audited by KPMG Mauritius, who reported that the Group had excess liabilities over assets of 
USD302 million as far back as 31 December 2012.  These audited accounts stated and I quote 
– 

“The  existence  of  a  material  uncertainty  which  may  cast  significant  doubt  on  the 
subsidiaries ability to continue as a going concern.” 

Amazingly, Madam Speaker, they did not qualify those accounts.   

The NTan Report, which was prepared by NTan Corporate Advisory PTA Ltd. and 

dated 20 December 2015, states at paragraph 2, and I quote – 

“The  introduction  to  the  BAI  Group  website  reads:  “Profits  with  integrity,  through 
marketing of innovative products and services using the best employment practices, 
for  the  benefit  of  all  stakeholders”.  As  this  report  will  show,  the  very  first  word, 
“profits”, was not true and that negates the whole phrase “Profits with integrity … for 
the benefit of all stakeholders”. 

It goes on to say, Madam Speaker, - 

“While the BAI Group was presented as a successful conglomerate and was ranked as 
one of the top groups in Mauritius, the BAI Group incurred massive losses year after 
year.  

In  the  four-year  period  ended  31  December  2013,  according  to  the  BAI  Group 
records, the BAI Group lost some Rs14.7 billion. Even the best capitalised companies 
in Mauritius would stagger under such losses (and the BAI Group was not one of the 
best capitalised companies in Mauritius).” 

They also state that the BAI Group was insolvent in terms of its balance sheet.  According to 
the BAI Group’s records as at 31 December 2013, the BAI Group had accumulated losses 
that exceeded its share capital by some Rs12 billion.   

10 

 
And lastly, Madam Speaker, in terms of the reports on the BAI issue, I will refer to 
the IMF Report of 2015, Article IV, Consultation with Mauritius, which states at Annex I – 
Mauritius: The Failure of British American Investment Co. (BAI) - 

“The BAI Group, a mixed international financial conglomerate and one of the largest 
conglomerates in Mauritius, comprised a number of entities operating in  insurance, 
banking,  asset  management,  retail  and  commercial  services,  with  cross  border 
operations  in  other  SSA  countries.    The  Insurance  Company  had  substantial 
proportion  of  its  assets  invested  in  related  companies.    In  addition,  it  issued  single 
policy premium products promising relatively high returns, but suffering from high 
lapse  rates,  that  were  only  sustainable  as  long  as  fresh  cash  was  injected  into  the 
scheme from new policies, from the investment proceeds from old policies (mostly in 
related companies), or from other entities in the group.  The BAI Group is now being 
resolved.” 

Then, they went on to say, Madam Speaker, that the episode also highlighted … 

Mr  Bérenger:  Madam  Speaker,  on  a  point  of  order.  We  have  heard  all  this  many 
times.    It  is  a  thing  of  the  past.    Is  this  being  adopted  as  a  strategy  not  to  reply  to  the 
questions, in fact? 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Minister,  I  have  given  you  the  leeway  to  give  some 
background information, but you should not take the time of the House regarding PNQs to 
give all your background information.  You can now come with replies to the questions with 
have been asked. 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, if I may be allowed just to finish those two lines. This 
is the latest IMF Report which has never been quoted before.  It is 2015.  It goes on to say –  

“This episode also highlighted issues of regulatory forbearance, political leaning and 
coordination problems among financial regulators. The consultation discussions noted 
the  systemic  importance  of  mixed  conglomerates,  of  which  several  banks  are  part, 
highlighting  the  importance  to  upgrade  consolidated  supervision  and  cooperation 
among  regulatory  agencies  -  in  particular  between  the  BOM  and  the  Financial 
Services  Commission  (FSC).    The  authorities  have  already  taken  steps  to  improve 
supervisory cooperation.” 

11 

 
Madam Speaker, before answering the specific parts, if I may be allowed to state that 
this whole thing started with the Bank of Mauritius revoking the licence of Bramer Bank on 
02 April 2015. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Minister, please sit down.  I have just drawn your attention 
to the fact that I have given you sufficient leeway to give background information.  I think it 
is fair that you must allow sufficient time for supplementary questions as well.  So, could you 
please come back to your question? 

Mr Bhadain: With regard to part (a) of the question, Madam Speaker, I am informed 
by the Financial Services Commission that the Special Administrators had made a request for 
the  transfer  of  assets  and  liabilities,  which  also  include  insurance  liabilities,  from  BAI  Co 
(Mtius) Ltd and its related companies to the then newly created National Insurance Co. Ltd 
and  NIC  General  Insurance  Co.  Ltd,  in  line  with  section  110B  of  the  Insurance  Act,  as 
amended, which provides that – 

“A Special Administrator shall, after consultation with the Commission, transfer, in 
whole or in part, the undertaking of an insurer  and any  of its related companies to 
such insurer and any of its related companies as the Minister may approve”. 

For this transfer of assets and liabilities, the Special Administrators had performed an 
team  of 

the  Actuarial 

involved 

independent  actuarial  valuation,  which  also 
PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) in South Africa. 

I am informed that the Board of the Financial Services Commission (FSC) considered 
the  recommendations  of  the  Special  Administrators  and  recommended  the  approval  of  the 
transfer  by  my  Ministry  on  04  August  2015.    On  07  August  2015,  after  that  I  apprised 
Cabinet  of  the  FSC’s  recommendation,  Cabinet  agreed  “to  the  transfer  of  part  of  the 
undertaking of BAI Co. (Mtius) Ltd and its related companies to the National Insurance Co. 
Ltd, the NIC General Insurance Co. Ltd and their related entities.” 

As  at  07  August  2015,  that  is,  the  date  of  the  transfer  of  undertaking,  the  total 
insurance  liabilities  for  the  long-term  insurance  segment,  which  was  transferred  to  the 
National Insurance Co. Ltd, was Rs6,273,619,665, while for the general insurance segment, 
total insurance liabilities of Rs336,142,121 were transferred to NIC General  Insurance Co. 
Ltd. 

These 

the  Special 
Administrators and independent property valuers [Vincent d’Unienville] and were approved 

liabilities  were  backed  by  assets  valued  by 

insurance 

 

12 

for transfer by the  Financial Services Commission (FSC). For National  Insurance Co.  Ltd, 
total  assets  amounted  to  Rs6,520,408,991  while  for  NIC  General  Insurance  Co.  Ltd,  total 
assets amounted to Rs351,339,304. 

Madam Speaker, I am informed by the NIC that, since the transfer of undertaking and 
the launch of their operations, the National Insurance Co. Ltd and NIC General Insurance Co. 
Ltd  have  been  servicing  the  policyholders’  obligations  and  have  to  date  effected  total 
payment of Rs606,066,966 for some 18,752 claims. The latest unaudited position of NICL’s 
insurance  liabilities  as  at  31  March  2016  amounted  to  Rs5,940,290,230  (as  compared  to 
Rs6,273,619,665  in  August  2015),  while  for  the  general  insurance  segment,  the  latest 
unaudited  position  of  NICG’s  insurance  liabilities  as  at  31st  March  2016  amounted  to 
Rs264,442,362 (as compared to Rs336,142,121). 

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (b) of the question, there were 16,341 victims 
regarding those notorious Super Cash Back Gold policies, out of which 223 were not eligible 
for repayment, that is, 168 did not register and 55 were corporate bodies. The total number of 
policyholders eligible for repayment was 16,118 policyholders.  

Madam  Speaker,  to  date,  10,211  policy  holders  have  been  repaid  in  full  and  final 
settlement out of the 16,118. Thus, the remaining 5,907 policyholders are awaiting payment 
of their capital amount or the remaining balance thereof. 

Madam  Speaker,  out  of  the  remaining  5,907  policyholders,  536  cases  have  been 
identified as being suspicious and those include both foreigners and Mauritian citizens. These 
cases are being looked into by the Financial Intelligence Unit. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, the remaining number of Super Cash Back Gold policy 
holders to date is 5,371 only and the total amount repayable is Rs5,391,957,383. The annual 
sum payable over 5 years is Rs1,078,391,477. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to Bramer Asset Management Limited, 3,021 investors 
registered for payment, 979 have been fully repaid; and 153 cases have been referred to the 
Financial  Intelligence  Unit  because  they  are  suspicious  cases.  The  remaining  amount  of 
investors to be repaid is 1,889 amounting to Rs1,601,952,799. The annual sum payable is, 
therefore, Rs320,390,560. 

This gives a total annual sum payable of Rs1,398,782,037 for both Super Cash Back 

Gold and Bramer Asset Management Ltd. 

 

13 

Madam  Speaker,  the  maximum  amount  payable  as  at  date  to  the  holders  of  Super 
Cash  Back  Gold  and  investors  over  a  five-year  period  which  will  be  repaid  from  the 
following sources. 

 

 

14 

 

 

Item 

Bank balances of NPFL 

Disposal of shares in Britam Kenya 

Securitisation of HP Book 

Disposal of BA Exchange 

Disposal of Kapu Kai Complex 

Total available 

# 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

 

Rs billion 

0.7 

2.6 

0.2 

0.2 

0.2 

3.9 

These are the figures provided to me by the Special Administrators and out of that 
figure of Rs3.9 billion what we have to pay by 30 June 2016 is the figure I have stated just 
before, which is Rs1.4 billion and Rs3.9 billion is coming in. 

Regarding  part  (c)(i)  of  the  question,  the  credit  facility  of  Rs3.5  billion  bearing  an 
interest rate of 3.75% per annum extended by the Bank of Mauritius to the National Property 
Fund Ltd. is repayable by 30 June 2016. The credit facility was duly approved by the Board 
of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  at  its  meeting  of  11  June  2015.  I  am  informed  that  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius has no objection for an extension of the credit facility to 30 June 2017 on the same 
terms and conditions. I must say, Madam Speaker, that the Bank of Mauritius does not fall 
under me, but I have gathered the information for the purposes of answering the PNQ of the 
hon. Leader of the Opposition. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (c)(ii)(A) of the question, I am informed by the 
Special Administrators that an MOU has already been signed with the existing shareholders 
of Britam Kenya on 11 March 2016 for an amount of Rs2.9 billion of which Rs2.6 billion 
will be paid by 15 May 2016. 

The signing of the escrow agreement was delayed by virtue of the different law firms 
involved in different jurisdictions. The agreement was finally signed on the night of 29 April 
2016.  

As yesterday was a bank holiday in Kenya, Madam Speaker, funds are expected to 
flow  in  the  escrow  account  as  from  today  and  I  am  pleased  to  announce  that,  as  at  this 

 

15 

morning,  we  have  already  received  a  first  swift  transfer.  Since  this  is  a  consortium  of 
investors,  I  am  made  to  understand  by  the  special  administrators  that  the  remaining  swift 
transfers will flow within the next two weeks, that is, by 15 May 2016. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (c)(ii)(B) of the question, the House may wish to 
note  that  on  28  August  2015,  Cabinet  took  note  that  Apollo  Bramwell  Hospital  has  been 
transferred to NIC Healthcare and agreed to issues to Apollo Bramwell Hospital being dealt 
with under the responsibility of the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development. At the 
material time, the proposal was to create a Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU), however, 
I am informed that the Sale and Purchase Agreement (SPA) is being finalised with Omega 
Ark Healthcare Investment Ltd, the preferred bidder at an agreed price of USD 60 million. A 
legal team from Omega Ark is expected to come this week and the signature of the SPA is 
scheduled before the end of this month. Again, Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the hon. 
Leader of the Opposition that Apollo Bramwell Hospital does not fall within the purview of 
my Ministry, but I have gathered the information for the purposes of answering his PNQ. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (c) (ii)(C) of the question, I am informed that two 
offers were received and the transaction adviser did an evaluation exercise of bids received. 
On 20 November 2015, it submitted a report recommending Capital Sterling Investment Ltd. 
as  the  preferred  bidder  with  a  cash  offer  of  Rs255  m.  The  other  offer  was  from  Change 
Express, an existing operator. 

The  application  of  the  Preferred  Bidder  was  made  to  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  on  17 
February  2016.  The  Bank  of  Mauritius  rejected  the  preferred  bidder  on  25  March  2016 
because the findings of an apparent due diligence were “revealing”. This contradicts the due 
diligence  done  by  the  Special  Administrator  as  none  of  the  shareholders  have  criminal 
records, they have clean records with World Check and Passport Check and shareholders are 
not  acting  in  nominee  capacity.  The  source  of  funds  has  been  disclosed  in  complete 
transparency and had been transacted through international bank of repute regulated by the 
Central Bank, by the Bank of Mauritius for the last 15 years. A revised submission was made 
and the Bank of Mauritius on 06 April 2016 maintained that the shareholders are not fit and 
proper persons.  

I  am  informed  that  negotiations  are  now  being  conducted  with  the  second  bidder, 
Change  Express,  with  a  view  to  completing  the  transaction  within  a  reasonable  timeframe 

 

16 

before 30 June 2016. But, again, Madam Speaker, that will depend on the Bank of Mauritius 
giving its green light. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (d) of the question, there is no Courts Ltd. Both 
Courts and Iframac were operating under the legal entity Iframac Ltd. The proceeds from the 
sale received were Rs360 m. and Rs229 m. were paid to banks within which Rs44 m. were 
paid to the SMEs. 189 employees were paid Ex Gratia payment of Rs13 m. This transaction 
has saved the jobs in Mauritius of 622 families, Madam Speaker. 

Iframac Motors, the brands were lost with BAI directors appointing an administrator. 
Cars and spare parts were sold for Rs89 m., Rs44 m. were applied for Ex Gratia payment of 
138 employees and 125 jobs were saved through redeployment to Leal and to IMC. 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, if I can start with the first part of my question, with 
the 135,000 poor people who had pension policies with BAI and now with NIC or the sister 
company.  I  am  sure  the  hon.  Minister  is  aware  that  on  07  April,  the  former  Minister  of 
Finance  and  Economic  Development  said  that  the  long-term  liabilities,  pension  liabilities 
were Rs4.2 billion. Today, if I heard correctly, it has gone up to Rs6.6 billion. Can I ask the 
hon. Minister whether the FSC has satisfied, is satisfied and has certified that the National 
Insurance Company and its sister company can face that kind of liability in the future? Is the 
FSC satisfied that the solvency ratio requirements under the Insurance Act are being abided 
by the NIC, and not like the BAI not being abided by? 

Mr Bhadain: Yes, Madam Speaker.  The FSC has, of course, conducted all the due 
diligence that it should conduct according to law and also based themselves on the evaluation 
of the then Special Administrators, PricewaterhouseCoopers who are assisted by a team from 
South Africa.  The liabilities in NIC are backed up by assets and, if I recall correctly, I stated 
that the liabilities were Rs6.3 billion and the assets were Rs6.5 billion on the balance sheet. 
Then, Rs600 m. has been repaid to policyholders whose policies have matured. 

Mr  Bérenger:    He  repeated  and  again.  Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  whether  he  is 

telling us that the FSC has certified that they are satisfied? 

Mr  Bhadain:    Absolutely,  Madam  Speaker,  because  the  FSC  would  never  give  a 

certificate to an insurance company if it is not satisfied.   

Mr Bérenger:  That is what it did in the past; the hon. Minister has just said it.  Not the 

same FSC.  Now, it is worse. 

 

17 

(Interruptions) 

If I can move on to the second part of my question because we are running out time; is the 
hon. Minister – because of so many figures quoted, we have to digest that – saying that, as far 
as the payment of 30 June to the Bramer Bank Asset Management and Super Cash Back Gold 
policyowners,  the  money  is  available  and  can  I  have  the  figures  every  30  June  over  the 
following four years, how much will be paid annually? 

Mr Bhadain:  I have already given those figures, Madam Speaker.  It is Rs1.4 billion, 
if I am not mistaken, in terms of the annual sums when you cumulate both Super Cash Back 
Gold and  Bramer Assets.   I  have also  given the  figures,  as  I  am informed, by  the Special 
Administrators that by 30 June 2016, an amount of Rs3.9 billion will be in the account of 
NPFL.  As at to date, there is Rs700 m. which is in the account of NPFL.  The deal with 
Britam  has  already  been  signed.    Money  has  been  received  today  and  will  flow  through 
according to the agreement which has been signed.  That is that Rs2.6 billion. So, for the 30 
June  2016,  commitment  of  paying  20%  debentures  to  those  policyholders  and  investors,  I 
think there is no reason as to why we should be worried. 

Mr  Bérenger:    Can  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  the  sum  injected  to  date  by 
Government and special funds, whatever, linked to Government, into NIC to bring us to that 
financial situation? 

Mr Bhadain:  Madam Speaker, I must say, if I may be allowed to explain on this one, 
when  this  whole  scandal  came  up  to  light  following  the  revocation  of  the  licence  by  the 
Central Bank, the insurance company was also hit. Now, as the then hon. Minister of Finance 
and Economic Development stated to Parliament on 07 April 2015, the long-term insurance 
policies were being safeguarded; 135,000 policies that were the recurring policies because the 
maturity dates were all over to 2030 and beyond. 

Mr Bérenger:  My question is how much funds, if the hon. Minister has the figure, 

have been injected by Government? 

Mr Bhadain:  I am coming to that. 

Madam Speaker:  Yes, hon. Minister, can I just ask you to reply to questions which 
have  been  asked?    Don’t  go  back  again  into  the  history  of  what  happened.    Reply  to  the 
question which had been asked because you have already taken a long time to reply to your 
question! 

 
Mr Bhadain:  I fully agree, Madam Speaker, but I must give some context to how 

18 

much we are talking about or else it will be a figure in a vacuum.   

(Interruptions) 

I will give the figure!  Then, don’t tell me that you don’t understand! 

(Interruptions) 

The figure for NIC, no public funds have been used for repaying Super Cash Back Gold and 
Bramer Asset Management Limited.  This is a commitment that was given to the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister that we will not take public funds. 

(Interruptions) 

However… 

Madam Speaker:  Please, sit down, hon. Minister! 

Mr  Bérenger:    The  question  is  not  whether  public  funds  have  been  used.    My 
question  is:  how  much  public  funds  have  been  injected  by  Government  and  other  bodies 
linked to Government into NIC, not into the pockets of the others? 

Mr Bhadain:  I have just stated, Madam Speaker, as regards NIC, no public funds 
have  been  injected  for  the  repayment  of  Super  Cash  Back  Gold  and  Bramer  Asset 
Management Limited.  However, when a company is formed… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Ameer Meea, you will have the opportunity to ask questions! 

(Interruptions) 

Now,  don’t  make  comments!  I  have  told  you  that  you  will  have  the  opportunity  to  ask 
question.  

Mr Bhadain:  However, Madam Speaker, when a new company is formed and you 
need  to  grant  a  licence  to  an  insurance  company,  it  must  have  a  minimum  capital.    That 
minimum capital was injected for the company to be formed, but no money has been used, 
public funds injected for repayment of Super Cash Back Gold or Bramer Asset. 

Mr Bérenger:  Can I know when the debentures - that have to be paid over five years, 
if I understood correctly – will be issued and when they are issued, will it be for the whole of 

 

19 

the debentures, and can we know whether, if that is the case, that goes straight into the public 
debt? 

Mr  Bhadain:    The  first  thing,  Madam  Speaker,  is  that  the  commitment  which  has 
been given by Government to all these people suffering is that they have already been paid 
Rs6 billion.  Now, the debentures will start as from 30 June 2016.  That’s the date.  I don’t 
know why everybody is getting worried before 30 June 2016.  They will be issued prior to 
that date. Now, as I have explained, money is flowing into the account of NPFL and we have 
a commitment of Rs1.4 billion, together Super Cash Back Gold and Bramer Asset. But if we 
are getting in Rs3.9 billion, we are also looking into alleviating the suffering of people with 
hardship cases. When we look at the table, I can tell you, Madam Speaker, that if, out of the 
Rs3.9  billion  which  is  going  to  flow  in,  we  repay  another  Rs250  m.  for  people  who  have 
invested under Rs1 m. into Super Cash Back Gold, that would take care of 1,141 families.  
So, we will do that. We will not only repay the 20% as committed, but as the funds flow in, 
we will try to do better than that. That is what we are working towards, day in day out.  

Mr  Bérenger:    Madam  Speaker,  as  far  as  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  is  concerned,  we 
have been told that it is not their role - I don’t think it is legal - but they have extended that 
Rs3.5 billion. Can I know the date on which the Bank of Mauritius confirmed that? 

Mr  Bhadain:    Madam  Speaker,  I  must  say,  if  I  may  be  allowed  to  give  some 
background, on 30 June 2015 we repaid Rs3.5 billion to the policyholders.  Now, at that time, 
it could have been the case that the shares of Britam could have been sold.  But the then hon. 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development decided that those shares would go into a 
Legacy Sovereign Fund and instead to get a Rs3.5 billion loan from the Bank of Mauritius.  
Now, the Bank of Mauritius approved that on 11 June 2015, if I am not mistaken, Madam 
Speaker. 

Mr  Bérenger:    The  extension,  I  want  to  know  about,  not  the  loan  in  2015!    The 

extension which the hon. Minister has mentioned. 

Mr Bhadain:  There is no need to shout!  Ask nicely! 

Mr Bérenger:  You don’t understand.  

Mr Bhadain:  I’ll tell you.  

 (Interruptions) 

It was at the beginning of May 2016, only a few days back, Madam Speaker. 

20 

 
Mr  Bérenger:    Madam  Speaker,  I  think  I  heard  the  hon.  Minister  say  that  we  are 
supposed to get money for the BAI shares in Kenya worth Rs2.9 billion. He will remember 
that on 20 October, he said here, it is on record –  

“We would obtain much more than Rs3.5 billion”.   

Can I know what has happened in the meantime?  Why now we are accepting Rs2.9 billion? 

Mr Bhadain:  Absolutely, Madam Speaker.  We had an offer from MMI which was 
negotiated  with  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  under  the  then  hon. 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development.  That offer was, if I am not mistaken, Rs4.3 
billion.  MMI  went  ahead  with  their  lawyers  to  conclude  the  deal  with  the  existing 
shareholders  of  Britam  in  Kenya  and,  of  course,  according  to  law,  we  have  pre-emption 
rights.    Their  consent  is  necessary,  but  they  decided  not  to  give  that  consent  and  also  the 
regulatory requirements in Kenya had to be met with the Central Bank, so MMI could not 
finalise  that  transaction.    The  existing  shareholders  of  Kenya  came  to  Mauritius,  but  the 
Special  Administrators  had  a  meeting  with  me  at  the  Ministry  and  all  the  team  and  they 
basically came up with that proposal of Rs2.9 billion.  In view of the fact that, after having 
worked  the  figures,  we  could  accept  that  figure;  we  went  ahead  and  the  Special 
Administrators accepted that by signing a MoU and now it is a done deal.  

Mr Bérenger:  Regarding Apollo Hospital, initially it was expected to get more than 
Rs5 billion.  Now, from what I heard, it keeps on going down and the deal is being finalised 
according to the hon. Minister because I heard what kind of due diligence BDO have done in 
other cases a few minutes ago. Can we know whether the due diligence has been carried out 
to know who is behind that offer by Omega Ark? 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, as  I have stated  before, Apollo Bramwell Hospital 
does not fall under the purview of my Ministry because a decision has been taken by Cabinet 
that  it  should  be  under  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  when  it  was 
decided that it would become a CHU which is a Centre Hospitalière Universitaire and the 
model  was  a  different  model.  Now,  that  did  not  go  ahead  and  I  don’t  have  all  the  details 
regarding  Apollo  Bramwell  Hospital  because  it  is  not  within  the  purview  of  my  Ministry. 
However,  what  I  do  know  is  that  Omega  Ark  has  made  that  bid  and  that  figure  which  I 
mentioned of USD60 m.  As to who is behind Omega Ark, I, personally, have not conducted 
any  due  diligence  neither  has  my  Ministry.  Question  could  be  put  to  the  hon.  Minister  of 
Finance and Economic Development. I believe they are people from England. 

21 

 
Mr  Bérenger:  The  last  part  of  my  question.  As  far  as  this  offer  for  BA  Exchange 
Western  Union,  I  listened  carefully  to  the  tone  of  the  hon.  Minister  -  although  he  has 
requested the Bank of Mauritius or rather Government to extend this Rs3.5 billion - but the 
tone is very negative as far as the Bank of Mauritius is concerned. Can I know whether, in 
spite of all the negative comments and the facts that we are obtaining concerning BDO, the 
Minister will keep on defending BDO where it cannot be defended? 

Mr  Bhadain:  Well,  I  am  not  defending  BDO,  Madam  Speaker.  I  know  in  what 
situation they are working because it is very complex in terms of how they have to raise those 
assets to recover to be able to repay those people. I know they are putting a lot of hard work 
into it and I have no reason to come and say that they are not working hard. On the other 
hand, there are commercial realities. We all know how it happens when you are disposing of 
a property and, especially, when you are in a distressed sale condition because you have a 
deadline and you have people suffering out there and you want to get the money to be able to 
pay them. This is not a normal sale. If BDO had all the time in the world, they would have, of 
course, looked for even better offers. 

Now,  with  regard  to  BOM,  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  mentioned  my  tone 
when I was answering the question. I must say that I was not very pleased of the fact that BA 
Exchange, the licence should have been granted by BOM for money to be raised through the 
sale  to  be  able  to  pay  the  Super  Cash  Back  Gold  people.  The  Bank  of  Mauritius  took  an 
enormous amount of time and then decided not to go ahead with it. Now, I do hope that they 
are going to go ahead with the second bidder very quickly so that money is raised. 

Secondly, in terms of another case for the transfer of Rs390 m. which had to do with 
the  hire  purchase  book  of  Courts  which  was  transferred  to  Bramer  Bank,  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius  decided  to  go  to  Court  to  prevent  that  money  coming  into  the  Special 
Administrators’ Funds to be paid to the special - we had to go to Court and fight, we lost 
time.  Then,  hon.  Shakeel  Mohamed  came  up  with  another  application  for  his  client,  Mrs 
Laina Rawat, and attached the BOM application to his application and then, at the end of the 
day, we had to go to Court for a few weeks. All this prevented us from moving quickly. 

Dr. Sorefan: Madam Speaker, may we know from the hon. Minister where matters 

stand regarding certain floors of Bramer House at Ebène, whether they have been sold?  

Mr Bhadain: No, these are still assets to be recovered because there are long lists of 
assets to be recovered, Madam Speaker. When I mentioned that figure of Rs3.9 billion, this is 

 

22 

as  at  30  June  2016.  Diplomat  Gardens,  for  instance,  there  are  many  properties  which  are 
there,  which  is  in  the  process  of  being  sold  by  the  Special  Administrator,  the  same  thing 
about the floors of Bramer Asset, there is land at Plaine Lauzun, there is land at Montebello 
and there are other assets which are going to be recovered.  As you know, selling properties 
and recovering takes more time, Madam Speaker. This is why, at one point in time, I stated to 
the hon. Leader of the Opposition that the two biggest assets are National Insurance Co. Ltd 
asset, the insurance company and MauBank. So, we can open up the share capital of NIC and 
MauBank to raise money coming in as and when required to meet those commitments and to 
repay people quickly. That is why we have made those offers. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Speaker, finally, this week we got the figures in relation to 
liabilities and assets of the NIC which is Rs6.3 billion to liabilities and Rs6.5 billion to assets. 
Clearly, the net assets value is Rs200 m. well below the Rs5.6 billion that the hon. Minister 
wanted to sell the shares to SICOM and NPF. My question to the hon. Minister is that last 
week, answering to the same question, he stated that – 

“An offer from Prudential plc UK has been received on 24 February 2016.” 

May I know how much this offer is for the NIC? 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, if I may be allowed to explain because there are so 
many  issues  which  are  being  raised  by  the  hon.  Member  which  are  not  correct.  Firstly,  I 
never stated that the current liabilities are R6.3 billion. I said Rs5.9 billion. I said Rs600 m. 
has  already  been  repaid  between  August  and  now.  So,  the  hon.  Member  is  talking  about 
assets of Rs6.5 billion and about liabilities to date of Rs5.9 billion. That’s the first correction. 
The second correction is in relation to Prudential. I stated, Madam Speaker… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhadain: I am answering. The second correction, Madam Speaker - correcting 
the hon. Member, not correction by me – is in relation to Prudential. I stated last week that an 
offer has, indeed, been received by Prudential UK for the acquisition of National Insurance 
Co. Ltd, the life insurance part and the hon. Member asked me to disclose the figure. Now, 
that offer is still valid for 180 days until August this year and a non-disclosure Agreement has 
been signed. I am sure everybody in this House understands that we cannot, even though I 

 

23 

want to be transparent, I want to go and give you the figure, I am bound by law not to do so 
and, if I do so, then you will have lawsuit from Prudential UK. That has to be understood. 

Thirdly,  in  relation  to  whether  the  valuation  of  Rs5.6  billion  which  has  been 
mentioned by the hon. Member offered to SICOM and SBM Holdings and he is talking about 
liabilities  of  Rs5.9  and  assets  of  Rs6.5,  this  is  not  how  you  value  an  insurance  company. 
These are the assets and the Balance Sheet which is basically the Balance Sheet value. An 
insurance  company,  Madam  Speaker,  is  based  on  the  NAV  value.  There  is  a  different 
actuarial methodology to calculate the value of an insurance company and it is also based on 
the cash flow forecast of the company. The hon. Member should know that.  They should not 
mislead the population. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order please! Hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  The  hon.  Minister  mentioned  that  when 
Courts and Iframac were sold, the money was repaid to the lenders, the bank of Iframac and 
Courts. So, may I know from the hon. Minister why was that money not paid to policyholders 
and whether the Special Administrators will apply the same logic whenever they sell other 
assets  with  the  BAI  Group,  meaning  that  the  secured  lenders  are  paid  first  before  all  the 
policyholders? 

Mr  Bhadain:  Madam  Speaker,  in  all  honesty,  what  happened  with  Iframac  and 
Courts and the banks was a meeting which was conducted by the then Minister of Finance 
and Economic Development with those banks to ask them to allow the sale to go ahead, even 
though they had charges on certain assets, and it was agreed that the banks would be repaid a 
certain amount and the priority of Government was to safeguard employment. With regard to 
Courts and Iframac, because of the number of people working in Courts and the number of 
people working in Iframac, it was not a priority to recover the maximum amount possible to 
repay Super Cash Back Gold policyholders and to risk losing 700/800 jobs in Mauritius. So, 
we prioritise on that and this is not what is going to happen in other cases. However, I have 
also had meetings with the banks, Barclays in particular, with regard to certain charges which 
are  on  Phoenix  Les  Halles  and  we  are  working  an  arrangement.  We  are  working  with  the 
banks, but we are telling them: ‘Look, this is a national issue and you have to basically help 
us as well! You have kids who walk on the street too.’ 

24 

 
Mr  Bérenger:  My  last  question  is  and  it  will  go  on  record.  I  am  asking  the  hon. 
Minister  whether  he  is  giving  the  guarantee  in  the  House  today  that  those  135,000  poor 
people who had pension policy with the BAI, their long-term pension rights are guaranteed, 
are safe and the FSC is watching that carefully and that as far as the 30,000 policyholders of 
Super Cash Back Gold and Bramer Asset Management are concerned, they will be paid on 
time? 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, with regard to the recurring premiums, the 135,283 
policies at the time when this whole scandal broke out, Government gave a commitment that 
these people will not lose the premiums they have been paying and at maturity they will all 
be paid.  True it is that the then Minister of Finance and Economic Development mentioned a 
figure of Rs4.2 billion, I have stated the figures as at date and Government will honour that 
commitment. NIC is working very well. I gave all the figures last week, I am not going to 
repeat for the sake of being stopped by the Opposition. But, all the indications are that NIC is 
a  flourishing  company,  it  is  doing  very  well.  It  is  opening  up  its  capital  and  I  very  much 
believe that there is no reason as to why these policies are at any risk. However, on the Super 
Cash Back Gold and Bramer Asset Management I have given the figures, Rs1.4 billion will 
have to be repaid on 30 June 2016. And, yes, Madam Speaker, I am giving the guarantee, we 
will honour that commitment. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Time is over! Hon. Sesungkur! 

NATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION - POLICE OFFICERS – 

COMPLAINTS AGAINST 

(No. B/338) Mr D. Sesungkur (First Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether,  in  regard  to  the  Police  Complaints  Division  of  the  National  Human  Rights 
Commission, he will for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to - 

(a) 

(b) 

the number of complaints lodged thereat against members of the Mauritius 
Police Force, since March 2015 to date, indicating the number thereof which 
have culminated into prosecution and eventually conviction, and  

if  consideration  will  be  given  for  a  review  of  the  manner  in  which 
investigations into the complaints are carried out. 

25 

 
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the National Human Rights 
Commission that since March 2015 to 29 April 2016, 693 complaints have been lodged at the 
Police Complaints Division against members of the Mauritius Police Force. 

 

Out of which - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

1 case has been referred to the Director of Public Prosecutions in accordance 
with section 14(b)(i) of the Police Complaints Act; 

4 complaints have been withdrawn; 

366 complaints have already been set aside, and 

the remaining are still under investigation. 

As  the  case  referred  to  the  Director  of  Public  Prosecutions  is  still  under  Police 

 
enquiry, there has been no prosecution so far. 

 
With regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed that it is not envisaged, at this 
stage, to review the manner in which investigations are carried out, but to build the capacity 
of the investigators by providing additional training. 

Madam Speaker, as already enunciated in the Government Programme 2015-2019 and 
Budget Speech 2015, a full-fledged Independent Police Complaint Commission presided by a 
former Judge of the Supreme Court will be set up to ensure that fundamental human rights of 
citizens are respected. 

I am informed that the relevant Bill is nearly finalised and it will soon be introduced 

 
in the House. 

Mr Ramful: I have been given to understand that at the Police Complaints Division, 
as it is right now, there is a problem about the interpretation of the law. The officers are not 
being able to exercise their powers because of a problem in the law. They are not using the 
normal  Police  procedures  that  they  are  supposed  to  do.  This  is  why  the  DPP’s  Office  is 
having problem to conduct prosecution in those cases. 

Madam Speaker: Ask your question now! 

Mr Ramful: Now, can I invite the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to look into the matter and 

come up with amendments, if need be? 

26 

 
The Prime Minister: Well, anyway, I don’t know where the hon. Member gets his 
information,  but  I  don’t  have  that  sort  of  information  and  I  don’t  see  any  reason  why  the 
Police don’t follow the same procedures in all investigations.  

TAXI DRIVERS, BUS DRIVERS & CONDUCTORS – ASSAULT & LARCENY 

(No. B/339) Mr D. Sesungkur  (First Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to reported cases of assault on taxi drivers, bus drivers and conductors and 
larceny  at  the  expense  of  the  latter,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the 
Commissioner of Police, information as to the number of reported cases thereof, respectively, 
since July 2012 to date, indicating the measures that have been or will be taken to curb the 
incidence thereof. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that there are 212 reported cases of assault and 64 reported cases of larceny on taxi drivers, 
bus drivers and conductors for the period July 2012 to 28 April 2016. 

I am also informed that the Commissioner of Police has taken the following measures 

 
to address the problem - 

(i) 

(ii) 

regular patrols are being effected by Police at bus terminals and taxi-stands; 

Police checks are also carried out in buses particularly early in the morning, at 
off-peak hours during the day and late in the afternoon at specific bus stops 
along certain bus routes; 

(iii)  mobile patrols escort buses along certain routes in some areas particularly at 

specific times; 

(iv) 

(v) 

the Special Supporting Unit is deployed during the week-end at specific 
locations to ensure the safety and security of bus drivers, taxi drivers and 
conductors as well as of their passengers, and 

working sessions are held with public transport employees on a regular basis 
to sensitize them on the necessary precautions to be taken to avoid such 
incidence while on duty. 

Mr Ganoo: Madam Speaker, some time back, I raised the question of a bus conductor 
who was assaulted by a member of the public, nearly losing one eye. The unions have made 

 

27 

representations to the authorities to examine the possibility of toughening the law with regard 
to aggressions exercised upon bus conductors and drivers in the exercise of their function, 
that is, when they are at work, if they are assaulted by members of the public. Could the Rt. 
hon.  Prime  Minister  look  into  the  possibility  of  making  the  law  more  severe  when  these 
drivers and conductors are working and in the exercise of their function? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  don’t  see  any  use  of  making  laws  more 
severe. The laws are there, the penalties are already prescribed. But, it all depends on how 
they are applied. It is the Courts that apply and we know that the Courts very often are very 
lenient. So, what is the use of making it more severe? It will come to the same thing, to the 
same result. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Gobin! 

Mr Gobin: Yes, thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going to be more specific after my 
learned friend hon. Ganoo.  Is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agreeable to consider, at least, that 
amendments  be  brought  to  our  law  to  make  offences,  such  as  assaults  on  drivers  and  bus 
conductors, an aggravating factor for the purposes of sentencing, just the same way as for 
larceny  if  committed  on  a  public  road  or  by  band.  Can  this  be  considered,  at  least,  for 
purposes of sentencing only?  

The Prime Minister: Well, what takes place, is an offence. How can it become by 

itself an aggravating factor? I can’t see the reasoning. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah! 

Mr Rutnah: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister confirm 
that, in the foreseeable future, more Police officers will be recruited in order to strengthen 
security on our streets and on buses? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I have already asked the Commissioner of Police that we 
must recruit more Police officers not only for that purpose, but for many other purposes and 
we are trying to get the necessary funds in the Budget. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Bhagwan! 

MBC – RESTRUCTURING EXERCISE 

(No. B/340) Mr R. Bhagwan  (First Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 

 

28 

whether, in regard to the television channels of the Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation, he 
will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Corporation,  information  as  to  where 
matters stand as to the implementation of the proposed privatization thereof, indicating if the 
Prime Minister’s Office has received any offer from the private sector in respect thereof and, 
if so, give details thereof. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, in my reply to Parliamentary Question B/139 
on  12 April  2016,  I  informed  the  House  that  I  had  already  given  instructions  for  the 
restructuring  of  the  Corporation,  in  line  with  the  Report  of  the  Public  Sector  Efficiency 
Bureau,  under  the  aegis  of  the  Ministry  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 
Institutional  Reforms.    The  Bureau  has  in  its  Report,  inter  alia,  recommended  that  an  in-
depth  survey  should  be  carried  out  to  gauge  the  extent  of  television  channel  preferences 
among its audience.  The whole issue of allocation of MBC/TV channels will be looked into 
in the context of that restructuring exercise. 

Madam Speaker, there is no record at the level of my Office of any offer from the 

private sector in respect of the privatization of the television channels of the MBC. 

Mr Bhagwan: Can I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he is aware that 
one French firm, NRJ Maurice, has been discussing with the MBC/TV on the possibility of 
having a  channel, either radio or TV, and that these discussions have been  going on since 
long, and it has reached far enough? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  here  the  question  is  about  television,  and  I  have 
answered.   If there is anything about radio, the  hon. Member should come with a specific 
question. 

Mr Bhagwan: Madam Speaker, I have said both radio and television.  Can the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister inquire whether there have  been discussions  at the level of the Prime 
Minister’s  Office,  officers,  Advisers  and  even  at  the  level  of  the  senior  personnel  of  the 
MBC/TV,  which  have  discussed  with  that  firm,  NRJ  Maurice,  as  I  mentioned,  which  is  a 
French firm? 

The Prime Minister: Well, we will try to find out. 

Mr Bérenger: The issue of privatisation of some MBC channels has been with us for 
a long time. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister must be aware that, under the previous Government, 
requests were made by certain people from the private sector to utilise this or that channel in 
the context of privatisation, la télévision privée. We are supposed, including the Government 

 

29 

side, to be in favour of télévision privée.  This idea of waiting for a complete restructuring of 
the MBC and then it will be considered, is that not a way de renvoyer aux calendes grecques, 
that is, to get rid of the whole issue de la télévision privée? 

The  Prime  Minister:  The  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition,  himself,  said  that  it  has 
been there for a very long time.  We have not been here for a very long time yet.  So, let us 
have patience. 

BEL OMBRE, BERRY LANE – DRAINS  

(No.  B/341)  Mr  G.  Lesjongard  (Second  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to the proposed works to be carried out by the National Development Unit 
to address the problem of flooding in the region of Bel Ombre, he will state where matters 
stand. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the National Development 
Unit that, following torrential rain of last February, a drain project at Berry Lane, Bel Ombre, 
was identified. 

Invitation  to  provide  Consultancy  Services  under  the  Framework  Agreement  was 

 
issued on 25 April 2016, and the closing date has been set for 25 May 2016. 

Mr  Lesjongard:  Madam  Speaker,  I  understand  that  now  invitation  for  tendering 
procedures has been initiated.  May I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he is aware 
that, on 08 March, a former Minister visited the flooded area and he came by helicopter to 
show the inhabitants how fast Government could react to such a situation, and he promised 
that, in a matter of weeks, the problem will be solved … 

Madam Speaker: Please, ask your question! 

Mr Lesjongard: … and until now not much has been done? 

The Prime Minister: I have already said what has been done and what is being done.  

I cannot say what more we can do right now. 

Mr Jhuboo: Madam Speaker, this is an issue I had raised in 2015 and the answer that 

I had from the then Minister of Environment was as follows – 

“Protective measures have been designed to desilt the river.” 

 

30 

And up to now, nothing has been done, to the extent that the Village Council, along with the 
Forces Vives, had to themselves clean the riverbanks.  So, can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
look into it urgently, please? 

The Prime Minister: Well, as a matter of fact, the District Council of Savanne has, 

from January to March 2016, cleaned drains in the region of Bel Ombre as follows – 

•  Cité Bel Ombre; 
•  Bouba Street; 
•  Michael Leal Street, and 
•  Morcellement St Martin. 

Well, at the level of the District Council, they are doing their job! What is wrong with it? 

Mr  Rutnah:  Madam  Speaker,  in  order  to  deal  with  the  problems  of  flooding 

nationwide, can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister … 

Madam Speaker: Excuse me, hon. Rutnah, I told you that the question relates to the 
region of Bel Ombre and that your supplementary question has to relate to Bel Ombre and not 
nationwide. 

Mr  Rutnah:  Can  the  Rt.  hon.  Minister  confirm  that  Government  is  considering 
setting up a Land Drainage Authority to deal with the problem of Bel Ombre and elsewhere? 

The Prime Minister: I understand this is being looked into. 

Mr Lesjongard: Can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister inform the House whether the NDU 

or officers of the NDU have identified what is the real problem concerning the flooding? 

(Interruptions) 

No, it is not.  It rains everywhere, but you do not have flooding everywhere.   

Is the NDU aware that people in the area have said that the problem of flooding is 

related to the Golf course nearby that region? 

The Prime Minister: Golf course! Well, I am learning it right now.  We will try to 

find out whether the real cause is the Golf course. 

IBA – DIRECTOR - APPOINTMENT 

(No. B/342) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked the Rt. hon.  Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 

 

31 

and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to Ms Y. C., Director of the Independent Broadcasting Authority, he will, 
for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Authority, information as to the – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

post she occupied immediately prior to her appointment thereat, indicating the 
date on which she resigned therefrom;  

date on which she submitted her application therefor, and  

number of applicants who applied for the said post, indicating their respective 
qualifications. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, the post of Director, Independent Broadcast 
Authority, is vacant since 15 December 2014, following the demise of the holder.  Section 11 
of  the  IBA  Act  provides  that  the  Authority  shall  appoint  a  Director  on  such  terms  and 
conditions as it thinks fit. 

In regard to part (a) of the question, Ms Y.C. was the Chairperson of the IBA prior to 
her appointment as Director.  She resigned as Chairperson of the IBA on 25 March 2016, date 
on which her appointment as Director took effect. 

Madam Speaker, I am informed by the IBA that, following approval by the Board, the 
vacancy for the post of Director was advertised by the Authority in the local press on 26, 27, 
28 and 29 October 2015.  The closing date for submission of applications was 10 November 
2015. 

In response to the advertisement, two applications were received, including one from 

Ms Y.C., Chairperson of the IBA. 

In view of the poor response received, the Board decided to cancel the exercise and to 
resort to the services of a private recruitment agency to carry out a fresh selection exercise for 
the filling of the vacancy for the post of Director. 

The vacancy for the post of Director, IBA, was advertised anonymously by the private 
recruitment agency in the local press on 14, 15, 16 and 17 February 2016.  The closing date 
for the submission of applications was 28 February 2016. 

Madam Speaker, I am further informed by the IBA that, from information obtained 
from the private recruitment agency, a total of 20 candidates, including Ms Y.C., submitted 
their application in response to the advertisement.  The private recruitment agency shortlisted 
seven candidates for a first round of interviews on 08 March 2016.  Following that exercise, 

 

32 

four  candidates  were  shortlisted  and  were  convened  for  a  second  round  of  interviews  on 
15 March 2016.  For this leg of the selection exercise, one member of the IBA Board formed 
part of the selection panel. 

As  a  result  of  the  final  interview  assessment,  Ms  Y.C.  was  ranked  first  by  the 

selection panel. 

By virtue of the powers conferred upon it by section 11 of the IBA Act, the Board 

made an offer of appointment as Director to Ms Y.C. 

Madam Speaker, I am informed that, since Ms Y.C. was an applicant for the post of 
Director, she had declared her interest and did not participate in deliberations pertaining to 
second  selection  exercise  undertaken  by  the  private  recruitment  agency.    The  then 
representative of the Ministry of Technology, Communication and Innovation on the Board 
of the IBA had presided over all meetings relating to the appointment of the Director of IBA. 

Madam Speaker, in regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed by the IBA that 
Ms Y.C.  submitted  her  application  for  the  post  of  Director  in  response  to  the  two 
advertisements when she was the Chairperson of the Authority. 

Madam Speaker, in regard to part (c) of the question, I am advised that it would not be 
appropriate for me to disclose the information requested by the hon. Member in regard to the 
qualifications of the applicants. 

Madam  Speaker,  as  the  House  may  be  aware,  both  the  Independent  Commission 
against  Corruption  and  the  Equal  Opportunity  Commission  are  currently  investigating  into 
the  recruitment  exercise  carried  out  by  the  Board  of  the  IBA  for  the  filling  of  the  post  of 
Director. 

 As I indicated earlier, the post of Director is filled by the Authority on such terms and 
conditions as it thinks fit. Any person who feels aggrieved by the decision of the Authority 
can appeal to appropriate independent institutions for redress. 

Mr Baloomoody: Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he can confirm that 
the  Board  which  took  the  decision  to  advertise  for  that  post,  that  lady  was  chairing  that 
Board? 

The Prime Minister: I said it already, she was the Chairperson. 

Mr Baloomoody: So, will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister confirm that, as Chairperson of 

that Board, she was aware that this post was being advertised? 

 

33 

The Prime Minister: Obviously, even if she would not have been the Chairperson, 

she was there, she must have known. 

Mr Baloomoody: Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, how can he, with his answer, 
reconcile the fact that that lady has publicly said that when she applied for that post, she was 
not aware for which post she was applying? 

The Prime Minister: Well, that’s what she said. I don’t know.  

Mr Baloomoody: Does the Rt. hon. Prime Minister find it proper that not only the 
Chairman of the  Board,  but a member of the  Board who sat  on the second selection was 
given questions to be answered by the applicant 24 hours prior to that application and that 
lady is also a member of the Board? 

The Prime Minister: I am not aware of that. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: Can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister confirm to the House and the nation 
that  the  whole  process  of  going  to  a  private  firm  for  the  filling  of  that  post  was  just  a 
gimmick, because it was well known that Government wanted that lady to become the MD of 
that institution because she was an active and still is an active member of the MSM? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  this  is  ridiculous.  There  is  nothing  to  show  that 
Government was concerned or took part in this exercise. I have just said how the whole thing 
took place and I could have refused to answer because the whole matter is being investigated 
by ICAC and the other institution.  I was good enough to give you information that I thought 
is proper and fair that you should be aware. 

Mr  Uteem:  Madam  Speaker,  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  mentioned  that  the  lady 
chaired the IBA when the post was being advertised. So, may I know from the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister,  since  we  don’t  have  the  Minutes  of  Proceedings,  whether  at  that  meeting  it  was 
decided what are the qualifications which a candidate should have in order to be appointed as 
a Director? 

The Prime Minister: Well, let us wait for the result of the investigation, then we will 

know, in fact, exactly what happened. I don’t have the Minutes of Proceedings. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody! 

 

34 

Mr Baloomoody: Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he can confirm that 
one of the profiles for that post was, by the list, to have a minimum of proven track record of 
five years’ working experience in a senior position and that lady does not have this profile? 

The Prime Minister: This would be for the enquiry to find out and let us know. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo, you have a question? No! Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: Can I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he has enquired 
whether  that  Senior  Government  Officer  who  sat  on  that  Board  of  interview  received 
instruction from his Minister to go for the appointment of Ms Choomka? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I am not an Enquiring officer. I did not enquire into it. 

Madam Speaker: Last question! 

Mr Baloomoody: Now, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister just mentioned that there are two 
enquiries  being  carried  out  by  EOC  and  ICAC  and  we  have  learnt  that  ICAC  is  having 
difficulties in inquiring because there are certain Board papers which are missing. So, can I 
ask  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  whether  he  will  ask  that  lady  to  step  down,  pending  the 
termination of these two enquiries, so that all the facts and documents are made available to 
the Enquiring officers? 

The Prime Minister: Well, that is not my duty. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Jhugroo! 

PMO - FORMER SENIOR ADVISER - APPOINTMENT 

(No. B/343) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to Professor A. S., Senior Adviser on Economic Matters who was formerly 
attached to the Prime Minister’s Office, since March 2006 to November 2014, he will state - 

(a) 

(b) 

if his attachment thereat was on a full time or part time basis, and  

the number of visits he had undertaken during that period, giving details as to 
the  countries  visited  and  expenditure  incurred  by  Government,  if  any,  in 
respect of his good self and of members of his family. 

 

35 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, as indicated in the reply to PQ B/616 on 06 
October 2015, Professor A. S. was employed on contract at the Prime Minister’s Office as 
Senior Adviser on Economic Matters on a part-time basis. 

 In regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed that according to records available 
at the Prime Minister’s Office and the Accountant-General’s Office, no expenditure has been 
incurred in connection with any overseas visits undertaken by Professor A. S. in his capacity 
as Senior Adviser to the former Prime Minister.  

I  must  point  out  this  person  was  domiciled  in  UK  and  he  was  acting  as  part-time 
Adviser to the Prime Minister. Well, if there have been visits from there elsewhere, it is only 
our Embassy, if they still have records available over there,  can ascertain and tell us whether 
there have been or not. 

Insofar as his visits to Mauritius are concerned, as indicated in the reply to PQ B/616, 
from March 2006 to November 2014, Professor A. S. had effected 44 visits to Mauritius and 
the  expenditure  incurred  by  Government  for  air  tickets  and  accommodation  in  respect  of 
Professor A. S. and his family members, amounted to Rs5,273,459. 

Mr  Jhugroo:    As  just  mentioned  by  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Professor  A.  S.,  
personal friend of the former Prime Minister, effected 44 visits. So, can the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister inform the House whether during his visits to Mauritius, he was accompanied by his 
family and on two occasions by his mistress ….  

The Prime Minister: I am sorry, I have said in my answer that he was accompanied 
by  his  family  members.  Now,  whether  it  included  mistress,  I  don’t  know.  I  don’t  know 
whether Professor A. S. had a mistress. 

Madam Speaker: How would you know? 

The Prime Minister: I know the former Prime Minister had one. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Jhugroo: Can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister inform the House whether Professor A. 
S.  was  paid  an  allowance  of  £200  on  a  daily  basis  and  was  also  provided  with  free 
accommodation, chauffeur-driven car and benefited a VVIP treatment… 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, are you asking a question or providing information? 

(Interruptions) 

 

36 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  Madam  Speaker,  I  have  not  converted  into  Pound 
Sterling or Rupees. The information I have got is in Rupees and I have said it was for his 
accommodation, for his air tickets and all that. I don’t know what the hon. Member wants to 
know more. 

Mr Jhugroo: Is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister aware that the Special Economic Adviser 
of the former Prime Minister - qui été vachement nourri -  had never submitted any Economic 
Mission  Report  to  any  Finance  Minister  of  the  former  Government  because  these  two 
playboys were busy smoking long cigars and drinking … 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

 (Interruptions) 

Hon. Jhugroo, I am on my feet! Please, don’t use words which are unparliamentary!  Please! 

(Interruptions) 

The  Prime  Minister:    Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  the  duty  of  Professor 
Scott was to advise the Prime Minister on strategic international and economic issues. The 
former Prime Minister, in his reply to PQ IB/674 on 23 November 2010, stated that Professor 
Scott was regularly submitting his reports to him, but such reports were meant for internal use 
and  policy  formulation.    There  is,  however,  no  record  of  any  such  report  at  the  Prime 
Minister’s  Office;  therefore,  I  take  it  that  they  were  meant  for  personal  use  of  the  Prime 
Minister.  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  I take this opportunity to draw the attention of hon. Members of 
the House that they shouldn’t cast aspersions on persons who are not in the House and who 
are not able to defend themselves.  Time is over!  Yes, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

SSRN HOSPITAL - CT SCAN - REPAIRS 

(No. B/351) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the CT-Scan equipment at the 
Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam National Hospital, he will state – 

(a) 
(b) 

since when it is out of order; 
the number of times it has undergone repairs, indicating the total cost thereof, 
and  

 
(c) 

37 

when request was made for the replacement thereof, indicating the outcome 
thereof. 

Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, I wish to inform 
the House that the CT-Scan at Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam National Hospital has been out 
of order since 31 December 2014.   

As for part (b) of the question, I am informed the equipment has undergone repairs on 

four occasions at the cost of Rs551,155.00   

Concerning  part  (c)  of  the  question,  the  request  for  replacement  was  made  by  the 

Consultant-in-charge on the 23 January 2014. 
Madam Speaker:  Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 
Dr. Sorefan:  Can the hon. Minister inform the House whether the CT-Scan is still 

functioning or is it out of order right now? 

Mr  Gayan:  Well,  I  understand  it  is  still  out  of  order,  but  arrangements  have  been 

made for patients to be sent to other hospitals.  

Madam Speaker:  Yes, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 
Dr. Sorefan:  May we know from the hon. Minister how old is this CT-Scan at SSRN 

Hospital? 

Mr  Gayan:    From  the  information  I  have,  Madam  Speaker,  that  equipment  was 

commissioned on the 29 May 2002.  So, it is about 14 years old.  

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 
Dr. Sorefan:  May we know from the hon. Minister when patients are recommended 
by Specialists for a CT-Scan investigation, what actions are taken?  Are they taken to other 
regional hospitals, for example, Jeetoo Hospital, which I hope has a functional one or are they 
referred to private clinics? 

Mr Gayan:  Well, Madam Speaker,  I thought that this was going to be one of the 
questions.  So, let me give some figures.  In 2014, 1847 patients were sent to other regional 
hospitals  namely  Jeetoo  and  Victoria;  in  2015,  2444  and  this  year  already  we  have  798 
patients who have been referred to Dr. Jeetoo and Victoria Hospitals where, I understand, the 
CT-Scans  are  operational.    In  2014,  34  patients  were  sent  to  private  clinics,  and  before  a 
supplementary, I will give the amount that was spent, Rs175,000 for the private clinics. In 
2015 and 2016, no one has been referred to private clinics because I have given instructions 
that they should be sent to the public hospitals. 
Madam Speaker:  Hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

38 

 
Dr. Joomaye:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to ask the hon. Minister if 
there  is  a  policy  to  allocate  maintenance  contracts  generally  for  medical  equipment  in  the 
Ministry or the Ministry rather waits for breakdown and orders repairs afterwards? 

Mr  Gayan:    Unfortunately,  Madam  Speaker,  we  have  the  legacy  of  the  previous 
Government and the legacy is that there has been no maintenance agreement with regard to 
the suppliers. But instructions have been given that henceforth, all major medical equipment 
that will be acquired will have to be accompanied by a maintenance agreement. At present, it 
is the Biomedical Engineer who supervises the repair works.  

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Jhugroo! 
Mr Jhugroo:  Is the hon. Minister aware that since long very often we have PQs with 
regard to breakdown of medical equipment in hospitals.  Will the hon. Minister consider to 
open an enquiry or ask the Police to open an enquiry because I think that, maybe, there is 
sabotage on behalf of some people dealing with these medical equipment. 

Mr Gayan:  Well, Madam Speaker, I am very concerned about the state of equipment 

in the hospitals and we are exploring all avenues to see how we can deal with that problem. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 
Dr. Sorefan:  Can we know from the hon. Minister, now that this CT-Scan is out of 
order,  what  procedures  have  been  set  up  to  replace  it?    Is  it  because  we  have  a  financial 
constraint, if yes, whether this will be taken in the next budget to really have a CT-Scan to the 
SSRN Hospital? 

Mr Gayan:  Madam Speaker, in fact, arrangements have been made for the CT-Scan 
to be funded in the next budget, not only for SSRN, but also another hospital, and we are also 
trying  to  see  if  we  can  expedite  the  procurement  procedures  because  the  procurement 
procedures are too lengthy when we come to deal with medical equipment which need to be 
procured very fast. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

AVENUE BERTHAUD, VACOAS - ONE-WAY TRAFFIC SCHEME  

(No. B/352) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  Avenue 
Berthaud,  in  Vacoas,  he  will  state  if  he  will  consider  recommending  the  extension  of  the 
partly  one  way  road  coming  from  the  Vacoas  road,  near  the  Mosque  found  thereat,  to  the 
main St Paul Road, at the level of the shell filling station, so as to ease traffic and to minimize 
risks of road accidents in the vicinity of the Visitation RCA School at Vacoas. 

39 

 
Mr  Bodha:    Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  the  Traffic 
Management  and  Road  Safety  Unit  of  my  Ministry  is  conducting  a  traffic  survey  in  the 
vicinity of the Visitation RCA School at Vacoas with a view to easing traffic and minimizing 
risks of road accidents. This study will consider the feasibility and impact of extending the 
one-way traffic scheme up to St. Paul Road whilst taking into account the adjoining network 
of roads whereby some roads are already operating as one-way traffic in peak time. 

As a more integrated solution to the traffic congestion problems in the morning and 
afternoon  peaks,  the  traffic  patterns  along  adjoining  roads  namely  ‘Jackson  Road’,  ‘Club 
Road’, ‘Lagesse Lane’, ‘Visitation Avenue’ and ‘Couvent de Lorette Avenue’ will also be 
assessed and appropriate traffic and road safety measures implemented accordingly as soon 
as possible. 

Madam  Speaker,  as  a  matter  of  policy,  my  Ministry  is,  in  fact,  considering  the 
possibility of operating a one-way traffic system wherever this is applicable, with no parking 
zones in congested areas of our towns. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Ameer Meea! 

SME – FUNDS - ALLOCATION 

(No.  B/353)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port Louis East) asked the Minister of Business, Enterprise and Co-operatives whether, in 
regard  to  the  10  billion  rupees  allocated  to  the  Small  Medium  Enterprise  Sector,  as 
announced  in  the  Budget  Speech  2015-2016,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain 
from the Small and Medium Enterprise Development Authority, information as to how same 
has been spent, indicating the outstanding amount thereof as at to date. 

Mr Bholah: Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the hon. Member that - 

(i) 

(ii) 

firstly, the information sought is not available at the SMEDA, but rather at 
MauBank which came into operation only in January, this year, and 
secondly, the Rs10 billion, as mentioned in the last Budget Speech, is to be 
made available over a period of 5 years for financing of new SME projects, 
but no provision has been made in the Budget. 

However, Madam Speaker, I am informed that the Ministry of Finance and Economic 
Development  has  released  an  amount  of  Rs135  m.  to  MauBank  to  provide  financial 
assistance  to  SMEs  that  are  eligible  for  the  SME  Development  Scheme  which  became 
effective on 12 February, this year. 

40 

 
I am further informed that to-date MauBank has received 20 such applications from 
MyBiz, the SME One-Stop Shop, for financial assistance for a total amount of Rs74 m. under 
the MauBank SME Financing Scheme. Two of these applications for loan for an amount of 
Rs4.2  m.  have  already  been  approved  and  funds  are  being  released.  As  regards  the  18 
remaining projects, additional information have been sought from the applicants by MauBank 
in order to ascertain that these qualify as bankable projects. 

Madam  Speaker,  furthermore,  the  SME  Development  Scheme  Committee  has 
approved  12  applications  that  are  being  transmitted  to  MauBank  for  financial  assistance 
under the MauBank SME Financing Scheme.  This will involve disbursement of an additional 
amount of Rs56 m.  

Therefore, Madam Speaker, already out of the Rs135 m. provided by the Ministry of 
Finance  and  Economic  Development  to  MauBank,  a  total  amount  of  Rs130  m.  have  been 
earmarked for loans to be provided as seed capital to the eligible applicants. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  House  may  wish  to  know  that  under  the  MauBank  Financing 
Scheme, eligible SMEs are granted loans at the current preferential interest rate of 3.4%, a 
maximum of 90% project financing with maturity of up to 10 years, no personal guarantee, 
and  an  amount  of  up  to  Rs10,000,  as  part  of  the  special  grant,  for  the  carrying  out  of  a 
feasibility study of the proposed project. 

Mr Bérenger: Can I know from the hon. Minister whether he is confirming that as at 

to date, the MauBank has not disbursed any money to SMEs? 

Mr Bholah: As I said in my earlier reply, Rs4.2 m. is being disbursed. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Ameer Meea: In the last Budget, there are not less than 25 paragraphs relating to 
the SME sector.  The hon. Minister himself, in a past PQ, stated that the Board is considering 
urgent  modalities  for  restructuring  the  SMEDA  in  a  view  to  meeting  the  needs  and 
aspirations of the SMEs. So, can I ask him where things are in relation to this restructuration? 

Mr Bholah: Madam Speaker, we have seen from the past that as high as 65% of start-
ups  do  fail  even  though  finance  has  been  adequately  provided  for.  There  are  factors  other 
than finance, and which are not less important than finance, that do help in the success of 
SMEs.  These are - 

• 

Lack of local skills and talents; 

41 

Lack of industrial space; 
Lack of technology; 
No new scope for economic activities, and even 
Limited and restricted local market potential. 

 

• 
• 
• 
• 

SMEDA is working on all these things. 

Mr  Mahomed:  Madam  Speaker,  what  kind  of  follow-up  is  being  provided  by  the 

SMEDA in order to ensure that things move better and faster? 

Mr Bholah: Well, SMEDA is contemplating putting up incubators in different parts 

of the island in order to provide the handholding and maintaining services to start-ups. 

Mr Jhuboo: Madam Speaker, the rapidity at which one can secure a permit, whether 
it is for a tabagie or a factory is of utmost importance.  Now, being given that we have been 
relegated from the 17th place to the 32nd place of ease of doing in the world, doesn’t the hon. 
Minister think that it is urgent to look into the matter of ease of doing business? 

Mr Bholah: Well, the setting-up of MyBiz is towards addressing the issue. 

Mr Bérenger: Can I know from the hon. Minister, he seems to have forgotten that 
Government promised a bank for SMEs - not MauBank or whatever - a bank for SMEs and 
Government, through the Budget, promised Rs10 billion over five years, but Rs2 billion last 
year  in  2014,  plus  this  SME  Bank  was  supposed  to  be  a  one-stop  shop  doing  all  the 
procedures,  helping  and  disbursing?  Is  the  hon.  Minister  aware  that  we  don’t  even  have  a 
one-stop shop, now they have to go to MyBiz, follow the procedures and so on, then they go 
to MauBank for finance and it is redone all again? So, when is something decent going to be 
proposed to the SMEs? 

Mr  Bholah:  I  don’t  recall  the  one-stop  shop  to  be  adhered  together  with  the  SME 

Bank. The SME one-stop shop was to be within SMEDA. 

Mr Bérenger: No. Go  and read back  your  Budget!  It was promised that this SME 
Bank would do both things, help, treat all the dossiers and so on and do the disbursing. That 
is what we call a one-stop shop. Now, we have two shops that have stopped. 

Mr Bholah: Madam Speaker, the one-stop shop which analyses projects and which 
certifies that each project can be allocated an SME certificate is within SMEDA and this is 
MyBiz.  Now,  the  bank  which  sanctions  loans  has  their  set  of  criteria  which  any  project 
should pass before disbursing loans. 

42 

 
Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, SME is the lung of this population to create growth and 
SMEDA is supposed to help those SMEs to raise finance. So, at the moment, wouldn’t the 
hon. Minister agree that today the criteria for eligibility is too strict and most of the SME 
sectors in Mauritius, those, for example, involved in trading are excluded from getting any 
help from SMEDA under the scheme? 

Mr  Bholah:  Initially,  the  SME  Development  Scheme  was  targeted  for  those 
companies that were set up only after 02 June 2015. This was extended to individuals and 
cooperative societies as well. 

Mr Ganoo: Can the hon. Minister confirm that one of the reasons which explained 

the delay or the small amount of financial assistance granted so far to  

the SMEs, in spite of the promise of Rs2 billion per year, is the fact that the MauBank now, 
has imposed one of its criteria being that the SMEs must have been set up after the 02 June 
2015 and it is only after that date that they are entitled to financial assistance? 

Mr  Bholah:  I  just  said  that  this  has  been  extended  to  individuals  and  cooperative 

societies as well. 

Madam Speaker: The Table has been advised that PQ B/366 has been withdrawn. 

I suspend the sitting for one and a half hours. 

At 1.02 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 2.35 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

HERITAGE CITY – MINISTRIES – RELOCATION 

(No.  B/354)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 
Institutional Reforms whether, in regard to the Heritage City, he will – 

(a) 

(b) 

give a list of the six Ministries that will be relocated thereat; 

state,  in  relation  to  the Prime  Minister’s  Office,  the  National  Assembly,  the 
State  Law Office  and the six other Ministries concerned with the relocation 
thereat, in each case, the – 

(i) 

actual expenditure being incurred as rent for the office space presently 
being occupied therefor and extent thereof, if any, and  

 

43 

(ii) 

terms  and  conditions  of  the  lease  agreement  for  the  rental  of  office 
space thereat, including the rent that will be payable. 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, with  your permission,  I will reply to Parliamentary 

Questions No. B/354 and No. B/377 together as they both relate to Heritage City Project. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of Parliamentary Question No. B/354, I am 
informed  in  addition  to  the  Prime  Minister’s  Office  and  the  National  Assembly,  the  six 
Ministries that have initially been earmarked to relocate to Heritage City are as follows –  

(i) 
(ii) 

the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development; 
the Ministry of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional 
Reforms; 
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade; 
the Ministry of Local Government; 
the Ministry of Technology, Communication and Innovation, and 
the Ministry of Housing and Lands. 

(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
In  addition  to  the  above,  the  Attorney  General’s  Office  and  part  of  the  State  Law 
Office are also proposing to relocate to Heritage City. Moreover, a request from the Ministry 
of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development,  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management  has  also 
been made and was received last Friday at my Ministry. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (b) (i) of Parliamentary Question No. B/354, the 
information is currently being compiled by the different Ministries and organisations and will 
accordingly be placed in the Library of the National Assembly. 

With regard to part (b) (ii) of Parliamentary Question No. B/354, the project is still at 
its initial stage and the lease agreement and the terms and conditions therein will be finalised 
only when the detailed Master Plan, the Schematic Design and bill of costs are ready. It will 
be premature at this stage for parties to already engage in a lease agreement. 

However,  I  am  informed  by  Heritage  City  Co.  Ltd  that,  according  to  the  figures 
worked out to date by the financial consultants, the rental will range between Rs41 to Rs45 
per square foot according to the financial model, but again, this is not final, we are waiting 
for the final schematic design as per my answer to the Private Notice Question of 19 April 
2016. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to Parliamentary Question No. B/377, the ‘foreign State’ 
with which the agreement has been entered into as per the provisions of Section 3 (1)(b) of 

 

44 

the Public Procurement Act is PCFC Real Estate, an entity wholly-owned by the Government 
of Dubai. This entity has designated Stree as its agent to assist the Government of Mauritius 
in  respect  of  Heritage  City  Project  which  will  be  executed  by  Heritage  City  Co.  Ltd.  a 
company wholly- owned by the Government of Mauritius. This is in line with the provisions 
of section 3(1) (1B) (a) of the Public Procurement Act.  

The  agreement  was  signed  on  behalf  of  the  Government  of  Mauritius  by  the 

Permanent Secretary of my Ministry on 23 February 2016. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Yes, so, finally, apart from the Parliament, the Prime Minister’s 

Office and the SLO, now we are being informed that, in fact, eight Ministries are moving… 

(Interruptions) 

The  hon.  Minister  said  six  Ministries,  but  according  to  my  count,  including  the  Attorney 
General’s Office and the Ministry of Environment which has been approached, it amounts to 
eight  Ministries.  If  the  hon.  Minister  wants  I  can  list  them  because  I  can  count  it  is  eight 
Ministries. In a reply to a PNQ on the Heritage City Project, the hon. Minister stated that a 
feasibility study for the Heritage City Project which consists of a list of requirements from all 
relevant  Ministries,  the  concept  Master  Plan,  cash  flow  and  financial  forecasts  including 
impact on GDP growth and national debt, the legal due diligence report, the value-for-money 
assessment report and so on have been performed. So, my question to the hon. Minister, in 
terms of good governance and transparency: is he ready to - not now if he doesn’t have it - 
place  a  copy  of  the  cash  flow  and  the  financial  forecasts  in  the  Library  of  the  National 
Assembly? 

Mr Bhadain: Yes, absolutely, Madam Speaker. I mean there is no reason as to why 
these figures cannot be made public. However, we would, of course, wait until the process is 
complete before making them public and then, of course, I will table it before the National 
Assembly. No issues with that. With regard to the six Ministries, I say again, we are talking 
about the Ministry of – 

Finance and Economic Development; 
Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms; 
Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade; 
Local Government; 
Technology, Communication and Innovation (ICT), and  

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi)  Housing and Lands. 

45 

 
I said a request has been received from the Ministry of Environment, I did not say it 
was accepted. With regard to the State Law Office, I said part of the SLO because there are 
Barristers and Attorneys who have to go to court and they are going to be based here in Port 
Louis.  But,  they  will  have  an  office  there  too  because  they  have  to  advise  the  Prime 
Minister’s Office and sometimes the Assembly also. 

Mr Ameer Meea: In his reply, the hon. Minister informed the House that the price 

per square foot is Rs41.45… 

(Interruptions) 

Rs41.00  to  Rs45.00.  Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  if  he  is  aware  that  last  week,  in  a 
Parliamentary  Question  answered  by  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  in  relation  to  SICOM 
Tower, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister informed the House about the SICOM Tower where the 
Minister of Finance would have moved, covering a space of 88,000 square feet at a monthly 
rental  of  Rs34.00  per  square  foot  inclusive  of  VAT,  Syndic  fees,  amenities  and  parking 
facilities.  So,  the  SICOM  Tower  is  a  new  building  and  new  applicable  rent  that  has  been 
agreed recently… 

Madam Speaker: Yes, what is the question of the hon. Member? 

Mr Ameer Meea: So, my question is: will the hon. Minister agree with me that, in 

fact, the Heritage City is more expensive than the actual rate that we have now? 

Mr Bhadain: Two things, Madam Speaker. One is Rs41.00 to Rs45.00 rent for the 

next 10 to 15 years, not today! Today if it is Rs34.00 which the price list… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Ameer  Meea,  I  have  asked  you  several  times  not  to  do 

crosstalking! 

Mr Bhadain: When we are looking at the next 15 years for Rs41.00 to Rs45.00, it is 

very cheap because you have to discount it to the present value and then do the comparison. 

Secondly,  you  can’t  compare  the  Heritage  City  with  the  SICOM  Tower  because 
Heritage City is a model where you will have all the infrastructure, technology and also e-
governance principles. We have seen those buildings where the public officials are working 
now. This is for the next generation of public officials. It is not comparable. 

(Interruptions) 

46 

 
Mr Ameer Meea: Can the hon. Minister give the guarantee to the House that this rent 
of Rs41.00 to Rs45.00, as he just mentioned, would be fixed in time, that is, during these 15 
years because according… 

(Interruptions) 

...to  my  understanding  rent  is  incremental,  you  increase  it  every  year.  But,  what  the  hon. 
Minister just said, can he give a guarantee that this sum is fixed. 

Mr  Bhadain:  According  to  the  financial  model  which  has  been  prepared,  Madam 

Speaker, there is an escalation clause of 10 percent every five years. So, if you take… 

That is why… 

That is why we said 41.00… 

That is… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Don’t make remarks, hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Bhadain: That is why we say Rs41.00 to Rs45.00 because there are escalation 

clauses. It is in line with commercial practice. 

Mr  Mohamed:  Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Minister  has  just  made  reference  to  a 
company based in Dubai, that is, a Dubai Government owned company. Had it been a local 
company, the Standing Orders would have told me to go and fetch the information here. But, 
since it is a company based in Dubai, could the hon. Minister, therefore, consider laying all 
the certificates of incorporation or its equivalent on the Table of this Assembly with all its 
shareholders as well as the relevant document that states - as he has just said - that it is the 
Government of Dubai that recommended Stree Consulting?  Whether he could also consider 
tabling that particular document where the recommendation is made, by whom and when? 

Mr  Bhadain:  Yes,  Madam  Speaker.  During  the  answer  to  the  PNQ,  a  couple  of 
weeks ago, I mentioned that there was a legal due diligence which was conducted. I have no 
problems whatsoever to table that legal due diligence report by a law firm in Dubai and also 

 

47 

the shareholders are the Government of Dubai. They are the shareholders. It is a 100 percent 
Government controlled entity, there are no private parties in there. 

Mr Mohamed: He has not answered the other question, Stree Consulting? 

Madam Speaker: Yes. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed: It was recommended, that document, recommending… 

Mr Bhadain: Absolutely, the legal due diligence was conducted on all these entities 

because when we asked the law firm to do a due diligence, it included… 

Mr Mohamed: The recommendation… 

Mr Bhadain: No, of course because, Madam Speaker, there is a process in law which 
has  been  followed.  The  process  in  law  for  a  G2G  is  that  there  is  an  arrangement  and 
agreement between the two Governments and then all the documents have been submitted to 
the High-Powered Committee which have been scrutinised by the Solicitor General, by the 
Financial Secretary and also by the Secretary to Cabinet before being forwarded to Cabinet 
and  Cabinet  approved  it.  All  these  documents  are  there,  but  in  due  time,  when  it  is 
permissible, according to law, I will table everything. I have no problems. 

Mr Mahomed: Will the hon. Minister shed some light on the following please? On 
the one hand, we are promoting the Heritage City as a work, live and play destination and, on 
the other hand, we are moving public officers, civil servants by thousands over there. Will 
public officers be buying these kinds of properties? Because they are in the habit of buying 
their own plot of land usually and building their own houses on the very basis of which the 
model is being based. 

Mr  Bhadain:  Madam  Speaker,  again,  a  couple  of  weeks  ago,  I  mentioned  the 
structure of Heritage City Project. I mentioned that it is an ellipse shape, meaning that you 
have a public side, a private side and, at the end of the day, it is a synergy which is drawn 
between the public and private aspects of it. 

With  regard  to  public  officials  buying,  things  are  changing  in  Mauritius,  Madam 
Speaker.  Young people joining the public sector will have no problem buying apartments 
and town houses also. 

 
These were in the days of my grandfather, when you bought a plot of land, had a cow 

48 

in the garden, and then you were constructing your house. 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, may I know from the hon. Minister the type of finishing 
that will be in that?  When you pay a price for rental, will that price – the price mentioned – 
include the  finishing,  I  mean all that will have  to be done by  each Ministry? What would 
happen to all the existing offices that are being presently occupied by the Ministries that are 
going to move to Heritage City? 

Mr Bhadain: The hon. Member is absolutely correct.  It will be up to the individual 
Ministries to basically do their layout and their furnishing, as is normally the case.  When my 
Ministry  moved  to  SICOM  Tower,  it  was  a  different  set-up  because  we  decided  to  rent 
furnished, whereas when the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development was going to 
move there, it was unfurnished, I believe.  But, in Heritage City, it’s core and shell, and then, 
of course, the individual Ministries will have to do their partitioning and furnish according to 
their requirements. 

Mr  Jhuboo:  Madam  Speaker,  my  question  pertains  to  the  administrative  part  of 
Heritage  City.    Can  we  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  whether  the  stream  of  future  rentals 
from  Government  will  be  able  to  meet  the  financial  requirements  of  servicing  both  the 
interests and the capital of, let’s say, Rs10 billion? 

Mr Bhadain: Absolutely.  This is what hon. Ameer Meea has been referring to as the 
cash flow forecast. I must state, Madam Speaker, that when the financial structure has been 
put in place, it took three months to actually come up with the right model.  The figures, in 
terms of the rental income flowing in and in terms of the VEFA profits which are going to 
flow in, will be in a defined period of time sufficient to redeem the shares.  This is what the 
model is all about. 

Mr Mohamed: I heard the hon. Minister say, both to hon. Ameer Meea and several 
other Members, that, in due course, if the law permits, he is going to table those documents.  
At this particular stage, I have asked him for specific documents, and so have hon. Members.  
What are the legal impediments, if any, that exist to stop him from tabling those documents 
right now? 

Mr Bhadain: I am sure my friend, the hon. Member, as a lawyer, would know that 
when you are dealing with Heritage City Co. Ltd. and when you are dealing with Stree, there 
are engagement letters which have been exchanged, with all the different aspects of the work.  

 

49 

There is a commercial aspect to it.  Now, if the company law permits, there is no problem, I 
will table it.  I mean, I do not have any problems. 

Mr Jhugroo: Is the hon. Minister giving the House a guarantee that there will be no 
Mauritian  partner  in  this  project  like  that  we  had  in  the  Neotown  project,  where  la  petite 
copine of the former Prime Minister was a shareholder? 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, I am not sure I have understood the question properly.  

But I can assure the House that this project is a challenge … 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, you are constantly disturbing the proceedings of the 

House. 

Mr Bhadain:  It is a challenge for my newly created … 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Is it your turn hon. Rutnah?  Hon. Minister, please carry on. 

Mr  Bhadain:  I  was  saying,  Madam  Speaker,  that  it  is  a  challenge  for  my  newly 
created  Ministry,  dealing  with  good  governance,  to  ensure  that  this  project  becomes  a 
benchmark  for  good  governance.    There  will  be  no  commissions,  no  variations,  no  hanky 
panky,  and  this  will  benefit  the  people  who  are  going  to  go  and  buy  those  properties  at  a 
cheaper price, because of all this nonsense that we have seen in those contracts mentioned by 
hon. Member in the past. 

Madam  Speaker:  The  hon.  Minister  of  Social  Security,  National  Solidarity  and 
Reform  Institutions  has  just  informed  me  that  she  has  to  attend  to  the  funeral  of  a  close 
relative and has made a request that the question asked to her be taken out of turn.  I have 
acceded to her request.  So, I am calling hon. Sesungkur. 

SALE BY LEVY - NATIONAL SOLIDARITY FUND - ASSISTANCE 

(No. B/382) Mr D. Sesungkur (First Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) 
asked the Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions whether, in 
regard to the Sale by Levy, he will – 

(a) 

for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  National  Solidarity  Fund, 
information  as 
that  considers 
disbursements therefrom, indicating the - 

the  composition  of 

to 

the  Committee 

 

(i) 

(ii) 

50 

criteria used for the granting of assistance and for the determination of 
the quantum thereof, and 

number  of  requests  for  assistance  received,  considered,  turned 
down/granted and quantum disbursed, and 

(b) 

state  where  matters  stand  regarding  the  proposed  setting  up  of  an  Asset 
Management Company to provide, inter alia, for the replacement of the Sale 
by Levy procedure. 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Madam Speaker, as regards part (a) of the question, I am 
informed  by  the  National  Solidarity  Fund  that,  following  budgetary  measures  for  financial 
years  2007/2008  and  2008/2009,  three  structures  were  set  up  to  examine  applications  for 
assistance and make recommendations as to eligibility. 

 Information with respect to all applications was compiled by a Technical Committee 
chaired by the then Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Finance and having as members 
two  representatives  of  the  Ministry  of  Finance  as  well  as  two  members  of  the  National 
Solidarity  Fund  Board.    The  information  on  each  case  was  then  submitted  to  the  National 
Solidarity  Fund Board.  The National Solidarity  Fund Board comprised the Chairperson, a 
representative of the Prime Minister’s Office, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Social 
Social  Security,  National  Solidarity  and  Reform  Institutions,  the  Mauritius  Tax  Payers 
Association,  the  Mauritius  Labour  Congress,  MACOSS,  and  the  Mauritius  Employers 
Federation.  Recommendations were then made  and submitted for financial clearance by a 
High  Level  Committee  set  up  under  the  chair  of  the  Financial  Secretary  and  comprising 
representatives  of  the  Prime  Minister’s  Office,  the  Attorney  General’s  Office  and  the 
Ministry of Social Security. 

Regarding  part  (a)  (i),  I  am  tabling  the  two  sets  of  criteria  that  were  applied  for 

financial years 2007/2008 and 2008/2009 respectively to assess eligibility. 

With regard to part (a) (ii), I wish to inform the House that, out of 468 applications 
received for both budgetary measures, 54 cases were found to be eligible and 414 were turned 
down.  A sum of about Rs15 m. from the National Solidarity Fund has been disbursed as at 
date from the amount earmarked for beneficiaries of assistance. 

I  am  informed  that  five  beneficiaries  are  being  paid  a  monthly  rent  allowance  of 

Rs1,250 subject to the  presentation of a life certificate. 

51 

 
As regards part (b) of the question, Madam Speaker, I am informed that the Bank of 
Mauritius  released,  on  08  January  2016,  a  consultation  document  on  the  setting  up  of  an 
Asset Management Company in Mauritius.  The Bank of Mauritius invited submissions, both 
oral and written, on the document, by 16 February 2016.  A number of representations from 
various stakeholders were received by the Bank of Mauritius.  Their representations are being 
considered  and,  where  appropriate,  will  be  taken  on  board  in  the  setting  up  of  the  Asset 
Management Company. 

I am tabling the two sets of criteria, as they are quite lengthy. 

Mr Sesungkur: From the information  communicated by  the hon. Minister, we  can 
see that the majority of the applications have been rejected and only 50 were approved.  In 
the light of this information, is the hon. Minister prepared to review the criteria, so that a 
majority of those people benefit from the funds which have been allocated under the NSF? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Well, this is Government policy.  The two sets of criteria 
have been set up in the budgetary measures 2007/2008 and 2008/2009.  So, we will look into 
it and see if we can come up with a new set of criteria if need be. 

Mr Sesungkur: With regard to the Asset Management Company, I would request the 
hon. Minister to see to it that this measure is implemented as soon as possible because of the 
tragedy  which  many  Mauritians  are  facing  with  the  sale  by  levy.    I  would  request  her  to 
ensure that this measure comes into force as soon as possible. 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Madam  Speaker,  Government  is  much  aware  of  the 
hardship caused by the sale by levy procedure to debtors.  We are fully aware of the plight of 
the debtors.  Following a Commission of Inquiry, chaired by Magistrate Ms Rangan, a report 
was drawn up and 13 recommendations have been made.  So, with a view to address the non-
performing loans, the Bank of Mauritius came with a proposal of the setting up of the Asset 
Management Company.  The main objective of the Asset Management Company would be to 
acquire,  in  a  phased  manner,  the  non-performing  loans  which  have  been  secured  both  by 
residential and commercial properties. We do hope that the coming into force of the Asset 
Management  Company  will  help,  to  a  great,  extent  both  the  debtors  and  the  financial 
institution. 

Mr  Uteem:    Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Minister  just  mentioned  the  Sale  by  Levy 
Commission of Inquiry which has submitted its report and in this House the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister mentioned that there was a Committee looking into these recommendations. So, may 

 

52 

I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister,  in  addition  to  this  measure  of  setting  up  the  Asset 
Management Company, are there other measures out of these recommendations that are being 
implemented at the level of her Ministry? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Well, as I have said, we are in the process of setting up the 
Asset Management Company but, at the same time, we are looking at the recommendations.  
We will come soon with some proposals, if need be. 

Mr Baloomoody: Pending the final setting up of the Asset Management Company, 
and taking into account  the recommendation of  Magistrate Ms Rangan,  can  I  ask the hon. 
Minister whether she can intervene vis-à-vis her colleague with regard to the NHDC Houses 
because this is Government Property, at least, pending the outcome of the final instrument 
which will come, that the NHDC freezes the selling of houses at the Sale by Levy? Even last 
week there were many houses which were sold by levy because of such a financial situation. 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: If I may explain.  Madam Speaker, with the coming into 
force  of  the  Borrowers  Protection  Act,  I  am  given  to  understand  that  the  number  of  cases 
before the Masters Court has considerably diminished. In the past, there were about 20 to 25 
cases of Sale by Levy before the Masters Court, but now we have about 10 to 15 cases only.   

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ameer Meea! 

UNITED ARAB EMIRATES - VISA ENTRY 

(No.  B/355)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 
International  Trade  whether,  in  regard  to  the  United  Arab  Emirates,  he  will  state  where 
matters  stand  as  to the exemption  of the  visa  entry  requirement  for  Mauritians  proceeding 
thereto.   

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, I am pleased to inform the House that on 
20  March  2016,  Mauritius  and  the  United  Arab  Emirates  signed  a  bilateral  Agreement  on 
“Mutual Exemption of Entry Visas for  Holders of Diplomatic and Special Passports”. The 
said Agreement with was signed in Abu Dhabi by  hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK, Vice-
Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands on behalf of the Government of Mauritius 
and by Mr Anwar Mohammad Gargash, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs on behalf of the 
Government of the United Arab Emirates (UAE).  

 

53 

The Agreement will allow nationals of Mauritius holding valid diplomatic passports 
to stay in the UAE for a period not exceeding 90 days while Mauritius will allow nationals of 
the UAE holding diplomatic and special passports to stay on its territory for the same period 
without entry visa and without fees.  

Mauritius has, on 31 March 2016, informed the UAE Authorities that Mauritius has 
completed all internal procedures for the entry into force of the Agreement as laid down in 
Article 12 of the Agreement.  

We  have  been  informed  by  the  UAE  Authorities  that  they  are  completing  the 

ratification procedures for the entry in force on the Agreement.  

I wish to inform the House that the Ministry, on 18 March 2016, has through a note 
verbale, requested the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the UAE to “(…) consider granting, on 
a  reciprocal  basis,  free  visa  on  arrival  to  Mauritian  nationals  travelling  to  the  UAE  with 
ordinary  Mauritian  passports”.  The  above  request  was  reiterated  on  28  April  2016  by  our 
High Commissioner in Islamabad.  

As matters stand, Madam Speaker, the issue of Mauritian nationals travelling visa free 
to  the  UAE  with  an  ordinary  passport  is  still  under  consideration  by  the  competent  UAE 
authorities. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr Bérenger: I just wanted to know what is meant by special passports. I heard the 
hon.  Minister  say  that  it  had  been  agreed  to  grant  this  visa  free  facility  to  diplomatic  and 
special passports, what is meant by special passports? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: I would think that diplomatic passports would probably be 

more specific to civil servants, but I won’t confirm it.  

Officials travelling. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

I don’t have the definition at hand. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Speaker, we have been made aware that an agreement has 
been  reached  for  diplomatic  and  special  passports,  but  the  thing  is  how  many  official 

 

54 

missions do we have to UAE on a yearly basis? It is only a handful of officials that go to 
Dubai every year. My question to the hon. Minister is: is he aware that ordinary passport for 
all Mauritians travelling to Dubai for a 96-hour visa costs Rs2,400; for 90 days, it is Rs7,000 
and for 90 days multiple entry it is Rs17,000? We understand that the United Arab Emirates 
is a partner to Mauritius, but this partnership should be a two-way traffic.  So, will the hon. 
Minister  use  his  Ministry  to  ensure  that  on  an  urgent  basis  this  agreement  for  ordinary 
passport is signed so that we all benefit from it? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: In fact, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister on his official visit there 
put up this question. The hon. Member is right; the rates which are being applied are quite 
high. I see here that the cost of visa single entry is Rs3,375 for a duration of either 14  or 30 
days and for a multiple entry short-term visa for 30 days, the fee is Rs6,750. The Rt. hon. 
Prime  Minister  was  quite  aware  of  it  as  this  issue  was  raised  by  my  friend  also  here,  and 
negotiations are underway to ensure that, as soon as possible, all Mauritians with a Mauritian 
passport can access to the UAE free of charge. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr  Bérenger:  May  we  ask  the  hon.  Minister  whether  what  has  been  granted  to 
diplomatic  and  special  passports,  supposedly,  and  what  has  been  requested  for  ordinary 
citizens, whether the request was made in the past and now to United Arab Emirates or to the 
Dubai Government? 

Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: It has been made.  Well, Islamabad recently reiterated this 

request to the UAE. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ramano! 

WESTMINSTER FINANCIAL LTD. - CLOSURE 

(No.  B/356)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms 
whether, in regard to the Westminster Financial Ltd., he will - 

(a) 

for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Financial Services Commission, 
information as to the - 

(i) 

(ii) 

amount of money invested therein, and  

outcome  of  any  inquiry  undertaken  in  relation  thereto  following  the 
closure thereof, and  

55 

state if Government proposes to financially assist the victims thereof, if any.   

 
(b) 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, this is yet another fraudulent Ponzi scheme which was 
perpetrated  under  the  Prime  Ministership  of  the  then  Prime  Minister.  I  am  informed  that 
Westminster Financial Ltd. (WFL) was incorporated on 03 October 2011 and applied for an 
Investment Advisor (Unrestricted License) with the Financial Services Commission (FSC) on 
25  June  2012.  The  FSC  issued  the  license  on  30  October  2012  and  the  directors  of  WFL 
were:  Mr  Feroz  Aslam  Dahoo,  Mr  Subudh  Caussy  and  Mr  Miheerannand  Nunkoo.  It  is 
worthy  to  note  that  prior  to  the  issue  of  the  license,  WFL  had  been  operating  and  taking 
deposits from the public prior to the issuance of a license from the FSC, which is in breach of 
Section 33 of the Securities Act. 

In April and May 2013, the FSC received queries from the public as to whether WFL 

was licensed by the Commission and whether WFL was allowed to give ‘such returns’.  

Following enquiries by members of the public in April and May 2013, FSC carried out 
a general inspection of the activities of WFL on 28 June 2013. The initial findings were, inter 
alia - 

1. 

2. 

3. 

The  activities  being  carried  out  by  WFL  were  in  contradiction  from  the 
business  plan  it  submitted  at  the  time  of  the  application  with  the  FSC.  The 
investigation revealed that all monies collected from the investors were being 
channelled to Westminster Singapore instead of being invested in a portfolio 
of  securities.  From  Singapore,  the  monies  were  purportedly  transferred  to 
various money managers for investment purposes, which was in contradiction 
with the business plan on the basis of which the license had been granted; 

The Company was not providing any investment advisory services, and 

Several departures were observed from the initial business plan. 

Madam  Speaker,  in  the  meantime,  the  CCID  had  already  started  an  enquiry  on  the 
activities of WFL and its directors following a dissemination report from the FIU. On 17 July 
2013,  I  am  informed  that  one  of  the  directors,  Mr  Feroz  Dahoo,  was  interviewed  under 
caution, arrested and bailed out on the same day. The enquiry revealed that Mr Feroz Dahoo 
had been taking deposits from the public prior to the issuance of a license from the FSC on 30 
October 2012. 

On the next day, 18 July 2013, WFL made representations to the FSC, which were not 

to the satisfaction of the regulator.  

 

56 

Subsequently, on 29 July 2013, the FSC issued directions for WFL to - 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

not accept any new investors; 

to  seize  its  business  operations  since  the  company  was  not  conducting  the 
business activity for which it was licenced; 

disclose to the FSC, the total assets under administration, and 

start returning the funds raised from the members of the public upon an agreed 
framework with the FSC. 

Madam Speaker, I am informed that after the FSC issued directions on 29 July 2013, 
WFL  stopped  its  operation,  but  failed  to  comply  with  the  ‘direction’  to  reimburse  funds 
raised from members of the public. On 23 October 2013, the legal representatives of WFL 
(BLC Chambers) made representations to the FSC that any immediate disinvestment of funds 
would imply material penalty losses and, as a result, proposed a timeframe within which the 
money from disinvestments will be repaid to the investors.  

In November 2013, FSC continued receiving complaints from members of public that 
WFL were still canvassing clients to invest money privately despite the directions issued by 
the FSC on 29 July 2013 preventing them from taking new investments from the public. 

On  18  November  2013,  the  legal  representatives  and  the  directors  of  WFL  were 

summoned to attend a meeting at the FSC where they were queried on three things – 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

whether repayment of existing investors is being effected; 

whether  the  company  is  still  operating,  that  is,  canvassing  clients  to  invest 
money; 

provide  a  written  undertaking  duly  signed  by  the  directors  that  WFL  is  not 
advertising its services to the public. This written undertaking was submitted 
to FSC on 18 November 2013.  

Following  that,  FSC  continued  monitoring  the  execution  of  the  repayment  plan.  As 
from  January  2014,  FSC  noted  that  WFL  was  not  adhering  to  its  repayment  plan  and  the 
capital investments were not being repaid.  

On 28 March 2014, FSC issued a letter to WFL informing them that their repayment 
plan is still outstanding following which they responded in April 2014 to say that investments 

 

57 

are  still  locked  into  money  managers  abroad  and,  as  a  result,  WFL  submitted  a  new 
repayment plan in which the company proposed to start effecting payment in June-July 2014.   

The FSC was not conformable with the details of a proposed repayment plan.  With the 
assistance of a financial company, they conducted a full-fledged investigation into the affairs 
of WFL from July to December 2014 with the objective to locate the funds invested by WFL. 
The investigation revealed that money is collected from the public in Mauritius… 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Minister, can you tell me whether your reply will be long?  If 

it is too long, then you better circulate it!  I think it is better for you to circulate your reply.  

Mr Bhadain:   I will nearly finish, Madam Speaker, if you will allow me. The funds 

went to Westminster… 

Madam Speaker:  I can give you two additional minutes, not more! 

Mr Bhadain:  Okay.  The funds went to Westminster Singapore Pte Ltd; other related 
entities namely, Aurcan Ltd and Multiport International Trading; in Madagascar  entities G-
tech & Mahere; individuals, namely, the Directors of WFL.   

The Police investigation is still being conducted, as I understand, and I would very 
much  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  ask  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  to  see  with  the 
Commissioner of Police that this case is looked into quickly.  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ramano! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Ramano:  Madame  la  présidente,  est-ce  que  je  peux  savoir  du  ministre  si  les 
autorités  internationales  ont  été  sollicitées  pour  recouvrir  la  somme  qui  a  été  syphoned  et 
aussi  si  on  peut  traquer  les  coupables  au  niveau  international  parce  que,  selon  mes 
informations, les responsables ont déjà quitté le pays?  

Mr Bhadain: Yes, Madam Speaker, the FIU has already initiated those procedures. In 
fact,  the  money,  after  having  left  Singapore  and  Madagascar,  has  gone  into  numerous 
jurisdictions.  So, it is going to take an  enormous amount of time to conduct the trail and 
then, of course to go through the mutual … 

… legal assistance procedure. 

(Interruptions) 

 
Mr  Bérenger:    Can  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  who  was  Minister  of  Finance 

58 

during this Westminster Financial Ltd. saga? 

Mr Bhadain:  Well, I don’t know… 

(Interruptions) 

I  would  suppose  it  would  have  been  the  current  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  but  the  Prime 
Minister was Navinchandra Ramgoolam. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan:  May we know from the hon. Minister, he has mentioned that – I have to 
mention  the  name  –  Mr  Feroz  Dahoo  was  arrested  after  an  enquiry  of  the  ICAC,  where 
matters  stand?    Because  nearly  one  year  has  lapsed  and  we  don’t  see  any  action  so  far 
especially for Mr Subudh Caussy, like my friend has mentioned, who is Interpol listed, where 
do matters stand on these two persons? 

Mr Bhadain:  I understand that the foreigners have already left Mauritius a long time 
back.  Mr Feroz Dahoo was arrested and I believe, the Police must act fast and they must, 
basically, progress this enquiry.  I am also aware that Mr Feroz Dahoo is subject to another 
investigation, in the Bagatelle Dam case together with Navinchandra Ramgoolam. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr  Mohamed:  Could  the  hon.  Minister  inform  us,  I  mean  is  he  aware  -  it  is 
unfortunate that he gave the name of someone just like that in Parliament, Mr Feroz Dahoo 
and painting him a black picture; he is still on a provisional charge - of any information, I 
mean for how long will this provisional charge go on? Because he has not been found guilty 
of any offence whatsoever, we only have the report of the FSC.  So, what is going on with 
this provisional charge?  Is there any main case that has been lodged or does he still benefit 
from the presumption of innocence? Maybe the hon. Minister could tell us? 

Mr  Bhadain:    Well,  Madam  Speaker,  as  I  said,  I  only  wish  that  the  Police  would 
have acted much faster in a case like this because money from members of the public who 
have contributed are at stake and this money has gone into different jurisdictions. Now, with 
regard to provisional charges, I think the hon. Attorney-General has already explained that 
this Government is working to bring PACE into play and we will do that soon.  

59 

 
Dr. Sorefan: Will the hon. Minister confirm to this House whether the Ponzi Scheme 
set up by Westminster Financial Ltd. was giving 12% interest and what did FSC do at that 
time when they were selling their product at 12% interest? 

Mr Bhadain:  I have already answered in terms of what the FSC has done and has not 
done  over  that  particular  period,  but  like  any  other  Ponzi Scheme,  the  returns  which  were 
being offered to the people were so high and this is again a message for the public that if it is 
too good to be true, then you should not invest into those kinds of products. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:    Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.    The  hon.  Minister  mentioned  that  the 
Government  is  not  going  to  compensate  any  of  the  victims,  but  is  the  hon.  Minister 
considering  asking  the  Financial  Services  Commission  to  make  it  compulsory  for  all 
licensees, anyone who is being issued a licence at the FSC, to either set up a compensation 
fund or take compulsory insurance cover to protect victims of any future Ponzi?  

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, the FSC has set up so many compensation funds lately 
for hit and run and for different other types, but, in this case, Madam Speaker, I mean, we 
can’t set up a compensation fund for stupidity of people who want to put their money into 
things they shouldn’t invest into. These people are also to be blamed because they are greedy.  
They want to get high interest.  I have said that the FSC has stated that they started selling 
even  before  being  licensed,  but  people  should  not  be  attracted  to  those  kinds  of  products.  
This is what Mauritius has to understand. And then, at the end of the process, when we look 
at Ponzi schemes like Sunkai, Whitedot, Westminster Financial, BAI, it is high time for us to 
come up with a Financial Literacy Programme for people across ages and I will definitely 
speak  to  my  colleague,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 
Education and Scientific Research on this issue if that can be introduced in the curriculum. 

LIQUEFIED NATURAL GAS - MINISTERIAL COMMITTEE 

 (No. B/357) Mr R. Bhagwan (First Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to 
the Ministerial Committee set up to look into the viability of the use of Liquefied Natural Gas 
in Mauritius, he will state the – 

(a) 

(b) 

composition thereof;  

date on which the meetings thereof have been held, and  

60 

date of submission of the report thereof and table copy thereof. 

 
(c) 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):    Madam  Speaker,  in  its  report  dated  October  2013,  the  National  Energy 
Commission chaired by Mr Dev Manraj recommended that a feasibility study on Liquefied 
Natural Gas be completed as soon as possible. I quote – 

“As  natural  gas  plants  are  ideal  backup  capacity  for  renewable  energy,  are  less 
polluting than coal, diesel and HFO, and will act also as anticipated investment for 
future semi base and peak load needs. Furthermore natural gas can be of relevance to 
transport fuel needs.” 

Unfortunately, no action was taken on that report. When I assumed office, I started 

exploring avenues for the implementation of that recommendation.  

After internal discussions at the level of my Ministry, a Ministerial Committee was set 

up to examine the issue.   

I  chaired  that  Committee  -  and  I  am  still  chairing  that  Committee  -  which  is  also 
composed  of  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  and  the  Minister  of 
Environment, Sustainable Development, and Disaster and Beach Management. 

Officials of the two Ministries as well as representatives of the Ministry of Tourism 
and External Communications, the Mauritius Ports Authority, the General Manager, Central 
Electricity  Board,  were  in  attendance  at  that  Committee.  Also  present  were  Messrs  Dev 
Manraj and Mr Graeme Robertson, the latter being my personal Adviser. 

The Committee met on 14 July 2015. In view of the numerous technical issues related 
to the project, it set up a technical working group chaired by my Ministry, to look into all the 
aspects related to the project.  

The technical working group comprises representatives of my Ministry, the Ministry 
of  Finance  and  Economic  Development,  the  Ministry  of  Environment,  Sustainable 
Development,  Disaster  and  Beach  Management,  the  Ministry  of  Tourism  and  External 
Communications,  the  Central  Electricity  Board,  the  State  Trading  Corporation  and  the 
Mauritius Ports Authority. 

The working group has held six meetings and I understand has almost finalised the 
Request for Proposal for a full feasibility study of the project. It is expected to submit a report 

 

61 

to  me  shortly.  A  representative  of  Marena  has  also  joined  the  Committee  with  a  view  to 
migrating the whole process to Marena under the relevant legislation. 

Mr Bérenger: Can I ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister whether this call for offers for 

a full feasibility study has already been issued? 

Mr Collendavelloo: No, it has not been issued yet. We are expecting the report first. 

Mr  Mahomed:  Madam  Speaker,  I  must  beg  to  defer  with  the  hon.  Vice-Prime 
Minister. I was a Member of the National Energy Commission. My question is as follows: 
would  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  shed  some  light  on  the  WorleyParsons  Report,  pre-
feasibility  study  for  assessing  the  potential  of  using  LNG  for  electricity  generation  in 
Mauritius of 31 July 2014 which states the following – 

“Import  and  use  of  LNG  for  power  generation  and  transport,  commercial  and 
industrial  sectors,  is  technologically  feasible,  but  commercially  challenging  in  the 
current conditions due to mainly low demand from the sources considered.” 

Now  that  the  Inter-Ministerial  Committee  has  been  set  up,  what  is  the  mandate  of  that 
Committee against this backdrop and how have things evolved in the meantime? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  Thank  you.  That  is  precisely  the  point.  The  WorleyParsons 
Report did stress these difficulties. What we had was the National Energy Commission which 
recommended this and WorleyParsons told us: ‘Be careful! There are certain pitfalls.’ This is 
why there is a Technical Committee. I have gone through the Minutes of Proceedings of all 
the meetings of this Technical Committee, not easy reading and certainly not very pleasant as 
bedtime  reading,  but  the  problem  is,  of  course,  the  commercial  challenge  trying  to  find 
whether  it  is  commercially  viable.  This  Government  is  not  going  to  take  any  risk  with 
spending huge amounts of money unless we are sure that this is commercially feasible and 
viable. Well, in a nutshell, the question is the transport of this gas. So, we are trying to work 
with the Board to see what are the other means. I am not a technician. There is a Technical 
Committee which is dealing with all this. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  whether  the  Technical 
Committee has had meetings with the private sector or they have been called in the working 
session? 

62 

 
Mr Collendavelloo: No, not at all. The Technical Committee is composed of several 
members and in this Technical Committee we have no member of the private sector. This is a 
Government Body. 

Mr Uteem: I am happy to hear the hon. Vice-Prime Minister mentioned that we are 
not  going  to  go  forward  unless  this  feasibility  study  makes  it  viable  for  Mauritius  to  use 
LNG. But, this being the case, wouldn’t the hon. Vice-Prime Minister agree with me that it is 
premature, today, to already require in all requests for proposals of new electricity plant that 
they should be compatible with LNG and, therefore, you know already binding our arms into 
limited technological plants? 

Mr Collendavelloo: We are travelling outside the purview of the question. So, I am 
answering off my hat.  The two new gas turbines which are being contemplated are combined 
cycles  so  that  they  can  be  adjusted  to  LNG.  But,  I  grant  that  we  are  all  right  to  be  very 
careful. I grant that. 

AIR QUALITY - MONITORING 

(No.  B/358)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms, Minister of Environment, 
Sustainable  Development,  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
monitoring of the quality of the air around Mauritius, he will state the results obtained over 
the period January 2016 to date from the fixed stations and mobile stations respectively in 
respect of the regions concerned with the exercise, indicating if the quality of the air in the 
vicinity of the bus terminals have equally been monitored and, if so, give details 

thereof. 

Mr  Wong  Yen  Cheong:  Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  monitoring  using  fixed 
stations, I am informed that my Ministry is equipped with two fixed stations since August 
2015.  One is located at the Islamic Cultural Centre in Port Louis and the other one at the 
Mauritius Meteorological Services at Vacoas. These stations are continuously monitoring the 
quality of ambient air with respect to airborne particles which is called Particulate Matter or 
PM10.   

Particulate Matter (PM10) average values at Vacoas is 12.4 microgrammes per metre 
cube (Mg/m3)  for the period January 2016 till date and in Port Louis it is 12.5 Mg/m3 cube 
for the same period. The results so far are well within the Mauritian Air Quality Standard of 
100Mg/m3. 

63 

 
Madam Speaker, regarding monitoring with respect to mobile stations, the National 
Environmental Laboratory of my Ministry is equipped with mobile ambient air monitoring 
stations  which  include  particulate  matter  analysers,  gaseous  analysers  (such  as  sulphur 
dioxide,  carbon  monoxide  and  oxides  of  nitrogen)  and  a  portable  gas  analyser.  These 
mobile/portable  analysers  are  used  to  monitor  air  quality  especially  at  hotspots  for 
appropriate enforcement measures to be taken as and when needed. 

Since  January  2016,  the  mobile  units  were  deployed  in  the  region  of  Pointe  aux 
Sables, Goodlands Industrial Estates (March 2016) and Coromandel Industrial Estates (April 
2016). Parameters tested include sulphur dioxide, carbon monoxide and oxides of nitrogen. 
Particulate  matter  was  also  measured  at  Pointe  aux  Sables.  All  the  results  obtained  were 
within the relevant standards. 

Madam  Speaker,  regarding  Air  Quality  in  the  vicinity  of  bus  terminals,  so  far, 
monitoring at Vacoas Bus Terminal and Immigration Square Bus Terminal (Port Louis) have 
been carried out. 

The  fixed  station  at  Vacoas  is  approximately  500  metres  from  the  bus  terminal  of 
Vacoas.  The data recorded from the continuous monitoring of this fixed station indicate that 
the  Vacoas  Bus  Terminal  does  not  impact  on  the  ambient  air  quality  in  its  vicinity  with 
respect to particulate matter. 

Monitoring  at  Immigration  Square  Bus  Terminal  (Port  Louis)  was  conducted  in 
December  2015  using  the  mobile  station.    Parameters  such  as  particulate  matter,  sulphur 
dioxide,  carbon  monoxide  and  nitrogen  dioxide  were  monitored.    All  the  parameters 
monitored were well within their respective standard limits. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  monitoring  of  air  quality  in  the 
vicinity of two other bus terminals, namely at Curepipe and Rivière du Rempart, will very 
soon be conducted. 

Mr Bhagwan: Can I know from the hon. Minister whether there is a set-up for the 
monitoring  following  results  with  the  Ministry  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  in  order  to 
exchange information and act accordingly? 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: As soon as I will get the information, I will do that. 

Mr Bhagwan: Can I know from the hon. Minister whether the monitoring of air quality at 
the level of power stations, especially at St- Louis and Fort-Victoria is being done? Can the 

 

64 

hon. Minister inform us about the latest tests carried out in the vicinity of St Louis and Fort 
Victoria? 

Mr  Wong  Yen  Cheong:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  there  are  some  air 
monitoring exercises that have been carried out. At Fort Victoria there was a caravan during 
the period of 21 to 28 January and the parameters were within the standards. 

Mr Bhagwan: Can I know what are the latest results for St Louis and whether there 

are any tests forthcoming? 

Mr  Wong  Yen  Cheong:  Madam  Speaker,  as  far  as  I  am  concerned  with  the 
information, I don’t have it now. We will carry them out if there is a need to do it, if there are 
some protestations or requests.  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Osman Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Up until 2014, we were ranked second 
worldwide by the World Health Organisation insofar as our overall air quality is concerned. 
What is the ranking today? 

Mr  Wong  Yen  Cheong:  Will  the  hon.  Member  please  repeat  the  question?  Thank 

you. 

Mr Mahomed: Up until 2014, we were ranked by the World Health Organisation as 

having the second best air quality in the world. What is the ranking today? 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: If the hon. Minister does not have the information, say so! 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Thank you. I don’t have the information, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan, last! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhagwan: Madam Speaker, since there have been repeated complaints… 

(Interruptions) 

Since there have been repeated complaints from the inhabitants of Canal Dayot and Pailles 
regions concerning the air quality in the region of St Louis, can the hon. Minister, at least, 
inform  the  House  whether  he  intends  to  carry  out  stack  emissions  and  also  other  tests  to 
measure the quality of air and then have the results laid in the Assembly? 

 
Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Madam Speaker, I will do that, thank you. 

65 

COCONUT TREES – PLANTING PROJECT 

(No.  B/359)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms, Minister of Environment, 
Sustainable  Development,  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
project for the planting of coconut trees around Mauritius, he will state the number of coconut 
trees which have been planted as at to date, indicating – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

(f) 

 the location thereof; 

 the names of the suppliers thereof; 

 the cost thereof; 

 the procurement method used therefor; 

 if  a  monitoring  exercise  has  been  carried  out  to  determine  the  success  rate 
thereof, and  

if  prior  technical  expertise  was  sought  on  the  use  of  coconut  trees  as  an 
effective method to combat soil erosion on the coast and, if so,  give details 
thereof. 

Mr  Wong  Yen  Cheong:  Madam  Speaker,  a  total  of  955  coconut  trees  have  been 

planted so far at 11 different locations. 

Information  being  sought  for  in  respect  of  parts  (a),  (b)  and  (c)  of  the  question,  is 

being tabled. 

With regard to part (d) of the question, I am informed that the Beach Authority had 
recourse to procurement methods as provided in the Public Procurement Act namely through 
quotations at the initial stage and then the open advertised bidding method whereby coconut 
trees had to be supplied on an “as and when required” basis. 

With regard to part (e) of the question, regular maintenance and watering of the plants 

are undertaken and the success rate is 87%. 

With respect to part (f) of the question, I am informed that the primary objective of 
planting coconut trees along the coast was to embellish the coastal belt and increase the green 
cover. 

 
However, I am also informed that the Department of Environment provided technical 

66 

advice as follows - 

(i) 

besides embellishing the coastal scenery, coconut trees have a functional role in 
mitigating beach erosion. Coconut trees have a fine fibrous root system and large 
root ball which tends to withstand wave and wind action and stabilise the beaches 
better than other trees with lesser root balls, and 

(ii) 

the required set back from the High Water Mark for planting of the coconut trees 
should be at least 15 metres. 

Mr Bhagwan: May I ask the hon. Minister whether he can inform the House in which 
Consultant  Report  it  has  been  recommended  to  carry  on  the  planting  of  coconut  trees  to 
combat soil erosion especially on the coast? 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Madam Speaker, no consultant has been sought for this. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Osman Mahomed! 

Mr  Mahomed:  Yes,  thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  In  Parliamentary  Question  No. 
B/105  with  respect  to  contractors  who  are  maintaining  our  beaches,  I  did  ask  the  hon. 
Minister  a  question  about  whether  the  maintenance  of  these  trees  fall  under  their 
responsibility and he said that he would look into the matter. Would the Minister be able to 
tell us today whether the maintenance of the coconut trees - many of which are dying off - 
falls under the responsibility of these beach contractors? 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Madam Speaker, as from the information I am given, there 
is only one contractor which is in Cap Malheureux, who has this contract of maintenance of 
the coconut palms.  

Mr  Bérenger:  Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  -  he  is  a  freshly  appointed  Minister  of 
Environment  –  whether  he  can  guarantee  to  the  House  that  there  have  been  no  corrupt 
practices  in  this  -  which  looks  like  an  innocent  coconut  tree  matter  -  therein?  Is  he  in  a 
position to give that guarantee to the House, and if not, what? You need advice from in front 
of you? No? 

(Interruptions) 

Therefore, are you satisfied, and if not, are you going to have an enquiry carried out by the 
proper persons? 

67 

 
Mr  Wong  Yen  Cheong:  Madam  Speaker,  as  far  as  I  am  concerned,  as  the  hon. 
Leader of the Opposition just mentioned, I have no factual evidence that there has been any 
corruption because if there is any, I think anybody who has this type of information, should 
go to the Police. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhagwan: Can I know from the hon. Minister whether he has enquired with the 
Beach  Authority  -  he  has  informed  us  of  the  procedures  which  have  been  used  for  the 
purchase of these coconut trees - which is that company, who are those persons who have 
supplied these coconut trees and at what rate? 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Madam Speaker, there are different types of methods that 
have been used, as I have already said in my answer. They are done in such a way as per the 
Public Procurement Act namely, through quotation at initial stage. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Dayal, you had a question? 

Mr Dayal: I would like… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

I would like the hon. Minister to confirm whether before 2014 coconut trees were planted in 
the general area of Caudan, who was the Minister and whether any coconut trees are standing 
there at present? 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

Order! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 (Interruptions) 

Hon. Bhagwan, please do not impute motives! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Dayal: On a point of order, Madam… 

Madam Speaker: Yes! 

 
Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Madam Speaker, I don’t have such information. 

68 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dayal, I will take your point of order after Question Time! 

Mr  Wong  Yen  Cheong:  Madam  Speaker,  I  don’t  have  such  information  as  from 
now, but what I know is that coconut trees are planted near all the hotels around the littoral.  
This is for embellishing and this is to procure a tropical aspect to the country for the tourists.  

Madam Speaker: Okay! Next question, hon. Lesjongard! 

(Interruptions) 

Now, you are disturbing the proceedings of the House with crosstalking! Hon. Lesjongard, 
ask your question! 

CEB – EX-BINANI SITE - LAND LEASE 

(No.  B/360)  Mr  G.  Lesjongard  (Second  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to 
the  Central  Electricity  Board,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  therefrom, 
information as to if it has submitted a request for land to the Mauritius Ports Authority and, if 
so, indicate the purpose therefor. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo): Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Central Electricity Board that CEB 
holds a lease of a portion of land of the extent of approximately 1.2 hectares on a site near 
Fort George Power Station. 

On  12  January  2016,  CEB  proposed  to  the  MPA  that  a  larger  portion  of  land  of  2 

hectares near Fort George Power Station be leased to CEB.  

On 18 March 2016, MPA offered two hectares of land found on the ex-Binani site. An 
agreement in principle has been reached between CEB and MPA and will be finalised soon.  

The purpose is to install two heavy duty industrial gas turbines, configured in open 

cycle mode, each rated between 35 MW and 40 MW. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr Bérenger: Can I ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister whether the MPA has agreed 

for these two new gas turbines to be purchased and installed there? 

69 

 
Mr Collendavelloo: The MPA has agreed in principle to the lease.  This agreement 
was reached yesterday. So, I do not have the details yet.  But I shall come to the House with a 
statement. 

Mr Lesjongard: I understand that an agreement has been reached now between the 
CEB and the MPA.  Was there a formal objection from the MPA before that agreement was 
reached? 

Mr Collendavelloo: I am sorry, I cannot understand the question.  What happened is 

that MPA has offered land to CEB, and the offer came from MPA.   

(Interruptions) 

No, on 18 March.  Of course, in the past! 

(Interruptions) 

No, in 2016!  I know it is a bit confusing.  Let me give the chronology.  At first, it already 
had  the  CT  Power  land  of  1.2  hectares.    Then,  CEB  wanted  to  get  a  portion  land  of  two 
hectares somewhere in the Port area, and that was in January.  Then, they discussed and MPA 
came with another portion of land, and that was on 18 March 2016.  Another portion of land - 
that is the confusion - but still of two hectares. Yesterday, they have reached an agreement 
and it is too early for me to give details … 

(Interruptions) 

In the Port area, at Fort George.  It is the ex-Binani site. It is where Binany was going to have 
its operations. 

CEB - SMALL SCALE DISTRIBUTED GENERATOR NET METERING SCHEME 

(No.  B/361)  Mr  G.  Lesjongard  (Second  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to 
the Small Scale Distributed Generator Net Metering Scheme, he will, for the benefit of the 
House, obtain from the Central Electricity Board, information as to the number of – 

(a) 

(b) 

applications received thereunder since its inception in September 2015 to date, 
and  

consumers  thereunder  connected  to  the  grid  of  the  Central  Electricity  and 
exporting power. 

70 

 
The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):  Madam  Speaker,  in  September  2015,  the  Central  Electricity  Board 
launched the Small Scale Distributed Generation Net Metering Scheme (SSDG) for a total 
capacity  of  5  MW  in  Mauritius  and  200  kW  in  Rodrigues,  allocated  to  two  categories  of 
customers as follows – 

• 

• 

Category 1 – single phase domestic customers for a total capacity of 4 MW in 
Mauritius and 150 kW in Rodrigues, and 
Category  2  –  the  three  phase  domestic  customers  IRS,  RES  and  other 
customers having a declared load less than 20 kVA, for a total capacity of 1 
MW in Mauritius and 50 kW in Rodrigues. 

I  am  informed  by  the  Central  Electricity  Board  that,  as  at  02  May  2016,  it  has 
received  1,618  applications  in  Mauritius  and  26  in  Rodrigues.    The  allocated  capacity  for 
Category  2  consumers  has  already  been  reached  while  Category  1  is  still  open  both  in 
Mauritius and Rodrigues. 

According to the records of CEB – 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

137  Undertaker’s  Permits  have  been  issued,  11  installations  have  been 
completed, three have already been connected to the grid; 

78 permits will be issued by CEB this week; 

292  applicants  have  completed  publication  of  notices,  as  required  by  the 
Electricity Act, and 152 applicants still have to submit their published notices, 
and 

(iv) 

technical surveys are being carried out for 828 applications. 

I have had the occasion in the past to draw the attention of the CEB that I was entirely 
dissatisfied  with  the  lengthy  processing  time  of  the  SSDG  applications,  and  I  have  asked 
CEB Management to review the procedures. 

I am also proposing to bring necessary amendments to the legislation … 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Sorry, I have several times asked hon. Members or hon. Ministers 

not to bring their phones in the House, please! 

 
Mr  Collendavelloo:    I  am  also  proposing  to  bring  necessary  amendments  to  the 

71 

legislation to facilitate the processing of Undertaker’s Permit for SSDGs. 

Mr Lesjongard:  Madam Speaker, I thank the hon. Vice-Prime Minister for his reply 
and for stating to the House his dissatisfaction in the rate requests are being approved and 
consumers connected to the network, because out of 1,618 applications, only three have been 
connected to the network.  It is at a very slow pace.  My question pertains to a category which 
is neither found under the SSDG and the MSDG, that is, consumers ranging from 5 to 15 kW.  
Can the hon. Vice-Prime Minister inform the House what the CEB intends to do to include 
that category of consumers under either SSDG or the MSDG schemes? 

Mr Collendavelloo: I have raised this question with CEB.  Now, to be fair to CEB, 
let us agree that this is new for them.  They have been used to be working in a particular 
engineering surrounding, and that has been a little bit slow in taking off.  For this grey area, 
we  have  had  several  requests,  that  is,  several  applications  like  petrol  stations  and  similar 
medium scale enterprises.  What CEB is doing, is to do ad hoc contracts just as it is doing for 
the MSDGs like Bagatelle, Super U, etc.  So, it is not satisfactory, I agree, but let us say that, 
very soon, when MARENA will take over the whole operation, we hope that there will be a 
new impetus to the matter. 

Mr Mahomed:  Madam Speaker, once upon a time … 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

Mr Mahomed: … the procedure was quite cumbersome, comprising requirement of 
the assent of the President of the Republic for each and every power producer in the country.  
But I do believe this has been revised.   

(Interruptions) 

Not yet? 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Member, ask your question! 

Mr Collendavelloo: No, it has not been revised, but that administrative side of the 
process is not the problem because once it has left CEB, it comes to my Ministry and - I have 
checked  today  -  it  takes  about  three  days  between  the  receipt  in  my  Ministry  and  the 
President’s signature.  So, that is not really the problem.  You want to see the problem?  This 
is the problem.  That is the flowchart between the time an application comes in - and it goes 

 

72 

through all this.  It is like a long-term underground map - until you get your permit.  So, that 
is unacceptable.  We are working on it.  A new Head of the division has been appointed, with 
specific instructions to try and speed up the process.  There is a new organigram that is being 
worked out.  To be fair, as I have said, it was a new matter.  They are very scared of safety 
issues.  They want to check everything before they grant the permit.  They are engineers.  I 
do not want to play with safety as well. 

Mr  Ganoo:  I  think  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  highlighted  one  of  the  reasons 
which are causing this delay in the granting of the permits, that is, the necessity to amend the 
law, the legal framework. 

Mr Ganoo:  Can I ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister whether regulations cannot be 
passed to change the law to help to expedite matters or do we have to come up with a new 
Electricity Act to review the Utility Regulatory Authority in which law, in fact, this Authority 
is given the power to grant licences in respect of utility services? So, can it not be done by 
regulations to expedite matters? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Well, we are both lawyers. We have, of course, thought of this. I 
do not think that regulations would have been ultra vires should we do it. It is better to pass a 
law, come to Parliament and review the whole process. It won’t take a long time. The law is 
ready. We just need to go through the process. That will not be very difficult. 

Madam Speaker: Last question, hon. Lesjongard! 

Mr Lesjongard: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will get back to the earlier question I 
put to the hon. Vice-Prime Minister concerning the category of consumers between 5 kW and 
50 kW, which comprises mostly of small and medium entrepreneurs. What is the difficulty in 
bringing that category of consumers under the ambit of the SSDG? Do we have a problem in 
bringing  them  because  it  is  the  same  type  of  metering  that  will  be  proposed  to  those 
consumers at the end of the day? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Let us be frank over the whole issue. The issue is that CEB was 
dragged into a process. For years and centuries they have been used to the same sort of power 
plant.  Now,  we  are  asking  them  to  go  into  a  paradigm  shift  and  that  has  been  the  great 
difficulty. Now, for your precise category, yes, I have seen the list. I have worked on the list, 
they are many; most of them petrol stations because they have got additional facilities and 
they are contracting. They are doing contracts with each and every one until we work. Don’t 
forget, they have done it in phases. The first phase is almost finished, the 4 MW, and we have 

 

73 

the  IRS,  RES  and  all  these.  When  they  have  gone  through  the  learning  process,  they  will 
come on the second phase. I hope they do it. If you want to help, you can go back to CEB. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Joomaye! Your question! 

MONOSODIUM GLUTAMATE - BAN 

(No.  B/362)  Dr.  Z.  Joomaye  (Second  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac)  asked  the  Minister  of  Industry,  Commerce  and  Consumer  Protection  whether,  in 
regard to monosodium glutamate, he will state - 

(a) 

if  the  banning  of  the  importation  thereof  has  been  recommended  by  the 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life, indicating -  

(i) 

(ii) 

if  this  measure  has  been  extended  to  all  imported  food  containing 
same, and  

the  number  of  countries  where  similar  measures  have  been  applied, 
and  

(b) 

if  any  complaint  has  been  registered  from  any  local  consumer  thereof  in 
relation thereto.  

Mr  Gungah:  Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  in  July  2015,  my 
Ministry had consultations with the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life as well as with 
other  relevant  authorities  to  consider  introducing  a  ban  on  the  importation  and  sale  of 
Monosodium  Glutamate  (MSG),  most  commonly  known  as  Ajinomoto  used  in  food 
preparations in view of its adverse effects on health.  

My Ministry was apprised by the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life that there is 
no  convincing  scientific  evidence  that  MSG  is  a  significant  factor  in  causing  systemic 
reactions resulting in severe illness or mortality. However, MSG has a high degree of sodium 
content,  and  is  thus  a  silent  killer  causing  several  reactions  such  as  headaches,  fatigue, 
disorientation, facial pressure and tightness.  

Moreover, I have been informed that in Mauritius, it is estimated that some 242,000 
adults aged between 20 to 74 years suffer from hypertension, and the 4% of all deaths are 
attributed to hypertension as underlying cause. Mauritius also has one of the highest rates of 
diabetes and prediabetes, a condition associated with increased risk of heart disease. The high 

 

74 

rates  of  diabetes  and  prediabetes,  coupled  with  those  of  obesity,  dyslipidaemia  and 
hypertension constitute a significant threat in terms of social and economic burden, be it for 
direct or indirect medical cost.  

According  to  a  Survey  on  Household  Out-of  Pocket  Expenditure  on  Health,  the 
households’ spending on health amounted to approximately Rs10.81 billion in the Financial 
Year 2014; and hypertension and diabetes were at the top of the list of the most commonly 
reported diseases.  

 While  the  highly  controversial  past  of  MSG  and  the  accompanying  ambiguous 
research  have  led  people  to  believe  MSG  is  harmless,  a  study  has  linked  MSG  intake  to 
obesity and other diseases mentioned above.  It is, therefore, appropriate  to ban the sale of 
MSG in Mauritius as it is likely to bring more harm than good to the population, taking into 
account the Mauritian context and not based on international surveys.  

Government has decided that it is not worth the risk to let our population continue 
consuming MSG, so as to prevent the health of the population from deteriorating any further.  

Madam  Speaker,  as  regards  part  (a)  (i)  of  the  question,  the  decision  is  to  ban 

importation of MSG as such only. It does not apply to imported food containing MSG.  

In respect of part (a) (ii) of the question, I have not been made aware of any country 
where, currently, importation of MSG is not allowed. As I stated previously, we should focus 
on the local context and not just adhere to what is being practised elsewhere.  

With regard to part (b) of the question, I wish to inform the House that, as at date, my 

Ministry has not received any complaint from any local consumer in relation to MSG. 

Dr.  Joomaye:  Madam  Speaker.  I  wish  to  thank  the  hon.  Minister  for  his  answer.  
According  to  international  Good  Manufacturing  Practice,  the  safe  dose  for  MSG  in  food 
preparations - because I understand that MSG on its own has been banned but not MSG in 
food preparations which are imported - would be 5 mL, 5 mL per KG. So, would the hon. 
Minister  consider  introducing  a  threshold  dose  for  importation  of  food  preparations  to  be 
authorised for import? 

Mr Gungah: Can the hon. Member repeat the question, please? 

Dr.  Joomaye:  Since  MSG  has  not  been  banned  in  food  preparations,  will  the  hon. 
Minister consider introducing a threshold dose in the food preparations being imported which 
would be 5 ML per KG, which is internationally accepted? 

 

75 

Mr Gungah: In fact, I welcome the suggestion of the hon. Member, because I think it 
is very important that products that are imported into the country have specifications of not 
only the presence of MSG but as well as the quantity, the percentage. 

Dr.  Joomaye:  MSG  being  a  flavour  enhancing  ingredient  in  the  light  of  the 
information  that  the  hon.  Minister  has  given,  will  he  consider  allowing  the  food 
manufacturers, the food technology industry to continue to import MSG to add in their food 
preparations,  for  example,  the  preparation  of  dried  noodles  industry,  one  of  which  is  very 
well known locally? 

Mr Gungah: Madam Speaker, the main problem is that we cannot control the amount 
of MSG that is being used in, for example, dried noodles. It is just like going to a restaurant 
and ordering for a meal without knowing the quantity that the chef has used in the food. So, 
the issue of having a partial ban does not arise, the ban is applied to each and all. 

Mr Mohamed: Since the ban is on all food that is produced in Mauritius as well as 
the importation of MSG itself and does not apply to MSG that is already in food imported to 
Mauritius, which is in itself a partial ban because it is coming to Mauritius within food that 
exists already. Would the hon. Minister consider the possibility of having regulations to the 
effect that state obligatory on labels that MSG is present, be it for imported food, be it for 
food that is sold in restaurants or food that is even manufactured in Mauritius? So, have it as 
a label pre-conditioned, but in bold characters so that the consumers can decide whether they 
want to buy or not, at least the choice resides in the consumers. 

Mr Gungah:  Madam Speaker, I fully agree with the hon. Member.  In fact what I 
replied earlier is that the presence of MSG is normally written on the package.  Some of the 
packages have also the quantity, that is, the percentage, but we should ensure now that all the 
products have their specified quantities and it is, of course, up to the consumers to decide the 
right choice. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Ganoo! 

Mr  Ganoo:    Doesn’t  the  hon.  Minister  think  that  this  banning  of  the  MSG  should 
have been, in view of the reasons that he just gave to the House, accompanied by a wider 
campaign among the population in terms of salt consumption which seems to be on the high 
side among our population. 

Mr Gungah:  Campaign is already being done, but we have to keep on doing it. 

 
Madam Speaker:  Hon. Jhugroo! 

76 

Mr Jhugroo:  Being given that there has been no scientific evidence that it causes 
harm to people consuming MSG, so, on what ground, the hon. Minister thinks that we should 
ban it in Mauritius? 

Madam Speaker:  But the hon. Minister already replied! 

Mr Gungah:  As I said, Madam Speaker…. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:    No  crosstalking,  please!    You  want  to  reply,  hon.  Minister!  

Please, do.  

You have already replied. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Gungah:  As I said, Madam Speaker, there have been adverse reports and I can 
refer  to  one  of  the  reports  that  came  from  the  Federation  of  American  Societies  for 
Experimental Biology… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order, please! 

Mr Gungah: … which was commissioned by the FDA and the report listed a range of 
possible symptoms associated with MSG consumption like burning sensation in the back of 
the neck, forearms and chest, and so on.  In fact, as I said, Government does not want to take 
the risk to let population consume products that may even lead to death. 

Madam Speaker:  Okay.  Next question, hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

Hon. Dr. Joomaye, Next question! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

HOSPITALS - CORONARY ANGIOPLASTY – STENTS 

(No.  B/363)  Dr.  Z.  Joomaye  (Second  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the cardiac 
patients who underwent coronary angioplasty in 2015, he will state the number of – 

77 

drug eluting stents used during that period and  

stents purchased by his Ministry over the same period. 

 
(a) 

(b) 

Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, concerning part (a) of the question, I am informed that 
420  drug  eluting  stents  were  used  in  the  year  2015  on  patients  who  underwent  coronary 
angioplasty during that period.  

With regard to part (b) of the question, I wish to inform the House that my Ministry 
procured 52 stents in 2015. The balance of stents used was made up of those which had been 
procured in 2014.   

Dr.  Joomaye:    I  would  like  the  hon.  Minister  to  confirm  if  he  is  aware  that  drug 
eluting stents are much more efficient than normal stents and that the hon. Minister would 
spare  no  effort  to  make  these  stents  available  for  the  patients  undergoing  coronary 
angiography in our public hospitals?  

Mr Gayan:  Madam Speaker, the jury is still out on this issue.  In fact, we have both 
kinds  of  stents  that  are  being  used  in  our  hospitals.  We  have  the  drug  eluting  stents.  For 
example, in 2014, there were 1200 drug eluting stents that were used and bare metal stents 
were 1330 and this has been the current practice.  

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

Dr. Joomaye:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Ministry of Health and Quality of 
Life spends lot of money on cardiac services and coronary angiography and on buying stents.  
I would like to ask the hon. Minister whether he has an internal audit of services for follow-
up of patients who have had these procedures and to know whether these procedures have 
been done correctly, and the rate of relapse is according to international norms? 

Mr Gayan:  On a fact, Madam Speaker, I have asked for statistics on the use of drug 
eluting stents and metal stents and to see which is more effective.  But I must say that I have 
not been communicated the result of that audit and when I pressed my officers on that, they 
sent me articles from other countries.  But I said, “I need to know what is happening here”, 
and  they  said,  “They  don’t  have  the  capacity  for  research”.    I  said,  “No,  but  we  need  the 
statistics” and I hope I get them. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Osman Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Is the hon. Minister aware or has he 
been made aware that there is an acute shortage of stents in certain hospitals; Jeetoo Hospital 

 

78 

being one of them whereby I have constituents of mine who are waiting for two months, three 
months now for a stent? Can the hon. Minister, please, look into the matter?  I have attended 
too many funerals these days, I don’t want to attend so many because it is life threatening. 
They are waiting for stents. 

Madam Speaker:  You have made your point! 

Mr Gayan:  Well, Madam Speaker, in fact, I must say that whenever there is urgent 
need for stents, stents are being procured at the hospitals by way of local purchase.  But I 
must say that the issue of stents has been a problem because there was invitation for bids in 
November 2014 and when the process was on, an aggrieved bidder went to the IRP and it was 
only in October 2015 that the IRP gave its decision and the decision was to annul the tender 
exercise. So, the whole thing had to be started again, but, in the meantime, stents are being 
procured at the level of each hospital.  

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem:  Precisely, following from what my Constituency colleague left, there is a 
big shortage of stents in Jeetoo Hospital and the hon. Minister has said that “as far back as 
October 2015”.  I am very aware of this IRP case.  So, more than six months ago, there has 
already been a ruling that a new tender should be launched.  So, may I know from the hon. 
Minister why is he taking so long for his Ministry to launch new tender when we are talking 
about life saving devices here? 

Mr Gayan: Tenders were launched in January 2016, Madam Speaker.  But as I have 
said repeatedly here, the tendering procedure, the procurement procedures are very lengthy 
and then, there is always the possibility of an aggrieved bidder challenging the decision and 
then it has to go to the IRP.  But I must say that there has been no case of urgency where a 
stent has not been procured at the level of the hospitals. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Leopold! 

 

PLASTIC BAGS - BAN 

(No. B/364) Mr J. Leopold (Second Member for Rodrigues) asked the Minister of 
Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms,  Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable 
Development, and Disaster and Beach Management whether, in regard to the plastic bags, he 
will state the difficulties being encountered by his Ministry for the enforcement of the ban 

 

79 

thereof since January 2016 to date in mainland Mauritius, indicating the remedial measures 
taken in relation thereto. 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong:  Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that no major 
difficulty  is  being  encountered  by  my  Ministry  for  the  enforcement  of  the  banning  of  the 
plastic  bags.  This  bold  measure  requires,  first  and  foremost,  a  change  in  people’s  mindset 
from a throw-away society to an ecologically responsible one. It is by far, one of the most 
challenging  national  environmental  initiatives  which  has  involved  many  stakeholders  from 
manufacturers, importers, traders to all of us, as customers.  

At  the  very  outset,  my  Ministry  has  laid  emphasis  on  sensitisation  and  awareness 
raising on a national basis with a mix of communication tools for maximum outreach, namely 
TV clips, radio spots, flyers, posters, banners, billboards and delivery of talks.   

Madam Speaker, regarding enforcement - 

(i) 

(ii) 

Firstly, there has been strict enforcement at the level of importation.  To date 
some  180,500  banned  bags  have  been  seized.    The  modus  operandi  for 
disposal of plastic bags seized is through recycling with the local recyclers. 

Secondly,  the  police  de  l’environnement  and  officers  of  my  Ministry  have 
already  embarked  on  enforcement  on  retail  outlets  namely  supermarkets, 
markets,  fairs  and  shops.  The  approach  has  been  rather  to  sensitise  the 
concerned operators.  

Observations made indicate that, in general, there is a compliance to the regulations. 

However, 

(i) 

some  traders  are  still  supplying  the  non-woven  polypropylene  bags  as  these 
are mistaken as being of textile material. 

(ii)  

some traders are also supplying the transparent non-biodegradable  

 

roll-on bags for packing of fruits and vegetables.  

So far, the enforcement officers have sensitised the operators through dissipating their 

confusions, providing explanations, clarifications and distributions flyers. 

To  date,  after  four  months  of  on-ground  sensitisation,  I  can  say  that  I  am  fully 

satisfied with the response we are getting with stakeholders - 

 
(i) 

80 

9 local manufacturers  are already producing biodegradable and compostable 
bags  from  105  tons  of  duly  certified  potato-starch  and  corn-starch  pallets 
imported from France and Italy. 

(ii) 

3 manufacturers of non-woven polypropylene bags have already  

(iii) 

registered to shift to production of non-woven biodegradable bags. 
about 4 million biodegradable and compostable bags have also been imported 
from Italy since 01 January 2016.  

Biodegradable  and  compostable  bags  are  now  available  at  the  local  markets  at  a 

reasonable price. 

Madam  Speaker,  now  that  we  are  witnessing  a  real  change  in  the  mindset  of 
Mauritians against the use of plastic bags, we will embark towards strict enforcement of the 
legislation. 

My Ministry has worked out a protocol to be used as guidance by authorised officers, 
namely Police Officer and authorised officers of the Department of Environment and Local 
Authorities to ensure enforcement in a harmonised manner. 

Mr Leopold: Madam Speaker, would the hon. Minister inform the House how many 

contraventions his Ministry has undertaken since the enforcement of this law? 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: I don’t have this information with me, Madam Speaker. 

Mr Mahomed: With regard to the difficulties the Ministry is facing - perhaps this has 
got to do with the substitution available on the market, the price of it being too high - would 
the hon. Minister consider bringing forward in the next Budget exercise some sort of subsidy 
for the replacement? 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, I have drawn your attention. This is the last warning 

I am giving you. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong:  Madam Speaker, to answer the question, I think there are 
proposals  in  this  sense,  but  we  have  to  analyse  if  it  is  possible  to  do  so.  It  is  a  national 
consensus. We know that it is a very courageous measure to be taken, but for the environment 
problem that we had, we have to stop using plastics in the future. 

 
Mr Mahomed: I was not referring to the sac cornet. I was referring to the bags that 

81 

are sold in supermarkets.  They are sold for Rs45 and Rs50.  That is what I was referring to. 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Madam Speaker, I think people have the option. They don’t 

have to use the bags which cost Rs45. Even if they cost Rs45, they are reusable. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Now, hon. Jhugroo, out! 

I order you out! 

You can’t continue like this! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Now, don’t take your time! You are losing the time of the House. 

The  Table  has  been  advised  that  the  following  PQs  have  been  withdrawn:  B/372,  B/373, 
B/376, B/378 and B/380. 

CITÉ ROMA, RICHE TERRE - SEWERAGE SYSTEM 

(No.  B/365)  Mr  G.  Oree  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  North  &  Montagne 
Longue) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in regard 
to the low cost housing estate in Cité Roma, Riche Terre, in Constituency No. 4, Port Louis 
North  and  Long  Mountain,  he  will  state  if  he  is  aware  that  the  residents  thereof  have  to 
regularly avail themselves of the services of the Waste Water Management Authority at the 
cost of two thousand rupees per intervention due to a lack of proper sewerage system thereat 
and, if so, will he, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the NHDC Ltd., information as to 
if remedial measures will be taken in relation thereto. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun): 
Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  Cité  Roma,  Riche  Terre  is  an  ex-CHA 
Housing estate constructed in the 1980’s. As such, it does not fall under the purview of the 
National Housing Development Co. Ltd (NHDC). 

82 

 
The housing units are of duplex type and a common cesspit has been provided for two 
houses. Some of the families have carried out concrete extensions to their ex-CHA houses 
and have put up individual septic tanks on their plot of land. 

All the residents have purchased their housing units from Government at the nominal 
price of Rs1,000 per unit in the 1990’s. As full-fledged owners of their houses, these families 
are expected to look after their property, including the maintenance of their cesspits, at their 
own costs, in case of overflowing. 

GLOBAL BUSINESS SECTOR - GROWTH RATE 

(No. B/366) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or) 

asked the Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms 
whether, in regard to the Global Business sector, he will state the growth rate thereof over the 
past three years, indicating the expected growth rate thereof in respect of the current financial 
year. 

(Withdrawn) 

LOW COST HOUSING UNITS - APPLICATIONS 

(No. B/367) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked the Minister of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment whether, in regard to 
the low cost housing units, he will give a list of the applications received for the allocation 
thereof in the course of the current financial year to date, indicating the ones which have been 
approved, indicating if the said applicants have been delivered therewith. 

Mr Roopun: Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that following Government 
decision in April 2015 to the effect that only vulnerable households living under the poverty 
threshold of Rs6,200 registered in the Social Register of Mauritius would be provided with 
appropriate support by the National Empowerment Foundation. An island-wide survey was 
carried out from June to December 2015. 

Based on the new survey, I am informed that the Foundation has, as at end of March 

2016, received 334 applications for housing facilities and the status is as follows – 

•  111 of the applicants are land owners; 
•  43 lessees of State land, and 
•  180 have authorisation to construct from the owner. 

83 

 
A further survey is presently ongoing to determine the technical specificities in terms 
of land topography, the actual extent of land available and the size of the individual housing 
unit to be constructed thereon. These will be fed into the tender documents to be launched 
shortly. 

I wish to inform the House that the new policy is to construct fully concrete housing 

unit of up to 50 square metres.  Hence, the need to have this detailed survey. 

Madam Speaker, the House may wish to note that before the new policy came into 
force, NEF was providing Corrugated-cum Iron Sheet housing units of 31.5 square metres at 
a unit cost of Rs276,000 to beneficiaries who were either land owners or in possession of a 
State  land  lease  or  having  obtained  authorisation  from  parents  and  relatives.  These 
beneficiaries had to reimburse an amount of Rs42,000 in monthly instalments of Rs500 over 
a period of seven years. 

Madam  Speaker,  in  respect  of  landless  beneficiaries,  NEF  was,  in  the  past,  also 

involved in the construction of integrated housing units. 

With  regard  to  hardship  cases  of  landless  beneficiaries,  they  were  referred  to  the 

Ministry of Housing and Lands for consideration for provision of State land lease.  

Currently,  consultations  are  ongoing  between  my  Ministry  and  the  Ministry  of 
Housing and  Lands/NHDC for the provision of full concrete housing units to beneficiaries 
who are not owners of land. 

Mr  Rughoobur:  Madam  Speaker,  from  the  reply  of  the  hon.  Minister,  I  note  that 
more than 50% of the applicants do not own a plot of land. Under the new conditions, will the 
hon. Minister confirm that ownership of land is a mandatory criteria for eligibility for a low-
cost housing unit? Has the Minister any solution to those who don’t have a plot of land? 

Mr  Roopun:  In  fact,  we  are  working  together  with  the  Ministry  of  Housing  and 
Lands  to  consider  ways  and  means  whereby  beneficiaries  under  the  SRM  will  be  given  a 
percentage of houses within NHDC estates which are in construction. We are trying, instead 
of  building  dedicated  housing  estates  consisting  essentially  of  all  those  registered  under 
SRM, to bring them within the NHDC estates so that there can be some integration with the 
lower middle income group. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Lepoigneur! 

84 

 
Mr  Lepoigneur:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  Can  the  hon.  Minister  inform  the 
House when the 48 units which are found at Petite Rivière, Albion Road, will be delivered to 
the beneficiaries? 

Mr Roopun: The pre-selection exercise has been completed, Madam Speaker, and we 
will  be  shortly  -  in  a  few  days  -  proceeding  with  the  drawing  of  the  lots  so  that  we  can 
identify those who will be given those units. 

Mr Rughoobur: Madam Speaker, the fact that there are 180 - more than 50 percent – 
applicants, not owning a plot of land, may I request the hon. Minister to, at least, consider the 
possibility  of  providing  them  with  that  structure  with  metal  and  timber  like  was  the  case 
before. Can the hon. Minister consider this possibility? 

Mr  Roopun:  Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  clarify  something.  The  180  persons  I 
mentioned  are  not  owners  of  land,  but  they  have  been  given  permission  by  the  owners  to 
construct; which means that there is a possibility to construct a housing unit for them on the 
land perhaps of a relative. Here, we are not concerned with those who are landless and for 
whom we can’t construct a social housing.  

Mr Rughoobur: Is the hon. Minister confirming that, not owning a plot of land, but 
merely having a permission from relatives, satisfies the criteria  for  getting  a plot? Even if 
they are not the owner of a plot of land, if they get a permission from a relative, does that 
allow them to satisfy the criteria? 

Mr Roopun: No.  In fact, this has been the practice before and we are working on 
specific conditions under which this will be maintained. The policy is still here. For example, 
if a relative or a parent gives the permission to a child, we are allowing the construction. 

Mr Sesungkur: Madam Speaker, I am sure the hon. Minister is aware that many of 
those  applications  are  pending  for  years  and  I  know  that  he  has  taken  a  good  decision  to 
move  forward  with  a  better  plan.  Can  the  hon.  Minister  ensure  that  those  plans  are 
communicated to the applicants and that there is a proactive communication with them? 

Mr Roopun: In fact, we know that there is a backlog and we will be giving priority to 
those who have been registered before so that everybody is given a fair chance, but we are 
also going to consider if there are specific cases, especially, if we have got young children. 
We  have  a  Project  Implementation  Committee  which  is  going  to  work  on  each  and  every 
application. 

85 

 
Mr Bhagwan: I come back to the houses at Petite Rivière. Regarding these houses 
which were launched  when the Deputy Prime  Minister was Minister of Social  Integration, 
commonly known as la caze boite zalumette - following the questions that we have asked in 
Parliament  -  can  the  hon.  Minister  inform  the  House  whether  all  the  amenities  such  as 
l’agrandissement des portes and others have been completed? 

Mr Roopun: Yes, all the remedial works had been completed by December. Now, we 
are in the process of completing works enabling connection them with all the utilities and this 
is presently ongoing. 

Madam Speaker: The Table has been advised that Parliamentary Question No. B/370 

has been withdrawn! Time is over! Hon. Dayal you had a point of order! 

Mr Dayal: Yes, Madam Speaker, you will recall that when I asked a question to the 
hon.  Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms,  Minister  of  Environment, 
Sustainable Development, and Disaster and Beach Management concerning the plantation of 
coconut  trees  before  2014  and  I  specifically  mentioned  the  area  of  Caudan  where  coconut 
trees… 

Madam Speaker: No, excuse me! What is your point of order? 

Mr Dayal: My point of order is, Madam, that when I was asking this question I knew 

hundred percent that the Minister was the then Minister… 

Madam Speaker: No, hon. Dayal, excuse me, this is not a point of order! 

 (Interruptions) 

This is not a point of order and I cannot accept this!   

(Interruptions) 

Please, this is not a point of order.  Please sit down! I am not prepared to accept it! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Dayal: I rephrase it, Madam. I heard the word… 

Madam Speaker: But, I said I am not prepared to take it. This is not a point of order!                                     

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10(2) 

 

86 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move that all the business on today’s Order 

Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS 

(4.20 p.m.) 

MILITARY ROAD, PORT LOUIS – SQUATTERS - RELOCATION 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun): 
Madam  Speaker,  with  your  permission,  I  propose  to  make  a  statement  in  relation  to  the 
matter raised by hon. Mohamed on 26 April 2016 at the National Assembly at adjournment 
time and pertaining to the squatters who are occupying land at Military Road, Port Louis. The 
House  will  recall  that  during  my  previous  statements  and  replies  to  PQs  on  squatters,  I 
informed that a cut-off date of 01 July 2015 has been adopted so that the issue of squatting 
can be effectively monitored and addressed. 

The squatters at Military Road are within the cut-off date of 01 July 2015. Some of 
them are occupying State lands on the proposed Ring Road track and some are just outside 
the  track.  It  was  initially  proposed  to  relocate  them  on  a  site  which  was  in  the  immediate 
vicinity of the land they are illegally occupying. Building site leases were granted to them. 
However, they made representations in view of the steepness of the proposed relocation site. 
It  was  thus  decided  to  move  them  to  another  site  along  Canal  Anglais  next  to  the  Islamic 
Centre  for  Disabled  Children.  Following  consultations  with  authorities  concerned,  it  was 
found that the cost of infrastructure would be on the high side and it was thus proposed to 
relocate these families at Pointe aux Sables. 

Representations have been received by the families to the effect that they are being 

relocated too far from their present living environment. 

Being given that social justice should prevail and people should not feel alienated in 
their new living environment, after due consideration of the case and following discussions 
with the relevant stakeholders, it has been decided that these families would be relocated at 
the site along Canal Anglais itself which is next to the Islamic Centre for Disabled Children. I 
have had discussions with my colleague Minister of Local Government and PPS Salim Abbas 

 

87 

Mamode,  who  have  agreed  that  the  local  authority  would  put  up  the  necessary  offsite 
infrastructure, together with the NDU.  

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

DR. A. G. JEETOO HOSPITAL - MRS S. A. - DEATH 

The Minister of Health and Quality of Life (Mr A. Gayan): With your permission, 
Madam Speaker, I wish to make a statement on the case of Mrs S. A. Following the death of 
late patient S. A. on 25 April 2016 at the age of 61 and following media attention that this 
case has attracted and is still attracting, I wish to bring certain clarifications and enlighten the 
House on this issue. 

Late patient S. A. was on 28 January 2016 admitted in the Surgical Unit of Dr. A. G. 
Jeetoo Hospital for swelling of left breast and a biopsy was performed by the surgeon on the 
next day. The specimen was sent to the Central Health Laboratory at Victoria Hospital for 
Histopathology examination. The patient was discharged on 29 January 2016 with a review in 
two weeks’ time.  

On 11 February 2016 the patient attended the Surgical Outpatient Department, but the 
histopathological  result  of  the  biopsy  was  not  available.  The  patient  was  reviewed  on  25 
February  2016  and  the  results  showed  no  evidence  of  malignancy.  In  view  of  her  state  of 
health, however, the surgeon decided to have an ultrasound guided biopsy carried out on the 
following day, that is, on 26 February 2016 at Dr. A. G. Jeetoo Hospital and the specimen 
was also sent to the Central Health Laboratory. 

On 14 March 2016, the patient was seen in the Surgical Out-Patient Department, and 
the result obtained on the same day showed features of infiltrating direct carninoma grade II.  
The patient was immediately referred to the Oncologist for further management, especially 
since  from  the  history  given  by  her,  that  is,  patient  Mrs  S.  A,  indicated  that  she  has  been 
suffering from left breast lump since the year 2013. 

On  25  March  2016,  the  patient  was  advised  by  the  Oncologist  to  attend  the 

Radiotherapy Out-Patient Department at Victoria Hospital for further management.  

On 28 March 2016, the patient attended the Radiotherapy and Oncology Department 
at Victoria Hospital where further investigations such as blood tests, chest x-ray, ultrasound 
abdomen and pelvis, cardiac echo and bone scan were done.  The ultrasound abdomen and 
pelvis  showed  multiple  lesions  over  the  liver  and  the  bone  scan  showed  metastatic  bone 

 

88 

disease.    These  tests  were  necessary  for  planning  her  treatment.  The  nature  and  the  poor 
prognosis of the disease were explained to the patient on the same day. 

Patient S. A. received the first cycle of chemotherapy on 06 April 2016 and was kept in ward 
from  06  to  13  April  2016.    On  13  April  2016,  the  patient  was  discharged  as  she  was 
asymptomatic and she had no symptoms.  On 25 April 2016, at 11.48 hours, the sister of late 
patient  S.  A.  phoned  SAMU  services  to  transport  patient  with  known  cancer  from  Beau 
Bassin to Radiotherapy Department, Victoria Hospital.  The sister informed that the patient 
has cancer and is weak, and is suffering from palpitations.  Following conversation between 
the doctor of the SAMU Services and the sister of the late patient, the doctor proposed that, 
instead of a SAMU reanimation ambulance, a normal ambulance could be needed to bring the 
patient to hospital in Port Louis.  The sister was also informed that arrangements had been 
made  for  the  conveyance  of  the  patient  by  a  normal  ambulance  from  the  Brown  Sequard 
Hospital at Beau Bassin itself, but that transport was not immediately available.  The sister 
then proposed to carry late patient by her own means. The conversation lasted five minutes in 
all and according to unconfirmed sources, the patient died on the same day at around 12.10 
hours at her residence. 

PORT LOUIS – HAWKERS 

The Minister of Local Government (Dr. A. Husnoo): Madam Speaker, with your 
permission  I  would  like  to  make  a  statement  in  regard  to  the  hawkers  in  the  City  of  Port 
Louis. 

With regard to the problem of hawkers in the City of Port Louis, I would like to 

inform the House of the latest development. 

The presence of hawkers on the streets of Port Louis, which has been going on for 
 
about 30 years or more, was creating quite a lot of problems to the public, the pedestrians, the 
market  traders  and  the  shop  owners,  amongst  others.    As  the  House  is  aware,  there  is  a 
judgement  from  the  Supreme  Court,  ordering  the  Commissioner  of  Police  and  the  Lord 
Mayor to prevent the hawkers from operating within a radius of 500m from the market place. 

While complying with this judgement, the Government and the Municipal Council of 
 
Port Louis have tried to find a humane solution to this problem and to enable the hawkers to 
continue earning their living. 

89 

 
Madam  Speaker,  may  I  inform  the  House  that  the  vast  majority  of  hawkers  have 
already  left  the  roads  and  streets  and  have  moved  into  their  temporary  premises  newly 
allocated to them.  The remaining few others are moving in the coming few days. 

 
Madam Speaker, there has been reluctance, initially, by the hawkers to move into this 
new location.  However, the Lord Mayor and I have been in close and regular contacts with 
the  hawkers  and  their  representatives  since  the  beginning  of  the  relocation  process.    All 
along, it has been made clear to them that they are not being deprived of the possibility to 
earn a living.  However in the light of the Supreme Court judgement, they cannot continue to 
operate on the streets. 

I must say that a large majority of the hawkers have participated in the process and 

they have been allocated a space to trade in temporarily. 

Yesterday, I again met the representatives of the hawkers and they have agreed that 

 
they will all definitely move away from the streets of the city to occupy their new location. 

There  are still a few minor issues that need to  be looked at, namely improving the 
 
amenities  available  thereat  in  relation  to  hygienic  and  sanitary  conditions  of  the  area,  the 
possibility of providing some shelter to protect hawkers and public from the sun and rain.  I 
have already requested the City Council to look at these issues very closely. 

 
The  representatives  of  the  hawkers  have  informed  me  that  there  could  be  a  few 
hawkers who may have been left out of the process for different reasons and possibly that 
they have not found it useful to participate in the process.  To these people, we are offering 
another  opportunity  for  them  to  be  registered  with  the  Municipality,  and  if  they  meet  the 
qualifying  criteria  set  out  by  the  Municipal  Council,  they  would  definitely  be  allocated  a 
space as well. 

The House may wish to note that I have explained to the representatives of the hawkers that 
their  relocation  is  a  temporary  one.    As  announced,  the  integrated  project  for  traffic 
alleviation and redevelopment of the city will soon start and, in this project, provisions will 
be made for the hawkers to be allocated permanently a space to trade for themselves.  The 
project is designed in such a manner as to direct the pedestrian flux through shops, boutiques 
and trading areas.  This will definitely improve and open up new commercial opportunities 
for the hawkers. 

90 

 
 
I  shall  ensure  that  the  Municipal  Council  monitors  the  situation  closely  at  the  two 
temporary  sites,  so  that  the  hawkers  may  work  in  acceptable  conditions,  pending  the 
implementation of the redevelopment of the City Project, which is forthcoming. 

PERSONAL EXPLANATION 

PQ B/306 – PAS GEOMETRIQUES - LEASE 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun): 
Madam Speaker, with  your permission,  I wish to make the following personal explanation 
with regard to the reply I made to PQ B/306 at the sitting of the National Assembly on 26 
April 2016. 

In the heat of the debate, I stated in my reply that, on 10 February 2011, Compagnie 
Culture  de  Tabac  Ltee  applied  for  an  excision  in  favour  of  Société  Mohamed  Umeir  Ibne 
Showkut when, I quote - 

“I was not Minister at all.”  

I also said, I quote –  

“On 15th February 2011…I was not Minister.”  

It was my intention to convey to the House that I was not Minister of Housing and Lands at 
the material time.  In fact, I did rectify that slightly later, and I quote -  

“If I, as a Minister of Housing, have not intervened on that…”  

Madam Speaker, I wish to reassure the House that it was never my intention to mislead 

the House on a matter, which, moreover, is of public domain. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

PUBLIC BILL 

Second Reading 

THE NATIONAL WOMEN’S COUNCIL BILL  

(NO. V of 2016) 

Order for Second Reading read. 

The Minister of Gender Equality, Child Development and Family Welfare (Mrs 
A. Perraud): Madam Speaker,  I move that the  National Women’s Council Bill (No. V of 
2016) be read a second time. 

91 

 
Madam Speaker, today is a historical moment for me, as you can understand, this is 
my  first  Bill  as  the  Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and  Family  Welfare, 
even more so because of the cause I am supporting today. 

Madam Speaker, you, yourself, are a standing testimonial of women empowerment, 
as  you the very first woman Speaker treading this Parliament. This is a historical moment 
indeed, as this House is called upon today to embark on a wonderful journey, to promote the 
empowerment of women and girls of Mauritius for a fairer world. 

Madam Speaker, it is with a feeling of pride and a proud sense of achievement that I 
am standing in front of the House today for the Second Reading of the National Women’s 
Council Bill. 

The main object of this Bill is to repeal the National Women’s Council Act of 1985 to 
provide  for  a  modern  and  appropriate  legislative  framework  in  order  to  further  promote 
women’s  empowerment  and  gender  equality,  especially  through  the  active  participation  of 
women in the social, economic and political fields. 

Madam  Speaker,  women’s  empowerment  is  a  pre-condition  to  poverty  alleviation, 
reduction  of  inequalities  and  gender-based  violence,  among  others,  identified  as  key 
challenges for the 21st century by the United Nations General Assembly, which adopted the 
17  Global  Goals  for  Sustainable  Development  on  25  September  2015.    Moreover,  the 
adoption  of  a  stand-alone  goal  aiming  at  achieving  gender  equality  and  empowering  all 
women  and  girls  underlines  its  critical  importance  for  the  realization  of  the  Post-2015 
development Agenda. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  essence  of  sustainable  development,  in  line  with  the  2030 
Agenda for Sustainable Development at global level, is inclusiveness, which is high on the 
development  agenda  of  this  Government,  as  underlined  in  its  Vision  2030  Economic 
Statement. There is no  doubt that achieving  gender equality, which is first and foremost  a 
human right and a matter of dignity, can be a catalyst for growth.   

Madam  Speaker,  the  setting  up  of  a  full-fledged  Ministry  of  Women’s  Rights  and  Family 
Affairs  in  1982  under  the  abled  leadership  of  the  Rt.  hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  was  a 
visionary step towards women empowerment. It was written that three decades later, under 
the same Prime Minister’s leadership, the Rt. hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, the Government 
would be giving a major boost to the gender equality agenda, through the adoption of modern 

 

92 

legislation for the promotion of gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls at 
all levels. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to quote here Ms Phumzile, the Executive Director of UN 

Women, a great lady - 

“Empowering women and girls and supporting their full participation can help solve 
the greatest challenges of the 21st Century.”  

This is what we are heading for, today, Madam Speaker. 

The National Women’s Council was set up under the National Women’s Council Act 
1985 to have in place a structure that would mobilise women at grass root level and assist 
them  in  getting  organised  into  Women’s  Associations,  vehicles  through  which  they  could 
express their needs and concerns.   

The development of women’s movement produced different trends worldwide. Their 
mass mobilization, lobby and advocacy for the realisation of gender equality and women’s 
empowerment  have  resulted  in  remarkable  outcomes  in  terms  of  influencing  the  State  to 
bring  about  meaningful  and  positive  measures  to  redress  discrimination  and  gender 
inequalities.  

However, while women’s issues have evolved rapidly in the country over the last decades, it 
is  an  undeniable  fact  that  the  National  Women’s  Council  has  remained  static  and  passive, 
with no change in its structure, membership and functions over the last 30 years. Thus, there 
is a blatant mismatch between the legislative and institutional arrangements, and the evolving 
environment within which women operate.   

An  official  report  of  the  Ministry  dated  2003,  (I  repeat,  2003)  states  that  it  was 
“apparent that the existing structure of the Council is outdated and that it is necessary to have 
a  new  structure  that  will  allow  it  to  function  as  an  autonomous  body  to  ensure  the  full 
integration  of  women  in  the  development  of  modern  Mauritius”.  More  than  a  decade  has 
elapsed and the National Women’s Council is still at the same point.  

In the same vein, the membership of the National Women’s Council has been treated 
as a matter of concern in some documents. Such concerns relate to the profile of membership; 
the under-representation of young women and the employed ones; the nature of goals being 
pursued and the “top-down” approach which have failed to create an enabling environment 
for the empowerment of the women’s associations. 

 

93 

The  rationale  for  the  repeal  of  the  current  legislation  and  the  enactment  of  a  more 
modern  piece  of  legislation  is  to,  accordingly,  enable  the  National  Women’s  Council  to 
transform  itself  into  a  dynamic  entity  that  would  be  in  a  better  position  to  respond  to  the 
changing  needs  of  the  contemporary  Mauritian  women  and  contribute  more  effectively  to 
uphold their status in a challenging world. Madam Speaker, let me quote now Ms Christine 
Lagarde, another icon of women empowerment, today Managing Director of the IMF. She 
once said: “When women do better, economies do better.” 

The new legislation, Madam Speaker, will also contribute to harmonise the role and functions 
of the National Women’s Council with those of the Gender Unit of my Ministry, particularly 
in  the  context  of  the  change  in  appellation,  and  the  paradigm  shift  from  the  “Women  in 
Development”  approach  to  the  “Gender  and  Development”  approach  as  from  2010.  In  the 
same  bid,  the  fifteen  Women  Centres,  operating  under  the  aegis  of  the  Council,  will  be 
rebranded as “Women Empowerment Centres”, catering for the needs of the 2016 clientele, 
again bearing in mind the SDGs, the Sustainable Development Goals.  

Madam Speaker, the Bill thus provides for the necessary legal framework to repeal 

and replace the existing National Women’s Council Act so as to -  

(a)  make  better  provision  for  the  functioning,  powers  and  membership  of  the 
National  Women’s  Council  and  provide  a  platform  for  women  to  voice  out 
their needs, concerns and aspirations, and 

(b)  make  better  provision  for  the  regulation  and  registration  of  Women 
Associations in the different regions of the Island of Mauritius, and for a more 
effective  management  of  the  Regional  Committees  responsible  for  the 
activities of Women Associations in their region. 

Madam Speaker, I will now highlight the main provisions of the Bill -  

(a) 

(b) 

to  ensure  that  the  Council  is  provided  with  the  appropriate  mechanism  and 
structure  for  it  to  operate  according  to  current  good  governance  practices,  it 
will be administered by a Board, as provided under Section 8 of the legislation 
with  a  reduced  membership  of  11  instead  of  15,  and  an  independent 
Chairperson nominated by the Minister; 

there would be better representation of Women Associations island-wide with 
the  setting  up  of  a  Regional  Committee  in  each  district  managed  by  an 
Executive Committee of nine persons.   

 

94 

At present, the island is divided into only four regions, namely – 
Port Louis/Plaines Wilhems/Black River; 

(i) 

(ii) 

Pamplemousses/Rivière du Rempart;  

(iii)  Grand Port/ Savanne, and  

(iv)  Moka/Flacq.  

Using  a  rotation  system  each  year,  three  Regional  Committees  will  be  represented  on  the 
Board;  

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

(f) 

(g) 

the  Board  will  be  able  to  co-opt  not  more  than  three  other  persons  with 
relevant expertise not already available on the Board to serve as members; 

the setting up of Committees constituted either wholly by members or partly 
by  members  and  other  persons,  as  determined  by  the  Board  to  look  into 
matters of a technical nature and assist it in the performance of its functions 
and the exercise of its powers; 

provision for the appointment of a Manager by the Board to act as Secretary 
and to be responsible, inter alia, for the control and management of the day-
to-day business of the Council; 

providing  the  National  Women’s  Council  with  the  means  to  implement 
Government policies relating to women’s empowerment and gender equality, 
and 

gender  neutral  terms  have  been  used  throughout  the  Bill  in  line  with  my 
Ministry’s policy to promote the use of gender neutral language. 

A special note regarding Rodrigues, which should come up with its own Bill 
so as to respond to the specificities of Rodriguan women. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to underline that my Ministry which has been celebrating the 
International Women’s Day on 08 March 2016 and will celebrate the  International Day of 
Families on 15 May 2016 will sustain its efforts all year round to ensure that gender equality 
becomes a reality for the harmonious socio-economic development of Mauritian families.   

The National Women’s Council, which will be revamped following the enactment of 
the proposed legislation, is one of the vehicles which will contribute to attain such objectives. 
The  new  legal  framework  will  contribute  to  strengthen  women’s  empowerment  and  thus 

 

95 

achieve  gender  equality  in  all  sectors  of  development,  through  the  active  participation  of 
women in the social, economic and political fields.  The Council will thus act as a catalyst 
with regard to measures that are required to be introduced in order to improve the welfare of 
women and will pave the way for a gender-responsive implementation of the 2030 Agenda 
for Sustainable Development. 

While  expecting  the  legislation,  my  Ministry  has  come  up  with  a  small  revolution 
regarding the services offered in the women centres, which certainly responded to the needs 
and  aspirations  of  women  of  the  80s,  but  today  are  somehow  obsolete.  We  have  already 
introduced  empowerment  programmes  which  are  being  carried  out  on  a  regular  basis  in 
numerous  fields  including  leadership,  adult  literacy,  climate  change  and  increased 
participation in politics, amongst others.   

Strategies to improve women’s status, strengthen gender equality policies, eliminate 
gender disparities and reduce female unemployment will all contribute to improve the status 
of the Mauritian women economically, socially and politically. 

In  the  same  breath,  a  clearer  definition  of  roles  has  been  devised  through  a 
Memorandum of Understanding, which was signed a few weeks back, between the Gender 
Unit of my Ministry and the National Women Council. Confusion of roles would only slow 
down  our  actions  and  we  are  not  prepared  to  sacrifice  our  mission,  Madam  Speaker!  The 
world cannot achieve sustainable development without full and equal rights for half of the 
world’s population, in law and in practice.   

Madam  Speaker,  this  Bill  will  go  a  long  way  towards  strengthening  the  existing 
measures being taken by my Ministry for the empowerment of women and the achievement 
of gender equality in the spheres already mentioned. Let me conclude by quoting once again 
Mrs Phumzile, I quote- 

“To  achieve  gender  equality,  we  need  to  mobilize  not  just  parliaments  but 
populations, not only civil society but all of society!” 

With these words, Madam Speaker, I commend the Bill to the House.  

I thank you.  

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo rose and seconded. 

(4.51 p.m.) 

96 

 
Mr  V.  Baloomoody  (Third  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West):  Madam 
Speaker, let me at the outset make it clear that  we, on this side of the  House, support the 
objectives of the Bill. 

(Interruptions) 

And let me take this opportunity to congratulate the hon. Minister for bringing the first Bill 
since she has been Minister. 

Madam Speaker, ‘gender’ means men and women.  Your comment that there is no 

femme this side is unwarranted.  

Madam Speaker:  Address yourself to the Chair, please! 

Mr Baloomoody:  You better…  

(Interruptions) 

Or if you don’t want to listen, go and join the Chief Whip!   

Madam Speaker, we believe that empowering women and girls and achieving gender 
equality is crucial to creating inclusive, open and prosperous society. This is why, Madam 
Speaker,  when  the  first  Bill  was  introduced  in  Parliament  in  1985,  the  then  Leader  of  the 
Opposition,  hon.  Paul  Bérenger,  said  it  loud  and  clear  that  we  were  always  for  the 
empowerment  of  women  and  gender  equality.  This  is  why  we  support  the  first  National 
Women’s Council Bill which was presented to the House in 1985.  

However,  since  the  passing  of  the  law  in  1985,  there  have  been  two  subsequent 
amendments to the original Act, namely in 1989, only four years after the original Act was 
passed,  there  was  an  amendment.  It  is  good  that  I  mention  why  this  amendment  passed 
because probably I will ask the hon. Minister to inform us why somebody who was in the 
Council is no more in the Council in the new Bill. The main objective was to enlarge the 
membership  of  the  National  Women’s  Council.  At  that  time,  Madam  Speaker,  the 
membership included mostly associating, grouping of some villages and their objective was 
the promotion of social, cultural, and, in some cases, even religious activities. 

The amendment in 1989 was mainly to include such organisations as the Mauritius 
Family  Planning  Association,  the  Mauritius  Alliance  of  Women,  the  Business  and 
Professional  Women’s  Association,  la  fédération  des  femmes  chefs  d’entreprises,  the 
Physically  Handicapped  Welfare  Association.  These  associations  were  allowed  to  join  the 
Council without being affiliated to a Regional Committee and we will see that in this Bill, 

 

97 

you  have  to  be  associated  with  a  Regional  Committee  and  this  is  one  question  probably 
which the hon. Minister, I hope, will answer; why she has put that restriction that you have to 
be associated with a Regional Committee even if you are a professional organisation to be a 
member of the Council? 

Subsequently, in 1991 another amendment was brought to the original 1985 Act with 
three main objectives namely to have a rotation of the members of the Regional Committee 
every two years so that more people can participate in the Regional Committee.  And, most 
importantly, to have one representative of the Ministry of Human Rights and a representative 
of the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life to sit on the National Committee. In 1991, the 
Government of the day was an MMM/MSM Government. We thought that it was important 
to have somebody from the Ministry of Human Rights and the Ministry of Health and Quality 
of Life to be on that Committee, but this has been deleted.  Probably, we will have to ask the 
hon. Minister to tell us why, she is in Government now. I think it is important not to include 
these representatives on the Committee. 

Now, after all these years, as mentioned by the hon. Minister, with these amendments, 
it is true to say that the working of the Women’s Council has failed in its objective and we 
will have to see the reason why. Up to now, most of the associations of the groups of women 
are  more  or  less  from  the  same  village.    They  are  mostly  women’s  wing  of  either  social, 
cultural  or  religious  activities.  So,  they  are  people  who  are  already  members  of  other 
organisations, but they are in the women’s wing of that organisation, be it social or cultural 
and because they get an allowance, they form an association - we will see when it comes to 
the association - and they become member of that Council. Very often, for 10 or 15 years, the 
same person will sit on that Committee. This is why the hon. Minister just said there is no 
young person because there is a sort of monopole by these left wing associations, especially, 
in social and cultural associations.  They hold office and they will not allow youngsters to 
join in so that they sit on the Committee.  They are invited in all the fiestas organised by each 
Government, be it on Women’s Day or even in other cases.  We will come to that. 

When we look at the members of the Council or members of the women’s association 

registered with the Registry of Associations – 

 “(…) for an association to exist legally, it must comply with the rules and regulations 
of the Registry of Associations.”  

98 

 
According to my information, nearly 90% of these associations are not abiding by the 
rules and regulations of the association. They are not holding General Annual Meeting on a 
regular  basis.  They  are  not  submitting  their  annual  audited  statement  of  accounts  and 
expenditure  as  approved  by  a  General  Assembly.  God  knows  whether  they  have  General 
Assembly!  They  have  not  been  able  to  comply  with  the  object  of  association  as  these 
committees are not properly registered with the Registry of Associations. 

There is that strong perception and I will go even further by saying that the National 
Women’s  Council  has  acted  as  the  political  arms  of  the  Ministry  responsible  for  women 
affairs under many Governments. The Council has been recruiting political agents. Most of 
them are recruited as Family Support Officers with an allowance on a month-to-month basis 
even they don’t have  any  qualifications whatsoever. At best, most of them will indulge in 
excursion,  in  activities  organised  by  the  Government,  especially  on  Women’s  Day  and  in 
some cases they are pressurised to come to the meeting of 1st May. So, they have been used, 
very often, as a political institution instead of being an independent institution.  This has been 
the main failure of this Council. 

Another challenge of that Women’s Council is that professional associations were not given 
that  facility  to  join  in  and  most  of  them  turned  their  back  when  they  recognised  the  way 
Women’s  Council  are.    They  don’t  want  to  associate  themselves  with  such  organisations, 
being  professional  associations.    The  other  challenge  from  the  Council  is  the  question  of 
finance. They have not been able to do what the law allows them to do because of lack of 
finance. I am informed that more than 95% of their allowance goes in budget, paying for that 
month-to-month salary which they give to those women and there is not much for innovation, 
education and empowerment. However, I note that the new Bill provides under Section 6 that 
the Council shall have the power to receive grants for its finance and donations. But then, 
again,  I  would  like  to  ask  the  hon.  Minister  to  tell  us  what  control  we  will  have  on  the 
Council?  From whom are they allowed to raise funds, for which type of projects and how is 
that fund controlled? 

Now,  the  hon.  Minister  said  that  there  was  a  report  in  2003  which  said  that  the 
Council is not functioning well and that we have to revamp the Council and review the whole 
process. It is a fact! But, it is a fact also that in 2003, when Mrs Arianne Navarre-Marie was 
Minister, she did set up a Committee to review. That committee was known as the Women’s 
Forum with professional women and other professionals. There was a committee to see how 
we can review and revamp the National Women’s Council.  The first forum was chaired by 

 

99 

Mrs Claret Ah Hung who was then the CEO of the Financial Commission. There was a work 
done  and  I  understand  that  there  have  been  meetings  and  consultations,  but  then, 
unfortunately,  the  election  came  in  2005  and  we  could  not  pass  another  law  to  better  the 
functioning of the National Women’s Council. 

Madam Speaker, we believe that the National Women’s Council should, amongst others, act 
as  an  independent  genuine  women’s  forum.  I  stress  on  the  word  ‘independent’.  It  should 
encourage  professional  women’s  associations  to  join  the  Council  so  that  they  could  come 
forward and propose legislations or amendments to existing legislations so as to ensure that 
they do not discriminate women, to advance women’s rights and the equality objective. In 
order  to  fulfil  these  objectives,  the  Council  should  be  independent  with  no  political 
interference. This is where we have failed. I will prove that, again, we are having too much 
political interference in  that new Council.  I will come to that later.  In order to fulfil these 
objectives, they should be independent.  The Council should have the financial means and 
professional human resources to organise educational events and awareness campaign so as 
to encourage new membership.  We don’t have the same people on the Council for 10, 15, 20 
years and Community-Based Programme. As we all know, the main issues regarding women, 
today, are – 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Unemployment 
We know the rate of unemployment how high it is amongst women and young 
girls. 

Poverty 
If there is one person who bears the burden of poverty more is the woman. 
Violence against women 
I am sure that the hon. Minister will not disagree with me. I read in one of the 
interviews she gave at the beginning of this year, that violence against women, 
the statistics we have today does not reflect the reality. This is another issue 
which concerns women, and 

The fourth one, which I have been informed by professional associations, is 
reproductive health. 

This is why I would like the hon. Minister to tell us why a representative from the Ministry of 
Health on the Council has been revoked in the new Bill. 

100 

 
Madam Speaker, stark gender disparity remains in the economic and political realms. 
While  there  has  been  some  progress  over  the  decades,  on  average  women  in  the  labour 
market  still  earn  24%  less  than  men.  The  Ministry  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations, 
Employment and Training will agree with me that even in many of our Remuneration Orders, 
in the tea factory, in the salt factory, women are earning less than men for doing the same job. 

As of August 2015, only 22 per cent of all national Parliaments were female, a slow 
rise from 11.3 per cent in 1995, that is, according to the UN figures. Meanwhile, violence 
against women is a pandemic affecting most countries especially those with low economic 
means.  And,  we  must  say,  even  in  Mauritius  due  to  several  factors,  social  and  economic, 
domestic  violence  is  on  the  increase.  People  especially,  I  know  it  from  my  constituency 
where I witness this and I am sure that many of us in our constituencies in the low family 
where  there  is  poverty  and  unemployment,  domestic  violence  is  on  the  increase  although 
many  people  do  not  report  it  and  so  it  does  not  appear  on  the  statistics.  So,  now  let  me 
comment on the draft Bill and make some remarks and I will be here to listen to the hon. 
Minister when she replies. My comments on the Bill are as follows -  

First,  the  organisational  structure  of  the  Council  remains  the  same  except  the 
Secretary  of  the  Council  will  become  the  Manager.  A  change  in  the  appellation  does  not 
bring any change in the day-to-day management of the organisation. And that Secretary, that 
Manager  will  be  appointed  by  the  Minister!  There  is  actually  and  there  has  been  a  strong 
perception  that  the  National  Women’s  Council  is  the  political  arm  of  the  Ministry.  The 
proposed  Bill  reinforces  this  perception  in  that  the  previous  Act,  the  word  ‘Minister’ 
appeared seven times while, in this one, it is mentioned 15 times! So, 15 times we have the 
interference  of  the  Minister;  by  appointment,  by  giving  instructions,  we  will  come  to  the 
section dealing with ‘Powers of Minister’. 

One of the main changes is that the National Committee which, with the new Bill, 
will  become  the  Board  will  be  chaired  by  a  person  nominated  by  the  Minister  whereas 
previously it was the Supervising Officer of the Ministry who was the Chairperson.  

The Board itself will comprise of more nominated members of the Minister than those 
democratically elected.  I use the words ‘democratically  elected’ because when we see that 
every two years they have to change there will be only three members from nine districts on 
the Board, one wonders whether it is democratic, three members representing more than 1000 
associations! 

101 

 
There will be four members nominated as compared to three in the previous Act. Only 
three  members  elected  by  Regional  Committees  will  form  part  of  the  Board  out  of  ten 
members including the Chairperson the more so that 1000 associations will be represented by 
only three members on the Board. What is more of concern is the power of the Minister with 
regard to that Council.  

Section 17, I will read it –  

“The Minister may give such written directions of a general character to the Board, 
not  inconsistent  with  this  Act,  as  may  be  necessary  in  the  public  interest,  and  the 
Board shall comply with these directions.” 

This is a direct imposition, political interference by the Executive on what we were supposed 
to have an independent Women’s Council! So, it is clear, already we have the perception that 
it is too politically biased. Now, we have in the law, when we look at the number of people 
nominated, the way they will be appointed and the power of the Minister, there is that true 
risk, the real risk that it will be another political tool for the Minister and probably for the 
Government.  So,  I  hope  that  the  hon.  Minister  will  enlighten  us  on  why  those  who  were 
represented on the Board do not appear again, why she needs those powers, why only three 
representatives  from  the  associations  instead  of,  as  it  was  before,  there  were  more 
representations. 

So, to conclude, Madam Speaker, let me say that women have a critical role to play in 
the  development  of  our  country.  Women  have  a  right  to  equality  in  all  areas.  It  must  be 
embedded across the legal system, upheld in both law and legal practices including proactive 
measures. Since all areas of life  relate to  gender equality, efforts must be made to cut the 
roots of gender discrimination wherever it appears. 

I have done, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for half an hour. 

At 5.10 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 5.47 p.m. with the Deputy Speaker in the Chair 

Mrs R. Jadoo-Jaunbocus (Second Member for  Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central): Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in the United Nations Sustainable Development Summit, 
on 25 September of last year, the world leaders there adopted, as indeed the hon. Minister has 

 

102 

pointed out, the 2030 agenda for sustainable development, and those included 17 sustainable 
development goals to end poverty, fight inequality and injustice amongst other things. 

We note that the fifth goal is Gender Equality.  Why does the UNDP focus on Gender 
Equality and Women Empowerment?  Because this is not only Human Rights, but also it is a 
pathway to achieving millennium development goals and sustainable development. 

The  UNDP  coordinates  global  and  national  efforts  to  integrate  gender  equality  and 
women’s empowerment into poverty reduction, democratic governance, crisis prevention and 
recovery and environment and sustainable development. 

It ensures that women have a real voice in all government institutions, starting from 
the Judiciary to the Civil Service, as well as the private sector and civil society, so that, in 
that way, they can participate equally with men in public dialogue and decision-making and 
influence the decisions that will determine the future of their families and countries.  That is 
the United Nations. 

Now, I cannot but turn to what the South African Development Community (SADC) says, 
because we are a Member State of the SADC and because I am a Member of the SADC.  It 
deals specifically with economic empowerment and requires the Member States, in order to 
achieve economic empowerment, to take the following commitments – 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

adopt  policies  and  enact  laws  which  ensure  equal  access,  benefits  and 
opportunities for women and men in trade and  entrepreneurship, taking into 
account the contribution of women in the formal and informal sectors; 

review the national trade and entrepreneurship policies to make them gender 
responsive, and 

introduce  measures  to  ensure  that  women  benefit  equally  from  economic 
opportunities (as an affirmative action provision). 

When we look at all these international bodies and what they are trying to achieve in the field 
of  women’s  rights,  gender  equality,  we  cannot  but  commend  the  hon.  Minister  for  having 
come  with  this  Bill,  the  National  Women’s  Council  Bill,  before  the  Parliament  today,  Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

It  is  a  very  responsive  piece  of  legislation.  It  responds  to  the  needs  of  the  modern 
society.  We have had the National Women’s Council Act passed in 1985, which was at that 
time relevant and at that time respondent to the needs of the society then, but society evolved, 

 

103 

especially  in  the  field  of  women’s  rights  and  women  equality.  We  started  with  women’s 
equality and we now talk of gender equality, of gender rights.  All this has evolved.  This 
piece of legislation very much succinctly takes that into account, takes that into its strive, and 
shows that the Ministry has moved with time.  And that is very important. 

Indeed, when I commend the hon. Minister, I also have to say what else are we going 
to have with a Prime Minister such as our Rt. hon. Prime Minister, who has always been there 
to support the right cause of women, to support laws and policies which promulgate gender 
rights to be respected.  This Government has been the epitome in showing how much respect 
is shown to women, how much value is shown to women, indeed, by, first of all, having a 
Speaker  who  is  the  first  in  the  history  of  Mauritius  who  is  a  woman,  nothing  less  but  a 
woman.    We  have  a  President  who  is  again  a  woman,  and  having  so  many  women  in  the 
Government and in such positions, so as to influence policy and decision, this is important.  
We  cannot  just  say  that  we  value  women  and  give  token  appointment  to  women.    When 
Government, when this Rt. Hon. Prime Minister says he values women and the contribution 
of  women,  he  puts  effectively  women  in  position  where  they  can  involve,  where  they  can 
influence  and  have  positive  impact  upon  decision-making.    That  is  a  Government  which 
shows that it values its women, it respects its women and it listens to the opinion and the 
voices of its women. 

Before I look at the Bill, I just wish to quote Cecilia who says –  

“I am a person in my own right (…)” 

talking about women  

“(…) and I would like to be as independent as possible.” 

Now, we turn to look at the Bill and what does it say.  The first part that I would like to look 
at is clause 4 of the Bill, that is, the Objects of the Council.  When we look at the actual one - 
the 1985 one - and we turn to section 4, the Objects of the Council, this shows, indeed how 
much  the  laws  and  the  needs  have  evolved.    Now,  we  talk  about  promoting  women’s 
empowerment and gender equality.  One of the objects of the Council at clause 4(a), (b) and 
(c) talks about providing a platform for women to voice their needs, concerns and aspirations.  
Most  importantly,  at  clause  4(b),  we  talk  about  ensuring  and  promoting  the  active 
participation of women in the social, economic and political fields in order to further their 
overall empowerment.  Now, we no longer talk about women’s rights to education, because 
that is a reality.  We no longer talk the women’s rights to have children.  We no longer talk 

 

104 

about the rights of women at work.  These are a reality.  What we talk about now is more 
evolving needs, and clause 4, in its objects, responds to those needs. 

Clause 6 of this Bill gives wide powers to the Council and, yes, there can be certain - 
as has been expressed - reserves about the powers but, indeed, for the Council to be effective, 
it must have such powers as may be necessary in order to attain its objects and discharge its 
functions most effectively. It must be unhindered in the way it puts into action the policy of 
the  Government,  the  policy  of  the  Council  and,  indeed,  puts  into  reality  the  aims  and 
objectives, the objects of that Council and that is why in Clause 5, Functions of the Council, 
we see that the Council shall have such functions as may be necessary to attain its objects 
most  effectively, 
implement  Government  policies  regarding  women’s 
empowerment and gender equality, amongst others. 

in  order 

to 

 One of the functions, which is very important and I wanted to highlight it, is that it 
will  advise  the  Minister  on  ways  of  addressing  factors  responsible  for  impeding  women’s 
empowerment  and  gender  equality.    That  is  new  and  very  important  because  we  have  the 
positive flowing action, but we also need to look at things which impact negatively and which 
pull us behind, and in so providing in Clause 5 (b), this is actively dealt with and it again 
shows how responsive this piece of legislation is. It is also said that the Council shall identify 
and recommend to the Board projects which will promote the participation of women in all 
sectors of the economy. Once again, we see, as has been enlightened by the SADC, as has 
been agreed by all leaders of the countries in the United Nations forum, that it is important 
for  poverty  alleviation  that  women  are  empowered  and  pulled  in  the  political  circle  and 
economic decision-making. 

Clause 8 talks about the composition of the Board. Once again, we see that the model adopted 
is that under that Board there will be Committees which shall sit as required. This model is 
one  which  is  favoured  by  some,  that  is,  a  Board  followed  by  Board  Committees  which 
renders  the  Board  to  work  more  effectively,  more  flexibly.    It  is  less  taxing  on  the  Board 
because  not  all  Board  members  will  be  taken  up  in  all  matters;  it  will  have  delegated 
committees under the Board decision which will take up matters, work out matters and enable 
more input, otherwise the Board would have been too cumbersome to examine the number of 
issues that will arise in the field of gender.  

I also congratulate the hon. Minister for having, with the amendment, increased the 
Regional  Committees  from  four  -  which  was  what  was  formerly  provided  by  the  law  -  to 

 

105 

nine,  plus  one,  and  including  Rodrigues  as  was  the  case  before.  This  is  very  important; 
Clause 20 of the Bill which deals with the Regional Committees says that we shall have nine 
districts of the Island of Mauritius. So, in effect, it gives a wider platform to women to come 
and express their views and participate in decision-making, participate in policy through, of 
course, the Committees and Representatives through the Board.  And now, cleverly and very 
intelligently, the problem of how all these Committees are represented on the Board is dealt 
with because, formerly, we had four and they were all represented on the Committee. Now, 
there will be a rotation, as provided in Clause 8 (6). There will be a drawing, a rotation basis 
of  all  the  Regional  Committees  to  be  represented  in  turn.  So,  it  lends  the  voice  to  all 
throughout  the  country  so  that  different  Regional  Committees  can  lend  their  voice  and 
participate to certain decisions being taken and certain policies being commented upon.  

In  all,  as  I  have  said,  this  Bill  moves  with  time  and  addresses  the  real  needs  of 
women, the real needs of society because for society to move on, women have to move along 
and bring society to where it needs to reach its target. 

I  shall,  therefore,  stop  right  here  as  I  am  being  told  that  my  time  is  almost  up. 
Therefore, I shall not carry on because when one talks about the cause of women, Mr Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, one can go on and on because it is so moving and so powerful. I shall, therefore, 
give my full support to this Bill because this Bill is the very essence of what l’Alliance Lepep 
is about.  I say thank you to the hon. Minister and thank you to the Government for bringing 
such a Bill to the House. 

Thank you. 

 (6.01 p.m.) 

Mr  S.  Rughoobur  (Second  Member  for  Grand’  Baie  &  Poudre  D’or):      Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir, I thank you for this opportunity to say a few words on this Bill. I would 
like,  first  of  all,  to  congratulate  the  hon.  Minister  and  the  entire  team  involved  in  the 
preparation of this Bill.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, people who have adequate experience in management and 
understand the challenges associated with the corporate world will tell you that you do not 
have  a  thousand  formulae  to  optimise  on  the  resources  you  have  on  board.  The  most 
important among the two formulae is to get your priorities right. 

I  would  like  to  congratulate  the  hon.  Minister,  once  again,  because  this  country 
requires that we optimise on the potential that women represent for our country. As a priority, 

 

106 

the hon. Minister and her team have chosen to put in place a well organised structure that will 
enable wide participation of women through the nine Regional Committees, of course, with 
Rodrigues as well.  

The objective of the structure, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, as I understand from the Bill, 
is the promotion of women’s empowerment and gender equality, trigger better participation 
of  women  in  the  socio-economic  and  political  affairs  of  the  country  and  provide  an 
appropriate forum for them to voice out their aspirations and concerns. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, this Bill talks about the aspirations of women. Not very far from 
here, the African Union, through Agenda 2063, has defined a list of seven aspirations for the 
continent  and  one  among  those  important  aspirations  talks  about  the  role  of  women  in 
furthering  progress  at  all  levels  in  an  economy.  Gender  parity,  women  empowerment  and 
participation, violence and discrimination against women are issues that are very high in the 
agenda of the African Union and we need to get prepared in order to ensure that, as member 
of  the  African  Union,  we  are  fully  in  tune  with  its  strategy  and  orientation  in  the  coming 
years. 

On the other hand, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, as the House is aware, the United Nations 
has a new global 2030 roadmap and seventeen sustainable development goals were approved 
by the UN Member States in September  2015.   As mentioned by the hon. Minister in her 
speech,  the  role  of  women  and  girls  are  crucial  in  meeting  those  goals  and,  once  again, 
through UN women, no effort is being spared to ensure that the list of goals, starting from 
poverty  alleviation,  zero  hunger,  quality  education,  clean  water  and  sanitation,  industry, 
innovation and infrastructure, decent work and economic growth to gender equality are met 
with the full participation of women. 

In the domestic front, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we cannot be that pessimist as well 
and  I  have  to  admit  that  Mauritius  has  witnessed  satisfactory  progress  in  terms  of  gender 
parity, even if there is still a long way to go. I need not mention the different positions where 
women presently excel, except the fact that there is little doubt or not at all on their capacity 
to deliver as effectively as men and even better in many situations. What the present Bill aims 
at is to provide them access, space and opportunity to contribute much more than what they 
are presently contributing. 

107 

 
The  structure  is  one  and  very  important  in  this  whole  process  of  restructuring. 
However, we need then to ensure that there are adequate resources to make the structure work 
effectively and, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I have got a few proposals – 

1. 

 

2. 

 

3. 

The participation of the private sector 

The participation of the private sector is not very clear in the structure that is 
being proposed. I am sure that the private sector will have a prominent role to 
play  in  accompanying  the  Women’s  Council  both  at  regional  and  national 
levels.  The  Board  of  Investment  has  the  responsibility  to  approve  CSR 
projects  by  the  private  sector  in  the  property  sector  and  these  investments, 
which are mandatory in many cases, bring both opportunities in terms of funds 
and  expertise  in  the  field  of  empowerment.  This  is  one  among  many 
opportunities  that  should  be  captured  by  the  proposed  Women’s  Council  in 
view of meeting the objectives for which it has been set. 
The collaboration with Local Authorities 

Following the last reform of our Local Government, there has been a drastic 
increase in the number of women as Councillors and this particular situation 
represents  an  excellent  opportunity  for  the  Regional  Committees  in  all  nine 
districts as well as Rodrigues to empower and encourage women participation 
in politics. I propose that there is a sort of MoU signed between the proposed 
National  Women’s  Council  and  the  Ministry  of  Local  Government  or  the 
Local  Authorities,  which  MoU  will  elaborate  on  the  exchanges,  type  of 
collaboration and resources that can be put at the disposal of the Council to 
promote  its  function  and  objectives.  The  Local  Authorities  have  a  series  of 
infrastructure  which  can  be  put  at  the  disposal  of  these  women  associations 
and  the  Regional  Committees  to  promote  their  activities.  The  sports 
infrastructure, Council halls, libraries are a few examples. 
Funds from abroad 

Contrary to the former Bill on disaster risk reduction and management where I 
proposed the setting up of a special fund to manage all sums of money that is 
available  from  international  organisations  and  where,  unfortunately,  my 
proposal  was  not  considered,  I  am  pleased  to  note  that  provision  has  been 
made in this Bill to create a general fund. I am sure that the Women Council 

 

4. 

108 

will take full advantage of the donations that are available abroad and that an 
appropriate process will be put in place to identify potential sources of finance 
and their effective management thereafter. 
Human Resources 

I  am  sure  that  the  hon.  Minister  is  very  much  aware  that  without  an 
appropriate  executive  team,  any  structure  put  in  place  will  never  give  the 
desired  results.  The  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  has  been  saying  on  numerous 
occasions  that  transparency  should  prevail  in  the  recruitment  process  at  all 
levels. I am sure that the hon. Minister will see to it that the Manager and his 
or her collaborators appointed at the National Women’s Council will have the 
stature to exceed the expectations raised by the setting up of the Council. The 
Government will ensure that the Board is properly constituted and delivers on 
the specific mandate it has to be entrusted with. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, finally, there are new women issues cropping up with new 
challenges and amongst them I would rapidly mention, at least, three that the setting up of the 
proposed Council will have to address - 

1. 

2. 

3. 

Gender related violence 

Education 

Economic quality 

In the case of gender related violence, the statistics have, unfortunately, not been very 
encouraging in spite of the genuine efforts and initiatives of the parent Ministry. I would like 
to mention a few extracts of the last report of Amnesty International on Women’s Rights in 
Mauritius and I quote – 

“Despite  laws,  in  discrimination  occurred,  particularly  against  women.  The 
law prohibits rape, but there is no provision criminalising spousal rape. Police 
and  does  judicial  system  did  not  effectively  enforce  the  law.  Rape  is 
widespread,  but  most  victims  chose  not  to  report  or  file  charges  against  the 
attackers  due  to  cultural  pressures,  fear  of  retaliation  and  lengthy  court 
processes.  The  law  criminalises  domestic  violence,  but  remains  a  major 
problem” 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, education of women and girls is another challenge and a new 
issue that will have to be addressed by the National Women’s Council. Every year, there are 

 

109 

reports of the excellent performance of girls at secondary level and the increasing stock of 
women graduates leaving universities and joining the labour market. What we fail to mention 
is the lack of career guidance and mismatch between what our education system is producing 
and the requirements of our job market. We should investigate on the reasons for which very 
few women are appointed on tech jobs.  

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  on  economic  quality,  I  would  like  to  quote  Mrs  Sandra 
Fluke, women’s rights activist, who states in a report on New Women Issues and Challenges 
and I quote – 

“(…) many poverty issues also impact women. Raising the minimum wage is 
actually  a  "women's  issue"  because  64%  of  minimum  wage  workers  are 
women. 

Women  are  increasingly  becoming  the  sole  or  primary  earners  in  their 
household, so economic issues that hold women back have huge impact on our 
entire  economy.  Let's  help  women  financially  support  their  families  as  we 
create more good-paying jobs in our communities” 

To conclude, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I understand that the setting up of the National 
Women’s  Council  is  a  major  challenge  for  the  Ministry  of  Gender  Equality,  Child 
Development and Family Welfare. There is no doubt that we are, once again, addressing an 
issue which is above party politics and I am sure that there will ultimately be consensus in the 
House as to need for such a structure to promote gender equality, parity and gender-based 
sustained development. 

With these few words, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I thank you all for your attention. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Mrs Monty! 

(6.11 p.m.) 

Mrs M. C. Monty (Third Member for Port Louis North & Montagne Longue): 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, thank you for allowing me to intervene on this present Bill.   

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  this  Bill,  long  overdue,  is  now  being  amended  after  three 
long decades, and comes at a time when women’s associations are so many in number that 
they  cover  the  whole  country  and  it  is  high  time  to  give  a  new  impetus  to  the  National 
Women’s Council and to create new avenues and co-operations with all stakeholders. 

110 

 
It is to be stressed, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that the roles, needs and involvement of 
women  in  public  life  have  known  a  considerable  and  constant  change  over  the  last  years. 
Consequently,  the  National  Women’s  Council  Bill  of  1985  could  no  longer  fit  the  present 
context and, in line with new trends, it was more than necessary to come forward with new 
structures. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, this Bill brings a long-awaited change and new avenues of 
cooperation  and  help  to  all  registered  associations  of  our  country.  By  reaffirming  its 
commitment to work towards more involvement and empowerment of women at all levels be 
they social, economic and political, with this Bill, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the Ministry of 
Gender Equality, Child Development and Family Welfare, confirms its decision to strengthen 
its partnership with all women’s associations through the National Women’s Council.  

This Bill, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, will stop women walking on new roads with old 
shoes and the time is ripe to move towards more participation of women from all regions of 
the country. The new structures, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, will ensure that every three years, 
in a spirit of fairness, by drawing lots, three Regional Committees will be represented on the 
Board of the National Women’s Council and this on a rotational basis, each for a period of 
one year, thus favouring the effective participation of women in a more democratic way. 

Moreover, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the use of gender neutral terms all throughout the 
Bill has to be highlighted thereby reflecting the policy of the Ministry to promote the use of 
gender neutral language. 

M.  le  président,  en  sus  de  favoriser  plus  de  représentativité  régionale,  un  aspect 
important au niveau même du comité est ici rehaussé; celui du profile de la personne devant 
assurer  la  présidence  qui  devra  faire  preuve  d’engagement  et  des  intérêts  au  niveau  du 
développement et de la participation des femmes et aussi de l’égalité du genre.   

Somme toute, M. le président, ce projet de loi, en venant consolider les acquis, ouvre 
un  espace  plus  large  vers  une  interaction  et  une  coopération  plus  élargie.  Ce  qui  aidera, 
certainement,  le  conseil  national  des  femmes,  au  niveau  de  ses  différentes  fonctions, 
nommément,  celle  d’étudier  et  d’analyser  tous  les  facteurs  entravant  le  développement, 
l’épanouissement  des  femmes  au  niveau  du  pays,  et  d’y  remédier,  en  soumettant  des 
recommandations  aux  ministères  concernés,  de  présenter  des  projets  qui  favoriseront  une 
meilleure participation des femmes dans différents secteurs de l’économie mauricienne, aussi 

 

111 

et  surtout,  de  promouvoir  les  droits  des  femmes,  en  tant  que  partenaires  à  part  entière  du 
développement social, économique, politique et humain dans son ensemble. 

M.  le  président,  la  révision  d’un  projet  de  loi,  arrivant  après  30  ans,  ne  peut 
qu’apporter  un  nouveau  souffle,  un  nouvel  élan,  un  meilleur  espace  de  dialogue,  de 
coopération  et  d’espoir,  à  toutes  les  femmes  dont  les  voix  sont  restées  trop  longtemps 
étouffées, faute de plateforme pour se faire entendre. 

M.  le  président,  les  nouvelles  structures  veulent  permettre  aux  associations  de  se 
rajeunir, de se renouveler, de se redynamiser et d’évoluer vers une fructueuse coopération, 
pour que les femmes soient encore plus partie prenante du développement à tous les niveaux 
de la société mauricienne. 

Pour  conclure,  M.  le  président,  je  voudrais  présenter  mes  vives  félicitations  à  la 
ministre de tutelle pour cette louable initiative, pour le nouveau souffle apporté à ce projet de 
loi  et  pour  avoir  remodelé  et  ravivé  les  structures  devenues  jusqu’ici  trop  archaïques,  trop 
restrictives et trop étouffantes. Pour cette bouffée d’air frais, M. le président, que la ministre 
soit remerciée au nom de toutes les femmes, de toutes les associations existantes et à venir, 
qui en bénéficieront. Sur ce, M. le président, je vous remercie. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo! 

(6.17 p.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Social  Security,  National  Solidarity  and  Reform  Institutions 
(Mrs  F.  Jeewa-Daureeawoo):  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  it  is  indeed  a  great  pleasure  and 
honour for me to be addressing this House today on this prominent Bill. It was, indeed, high 
time  that  a  more  modern  legislative  framework  be  adopted  for  the  smooth  and  effective 
running and functioning of our National Women’s Council.  The present Act has served its 
purpose.  However,  we  need  to  move  forward  for  women’s  empowerment  and  gender 
equality. 

We cannot afford to stay behind in an era where we have a duty to enhance women’s 
rights. This Bill will be repealing the National Women’s Council Act which established the 
National Women’s Council back in 1985. If I may say, during the last decades, there have 
been endeavours to promote women empowerment and  gender  equality. This Bill is being 
introduced to the House today to complement this constructive démarche. 

112 

 
At this stage, it is important to highlight the principal difference between the National 
Women’s  Council  Act  1985  and  this  Bill  2016.  The  1985  Act,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir, 
focused on the very creation of the Council whereas this present  Bill engages itself in the 
design and setting up of a comprehensive structure for the effective operation of the Council. 
What we want to see today, in the wake of the passing of this Bill, is a full-fledged National 
Women’s Council. 

Clause 3 of the Bill re-establishes the Council and clause 31 of the Bill provides the 
usual  transitional  provisions  and  savings.  I  fully  concur  with  the  detailed  transitional 
provisions  which  will  ensure  that  the  actual  activities,  membership  and  employment 
arrangements of the current National Women’s Council are not interrupted. 

The Bill, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, has abolished the office of the National Committee. 
It has instead set up a more modern management structure for the Council. I fully agree with 
the creation of a ‘Board’ in lieu of the use of the National Committee for the administration 
of  the  Council.  Under  the  National  Women’s  Council  Act  1985,  the  Council  was  being 
managed and administered by the National Committee. It consisted of 11 members, namely 
representatives  from  various  Ministries  with  the  Permanent  Secretary  of  the  Ministry  for 
Women’s Rights, Child Development and Family Welfare as the president of the Committee. 

However,  clause  8  of  the  Bill  creates  the  ‘Board’  that  will  govern  the  National 
Women’s Council. It now provides for a totally different composition. I wish to applaud the 
initiative of having first of all a Chairperson at the head of the Council. The qualifications 
specified for the post of the Chairperson have been rightly chosen. Unlike the 1985 Act, the 
Council  will  now  be  led  by  a  person  who  is  committed  to  the  cause  of  women’s 
empowerment and gender equality. I believe that a Chairperson devoted to the objectives of 
the Council will be appointed; someone who will be endowed with the resources and time 
required to fulfil efficiently the responsibility involved in the said post. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan, your phone has already disturbed. Please! 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Further, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I particularly admire the 
idea of including in the Board, four members, with experience relating to social, economic or 
political  empowerment  of  women.  Indeed,  the  presence  of  these  learned  members  will 
contribute, to a large extent, in the achievement of the goals of the Council. 

113 

 
It  is  also  noteworthy  that  emphasis  has  been  laid  in  the  Bill  on  the  special 
characteristics of the members. I understand these characteristics have been stressed with a 
view to ensuring good governance. The Bill particularly highlights that no member should be 
actively engaged in politics nor should be engaged in any activity which could undermine the 
integrity of the Council. In an attempt to guarantee fairness in the proceedings, the Bill has 
even gone to the extent of specifying the requirement of disclosure of interest under its clause 
11.  I  concur  with  this  endeavour.  We  cannot  just  assume  the  ethic-conscience  of  the 
members.  This  provision  will  undoubtedly  promote  good  governance  and  the  long-term 
success of the Council. 

We can see from clause 12 of the Bill that the Council will now be equipped with a 
‘Manager’ who will be appointed by the Board. This position has rightly been designed to 
ensure  the  timely  execution  of  the  policy  of  the  Board.  I  am  sure  with  an  effective 
coordination, I cannot see any reason why the Council will not attain its goals successfully in 
the near future. 

I  also  wish  to  say  that  the  1985  Act  only  made  provisions  for  the  creation  of  five 
Regional  Committees  including  Rodrigues.  With  the  surging  percentage  of  women  in 
Mauritius  and  Rodrigues,  it  was  quite  obvious  that  five  Regional  Committees  would  not 
sustain  the  needs  and  requirements  of  the  women  of  these  regions.  The  2016  Bill  has 
addressed  this  problem  through  the  creation  of  nine  Regional  Committees  to  cater  for  the 
needs  of  women  of  the  nine  districts  of  Mauritius.  Rodrigues  will  still  have  its  separate 
Regional Committee. 

 In  general,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  in  addition  to  the  passing  of  this  Bill,  in  my 
humble  opinion,  there  is  an  equally  pressing  need  for  us  to  attract  even  more  active 
participation of women in the various spheres of society, be it, social, economic or political. 
It  is  true  that  the  new  National  Women’s  Council  will  be  more  efficient.  However,  in  the 
same  line,  we  should  also  increase  our  campaigns  for  the  sensitisation  of  women’s 
organisations and women themselves of the benefits associated with being affiliated with the 
Council.  I am sure that this will propel the National Women’s Council as a dynamic platform 
where women would feel at ease to voice out their needs, dreams, visions, motivations and 
endeavours amongst others. 

I  also  wish  to  highlight  an  important  practical  aspect.  In  future  we  should  also 
contemplate  to  promote  an  interactive  online  platform  for  the  members  of  the  National 

 

114 

Women’s Council. We should be prepared to welcome the recent technological advancement 
and  use  them  to  achieve  the  objectives  of  this  Bill  in  the  most  forceful  and  innovative 
manner. 

I fully support this Bill, I commend and thank the hon. Minister of Gender Equality, 
Child Development and  Family Welfare  for bringing  forward this  Bill to further empower 
women and for the effective promotion of gender equality. With this Bill, there will be active 
participation of women  of all walks of life in the various fields of society. The increasing 
force of women will have the potential of opening up doors of opportunities by redefining 
cultural, social and political norms and by closing the gender gap. I am looking forward to the 
passing of this Bill and to the implementation of the provision in a very near future. 

Thank you. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Toussaint! 

 (6.26 p.m.) 

Mr J. C. Toussaint (Second Member for Curepipe & Midlands): Thank you, Mr 

Deputy Speaker, Sir, for giving me the opportunity to say a few words on this Bill.  

Avant de commencer, je voudrais d’abord féliciter la ministre d’avoir proposé à cette 
Chambre le National Women’s Council Bill. Comme les autres membres ont dit avant moi, ça 
fait très longtemps que ce projet de loi était attendu. Je voudrais aussi, avec votre permission, 
M. le président, saluer à l’occasion de la journée Internationale de la Presse aujourd’hui, les 
journalistes et plus particulièrement les dames qui font un travail pas évident des fois. Je vous 
salue bien bas. 

Quand nous regardons l’histoire de l’humanité pour comprendre d’où vient la femme, 
ou est-ce que la femme est en train de partir, dans quelle direction, il y a beaucoup de choses 
qui se sont passées. Il y a eu beaucoup de dénigrements vis-à-vis de la femme. Il y a eu pas 
mal  de  violences  vis-à-vis  de  la  femme  et  il  y  a  des  choses  qui  peuvent  paraître  banales 
parfois mais qui sont très fortes. En faisant un peu de recherche je suis tombé sur quelque 
chose  que  je  souhaiterais  lire.  C’est  par  rapport  à  la  femme  comédienne  à  l’époque  de 
Shakespeare. And I will quote –  

“Globe Theatre Female Roles - Women were forbidden (…)” 

Pas juste par la société tout simple but - 

“Women were forbidden, by law, to perform in the Elizabethan theatre (…)” 

 

115 

À l’époque de Shakespeare. Et bien sûr, ils étaient des jeunes  gens qui  jouaient le rôle de 
femme et donc la belle Juliette n’était autre qu’un jeune homme de 15,17 ou 18 ans ! Et je 
redis c’était la loi, la femme n’avait pas le droit de jouer au théâtre. 

Heureusement, qu’avec le temps, ce n’est plus le cas et, aujourd’hui, dans le monde 
moderne, que ce soit à Maurice ou ailleurs dans le monde, la femme est partout et c’est très 
bien comme ça. La femme est mère de famille, d’abord et avant tout, parce que nous avons 
tous ici une maman, nous avons ou nous avions. 

La femme est dans le secteur manuel et c’est agréable de voir quand vous conduisez 
votre petite voiture, vous hommes, et que vous regardez en haut par exemple, vous voyez une 
dame  au  volant  d’une  grosse  machine,  d’un  gros  camion.  Donc  vous  regardez  tout  droit 
devant vous. La femme est dans le bureau, la femme est dans la politique, la femme est dans 
les services essentiels, la femme est partout… 

Et même à l’Assemblée ici bien sûr. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Alors, merci à Madame la ministre, pour le travail qu’elle fait. Merci à notre Premier ministre 
qui a toujours été et qui est toujours un défenseur de la cause féminine. 

En lisant le National Women’s Council Bill, il y a, par exemple, in part (b) –  

“The Bill accordingly improves the regulation of women associations.” 

Les  associations  féminines  ont  un  rôle  très  important  dans  l’épanouissement  de  la  femme 
Mauricienne et c’est important que nous ayons aujourd’hui un projet de loi qui va encourager 
cela  et  qui  va  donner  plus  d’ouverture  aux  associations  féminines  afin  qu’elles  puissent 
remplir leur rôle. 

Quelque chose qui m’a aussi frappé est par rapport au fonctionnement du conseil… 

La partie (f) – 

 “Promote the recognition of women’s rights as human rights.” 

Très  important.  Et,  bien  sûr,  pour  promouvoir  tout  cela,  nous  avons  tout  un  arsenal  de 
moyens de nos jours avec les médias, la technologie, l’Internet et le Facebook. 

116 

 
Je  ne  serai  pas  très  long  et  je  cherchais  pour  terminer  un  modèle  parce  que  nous 
parlons aujourd’hui de la femme qui, à travers ce projet de loi, aura toute sa valeur et pourra 
évoluer. Donc, je cherchais un modèle et, comme il y a tout plein, que ce soit à Maurice ou à 
l’extérieur, je me suis dit que je vais rapidement raconter l’histoire d’une femme Mauricienne 
qui a toujours fait preuve de courage et qui s’est toujours occupé de sa famille. Cette femme 
naquit dans les années 45 à peu près… 

(Interruptions) 

Oui,  moi  de  même.  A  la  mort  de  sa  mère,  son  père  l’abandonna  et  elle  fut  élevée  par  sa 
grand-mère maternelle. 

À  l’âge  de  14  ou  15  ans,  elle  dut  arrêter  l’école  faute  de  moyens  car,  à  l’époque, 
l’école  était  encore  payante.  Mais  tout  ceci  pour  vous  dire  qu’elle  avait  une  connaissance 
générale de pas mal de  choses. Après son mariage,  elle mit au monde trois enfants et elle 
s’occupait de ses trois enfants à la sueur de son front. Son époux était un peintre de bâtiments 
et dans les années 70, nous le savons, il n’y avait pas beaucoup de potentiel à cette époque. 
Cette  femme  se  levait  très  tôt  le  matin,  s’occupait  de  sa  maison  et  de  ses  enfants  et  bien 
souvent elle passait une journée avec un simple petit morceau de pain comme nourriture. Elle 
gardait le reste pour ses enfants. Quand ses enfants revenaient de l’école, elle était là, à côté 
d’eux, à les aider à faire leurs devoirs parce qu’elle croyait dans l’éducation. Et aujourd’hui, 
nous ne cessons de le répéter, en tant qu’anciens enseignants et anciennes enseignantes, nous 
connaissons la valeur de l’éducation et cette femme l’avait compris bien des années de cela. 

Bien plus tard elle prit un job comme bonne à tout faire pour essayer  comme on dit, 
ajoute  ène  ti  peu,  zoine  deux  boutes.  J’abrège.  Le  08  mars  2009  le  jour  de  la  Journée 
Internationale de la Femme cette femme fut conduite à sa dernière demeure à l’âge de 62 ans 
au cimetière de Bigara à Curepipe. Donc, elle est un modèle de courage et de détermination. 
Aujourd’hui,  je  prends  le  temps  de  la  Chambre  pour  lui  rendre  hommage,  cette  femme 
s’appelait Gilberte Toussaint et c’était ma mère! 

(Interruptions) 

Merci pour tout ce que vous faites pour les femmes. Merci à notre Premier ministre, et 
moi je vous souhaite bonne chance. Ce que nous disons c’est que l’appel que nous lançons 
aujourd’hui,  à  travers  ce  projet  de  loi,  va  déclencher  quelque  chose  dans  la  tête  de  nos 
mauriciennes et elles pourront prendre leur vie, leur destin en main. 

Merci beaucoup, M. le président. 

 
(6.35 p.m.) 

117 

Mrs D. Boygah (Second Member for Vieux Grand Port & Rose Belle): Mr Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, I wish to congratulate our colleague, hon. Minister of Gender Equality, Child 
Development and Family Welfare for her historical day, for her first Bill initially, and for her 
and her team’s laudable initiative to repeal the National Women’s Council Act of 1985. 

As  a  representative  of  Mauritius  in  the  Commonwealth  Women  Parliamentarians’ 

Africa, it is an honour to participate in this Bill, as it meets the objectives of the CWP.  

One of the main objectives of this Bill is to provide women with the necessary tools 
and means, so that this important section of the population be fully empowered to actively 
participate in social, economic, political advancement of our Republic. 

May I recall, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that, as far as 1910, women organisations were 
founded with a primary focus on social, religious, socio-cultural activities and mostly literacy 
for women and girls. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  during  the  1960s,  Women  Associations  embarked 
themselves  into  training  women  into  several  activities,  enabling  them  to  earn  a  living. 
Women were provided with free training in embroidery and basket making. 

 The mid-1970s came, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, where we have witnessed the emergence of a 
real fight for the enhancement of women’s rights, equality of sex in the law, abolition of sex 
discrimination,  and  a  more  active  participation  of  women  in  various  fields.  Notable 
contributions  were  made  in  terms  of  the  development  of  the  transformative  feminist 
consciousness and activism. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker  Sir,  in  the  mid-1970s,  those  Women  Associations  regrouped 
themselves,  gathered  in  strength,  and  started  voicing  out  women’s  grievances  and  the 
safeguard  of  women’s  rights.    Some  eminent  female  personalities  like  France  Boyer  de  la 
Giroday actively participated in forums and speeches throughout the island, in colleges and 
clubs, to sensitise the young, mainly female, towards women’s rights.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the National Women’s Council was set up in 1985 to provide 
a platform, to establish a dialogue with the associations by the Government under the prime 
ministership  of  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth.  The  Council  and  the  Women  Associations  worked 
hand-in-hand towards the advancement of women in many fields. 

118 

 
 You will recall, Mr Deputy Speaker Sir, that, with the advent of the EPZ in the mid-
1980s, under the prime ministership of Sir Anerood Jugnauth, women entered the world of 
employment. They become economically self-reliant. Women’s place ceased to be at home. 
This  triggered  a  more  active  participation  of  women  in  many,  many  new  fields.  Women’s 
organisations  emerged,  thus  shaping  the  way  of  thinking  of  women.  The  then  Women’s 
Council’s Act of 1985 regulated the whole network of women’s associations. The Council, 
through  its  members,  embarked  into  a  centred  approach  to  address  issues  related  to  the 
development of women. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, 30 years have elapsed since.  I repeat, as the hon. Minister 
said,  30  years  have  elapsed  since.    Women  have  further  emancipated.    The  aspirations  of 
women are no more the same. Women are more present in nearly all fields and much more.  
Gender  equality  is  no  more  taboo.    Equal  pay  for  equal  work  is  the  norm,  except  some 
backwards few. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the goals set up by the Council of 1985 till date has not yet 
been attained for multiple reasons and for very far not to match the women’s needs and the 
challenges of the 25th century. 

The need for a new Council to address the new challenges facing women and to be in 
line  with  the  challenging  world  is  being  felt.    Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  25th  century 
women have risen to great positions in various key sectors, making a significant contribution 
to the global economy. More and more women are looking at new opportunities to exhibit 
their abilities. However, in spite of evident progress of women, there is lot to be done for the 
uplift and emancipation of women. Women who do play a vital role in the society need to get 
their  own  identity  because  identity  is  the  key  for  all  human  beings.  It  is  imperative  that  a 
woman knows her strength as well as her weaknesses, so that she may be at her best in the 
team,  as  a  team  member  working  cooperatively  with  all  around  her,  whether  at  home  or 
away. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  woman  has  always  and  will  always  be  working  woman. 
Women’s nature is on the home front, as they have done throughout times, but now women 
are stepping out of their home to contribute in the cooperative, educational, social service, 
medical,  financial  and  a  varying  and  endless  list  of  career  paths.  Women  have  played 
important roles in our society. So many women have impacted today’s society for the better. 
There is an endless list where many women in various parts of the nation have changed lives 

 

119 

and shaped destinies, giving new direction to so many in the country. However, Mr Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, woman has always had a challenging task to be at the forefront in a number of 
male dominated sectors. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, hence, to empower women after three decades, the National 
Women’s Council needs to be reviewed to cater for the new challenges facing women and the 
society at large. With the advent of information technology, resulting in a nation’s national 
and  international  exposure,  a  new  piece  of  legislation  has  become  a  must.  Various 
shortcomings  have  surfaced,  and  this  new  Bill  will  address  these,  so  that  women’s  new 
aspirations are positively entertained. 

This new Bill, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, has, as main objectives, to provide a platform 
for  women  to  voice  their  needs,  concerns  and  aspirations;  to  improve  the  regulation  of 
women’s associations and manage more effectively the Regional Committees responsible for 
activities of Women Associations; to promote women empowerment and gender equality, and 
to  empower  women  towards  a  more  active  participation  in  social,  economic  and  political 
field,  without  forgetting  Rodrigues,  where  there  will  be  a  new  Bill,  but  that  will  be 
customised according to the needs of the Rodriguan women. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  advent  of  technology  has  changed  the  world.  Women 
need  to  be  initiated  to  new  technologies  for  their  enhancement  and  safety.  Mr  Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, the Government of  India has some days back passed a law where  all mobile 
phones will be bound to be equipped with a panic button.  

This will enable women and girls and vulnerable ones to press this button ahead of 
any sort of danger. Police will come in no time. The existence of such phone is unknown to 
most  of  us.  The  Council  can  promote  this  type  of  phone  among  its  members  and  can  ask 
Government for a similar legislation in Mauritius. This is a clear example of technology at 
the service of all. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  with  this  new  Bill,  the  National  Women’s  Council  will 
engage  its  members  in  addressing  goals  of  equity,  autonomy,  empowerment  and  social 
transformation.  The  Council  comprising  of  women  irrespective  of  their  class,  educational 
background, and ethnicity will be an autonomous nonpartisan body to enable it to reach its 
goals.  

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  we,  women,  are  striving  for  a  30%  candidature  for  the 
Legislative  Assembly  while  women  represent  31%  of  the  population  and  with  this  new 

 

120 

legislation  of  National  Women’s  Council,  the  hopes  and  aspirations  of  women  will  be 
revamped. A long way still ahead for those to realise that women are the backbone of our 
society. No nation will progress without the recognition of women as a decisive driving force.  

To end, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I will emphasise that it is not a coincidence that this 
legislation comes with Sir Anerood Jugnauth, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister of our Republic. 
The latter has at heart the emancipation of women. Our Prime Minister recognises the force 
of  women.  Hopefully,  this  Bill  which  will  gather  unanimity  -  as  confirmed  by  hon. 
Baloomoody representing the Opposition - will benefit the whole society. As women, we are 
the shapers of the modern society. 

Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

 (6.46 p.m.) 

Mr J. F. François (First Member for Rodrigues):  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, hon. 
Members,  especially  hon.  ladies,  I  stand  up  as  a  man  to  speak  on  this  National  Women’s 
Council Bill of 2016, as in our world today, gender is an issue that needs to be embraced as 
much by men as by women, to bring about changes and make a difference in our society.  

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  you  will  agree  with  me  that  men  are  also  key  actors  in 

furthering women’s empowerment. In that regard, I treasure equally the role of women - 

in our nation-building,  
for their contribution in the smooth running and transition of our society, and 
as key social and economic agent for change. 

(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
I congratulate the hon. Minister for the introduction of this Bill, which I will debate on 

broadly. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, as we stride forward, I feel that there is a new route and a 

renaissance of our attitude towards gender issues.  

The  promotion  of  gender  equality  implies  an  explicit  attention  to  women’s 
empowerment, and hon. Minister Mrs Perraud is absolutely right in that endeavour through 
the provision of this Bill. 

We are bound to achieve the vision of a Progressive Transform Republican Society. 
Our women need to be fully engaged and empowered to do so without any unfair barriers in 
that regard. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, my political party, OPR, strongly supports the empowerment 
of  women,  gender  equality,  where  both  women  and  men  are  key  actors  in  the  economic, 

 

121 

social, political development of our Republic and I will also add the legal and environmental 
development in our Republic. 

It is a commendable Bill for more actions for and by women, without any limitation in 
our  Republic.  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  this  Bill  will  allow  our  Republic  to  deepen  our 
commitment  towards  the  target  of  Sustainable  Development  Goal.  Gender  Equality: 
Achieving gender equality and empowerment of all women and girls in our society.  Women 
- and I agree with that - are powerful catalysts for sustainable development and that is what 
exactly I believe  hon. Minister Mrs Perraud is aiming at with this Bill, as pointed out also by 
other hon. Members. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in 1995, the Fourth World Conference on Women held in 
Beijing,  China,  had  marked  a  significant  turning  point  for  the  global  agenda  for  gender 
equality  and  women’s  empowerment.  It  sets  the  strategic  objectives  and  actions  for  the 
advancement  of  women  and  the  achievement  of  gender  equality  in  12  critical  areas  of 
concern, amongst which -  

(i)  Women and poverty;  

(ii)  Women and the economy;  

(iii)  Women and health; 

(iv)  Education and training;  

(v)  Girls; 

(vi)  Human rights of women;  

(vii)  Violence against women  

(viii)  Women and the media, as rightly pointed out by hon. Toussaint  

(ix) 

 Women and the environment.  

 Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, my concerns in relation thereof, is how far our Republic has 

made progress with regard to this Beijing Declaration? Are we on the right-track? 

However, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in the context of Africa, I am glad to note that, in 
the  First  African  Gender  Equality  Index  2015,  the  ranking  identifies  the  Republic  of 
Mauritius amongst the top five African countries (with South Africa, Rwanda, Namibia and 
Malawi) and that we are doing best on gender equality and, over time, the best improvers. 
Congratulations to our Republic! 

 

122 

Our  Republic  also  ranked  first  in  the  top  10  country  performance  for  Women  and 
Human  Development,  followed  by  Tunisia,  South  Africa,  Botswana,  Namibia,  Libya, 
Algeria, Cape Verde, Swaziland, Egypt and Arab Republic. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, this Gender Equality Index Report, I believe, gives credit to 

our Republic and shall act as a good catalyst to better all our endeavours in that direction.  

And, with regard to the actual situation, a few fundamental questions still need to be 
asked for us to make further progress, to be exemplary in terms of leadership on all fronts and 
to reach an excellent global ranking. 

One question is: Are we satisfied with the representation proportion of seats held by 
women in our national Parliament itself, in Ministerial-level positions, in number of justices 
in  our  Court  of  Law,  in  various  fields  of  responsibilities  such  as  Political  Party  Leaders,  
Chief Police Commanders, pilot and so on? 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, having said so,  I have  a dream that will revolutionise our 
political system and political perceptions, that is, to see a woman as Prime Minister of our 
Republic  one  day.  Will  that  be  possible?  Is  our  society  ready  for  it  or  not?  Will  that  be 
possible,  when  our  Republic  is  engaged  to  a  fully  gender-neutral  language  throughout  its 
functionality as is the case in Namibia’s Constitution?  

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  in  the  context  of  this  Bill,  I  believe  empowerment  means 
simply women gaining more power and control over their own lives.  I hope it will increase 
exponentially  the  economic  empowerment  of  women,  especially  for  those  who  are  most 
excluded in our society today. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, no women shall be economically isolated or end up insecure 
in our Republic.  They must be linked to the economic assets, formal trade, access to modern 
technology  and  entrepreneurial  competencies,  as  well  as  financial  services  to  pursue 
economic opportunities. 

This National Women Council Bill must guarantee this security in partnership with all 

stakeholders, be it by Government or private sectors. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, coming to Climate Change, in December last at COP21, the Paris 
Agreement  acknowledged  that  climate  change  is  a  common  concern  of  humankind.    It 
stipulates that, I quote- 

“parties  should,  when  taking  action  to  address  climate  change,  respect, 

123 

 
promote and consider their respective obligations on human rights, the right to 
health (…)” 

And more importantly - 

“(…) the right to development, as well as gender equality, empowerment of 
women and intergenerational equity” 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  two  weeks  ago,  the  Disaster  Risk  and  Reduction 
Management  Bill  by  hon.  Wong  Yen  Cheong  was  passed  in  our  august  Assembly,  with 
consideration given to include ‘gender’ as amended.  

I think we are on the right track to integrating gender into disaster risk management in 
our Republic and this is supported, as outlined by the Japan Hyogo Framework for Action1, 
which specifies and I have to quote – 

“A gender perspective should be integrated into all disaster risk management 
policies, plans and decision-making processes, including those related to risk 
assessment,  early  warning,  information  management,  and  education  and 
training”. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it is essential to provide a platform for women to voice and 
support  women’s  participation  in  national  and  local  decision-making  in  promoting  women 
leadership.  

The  Bill  provides  voices  for  women,  but,  in  as  far  as,  family,  spouse  violence  is 
concerned, we need to work together and improve our responses considerably if we are going 
to  bring  about  changes  in  our  society.  Gender-based  violence  is  a  major  obstacle  to  the 
achievement of equality and development.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, rightly so, women and girls continue to be seriously affected 
by  gender-specific  violations  of  their  human,  sexual,  and  reproductive  rights.  Women  and 
girls in our society today are still being continued to be victims of rape. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  domestic  violence,  which  is  rampant,  is  a  source  of 
disempowerment for women and I believe that the role, and this is very important, of “men 
for gender”, will have to help to change this brutal environment. 

I seize this opportunity to raise this issue, which I have failed to witness considerably in 
our Republic, the issue of men for gender equality which shall mobilise men of all walks of 
life to transform masculinities for gender equality.  Men for gender equality! 

 

124 

I seriously think that it is high time to consider same, to set up ‘Men for Gender’, which 

I believe in this transitional period will revolutionise our way of looking at gender equality. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  with  regard  to  Rodrigues,  the  Bill  makes  provisions  as  per 

section 5(d) – 

“collaborate  closely  with  such  body  having  objects  similar  to  those  of  the 
Council as may be set up by the Rodrigues Regional Assembly” 

As per section 8(e) –  

“(…) the Board which shall consist of –  

a representative of such body having objects similar to those of the Council as 
may be set up by the Rodrigues Regional Assembly; ” 

And as per Section 20 (1) (b) – 

“Rodrigues shall form a separate region.” 

These  provisions  must  allow  the  proper  functioning  of  Rodrigues  Autonomy,  where 
Rodrigues  and  the  Regional  Assembly  must  set  up  its  specific  structures  from  which  the 
Chairperson shall then represent Rodrigues on the National Council and Committee. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, before going further, allow me to seize this opportunity to 
congratulate those police women constables in our Police Force, who for the first time in the 
history  of  Rodrigues,  five  women  police  constables  were  promoted  to  the  grade  of  Police 
Women Sergeant. This is empowerment for women and we are thankful. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in Rodrigues, the Deputy Chief Commissioner, Mrs Gaspard 
Pierre-Louis,  responsible  for  Gender  Equality,  is  putting  in  place  many  programmes  to 
support  the  empowerment  of  women  that  provide  them  with  skills,  mentoring,  access  to 
networks and markets, and financial resources. There is no doubt that this kind of programme 
is having a meaningful impact in the lives of our Rodriguan Women.  

M.  le  président,  Rodrigues  valorise  pleinement  les  rôles  de  la  femme  dans  notre 
société. Des ONG, comme le Centre Carrefour, s’engagent à regrouper les femmes à travers 
de la formation continue sous le slogan ‘Pran Conscience Valer Fam’, comme base de ce 
qu’elles font pour la femme Rodriguaise. 

125 

 
Elles  ont  lutté  ensemble  dans  la  solidarité  pour  défendre  les  droits  des  femmes 
Rodriguaises, par exemple, pour remédier la souffrance des femmes enceintes, concernant le 
problème  de  non-régularité  des  gynécologues  à  Rodrigues.  D’ailleurs,  l’honorable  Premier 
ministre et l’honorable ministre de la santé ont contribué à régler ce problème.  

M.  le  président,  pour  assurer  la  Chambre  et  l’honorable  ministre  concernant 
Rodrigues,  je  suis  heureux  d’annoncer  que  Rodrigues  propose  de  mettre  en  place  des 
règlements en faveur des femmes et des filles rodriguaises qui visera à - 

(i) 

 (ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

mettre en place une structure représentative des femmes dans tous les secteurs 
de vie à Rodrigues; 

favoriser  l’épanouissement  économique  des  femmes  à  travers  le  travail  égal 
qui  est  égal  à  salaire  égal,  chance  égale  sur  le  marché  de  l’emploi, 
démocratiser l’accès à tous types de travail; 

garantir son accès aux services banquiers sans avoir à être sous la tutelle de 
son conjoint; 

l’épanouissement  social  et  politique  pour  plus  de  représentativité  dans  les 
instances décisionnelles et dans les élections;  

(v) 

la promotion de la santé des femmes, sa santé reproductive et autre; 

(vi) 

corriger la disparité dans le domaine de l’emploi. 

A Rodrigues, plus de filles réussissent académiquement, mais moins des filles et des femmes 
embauchées car, la plupart des travails sont réservés qu’aux hommes, par exemple, pompier 
et autres.  

Rodrigues travaille pour permettre des programmes dans un esprit de discrimination 
positive pour rattraper son retard car trop souvent les filles étaient sacrifiées par rapport à son 
frère dans son éducation sociale et académique.  En disant ceci, M. le président, je suis très 
ému parce que moi-même dans ma famille, je l’ai vécu, où ma grande sœur a dû sacrifier 
toute  sa  vie  pour  permettre  à  mes  frères,  mes  sœurs  et  moi-même  d’aller  à  l’école  ou 
participer dans la vie sociale et communautaire. Elle s’occupait des animaux, allait chercher 
du bois et l’eau, et faisait le ménage pendant que ma mère et mon père s’occupaient de notre 
plantation agricole et je lui en suis très reconnaissant!  

M. le président, la mutation de notre société doit aussi passer par un changement de 
regard  sur  la  femme.  C’est  connu  dans  notre  société  aujourd’hui,    un  mari  adultère  titré 

 

126 

comme un vagabond est considéré comme un grand galant mais une femme dans la même 
situation est victime à jamais comme une…, je ne termine pas la phrase, M. le président, à 
chacun son interprétation.  

M. le président, il est bon de souligner qu’à ce jour à Rodrigues, il  y a plus d’une 
soixantaine d’associations de femmes dans les différents villages qui sont organisées autour 
des formations diverses dans les centres avec des programmes qui favorisent  le renforcement 
des capacités entrepreneuriales; l’encadrement des enfants; l’épanouissement de la famille et 
cette culture du respect de l’environnement dans le cadre d’une île Rodrigues durable. 

M.  le  président,  dans  le  secteur  de  l’Economic  Empowerment  de  nos  femmes,  les 
femmes  de  Rodrigues  sont  bien  ancrées  dans  ce  nouveau  concept  de  l’économie 
communautaire et solidaire, à l’exemple, des groupes de femmes qui gèrent des business dans 
le domaine de la restauration ou transformations agro-alimentaire. 

M. le président, dans le contexte de protection de l’Environnement et le phénomène 
du changement climatique, nos femmes à Rodrigues s’engagent et rentrent dans l’innovation 
ici pour des projets de recyclage, surtout après la décision de bannir l’utilisation des sacs en 
plastique. 

M. le président, je vais m’arrêter ici. Ce projet de loi s’étale dans l’axe du progrès et 

de la modernité pour l’émancipation et l’empowerment de la femme. 

Je dis oui à ce projet de loi et je vous remercie pour votre attention.  

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Members, Madam Speaker will now take the Chair.   
At this stage, Madam Speaker took the Chair. 

(7.06 p.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 
Scientific  Research  (Mrs  L.  D.  Dookun-Luchoomun):  Madame  la  présidente,  c’est  un 
privilège  certain  et  un  honneur  pour  moi,  ce  soir,  de  m’exprimer  devant  cette  auguste 
assemblée  sur  le  National  Women’s  Council  Bill,  présenté  par  ma  collègue,  l’honorable 
Perraud, ministre de l’Égalité des genres, du développement de l'enfant et du bien-être de la 
Famille. 

Ce  projet  de  loi  vient  remplacer  la  législation  existante  de  1985,  régissant  le 

fonctionnement du National Women’s Council. 

127 

 
Madame  la  présidente,  avec  toutes  les  interventions  avant  moi,  je  ne  compte  pas 
élaborer sur les détails techniques et légaux du projet de loi, mais je parlerais en générale. 
Madame la présidente, avec l’évolution de la société au fil des années, il est devenu important 
de revoir le fonctionnement du National Women’s Council. 

Si dans le passé il opérait surtout avec le but de meubler le temps libre des femmes au 
foyer, leur donner des opportunités de loisirs, leur donner des moyens d’apprendre à coudre, 
à  faire  de  l’artisanat,  aujourd’hui,  la  réalité  est  tout  autre.  La  femme  mauricienne  a  de 
multiples rôles. On parle même du multitasking.  Outre son rôle, au sein de la famille en tant 
que  mère,  épouse,  ses  responsabilités  ont  bien  évolué.  Elles  ont  aujourd’hui  une  vie 
professionnelle active. Et, c’est pour répondre à cette évolution qu’aujourd’hui, ma collègue, 
l’honorable ministre de l’Egalité des genres, du développement de l’enfant et du bien-être de 
la famille, a présenté ce nouveau projet de loi à l’Assemblée Nationale. Je la félicite pour 
cette démarche. 

Madame la présidente, je voudrais attirer l’attention de la Chambre sur le fait que Sir 
Anerood  Jugnauth,  notre  Premier  ministre,  a  toujours  été  un  fervent  défenseur  de  la  cause 
féminine.  Dès  son  premier  mandat,  il  créa  le  premier  full-fledged  Ministry  for  Women’s 
Rights, et durant ce même mandat, une série de mesures ont été prises et des amendements 
apportés aux législations en faveur de l’émancipation de la femme mauricienne. Aujourd’hui, 
Sir  Anerood  est  de  nouveau  à  la  tête  du  gouvernement  et  ce  nouveau  projet  de  loi  vient, 
encore  une 
l’encadrement  nécessaire  pour 
l’épanouissement de la femme et je voudrais lui remercier pour cela. 

l’accent  qu’il 

fois,  mettre 

faut  sur 

Madame  la  présidente,  ce  projet  de  loi  se  veut  nécessaire  car  il  pose  les  jalons  et 
dessine des contours du développement futur et de l’avancement de la femme mauricienne 
dans les sphères de la vie, que ce soit au niveau social, économique ou politique. Parmi les 
objectifs cités dans le texte de loi à la section 4: promouvoir l’autonomisation des femmes et 
l’égalité des genres, assurer et promouvoir la participation active des femmes dans le social, 
l’économie  et  la  politique,  cela  en  vue  qu’elles  aient  un  statut  plus  important.  Et 
troisièmement,  fournir  aux  femmes  une  plateforme  commune  pour  qu’elles  puissent  faire 
entendre leur voix. 

La femme représente aujourd’hui plus de 50% de la population. On ne veut guère se 
permettre de gaspiller le potentiel de la moitié de la population. On parle là de 50% du brain 
power  de  notre  République.  Etant  donné  les  défis  auxquels  nous  sommes  aujourd’hui 

 

128 

confrontés, que ce soit au niveau - comme l’a si bien dit mon collègue intervenant avant moi - 
du  changement  climatique  ou  encore  les  pressions  croissantes  pesant  sur  les  modèles 
économiques, en passant par le chômage, la pauvreté, la nécessité se fait ressentir pour les 
personnes avec les têtes sur les épaules, les personnes épanouies. Je ne parle certainement pas 
seulement des femmes. Je parle ici de tous les membres de notre population. Mais, je dois 
certainement faire ressortir que la contribution des femmes ne peut être négligée. Il va sans 
dire que je parle ici de la nécessité de take on board les femmes. On ne peut les mettre à 
l’écart,  car  leur  contribution  devient  cruciale.  C’est  sûr  que  les  femmes  apporteront  leurs 
idées,  leurs  points  de  vue,  des  nouvelles  perspectives  aux  projets  du  pays.  La  diversité, 
Madame la présidente, cela est prouvé, ne peut qu’être bénéfique à la prise des décisions. 

Nous le savons, Madame la présidente, que les discussions sont déjà entamées sur la 
Réforme Electorale, qu’il y a un Comité interministériel qui en discute. Je suis, pour ma part, 
convaincu que le moment est propice pour que la femme mauricienne fasse entendre sa voix 
sur ses aspirations politiques, surtout pour une meilleure représentativité dans ce domaine. 

J’accueille  la  démarche  de  la  ministre  d’inclure  dans  les  objectifs  du  National 

Women’s Council à la clause 4(b) - 

“ensure and promote the active participation of women in the social, economic and 
political fields in order to further their overall empowerment;” 

Nous  le  savons  tous  que  parmi  les  pays  de  la  SADC,  à  titre  d’exemple,  nous  ne 
sommes pas au avant-poste en termes de la représentativité de la femme au niveau politique. 
Nous devons songer sérieusement à commencer, avec au moins 33% des femmes sur la liste 
des candidats, en espérant que le pourcentage augmentera au fil des années. 

Madame la présidente, la langue anglaise nous gratifie d’une image qui n’est guère 
insolite,  mais  certainement  imprégnée  de  portée  extraordinaire.  On  parle  du  glass  ceiling, 
qu’il nous faut  à tout prix faire voler  en éclats  et aussi du sticky floor  duquel il nous faut 
absolument se libérer. 

Madame  la  présidente,  c’est  bien  d’être  conscient  de  ces  contraintes,  mais  cela  ne 
suffit guère, car pour arriver à ce plafond, à ce ceiling, avant de l’éclater, il nous faut encore 
avoir une échelle. Cependant, si cette échelle est une glass ladder, croyez-moi la bataille est 
loin  d’être  gagnée !  Alors  les  glass  ladders  devront  être  remplacées  par  les  iron  ladders. 
Donc, cela suppute que toute barrière doit être enlevée et non simplement levée, car la femme 
mauricienne mérite ce droit de jouir des chances égales. 

129 

 
En tant que ministre de l’Education et de ressources humaines, je ne saurais trahir la 
cause féminine, puisque rien que la performance académique des filles prenant du primaire 
jusqu’à l’enseignement supérieur, parle d’elle-même. Si la femme peut être brillante dans ses 
études,  pourquoi  ne  peut-elle  pas  réussir  dans  toutes  les  sphères  de  la  vie,  que  ce  soit 
économique, sociale ou politique. Nous avons la preuve incontournable et irréfutable que la 
femme mauricienne d’aujourd’hui est disposée à prendre de nouvelles responsabilités à tous 
les niveaux. 

Nous  avons,  aujourd’hui,  comme  la  Présidente  de  la  République,  une  femme  en  la 
personne de Madame Ameenah Gurib-Fakim et au poste du Speaker, Madame la présidente, 
nous  avons  vous-même.  Non  plus  devrait-on  omettre  le  nombre  important  de  femmes 
occupant  des  postes  clés  à 
institutions 
gouvernementales tout comme au Judiciaire. 

tête  des  différents  ministères  et  des 

la 

Madame la présidente, tel n’est cependant pas la tendance générale. Bien malgré moi, 
je  note  que  le  secteur  privé  n’octroie  pas  à  la  femme  des  opportunités  à  la  mesure  de  ses 
capacités  et  de  ses  talents.  Ça  vient,  mais  vraiment  beaucoup  trop  lentement.  Et  donc, 
l’importance capitale de ce National Women’s Council Bill qui viendra justement développer 
des stratégies afin de corriger certaines anomalies et vient doter le pays d’un cadre légal plus 
moderne  et  approprié  pour  mieux  accomplir  la  mission  du  National  Women’s  Council  qui 
consiste, comme je l’ai déjà mentionné avant, à promouvoir l’autonomisation des femmes et 
assurer l’égalité des genres et une plus grande participation de la femme dans les différentes 
sphères de la société. 

Les  pays  qui  investissent  dans  la  promotion  du  statut  social  et  économique  de  la 
femme ont généralement des taux de pauvreté les plus bas. La citation qui suit en dit long et 
je cite la version anglaise – 

“If you educate a man you educate an individual, but if you educate a woman you 
educate a family and a nation.” 

La participation des femmes demeure donc fondamentale pour la démocratie et elle 
est surtout essentielle car axée sur la  réalisation  du développement durable, de la paix qui 
sont, comme je vous ai dit, Madame, les choses les plus importantes et vitales pour la survie 
humaine. La contribution de la femme, que ce soit dans le plan familial, social, économique 
ou politique est non négligeable. Et le rôle de la femme continue à accroître partout dans le 

 

130 

monde.  Il  est  impératif  que  les  législations  soient  adaptées  aux  réalités  du  jour.  C’est 
justement ce qu’on fait aujourd’hui, Madame la présidente.  

Je voudrais aussi m’appesantir sur cette réalité qui dure dans le quotidien de pas mal 
de  femmes  Mauriciennes  malgré  certaines  avancées.  Elles  continuent,  Madame,  à  être 
victimes de violences, d’abus, de maltraitance et d’inégalité. Le nouveau mandat du National 
Women’s Council consistera à travailler directement avec les femmes, les informer de leurs 
droits et des nouvelles opportunités pour qu’elles puissent mieux prendre leur destin en main.  

Le National Women’s Council aura aussi à mettre sur pied un réseau d’associations 
féminines  afin  que  ces  dames  puissent  échanger  leurs  points  de  vue  et  échanger  leurs 
connaissances et expériences. Le National Women’s Council devra aussi être en mesure de 
faciliter  le  dialogue  avec  l’État  pour  la  formulation  des  politiques  tenant  en  compte  les 
besoins  stratégiques  des  femmes  et  aussi  mettre  en  œuvre,  suivre,  évaluer,  remédier  et 
permettre  un  examen  constant  des  politiques  qui  seraient  en  adéquation  avec  les  besoins 
pratiques et stratégiques des femmes. 

Le National Women’s Council permettra aux femmes de faire entendre leur voix. Un 
autre  élément  crucial,  le  National  Women’s  Council  pourra  préserver  son  autonomie  afin 
d’être  pleinement  non  partisan,  inclusif  et  représentatif  de  femmes  de  n’importe  quelle 
origine.  

À l’image des réformes enclenchées dans divers secteurs dont l’éducation, ce projet 
de loi vient enclencher, selon moi, de profonds changements dans la manière dont œuvrent 
les femmes dans la politique, le social et le monde économique. Le partage des connaissances 
et  d’expérience  permettra  certainement  aux  femmes  de  pouvoir  se  lancer  d’une  façon  plus 
adéquate.  

Aucun  au  monde  ne  peut  se  permettre  de  prendre  en  considération  cette  moitié  de 
population importante que forment les femmes. La démocratie oblige que femmes et hommes 
se rendent compte de cette nécessité de la notion d’égalité et de réaliser cette égalité dans les 
sphères de la vie. Je n’ai pas de doute que le National Women’s Council permettra à la femme 
Mauricienne  d’aspirer  à  un  avenir  plus  serein  que  ce  soit  pour  elle,  pour  sa  famille,  ses 
proches ou pour la société ou le pays. 

The National Women’s Council has a mandate of promoting the interest of women 
and protecting them ensuring that they get equal opportunities. The strategies of the Council 
will have to include the economic empowerment of women through building up skills which 

 

131 

will  ensure  their  gainful  employment,  political  empowerment  through  development  of 
awareness, training and mobilization for equitable representations in all spheres of life. 

Madam Speaker, others have mentioned it before me, today the Mauritian woman has 
got a role to play in all spheres of life and they have taken a step forward. They are in the 
judiciary,  they  are  in  the  financial  services  and  they  are  in  any  other  economic  field  you 
might think of. We need to empower them and we need to provide them with the scaffolds to 
rise and the National Women’s Council should be providing these scaffolds. I am sure with 
the new legislation the support they provide to women will be more adequate. 

Madam  Speaker,  even  in  today’s  modern  world,  there  is,  unfortunately,  an  urgent 
need for the prevention of violence and discrimination against women and this is inside and 
even outside the home. The Council will have to ensure, through legal reform and sensitive 
enforcement, that this situation be remedied. We must not forget, Madam Speaker, that the 
Council  will  be  the  platform  that  will  bring  about  amelioration  of  conditions  of  socially 
challenged women as well. This includes drug addicts, those women dependent on alcohol, 
sex workers and those living in precarious conditions.  

Madam Speaker, we must not also forget the subtle ways in which women are often 
ill-treated namely through indecent representations in the media, on TV, in advertisements. 
The Council would be the most appropriate body to raise awareness against such cases and 
organise both legal and social sanctions.  

Madame  la  présidente,  une  fois  la  nouvelle  législation  promulguée,  j’inviterais  la 
femme Mauricienne à profiter de ces plateformes mises en place par le National Women’s 
Council. Cela l’aiderait à accomplir ses ambitions et aider à construire une île Maurice encore 
plus moderne et démocratique. 

Madam Speaker, I once again would like to thank the Minister of Gender Equality, 
Child Development and Family Welfare hon. Mrs Aurore Perraud for having brought this Bill 
to the House and I thank you all for your kind attention. 

 (7.20 p.m.) 

Mr  D.  Ramful  (Third  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien):  Madam 
Speaker, when we go back in history and we look at the various steps that have been taken by 
successive governments, I think the House will agree with me that we should be proud as a 
nation  that  has  always  taken  positive  steps  when  it  comes  to  the  promotion  of  women’s 
rights.  

132 

 
I won’t go into the various decisions that have been taken, the various institutions that 
have been set up, the various legislations that have been brought before this House except to 
refer to one event. It was when the Government of Mauritius back in 1976 took the decision 
to set up a Government machinery for the promotion of women’s rights. This was the first 
Ministry for Women’s Affairs back in 1976. It was in the wake of the International Women’s 
Year in 1975. 

In that same spirit, in 1985 the existing National Women’s Council was set up and 
that was following the accession of Mauritius to the Convention on the Elimination of All 
Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW). As per Article 3 of that Treaty, and I 
read that Article – 

Mauritius  was  required  to  take  all  appropriate  measures  to  ensure  the  full 
development and advancement of women for the purpose of  guaranteeing them the 
exercise  and  enjoyment  of  human  rights  and  fundamental  freedoms  on  a  basis  of 
equality  with  men.  And,  it  was  in  that  respect  that  the  National  Women’s  Council 
back in 1985 was set up with the objective to provide for a platform for a dialogue 
between the State and the various women’s associations in the country. 

I  do  agree  that  there  have  been  a  lot  of  criticisms  concerning  the  working  of  the 
National  Women’s  Council.  Although  I  have  to  say  that  Mauritius  has  made  remarkable 
progress when it comes to women’s empowerment and gender equality yet I agree that we 
have a long way to go when it comes to the participation of women and I have to highlight 
here, especially when it comes to the economic activity of the country.  

I  will  refer  to  a  few  statistics,  Madam  Speaker.  The  latest  statistics  in  Mauritius 
indicate that women are still very much less economically active than men. In 2014, 45.4 per 
cent of women aged 16 and above were actively participating in the economy against 75.2 per 
cent among men of the same age group.  

According to the Global Gender Index, which seeks to measure one important aspect 
of gender equality, the relative gaps between women and men across a large set of countries 
and  across  four  key  factors,  including  economic  participation  and  opportunity,  education 
attainment,  health  and  survival,  and  political  empowerment,  Mauritius  holds  the  106th 
position overall out of 142 countries, regressing - that was in 2014 - from the 98th position, 
which was held back in 2013.  So, as I have said, although we have done some progress, there 
is still a long way to go. 

133 

 
Therefore, to the extent that this Bill reinforces our commitment to empower women 
and  promote  gender  equality,  then  the  Bill  is  most  welcome.  I  have  looked  at  the  various 
provisions of the Bill.  There are, I have to admit, positive steps in the new Bill compared to 
the  existing  Act.    For  example,  provision  is  now  being  made  for  the  appointment  of  a 
Chairperson  instead  of  the  Permanent  Secretary  of  the  Ministry  heading  the  National 
Committee.  There  are  also  the  Regional  Committees,  under  this  new  Bill,  that  have  been 
extended to allow for better representation from various regions.  Under the Act, as it is, we 
have about four Regional Committees, excluding Rodrigues,  and now it is being proposed 
that,  for  each  district  -  there  are  nine  districts  -  there  shall  be  a  Regional  Committee  to 
manage  and  administer  the  Women  Associations  in  those  regions.  These  are  some  of  the 
positive steps. 

I have a few interrogations and some qualms concerning some of the provisions of the 
Act.  Hon. Baloomoody has made reference to a few provisions. Firstly, it is with regard to 
the  representation  on  the  Council.  Now,  in  the  existing  Act,  provision  is  made  for  the 
representatives of the Ministry of Youth and Sports, the Ministry of Education and Human 
Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific Research, the Ministry of Health and Quality of 
Life to be present on the Board. Now, there was a reason for these resource persons to be 
present on the Board. They were on the Board with the specific mission to assist the Council 
on  matters  concerning  their  respective  sectors,  which  were  considered  important  for  the 
empowerment of women.  That was why they were sitting on the Board.  Now, this has been 
removed.  It is being proposed in the new Bill that these representatives be removed and, in 
my opinion, that would be a step backward. 

Secondly,  there  is  section  8(6),  which  provides  for  the  representation  of  the  nine 
Regional Committees on the Board. According to the Bill, the representation shall be on a 
rotation basis. When I read the Bill, only three Regional Committees shall be represented for 
a period of one year. This would lead to six out of nine Regional Committees being left out of 
the Board for a period of one year.  I am of the opinion that this would definitely be a hurdle 
in securing a permanent platform at all times between the Ministry and the associations in all 
the regions in the country. 

Thirdly,  Madam  Speaker,  section  10  provides  for  the  setting  up  of  committees  in 
different  fields.    I  am  making  here  reference  specifically  to  section  10(2)  (b),  where  it  is 
provided that – 

 
“a committee may be constituted – 

134 

(b) partly by members and partly by other persons.” 

Now, who are the other persons?  Nowhere is it defined who are the other persons, what are 
their qualifications and what would be the experience required.  Nothing is being provided. 
We are being left in the dark as regards that particular provision, namely who would be the 
members of those sub-committees. Worse is that they are going to be paid allowance to be 
decided  by  the  Board.  There  is  another  provision,  clause  18(2)  (a),  and  it  concerns  the 
membership of a Women Association. It is being provided there that – 

“An application by a Women Association to become a member of the Council shall be 
made in the prescribed manner (…).” 

Now, we would have expected, since we are debating the Bill, that provisions be made in the 
Act  as  to  the  criteria  that  need  to  be  satisfied  for  a  Woman  Association  to  be  eligible  to 
become a member of the Council, but this has not been provided for. 

Lastly,  it  concerns  the  appointment  of  the  members  of  the  Executive  Committee, 
provided  under  clause  20(4)  (a),  that  is,  the  Executive  Committee  of  the  Regional 
Committees. It has not being provided who would appoint the members of those Regional 
Committees. What is the mode of selection? Is there going to be an election? What would be 
the duration of the term in office of the Executive members? So, this is not very clear. Not 
only we are not told how the Regional Committees are going to be constituted, but we are 
also  not  told  how  these  Regional  Committees  are  going  to  elect  their  representatives  who 
would eventually sit on the Board. 

I am highlighting these issues because - I am not criticising - we all want the Council 
to work.  We want to have an institution that would work, and I hope that the hon. Minister 
will enlighten us on these issues. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

 (7.34 p.m.) 

Mrs Perraud:  Madam Speaker, I thank all the hon. Members who have taken part in 
the  debate  on  this  Bill,  and  I  am  pleased  to  note  that  there  is  unanimity  in  this  House  on 
gender  equality  and  women’s  empowerment  agenda  through  the  modernisation  of  the 
legislative framework. 

135 

 
Madam Speaker, I wish at the very outset to acknowledge the multiple issues raised 
by hon. Baloomoody whilst at the same time express my appreciation for enlightening me on 
issues that he is knowledgeable about.  I am informed that hon. Baloomoody was a member 
of the Task Force which was set up to review laws that were discriminatory against women. 
Madam  Speaker,  Members  of  this  House  will  also  appreciate  that  when  I  took  office  as 
Minister  in  December  2014,  I  inherited  a  structure  with  all  its  weaknesses,  problems  and 
shortcomings and it is precisely because of this that we are here today, to repeal the National 
Women’s Council Act of 1985 and come up with a new Bill. I have tried to lump the various 
issues raised and proposals made under six core headings - 

Membership;  
Organisational structure;  

Financial resources;  
Discourses, activities, and  
Powers of the Minister.  

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii)  Autonomy;  
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Madam Speaker, it is true that we are faced with the ‘Founder Syndrome’ regarding 
membership of the Council whereby some presidents/members se sont agrippés à leur statut 
de presidents/ membres de leurs associations respectives. This has, undoubtedly, resulted in 
the monotony and limited activities. Another challenge is the membership of the Council and, 
very often, the members are totally not updated on challenges facing women. They are not 
innovative in their approach and their discourses have remained stereotypical.  

Madam  Speaker,  let  me  clarify  the  90%  of  the  members  which  are  supposedly  not 
compliant with the rules and regulations of the Registrar of Associations. Let me reassure the 
House  that  all  Associations  registered  with  the  National  Women’s  Council  are  de  facto 
registered with the Registrar of Associations.  

Madam Speaker, let me also clarify the membership of the Board.  But before doing 
that, let me once again reiterate that the new structure and membership of the Board is more 
democratic as we are moving from four Regional Committees to nine Regional Committees. 
This measure, in itself, demonstrates that we are enlarging our scope of intervention to have a 
wider  representativeness  of  women’s  voices  to  be  heard  on  the  Board.  Moreover,  we  will 
have  a  rotation  of  three  members  of  the  Regional  Committees  on  the  Board,  we  shall 
concurrently  put  in  place  a  mechanism  where  all  the  nine  Regional  Committees  will  be 

 

136 

provided a platform to discuss about women’s issues. These aspects are of operational nature 
and these will be looked into once the Bill is approved.  

It is true that membership is reduced, but we have made provisions for the setting up 
of technical committees to look into emerging issues whilst co-opting experts to discuss these 
emerging issues as provided in Section 10 of the Bill: such as reproductive health, gender-
based violence, poverty alleviation and unemployment.  

Madam  Speaker,  I  will  invite  the  hon.  Member  to  refer  to  Section  8(2)  (a)  where 
provision  is  made  for  the  Board  to  co-opt  up  to  three  persons  with  expertise  not  already 
available  to  the  Board.  Madam  Speaker,  it  is  not  correct  to  say  that  I  will  appoint  the 
Manager as it is clearly spelt out at Section 12(1) that this will be done by the Board. Madam 
Speaker, I wish to clarify that as clearly spelt out in Section 17, as Minister, I may give such 
written  directions  of  a  general  character  to  the  Board,  as  may  be  necessary  in  the  public 
interest and, as Minister, I need to ensure that the policies and interventions of the Council 
pertaining  to  women’s  empowerment  and  gender  equality  are  well  aligned  to  those  of  the 
Ministry  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and  Family  Welfare.  Our  policies  and 
strategic directions should not be décousus et allant vers des directions opposées.   

Madam Speaker, on another note let me reassure the House and hon. Members that 
any instruction that the Minister may give, shall be written and not inconsistent with the Act 
in public interest, thereby, demonstrating the Minister’s commitment and willingness not to 
interfere with the affairs of the Board.  

In regard to the Human Resource aspect of the National Women’s Council, I wish to 
inform the House that since December last, the Council has recruited a full-fledged Secretary 
Programme Coordinator and Programme Officer who shall be responsible to manage the day-
to-day  businesses  of  the  Council  as  well  as  to  come  forward  with  projects  and  innovative 
activities for the empowerment of women and gender equality.  

In parallel, I have deemed it strategic to have the officers of the National Women’s 
Council working at the Ministry be returned to the Council in a phase-wise manner in order 
to  enable  the  organisation  to  review  and  consolidate  its  Information,  Education  and 
Communication campaigns.  

Madam Speaker, let me point out that the concern of Members of the House regarding 
the financial resources and judicious management of funds have been well noted. However, 
allow me to point out that in line with the Financial Reporting Act, the National Women’s 

 

137 

Council has the responsibility to have its financial accounts examined by the National Audit 
Office. This practice definitely ensures the good practice and governance of the institution. In 
addition to that, this new Act makes provision for the Council to receive grants, donations, 
amongst others.  

Madam Speaker, let me reassure the House that there shall be sound management of 
the funds received and any expenditure to be incurred by the National Women’s Council shall 
be scrutinised by the Finance Committee and then by the Board for approval.  

Madam Speaker, with reference to the issues raised by hon. Ramful, I wish to point 
out  that  in  light  with  Section  20(3)  and  (4)(a)  since  each  Regional  Committee  shall  be 
registered  with  the  Registrar  of  Associations,  it  is  understood  and  clear  that  there  be  an 
election for each Regional Committee to elect their Executive Members under the supervision 
of the Registrar of Associations.  

On another note, I need to highlight that no employee of the Council shall stand as a 

candidate for election as members of the Executive of the Regional Committee.  

Madam  Speaker,  I  would  like  to  thank  all  hon.  Members  of  this  House  for  their 

contribution and a special thank for my team who has worked on this piece of legislation.   

Et aussi, Madame la présidente, on voit que tout ce qui concerne l’autonomisation de 
la  femme,  tout  ce  qui  concerne  la  protection  de  la  femme  c’est  aussi  l’affaire  de  tout  un 
chacun et je crois qu’aujourd’hui tous les membres de cette Chambre sortiront ici avec une 
note d’espérance, du moins pour moi, parce que j’ai toujours dit, depuis que je suis arrivée à 
la tête de ce ministère, que tous les Mauriciens doivent se sentir concernés par la condition 
féminine et doivent travailler pour donner plus d’autonomisation à la femme. Nous avons vu 
aujourd’hui,  que  ce  soit  les  députés,  les  secrétaires  parlementaires  privés,  les  ministres  et 
aussi  les  membres  de  l’Opposition,  tous  ont  voulu  apporter  leur  contribution  et  je  leur  dis 
merci.   

Merci beaucoup, au nom de toutes ces femmes, de toutes les femmes de la République 
de  Maurice.  Nous  avons  entendu  des  discours  bien  travaillés.  On  a  fait  beaucoup  de 
recherche. Les discours étaient passionnés, passionnants et aussi empreints d’émotions.  Nous 
avons aussi entendu des éloges à la femme qui est forte, la femme courage, la femme dans 
toute sa beauté, et en tant que femme je tiens, messieurs, mesdames, à vous dire merci. Merci 
d’être des ambassadeurs pour la cause de la femme et j’aimerais qu’on se quitte ce soir avec 
cette  belle  citation,  d’une  des  plus  célèbres  femmes  écrivains  au  monde,  Edith  Wharton. 

 

138 

J’aimerais qu’on parte, chacun d’entre nous, avec cette citation ce soir.  Elle dit ceci – “Il y a 
deux  façons  de  répandre  la  lumière:  en  étant  une  bougie,  ou  le  miroir  qui  reflète  cette 
bougie.”  

Messieurs, Mesdames, choisissez comment vous voulez répandre cette lumière dans 

la société. 

Merci beaucoup. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Bill read a second time and committed.  

COMMITTEE STAGE 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

The National Women’s Council Bill (No. V of 2016) was considered and agreed to.  

On the Assembly resuming with Madam Speaker in the Chair, the Speaker reported 

accordingly. 

Third Reading 

On motion made and seconded, the National Women’s Council Bill (No. V of 2016) 

was read the third time and passed. 

ADJOURNMENT 

The Prime Minister: I beg to move that this Assembly do now adjourn to Tuesday 

17 May 2016, at 11.30 a.m. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned. 

At 7.50 p.m., the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Tuesday 17 May 2016 at 

11.30 a.m. 

WRITTEN ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

ELECTORAL LAWS & REGULATIONS – AMENDMENT 

(No. B/344) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 

 

139 

and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to the electoral laws and regulations, he will state if consideration will be 
given for proposed amendments to be introduced thereto with a view to implementing a code 
of conduct with legal provisions to govern the political parties and the candidates, including 
the review of the present use of ‘bases’ during electoral campaigns. 

Reply:  As  the  House  is  aware,  since  the  By-Election  held  in  the  Constituency  of 
Quartier Militaire and Moka in March 2009, the Electoral Supervisory Commission has been 
formulating a Code of Conduct for every election with the aim of complementing the existing 
legal provisions regarding the holding and conduct of elections in Mauritius, most specially 
those provisions relating to bribery, treating, undue influence and illegal practice. 

The  objective  of  the  Code  is  to  ensure  the  integrity  and  credibility  of  the  electoral 
process.  The  Code  has  been  conceived  as  a  set  of  principles  to  be  adhered  to  by  all 
stakeholders and to be upheld in both spirit and letter. 

With regard to implementing a Code of Conduct having force of law, I am informed 
that opinions are divided on this issue.  In India, for example, there was an attempt in the 
mid-eighties to bring its Code of Conduct in the statute book. 

However,  the  Election  Commission  of  India  has  since  changed  its  mind  on  the 
question  of  giving  statutory  backing  to  the  Code.    Based  on  its  experience  of  conducting 
several general elections, the Election Commission of India is now firmly of the view that 
bringing the Code on the statute book would be a self-defeating measure, because in their 
view any violation of the Code must have a quick reaction and remedial measure, which may 
not be possible if the matter is taken to the Courts and becomes the subject of examination in 
a  regular  judicial  process.    The  Election  Commission  of  India  feels  that  any  judicial 
pronouncement  after  the  election  is  already  over  would  have  little  relevance,  and  has 
accordingly withdrawn its earlier recommendation to give the Code a statutory backing. 

Moreover, many jurisdictions believe that a Code of Conduct should have no statutory 
backing  as  it  is  felt  that  public  opinion  is  the  moral  sanction  for  any  breach  of  the  Code.  
Armed  with  such  moral  sanction,  the  Election  Commission  can  ensure  its  observance  by 
political parties and candidates. 

Laws and regulations dealing with a whole gamut of election offences set out in the 
Representation of the People Act and the Code of Conduct are complementary instruments 
which may therefore co-exist. 

140 

 
In regard to the review of the use of so called “baz”, during electoral campaigns, I 
must say that I am myself very much against this practice which I consider has no place in a 
modern  democracy.  Besides,  the  Code  of  Conduct  issued  by  the  Electoral  Supervisory 
Commission calls upon all participants in an election to refrain from the setting up of such 
“baz”. 

Moreover,  section  65(3)  of  the  Representation  of  People  Act  also  prohibits  the 
opening up of any rooms or buildings within 200 metres of the polling station for the purpose 
of  any  activity  directed  towards  promoting  or  procuring  the  election  of  a  candidate  at  an 
election. 

As  the  House  is  aware,  the  Government  is  already  embarked  on  the  reform  of  our 
electoral system as enunciated in the Government Programme 2015-2019.  The issues raised 
by the hon. Member may be addressed in this same context. 

SBM – FORMER MINISTER OF FINANCE AND ECONOMIC 

DEVELOPMENT – LOAN 

(No.  B/345)  Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis East) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister 
of Finance and Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development 
Unit whether, in regard to the loan recently contracted by the former Minister of Finance and 
Economic  Development  at  the  State  Bank  of  Mauritius,  he  will  state  when  was  he  made 
aware thereof and by whom. 

Reply: As the hon. Member is aware, an enquiry into the matter has been instituted by 

the Independent Commission Against Corruption (ICAC). 

By  virtue  of  sections  81(2)  and  81(3)  of  the  Prevention  of  Corruption  Act,  no 

information can be disclosed on any case under investigation by the ICAC. 

The hon. Member will also appreciate that it would not be appropriate, at this stage to 

provide details which may cause prejudice to the ongoing investigation. 
RACECOURSE (NEW) – SETTING UP 

(No. B/346) Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in 
regard to the proposed relocation of the Race Course at Champs de Mars on the west coast, 

 

141 

he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Gambling  Regulatory  Authority, 
information as to where matters stand thereof and by whom. 

Reply:  A  proposal  from  a  private  promoter  has  been  received  at  the  Gambling 
Regulatory Authority through the Board of Investment for the setting up of a new racecourse 
in the West. This proposal is being studied. 

ELECTORAL BOUNDARIES COMMISSION – CONSTITUENCIES – 

DELIMITATION 

(No. B/347) Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in 
regard  to  the  constituencies  of  the  Republic  of  Mauritius,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the 
House, obtain from the Electoral Boundaries Commission, information as to if consideration 
will be given for  a review of the delimitation thereof, in view of the disparity in terms of 
inhabitants in certain constituencies, which are not equal to the population quota. 

Reply:  As  the  House  is  aware,  section  39(2)  of  the  Constitution  provides  that  the 
“The Electoral Boundaries Commission shall review the boundaries of the constituencies at 
such times as will enable them to present a report to the Assembly 10 years, as near as may 
be, after 12 August 1966 and, thereafter, 10 years after presentation of their last report”. 

The House will appreciate that in the light of the provisions of the Constitution with 
regard  to  the  function  of  the  Electoral  Boundaries  Commission,  it  is  clear  that  the 
Commission is not answerable to my Office in respect of the delimitations of constituencies 
and their boundaries. 

As I explained in my reply to PQ B/371 of 01 September 2015, the last Report of the 
Electoral Boundaries Commission on a review of the boundaries was tabled in the National 
Assembly  on  10  November  2009.    However,  the  National  Assembly  was  dissolved  on  31 
March 2010 and there was no resolution brought in the Assembly before its dissolution to 
approve or reject the recommendations of the Report of 2009. 

I  am  informed  that  the  Electoral  Boundaries  Commission  proposes  to  embark  on  a 
fresh exercise for a review of the boundaries of the constituencies and present a new report, 
which is due in 2018. 

 

 

 

142 

TAX POLICY 

(No.  B/348)  Mrs  D.  Selvon  (Second  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to the tax system, he will state – 

(a) 

(b) 

If Government will consider a new trend whereby leading economic thinkers 
are  suggesting  a  progressive  wealth  tax  to  replace  income  tax  as  a  more 
effective measure to fight poverty and inequality, and 
if consideration will be given for the setting up of a technical committee of 
economists to study if the replacement of the income, estate and gift taxes with 
a progressive wealth tax would be more appropriate to reduce the inequalities 
than  any  other  tax  and,  if  so,  indicate  if  it  will be  advisable  to  wait  for  the 
submission of the report thereof prior to the launching of the Marshall Plan for 
Poverty Alleviation. 

Reply: It would not be appropriate at this stage to make any statement on our future 
tax policy orientation as we are fully engaged in the preparation of the 2016/2017 Budget, 
which will be presented shortly. 

As  announced  in  the  Government  Programme  2015-2019,  Government  will 
implement an equitable tax policy based on the philosophy of ‘fiscalité légère’.  To this end, 
Government is considering various policy options. 

It  may  be  noted  that  at  the  international  level  there  is  no  conventional  wisdom  on 
wealth  tax.  Indeed,  while  countries  such  as  France,  Spain,  Switzerland  and  Italy  have  a 
wealth  tax,  others  including  Austria,  Denmark,  Germany,  Finland  and  Sweden  have 
abolished their wealth tax, the latest one being India last year. 

ABERCROMBIE POLICE STATION – CONSTRUCTION 

(No.  B/349)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National 
Development Unit whether, in regard to the Divisional Headquarters at Abercrombie, he will, 
for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to – 

(a) 

if  the  abandoned/seized  vehicles  parked  thereat  will  be  removed  to  increase 
the parking capacity thereat; 

 
(b) 
(c) 

143 

if the Police Quarters thereat have now been vacated and, if not, why not, and 
if the implementation of the project for the construction of a modern one has 
started and if not, why not, indicating – 
(i) 

where  the  offices  thereof  will  be  relocated  during  the  construction 
period, and 
the  use  that  will  be  made  of  the  offices  presently  housing  same,  the 
Abercrombie Police Station and the Operations Room on completion 
of the project. 

(ii) 

Reply: In regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed by the Commissioner of 
Police that the seized vehicles parked at the Divisional Headquarters at Abercrombie have all 
been removed. 

Concerning part (b) of the question,  I  am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that there are fourteen Police Quarters at Abercrombie, out of which two are presently being 
occupied  by  serving  Police  Officers  as  residence,  ten  are  being  used  as  offices  and  the 
remaining two are unoccupied. 

I wish to refer to the reply I made to Parliamentary Question B/67 at the sitting of 24 
February  2015,  where  I  indicated  that  the  two  officers  concerned  have,  on  13  December 
2013,  been  served  with  a  notice  to  vacate  their  respective  quarters,  with  the  option  to  be 
housed in other quarters in another region. 

However,  both  officers  did  not  vacate  the  quarters  and  in  February  2014,  they 
informed the Commissioner of Police that the construction of their houses were in progress 
and they would vacate the quarters as soon as the construction works would be completed.  In 
this respect, they asked for a delay of around six months.  As the delay has expired and it 
seems that they are reluctant to vacate the quarters, the Attorney-General’s Office has been 
requested to initiate legal action for their eviction. 

In regard to part (c) of the question, I am informed that the preliminary design for the 
construction of a new modern building at Abercrombie, incorporating all the requirements for 
a  state-of-the-art  Police  Divisional  Headquarters,  has  been  completed.    The  building  is 
designed to be sustainable, energy efficient and providing for universal access.  The cost of 
the  project  has  now  been  estimated  at  Rs80  m.  and  the  approval  of  the  Project  Plan 
Committee  will  accordingly  be  sought.    The  preparation  of  the  detailed  drawings, 
specifications  and  bidding  documents  for  launching  of  tenders  will  be  completed  in  about 
five months’ time. 

144 

 
I  am  informed  by  the  Commissioner  of  Police  that  in  the  circumstances  explained, 
works could not start in March 2016 as initially planned.  The construction works, including 
the pulling down of the Police Quarters, have now been planned to start in March 2017 and 
are expected to be completed by May 2018. 

In regard to part (c) (i) of the question, the offices presently located in the existing 
Police  Quarters  will  be  relocated  at  the  ex-Police  Quarters  at  Roche  Bois  during  the 
construction  period  and  the  existing  buildings  at  Abercrombie  will  be  pulled  down.    The 
building at Roche Bois is presently being used by the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life 
as a Drop-In-Centre for the Harm Reduction Programme.  A request has already been made 
to that Ministry for putting the unutilised part of the building at the disposal of the Police 
Department.  Should the Ministry not be in position to release the required office space, the 
Police Department will rent appropriate space to accommodate these offices. 

In regard to part (c) (ii) of the question, the quarters presently housing the offices will 
be  pulled  down,  whereas  the  existing  building  accommodating  the  Abercrombie  Police 
Station  and  the  Divisional  Operations  Room  will  continue  to  operate  from  their  current 
location as they do not form part of the new project. 

VALLEE DES PRETRES – POLICE STATION 

(No.  B/350)  Mr  G.  Oree  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  North  &  Montagne 
Longue) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of 
Finance and Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
whether, in regard to the Abercrombie Police Station, he will, for the benefit of the House, 
obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to – 

(a) 
(b) 

the regions and size of population it covers, and 
if  consideration  will  be  given  for  the  setting  up  of  another  Police  Station 
within  the  region,  particularly  in  Vallée  des  Prêtres,  in  view  of  the  fast 
expansion of the regions and, if so, indicate when and, if not, why not. 

Reply: In regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed by the Commissioner of 
Police  that  for  the  purpose  of  policing,  Abercrombie  Police  Station  covers  an  area  of  22 
square km with a total of 75,000 inhabitants as follows – 

Vallée des Prêtres 
Cité La Cure  
 
Ste Croix  

 
 
 

- 
- 
- 

20,000 inhabitants 
18,000 inhabitants 
22,000 inhabitants 

 

145 

Batterie Cassée 

 

- 

15,000 inhabitants 

As regards part (b) of the question,  I  am further informed by the Commissioner of 
Police that for the time being it is not envisaged to set up a new Police Station in the region of 
Vallée des Prêtres as the area is adequately policed by Abercrombie Police Station and other 
units of the force such as the Emergency Response Service, Bike Patrol, Divisional Support 
Unit, Divisional Traffic Patrol, Field Intelligence Officers, CID and ADSU. 

AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS – SELF-SUFFICIENCY 

(No. B/368) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked the Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security whether, in regard to food security, he 
will state the measures that are being taken for Mauritius to become self-sufficient in terms of 
agricultural products. 

Reply: Mauritius by virtue of its size and population does not have the  means and 
capacity to reach self-sufficiency for all agricultural products. In fact, Mauritius has always 
been a net food importing country and most of the foods that we consume namely rice, wheat, 
edible oil, fresh fruits, pulses, meat, milk and milk products are imported. Imports represent 
77% of our  food requirements and for 2014 the  value of foodstuffs imported amounted to 
around MUR 38 billion. 

However,  Mauritius  is  self-sufficient  in  fresh  vegetables  and  tropical  fruits  with  a 
production  of  around  113,000  tons  annually  on  4300  ha  of  land.  We  are  also  almost  self-
sufficient in the production of chicken meat, eggs and venison and 50% in pig meat. Milk 
production averages 4.5 million litres annually.   

With the phenomenon of climatic changes and natural calamities such as flash floods 
and droughts which are expected to be recurrent and more damaging in the coming years, our 
local  food  production  potential  may  be  seriously  threatened.  In  fact,  Mauritius  as  a  Small 
Island Developing State is extremely vulnerable as far as food security is concerned. 

My Ministry has come up with a new Strategic Plan 2016-2020 for the Food Crop, 
Livestock  and  Forestry  Sectors  to  give  a  new  boost  to  the  agricultural  sector.  The  main 
objective  of  the  plan  is  to  increase  production  of  priority  products  such  as  vegetables  and 
fruits for both local consumption and export and to encourage agro-processing activities for 
production of processed agricultural products to reduce dependency on imports. As the House 
is aware, a large array of processed food is being imported at huge cost and if we can produce 
these products ourselves, the country will benefit in terms of foreign exchange savings.  In 
that  context,  the  young  and  women  will  be  encouraged  to  engage  in  agriculture  and  agri-
business. 

 
My Ministry has taken a series of measures to increase our level of self-sufficiency in 

146 

agricultural products and these inter alia include - 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

the implementation of some 19 Schemes to boost the production of strategic 
crops such as onion, potato and garlic and other food crops. A number of these 
schemes  will  be  reviewed  in  the  next  budget  to  make  them  more  farmer 
friendly. New Schemes will also be introduced; 
encouraging research to  develop new high  yielding varieties of  crops  which 
are more tolerant to the attack of pests and diseases; 
training of farmers in new technologies in the agricultural sector to improve 
and upgrade their farming practices so that their production system becomes 
more efficient and competitive; 

the release of some 425 ha of sugar cane lands for agricultural diversification 
projects mainly to boost food crop production, and 
promotion  of  a  Value  Chain  approach  to  improve  efficiency  along  the  crop 
filiere from seed production, field production efficiency, pre and post-harvest 
practices  to  minimize  losses,  improve  quality  and  value  addition  to  their 
produce through minimal processing/agro-processing. 

The Agricultural Marketing Board is also implementing a number of projects aimed at 
increasing storage facilities for onions and garlic. Two dryers at the AMB will be converted 
into  cold  rooms  for  the  storage  of  an  additional  500-600  Tons  of  onions.  A  Seeds  Garlic 
Warehouse will also be constructed at Moka for the storage of garlic seeds in a more hygienic 
and  ventilated  conditions.  These  will  be  operational  as  from  the  crop  season  2017.  In 
addition,  the  AMB  will  also  purchase  a  weighing,  packing  and  labeling  machine  with  an 
estimated capacity of around 30 packs per minute to increase its output capacity at its points 
of sales. 

My Ministry is also initiating measures for the construction of a National Wholesale 
Market and a new Slaughter House which would ensure that quality products are offered to 
consumers. 

To  boost  the  production  of  meat  and  milk,  dedicated  livestock  zones  with  all 

infrastructural facilities will be set up. 

 As  we  are  celebrating  the  International  Year  of  Pulses  this  year,  a  calendar  of 
activities has been finalised. The main objective of this event is to encourage farmers to grow 
pulses on a larger scale to meet part of the local demand. The seeds of pulses which were 

 

147 

previously cultivated are being currently multiplied at the Barkly Experiment Station and will 
be distributed free of charge to farmers for large scale and backyard production. In the long 
run,  this  will  enable  Government  to  reduce  its  imports  and  save  on  foreign  currency  and 
achieve significant savings in the food import bill. Moreover, talks on the nutritional value of 
pulses will also be organised at the level of Schools Island wide.  

To  valorise  and  increase  local  fruit  production  such  as  litchis,  longanes,  mangoes, 
pitaya, citrus fruits, custard apple, pomegranate and jamblon among others, the production of 
planting  materials  is  being  increased  substantially  by  my  Ministry  for  distribution  to  the 
farming  community  for  the  setting  up  of  fruit  orchards  and  also  for  backyard  plantations. 
These planting materials will be sold at highly subsidized prices. 

With the implementation of the “ Programme Regionale de la Securite Alimentaire et 
Nutritionelle” by the Indian Ocean Commission with the technical assistance of the Food and 
Agricultural Organisation and to which Mauritius is a party, Madagascar will be transformed 
into a food granary for the Indian Ocean. With this initiative, food security will be reinforced 
in  Mauritius  as  we  will  be  able  to  import  agricultural  products  at  more  affordable  prices 
therefrom. 

Cross border initiatives through Intra-COMESA/SADC Trade of agricultural products 

will also be encouraged to increase our food security level. 

Food  Security  also  encompasses  Food  Safety.  Whilst  we  are  taking  a  series  of 
measures to increase our production of agricultural products, we are also taking measures to 
address the Food Safety issue. 

Farmers  are  being  encouraged  to  shift  from  conventional  agricultural  practices  to 
bio/organic  agricultural  practices.  In  fact,  Fiscal  and  financial  Incentives  are  being  given 
through  the  Bio  Farming  Promotion  Scheme  to  farmers  engaged  in  bio  farming/organic 
activities  subject  to  them  complying  with  specific  criteria.  Exclusive  bio/organic  farming 
zones will also be established shortly and an Agricultural Certification Body will be set up 
under  the  aegis  of  my  Ministry  for  the  certification  of  agricultural  products  adhering  to 
bio/organic norms. 

 

PANAMA PAPERS – FIU INQUIRY 

(No.  B/369)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 
Reforms  whether,  following  the  recent  Panama  Papers  leak,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the 
House, obtain from the Financial Intelligence Unit, information as to if an investigation has 

 

148 

been carried out to ascertain whether any Mauritian entity and/or individual is/are involved 
therein  and  have  committed  any  offence  and,  if  so,  indicate  where  matters  stand  as  to  the 
inquiries carried out thereinto, including the names of the said entities/individuals suspected 
of being involved therein and incidentally the offences having been committed. 

Reply: The Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU) is looking into the cases mentioned in 
the Panama papers. I am informed by the FIU that its enquiry has not yet been completed and 
by virtue of section 30(2) of the Financial Intelligence and Anti-Money Laundering Act 2002, 
the FIU is unable to divulge information publicly. If a potential offence is detected, the FIU 
will  disseminate  its  report  with  all  relevant  information  to  the  relevant  investigatory  or 
supervisory authorities such as ICAC, Police, MRA, BOM and others.   

 

INTEGRITY REPORTING AGENCY - DIRECTOR 

(No.  B/370)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 
Reforms whether, in regard to the Integrity Reporting Agency, he will state if the Director 
thereof has been appointed and, if so, indicate the – 
(a) name of the incumbent thereof; 
(b) qualifications thereof, and  
(c) terms and conditions of appointment thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

STC – PETROLEUM PRODUCTS - CONTRACT 

(No.  B/371)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Industry,  Commerce  and  Consumer  Protection  whether,  in 
regard to the contract for the supply and transportation of petroleum products for the  year 
2016  and  beyond,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  State  Trading 
Corporation, information as to if bids have been launched therefor and if so, when and, if not, 
why not. 

Reply: I am advised by the State Trading Corporation (STC) that no bids have been 
launched for the supply of petroleum products for 2016 and beyond. Prior to 2006, STC was 
launching annual international tenders for the procurement of petroleum products. However, 
since 2006, following discussions between the Government of India and the Government of 
Mauritius,  STC  has  been  purchasing  these  products  directly  from  Mangalore  Refinery  and 
Petrochemicals  Limited  (MRPL)  as  the  latter  can  produce  and  deliver  the  seven  types  of 
products required for the specific needs of Mauritius. 

149 

 
 

The STC, thus, entered into a first contract with MRPL in July 2006 for the 
supply  of  petroleum  products  for  a  period  of  one  year.  This  contract  was  renewed  in  July 
2007 for a period of three years and again in 2010 and 2013 for successive periods of three 
years each. The current contract will thus expire at the end of July 2016. 

 

Generally,  the  same  terms  and  conditions  were  being  reconducted  in  the 
contract on each renewal, including the financial element, i.e. the premium. However, for the 
next contract covering period 2016-2019, I had instructed the STC to discuss with MRPL the 
possibility of a reduction in the premium. 

 

The STC has engaged such discussions with MRPL. I also personally met with 
Hon. Shri Pradhan, the Indian Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas last January and evoked 
that  subject  matter  with him.  There  was  consensus  on  that  issue.  The discussions between 
STC and MRPL have not yet been concluded.  The objective is to achieve a better deal from 
which the country at large will benefit. 

 

It would, therefore, be premature at this stage for me to give any additional 
information  on  this  matter.  However,  once  the  discussions  are  concluded,  I  shall  apprise 
Cabinet of the outcome and inform members of the House also. 

 

Regarding the transportation element, the current contract also expires in July 
2016. There is provision in the contract to extend it for a period of one year. Once the supply 
contract has been finalised, appropriate action will be taken by the STC for the transportation 
contract. 

 

ECONOMIC & TRADE ADVISORS – SALARIES & FRINGE BENEFITS 

(No. B/372) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien)  
asked the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade whether, 
in regard to the Economic and Trade Advisors in post since July 2005 to December 2014, he 
will give a list thereof, indicating in each case the – 

(a) posting thereof; 
(b) duties and responsibilities thereof, and  

(c) breakdown of salaries, foreign service allowances and/or other allowances drawn 

and fringe benefits to which they were entitled. 
(Withdrawn) 

 
 
 

 

150 

LE BOUCHON PUBLIC BEACH - UPGRADING 

(No. B/373) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms, Minister of Environment, 
Sustainable  Development,  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management  whether,  in  regard  to  Le 
Bouchon  Public  Beach,  he  will  state  if  consideration  will  be  given  for  the  rehabilitation/ 
upgrading/ uplifting thereof, including the provision thereat of – 

(a) adequate parking facilities; 
(b) installation of kiosks and benches, and 
(c) installation of lighting system. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

PORT LOUIS – NEF PROJECTS 

(No.  B/374)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment whether, in 
regard to the National Empowerment Foundation, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain 
therefrom, information as to the number of projects it has implemented in Constituency No. 
2, Port Louis South and Port Louis Central, since January 2015 to date, indicating the number 
of beneficiaries thereof in each case. 

Reply:  In  addition  to  projects  implemented  by  other  Ministries,  the  National 

Empowerment Foundation implements  its projects districtwise  . 

The list of projects implemented in the district of Port Louis by the Foundation since 

January 2015 to date and the number of beneficiaries in each case, are as follows - 

List  of  projects  implemented  by  NEF  in  the  district  of  Port  Louis  as  from 

January 2015 

ear 

Y

2

Project 
implemented 

Number 
of beneficiaries 

Construction  of 

16 

015 

CCIS housing units 

REGION 

Marjolin,  Roche 
Bois,  Vallee  Pitot,  Canal 
Dayot,  Pointe  aux  Sables 
and GRNW 

 

Distribution  of 
school materials to needy 
children 

3636 

District  of  Port 

Louis 

151 

42 

25 

18 

1 

42 

District  of  Port 

Marjolin,  Cite  La 

Robert Scott, Cite 

Louis 

Cure  

La Cure 

Tranquebar 

Tranquebar 

2615 

Port Louis 

20 

 1 

16 

Bois 

Balisage,  Roche 

Pointe aux Sables 

Roche Bois  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Organisation  of 
a  recreational  activity  at 
Calodyne Sur Mer Hotel 
Construction  of 

an access road  

Upgrading  of  a 
Day  Care  Centre  at  Cite 
La Cure 

Upgrading  of  a 

housing unit 

 

Sensitisation  on 

Substance Abuse 

Distribution  of 
school materials to needy 
children 

Construction  of 
a Children’s Playground  
Construction  of 
a CIS Housing unit for a 
fire victim 

Setting  up  of  a 
Rehabilitation Centre and 
a  Half  Way  house    for 
homeless 
vulnerable 
people 

2016 

 

 

 

 

DOT MU DOMAIN NAME- REGISTRATION 

(No. B/375) Mr M. Gobin (First Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked the Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the 
registration of the top level domain name “mu” in the name of the State of Mauritius, he will 
state where matters stand. 

Reply: In a reply to PQ. B/35 made on 10 February 2015 on the same issue by my 
predecessor,  this  August  Assembly  was  informed  of  the  ownership  of  the  Dot  Mu  (.mu) 

 

152 

domain name and the negotiations around the sale of the gov.mu second level domain name 
to the Government.  Hon. Members will recall that at one point in time, that is, in October 
2014, the owner of Internet Direct Limited, namely Mr. Yann Kwok, claimed Rs864,217,926 
for the gov.mu domain name, which was never materialised. 

Following Government decision in February 2015 to consider the acquisition of the 
“.mu” domain name, my Ministry has had several meetings with Mr. Yann Kwok, Director of 
Internet  Direct  Ltd,  with  a  view  to  re-delegating  the  domain  name  to  a  Multi-Stakeholder 
Forum to be set up. 

Mr.  Yann  Kwok  has  each  time  submitted  claims  for  arrears  due  on  the  gov.mu 
domain name without committing himself on the way forward as regards the “.mu” domain 
name.    However,  this  proposal  was  not  acceptable  by  my  Ministry  as  acquisition  of  the 
gov.mu second level domain name in isolation was risky due to the fact that in October 2014, 
the  “.mu”  administrator  had  switched  off  that  domain  name  and  all  its  203  third  level 
domains. 

Hence,  during  a  meeting  held  on  17  September  2015  at  my  Ministry  along  with 
representatives of the ICT Authority (ICTA) and the National Computer Board (NCB) with 
Mr. Y. Kwok and his lawyer, the latter was requested to submit a new proposal which would 
include the settling of arrears due on the GOV.MU administration as well as the delegation of 
DOT MU to an independent multi stakeholder forum that would be representative of the DOT 
MU community on the Internet. 

Despite reminders sent on 05 October 2015 and 14 October 2015 and a proposal for a 

meeting on the 28 October 2015, the latter did not respond. 

Concurrently,  a  Multi-Stakeholder  Forum  for  Internet  Governance  comprising 
representatives  of  the  local  Internet  community  has  been  set  up  in  June  2015  upon 
recommendations of the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN), 
which is the international body responsible for internet domain names, with a view to looking 
into policy aspects of taking over the management of the ‘.mu’ from Internet Direct Ltd.  

Though  discussions  have  already  started  with  the  local  internet  community,  no 
consensus has been found so far among the members as regards the model of the entity to 
eventually manage the ‘.mu’ domain. It is to be noted that, in the absence of an alternative 
entity to be set up to replace Internet Direct Ltd, which, nonetheless, offers a secure, reliable 
and  stable  service  in  the  cyberspace,  ICANN  would  not  consider  the  re-delegation  of  the 
‘.mu’ domain name. 

153 

 
Since the re-delegation process is a long haul one as it requires the participation of the 
Internet  community  at  large,  and  the  Forum  has  to  be  ready  in  terms  of  technology  and 
resources to be able to actually take over in case re-delegation is approved by ICANN, my 
Ministry proposes - 

to re-establish contact with Mr. Y. Kwok so as to give a last chance to the negotiation 
process; 
alternatively to file for a ‘forced delegation’ procedure with ICANN  in view of the 
fact that Mr. Y. Kwok has consistently shown his bad faith despite several attempts 
made for a mutually and amicable re-delegation process since the first attempt made 
in May 1999. 

i. 

ii. 

 

UNEMPLOYMENT  

(No.  B/376)  Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis East) asked the  Minister of  Labour,  Industrial Relations, Employment  and Training 
whether, in regard to the unemployed, he will state the present number thereof, indicating the 
– 

(a) number thereof found in the age group of 16 to 28 years, and  
(b) actions being taken to address the present unemployment issue. 
 

(Withdrawn) 

 

HERITAGE CITY PROJECT - IMPLEMENTATION 

(No.  B/377)  Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 
Reforms whether, in regard to the Heritage City Project, he will state the date on which the 
Government  of  Mauritius  has  signed  an  Agreement  with  a  foreign  State  for  the 
implementation thereof, indicating - 

(a) the terms and conditions of the Agreement, and 

(b) who signed the Agreement on behalf of the Government of Mauritius. 

(Vide reply to PQ No. B/354) 

 

 

 

154 

SAUDI ARABIA - DIPLOMATIC RELATIONSHIP 

 (No.  B/378)  Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and  International 
Trade  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Non  Aligned  Movement,  he  will  state  the  impact  of  our 
membership  thereto,  if  any,  following  the  development  of  our  diplomatic  and  bilateral 
relationship with Saudi Arabia. 

(Withdrawn) 

QUATRE BORNES - DECONGESTION PROGRAMME 

(No.  B/379)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
implementation of the Decongestion Programme in the centre of Quatre Bornes and in the 
vicinity thereof, he will state where matters stand. 

Reply: In my reply to PQ B/736 at the sitting of the National Assembly held on 20 
October  2015,  I  informed  the  House  of  the  elaboration  of  a  Decongestion  Programme  in 
Quatre Bornes and its vicinity. 

 I am now informed by the Traffic Management and Road Safety Unit of my Ministry 
that  one  (1)  additional  lane  along  St  Jean  Road  in  the  direction  of  La  Louise  during 
afternoon  peak  hours  between  15  00  hrs  and  19  00  hrs  from  Monday  to  Friday  has  been 
implemented and is presently in operation.  In addition, parking space has been provided at 
the back of Quatre Bornes market. 

In  my  reply  to  PQ  B/736,  I  also  informed  the  House  that  I  will  look  into  the 

synchronisation of the traffic lights at St Jean Road from La Louise to St Jean roundabout. 

 The Traffic Management and Road Safety Unit has advised that synchronisation of 
the traffic lights along that road will have limited impact because of side frictions such as 
entering  and  exiting  from  parking  slots  and  frequent  stopping  of  vehicles  for  various 
purposes. 

 I am further informed that in order to improve mobility and fluidity of traffic in that 
region a set of Traffic Signal Equipment will be installed at the junction of Osman Avenue 
and St Jean Road by the end of June 2016 following which the following measures will be 
implemented - 

 

155 

•  The conversion of Buswell Avenue from its junction with Belle Rose Avenue up 
to Paul Henri Avenue into a one-way road with traffic flowing in the direction of 
St. Jean Road[A8]. 

•  The conversion of the one-way set up along D’Epinay Avenue from its junction 
with  C.  Hall  Avenue  up  to  St.  Jean  Road  [A8]  at  the  signalised  cross  junction 
[D’Epinay Avenue/St. Jean Road (A8)/Avenue des Capucines] and the conversion 
of  D’Epinay  Avenue  from  its  junction  with  C.  Hall  Avenue  up  to  Belle  Rose 
Avenue into a one-way  road with traffic flowing in the direction of Belle Rose 
Avenue. 

•  The conversion of the one-way set up along Osman Avenue from its junction with 
Tagore Avenue up to St. Jean Road [A8] with traffic flowing in the direction of 
St. Jean Road [A8]. 

•  The conversion of Avenue des Rosiers from its junction with St. Jean Road [A8] 
to its junction with Ylang Ylang Avenue into a one-way road with traffic flowing 
in the direction of Ylang Ylang Avenue. 

•  The  conversion  of  the  cross  junction  [Osman  Avenue/St.  Jean  Rd  (A8)/Avenue 
des Rosiers] into a signalised junction with the provision of two pedestrian phases 
along St. Jean Road [A8]. 

•  The  conversion  of  zebra  crossings  into  pelican  crossings  along  Candos-Vacoas 

Road [B3] and along Palma Road (B2) near taxi stand. 

 The hon. Member had in relation to the PQ proposed the relocation of the taxi stand.  
He will understand that this is a sensible issue.  My Ministry will study all implications in 
consultation with all stakeholders before coming up with alternative options. 

 We need some time to make a complete assessment of the traffic impact of the above 
mentioned  measures  to  come  up  with  any  additional  measures  to  mitigate  the  traffic 
congestion in the centre of Quatre Bornes and its vicinity. 

LAGOONS - FISHING PROHIBITION 

(No. B/380) Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and  Outer  Islands 
whether, in regard to the project for the prohibition of fishing in the lagoons, he will state if 
consideration will be given for a review of the regulations made in relation thereto. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

156 

BEL OMBRE – SOCIAL PROJECTS - IMPLEMENTATION 

(No. B/381) Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to Bel Ombre, he will state where matters 
stand as regards the projects for the implementation thereat of a - 

(a) Youth Training Centre;  

(b) health track;  

(c) beach volley ground; 

(d) beach soccer ground;  

(e) cycling track;  

(f) jogging track, and  

(e) nautical activities. 

Reply:  I  have  to  inform  the  House  that  in  the  context  of  social  projects  to  be 
implemented  in  the  region  of  Bel  Ombre,  a  plot  of  land  to  the  extent  of  5A22P  has  been 
vested in my Ministry in 2010.  In January 2010, a proposal was received from Bel Ombre 
Foundation For Empowerment for implementation of a project comprising the following - 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

Parcours de Santé 
Beach Volleyball Ground 
Beach Soccer Ground 
Cycling Track 
Jogging Track 
Nautical Activities 

 In  August  2010  the  Ministry  informed  the  Foundation  that  it  was  agreeable  to  the 
implementation of the project which was to be financed by the latter.  In 2012 the site was 
cleared  and  works  were  supposed  to  start.    Meanwhile,  there  was  a  change  in  the 
management of Bel Ombre Foundation For Empowerment and subsequently, the Foundation 
did not proceed with the project. 

 As  there  was  no  further  development,  the  Ministry  decided  to  come  up  with  an 
alternative  project  of  putting  up  a  Youth  Recreational  and  Camping  Centre  comprising  a 
properly fenced open air camping area for outdoor activities with minimum infrastructures in 

 

157 

accordance  with  requirements  of  the  Ministry  of  Environment.    However,  the  project  was 
deferred due to budgetary constraints. 

 When I took office as Minister, I effected a site visit and it has been decided to revive 
the project.  Procedures for fencing works to be undertaken have already been initiated and 
the remaining infrastructural works would be carried out in the next financial year. 

  

SPEED CAMERAS - OPERATIONAL 

(No. B/383) Mr D. Sesungkur (First  Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
speed cameras, he will state if - 

(a) they are all fully operational and, if not, why not, and  

(b)  a  study  has  been  carried  out  to  ascertain  if  the  use  thereof  has  generated  the 

expected outcome of reducing the number of road accidents. 

Reply: I would like to inform the House that there are 54 fixed speed cameras placed 
throughout the island, out of which 51 are fully operational with the exception of  three (3) 
which have been temporarily switched off - 

(i) 

at  Pellegrin-  St  Jean  along  motorway  M1,  due  to  theft  of  electric  cables. 
Necessary  action  has  been  taken  to  have  an  overhead  cable  crossing  the 
southbound motorway for the supply of electricity to the Speed camera, and 

(ii)  at Upper Valton, and Lower Valton where the speed cameras have been switched 
off due to the road structure failure of the Terre Rouge Verdun motorway M3 at 
that level of the bypass and the installation of a temporary road hump which has 
been constructed to divert traffic off the affected area.  

As regards part (b) of the question, I am informed that the accident rate within 500 
metres radius of the speed camera sites for the year 2013-2015 have been drastically reduced 
overall.  Fatal and serious injury crashes have, in fact, been reduced by more than 50% as 
compared to the previous three years. 

 However, the sites have to be monitored over a longer continuous period of at least 5 

years to be able to measure the real impact.  

It is expected that with education and sensitization campaigns, the fatal and serious 

injury crashes will be reduced further. 

 

158 

We have observed that in the region where speed cameras have been installed, drivers 
tend to reduce speed before and to accelerate after.  My Ministry is accordingly proposing to 
carry out an audit of the present system as regards to location and efficacy.  In the light of the 
study  we  will  consider  coming  up  with  a  new  system,  the  speed  zone  system  which  will 
discourage drivers to speed up outside zones where cameras are installed. 

In the meantime, the Police will make extensive use of the hand held mobile cameras. 

I also wish to inform the House that up to now, the driving licence of four (4) persons 
have already been suspended under the new Penalty System and more than 100 persons are in 
the red zone. 

 

BAGATELLE DAM - OPERATIONAL 

(No. B/384) Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
Bagatelle Dam, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Central Water Authority 
and the Central Water Resources Unit, information as to the status of the works carried out 
thereat as at to date, indicating - 

(a) when it will become operational, and  

(b) the total expenditure incurred in relation thereto. 

Reply: The contract for the construction of the Bagatelle dam was awarded in July 
2011.  Works  started  in  December  2011  and  the  expected  completion  date  was  December 
2014. 

During  the  implementation  of  the  works,  there  were  two  major  design  changes, 

namely - 

(i) 

(ii) 

In  September  2012,  change  of  the  spillway  from  Ogee  type  to  Morning 
Glory; 

 In January 2013, suspension of grouting (a procedure by means of which 
a  mixture  of  cement  and  sand  and  other  materials  such  as  epoxy  are 
injected  into  voids  and  cavities  in  soil  or  rock  formations  to  reduce 
permeability and increase strength)   and design and construction of a Cut 
Off  Wall  of  80  cm  thickness  and  average  depth  of  30  metres  along  the 

 

159 

entire dam foundation as dam foundation treatment. This was the result of 
the  advice  of  an  independent  expert,  Mr  Lutz  Schewe,  on  the  potential 
presence of dispersive material in the foundation.   

Consequently, the completion date was extended to December 2016 for impoundment 

of the dam and July 2017 for other ancillary works.  

82% of the project has been completed and a total of Rs4.9 billion has been spent for 

the works contract and the consultancy services.   

CEB - ELECTRICITY TARIFFS 

(No. B/385) Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to the Central 
Electricity Board, following the windfall gains it has realized as a result of the fall in the price 
of  petroleum  products  on  the  world  market,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain 
therefrom, information as to - 

(a) the quantum of the profits thereof as at end of March 2016;  

(b) the projected quantum of the profits thereof as at end of December 2016, and  

(c) if consideration will be given for a review of the electricity tariffs charged by the 
Board  from  the  small  and  medium  enterprises  and  the  small  commercial 
operators. 

Reply: With regard to part (a) and (b) of the question, I am informed by the Central 
Electricity Board, that estimated profits for the period January to March 2016 is Rs723 m. 
and for the period ending December 2016 it is Rs2,815 m.   

As regard part (c) of the question, the hon. Member may wish to refer to my reply to 
the PNQ on 03 December 2015, where I stated that a general tariff reduction is not envisaged. 
At my request, the CEB has extended the social tariff 110 A to consumers with an average 
consumption up to 85 kWh.  Priority has been given to households on the social register.     

I also informed the House that the CEB has refunded Government loans up to Rs2 
billion and plans investments of about Rs7.8 billion in the next two years for new generation 
plants and strengthening of the grid.  

 

160 

I  therefore  consider  that  the  proposal  of  the  hon.  Member  may  not  be  considered, 
except  in  the  context  of  an  overall  tariff  review  once  the  Utility  Regulations  Authority 
becomes operational.   

PORT LOUIS – HAWKERS - RELOCATION 

(No.  B/386)  Mrs  D.  Selvon  (Second  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 

asked the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the hawkers, he will state – 

(a)  

 (b)  

(c)  

if he is aware that the latter presently operating in Port Louis are proposing the 
holding of discussions with the authorities regarding the place and modalities 
of the relocation thereof and regarding the apprehensions thereof concerning 
the proposed extent of the space to be allocated to each one of them and, if so, 
indicate if he will accede thereto and review the extent of the proposed space 
to be allocated; 
the exact size of each stall currently proposed at Decaen, the number of toilets 
facilities  and  the  state  thereof  and  the  number  of  hawkers  to  be  transferred 
thereto, and  
costs of the -  
(i)  
(ii)  

Hawkers Palace built in 2000, and  
current hawker’s market at Decaen. 

Reply: With regard to part (a) of the question, the House may wish to note that the 
City Council of Port Louis has, since last year, started the process for the relocation of the 
hawkers to the two temporary sites identified and those concerned were fully aware that they 
should  move  thereat,  as  there  is  a  Supreme  Court  judgement  that  they  should  not  operate 
within a radius of 500m from the Central market. 

As regards part (b) of the question, I wish to inform the House that – 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

the  exact  size  of  each  stall  at  Decaen  is  of  length  1.5m  and  breadth 
1.5m, i.e, 1.5m x 1.5m; 
there are 5 toilets for females, 4 toilets for males, and one urinal which 
are all in good working conditions with availability of water supply; 
the number of hawkers at Decaen that can be housed is 634 as follows 
– 

Non-foodstuffs 
Foodstuffs 
 
 
Vegetables 

- 
- 
- 

514 
60 
60 

161 

 
I would like to inform the House that the marking for the stalls is the same that was 
agreed  by  the  hawkers,  when  those  sites  were  proposed  by  the  previous  Government  and 
previous Municipal Council. 

With  regard  to  part  (c),  I  am  informed  that,  in  so  far  as  the  Hawkers  Palace  is 
concerned, the project was implemented by the DBM Properties Development Ltd. and the 
Letter of Award for its construction was for an amount of Rs476.5 m. excluding VAT. 

As regard, the sites at  Decaen and  Immigration Square, the City Council has spent 

Rs20.2 m. for their refurbishment for use as temporary hawkers sites. 

 

PORT LOUIS - HAWKERS 

(No.  B/387)  Mrs  D.  Selvon  (Second  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 

asked the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the hawkers, he will – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c)  

 give a list of the streets proposed from 2000 to date by Government and the 
Municipal  Council  of  Port  Louis,  respectively,  to  be  pedestrianized  for  the 
holding of the activities thereof;  
state if consideration will be given for the setting up of a single authority for 
the  issue  of  licences  and  for  the  regulation  of  the  activities  thereof  in  the 
towns,  villages  and  on  the  beaches  and  to  ensure  the  maintenance  of  a 
centralized database thereof and, if so, indicate when and, if not, why not, and  
state  if  Government  is  in  presence  of  a  total  and  outright  rejection  by  the 
hawkers  operating  in  Port  Louis  of  any  form  of  relocation  to  a  central 
hawkers’ centre. 

Reply: With regard to part (a) of the question, I would like to inform the House that 
this Government has planned for the relocation of hawkers, both in the short term and in the 
long term and I have just made a statement in this House regarding latest development in the 
matter. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, Municipal Councils and District Councils have 
been and are the authorities for the issue of licences and the regulation of activities in their 
respective jurisdictions.  The setting up of a centralised database for economic operators will 
go in a direction opposite to the decentralised process in Local Government. 

As  regards  part  (c)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  a  large  number  of  hawkers 
have  signed,  with  the  Municipal  Council  of  Port  Louis,  the  necessary  documents  for  the 
occupation of slots at Decaen and Immigration Square.  As at 30 April, 50% of the registered 
hawkers have moved into the new premises.  Following the meeting I have had with their 

 

162 

representatives  yesterday  (02  May  2016),  I  understand  that  the  remaining  hawkers  are 
moving to the two sites in the days to come. 

 

NINE-YEAR BASIC SCHOOLING PROGRAMME - INTRODUCTION 

(No. B/388) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 
Research  whether,  in  regard  to  the  introduction  of  the  Nine-Year  Basic  Schooling 
Programme, she will state the projected impact thereof on the private colleges and on the staff 
working thereat. 

Reply:  The  Nine-Year  Continuous  Basic  Education  (NYCBE)  reform  aims  at 
bringing forward a new educational paradigm establishing a strong foundation for the present 
and future learning success of all students. We believe that it will have positive impacts on all 
stakeholders.  It  may  in  fact  turn  out  to  be  a  perfect  model  for  a  win-win  scenario  for  all 
parties  concerned.  I  must  emphasise  that  this  reform  project  has  been  commended  by  our 
international partners. 

The NYCBE is a comprehensive and a systemic one which takes on board all state 
and private colleges, both aided and non-aided.I wish to highlight that these are privileged 
partners  of  the  Ministry  and  they  have  generally  expressed  their  support  for  its 
implementation. 

Of course, the Managers of Private Secondary Schools have raised issues pertaining 

to intake of students and the future of their schools. 

Referring to the intake of students, it is worth noting that all students after completing 
the six years of Primary Schooling will transit to Grade 7 and will be allocated a regional 
secondary school (state/private) based on the same criteria currently applicable for admission 
to Form I in Regional Schools.We shall thus be achieving a 100 per cent transition rate from 
Primary to Secondary.  

It is also to be noted that a dozen of the existing National Colleges will be converted 
into Academies and there will be NO intake at Grade 7 in these institutions as from January 
2018. It stands to logic therefore that these students will be directed to Regional Secondary 
Schools, further increasing the scope for enrolment in Private Secondary Schools.  

Academies will be admitting students at Grade 10 as from 2021. This, in fact, opens 
the  door  wider  for  private  colleges  to  increase  their  student  intake  at  Grades  7,  8  and  9 
progressively. 

163 

 
May  I  remind  the  House  that  the  students  will  retain  the  right  to  follow  their  post 
basic education in the same Regional School where they would have been admitted at Grade 
7. 

May  I  also  add  that  another  interesting  element  of  the  reform  is  the  provision  of 
special class with a reduced size in every Regional Secondary School where students in the 
extended 4-year cycle will follow the same core curriculum as those in the regular three-year 
cycle.  This  represents  yet  another  opportunity  for  private  colleges  in  terms  of  additional 
intake. 

In fact, private colleges would not lose but stand to gain.  
True  it  is  that  the  current  demographic  trend  may  have  an  impact  on  student 
population but this prevails independently of the NYCBE reforms. I repeat, this decline in 
school population is no way an offshoot of the NYCBE reforms as some would have it.  

My  Ministry  is  alive  to  this  fact  and  is  taking  necessary  measures  to  ensure  that 

Private Secondary Schools are not affected by this phenomenon. 

Currently, school population has been officially capped at a maximum of 1,400 per 
secondary school. Hence, on grounds of equity, the reform calls for a capping on the total 
student population in any secondary school operating with a population beyond the ceiling 
set.  Schools  concerned  have  already  been  instructed  to  reduce  their  intake  so  as  to  be  in 
conformity with this policy. This ceiling is called upon to be further lowered in time. 

Further, my Ministry is coming with a policy for the gradual reduction of class size 
thereby lowering the pupil-teacher ratio to a reasonable level (say a ratio of 25:1), and hence 
providing  better  learning  conditions  and  facilitating  learners,  especially  those  requiring 
remedial support. 

As for the impact on staff, I wish to draw attention to the fact that one cornerstone of 
the  NYCBE  reform  project  concerns  ‘Teacher  Education  Reform’  which  will  ensure  the 
development of a highly skilled teaching force. Continuous Professional Development (CPD) 
will also help in their career progression.  

In addition, the setting up of the Teachers’ Council will further the professionalization 
in  this  domain.  I  would  like  to  stress  that  all  Educators  will  benefit  from  these  measures 
irrespective of them being from the public or private sector. 

Further, I wish to stress that in my reply to PQ B/923, I had informed the House that 
the  NYCBE  reform  provides  for  the  elimination  of  the  Prevocational  Education  both  in 
public and private secondary schools.  

164 

 
I  wish  therefore  to  again  reassure  the  House  on  this  score:  all  teachers  (whether 
involved  in  the  prevocational  classes  or  otherwise)  would  be  taken  on  board  in  the  new 
reform  programme  and  their  services  would  be  needed  in  schools  for  teaching  and 
remediation programmes. The MIE is working on tailor-made training programme for these 
educators.  

GRNW WEST BRIDGE =- REHABILITATION 

(No. B/389) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the old 
Grand River North West Bridge, he will state if consideration will be given for the reopening 
thereof and, if so, indicate when. 

Reply: I wish to refer the hon. Member to the reply I made to PQ B/859 at the sitting 
of  the  National  Assembly  on  10  November  2015,  wherein  I  stated  that  my  Ministry  is 
undertaking a major Road Decongestion Programme which includes the A1-M1 road which 
will  link  Coromandel  to  Sorèze.    The  impact  of  this  road  will  help  in  deciding  on  the 
reopening of the Grand River North West Bridge. 

However,  in  the  meantime,  the  RDA  has  already  undertaken  a  preliminary  study 

regarding the rehabilitation of the bridge. 

In  the  light  of  the  findings  of  the  study,  my  Ministry  has  decided  to  include  the 
rehabilitation  of  the  old  GRNW  Bridge  in  the  approved  list  of  proposed  projects  for 
budgetary provision for financial year 2016/2017. 

 

CAMP DE MASQUE - COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTRE - 

CONSTRUCTION 

(No.  B/390)  Mr  K.  Tarolah  (Third  Member  for  Montagne  Blanche  &  GRSE) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  whether,  in  regard  to  the  proposed 
construction of a Community Health Centre at Camp de Masque, he will state if a new site 
has been earmarked therefor and, if so, indicate the location thereof and, if not, indicate the 
actions taken, if any, to remedy the chaotic situation prevailing thereat. 

Reply: I wish to inform the House that land to an extent of 1,055 m2 (25 Perches) for 
the construction of a new Community Health Centre at L’Unité, Camp de Masque has been 
vested in my Ministry since 2012. The exact location is about 200 metres from the main road 
and is at the rear side of the SILWF Unité Housing Estate.   

This project was approved by the Project Plan Committee in January 2014. 

 
My  Ministry  is  awaiting  the  revised  preliminary  design,  based  on  an  existing  type 

165 

design model, prior to finalizing the detailed drawings and bidding document. 

The construction itself will take about 8 – 10 months after the award of the contract. 
The CHC is expected to be operational as from December 2017, provided all the necessary 
permits  and  approvals  are  obtained.  This  construction  will  go  a  long  way  to  remedy  the 
current situation related to this service centre.  

 

EXCLUSIVE ECONOMIC ZONE - TUNA FISHING  

(No. B/391) Mr J. C. Barbier (Fifth Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked the Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, Shipping and Outer 
Islands whether, in regard to tuna fishing in our Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ), he will 

state – 

(a)  

(b)  
(c)  

the number of licensees who are presently operating, indicating the number of 
local vessels carrying out the said activity thereat  
the average annual catch and  
if he is aware of any action undertaken by Green Peace to stop overfishing of 
tuna in our EEZ. 

Reply: With regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed that 105 fishing licences 
were issued to foreign fishing vessels to fish for tuna in our Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) 
as at date. 

The number of licences issued to local fishing vessels is 10. 
With regard to part (b), the average annual catch of tuna caught in our EEZ for the last 

five years stood at 5345.48 tonnes.  

Regarding part (c), I am informed that presently Greenpeace is conducting a 
campaign in the Indian Ocean to collect information with respect to tuna fishing and 
to track down any use of unauthorised fishing gears. It has reported having found one 
such fishing gear that has been used for fishing. 

PLAINE LAUZUN - COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTRE  

(No.  B/392)  Mr  J.  C.  Barbier  (Fifth  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  whether,  in  regard  to  the  closure  of  the 
Plaine Lauzun dispensary, he will state if consideration will be given for the advisability of 
building a new one in the vicinity thereof or around the old Moka Road in Plaine Lauzun. 

166 

 
Reply: The Answer is no. 
There are two Primary Health Care Centres, namely, Dr Bouloux Area Health Centre 
at  Cassis  and  Pailles  West  Community  Health  Centre  which  are  within  2  km  from  Plaine 
Lauzun.  Since the closure of Plaine Lauzun Community Health Centre in April 2010, the 
population from its catchment area is being catered for by Dr Bouloux Area Health Centre 
and  the  Pailles  West  Community  Health  Centre,  which  started  operating  on  20  November 
2012. 

POINTE AUX SABLES - HOUSING UNITS - BENEFICIARIES 

(No.  B/393)  Mr  J.  C.  Barbier  (Fifth  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked  the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
Empowerment  Programme,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  therefrom, 
information as to the number of housing units provided thereunder in Pointe aux Sables, if 
any, over the past two years, indicating – 

(a) the eligibility criteria prescribed therefor, and  
(b) if he will table a list of the beneficiaries thereof. 
Reply:    The  Empowerment  Programme  falls  under  the  purview  of  the  Ministry  of 

Social Integration and Economic Empowerment.  

It  is,  in  this  context,  that  the  Ministry  of  Social  Integration  and  Economic 
Empowerment, under the Empowerment Programme, has constructed 82 housing units on a 
plot of State land of an extent of six arpents at Pointe aux Sables. These housing units have 
been constructed specifically for the relocation of the squatters found over land acquired for 
the Ring Road project at Tranquebar.  It is imperative for these families to move from their 
present location to enable the implementation of Phase 2 of the Ring Road Project.  

The  housing  units  are  made  up  of  concrete  with  corrugated  iron  sheet  roofs  over 

individual lots.   

In regard to part (a) of the question, the eligibility criteria are – 

(i) 

(ii) 

the  beneficiary  should  not  be  a  landowner  nor  a  State  Land  Lessee, 
whether in Mauritius or in Rodrigues, at the time of the offer of the 
lease, and  
the cut-off date of 01 July 2015 adopted by my Ministry. 

With reference to part (b) of the question, I am hereby tabling the list of the families 

who are being relocated from Tranquebar to Pointe aux Sables. 

Over  the  past  two  years,  the  Ministry  of  Social  Integration  and  Economic 
Empowerment  has  undertaken  other  projects  at  Pointe  aux  Sables  and  the  Honourable 

 

167 

Member  for  Grand  River  North  West  and  Port  Louis  West  may  wish  to  put  a  substantive 
question to my colleague, the Minister of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment. 
GRNW & PORT LOUIS WEST – WATER PIPES - REPLACEMENT 

(No. A/6) Mr P. Armance (First Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked the 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to the project 
for the replacement of the old water pipes under the Build Mauritius Fund, he will, for the 
benefit of the House, obtain from the Central Water Authority, a list of the regions identified 
therefor in Constituency No. 1, Grand River North West and Port Louis West, indicating the 
time frame set out for the implementation thereof. 

Reply:  I am informed by the Central Water Authority that the regions of Grand River 
North West and Port Louis West are supplied from the Pierrefonds Tunnel system through 
the New Bosquet Reservoir. 

The  following  pipe  replacement  projects  are  being  implemented  under  the  Build 

Mauritius Fund to improve water distribution from the Pierrefonds tunnel system- 

(i) 

the  replacement  of  5  km  of  pipeline  downstream  New  Bosquet  reservoir  to 
Coromandel/Richelieu.  Works  have  started  in  April  2016  and  expected  to  be 
completed in July 2017; 

(ii)  replacement  of  12  km  of  pipeline  from  Pierrefonds  tunnel  to  New  Bosquet 
reservoir.  Works  are  expected  to  start  in  October  2016  and  expected  to  be 
completed in January 2018.  

GRNW BRIDGE - REHABILITATION 

(No. A/7) Mr P. Armance (First Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked the 
Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  the  old  Grand 
River North West Bridge, he will state if consideration will be given for the – 

(a) 
(b) 

reopening thereof, and  
embellishment and rehabilitation thereof, including replanting on the riverside in 
the vicinity thereof. 

Reply: I refer the hon. Member to the reply I made to PQ B/859 at the sitting of the 
National Assembly on 10 November 2015, wherein I stated that my Ministry is undertaking a 
major  Road  Decongestion  Programme,  which  includes  the  A1-M1  road  which  will  link 
Coromandel to Sorèze.  The impact of this road will help in deciding on the re-opening of the 
Grand River North West Bridge. 

 

168 

However,  in  the  meantime,  the  RDA  has  already  undertaken  a  preliminary  study 

regarding the rehabilitation of the bridge. 

In  the  light  of  the  findings  of  the  study,  my  Ministry  has  decided  to  include  the 
Rehabilitation  of  the  Old  GRNW  Bridge  in  the  approved  list  of  proposed  projects  for 
budgetary provision for Financial Year 2016/2017. 

As  regards  part  (b)  of  the  question,  the  Ministry  of  Environment,  Sustainable 
Development,  Disaster  and  Beach  Management  will  be  approached  to  carry  out  the 
embellishment works.  

 

GRNW & PORT LOUIS WEST – MULTI-SPORTS COMPLEX 

(No. A/8) Mr P. Armance (First Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked the 
Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to Constituency No. 1, Grand River North 
West and Port Louis West, he will state if there is any project for the construction of a multi-
sports  complex  thereat  and,  if  so,  indicate  the  expected  start  and  completion  dates  thereof 
and, if not, if consideration will be given for the implementation of a project therefor. 

Reply:  My Ministry does not have any project for the construction of a multi-sports 

complex in the Constituency No. 1 as at present.   

There  are  already  2  Dojos  in  G.R.N.W.    The  bigger  Dojo  which  is  of  international 
norms  and  standards  is  used  by  the  Mauritius  Judo  Federation.    National,  regional  and 
international competitions in Judo are held at the Dojo.  The smaller Dojo is used for training 
purposes and is utilized by inhabitants of the region to practice Karaté,  Aerobics, Jiu-Jitsu 
and Aikido, among others. 

 

ROBERT EDWARD HART BOTANICAL GARDEN - UPGRADING 

(No. A/9) Mr P. Armance (First Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked the 
Minister  of  Local  Government  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Robert  Edward  Hart  Botanical 
Garden,  he  will  state  if  he  is  aware  of  the  derelict  state  thereof  and,  if  so,  indicate  if  the 
renovation thereof is being envisaged. 

Reply:    I  am  aware  of  the  bad  state  of  the  Robert  Edward  Hart  Botanical  Garden 

especially the road which is in a pitiful state as well as lack of lighting facilities thereat. 

As you would recall, the Robert Edward Hart Botanical Garden would have form an 

integral part of the Neotown Project (which has now been shelved). 

 

169 

I  am,  however,  informed  by  the  Municipal  City  Council  of  Port  Louis  that  the 
upgrading  of  the  garden  which  consists,  among  others,  of  the  resurfacing  of  the  road 
infrastructure and the improvement of the lighting network will cost around Rs25 m.. The 
works will be carried out once funds are identified therefor.  

YVES CANTIN AREA HEALTH CENTRE – SERVICES 

(No. A/11) Mr F. Quirin (Fourth Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) asked 
the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the Yves Cantin Area Health 
Centre in Black River, in Constituency No. 14, Savanne and Black River, he will – 

(a) 

state the  
(i) 
(ii)  number of ambulances attached thereto, and  

services provided thereat, and  

(b)  give a list of the medical staff posted thereat, indicating the  

respective working hours thereof, and  

(i) 
(ii)  opening hours thereof. 

Primary Health Care Services 

(i) Services provided at Dr. Yves Cantin Community Hospital 

Reply: The information sought for is as follows – 
(a) 
• 
(i)  General consultation (24 hr basis) 
(ii)  Treatment of minor injuries 
(iii)  Family Planning 
(iv)  Maternal and Child Health 
(v)  NCD Clinics/Diabetic Clinic 
(vi)  Dental Clinics (Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday) 
(vii)  Diet Clinic 
(viii) Vaccination session for babies 
(ix)  Well baby clinic 
(x)  Screening for NCDs and cervical cancer 
(xi)  Vaccination (Vaxigrip) for vulnerable population since 12 April 2016 
(xii)  HIV/AIDS Clinic (as from 29 April 2016) 

 

Specialist Clinics 

• 
(i)  Obstetric  : Tuesdays – 1 p.m. to 4 p.m. 
(ii)  Psychiatric 

: Every 3rd Thursday – 9.00 a.m. to Noon 

 

170 

(iii)  Paediatric : Every 1st and 3rd Wednesday – 1.00p.m. to 4.00 p.m. 
(iv)  Dermatology 
(v)  ENT 
 
(vi)  Eye 
 
(vii)  Diabetology 

: Every 3rd Friday – 9.00 a.m. to Noon 
: Every 2nd and 4th Tuesday – 1.00 p.m. to 4.00 p.m. 
:Every 3rd Wednesday – 1.00 p.m. to 4.00 p.m. 
:Every 1st Monday – 9.00 a.m. to Noon 

 

Other Services 

• 
(i)  Laboratory 

: 

Monday to Friday – 9.00 a.m. to 4.00 p.m. 

Saturday – 9.00 a.m. to Noon 

(ii)  Pharmacy  :  
 
(iii)  X-Ray 

on a 24 hours basis 
: 

Monday to Friday – 9.00 a.m. to 6.00 p.m. 

Saturday – 9.00 a.m. to Noon 
(closed on Public Holidays and Sundays) 
Wednesday – 9.00 a.m. to 4.00 p.m. 

EPI Session 

:  

 

(iv)  Physiotherapy: 
(v)  Medical Social Worker:  
Every 2nd Tuesday from 9.00 a.m. to Noon 
(vi) 
(vii)  Blood collection : Tuesdays and Thursdays – 6.00 a.m. to 8.00 a.m. 
(viii)  Methadone distribution :  
Everyday from 6.00 a.m. to 8.00 a.m. 
(ix)  Consultation for Methadone Therapy : Saturdays from 9.00 a.m.  

Thursdays from 9.00 a.m. to 4.00 pm. 

(x) 

Community based Rehabilitation : Mondays from 9.00 a.m. to  

4.00 p.m. 

to Noon 

(ii)  Number  of  ambulances  attached  to  Dr.  Yves  Cantin  Community 

(a) 
Health Centre. 

One 

List  of  Medical  Staff  posted  at  Dr.  Yves  Cantin  Community  Health 

(b) 
Centre 
Four Medical and Health Officers/Senior Medical and Health Officers are posted at the 

Dr. Yves Cantin Community Health Centre on a rotation basis – 

(i)  Dr. Dhanilall Beekharry 
(ii)  Dr. Valtan Bunwaree 
(iii)  Dr. Arvind Sing Ramchurn 
(iv)  Dr. Leckraj Gya 

 

171 

They  also  cover  Community  Health  Centres  in  the  catchment  area,  namely–  Beau 

Songes, Flic-en-Flac, Tamarin, Case Noyale, La Gaulette, Chamarel. 

(i) Working hours at Dr Yves Cantin Community Health Centre 

 
(b) 
The working hours at Dr Yves Cantin Community Health Centre are from 9.00 a.m. to 
4.00 p.m. A Medical and Health Officer is on call everyday from 4.00 p.m. to 9.00 a.m. the 
following day. 

 (ii) Opening hours of Dr. Yves Cantin Community Health Centre 

(b) 
The Dr. Yves Cantin Community Health Centre operates on a 24-hour/seven day basis. 

 

SAVANNE & BLACK RIVER – BUS SERVICE  

(No. A/12) Mr F. Quirin (Fourth Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) asked 
the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  the  public 
transport system in Constituency No. 14, Savanne and Black River, namely along the route 
No. 5, Baie du Cap to Quatre Bornes, he will state if he is aware of the difficulties met daily 
by the inhabitants of the region along the said route, such as inadequate number of buses and 
time table not being respected and, if so, indicate if urgent remedial measures will be taken in 
relation thereto. 

Reply:    According  to  information  from  the  National  Transport  Authority  Bus  Route 
No. 5 (Quatre Bornes Traffic Centre to Baie du Cap) extends over a distance of 46 kms via 
Palma,  Bambous,  Cascavelle,  Tamarin,  Riviere  Noire,  Case  Noyale,  La  Gaulette  and  Le 
Morne.  The route is served by 20 buses owned by individual operators who are grouped into 
the Quatre Bornes Bus Owners Cooperative Society Ltd. 

In addition, passengers commuting along Route No. 5 also benefit from the services 

available along the Routes 119, 120, 243 and 243 A. 

 
In line with the authorised timetable, five (5) buses operate between 05h00 to 18h30 
at intervals varying from 15 minutes to 20 minutes.  48 trips are undertaken during weekends, 
while 42 trips are effected on Sundays and Public Holidays in each direction. 

Representations  were  made  by  the  commuters  for  non-observance  of  time  table.  
Thus, regular meetings are held with the operators with a view to sensitising them regarding 
strict compliance of the time table. 

Regular  monitoring  and  checks  have  been  carried  out  on  Route  No.5  and 

contraventions have been established for 2015 and 2016 as follows - 

 

Description of Contravention 

172 

Failing 

to  observe 

time 

table 

(running time) 

Failing to observe timetable (time of 

departure) 

Waiting unnecessarily at a bus stop 

Others 

Total 

2

2

3 

7 

1

4

015 

0 

0 

0 

2016 

(as at 29 April) 

6 

2 

4 

4 

16 

 
A meeting was held with the Quatre  Bornes  Bus Owners Cooperative Society on 26 
April 2016.  It has been agreed that Traffic Officers would be posted at Palma and Rivière 
Noire so as ensure that the running time for the leg from Palma to Rivière Noire is observed.  
In  case  an  operator  defaults,  he  would  be  sanctioned  by  a  suspension  of  four  hours  the 
following day. 

In  addition  on  30  April  2016,  the  Police  had  a  meeting  with  the  Quatre  Bornes  Bus 
Owners  Cooperative  Society  and  its  members  for  joint  operations  to  ensure  observance  of 
time table and avoid unnecessary delays at Bus  Stops at Quatre Bornes and Palma.  Their 
attention was drawn on the need to provide a satisfactory service to the users.  During the 
meeting, it was agreed that - 

(i) 

regular  checks  would  be  made  and  contraventions  would  be  established, 
accordingly; 

(ii)  waybills of the bus should be properly kept and the members of the Cooperative 

Society would be held responsible for bus crews actions, and  

(iii)  a 

joint 

check  on 

illegal  operators  would  be  held  on  Friday  

06 May 2016. 

 

173 

In  case  of  breakdown  of  any  bus  on  Route  No.  5,  the  timetable  is  disrupted  and 
passengers  at  times  encounter  transport  problems.    The  Cooperative  Society  has  been 
instructed to supplement the service by redirecting a bus from another route to route No. 5 in 
such situation. 

