No. 07 of 2016 

 

1 

 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

(UNREVISED) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

 

TUESDAY 17 MAY 2016 

 

 

 

 

2 

CONTENTS 

 
 

 

PAPERS LAID 

QUESTIONS (Oral) 

MOTION 

BILL (Public) 

ADJOURNMENT 

QUESTIONS (Written) 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

 

THE CABINET 

 
     (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

 
Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 
KCMG, QC  

Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 
GCSK  
Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

 
Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development, Minister 
for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 
Communications 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon.  Ivan  Leslie  Collendavelloo,  GCSK, 
SC 
Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 
Utilities 

 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

International Trade 
 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha, GCSK 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan, SC 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 
Sinatambou 
Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 
Perraud 

of 
Minister 
Empowerment 
Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation  

Integration 

and  Economic 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 
Family Welfare 

 

Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain, GCSK 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

 
Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 
Cheong, MSK 

Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 

4 

Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 
Institutional Reforms  
Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 
Institutions 
Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands 
 
Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms, 
Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 
Disaster and Beach Management 
Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and 
Training 

 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Gopall, Mr Navin (Temporary Transfer to 
RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 07 of 2016 

 

Sitting of 17 May 2016 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PAPERS LAID 

 

7 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table –  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A.    Prime Minister’s Office ‒ 

(a)   Report of the Commission of Inquiry on Processes/Practices for Granting of 
Loans Secured on immovable property and sale by levy of 19 August 2014. 

(b)   Performance Audit Reports December 2015 (In Original) on the: 

(i) 

(ii) 

“Healthcare Waste Management in Regional Hospitals” - Ministry of 
Health and Quality of Life. 
“Enhancing Employability of Jobseekers” - Ministry of Labour, 
Industrial Relations, Employment and Training (Employment 
Division). 

B.    Ministry of Energy and Public Utilities ‒ 

The  Radiation  Protection  (Safe  Transport  of  Radioactive  Material)  Regulations 
2016.  (Government Notice No. 106 of 2016)  

C.    Ministry of Health and Quality of Life ‒ 

The  Medical  Council  (Medical  Institutions)  (Amendment  No.  2)  Regulations 
2016. (Government Notice No. 107 of 2016) 

D.    Ministry of Local Government ‒ 

The Annual Performance Report 2014 of the Local Development Fund. 

E.    Ministry of Arts and Culture ‒ 

The National Heritage Fund (Amendment of Schedule) (No. 2) Regulations 2016. 
(Government Notice No. 111 of 2016)  

F.    Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection ‒ 

(a)   The  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Fairs)  (Amendment)  Regulations 

2016. (Government Notice No. 110 of  2016) 

(b)   The Rodrigues Consumer Protection (Control of Price of Taxable and Non-
Taxable  Goods)  (Amendment  No.  14)  Regulations  2016.  (Government 
Notice No.108 of 2016) 

(c)   The Rodrigues Consumer Protection (Control of Price of Taxable and Non-
Taxable  Goods)  (Amendment  No.  15)  Regulations  2016.  (Government 
Notice No.109 of 2016) 

G.    Ministry of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions ‒ 

The  Annual  Report  2014  of  the  National  Council  for  the  Rehabilitation  of 
Disabled Persons (NCRD). 

 

8 

ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

 

CHAGOS ARCHIPELAGO &  TROMELIN ISLAND  - MAURITIUS 

SOVEREIGNTY 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit  whether, in regard to 
the  sovereignty  of  Mauritius  over  the  Chagos  Archipelago  and  over  the  Tromelin  Island 
respectively, he will state –  

(a)  

(b)  

the exchanges, if any, between Mauritius, the United Kingdom and the United 
States of America since the Ruling delivered by the United Nations Arbitral 
Tribunal  in  March  2015  on  the  so-called  Chagos  Archipelago  Marine 
Protected Area and the beginning of this turning-point year 2016, and  

if Government has had time to take up the issue of the sovereignty over the 
Tromelin Island with the President of the Republic of France since February 
last.  

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker,  it has always been the unequivocal stand of 
Mauritius that the Chagos Archipelago, including Diego Garcia, and the Island of Tromelin 
form an integral part of the territory of Mauritius. 

Mauritius does not recognise the so-called “British Indian Ocean Territory” which the 
United Kingdom purported to create by illegally excising the Chagos Archipelago from the 
territory of Mauritius prior to its accession to independence, in violation of international law 
and United Nations General Assembly Resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, 2066 
(XX)  of  16  December  1965,  2232  (XXI)  of  20  December  1966  and  2357  (XXII)  of  19 
December 1967. 

Pursuant to its commitment to ensure that the territorial integrity and sovereignty of 
Mauritius are fully respected and safeguarded, my Government is sparing no efforts so that 
Mauritius can effectively exercise its sovereignty on the Chagos Archipelago and the Island 
of Tromelin.  

Madam  Speaker,  in  reply  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  as  the  House  is  aware,  the 
Arbitral Tribunal in the case brought by Mauritius against the United Kingdom to challenge 

 

9 

the legality of the ‘marine protected area’ which the United Kingdom purported to establish 
around the Chagos Archipelago delivered its Award on 18 March 2015.   

The  Tribunal  unanimously  held  that  the  ‘marine  protected  area’  which  the  United 
Kingdom  purported  to  establish  around  the  Chagos  Archipelago  in  April  2010  violates 
international  law.    It  ruled  that  the  United  Kingdom  had  breached  its  obligations  under 
Articles  2(3),  56(2)  and  194(4)  of  the  United  Nations  Convention  on  the  Law  of  the  Sea 
(UNCLOS).   

In  reaching  these  conclusions,  the  Tribunal  made  a  number  of  important  findings. 
Having  considered  in  detail  the  undertakings  given  by  the  United  Kingdom  to  Mauritian 
Ministers  at  the  Lancaster  House  in  September  1965,  the  Tribunal  found  that  the  United 
Kingdom’s commitments towards Mauritius in relation to fishing rights and oil and mineral 
rights in the Chagos Archipelago and its surrounding waters are legally binding.  Moreover, 
the Tribunal found that the United Kingdom’s undertaking to return the Chagos Archipelago 
to Mauritius when no longer needed for defence purposes is legally binding.  The Tribunal 
went on to hold that the United Kingdom had not respected Mauritius’ binding legal rights 
over the Chagos Archipelago. 

In its Final Observations, the Arbitral Tribunal stated that, I quote - 

 “It is now open to the Parties to enter into the negotiations that the Tribunal would 
have  expected  prior  to  the  proclamation  of  the  MPA,  with  a  view  to  achieving  a 
mutually satisfactory arrangement for protecting the marine environment, to the extent 
necessary under a “sovereignty umbrella.” 

 
Following the delivery of the Award, I wrote to the British Prime Minister on 14 April 
and 14 May 2015 to indicate that Mauritius stands ready to enter into negotiations with the 
United  Kingdom,  on  the  understanding  that  the  latter  shall  fully  respect  the  rights  of 
Mauritius under UNCLOS and international law.   

I  also  drew  the  attention  of  the  British  Prime  Minister  to  the  ruling  of  the  Arbitral 

Tribunal at paragraph 298 of its Award that, I quote - 

“the  United  Kingdom’s  undertaking  to  return  the  Chagos  Archipelago  to  Mauritius 
gives Mauritius an interest in significant decisions that bear upon the possible future 
uses of the Archipelago.  Mauritius’ interest is not simply in the eventual return of the 
Chagos  Archipelago,  but  also  in  the  condition  in  which  the  Archipelago  will  be 
returned.” 

 

10 

In view of this ruling of the Tribunal, I have impressed on the British Prime Minister 
that the United Kingdom cannot take any action in connection with the defence uses of the 
Chagos Archipelago, including the UK-US agreement in respect of the Chagos Archipelago, 
without the full prior involvement and consent of Mauritius.   

The British Prime Minister replied to me on 09 June 2015, proposing that Mauritius 
and  the  United  Kingdom  engage  in  discussions  on  marine  conservation  matters.    He  also 
indicated  that  the  United  Kingdom  does  not  accept  that  Mauritius  has  any  right  to  be 
consulted or to join in negotiations between the United Kingdom and the United States about 
the defence uses of the Chagos Archipelago.   

In a letter which  I subsequently addressed to the British Prime Minister on 06 July 
2015, I pointed out that a constructive engagement on the Chagos Archipelago issue would 
not be possible with discussions limited only to marine conservation.  I stressed that the issue 
of marine conservation should be addressed in the framework of a broader discussion on the 
Chagos  Archipelago,  having  regard  to  the  obligations  of  the  United  Kingdom  under 
international law, including UNCLOS, as recognised by the Award of the Arbitral Tribunal.  
I reiterated the stand of Mauritius that any action taken by the United Kingdom in connection 
with the defence uses of the Chagos Archipelago, including the UK-US agreement in respect 
of  the  Chagos  Archipelago  should  be  with  the  full  prior  involvement  and  consent  of 
Mauritius.    Mauritius  has  urged  that  its  rights  should  be  expressly  recognised  in  any 
continuation of the present agreement between the UK and the US in respect of the Chagos 
Archipelago.  I also underscored that the meeting proposed by the UK should be held without 
prejudice to either country’s position on sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago.  

Following a  further exchange of correspondence between Mauritius and the United 
Kingdom,  the  latter  agreed  to  the  holding  of  a  meeting  of  senior  officials  from  the  two 
countries on 09 November 2015 in London.  Another meeting was held on 11 May 2016 in 
Mauritius.  During these meetings, the following issues were discussed - 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

interpretation and implementation of the Award delivered by the Arbitral 
Tribunal in the case of Mauritius v United Kingdom; 

protection of the marine environment of the Chagos Archipelago; 

fishing rights of Mauritius; 

oil and mineral rights of Mauritius; 

 
(e) 

(f) 

(g) 

11 

resettlement; 

UK-US agreement in respect of the Chagos Archipelago; 

submission to be made by Mauritius to the Commission on the Limits of the 
Continental Shelf in respect of the Chagos Archipelago Region; 

(h)  maritime delimitation with the Maldives, and 

(i) 

the United Kingdom’s proposal for the establishment of a bilateral consultative 
mechanism on marine conservation in the Chagos Archipelago. 

Hardly any progress has been made in these two rounds of discussions in view of the 
differing  interpretations  of  the  Award  by  Mauritius  and  the  United  Kingdom.    Mauritius 
considers  that  the  ‘marine  protected  area’  purportedly  established  by  the  United  Kingdom 
around the Chagos Archipelago is without legal effect under international law and cannot be 
enforced; this view is not shared by the United  Kingdom.  Further, the United Kingdom’s 
interpretation of the Award is very, very narrow.   

These two rounds of discussions have been held without prejudice to the position of 
Mauritius and the United Kingdom on the issue of sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago, 
including UN General Assembly Resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, and to all the 
rights of either country under international law, including under the UN Charter. 

I also wish to point out that prior to the first round of discussions, we made it very 
clear to the UK side that since Mauritius does not recognise the so-called “BIOT”, it could 
not have any discussions with any representative of the so-called “BIOT”.  However, there 
could be discussions with officials from the UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office.  Hence, 
the UK delegation at the two rounds of discussions was led by Dr. Peter Hayes in his capacity 
of Director for Overseas Territories. 

Madam  Speaker,  immediately  before  the  meeting  of  senior  officials  held  last 
Wednesday in Mauritius, I saw Dr. Peter Hayes, Director for Overseas Territories at the UK 
Foreign and Commonwealth Office and Head of the UK delegation, in my Office.   

During that meeting, I pointed out that the United Kingdom had illegally excised the 
Chagos Archipelago from the territory of Mauritius prior to its accession to independence.  I 
also referred to the undertaking which the United Kingdom had given to Mauritius on several 
occasions, including during meetings which I have had with my British counterparts in the 
past, that the Chagos Archipelago would be returned to Mauritius when it would no longer be 

 

12 

needed for the defence of the West.  I mentioned that since the Cold War was over and the 
Soviet  Union  no  longer  existed,  the  UK  had  to honour  its  undertaking  and  could  not  now 
contend  that  the  Chagos  Archipelago  was  needed  to  fight  terrorism  and  piracy  as  they 
pretend.    I  stated  that  it  is  totally  unacceptable  for  the  UK  to  keep  coming  up  with  new 
excuses in order not to return the Chagos Archipelago to the effective control of Mauritius.  I 
underscored that if the UK were to honour its promise by returning the Chagos Archipelago 
to the effective control of Mauritius, this would contribute to completing the decolonisation 
process of Mauritius and would be a win-win situation for both countries.   

In  this  regard,  I  requested  that  the  Chagos  Archipelago  be  returned  by  the  United 
Kingdom  to  the  effective  control  of  Mauritius  by  a  precise  date  to  be  agreed  upon  and 
proposed  that  consideration  could  be  given  to  the  joint  management  of  the  Chagos 
Archipelago pending its return to Mauritius.  I asked for a reply to be given to my request by 
the end of June 2016, otherwise Mauritius would take appropriate action at the international 
level, including at the United Nations.  The need for a precise date to be set for the return of 
the  Chagos  Archipelago  to  the  effective  control  of  Mauritius  was  also  stressed  during  the 
bilateral talks last week. 

I wish to point out that during the meeting which I had with Dr. Hayes, I made it very, 
very clear that Mauritius does not have any objection to the continued use of Diego Garcia as 
a military base by the United States in the context of an agreement providing for the return of 
the Chagos Archipelago to the effective control of Mauritius by an agreed date.  I indicated to 
Dr. Hayes that Mauritius was even prepared to grant a sixty-year lease to the United States in 
respect of Diego Garcia, subject to the payment of a rent.   

As regards the resettlement of the Chagos Archipelago, I reiterated to Dr. Hayes our 
stand  that  it  is  only  with  the  Government  of  Mauritius  that  the  Government  of  the  United 
Kingdom can discuss that issue since it is the resettlement of Mauritian citizens which is at 
stake.  

Mauritius  has  conveyed  to  the  United  Kingdom  that  it  cannot,  on  the  basis  of  the 
ruling of the Arbitral Tribunal at paragraph 298 of its Award, take any internationally lawful 
decision  relating  to  resettlement  without  the  prior  involvement  and  consent  of  Mauritius.  
Mauritius  has  also  made  it  clear  that  it  cannot  participate  in  a  unilaterally  determined 
consultation  exercise  that  imposes  consultation  under  domestic  law.    The  consultation 
exercise purportedly carried out by the  UK Government also envisaged  resettlement under 

 

13 

conditions amounting, again, to a gross violation of the most basic human rights of Mauritian 
citizens of Chagossian origin.  

Madam Speaker, following the Award delivered  by the Arbitral Tribunal in the  case 
brought by Mauritius against the United Kingdom under UNCLOS, I have also written on 14 
April 2015 to the President of the United States to inform him of the Award and to urge him 
to contribute actively to a rapid settlement of the dispute between Mauritius and the United 
Kingdom over the Chagos Archipelago and an early return to full legality in accordance with 
international law.  I also expressed the expectation of Mauritius that it should be involved in 
any negotiations regarding the continued use of Diego Garcia for defence purposes beyond 
2016 in view of the Award of the Arbitral Tribunal. 

In the bilateral talks between Mauritius and the United Kingdom, Mauritius has asked 
the United  Kingdom to  invite the United States  to participate in trilateral  discussions with 
Mauritius and the United Kingdom.   

Moreover,  I urged the  United States, in my statement to the United  Nations General 
Assembly  last  October,  to  engage  in  discussions  with  Mauritius  regarding  the  long  term 
interest  of  Mauritius  in  respect  of  the  Chagos  Archipelago.    When  Dr.  Shannon  Smith, 
Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs called on the Secretary to Cabinet and 
Head of the Civil Service last November, the latter reiterated the invitation of Mauritius to the 
US to engage in discussions with Mauritius.   

When  Hon.  Linda  Thomas-Greenfield,  US  Assistant  Secretary  of  State  for  African 
Affairs,  called  on  me  last  January  during  her  visit  to  Mauritius,  I  conveyed  to  her  that 
Mauritius does not oppose the existence of a military base in Diego Garcia in the context of 
an  agreement  that  settles  once  and  for  all  the  issue  of  sovereignty  over  the  Chagos 
Archipelago.  

Madam Speaker, as the House will see, Government has not remained inactive since the 
first meeting of the Committee on Chagos Archipelago held under my chairmanship on 13 
April 2015. During that meeting, views were exchanged with a view to contributing to the 
development  of  a  strategy  by  Government  for  concrete  action  to  be  taken  at  the  earliest 
opportunity. 

Madam Speaker, in reply to part (b) of the question, I wish to inform the House that 
Government will continue to press for the early resolution of the dispute between Mauritius 

 

14 

and France over the Island of Tromelin, in the spirit of friendship and trust which has always 
characterised the relationship between our two countries. 

As  the  House  is  aware,  pending  the  settlement  of  the  sovereignty  dispute  between 
Mauritius and France over the Island of Tromelin, the two countries reached an agreement in 
2010 on the co-management of the Island of Tromelin, without prejudice to the sovereignty 
of Mauritius over the island. 

I  propose  to  take  up  the  issue  of  sovereignty  over  the  Island  of  Tromelin  with  the 

French President when I next meet him. 

However,  in  the  meantime,  I  have  had  the  opportunity  to  raise  the  issue  of  the 
sovereignty  over  the  Island  of  Tromelin  with  the  French  Ambassador  and  other  French 
dignitaries.   

When the President of the French National Assembly called on me last month, I urged 
for  the  early  resolution  of  the  issue  of  sovereignty  over  the  Island  of  Tromelin.    I  also 
informed  the  President  of  the  French  National  Assembly  that  Mauritius  might  have  to 
reconsider  its  position  if  the  French  authorities  do  not  show  greater  interest  in  moving 
forward  the  ratification  process  of  the  agreement  on  co-management  of  the  Island  of 
Tromelin in the French Parliament.   

Madam Speaker, I would like to reaffirm the commitment of my Government to ensure 
that the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Mauritius are fully respected and safeguarded. 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, I hope you will give us some time to put our questions. 
Before I move to the part of the question relating to the UN General Assembly to leave the 
issue of the arbitration pronouncement behind us, has Government, with its lawyers here and 
overseas from UK or elsewhere, looked at the possibility or advisability of going back to the 
Tribunal being given the way the UK is interpreting the pronouncement? 

The Prime Minister:  Well frankly, we have not discussed that because I don’t see the 
need of going back to UNCLOS.  The award is there. It is very clear.  UK is trying to play 
hide and seek with us and that is no reason for us to go to back to UNCLOS. 

Mr Bérenger:  If I can move on. Can I know whether the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has 
had the occasion of raising personally with Prime Minister Cameron and President Obama 
the  whole  issue  of  the  Chagos,  of  our  sovereignty  and  so  on,  especially  at  last  year’s 

 

15 

Commonwealth Summit in Malta at the retreat, whether the Rt. hon. Prime Minister had a 
chance to take that up one to one with Prime Minister Cameron? 

The Prime Minister:  In fact, I tried, but Cameron evaded all the time and I got the 

signal that he was unwilling to meet me and discuss this matter. 

Mr Bérenger:  The Rt. hon. Prime Minister has informed us that he is given dates and 
if we don’t have agreement by that date, by the end of June, if I heard correctly, the decision 
is to go to the General Assembly of the UN and then on to the International Court of Justice.  
Can I know - for the record especially because now we have moved further - why since the 
last elections there has been no attempt - it’s already more than a year back - to re-launch the 
2001 initiative which we took when the Prime  Minister was Prime Minister, which  I took 
with Foreign Minister Jack Straw, which he took with President Bush, and which I took again 
a year later with President Bush?  Why since the elections there has been no attempt to re-
launch that initiative? 

The Prime Minister:  Well, we didn’t re-launch that initiative because, in the light of 
the Award, we have tried to start negotiations with the findings of the Award. I can’t say how 
I could have taken other initiatives and other discussions with the Prime Minister or with the 
President of the United States. The President of the United States in the past, when I met him 
and I discussed the matter, all the time their excuse was: “Look, we have an agreement with 
UK.  We can’t deal with you, you must deal with UK!” That has always been their stand. 

Mr Bérenger: Now, we have been told that if agreement is not reached -and I hope it 
is reached - by a given date, we are going to the General Assembly and on to the International 
Court  of  Justice.  This  needs  a  lot  of  preparation  and  planning.  Can  I  know  whether 
Government is targeting the General Assembly of this year or the General Assembly of next 
year? 

The Prime Minister: Of this year! 

Mr Bérenger: This year! 

The Prime Minister: That’s why I have given time limit - end of June. 

Mr Bérenger: Yes, but the problem is that at the level of the United Nations, to get it 
on  the  agenda  of  the  United  Nations  General  Assembly  is  not  that  easy.  Can  I  know, 
therefore, whether - if the target is the General Assembly of this year – we have approached 
the present Chairperson of the General Assembly, because this is essential? 

 
The Prime Minister: Our representative there is doing the needful and I also raised 

16 

the matter with the Secretary-General of the United Nations when he was visiting us here. 

Mr Bérenger: There was reference made to the Committee set up on 20 March 2015 
with Parliamentarians of all the parties. We met twice and now we hear no more.  We did not 
achieve anything and now we hear absolutely nothing. The Committee has not met for many, 
many months. Can I know what is the intention of the hon. Prime Minister? 

The Prime Minister: Well, we are taking the necessary steps. I have explained in my 
answer and I see no need for such a meeting at this stage. When the need will require, we will 
certainly meet? 

Mr Bérenger: Does the hon. Prime Minister plan, whilst this process is taking place 
at the United Nations, to meet personally with both the UK Prime Minister and the outgoing 
President, President Obama of the United States? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I have not made any attempt insofar as the President of 
the United States is concerned, but the Prime Minister of UK, I have said, he does not want to 
meet me and discuss this matter. So, how can I? 

Mr Bérenger: If I can move on to the Tromelin issue. I was a bit surprised to hear 
and I want to clarify that point because the previous Government had signed an Agreement 
with  France  for  cogestion  of  Tromelin,  but  the  previous  Government  withdrew  and  as  the 
Prime Minister is aware, asked President Hollande to forget about that, now, we are going for 
sovereignty. Now, when I listened to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, I have the impression that 
the issue of cogestion is again on. I think I heard the hon. Prime Minister say that he will 
insist that the procedures be done for the ratification of that Agreement which has already 
been  ratified  by  Mauritius,  but  which  is  before  the  French  Assembly.  So,  is  that  idea  of 
cogestion still on in spite of the fact that the previous Government had turned a page on that? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I have said when I answered the PNQ. Being given our 
friendly relations with France, we are trying by all means to have a friendly settlement of this 
matter. Since this question of cogestion has been ratified by Mauritius, it has to be ratified by 
the Assembly in France which they have not done and I have made it very clear that if they 
don’t do it within a certain time, then we will consider that this cogestion is no longer on and 
we will take other steps that will be necessary. 

Mr  Bérenger:  I  am  sure  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  is  aware  that,  in  fact,  the 
previous  Government  told  the  French  side  not  to  move  ahead  with  ratification  of  that 

 

17 

Agreement by the National Assembly of France. Can I have confirmation that we have gone 
back on that, now we are canvassing again for cogestion although we gave notice to France 
that this is behind us? 

The Prime Minister: Well, if that were so, when I talked to the French people they 
would have told us that: “Your Government does not want us to go forward.” But they did 
not  tell  me  that.  They  have  said  that  they  had  certain  problems,  that  is  why  it  had  been 
delayed and they are trying to get it through. But, I have pointed out to them that we can’t 
wait indefinitely. 

Mr Bérenger:  The hon. Prime Minister will allow me to point out that it seems we 
have  been  misled  because  of  the  Président  of  the  French  Assembly,  Mr  Bartolomé,  who 
called on the Prime Minister, as he informed us. But it seems he is not aware that the former 
Prime Minister of Mauritius informed President Hollande that we are no longer requesting for 
- it is on record and the hon. Prime Minister referred to that when he replied to my PNQ. This 
is on record and, therefore, why are we going back with the issue? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I am not aware that the previous Government has taken 

such a step. 

Mr  Bérenger:  In  reference  to  the  Prime  Minister’s  reply  to  my  PNQ,  we  better 
double-check. If I can ask a last question, last but one as usual; when we discussed Tromelin 
here, on 26 February 2005, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister said that,  yes, he will discuss that 
with the President of Madagascar, the issue of Mauritius claiming sovereignty over Tromelin 
and Madagascar claiming sovereignty over the four other so-called îles Éparses. Now, can I 
know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he has discussed that with the President of 
Madagascar, especially being given that he was in Mauritius the 12 March last year? 

The Prime Minister: Well, no. I didn’t discuss that. 

Mr  Mohamed:  Madam  Speaker,  may  I  ask  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  since  we 
have heard that the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom is giving him the runaround and 
does  not  want  to  meet  and  since  we  have  also  clearly  heard  from  all  Prime  Ministers  in 
history that Mauritius clearly does not recognise the BIOT, why is it, therefore, that the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister, in spite of Mauritius not recognising the BIOT, has decided to receive 
and meet with Dr. Peter Hayes, whom if I am not mistaken, is a Commissioner of the BIOT? 
Would this not, therefore, in itself implicitly recognise the BIOT by giving audience to the 
Commissioner of the BIOT? 

18 

 
The Prime Minister: I made it clear that we made it very clear, we don’t recognise 
BIOT, we are not going to discuss with BIOT. This person is from the Foreign Office and he 
has come with a delegation of the British Government. 

Mr Ganoo: Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, with regard to the announcement 
that he has just made of the eventuality of going before the  International Court of Justice, 
whether  we  have  already  sought  advice  from  our  lawyers  and  are  they  agreeable  to  this 
course? 

The Prime Minister: Yes, definitely. We are all along consulting our lawyers here 

and one who is in UK. 

Mr Bérenger: I am sure there have been consultations. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister is 
aware that if we do reach the International Court of Justice, we will have only an advisory 
ruling.  I  don’t  know  if  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  has  looked  at  the  number  of  advisory 
rulings that have piled up in the past, Palestine, Sahara, name it, to no effect.  Therefore, can I 
ask  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  whilst  he  will  prepare  for  that  action  -  it  must  be  well 
prepared  -  will  he  agree  with  me  that  urgently  he  should  write  anew  to  both  of  them  to 
explain what we are doing and also seek appointments with both the Prime Minister and the 
President on that issue? 

The Prime Minister: Well, that is the only course that is opened to us. I would like to 
know  from  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  what  other  course  there  is.  I  know  that  the 
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice will not be binding. But, it will have a 
moral effect on UK and in the United Nations, other countries also will make use of that and 
we,  in  every  other  forum,  wherever  we  will  go,  we  will  raise  this  matter  and  we  will  do 
British bashing on this. They pretend to be freedom lovers, fighters of democracy and justice, 
but to me it seems, their philosophy is: Might Is Right! 

Madam Speaker: No other question, hon. Leader of the Opposition? Time is over! 
Questions  addressed  to  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister!  Hon.  Members,  the  Table  has  been 
advised that Parliamentary Question No. B/409 with regard to the construction of the market 
of Central Flacq will now be replied by the hon. Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land 
Transport. Hon. Sesungkur!  

 

MONTAGNE BLANCHE & GRSE - DRUGS PROLIFERATION 

19 

 
(No. B/395) Mr D. Sesungkur  (First Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to drugs, he  will state if he  has been made aware of an increase in the 
proliferation thereof in Constituency No. 10, Montagne Blanche and Grand River South East 
and,  if  so,  will  he,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Commissioner  of  Police, 
information as to the – 

(a)  

additional measures that will be taken, if any, to curb the incidence thereat, 
and  

(b)  

number of arrests effected in connection therewith, over the past two years. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police 
that the number of illegal drug cases detected by Police in Constituency No. 10, Montagne 
Blanche and Grand River South East over the past two years is as follows - 

(i) 

(ii) 

87 cases in 2014; 

87 cases in 2015, and 

(iii) 

35 cases from January to 12 May 2016. 

In regard to part (a) of the question, I am also informed that in line with the strategic 
objectives 2015-2018, the following additional measures are being implemented to fight the 
drug scourge – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

launching of intelligence-led operations known as “Knock & Roar” aimed at 
keeping  habitual  criminals  and  those  frequently  engaged  in  unlawful  drug 
activities under strict watch; 

conducting  periodical  crack  down  operations  at  places  where  illegal  drugs 
were previously seized; 

posting of young motivated Police Officers in the ADSU with a view to better 
sensitising youngsters and also to infiltrate any nexus in that age group, and 

(d) 

the extensive use of Facebook for sensitisation of the population. 

In regard to part (b) of the question, I am further informed by Police that over the past 

two years, 115 persons were arrested in 111 cases. 

20 

 
Mr Sesungkur: Madam Speaker, the nation is grateful to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
for the courageous battle he is waging against drugs. Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to 
see to it that the ADSU multiplies its interventions in that region? 

Madam Speaker: The ADSU multiplies its interventions in the region. 

The Prime Minister: I have just said of the steps that have been taken. If there are 

other new ideas that may come up, we will try to put into practice. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister mentioned 
that  usual  drugs  traffickers  are  being  tracked,  but  now  the  scenario  has  changed  with  the 
incoming of synthetic drug which is being home-made by people who have basic knowledge 
of chemistry, which is cheap and which is being, even in some places, marketed, let alone in 
Constituency No. 10, on a door to door basis… 

Madam Speaker: Don’t make a statement! Please, ask your question! 

Mr  Mahomed:  What  is  being  done  in  the  light  of  these  new  developments  in  the 

sector? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I entirely agree that synthetic drug is more threatening 
now and it has become very common even with youngsters, kids going to school; as the hon. 
Member mentioned it is being home-made. Now, can I have a Police officer in each house in 
this country to keep watch on all the youngsters? 

Mr Ganoo: But, in fact, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister should have read one of today’s 
papers where it has been mentioned that in a school, school kids have been found with drugs. 
Can  I  ask  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  to  see  to  it  that  the  authorities  target  la  population 
estudiantine  so  that  we  can  organise  sensitisation  campaigns  within  school  premises  with 
regard  to  the  scourge  and  the  devastating  effect  of  synthetic  drug,  as  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister himself just mentioned? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  I  will  pass  it  on  to  the  Commissioner  of  Police.  But  I 
must say that the authorities may take whatever steps, sensitisation as much as we can, but 
the responsibility of parents to me is first and foremost. Parents should know how to educate 
their children and sensitise them that drugs are something that will be killing in the long term 
and make the children conscious of the danger of using drugs. 

Madam Speaker: Last question, hon. Fowdar! 

21 

 
Mr  Fowdar:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  In  Goodlands,  we  have  seen  that  many 
Police raids fail because the drug traffickers seem to have knowledge of the timing of the 
raid.  Can  I  ask  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  whether  he  will  request  the  Commissioner  of 
Police to do a sort of reshuffling within the ADSU team? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I will ask the Commissioner of Police to see to it. I don’t 
know whether the information goes from the side of the Police. But one thing that I have been 
told is in certain Cités, there are people who are being trained, they are called martins… 

(Interruptions) 

So, they are placed all along and any arrival of the Police is signalled, message is sent and 
Police raid is a complete failure. But this is also where society, where people should also be 
sensitised that they should not allow themselves to be used as martins. 

 

PRIVATE SECURITY SERVICES – REGISTERED FIRMS 

(No. B/396) Mr D. Sesungkur (First Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to the private security services, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain 
from the Commissioner of Police, information as to the number of – 

(a)  

(b)  

(c)  

persons presently registered to perform the duties of security guard; 

firms presently registered to offer security guard services, and  

reported cases of breach of the Private Security Service Act, if any, over the 
past four years, indicating the actions taken in relation thereto. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, in regard to parts (a) and (b) of the question, I 
am informed by the Commissioner of Police that as at to date, 6,433 persons are registered to 
perform duties of security guard as per section 7 of the Private Security Service Act 2004, 
and 35 firms are registered to offer private security services as per section 4(1) of the Private 
Security Service Act 2004. 

As for part (c) of the question, I am informed that from 2012 to date, 119 persons and 

 
11 firms have been booked for offences under the Private Security Act.   

Action taken in the different cases is as follows - 

22 

in 21 cases, the accused were fined; 

 
(i) 

(ii) 

in six cases, the accused obtained absolute discharge; 

(iii) 

one case has been dismissed by Court; 

(iv) 

one case has been struck out by Court; 

(v) 

three cases are awaiting Court action; 

(vi) 

70 cases are still under enquiry; 

(vii) 

the DPP has advised no further action in 15 cases; 

(viii) 

in ten cases, caution has been administered upon DPP’s advice, and 

(ix) 

in three cases, the accused have passed away. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that the Private Security Service Act is 
currently  being  reviewed  with  a  view  to  introducing  new  provisions  for,  inter  alia,  better 
control  over  the  licences  of  private  security  services,  registration  of  security  guards  and 
setting up of training institutions for trainers.  It is also envisaged to put an upper age limit for 
persons willing to perform duties of security guard.  Consultations with stakeholders on the 
review of the Act are ongoing. 

Mr Baloomoody:  The Rt. hon. Prime Minister has just given a list of the accused.  
May  we  know  how  many  companies  the  licence  has  been  revoked  in  breach  of  the  Act 
because all these accused are working for a company? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I do not have the answer.  Since they have already been 
fined by the Court, I do not think there has been revocation of any licence. I hope I am right 
in what I am saying. 

 

LOTTOTECH - REVENUE COLLECTED – CONSOLIDATED FUND 

(No. B/397) Mr D. Sesungkur (First Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether,  in  regard  to  the  Lottotech,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the 
Gambling Regulatory Authority, for each of the years 2012 to date, information as to the – 

(a)  

total amount of -  

 

(i)  

(ii)  

23 

betting intake, and  

revenue  collected 
Consolidated Fund, and  

therefrom  which  have  been  credited 

to 

the 

(b)   measures that are being taken to discourage betting and gambling. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am tabling the information requested in parts 
(a)  (i)  as  regards  total  amount  of  betting  intake  and  (a)  (ii),  in  respect  of  total  amount  of 
revenue collected, therefrom, which have been credited to the Consolidated Fund. 

As regards part (c) of the question, I wish to remind the House that my Government 

 
has taken a series of measures, since 2015, for discouraging betting and gaming, namely – 

(i) 

(ii) 

 (iii) 

(iv) 

there is a total ban on scratch cards: all scratch cards were removed from the 
market by 30 June 2015; 

advertising  to  promote  gambling  activities  has  been  proscribed:  only 
information regarding results can be communicated to the public;  

the gaming licence fees and betting taxes have been increased substantially, as 
stipulated in  the 2015/2016 Budget, and 

the relocation of all gaming houses from city centres to approved designated 
areas, is in process.  

 
In  addition,  I  am  informed  that  the  Gambling  Regulatory  Authority  has  already 
prepared  a  Roadmap  on  responsible  gambling  and  will  shortly  embark  on  a  sensitisation 
programme for the general public and youth, in particular.  

Mr  Uteem:  The  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  just  mentioned  about  the  advertisement 
which is banned. But wouldn’t he agree that despite the ban on advertising, every radio, every 
week continues to incite people to play by saying that the cagnotte a augmenté and, therefore, 
would  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  see  to  it  that  there  is  a  complete  blackout  on  all 
information relating to Lotto, so as not to incite people to gamble if there are no winners in 
one week? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I also listen to the radio, and what I have been listening is 

that they give the result - the numbers - and then they say what is the amount at stake. 

Well, world over, I understand it is like this. 

(Interruptions) 

24 

 
Mr Ameer Meea: The Rt. hon. Prime Minister just stated that the relocation process 
is ongoing.  May I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether sites have already been identified, 
where are they going to be and what is the time frame because it has been more than a year 
that this has been announced and, until now, nothing has been done. 

The Prime Minister: I will ask the hon. Member to come with a specific question on 

that. 

POLICE - COUNTER TERRORISM UNIT - OFFICERS 

(No.  B/398)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to the Counter Terrorism Unit, he will for the benefit of the House, obtain 
from the Commissioner of Police, information as to the – 

(a)  

number of officers presently attached thereto, indicating;  

(i)  

(ii)  

in each case, the date of appointment and grade thereof, and  

if any one thereof has benefitted from any scholarship and, if so, give 
details thereof, and  

(b)  

actions  being  taken  for  the  upgrading  thereof  in  terms  of  manpower  and 
equipment. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  as  regards  part  (a)  (i)  of  the  question,  the 

information cannot be disclosed in view of the sensitivity of the issue. 

In  regard  to  part  (a)  (ii)  of  the  question,  a  training  programme  for  the  Counter 

Terrorism Unit is ongoing.  So far, four officers of the Unit have attended training abroad.  

As for part (b) of the question, the Government Programme 2015-2019 provides for a 
re-organisation of the Counter Terrorism Unit together with new mandates.  In this respect, a 
Committee has been set up at the level of my Office to look into the upgrading thereof.   

BETTING – LICENCE - ISSUE 

(No.  B/399)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to betting, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Gambling 

 

25 

Regulatory  Authority,  information  as  to  the  number  of  the  new  operators  who  have  been 
issued with a licence therefor since January 2015 to date, in respect of – 

(a)  

(b)  

(c)  

horse racing;  

football match, both overseas and local, and  

other types thereof, indicating in each case the  

(i)  

name and address of the licence holder thereof, and  

(ii)  

terms and conditions thereof. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  with  your  permission,  I  shall  reply  to 
Parliamentary Question B/399 and Parliamentary Question B/405 together.  I am advised that 
except for Grand’Baie Casino Ltd which has been granted its operator’s licence in June 2016 
and a licence to operate 50 gaming machines in February 2016, no licences have been issued 
to any new operator. However, I wish to inform the House that licences have been issued by 
the Gambling Regulatory Authority to firstly correct injustices and establish a level playing 
field  among  existing  licensees  and  secondly,  to    reinstate    some  licences  following  legal 
advice and after obtaining the necessary clearances. 

A football licence to conduct fixed odds betting on foreign football matches, for one 
principal place of business plus 8 outlets, has been issued to SMS Pariaz Ltd on 14 December 
2015.  SMS  Pariaz  Ltd  was  the  only  major  operator  that  had  been  deprived  of  a  football 
licence, despite the fact that a thorough evaluation process on 9 companies had been carried 
out in January 2013, wherein the company topped the list and was found fully eligible for 
obtaining a football licence. 

The  present  Board  of  the  Gambling  Regulatory  Authority  acted  in  the  light  of 
Government’s  decision  dated  16 October  2015  whereby  authorisation  was  given  to  issue 
licences to correct injustices and establish a level playing field among existing licensees.  

Along  the  same  line,  licences  for  new  outlets  have  been  issued  to  other  existing 

licensees, namely Bosco & Co Ltd, Silversports and Value Plus Ltd. 

I  also  wish  to  inform  that  the  licences  of  Empowering  People  Ltd,  Ashley  Singh 

Jankee and Louis Jocelyn Lee Shim have been reinstated. The details are as follows -  

The licence of Empowering People Ltd was revoked, on 29 July 2011, on grounds of 
 
non-payment  of  unclaimed  winnings  to  the  National  Solidarity  Fund.  The  company  had 

 

26 

settled its dues to the National Solidarity Fund on 08 April 2011, 46 days after notification by 
the Gambling Regulatory Authority.  

Following  the  revocation  of  its  licence,  the  company  applied  for  leave  for  Judicial 
Review in front of the Supreme Court.  On 25 September 2012, the Supreme Court granted 
leave to Empowering People  Ltd to apply  for a  judicial review against the decision of the 
Gambling Regulatory Authority, on the basis as  

to whether this decision was based on the principle of reasonableness and proportionality. 

Thereafter, the Counsel of the Gambling Regulatory Authority appearing in this case, 
Me Antoine Domingue, advised the present Board, on 07 December 2015, to reconsider the 
decision of the former Board.  

His  advice  was  based  on  the  judgment,  in  the  case  on  the  application  of  Daly  v/s 
Secretary of State for Home Department [2001] UKHL 26, as expounded by Lord Steyn. Me 
Domingue advised as follows - 

“Applying the ‘Daly template’ to the facts of the present matter I am in no doubt that 
the  right  balance  was  not  struck  by  the  previous  Gambling  Regulatory  Authority 
Board  when  it  decided  to  revoke  the  applicant’s  licence.  I  view  such  decision  as 
arbitrary and excessive in the circumstances, as it falls foul of the rule that the means 
used  to  impair  the  right  should  be  no  more  than  is  necessary  to  accomplish  the 
objective.    I  find  arbitrary  and  excessive  in  the  circumstances  to  have  inflicted  the 
ultimate  sanction  upon  the  licensee  and  its  employees  and  has  to  all  intents  and 
purposes imposed a ‘death penalty’ when a 50,000 rupee fine would have sufficed in 
the circumstances to accomplish the objective of ensuring that a peripheral condition 
of the licence should be complied which is incidental and peripheral to the regulation 
and control of the applicant’s gambling activity.” 

Me Antoine Domingue, further, opined that the Board would be well advised to – 

“(i)  reconsider  the  earlier  impugned  decision  of  the  previous  Board  to  revoke  the 
licence;  (ii)  consider  the  reinstatement  of  the  applicant’s  licence,  in  terms  of  the 
applicant’s letter dated 9 November 2015; and (iii) consider whether the imposition of 
a fine of Rs50,000 rupees under Section 99(9) of the Act would accomplish the policy 
and objectives of the Act.” 

27 

 
In  view  of  the  above,  the  Gambling  Regulatory  Authority  sought  advice  from  an 
independent Law Firm, namely Legis Consult, on the way forward and, on 13 April 2016, the 
advice of the latter was as follows - 

“I am of the view that the Gambling Regulatory Authority may accept the payment of 
the penalty fee by Empowering People Ltd which payment would be in compliance 
with the decision of the Gambling Regulatory Authority as conveyed to the Court on 
03 March 2016”. 

 
Following that advice, the Gambling Regulatory Authority Board decided to reinstate 
the licence of Empowering People Ltd for one principal place of business and 5 outlets only 
and imposed the payment of a fine of 50,000 rupees under Section (99)9 of the Act. 

The  Bookmakers  licences  of  Messrs  Ashley  Singh  Jankee  and  Louis  Jocelyn  Lee 
Shim  were  reinstated  after  the  Mauritius  Turf  Club  and  the  Mauritius  Revenue  Authority 
provided  the  necessary  clearances.  The  decision  of  the  Gambling  Regulatory  Authority 
regarding  these  Bookmakers  was  in  line  with  Government  Decision  of  16  October  2015, 
whereby  authorisation  was  given  to  consider  the  re-establishment  of  the  licences  of 
bookmakers, who could not renew their licences within the prescribed time frame for reasons 
beyond their control. 

Mr Bhagwan: I listened carefully to the long reply of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
regarding the legal advice of lawyers. Can I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether 
his Senior Adviser at his office, Mr Beekarry, is the one who defended these files at the level 
of  the  GRA  using  the  name  of  the  Prime  Minister  and  he  was  mandated  by  the  Prime 
Minister to defend these cases at the level of the GRA Board? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I am not aware that my Adviser was Defence Counsel.  

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhagwan: Not only Defence Counsel… 

(Interruptions) 

…he is the Defence Counsel of the financier of the MSM. In the Budget Speech of 2015, at 
paragraph 187 – “Nation Zougadère”, Government clearly defines the policy as follows –  

“(...)  a  total  ban  on  issue  of  new  gaming  and  betting  licences  except  for 
casinos, for a period of five years.” 

 

28 

Can I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister how does he reconcile the fact that Government 
took  a  decision  to  ban  the  issue  of  new  gaming  licence  concerning  “Nation  Zougadère” 
which they have campaigned during the election and now permits are given to one financier 
of the MSM, Mr Lee Shim, who is well-known, and also to the company of PPS Boygah after 
the saga of the Barachois? 

The Prime Minister: Well, whatever may be our policy, we have to abide by legal 
advice and we can’t go against legal advice because if we go against legal advice and if the 
party were to take us to Court, we would have had no stand to defend. 

Mr Ramful: Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to confirm that the decision of the 
Privy Council was to grant leave to Empowering People Limited to challenge the decision of 
the  GRA  on  the  merits  and  as  a  result  of  the  GRA’s  decision  to  grant  the  licence 
straightaway, the matter did not go on merits before the Supreme Court?  

The Prime Minister: Well, I have just said. The GRA has acted according to legal 

advice obtained.  

Mr Bhagwan: We all know that the GRA is chaired by a former MSM candidate, 
Lawyer Raouf Gulbul.  Will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister query whether when the case of Mr 
Lee Shim was discussed at the level of the GRA, Mr Gulbul declared his interest. I have in 
my hand - I’ll circulate - a judgement of the Supreme Court where Mr Gulbul was the lawyer 
of ‘SMS Pariaz’.  In that Board, did he declare his interest? 

(Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister: Well, I don’t know whether Mr Gulbul was present, whether he 

took part, unless I get the necessary information. 

(Interruptions) 

Well, the answer is yes, he did not take part.  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! Hon. Bhagwan, you stand up and ask your question! 

Mr Bhagwan: I circulated a judgement of the Supreme Court and I ask the Rt. hon. 

Prime Minister to have a look at that judgement. One last question, Madam Speaker? 

Madam Speaker: Yes, it is your question. 

(Interruptions) 

 
Mr Bhagwan: Qui arrivé? To Avocat toi? 

29 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: To ene zavocat toi! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan, please address the Chair and ask your question!  

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Bhagwan address the Chair and ask you question! 

(Interruptions) 

Order please! Order! 

Mr Bhagwan: Can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister at least inform the House what action 
he intends to take in the public interest against the two persons at the head of the GRA, one 
former MSM candidate, Lawyer Gulbul and his chief adviser who is dealing in the day-to-
day process of the GRA, as if they are the owners of the GRA and they are the agents of the 
MSM instead of Government representatives?  

The Prime Minister: I just answered. I must make it clear that when I said yes, that 

Gulbul didn’t participate. 

He didn’t. 

(Interruptions) 

 Now, about this last question, what shall I say?  

Gulbul ... 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please! Hon. Bhagwan, please mind your language! 

Hon. Bhagwan!  

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Bhagwan, I am talking to you! There should be no threat in this House! 

 

No threat, please!  

30 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister: Well, I would like to point out that Mr Gulbul was a former 

member of the MMM. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: It is your question? It is not your question. It is the question of hon. 

Bhagwan and hon. Ramful! Okay. Hon. Ramful! 

Mr Ramful: May I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister who were the Counsels 

appearing for Empowering People Ltd during the negotiations with the GRA?  

The Prime Minister: Who were the Counsels, I don’t know! Come with a specific 

question! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan: Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea! Please! You know,  I have to decide on who 
asks the questions.  There are two hon. Members who have asked the question, hon. Bhagwan 
and hon. Ramful. Priority is for them and if ever time permits, then  you will be given the 
floor, otherwise you won’t be given the floor. 

Dr. Sorefan: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister said as per 
section 191, total ban, very good, and he said there is no new licences. May I know from the 
Rt. hon. Prime Minister, we have been hearing empowerment, how come we have a betting 
company with the name of Empowering Betting Ltd? 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan, please, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister will not be 

able to answer this question. I don’t think this question is admissible. 

(Interruptions) 

Dr. Sorefan: The word! 

Madam Speaker: Sorry, this question is not admissible. Yes, hon. Rutnah! 

 

31 

Mr Rutnah: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister be kind 

enough to provide to the House a list… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No. The hon. Member can’t question me because I am giving in 

turn. I know… 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, I know whose turn it is and nobody can decide in my place. 

(Interruptions) 

Did you say if that suits me? Did you say?  

(Interruptions) 

You have to withdraw this! Hon. Mohamed, withdraw this! 

 (Interruptions) 

Did you withdraw? 

Mr Mohamed: I said if you feel offended, I am withdrawing. 

Madam Speaker: You have to withdraw! 

Mr Mohamed: I am doing it.  

Madam Speaker: Yes. 

Mr Mohamed: Good. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, I give each Member a chance to ask a question 

and each Member in turn. You cannot decide on this! I decide on this! 

Mr Rutnah: Can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister table a list of licences that have been 
granted to all operators since 2000 to 2014 so that we can ascertain whether licences were 
granted on a political bias basis by the last Government? 

The Prime Minister: I will certainly do that. 

Madam Speaker: Time is over! The Table has been advised that PQ Nos. B/409 and 
B/410 have been withdrawn. The Table has also been advised that PQ No. B/431 in regard to 

 

32 

Les  Salines  Waterfront  Development  (Neotown)  Project  will  now  be  replied  by  the  hon. 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External Communications.  

FLACQ - MARKET - CONSTRUCTION 

(No. B/409) Mr R. Dayal (First Member for Flacq & Bon Accueil) asked the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to 
the construction of the market of Central Flacq by the National Development Unit, he will 
state the - 

(a)  

(b)  

(c)  

(d)  

cost thereof;  

procurement method used therefor;  

name of the contractor therefor, and  

variation costs, if any, indicating the reasons therefor. 

(Withdrawn) 

LALLMATIE - MARKET - CONSTRUCTION 

(No. B/410) Mr R. Dayal (First Member for Flacq & Bon Accueil) asked the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to 
the construction of the market of Lallmatie by the National Development Unit, he will state if 
- 

(a)  

(b)  

a prior planning exercise had been carried out in relation to the site inasmuch 
as vehicular access thereto is difficult, and  

provision has been made for proper ventilation and lighting thereat and, if not, 
why not. 

(Withdrawn) 

FLACQ DISTRICT COUNCIL  

- BEL AIR MARKET FAIR & CAPITAL PROJECTS 

(No. B/411) Mr D. Sesungkur (First  Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) 
asked the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the Flacq District Council, he 

 

33 

will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  therefrom,  information  as  to  the  total  amount  of 
funds allocated thereto for the financial year 2015/2016 for capital projects, indicating - 

(a) 

the number and value of the projects completed as at to date, and  

(b)   where matters stand as regards the construction of the Bel Air Market Fair. 

Dr.  Husnoo:  Madam  Speaker,  with  your  permission,  I  shall  arrange  for  the 
information  requested  for  at  part  (a)  of  the  question  to  be  placed  in  the  Library  of  the 
National Assembly. The total amount allocated by the way is Rs12,500,000.  

With regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed by the District Council of Flacq 
that the project for the construction of a market fair on a site near the Bel Air State Secondary 
School was at a design stage at the Ministry of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport. I am 
given to understand that the project has been kept in abeyance as there are diverging views 
between  the  Village  Council  of  Bel  Air,  the  Force  Vives  and  the  Members  of  the 
Constituency on the choice of the site.  

I  am  informed  that  several  site  visits  have  been  effected  to  identify  an  appropriate 

location but as at date none has been finalised. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Sesungkur! 

Mr  Sesungkur:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  I  am  sure  the  hon.  Minister  must  be 
aware of the plight of the inhabitants of Bel Air and the surrounding areas that this problem 
has been there for quite a while, for a number of years. I would like to have from the hon. 
Minister a timeframe as to when this project is expected to be completed. 

Dr. Husnoo: Exactly. Madam Speaker, firstly, I did not want to impose a site on the 
villagers  myself.  I  thought  it  was  better  for  me  to  leave  it  to  the  local  councillors,  to  the 
Member of Parliament in that particular area to decide. But, if eventually, they cannot agree 
on a site, I will have to decide on something but, I think it is better for me to give them the 
chance to decide because they know the local situation better than I do. Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Bhagwan! 

MRS S. A. - DEMISE - INQUIRY 

(No.  B/412)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to Mrs S. A. who resided 
at  Colonel  Barkly,  in  Beau  Bassin,  he  will  state  if  consideration  will  be  given  for  the 

 

34 

advisability  of  setting  up  an  independent  inquiry  to  be  presided  by  a  Senior  Magistrate 
following her demise on 25 April 2016 after having attended hospital on several occasions for 
treatment. 

Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, it is not considered advisable to set up an independent 

enquiry presided by a Senior Magistrate.  

I wish to inform the House that, further to the statement I made on 03 May 2016 on 
this issue, my Ministry carried out an in-depth independent enquiry to look into the case of 
late patient Mrs S. A.  

The enquiry panel was mandated to - 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

determine whether there has been any act of medical negligence in the 
management of the case of late Mrs S. A.; 
look into the processes involved at the level of the laboratory and records 
department to determine whether the results of the biopsy were delivered in a 
timely manner; 
identify all shortcomings, make recommendations and propose disciplinary 
measures, if any, and 
look into the issue of request for SAMU services. 

(d) 
The panel was composed of the following officers, namely - 

Dr. I. Nawoor, acting Regional Health Director, SSRN Hospital; 
Dr. A. M. Keenoo, Consultant-In-Charge, General Surgery, SSRN Hospital;  

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii)  Dr. A. Mohith, Consultant Oncology, Victoria Hospital;  
(iv)  Mr K. Puddoo, Assistant Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Health and Quality 

of Life, and  

(v)  Mrs R. Rampat, Assistant Manager, Human Resources, SSRN hospital.  

The  Enquiry  Committee  met  all  the  parties  directly  concerned  with  the  case  including  the 
relatives of late patient Mrs S. A.  

In its report, the Committee has concluded that - 

(i) 
(ii) 

there is no evidence of medical negligence in the management of the case; 
the processing of the specimens at the Central Health Laboratory, Candos, was 
within the normal time frame and internationally accepted time frame (2 to 3 
weeks); 

 
(iii) 

35 

both histopathological results were received by the treating doctors, that is, the 
surgeon and the oncologist in a timely manner (within 2 to 3 weeks), and  
the SAMU services responded appropriately as per established protocol. 

(iv) 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Madam  Speaker,  since  I  am  sure  the  hon.  Minister  is  aware  of  the 
public uproar concerning this case of the death of late Mrs S. A., would he ask the Medical 
Officers  to  enquire  upon  themselves  within  what  happened  at  the  level  of  the  Ministry  of 
Health and Quality of Life, I think the population and the people of the region will not accept 
this. Can I ask, again, the hon. Minister - if he has nothing, if the Ministry has nothing to hide 
- if he is agreeable again to consider the request of asking a Senior Magistrate to look into all 
the issues since Mrs S. A. first attended hospital and the time she was not given an ambulance 
of the service of the SAMU? 

Mr  Gayan:  Madam  Speaker,  it  is  important  that  I  make  it  very  clear  that  the 
Members  of  the  Committee  were  not  doctors  of  the  hospital  where  she  was  being  treated. 
They were all from another hospital. One is the Ag. Regional Head Director and there was 
also  a  consultant  in  charge,  senior  officers  and  I  believe  that  they  have  done  what  was 
expected of them.  But I must say also I am not aware of any uproar, but I do know that… 

Well, if you listen to radio, you will think that this country has already gone to the dogs. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Gayan:    Well,  anyway  we  are  not  protecting  any  cluster.  Let  me  say,  Madam 
Speaker, that this is a sad case because in November 2013, that particular lady attended the 
Dr.  A.  G.  Jeetoo  Hospital  in  the  Accident  and  Emergency.    She  was  given  treatment  in 
November  2013  and  in  January  2014,  and  then  she  was  given  an  appointment  to  be 
reassessed within three months and she didn’t attend the hospital.  It was only on 29 January 
2016, that is, more than 18 months after she had been expected at the hospital that she turned 
up.  These are the records that I have in my file. 

Mr Bérenger:  I read very carefully the statement from the hon. Minister himself.  It is 
shocking  the  way  that  cancer  patient  was  treated.    I  don’t  find  another  word.    Really 
shocking! When you read what the hon. Minister himself said, the sequence of events.  Now, 

 

36 

Government is not prepared to have an independent enquiry into that case, so that this does 
not repeat itself.  I am sure the hon. Minister is aware that cancer patients go through hell 
including in that case.  Therefore, since Government refuses to have an independent enquiry 
from a Senior Magistrate or whoever it is; will the hon. Minister, at least - so that we can look 
at it, have expert advice and take action - lay a copy of the report from that panel on the Table 
of the National Assembly? 

Mr Gayan:  Well, I have no difficulty in doing that.  I will certainly do it in the course 
of the day. But let me say also, Madam Speaker, that it is because I am fully aware of the 
plight  of  the  cancer  patients  that  I  have,  since  assuming  office,  been  fighting  for  a  new 
Cancer Unit to be set up. We are in the process of finalising at least the first phase of the 
works and we are also rushing to expedite the second phase of work so that we have adequate 
facilities  for  all  the  people  who  suffer,  unfortunately,  from  cancer.    I  believe  that  we  are 
doing whatever we can, but we are in a system where the procurement procedures are lengthy 
and  unfortunately,  there  is  nothing  I  can  do  about  it.  I  am  doing  the  best  I  can  in  the 
circumstances, but I wish to give the assurance to the House that we are doing our very best 
to make sure that we have a state-of-the-art facility within the least possible delay. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr.  Sorefan:    Madam  Speaker,  three  weeks  ago,  I  mentioned  a  case  here  to  be 
answered by the hon. Minister about Mrs R. B. who had undergone a gall bladder surgery and 
the hon. Minister referred that to the Medical Council.  The hon. Minister should know that it 
is internationally unaccepted that the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life inquires on itself.  
This is a very pertinent issue.  Will he really think about having a Medical Hub in Mauritius 
and that the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life set up an independent body outside the 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life to look on all these cases?  The hon. Minister said: 
“This case is a sad case”.  Any person who dies is a loved one of a family.  They are all sad 
cases.  

Madam Speaker:  You have made your point, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Mr Gayan:  Madam Speaker, there is a procedure whenever there is an allegation of 
medical negligence. It starts with a departmental inquiry and then if there are grounds, it is 
escalated  to  the  other  body.    I  am  just  following  what  is  already  in  the  system,  but  I  am 
opened to any other suggestions.  But let me also say, Madam Speaker, there was a survey 

 

37 

recently published in the United States and the third cause of death in the United States is 
medical errors. So, we are not alone in being concerned about issues of medical negligence. 

(Interruptions) 

I am just saying what was in the States. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Bhagwan:    We  will  expect  the  report  to  be  laid  on  the  Table  of  the  National 
Assembly.  Can I ask the hon. Minister whether he was made aware of the calvaire de Mrs S. 
A. since the first time she went to hospital in January when she was having other problems, 
knee problems?  Is the hon. Minister satisfied with the way Mrs S. A. was treated, the reply 
given  to  her  and  her  husband  when  they  were  asking  for  the  medical  results,  the  way  the 
appointments were postponed, the way cancer treatments were given at the hospital and they 
were not given ambulance?  So, is the hon. Minister telling the nation and the people of his 
own Constituency that he is happy the way things went on since January 2016 and that he is 
satisfied with the report given by the officers of his Ministry?  I am not making politics.  This 
is a serious case and the hon. Minister will have to reply. 

Mr Gayan:  Madam Speaker,  I went to see the lady before she passed away on the 
Sunday.  She was at the hospital and then I had news that she had passed away and I went to 
see the family.  I spoke to the family and they told me whatever hon. Bhagwan is saying and I 
checked.    But  unfortunately,  when  somebody  passes  away,  of  course,  there  are  lots  of 
emotions.  I have said in my Statement what is contained in my file factually. Of course, we 
can always improve and this is why I want this new Cancer Centre to be set up at the earliest 
and this is what we are working on. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Quirin! 

Mr  Quirin:  Madame la présidente, peut-on savoir du ministre s’il compte revoir le 
protocole qui concerne les activités du SAMU, principalement dans les cas urgents car dans 
le cas de Madame S. A., elle a fait appel au SAMU qui finalement n’est jamais arrivé?  Peut-
on savoir s’il compte amender ce protocole? 

Mr Gayan:  Madam Speaker, there is an international norm for Emergency Services 
like SAMU.  We are, in fact, trying to see if we can increase the number of ambulances for 
SAMU to provide a better service.  But then, SAMU has its own protocol.  If we change the 
nature  of  the  protocol,  then  we  may  be  changing  the  nature  of  SAMU.    There  were 

 

38 

ambulances available, but at the time that the request was made and arrangements were made 
for the ambulance to go, in between the arrangements being made, the lady had passed away.  
So, it happened within ten minutes.   I said it is  an unfortunate  case, but the arrangements 
were made for an ambulance to go from Brown Sequard Hospital.  

Madam Speaker:  Yes, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan:  Can I know from the hon. Minister - being given that the members of 
the family were asked to come to the Ministry to give additional information - whether they 
will be provided with a report of the enquiry panel so that they can assess by themselves and 
take further action if need be? 

Mr  Gayan:    I  will  be  tabling  the  report,  Madam  Speaker.    So,  it  will  be  a  public 

document. 

I am sure the hon. Member…. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Bhagwan, not from a sitting position!  If you have something 
to say,  you wait for the hon. Minister to reply  and then  you stand up and say.   Yes, hon. 
Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr Bérenger:  I have a last question. What has just been said is unfair.  I read carefully 
the Statement from the hon. Minister.  We are dealing with somebody who had gone through 
cancer treatment, who had spent days in hospital with cancer, being treated for cancer.  When 
her family phones and says: “she is dying; we need a SAMU with a doctor”.  The family is 
informed  that  there  is  no  SAMU;  they  will  send  an  ordinary  ambulance  without  a  doctor.  
And according to his own Statement adding that ordinary ambulance is not available, without 
indicating how long it would take and the hon. Minister finds that acceptable? 

Mr Gayan: Well, Madam Speaker, I hate doing politics with a case like this.  But I 

hope also the Opposition does not play politics. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Excuse me… 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Gayan: What I said… 

 
Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Members,  please,  be  calm  and  don’t  get  excited!  Hon. 

39 

Members, no Member can threaten another Member. 

(Interruptions) 

He is making his statement, but nobody, no hon. Member can threaten another hon. Member. 

Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, what I said was that when SAMU was contacted by the 
family, the family was explained about the protocol of SAMU. If the Opposition insists, I will 
table  also,  Madam  Speaker,  the  transcript  of  SAMU,  whatever  took  place  there,  so  that 
everybody  knows  what  took  place  and  what  happened,  because  it  was  the  member  of  the 
family who called SAMU, agreed that this was the best thing to get the ambulance, but not 
SAMU. I will table that also. 

Mr Fowdar: Madam Speaker, I would like to ask the hon. Minister whether he has 
carried  out  a  study  or  survey  to  see  whether  the  Medical  Officers  involved  in  medical 
negligence, come from a similar academic and professional background? 

Mr Gayan: I don’t have that information, but if you were to come with a substantive 

question, I will look into that. 

Madam Speaker: The Table has been advised that PQ B/427 has been withdrawn. 

I suspend the sitting for one and a half hours. 

At 1.05 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 2.40 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

TERRE ROUGE/VERDUN LINK ROAD - REHABILITATION WORKS 

(No.  B/413)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the Terre 
Rouge/Verdun  Link  Road,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Road 
Development  Authority,  information  as  to  where  matters  stand  as  to  rehabilitation  works 
being carried out thereat, indicating the – 

(a) 

cost thereof, indicating the amount thereof paid as at to date and names of the 
consultants therefor, indicating the fees – 

(i) 

payable thereto, and 

 

(b) 

40 

(ii) 

paid as at to date 

name of the contractor thereof, indicating the amount paid thereto as at to date, 
and 

(c) 

expected – 

(i) 

(ii) 

completion date thereof, and 

date of coming into operation thereof. 

Mr  Bodha:  Madam  Speaker,  I  presume  that  the  hon.  Member  is  referring  to  the 
works  being  currently  carried  out  between  Ripailles  and  Valton  roundabouts,  that  is,  the 
‘Treatment  of  landslides  and  remaining  roadworks  along  Southbound  carriageway  at 
Ripailles’ Project. 

Madam Speaker,  I am informed by the RDA that during the implementation of the 
project  ‘Terre  Rouge  Verdun  Link  Road’  by  COLAS  (Mauritius)/COLAS  (Madagascar) 
under the supervision of EGIS BCEOM, several landslides occurred during the period 2010 
to  2013  in  four  specific  zones  of  cuts,  namely  D4,  D5,  D6  and  D7.  Those  landslides 
prevented the completion of the Terre Rouge Verdun Link Road project over a length of 2.7 
km, along the Southbound Carriageway towards Ripailles. 

During that period of three  years,  I am further informed that several attempts were 
made to re-profile the slopes at that time, but given the complexity of the terrain and the high 
water table, the works could not be completed successfully, hence the decision of the RDA to 
allocate a separate contract for the treatment of the landslides. 

Following an international bidding exercise carried out by the Central Procurement 
Board,  the  contract  was  awarded  to  Sinohydro  Corporation  Limited  for  an  amount  of 
Rs762,262.031. The commencement date was 03 October 2014 and the contract period was 
457 calendar days, that is, up to 02 January 2016. 

I  am  also  informed  that,  in  October  2014,  the  RDA  concurrently  appointed  a 
geotechnical expert firm, namely, GETS, as consultant for a consultancy fee of Rs4,523,525.  

The assignment of GETS basically  comprised the following – 

(i) 

review of the design worked out by EGIS BCEOM for the proposed treatment 
of landslides for the four zones, and 

(ii) 

supervision during construction works. 

41 

 
Madam  Speaker,  according  to  the  observations  of  GETS,  the  tests  after  the  design 
made by EGIS BCEOM were incomplete as piling details were missing; the specifications 
were  inadequate;  and  insufficient  land  was  available  at  zones  D5,  D6  and  D7  for  the 
implementation  of  the  treatment  of  the  landslide  problems.  A  low  factor  of  safety  during 
temporary conditions on site was also observed by GETS. The contractor was thus unable to 
complete the re-profiling works as per the original scope of works defined by EGIS BCEOM.  

GETS was, therefore requested to redesign the zones and carry out additional investigation. 
The fees were revised and the final consultancy fees amounted to Rs9.7 m. 

Madam  Speaker,  in  February  2015,  following  heavy  rainfall,  severe  cracks  were 
observed at the toe of the mountain slopes in zone D6 which caused a collapse of about two 
metres. These cracks propagated over a circumference of 80 metres and are located at about 
100 metres from the carriageway.  

In  March  2015,  the  RDA  appointed  ARQ  (Pty)  Ltd  to  review  the  new  design 
proposed  by  GETS  and  for    additional  investigations  and  tests  for  a  consultancy  fee  was  
Rand 561,000. 

 Both consultants agreed to adopt a minimum factor of safety of 1.4 instead of around 

1.1 which was adopted by EGIS BCEOM for the slope stability.  

Madam Speaker, works were stopped for four months pending the new tests and the 

design.  

As to the progress of works on site today, I am informed by the RDA that, in zone D4, 
that is, nearest to the Ripailles Roundabout, additional borehole drilling and laboratory tests 
have  been  carried  out  to  determine  the  shear  strength  parameters.  These  were  required  to 
analyse the re-profiling of the slopes to achieve a higher recommended factor of safety. As at 
date, all works in zone D4 have been completed.  

As regards zone D5, re-profiling has been completed except for road works and the 
installation  of  rock  nets  to  prevent  loose  rocks  from  falling  onto  the  carriageway.  I  am 
informed that the road works will be completed by end of this month. As for the rock nets, 
they will be completed in December and this section of the Link Road will be opened end of 
this month. 

Concerning zone D6, both geotechnical drilling and geophysical investigations were 
done.  Zone  D6  is  considered  to  be  the  most  difficult  and  vulnerable  zone  due  to  the 

 

42 

observance of severe cracks. Land has also been compulsorily acquired to implement the re-
profiling works. 

Following the investigations carried out by GETS, it was concluded that the bedrock 
subsurface level caused the slip of soft materials. Additionally, the ground water table was 
measured  regularly  together  with  surface  control  points  to  determine  the  relative  ground 
movements over a period of 12 months. GETS submitted its final design in March this year 
and re-profiling works have started and are expected to be completed in a few months. 

As regards zone D7, that is, the last zone which is closer to Valton, re-profiling works 
in four sections out of five have been completed. These core holes were drilled in zone D7 to 
determine the soil strata and the geophysical investigations were extended to this zone. Land 
acquisition procedures are ongoing. Thereafter, the RDA will enter land and start works soon. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed that the project 

cost is Rs762,262,031. As at date, the amount certified by the RDA is Rs496 m.  

As  regards  part  (b)  of  the  question,  the  consultants  are  Geotechnical  Services 

Ltd (GETS) and ARQ (Pty) Ltd.  

(i) 

(ii) 

The fees payable to GETS are Rs9.7 m. - as I have said - and those paid to 
ARQ (Pty) Ltd. to review the designs of GETS  are Rand 561,000.  
As  at  date,  the  amount  certified  by  RDA  for  payment  to  GETS  is  Rs7  m. 
However, no payment has yet been effected to ARQ (Pty) Ltd. as they have 
not yet submitted their final report. 

As regards part (c) of the question, the contractor is Sinohydro Corporation Ltd and the total 
amount paid so far is, as I said, Rs496 m. 

Concerning part (d) (i), the expected completion is end of 2016 and the expected date 

of coming into operation of this whole segment of the road will be by the end of the year. 

Mr Bhagwan: Can I know from the hon. Minister whether he has an idea - because 

we are lost in so many figures - how much fees exactly will be paid in total to consultants? 

Mr Bodha: Fees to consultants will be Rs9.7 m. to GETS and 561,000 Rands, so it is 

about Rs1.2 m. to ARQ. 

Mr Bhagwan: What I understand from the hon. Minister is that the work has been 
given  to  Sinohydro.    We  have  been  here  in  the  National  Assembly,  and  he  himself  has 
witnessed what we have heard about the past records of Sinohydro Corporation.  Can the hon. 

 

43 

Minister, at least, inform the House whether he has discussed with consultants - even  for 
consultants we have doubts, there have been so many and their performance? Can the hon. 
Minister give the assurance to the nation, the taxpayers, that whatever the country is spending 
we  won’t  have  any  problem  following  so  many  consultants,  and  also  the  topographical 
situation of the region? It is a very wet region. Won’t we have any problem in the coming 
months? 

Mr Bodha: I totally  agree with the hon. Member.  In fact, it is a very difficult and 
vulnerable terrain and the idea was to master the terrain, to understand the geophysical and 
geological  aspects  of  the  terrain.  Now,  the  whole  problem  of  that  section,  because  what 
happened in fact, the first project, Madam Speaker, was Rs1.2 billion and when they reached 
the cuts, they stopped that project and they went on the lanes going up towards Ripailles and 
for  two  kilometres  the  cuts  were  left  to  themselves  and  that  was  the  second  project. 
Sinohydro was chosen after a bid by the Central Procurement Board. 

I totally agree with the hon. Member as regards consultancy. The problem about this 
Terre Rouge/Verdun Road, Madam Speaker, I have always said it in this House, is that the 
consultancy at the very beginning when we started the tests cost 20,000 Euros - Rs800,000 -  
and it was done in a month and it was on those tests that the design was built. But when we 
came,  we  started  all  the  geological  tests  and  we  have  seen  to  it  that  the  slopes  have  been 
stabilised over twelve months before we have accepted the final design.  

The total cost of consultancy is about Rs10 m. for a project of Rs800 m. and I think 
that we have done the right tests and we have the right design now. Anybody going through 
this  segment  can  see  the  works  that  are  being  done.  We  have  seen  to  it  that  we  have  the 
GETS design, we have the ARQ and recently there was a very high level team of engineers 
who came from South Korea and we took them to that site and they have also said that we are 
doing the right thing. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Can  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister,  if  he  can  give  us  some 
information, that the lane going down where there were cracks when the road was opened 
initially and then a bypass had been made… 

Mr Bodha: The embankment failure? 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Yes.  Can  the  hon.  Minister  give  us  some  information  about  the 
situation? When we go along this Terre Rouge/Verdun Road we have the impression that that 
part is left unattended. Can the hon. Minister give us some information? 

44 

 
Mr Bodha: When we had the embankment failure we had to understand why there 
was a failure and it took us some time. In fact, ARQ did a number of tests over months to see 
that  the  embankment  stabilises  so  that  it  does  not  move  anymore.  This  is  where  we  have 
reached. ARQ did the tests and a design, and has proposed us a technical solution, that is, we 
should have stone columns for about 15 metres into the embankment and then we do the road 
on top. Then, when the South Korean team came, they proposed a second solution which is a 
horizontal  solution,  saying  that  we  remove  everything  over  20  metres  and  we  fill  it 
horizontally.  

In fact, we are going to go most probably on the second solution. The design is going 
to be ready in two weeks.  We are going to call for tender and most probably we are going to 
have the road repaired by the end of the year. In fact, I am expecting that the whole road with 
the cuts and the remedial works at the embankment failure will end up by the end of this year. 

Mr Bérenger: May I know from the hon. Minister how did that South Korean team 
come in? Was there any tendering procedures? How did they come in? On what basis did 
they work? How much are they being paid? Are they going to produce a report? 

Mr  Bodha:  Well,  when  I  went  to  Seoul  on  a  conference  I  met  the  Minister  of 
Infrastructure there and I told him about the road decongestion programme being carried out 
in  Mauritius.  I  visited  the  Korea  Expressway  which  is,  in  fact,  the  RDA  of  Korea  and 
manages  4000  kilometres  of  motorway.  I  visited  two  sites:  one  was  a  motorway  of  21 
kilometres  over  the  sea  four  lanes  and  a  tunnel  of  12  kilometres.  Then  I  requested  the 
Minister whether he could send a high level team of engineers to reassess our project. In fact, 
I asked them for an opinion about what we are doing and, in the meantime, we have signed a 
Memorandum of Understanding between the RDA and the Korea Express Corporation.  That 
is where we are as regards the Korean experience.  

Madam Speaker: Hon. Osman Mahomed! 

Mr  Mahomed:  Notwithstanding  the  low  fees  being  tendered  by  the  consultant, 
namely, Egis BCEOM, would the hon. Minister inform the House whether he finds it normal 
that a consultant does incomplete works, missing important things like piling on a dangerous 
slope  and  whether  it  is  being  envisaged  to  claim  damages  from  the  consultant  on  the 
professional indemnity insurers because it is not normal that we pay for it? 

Mr Bodha: Well, Egis BCEOM was chosen by the former regime.  That’s the first 

thing.   

45 

 
The  second  thing  is  that  we  have  an  inquiry  today  into  who  is  responsible  for  the 
embankment  failure.    In  the  light  of  the  inquiry,  we  are  going  to  sue  the  consultant,  the 
designer and the company which constructed the embankment and suing damages. 

Mr Bhagwan:  Madam Speaker, from what we have gathered - I think it has been 
widely advertised in the press - that there is a close relative of the Chairperson of the RDA, 
Mr  Wong  So,  who  is  associated  with  these  Korean  experts.  Can  the  hon.  Minister  give 
assurance to the House that we will not have any repetition of what has happened on several 
projects where there has been connivance between people at the very top of the RDA and we 
know the consultant’s reputation? 

Mr  Bodha:  In  fact,  the  daughter-in-law  of  the  Chairperson  of  the  RDA  is  a  South 
Korean, but she has a snack in Grand’ Baie, which has nothing to do with the project.  But I 
can reassure the hon. Member and the House that if we go with the South Korean technology, 
it will have to be the best technology affordable and it will have to be the best in the best 
interest of Mauritius. 

Dr. Sorefan:  The hon. Minister mentioned Sinohydro during the landslide.  May we 
know from the hon. Minister if there has been any variation cost filed with the RDA on top of 
the Rs769 m. contract value and what is the estimated cost of this project inclusive of what 
we paid to Colas by the end we finish with this project to be functional? 

Mr Bodha: I thank the hon. Member for this question.  In fact, we have to know that 
the Terre Rouge/Verdun Phase I, Madam Speaker, started with Rs1.2 billion and ended up at 
Rs2 billion.  The Terre Rouge/Verdun Phase II was estimated at Rs800 m. and we are going 
to remain within that budget.  What is also important is that we had stopped the works for 
four months because we did not want the works to continue whilst we were not satisfied that 
the tests were adequate and the design was the best.  Now, we will see whether the Sinohydro 
will put up a claim for not working for four months – we have told them, but as regards the 
project per se, the budget is going to be the same. 

Madam Speaker: Last question, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan:  Madam Speaker, with all the recent accidents which have occurred, 
can the hon. Minister inform the House whether – on the same land where construction is 
going  on  -  consideration  has  been  given  to  the  security  aspect.    We  all  know  about  this 
problem of lightings on the motorways.  This Terre Rouge/Verdun road is a very dangerous 
road.    Can  the  hon.  Minister  inform  the  House  whether  at  the  same  time  this  question  of 

 

46 

security of those driving along, especially at night, is being taken care of, not only lightings, 
but also road markings and others prevention measures? 

Mr Bodha: I thank the hon. Member because he has raised some interesting points.  
As  regards  the  lighting  on  the  motorway,  we  are  discussing  with  the  Ministry  of  Public 
Utilities, to see to it that the motorways should be, henceforth, lit by the CEB.  So, we are 
working on this issue.   

As regards the road markings, I agree with the hon. Member. The alignment of the 
Terre Rouge/Verdun road is a very dangerous one.  The alignment is such, but we cannot do 
much.  We can correct what we can correct, which we are going to do.  We will see to it that 
the lighting is adequate and that the road markings are done in such a manner that there is 
road safety along the whole of the link road. 

ANSE LA RAIE - YOUTH TRAINING CENTRE - UPGRADING 

(No. B/414) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the Youth Training Centre at 
Anse La Raie, he will state the – 

(a)  

(b)  

amount  of  money  allocated  in  the  current  budget  for  the  upgrading  thereof, 
indicating the amount thereof already spent; 

urgent  measures  being  taken  for  the  upgrading  of  the  existing  facilities 
provided thereat in view of the deteriorating state thereof, and  

(c)  

number of events organised thereat by his Ministry since January 2015 to date. 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  a  sum  of  Rs4.5  m.  is 
allocated in our current budget for the Anse La Raie Youth Training Centre. This sum was 
meant  for  the  upgrading  of  dormitories  thereat.    However,  this  project  has  been  kept  in 
abeyance as we intend to go ahead with a new full-fledged Residential Youth Training Centre 
with  some  sports  infrastructure  there.    My  Ministry  is  presently  working  on  the  project 
requirements. 

As regards part (b) of the question, I wish to inform the House that some minor works 
have been carried out during the course of this financial year to upgrade the basic facilities 
like kitchen, toilet and bathrooms to enable the use of the yard for youth camping and other 
youth related activities. 

47 

 
Concerning part (c) of the question, I am informed that a total of 27 activities in terms 
of adventurous journeys and expeditions have been organised for the period January 2015 to 
date.    All  these  activities  were  organised  in  the  context  of  the  Duke  of  Edinburgh’s 
International Award - Mauritius. 

Mr Rughoobur: May I know from the hon. Minister - because we have mentioned in 
the  Government  Programme,  as  you  rightly  pointed  out,  that  there  will  be  a  modern 
Residential Training Centre – what is the status?  I would like to know whether the plans are 
ready  and  whether  a  consultant  has  been  pointed.    Do  you  have  a  time  frame  as  to  when 
works are going to start? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Actually,  there  was  an  issue  on  the  plot  of  land  because  a  big 
portion of that land was excised for a hotel promoter who got the land at the back.  Now that 
the Ministry of Housing and Lands has reclaimed all the lands back, my Ministry is working 
now on the potential project that we are going to put there. 

Mr Rughoobur: Looking at the condition of the site now there, may I ask the hon. 
Minister to enlighten the House whether he has got a maintenance team within the Ministry 
to look after the maintenance of the site or whether the Minister proposes to come with the 
appointment of a separate maintenance department to do the maintenance? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Actually,  we  have  an  in-house  maintenance  department  in  the 
Ministry,  they  are  the  one  doing  the  minor  works.    The  Ministry  of  Environment  and 
Sustainable Development is also giving us a hand since it is a beach front plot of land. 

Madam Speaker: Last question! 

Mr  Rughoobur:  I  make  a  humble  request  to  the  hon.  Minister  to  kindly  look  into 
these issues and try to ensure that in days and months to come, the site is in a condition so 
that the youth might be using it for activities in the coming weeks. 

Mr Sawmynaden: I will definitely look into it. 

 

 

GRAND’BAIE & POUDRE D’OR - POVERTY ALLEVIATION 

(No. B/415) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked the Minister of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment whether, in regard to 

 

48 

the fight against poverty engaged since January  2015 to date, he will state if a survey has 
been carried out in Grand Gaube, Camp Carol, Grand Bay and Poudre d’Or Village to assess 
the support that is required by the needy families living thereat and, if so, indicate in each 
case the – 

(a)    

type of support provided thereto, and  

(b)  

amount  of  money  spent  in  connection  therewith,  excluding  the  expenditure 
incurred in respect of the supply of school materials. 

Mr  Roopun:  Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  refer  to  my  reply  made  to  Parliamentary 
Question B/367 of 03 May last wherein the House was informed of the island-wide survey of 
vulnerable  households  that  was  conducted  from  June  to  December  2015  with  a  view  to 
determining their eligibility under the Social Register of Mauritius. 

As  stated,  to  date,  some  13,174  households,  living  below  the  poverty  threshold  of 
Rs6,200,  and  eligible  under  the  Social  Register  have  been  identified  and  the  exercise  is 
ongoing.   

With this updated database, the Foundation is now in a position to determine the exact 
needs  of  these  households  and  provide  them  with  the  necessary  support  in  terms  of  its 
existing Programmes and services provided by other governmental institutions. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  Foundation  that,  pursuant  to  this  exercise, 

1,093 families living in these regions have been found eligible under the SRM.   

The detailed profiling and needs assessment of these families is ongoing at the level 
of the Foundation.  This will, no doubt, contribute towards the formulation and execution of 
targeted interventions, especially in the context of the implementation of the Marshall Plan 
against Poverty.   

Out of the 1,093 families, the Foundation has, so far, received 15 requests for housing 
support of which 3 are for fully concrete housing units of up to 50 square metres and 12 for 
the upgrading of the housing units. 

Madam Speaker, with respect to parts (a) and (b) of the question, I am informed that 
from  January  2015  to  date,  the  Foundation  has  provided  the  following  support  in  these 
regions – 

(i) 

Three families living in Grand Gaube have received support for the upgrading 
of their housing units for a total amount of Rs106,650, and 

 
(ii) 

49 

one  family  residing  in  Grand’  Baie  has  benefited  from  a  CIS  housing  unit, 
costing Rs68,000.   

Over  and  above,  I  am  also  informed  by  the  Ministry  of  Social  Security,  National 
Solidarity and Reform Institutions that for the period January 2015 to February 2016, a total 
amount  of  Rs772,395  has  been  paid  to  the  children  of  the  1,093  families  under  the  Child 
Allowance Scheme. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that,  pending  the  completion  of  the 
needy  assessments,  other  collaborative  initiatives  are  being  pursued  by  my  Ministry  and 
relate first to the implementation of l’école des parents for the benefit of NEF beneficiaries 
around  the  island  including  these  regions.  The  modalities  of  which  are  being  worked  in 
consultation with the Ministry of Gender Equality, Child Development and Family Welfare. 
Second,  the  provision  of  social  housing  units  to  eligible  landless  beneficiaries  under  the 
SRM, consultation with the Ministry of Housing and Lands are ongoing on this issue.  

Mr Rughoobur: Madam Speaker, may I ask the hon. Minister, these few weeks we 
have  got  representations  from  many  people  in  these  regions  regarding  a  communication 
problem. Communication problems meaning that they don’t know exactly where they have to 
go  to  report,  to  make  application  for  support  and  assistance.  May  I  know  from  the  hon. 
Minister the fact that there were field officers in these regions earlier, it seems that these days 
even in CAB Offices they are no longer there. May I request the hon. Minister to please look 
into the matter to ensure that there are adequate field officers within these areas and that there 
is a proper communication so as they know where they have to go. 

Mr Roopun: Madam Speaker,  I must state that since  I  assumed office,  I created  a 
hotline at my Ministry, the 129 where any beneficiary or any other person wishing to give us 
information about when there is need for us to intervene can phone at the hotline 129 and also 
in all CAB offices at least once a week officers of the NEF are present there. It may not be on 
the  day  MPs  are  there  for  their  constituents  but  they  are  present  in  each  and  every  CAB 
Office at least once every week. In addition to the question of having more field officers, I 
agree with the hon. Member that there are too little officers in the fields and too many in the 
offices.  Yet  whatever  has  to  be  done  will  be  in  a  complete  revamping  of  the  National 
Empowerment Foundation, there will be reorientation and also we will try to see how we can 
render it more effective. In any event our priority is not just to recruit but at least to be more 
efficient. 

50 

 
Mr Uteem: I listened carefully to the answer of the hon. Minister and although the 
question relates to Grand Bay, it’s of general application. The hon. Minister mentioned aid 
that is being given in terms of housing, in terms of financial assistance but I haven’t heard 
anything about empowerment. The National Empowerment Foundation is not a substitution 
for the Ministry of Social Security. It was meant to empower these people. So, may I know 
what has the National Empowerment Foundation done since 2015 in the region of Grand Bay 
and elsewhere to empower these people to get out of poverty.  

Mr  Roopun:  Madam  Speaker,  the  question  of  empowerment  I  take  it  is  more 
challenging but the empowerment is a process. It is not just coming and empowering people. 
There should be education, sensitization and for somebody to be empowered he should, first 
of all, be willing to be empowered. There have been training courses given to those needy 
but,  at  times,  you  would  be  surprised,  nobody  turns  up.  This  is  the  problem!  Whatever 
employment is being offered in the private sector does not seem to interest the neediest, they 
are  contenting  themselves  with  whatever  is  being  given  through  allocation  and  the  first 
question they ask: if I take  this employment I won’t get my pension. The whole problem is to 
try to educate and empower by different means. That is why we are coming with l’école des 
parents. We are trying to encourage them to send their kids to school so that they  can be 
empowered  through  education.  There  is  mobility  and  it  is  more  complicated  than  just 
empowering but I agree with the hon. Member this should be our main objectives not to assist 
but to empower. 

Mr Fowdar: Can I ask the hon. Minister whether he is going to review this threshold 
for allocation of school materials, the salary in particular to allow more families to benefit 
from this grant.  

Mr Roopun: Madam Speaker, this is not within my province. It has a lot of financial 
implication but what we are doing actually is: we are trying to cater for the neediest among 
the needy. I know that this is something which will have to be taken up with the Ministry of 
Finance so that, if we have the means of course we will do it but it is a question of trying, 
first of all, to help those in dire need of our support. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Rughoobur! 

 

INFORMATION COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY SECTOR  

- GROWTH RATE 

51 

 
 (No.  B/416)  Mr  S.  Rughoobur    (Second  Member  for  Grand’  Baie  &  Poudre 
d’Or) asked the Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard 
to the Information Communications Technology sector, he will state the annual growth rate 
thereof over the past five years, indicating the expected growth rate thereof for the current 
year. 

Mr  Sinatambou:  Madam  Speaker,  according  to  Statistics  Mauritius,  the  annual 
growth  rate  in  the  Information  and  Communication  Technology  Sector,  for  the  past  five 
years, has been as follows – 

Year 2011  

9.4 % 

Year 2012  

9.1 % 

Year 2013 

7.0% 

Year 2014 

6.6% 

Year 2015 

7.1% 

As regards the forecasted growth rate for the current year 2016, it will, according to 

Statistics Mauritius, be at 7.2%.  

Madam  Speaker,  as  the  House  may  note,  there  has  been  a  declining  trend  in  the 
growth rate during the period 2011 to 2014. However, since the new Government came into 
power, we have seen the beginning of a reversal in the declining trend and the growth rate 
which was 6.6% in 2014 rose to 7.1% in 2015. It is expected that this trend is called upon to 
grow  further  with  new  measures  being  proposed  such  as  the  availability  of  ultra-high 
bandwidth Internet connectivity, the deployment of fibre to the Home Internet connectivity 
across the island, the forthcoming setting up of 350 Wi-Fi hotspots, the introduction of an 
open  data  policy,  the  launch  of  a  national  innovation  framework  and  the  setting  up  of  the 
third fibre optic submarine cable.  

Mr Rughoobur: Thank you Madam Speaker. The Minister mentioned the growth rate 
for the last five years and we know that it is almost one digit. Can the hon. Minister enlighten 
the House as to the reason for which before 2010 the double digit growth felt down to one 
digit during the last five  years and what are the measures that have been taken to remedy 
that? 

Mr Sinatambou: Well, I don’t think I can answer why a two figure growth has come 
down to one figure during the last five years. What, however, I would like perhaps to take the 

 

52 

opportunity to enlighten the House about is that when I first became a Minister in 2005, the 
then Government wanted to make of ICT the fifth pillar of the economy, but in 2008 when I 
was elected as Deputy Speaker of the House, not after being revoked but after resigning, it 
had already become the third pillar of the economy.  

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

Mr Sinatambou: Therefore … 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

Mr Sinatambou: What is good to know however, is that it is still the third pillar of 

the economy. 

Mr Rughoobur: On the important issue of training and empowerment, may I know 

from the hon. Minister... 

(Interruptions) 

On  the  issue  of  training  and  empowerment,  may  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  if  he  can 
update the House on the setting up of the training academy, the structure, whether it has been 
set up, whether a manager has been appointed? 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No crosstalking please! 

Mr Sinatambou: In fact, coming to this ICT Academy Madam Speaker, I understand 
that it has not been a success to say the least, but since the new Government came into place 
it  has  set  out  to  actually  revamp  it.  As  it  is  to  date,  we  have  tried  to,  shall  I  say,  solve 
especially the mismatch between academic skills and the employability  of those who have 
acquired these academic skills.  

Therefore, the ICT Academy which is to be revamped will probably have a number of 
components  such  as  an  IBM  MEA  University  course  delivery  facility.  We  have  already 
obtained Cabinet’s approval to set up an Oracle Centre of Excellence after discussing with 
Oracle and we already have in the country now a Centre of Excellence from the International 
Telecommunication Union. 

 

53 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Osman Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Would the hon. Minister be able to tell 
the House whether he is comfortable at 7.2% growth rate we will be able to create 15,000 
jobs that is being catered for in the Economic Mission Statement read by the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister  last  year  given  that  we  are  losing  out  on  Foreign  Direct  Investment,  only  this 
morning  it  is  said  that  on  the  Africa  Attractiveness  Index  we  are  lagging  behind  other 
countries?  

Mr Sinatambou: Well, although we can never forecast the future with precision, I am 
however quite comfortable. There are many reasons, but one of the most important is, if I 
take the BPO sector, the fact that the Business Process Outsourcing sector in 2014 generated 
a turnover in the world of US$304 billion. We have been in that sector for many years now. If 
we can only attract 1% of that sector - we leave 99% of it to the rest of the world - just 1% of 
it would mean an additional $3.3 billion to our GDP increasing it by 25%. We only need to 
get it right and I hope that we will be able to do that. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Sesungkur! 

Mr Sesungkur: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I  am sure the hon. Minister is aware 
that this is one of the key pillars of our economy which can be developed further with a huge 
potential for growth. But the main complaints that we heard from the operators is that there is 
a  severe  mismatch  between  competence  and  availability  of  labour.  How  the  Minister  is 
addressing this issue and what are the plans for the future to develop this sector? 

Mr Sinatambou: Well, I just explained in an earlier reply that the Ministry and the 
country at large are aware of that mismatch. How do we address it? There have been three 
ways up to now. Oracle is a leading world-class professional course deliverer and not later 
than last week it has agreed to set up a Centre of Excellence in Mauritius. Similarly, when it 
comes  to  telecommunications,  the  International  Telecommunication  Union  (ITU)  has  six 
Centres of Excellence in Africa and one of them is now in Mauritius. Last, but not least, for 
the time being, we are negotiating with IBM for IBM to actually agree to set up an MEA 
University course delivery facility here. So, I believe that this is what is right for addressing 
the mismatch. 

Madam Speaker: Last question, hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Could the hon. Minister tell us - since 
we  are  talking  about  this  mismatch  -  how  many  jobs  for  Mauritians  only  has  this  sector 

 

54 

created ever since January 2015 and how many job losses have there been ever since January 
2015 since we are expecting, as he rightly says and I hope it is true, that we are going to go 
through better days? 

Mr Sinatambou: Well, unfortunately the hon. Member will appreciate that I cannot 
have those facts in view of the question which was put. I will be very happy, however, to 
look into the matter if he comes up with a substantive question. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

RELIGIOUS BODIES - SUBSIDIES 

(No. B/417) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the Minister of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific Research 
whether, in regard to the religious bodies which have an institution for teaching cultural and 
religious matters, she will state the names thereof, indicating the procedure followed for the 
disbursement of subsidies thereto. 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  Madam  Speaker,  my  Ministry  does  not  provide  direct 

grants or subsidies to religious bodies for cultural and religious activities.  

However, fees are paid to persons teaching oriental languages in evening classes run 
by  registered  socio-cultural  organisations,  in  a  bid  to  preserve  ancestral  languages.  These 
classes are held in the evening during weekdays or in some cases, on Saturdays and Sundays. 
The languages taught are Hindi, Urdu, Tamil, Telugu, Marathi, Mandarin and Arabic.  

Payment is effected based on returns submitted by Managers of evening schools after 
a proper verification and certification carried out by visiting officers who are appointed by 
the Zonal Directorate in the respective zones.  

Allowances are paid to teachers at approved rates and ranges from Rs1000 to Rs2000 
per teacher per month on the basis of qualifications held by them. They should each cover at 
least 12 hours to be paid such an allowance, otherwise they are paid on a pro rata basis. Some 
Rs22 m. has already been paid this financial year in the form of allowances mainly to about 
1,500 teachers. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Minister  has  mentioned  they  are  paid  per 
teacher. Is the hon. Minister aware that in some institutions they are paid, like she said, pro 
rata which I take it the number of hours? Will she inform the House whether for those who 

 

55 

teach Hinduism and other cultural activities, all payments go to only one person - I will not 
mention his name - and this person distributes it to the institutions? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: No. This is not the case, Madam Speaker, and as I have 
just mentioned, Hinduism does not fall into this category. There are languages taught. I have 
just mentioned the list of languages taught and the payment is effected to the teachers after 
verification by the visiting officers of the Ministry in these respective schools. No payment is 
effected to one person as such. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr  Mohamed:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  Hon.  Dr.  Sorefan  has  put  a  question 
about certain information that circulate in the public and it is clear that there are some zone 
d’ombre which we are happy the hon. Minister is clarifying. I looked at the question which is 
put by hon. Dr. Sorefan and basically what he is asking for are the names of those people who 
are  receiving  those  funds.    This  is  what  exactly  he  asked.  Now,  could  the  hon.  Minister 
consider the possibility of tabling a complete list since that is what the question asked for? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Madam Speaker, I do not have the list of the names and 
individuals teaching, but I do have the list of all the evening schools for the different subjects 
which I will be ready to table in the National Assembly. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Fowdar! 

Mr Fowdar: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Can I ask the hon. Minister -the fact that 
Government gives subsidies to these religious bodies - whether she has got her say to see the 
content  of  the  courses  that  are  being  run  so  that  it  excludes  extremism  or  politically 
motivated? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Madam Speaker, I have just mentioned that my Ministry 
does not  give subsidies  to these sociocultural institutions, but pays directly to the teachers 
running evening classes in languages. Now, the languages taught are according to the courses 
that  are  held.  They  normally  go  for  -  I  do  understand  that  -  Hindi  there  are  a  number  of 
examinations  that  are  conducted  by  the  Hindi  Pracharini  Sabha  and  other  examinations 
leading  to  the  subjects  at  SC  and  HSC  levels.  So,  there  is  already  a  curriculum  and  they 
normally go by it and there are no risks of extremisms and things of the sort because they are 
related to the teaching of languages only. 

Madam Speaker: Last question, hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

 

56 

Mr Mohamed: I thank the hon. Minister for her previous answer to my question that 
she would table the list, but my question is that - I am getting back to that again - would it be 
impossible for the hon. Minister to table the list of names because since there are names of 
people receiving money, and it is not Rs1 m. or Rs2 m., it is quite a lot of money? Now, 
could we consider, therefore, the list, the names, the details, how much was received for each 
subject? 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun: Madam Speaker, as I have just mentioned, I am sure that 
if  I  get  a  specific  question  on  the  names  of  the  individuals,  I  will  certainly  table  it  in  the 
Assembly, but what I need to mention is that the payment is done to teachers. In fact, we are 
talking about Rs22 m., but it goes for over 1,504 teachers in more than 649 evening schools 
and  the  number  of  students  benefiting  from  it  ranges  to  37,330  students.    If  there  are  any 
problems about someone receiving more fees than others, I will certainly look into the matter 
and we will come back to the Assembly. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

MEDICAL COUNCIL - STUDENTS IN MEDICINE - REGISTRATION 

(No. B/418) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked the 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the 2013 Examinations held by 
the Indian Authorities for the screening of Students in Medicine after their pre-registration, he 
will state- 

(a) 

the number thereof who sat therefor, indicating the number thereof who have-  

(i) 

(ii) 

passed and been registered with the Medical Council and  

failed,  indicating  the  number  thereof  who  have  nevertheless  been 
registered with the Medical Council and  

(b) 

why the said Students have been required to sit for the said Examinations after 
pre-registration as opposed to the practice that obtains in India which requires 
the Student in Medicine to sit therefor before preregistration. 

Mr Gayan:  Madam Speaker, I assume that the hon. Member is, in fact, referring to the 

National Board of Examinations of India when he made reference to the Indian Authorities.  

I  am  informed  by  the  Medical  Council  of  Mauritius  that  at  the  Medical  Registration 
Examination  held  on  14  October  2013,  out  of  the  seven  candidates  who  took  part  in  the 
examinations, two of them were successful and were registered as Medical Practitioners.  

 

57 

With regard to part (ii) of the question, I am informed that five candidates failed the 
examination namely, four Mauritians and one Non-Mauritian.  Representations were made by 
Pre-Registration House Officers to the effect that they will not sit for the examination as no 
such mention was made in their letters of offer of enlistment of 05 May 2011.  Legal advice 
was sought and subsequently, the four Mauritians who failed the examination were exempted 
from 
the Medical 
Council Exemption from Examinations Amendment No. 2 and they were registered with the 
Medical Council on 04 February 2014. 

line  with  Regulations  made  under 

the 

the  examination 

in 

All  Pre-Registration  House  Officers  who  were  enlisted  by  my  Ministry  prior  to  31 
December 2013, were exempted from examination for the purpose of registration as general 
practitioners. 

With regard to part (b) of the Question, I wish to inform the House that, in line with 
section 22 of the Medical Council Act, all those who wish to register as general practitioners 
by the Medical Council of Mauritius have to satisfy, inter alia, the following criteria - 

(i) 

(ii) 

the Pre-Registration House Officer has to complete to the satisfaction of the 
Council a pre-registration training of a maximum of 18 months, and  

he  has  to  pass  an  examination  which  is  presently  being  carried  out  by  the 
National Board of Examiners of India. 

However, Regulations No. 2 of 2014 provide exemptions to take such examination in 

respect of the following – 

 (i) 

all  those  who  establish  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  Medical  Council  that  they  are 
duly registered as general practitioners with the regulatory body of the country 
where  they  are  practising  in  medicine  immediately  before  they  apply  for 
registration  in  Mauritius  and  they  have  practised  as  general  practitioners  for  a 
minimum period of three years in that country, or  

(ii) 

all those who are registered before 31 December 2013 as pre-registration trainees 
by any regulatory authority. 

I  am  also  informed  by  the  National  Board  of  Examiners  that  in  India  the  candidates 
have,  in  the  first  instance,  to  pass  the  Medical  Registration  Examination  before  they  are 
temporarily registered by  the Medical Council of  India.  They have then to undergo a 12-
months’ training before they are permanently registered as general practitioners. 

 

58 

Madam Speaker, in view of the multiple complaints both from the medical profession 
and  threats  received  from  some  Pre-Registration  House  Officers  who  do  not  pass  their 
assessments,  I  am  proposing  to  review  the  whole  examination  set  up.   In  this  context,  the 
Medical Council Act will be reviewed to have examinations prior to pre-registration training 
as it is the case in India. 

Dr. Sorefan: Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister has said that they do examinations in 
India before going for the internship and this is not the case in Mauritius.  The MoU was in 
that direction and I don’t know why this is not the case in Mauritius, but the hon. Minister 
said he is going to review.  So much the better for the students!  May we know from the hon. 
Minister how come a new MoU was signed with the NBEI when the Supreme Court of India 
qualified  the  Medical  Council  of  India  to  be  of  deep-rooted  corruption  which  is  prevalent 
among the Council and its members and without forgetting the parliamentary committee of 
India stating that the Medical Council of India is largely responsible for corruption in health 
care? How come the hon. Minister signed a MoU with such a corruptive institution? 

Mr Gayan: Well, the MoU that was signed and the further MoU that will be signed is 

not with the Medical Council of India.  It is with the National Board of Examiners of India. 

Dr. Sorefan:  Yes, but the hon. Minister knows very well that the NBEI is as per the 
Medical  Council  Regulations  to  set  up  the  examination.    So,  whether  you  sign  it  with  the 
NBEI, it is the Medical Council of India! 

Mr Gayan:  No, this is not that case at all.  They are two different institutions and we 

are only dealing with the National Board of Examiners. 

 

 

MEDICAL LABORATORY – QUALITY ASSURANCE 

(No. B/419) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked the 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the medical laboratories, he will 
– 

(a) 

state  the  number  thereof  operating  in  the  private  and  public  sectors 
respectively, indicating if they are subject to any - 

(i) 

internal quality assurance and, if so, indicate under whose supervision 
the exercise is carried out, and  

 

59 

(ii) 

external independent quality assurance and, if so, indicate under whose 
supervision the exercise is carried out, and  

 (b) 

table the national health laboratory policy, if any. 

Mr  Gayan:  Madam  Speaker,  as  at  date  14  medical  laboratories,  including  one  in 
Rodrigues,  operate  in  the  public  sector  and  another  33  private  medical  laboratories  are 
registered by my Ministry. 

Regarding part (i) of the question, all medical laboratories, public or private, have to 
carry  out  internal  quality  control  on  a  daily  basis  and  keep  records  of  the  results  for 
verification by the authorities.  All the activities are supervised by the Officer-in-Charge of 
the laboratories. 

As regards the private sector, the medical laboratories are licensed by the Ministry of 
Health and Quality of Life pursuant to the Private Health Institutions Act of 1989 and the 
Regulations made thereunder. 

The licence is renewed on a yearly basis after inspection of a team from the Ministry of 
Health and Quality of Life and after ensuring that they meet all the technical requirements 
including evidence of internal quality control which is a mandatory requirement.   

Regarding  part  (ii)  of  the  question,  both  public  and  private  medical  laboratories  are 
enrolled for external quality assessment (EQA) on an optional basis. So far six departments 
of  the  Central  Health  Laboratory  of  my  Ministry  are  enrolled  with  various  external 
assessment  bodies  and  I  am  informed  that  the  majority  of  the  private  medical  laboratories 
participate  in  an  External  Quality  Assessment  Scheme,  under  the  supervision  of  the 
respective Laboratory or Quality Manager. 

As regards part (b) of the question, my Ministry obtained the assistance of the World 
Health  Organisation  in  March  2012  for  the  purpose  of  developing  a  National  Health 
Laboratory  Policy  and  a  subsequent  National  Health  Laboratory  Strategic  Plan  for  the 
country. The Consultant from the WHO submitted a draft National Health Laboratory Policy 
Document in April 2012.  This document was revised by a Technical Committee at the level 
of my Ministry and was revisited last year taking into account further developments including 
the e-health project.  A working group has been set up to review the pre-final document and a 
validation workshop will be held with all stakeholders by mid July 2016 and the final report 
is expected to be ready by the end of July 2016. 

 

60 

Dr. Sorefan:  Madam Speaker, from what I heard from the hon. Minister as regards the 
external independent body, we do not have it, it is by the Central laboratory, if I heard the 
hon. Minister rightly.  Will the hon. Minister really go as per the WHO which I asked if a 
copy of the policy could be tabled, whether the hon. Minister will go for this and really go for 
an independent quality assurance institution because Mauritians are getting figures. I am in 
that field and when people get from a private lab, it as if they copy the result from a book. 
That is very important to look into it, that is, to set up an independent institution, be it to look 
for the central lab, the public lab as well as the private lab. 

Madam Speaker:  You have made your point! 

Mr Gayan:  Madam Speaker, I have just mentioned that there is a document which is 
being  finalised  and  I  will  certainly  suggest  this  particular  point  to  the  committee  that  will 
look into that. 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Can  the  hon.  Minister  inform  the  House  whether  each  and  every 
medical laboratory all over the island is under the responsibility of a professional Pathologist 
and,  if  not,  why  not,  and  whether  one  Pathologist  can  be  responsible  for  several  medical 
laboratories opened all over the island? 

Mr Gayan: Well, I am afraid I don’t have the answer, but if the hon. Member will 

come with a substantive question, I will provide the answer. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

 

 

REPUBLIC OF MAURITIUS & REPUBLIC OF SOUTH KOREA –  

INFRASTRUCTURAL WORKS – AGREEMENT 

(No. B/420) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the Agreement 
signed  by  Government  with  a  South  Korean  firm  in  April  2016  for  the  realisation  of 
infrastructural works, he will state the – 

(a) 

(b) 

name and status of the said firm; 

projects  earmarked  for  implementation  thereunder,  giving  details  thereof  in 
each case, and 

61 

financial implications thereof.    

 
(c) 

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, I have to inform the House that no agreement has been 
signed  between  the  Government  of  the  Republic  of  Mauritius  and  that  of  the  Republic  of 
South Korea for the realisation of infrastructural works. 

However,  on  05  April  2016,  a  Memorandum  of  Understanding  (MoU)  was  signed 
between  the  Road  Development  Authority  (RDA)  and  the  Korea  Expressway  Corporation 
(KEC). The main objectives of the MoU are to promote technical and institutional knowledge 
exchange in the field of road and transport, and to collaborate on the implementation of the 
Road Decongestion Programme (RDP) through close collaboration between the parties. 

In fact, when I attended the World Road Congress in South Korea in November last, I 
asked  for  a  meeting  with  my  counterpart  and  representatives  of  the  Korea  Expressway 
Corporation, which operates along the same lines as the RDA and manages 4,000 kilometres 
of expressways, bridges and tunnels since 1968.  

KEC  has  undertaken  major  projects  worldwide  in  Singapore,  Saudi  United  Arab 
Emirates, Turkey and some African countries. During my stay, I made a request to see de 
visu the roads, tunnels and bridges which have been constructed by the Korea Expressway 
Corporation and using the latest state-of-the-art technology. 

Consequently, a team of the best engineers from well-established companies in Korea 
and worldwide came to Mauritius in November last and again in March this year. The final 
Mission Report which was submitted in April 2016 is being currently examined. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to parts (b) and (c) of the question, I have to inform the 

House that no decision has been taken at this stage. 

Dr.  Sorefan:  The  hon.  Minister  has  said  no  agreement  has  been  signed  by  the 
Government.  Which  is  the  Government?  RDA  forms  part  of  the  Ministry  of  Public 
Infrastructure and Land Transport, the Ministry of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 
forms part of the Government. It is the Government!  

(Interruptions) 

Well, not the Korean Government.  The question is about a Korean firm; as you rightly said, 
the Korea Expressway Corporation. Will the hon. Minister inform the House whether this is a 
private company and its main expertise is in toll roads in South Korea and other parts of the 
world? 

 
Mr Bodha: From what I understand, KEC is the regulator, the builder. They are, in 

62 

fact, responsible for all the roads, tunnels and bridges in Korea since 1968. 

Mr Mahomed: My question pertains to the Road Decongestion Programme and it is 
as follows.  In the past, we were dealing with Singapore for such matters for two reasons. We 
are both small island developing States and we both use British standards in our design. So, 
why Korea? They don’t use British standard and they are not small islands, as far as I know. 
Why South Korea for the Road Decongestion Programme? 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Bodha: The Road Decongestion Programme was not designed by Singapore. In 
fact, it was designed by South Africa and the consultants were Maynards and they imposed a 
budget of 34 billion, which we have brought back to 15 billion. That’s a first thing. Second is 
that the Korean technology as regards to tunelling, bridges, bridge separators are among the 
best in the world today. 

Dr. Sorefan: The hon. Minister has mentioned about this Korean firm doing the work 
on advising to remedy the situation at Verdun-Terre Rouge Road, taking action, telling what 
to do, what not to do. Will the hon. Minister tell us that this MoU was just for that or is it for 
the Road Decongestion Programme, and if he can table the MoU that has been signed? 

Mr Bodha: Of course, Madam, we can table the MoU.  In  fact, what the MoU has 
done, in fact, is we are proceeding in stages. We have an MoU between the KEC and the 
RDA. If the Mission Report which has been submitted to us satisfies all the conditions that 
we want to implement as regards the Road Decongestion Programme, then we will move to a 
second stage which will be a G to G Agreement.  

Madam  Speaker,  the  problem  of  the  decongestion  in  the  past,  first  of  all,  was  by 

choosing the lowest bidder, we were restrained as regards the technology. 

Second, by choosing the lowest bidder, we had the worst consultants. By going that 
way, we have seen what has happened to the ring road and  to the Terre Rouge-Verdun. So, 
the most important thing for this Government today to be able to see to it that we have the 
best technology, we have to choose which technology to use as regards  tunelling, bridges, 
bridge separators. So, that’s the question today: which technology are we going to use? We 
have a Mission Report which has analysed the technical and financial aspects of the Road 

 

63 

Decongestion Programme. They have come forward with a number of innovations, proposals. 
This is being considered. If we see that technically and financially that’s the best option for 
Mauritius, then we will move to the second stage. 

Madam Speaker:  A last question on this, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan: What  I heard from the hon. Minister, it looks as if this company has 
been already in the file to get the tender, G to G, because you are going to study - if you are 
happy.  Will the hon. Minister give an assusrance to this House… 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Dr.  Sorefan,  this  is  a  matter  of  opinion.  Right!  Ask  your 

question! 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Will  the  hon.  Minister  inform  the  House  that  all  procedures  will  be 

followed, even G to G, not going for a tender in South Korea, if need be? 

Mr Bodha: All the procedures will be followed. This Government will do everything 
in  all  transparency  and  it  will  have  to  be  done  in  the  best  interest  of  the  country,  Madam 
Speaker.  What  we  have  seen  in  the  past:  variations,  delays  in  project  implementation,  the 
worst technology, this is not going to happen with this Government, Madam Speaker. We 
going to table in this Assembly what we can do and show what can be done as regards the 
best Road Decongestion Programme.  

Madam  Speaker,  we  will  go  on  a  G  to  G  if  really  we  feel  that  this  is  in  the  best 
interest. When the Road Decongestion Programme was decided by the former Government, it 
cost  34  billion,  including  the  Dream  Bridge.  When  we  removed  the  Dream  Bridge,  we 
reviewed all of them. I am going to give one example, Madam Speaker.  One tunnel with two 
lanes under the Signal Mountain was to cost 5 billion with the Maynards  under the former 
Minister and the former Government. One tunnel with two lanes! We are going to construct 
tunnels with four lanes, not only one, two for less. And, we are going to come here… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Who asked for your comments, hon. Jhugroo? 

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, we owe it to the nation that we give the best modern 
infrastructure at the best price and, if need be, for compliance to the best standards, because 
standards  were  mentioned.  For  compliance  to  the  best  standards,  we  also  will  come  with 
project management, supervisors, to see that the Koreans or anybody else do what has to be 
done in the best interest of the country. 

 

64 

LE BOUCHON VILLAGE – COMMUNITY CENTRE  

(No. B/421) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions whether, in 
regard to the Le Bouchon Village, in Constituency No. 12, Mahebourg and Plaine Magnien, 
he will state if consideration will be given for the setting up of either a Community Centre or 
a Social Welfare Centre thereat and, if so, indicate when and, if not, why not. 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: I am informed that Le Bouchon Village along with Carreau 
Acacia, Desplaces, Mon Désert and Camp Bosnie is being presently serviced by Camp Carol 
Social  Welfare  Centre.  It  is  accommodated  in  a  centre  in  the  village  hall  of  Camp  Carol 
which operates under the aegis of the Grand Port District Council. 

There  is  also  a  community  centre  which  is  situated  at  Carreau  Esnouf  some  4 

kilometres from Le Bouchon Village.  

The  population  of  Camp  Carol,  Le  Bouchon,  Carreau  Acacia  and  Camp  Bosnie  is  around 
3,000 inhabitants. As regards Le Bouchon, it has a population of about 800 inhabitants and it 
is adjacent to Camp Carol. The Village of Le Bouchon is within the catchment area of Camp 
Carol Village Council. 

It is worth noting that I have requested the Social Welfare Division of my Ministry 
and the Sugar Industry Labour Welfare Fund to carry out a study and to advise on the need of 
having either a Social Welfare Centre or a Community Centre in the region of Le Bouchon.  

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Uteem! 

MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND LANDS - MR R. A. – RECRUITMENT 

(No.  B/422)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in regard 
to Mr R. A. employed at his Ministry, he will state the – 

(a)  

post occupied, indicating the – 

(i)  

qualifications requirements for the post, and  

(ii)  

qualifications held by Mr R. A.  

salary and allowances drawn, and  

procedure followed for the recruitment thereof. 

(b)  

(c)  

65 

 
The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun): 
Madam Speaker, as the House is aware, my Ministry deals with many legal issues including 
the administration of various legal documents on a daily basis.  

Since February 2015, Mr L. A., also known as R. A., Barrister at Law, is employed on 
contract  as  Adviser  on  Legal  Issues  at  my  Ministry.    Mr  L.  A.  has  contributed  in  the 
retrieving  of  more  than  400  hectares  of  undeveloped  State  land  from  promoters  and  in 
forfeiting  deposits  and  recouping  arrears  of  more  than  Rs400  m.    In  all  the  cases  no 
compensation whatsoever was paid to the promoters.  For instance, in the case of a company 
whereby the lease had been cancelled years back, we are now dealing with the case through 
mediation  and  negotiation.    No  compensation  whatsoever  will  have  to  be  paid  to  the 
company.   

However, in the past the Government has had to pay damages to the tune of Rs170 m. 
to  a  company  for  erroneous  cancellation  of  the  Letter  of  Intent  issued  to  the  company. 
Furthermore,  there  were  many  suspected  cases  of  malpractices  whereby  State  lands  were 
granted to promoters for speculation purposes. 

Madam  Speaker,  Mr  L.  A.  has  helped  in  the  implementation  of  the  new  policy 
framework for State land allocation and for the redrafting of all legal documents - this is the 
job  of  Mr  L.  A.  -  such  as  leases  of  State  land,  Letter  of  Intent  and  Letter  of  Reservation 
wherein  strict  time  frame  is  given  to  lessees  for  compliance  and  submission  of  relevant 
documents.  

Mr  L.  A.  has  also  conducted  a  legal  audit  on  suspected  cases  of  malpractices  and 

many cases have been referred to the Police for inquiry. In reply to part (a)… 

 (Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  Please  don’t  disturb,  hon.  Baloomoody!    Allow  the  hon.  Vice-

Prime Minister to reply and then you will ask your question! 

Mr Soodhun: I think he is a lawyer, he should know how.  

(Interruptions) 

What politique? This is the reply.  This is politics? This is the answer to that. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Vice-Prime Minister, reply to your question! 

Mr Soodhun: Okay! I will continue but he should not provoke!  

 

66 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: You don’t have to reply to somebody from a sitting position! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Soodhun: When hon. Jhugroo… 

(Interruptions) 

You have to put order in this sometimes! 

Madam Speaker: You don’t have to reply to a hon. Member from a sitting position! 

Reply! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Soodhun: In reply to part (a) (i) of the question, I wish to inform the House that 
there is no prescribed scheme of service for Adviser on Legal issues in the Public Service but 
logically an Adviser on Legal Issues needs to have a legal background and to be a Barrister at 
Law, entitled to  practice law in Mauritius.  

With 

regard 

(a) 

to  part 

the  question,  Mr  L.  A.  holds  an 
LLB  (Honours)  from  the  University  of  London  and  also  a  Master  Degree  in  Business 
Administration from the University of Mauritius.  He has been called to the Bar in England 
and Wales and also in Mauritius.  

(ii)  of 

(Interruptions) 

 Mr L. A. is on the Roll as Barrister and is a Member of the Mauritian Bar Association 

and is qualified to practise law in Mauritius under the Law Practitioners Act 1984.   

As regards part (b) of the question, Madam Speaker, Mr L. A. is presently drawing an 

all-inclusive salary allowance of Rs95,000… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

Mr Soodhun: …and a monthly travelling allowance of Rs10,200. This all-inclusive 

allowance includes gratuity… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody, please don’t provoke!  

 
Mr Soodhun: This all-inclusive allowance includes gratuity… 

67 

(Interruptions) 

Exactement!  Cashable  leave,  passage  benefits  and  end  of  year  bonus  in  included  in  the 
Rs95,000. 

(Interruptions) 

With respect to part (c) of the question, I wish to inform the House that as the case for 
almost all advisers, current and past, his appointment was made pursuant to section 89 (3) (h) 
of  the  Constitution  and  sections  13.4(ii)  and  13.6  of  the  PRB.    Recommendation  for  the 
appointment of Mr L. A. was made to the Prime Minister through the Secretary to Cabinet 
and the Head of the Civil Service. 

Madam Speaker, the Adviser on Legal Issues is contributing significantly to the “bon 
déroulement”  of  my  Ministry  within  legal  parameters  and  believe  me  “c’est  terminé  la 
braderie de terrain de L’État” since 2015. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Osman Mahomed! Okay, hon. Uteem first and then you. 

Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  May  I  know  from  the  hon.  Vice-  Prime 
Minister whether the main reason why this gentleman, who has less than four years call at the 
Bar, has been retained at a salary of Rs95,000 and, I quote, it is reported because he was   

“un des Campaign Managers de l’Alliance Lepep dans la Circonscription  

Numéro 1 » ? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Soodhun: So, what is wrong? He is an LLB! He is all that… 

Madam Speaker: Don’t get excited, please calm down! 

Mr Soodhun: I agree… 

(Interruptions) 

…but he should know, he is also a Barrister. So, the Barrister has no rights, even his agents? 
How many in 2000… 

(Interruptions) 

 

68 

Let me tell you, Madam Speaker, in 2000 I was Minister and do you know how many of our 
agents in the MMM/MSM were appointed? 

Today it is a miracle? 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Okay. Yes hon. Uteem! 

Order, please! Order! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

I heard the… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

I heard the hon. Vice-Prime Minister’s answer as to the scheme of duty and what this hon. 
gentleman  does.  May  I  know  from  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  whether  it  is  part  of  the 
scheme of duty of Mr L. A. to accompany the Vice-Prime Minister to a Police station to give 
a declaration of a personal nature or was the Vice-Prime Minister only getting a free ride at 
the expense of taxpayers’ money? 

Mr Soodhun: Pe servi Raffick Goolfee pour proxy! Let me give the answer. So far, 
Mr L. A. has not represented any client at the level of Police inquiry. It is the responsibility of 
Mr  L.  A.  to  abide  by  the  code  of  ethics  of  the  Barristers  with  regard  to  employment  as  a 
Barrister and he can go and check at the Central CID whether he has been attending any for 
me or any other person. I can challenge… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Osman Mahomed! 

Mr Soodhun: I can challenge! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 
Mr Mahomed: Thank you… 

69 

(Interruptions) 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. My question pertains to what the hon. Vice-Prime Minister just 
mentioned, reclaiming of 400 hectares of land that were leased to developers and the question 
is as follows: how many Court cases are we being faced firstly and, secondly, has the legal 
advice that has been tendered by Mr R. A. been approved by Government Legal Adviser, by 
that I mean the State Law Office, because the last thing we would want to have at our hands 
is a hefty bill for Government to compensate those land owners? 

Mr Soodhun: I will ask the hon. Member to be patient, he is going to see because a 
lot of cases have been referred to the Central CID and also to the ICAC and the results will 
come  in  very  soon;  it  depends  on  the  DPP  to  decide.  If  the  hon.  Member  comes  with  a 
substantive question, I am going to give him all the details. In the first part of my answer, I 
have given details on how many works have been carried out by Mr R. A. as Legal Adviser. 

Mr Ameer Meea:  In his reply, the hon. Vice-Prime Minister stated that, under Mr R. 
A., his Ministry has recouped more than 400 hectares of land from promoters who had not 
developed their land.  Is he ready to table a list of these 400 hectares of land, where these 
lands are and what extent are these lands? 

Mr Soodhun: I will ask the hon. Member to contact our website and he will get all 

the information.  I have no objection for that. 

Mr  Rutnah:  Can  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  state  to  the  House  whether  he  can 
provide or table a list of all the Advisers that were attached to the Ministry since the  year 
2000 and whether since the year 2000 to now any other Advisers have, in the past, recovered 
400  acres  of  land  and  whether  post  the  appointment  of  Mr  L.  A.  damages  to  the  tune  of 
Rs170 m. have been paid. 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Rutnah,  the  first  part  of  your  question  is  not  admissible 
because it does not relate to the main question.  Now, if the hon. Vice-Prime Minister wants 
to reply to the other question, he can do so. 

Mr Soodhun: In fact, I will say that it has never happened that such a wonderful job 
had been done at the Ministry. It is not a secret, we have it every day; one can read on the 
newspapers.  Let me give the details not for the year 2000, but, at least, for the previous five 
years.  They were – 

 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

70 

Mr Marie Jean-Claude Fleury, Special Adviser to the Minister; 
Mr Ziyad Issack, Special Adviser on information matters; 
Mrs Goolam Maria Sookeechan, Adviser on matters relating to housing states; 
Mr Abdul Rashid Odally, Adviser on housing matters, and 
Mrs Rouksanee Moosun, Adviser in Public Relations Unit. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, they did not need a legal adviser because they have a braderie, a festival de 
la terre, but today we have stopped all these. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Bhagwan, do not provoke anybody, please! 

 

SUPER CASH BACK GOLD SCHEME & BRAMER ASSET MANAGEMENT - 

GOVERNMENT-OWNED ENTITIES - REFUND 

(No.  B/423)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 
Reforms whether, in regard to the policy holders of the Super Cash Back Gold Scheme and of 
Bramer Asset Management, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the National 
Property Fund Ltd., a list of the Government-owned entities and related pensions funds which 
are not eligible to receive any refund or debenture therefrom, indicating in each case the – 

(a)  

(b)  

(c)  

name thereof;  

reasons therefor, and  

amount invested therein. 

(Withdrawn) 

ÉCOLES DE FOOT - FUNDS 

(No.  B/424)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the Écoles de Foot, he 
will state, for each of the years 2013, 2014, 2015 and 2016, the number thereof region-wise, 
indicating in each case, the – 

(a)  

number of children trained thereat, and  

71 

aggregate amount of funds disbursed thereto. 

 
(b)  

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  circulating  the  information  regarding  the 
Écoles de Foot for the years 2013, 2014, 2015 and 2016 together with the number of trainees 
thereat as well as the amount of funds disbursed thereto. 

Mr Uteem: In regard to Port Louis, there were ten Écoles de Foot and a few weeks 
ago, the Ministry has taken the decision to reduce those ten Écoles de Foot to only two Écoles 
de Foot. So, may I know from the hon. Minister the reason for the reduction in the number of 
Écoles de Foot in Port Louis? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  It  was  not  a  few  weeks  ago,  but  it  was  last  year  when  actually 
there was a problem between who was running the Écoles de Foot: the MFA, the Ministry or 
the Local Government.  I was made aware of the problem and an officer of my Ministry had a 
meeting with all the trainers and then they agreed - since there were not funds budgeted for 
them - that they will run the Écoles de Foot provided that we give them their equipment and 
the equipment were being given to them.  We have taken the decision that, as from 01 July 
2016, all the Écoles de Foot all over the island will be re-opened as per the numbers and even 
increased accordingly. 

Mr Uteem: I am extremely surprised by the answer of the hon. Minister because  I 
have a copy of several petitions that have been sent to his Ministry, the latest one being on 
the 02 of May signed by coachers of each École de Foot in Port Louis, asking the Minister 
precisely to reconsider his decision because they do not agree with the closing down of the 
Ecole de Foot.  Each École de Foot has between 50 to 60 students. So, may I know the hon. 
Minister why have they been closed and how are two schools now going to look after 600 
children? 

Mr Sawmynaden: I have just answered to that, Madam Speaker.  I said that it was 
closed and, as from 01 July 2016, all of them will be re-opened and increased accordingly 
because it will be in the budget.  So, they will be paid accordingly. 

Mr Quirin: Dois-je rappeler à l’honorable ministre que le 19 août 2015, son ministère 
avait  émis  un  communiqué  informant  le  public  que  toutes  les  Écoles  de  foot,  les  Centres 
Techniques  Régionaux  et 
le  centre  Technique  National  François-Blaquart  étaient 
opérationnels. De ce fait, je ne comprends pas. On ouvre les écoles de foot, on relance… 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Member, please ask your question! 

72 

 
Mr  Quirin:  Peut-on  savoir  qu’est-ce  qui  explique  qu’aujourd’hui  un  très  grande 
nombre  d’écoles  de  foot,  il  n’y  a  que  deux  écoles  qui  fonctionnent  dans  chaque  région. 
L’honorable Uteem, avant moi, a mentionné Port Louis et moi je parle de toutes les régions 
de l’île - deux écoles de foot alors qu’il y avait au moins une douzaine dans chaque région. 
Peut-on savoir qu’est-ce qui explique ce changement dans la politique du ministère? 

Mr Sawmynaden: I have just answered to that.  I will repeat myself again. All the 
Écoles de foot  fell under my Ministry, the MFA and the Local Government. Some of them 
were being run by the Local Government and some by the MFA.  The MFA wanted to run all 
the  Écoles  de  foot.    Since  football  falls  under  their  purview,  so  we  agreed  to  that.  
Unfortunately, they could not open so that is why we re-open again, but we cannot re-open 
full-fledge. Now the Ministry, after having met all the parties concerned, has decided that, as 
from 01 July, we are going to take all the Écoles de foot under my Ministry, so that we won’t 
have any problem in the future. 

Mr  Quirin:  Madame  la  présidente,  permettez-moi  de  dire  que  d’après  les 
informations qui circulent, les raisons que vient donner l’honorable ministre, ce ne sont pas 
les raisons que les animateurs, les moniteurs de l’école de foot ont reçu à travers les officiers 
du ministère... 

Madam Speaker: Yes, what is your question? 

Mr  Quirin:  Je  vais  encore  une  fois  mentionner  ce  communiqué  du  19  août  où 
mention est faite des structures qui sont des cellules éducatives et sociales alors qu’il y a un 
gros  problème  de  prolifération  de  drogues  dans  le  pays,  Madame  la  présidente.  Doit-on 
comprendre… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: The hon. Member is referring to which communiqué.   

(Interruptions) 

Hon.  Quirin,  please,  sit  down!    You  are  referring  to  which  communiqué.  Refer  to  the 
communiqué,  is  it  by  the  Ministry  of  Youth  and  Sports  and  then  you  ask  your  question.  
Don’t make a statement! 

Mr Quirin: Le communiqué que j’ai mentionné dans ma question précédente datant 
du 19 août 2015. Doit-on comprendre que les raisons que l’honorable ministre vient de nous 
donner sont les vraies raisons ou bien c’est une question de budget comme les informations 

 

73 

que moi j’ai reçues, on parle d’une question de budget c’est pour cela qu’on a fermé un très 
grand nombre d’écoles de foot? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, I just mentioned that everything fell under the 
MFA and they said that they were going to open, but they never open.  I took the initiative to 
open, but we could not open everywhere because of budget constraint.  As from 01 July, all 
of them will be open and the number will be increased as well. 

LIGHT RAIL TRANSIT SYSTEM PROJECT - COST BENEFIT ANALYSIS 

(No. B/425) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to 
the  Light  Rail  Transit  System  Project,  he  will  state  if  the  decision  of  Government  not  to 
proceed with the implementation thereof for economic reasons was based on a long term cost 
benefit analysis and, if so, indicate when same was carried out and by whom. 

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, in the year 2015, the Government reviewed the whole 
project of Light Rail Transit System and we decided to proceed with the implementation of a 
new road decongestion programme as a priority. The Road Decongestion Programme which 
was initially estimated to cost Rs34 billion was revised to Rs15 billion as I mentioned earlier.  

However,  following  recent  negotiations  between  the  Government  of  India  and 
Mauritius,  the  Government  of  India  has  offered  a  new  package  of  financial  facilities  to 
implement major infrastructural projects and in this respect, Government may reconsider the 
Light Rail Transit System Project, as one of the options to be retained.  

Mr Mahomed: I need not ask any more questions because it is being reconsidered. 

So, I go straightaway to PQ No. B/426. 

Madam  Speaker:  The  Table  has  been  advised  that  the  following  PQs  have  been 

withdrawn. PQ Nos B/438, B/439, B/443 and B/444. Yes, hon. Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed: I thank the hon. Minister for his answer because that was a concern of 

ours.  

LIGHT RAIL TRANSIT SYSTEM PROJECT – COMPULSORY 

ACQUISITION 

(No. B/426) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to 

 

74 

the Light Rail Transit System Project, he will state if a Committee has been set up to look 
into the aspect of the land earmarked therefor and, if so, indicate - 

(a)   when the said Committee was set up;  

(b)  

(c)  

the name of the Chairperson thereof, and  

the terms of reference thereof. 

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, in my reply to PQ No. B/85 at the sitting of the National 
Assembly  on  24  February  2015,  I  informed  the  House  that  92  plots  of  land  had  been 
earmarked for acquisition along the corridor between Curepipe and Port Louis. Out of the 92 
plots, 88 plots have already been acquired to the extent of around 47A, 33P, while the owners 
have challenged the legality of the compulsory acquisition in respect of the remaining four 
plots.  

With regard to part (b) of the question, a Technical Committee was, in fact, set up in 
2015 under the chair of Dr. Reesaul, former Chief Executive Officer of the Mauritius Land 
Transport Authority. The other members were representatives of the Ministry of Housing and 
Lands, Ministry of Finance and Economic Development, MLTA and the Ministry of Public 
Infrastructure and Land Transport.  

As regards part (c) of the question, the terms of reference of the Committee was to 
look into the financial and legal implications of retaining the land which has been earmarked 
for the MLRT project for the Road Decongestion Programme.  

However, the Committee never met in the light of the decision to dissolve because we 
took the decision to dissolve the Mauritius land Transport Authority. To date, Government 
has decided to retain the land for any future alternative mode of transport.  

Mr  Mahomed: When  I set this question, it was with the objective that  we are not 
going ahead with the LRT, but now we are going ahead with the  LRT.  My question was 
geared at knowing from the hon. Minister whether applications are being received to release 
the land that was before reserved for the LRT, but I believe this is not the case.  Is that right? 

Mr Bodha: The hon. Member is right. 

Mr Uteem: Has any study been carried out to find out what would be the increase in 

cost of this LRT Project if the Government goes ahead with it?  

75 

 
Mr  Bodha:  No.  In  fact,  the  whole  concept  is  being  reviewed,  the  alignment,  the 
number  of  stations  and  the  technology.  So,  we  are  at  the  stage  of  reassessing  the  project. 
There has been an informal meeting under the chairmanship of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 
and  representatives  of  the  different  Ministries,  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic 
development and MPI.  What is being considered is to see all the works that have been done 
with the Singaporean Consultants, to go through all the documents which are there and to see 
whether we can make them reconsider in the light of a number of new issues like alignment, 
number of stations and whether we are going to use this technology. So, that is where we are 
today. 

Dr. Sorefan: Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister has mentioned that certain plots of 
land have already been acquired.  That was as per the old design of the previous Government 
and  they  have  been  acquired  and  the  hon.  Minister  is  mentioning  that  there  will  be  new 
design, new rethinking.  Does that mean if he is going with a new design, those lands that 
have already been acquired and are not being used will be returned to the owner? 

Mr Bodha: We are not yet there, we have to see the alignment. I said we have to see 
the new stations. In fact, the whole issue is how do we complement the Road Decongestion 
Programme and the LRT? So, what we are thinking, in fact, is to have three stages, that is, the 
infrastructure  today,  the  second  stage  is  the  Road  Decongestion  Programme  and  the  third 
stage will be the LRT which will complement the whole mass transit system in Mauritius. 

 

 

BRITISH AMERICAN INVESTMENTS – ALLEGED PONZI SCHEME 

(No. B/427) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 
Reforms  whether,  in  regard  to  the  British  American  Investments  which  were  presented  by 
Government on Friday 3 April 2015 as being a vast Ponzi scheme, he will, for the benefit of 
the House, obtain information as to if any complaint has ever been filed by policy holders 
thereof  prior  thereto  for  non-payment/non-reimbursement  and,  if  so,  indicate  the  number 
thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

SCRAP METALS - EXPORT  

76 

 
(No. B/428) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Industry,  Commerce  and  Consumer  Protection  whether,  in 
regard to the metal recycling market, he will state the expected impact thereon of the recent 
decision of Government to ban the export of scrap metals. 

Mr  Gungah:  Madam  Speaker,  as  you  may  be  aware,  in  January  this  year, 
Government decided, among others, to ban the export of scrap metal, including copper, with 
a view to better controlling and regulating scrap metal activities.  

This decision has been prompted mainly by the fact that there have been substantial 
number of thefts of scrap metal in the country, especially in institutions like the Mauritius 
Telecom and the Central Electricity Board whereby the telecommunications and electricity 
networks  were  disturbed  and  street  lighting  cut  off.  Even  religious  organisations  have  not 
been spared.  

In 2007, 622 thefts of scrap metal had been reported to the Police, 504 in 2008, 257 in 
2009, 312 in 2010 and 357 in 2011.  Taking into consideration the number of thefts of scrap 
metal, it was decided in August 2012 to ban the exportation of scrap copper. 

 
However, though the number of thefts went down, they still occurred and in 2014 for 
instance,  124  cases  were  reported  to  the  Police.  Moreover,  there  are  companies  which  are 
illegally  exporting  copper  by  hiding  it  within  masses  of  scrap  metals.  This  has  been 
confirmed by the Mauritius Revenue Authority after examination of containers with heavy 
scrap  metal  and  aluminium  scrap  meant  for  export  and  following  tests  effected  by  the 
Mauritius Standards Bureau on samples of scrap taken from these containers.  

Consequently, in January 2016, it was decided to ban the exportation of scrap metal 

altogether.  

As  a  result  of  the  ban  on  exportation  of  scrap  metals,  scrap  metal  dealers  and 
exporters  have  to  sell  their  scrap  metals  to  foundries  and  steel  manufacturing  plants  in 
Mauritius.  

Samlo  Koyenco  Steel  Co.  Ltd,  being  the  sole  foundry  in  operation  presently,  has 
given the commitment, by way of a proposed agreement, to purchase all scrap metals, ferrous 
and non-ferrous in an unlimited quantity from the dealers and exporters.  The company has 
also agreed to pay the exporters the international market rate, that is, the International Scrap 
Metal Price Index – Asian less cost of freight and port charges. 

 
As  such,  companies  in  the  metal  recycling  market  and  scrap  metal  operators  may 

77 

enter into agreement with Samlo Koyenco Steel Co. Ltd to sell their scrap metal. 

I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  from  information  obtained,  another  company  has 
proposed to set up a foundry for the melting of copper, brass and aluminium metals. Once 
this foundry is operational, operators may sell their scrap metal to that foundry as well. I have 
also  been  informed  that  there  are  two  more  companies  that  have  shown  their  interest  in 
setting up foundries. 

However, it is noted that there are companies which, though not operating in the scrap 
metal  sector,  generate  scrap  metal  like  ‘tin  free  steel’  from  their  production  process.  Such 
companies have approached Samlo Koyenco Steel Co. Ltd to take over their scrap metals. 

Recently, it has been brought to my attention that Samlo Koyenco Steel Co. Ltd has 
informed that cans are mainly composed of carbon and that the composition of these cans are 
not the same as scrap metals normally melt in their furnace; Samlo Koyenco Steel Co. Ltd 
cannot, therefore, collect such items from these companies.  

I am, therefore, examining this particular request of these particular factories to find a 

solution to the satisfaction of all parties concerned. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Osman Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I understood from the reply of the hon. 
Minister  that  theft  was  the  main  concern.  Now,  before  the  decision,  my  question  is  as 
follows: would the hon. Minister shed light on the following: before there were a lot of small 
families earning living out of metal recycling, be it to send to foundries or to export and now 
there is only one player in the market until such time that others come into play, what impact 
will this have on those small recyclers who are living out of this? 

Mr Gungah: Madam Speaker, according to information that I have, the number of 
those  holding  valid  permit  as  at  date:  scrap  metal  exporter  licence:  11,  scrap  metal  dealer 
licence: 14, scrap metal carrier permit: 59, and scrap metal collector permit: 62. There are 
others  working  informally  in  the  sector  and  at  the  same  time  working  elsewhere.    My 
Ministry is acting as an intermédiaire between all these operators and, for the time being, as 
there is only one foundry, Samlo, we must find solutions with all parties concerned. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

 

78 

Mr Mohamed: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Could the hon. Minister tell us whether 
he is aware that true it is that there are regulations that have been made banning the export of 
metals including copper, but at the same time his Ministry has delivered an export permit to 
one particular individual of Indian origin, coming from India, to operate a foundry to melt 
copper  and  export  the  melted  copper  under  a  different  HS  code  and,  in  so  doing, 
circumventing the whole ban as provided for in the regulation? 

Mr Gungah: Madam Speaker, I am not aware of that. In any case, if that would have 
been the case, I am sure I would have known because particular files like that come to me 
directly. I am sure it is not like that. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhagwan: Can I know, Madam Speaker, from the hon. Minister whether he has 
received,  on  several  occasions,  the  operators  in  this  recycling  business  and  whether  they 
made  proposals  to  the  hon.  Minister  who  promised  them  to  come  with new  regulations  to 
allow them to go to other than Samlo? 

Mr Gungah: Madam Speaker, I have met the Association of Scrap Metal Workers 
and there have been regular meetings with officers of my Ministry. My Ministry informed the 
Association to meet Samlo-Koyenco Steel Company Ltd to sort out everything that is written 
in the agreement in case there are changes to be made. But unfortunately, that meeting could 
not  be  held  and  my  Ministry  took  the  initiative  to  invite  both  parties  for  a  meeting,  but 
unfortunately again, the scrap metal association did not turn up. 

Mr Jhugroo: After having listened to the concern of hon. Osman Mahomed and that 
of the hon. Minister, can he give a guarantee that the only foundry Samlo-Koyenco that we 
have got is giving a guaranteed price that the dealers of metal scraps will get the same price 
as they were getting before? This was the concern. 

(Interruptions) 

No,  because  the  information  that  I  think  he  has  got  and  I  have  got  is  not  the  same  price 
guaranteed by Samlo-Koyenco. So, I think that the hon. Minister should look after the price 
being paid to all these dealers with scrap metals? 

Mr Gungah: Madam Speaker, I have got a copy of the sale of scrap metals agreement 
and it is clearly written - it has not yet been signed - that is why we want them to negotiate in 
case there is anything they want to change… 

 

79 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, please! 

Mr Gungah: …in the clause of payment it is clearly written that the price of the scrap 
metals - ferrous and nonferrous - will be international market rate. That is, as I mentioned in 
my reply, the international scrap metal price index Asian, less the costs of ocean freight and 
port charges. 

EBENE - CULTURE HOUSE - CONSTRUCTION 

(No.  B/429)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 
asked the Minister of Arts and Culture whether, in regard to the proposed construction of a 
Culture House in the region of Ebene, he will state where matters stand. 

Mr Baboo: Madam Speaker, as you may already be aware, the project to construct a 

Culture House dates as far back as the 1990s.  

I wish to refer the hon. Member to the reply I made to PQ No. B/629 at the National 

Assembly on 06 October 2015. Since then, the progress achieved to date is as follows - 

(b) 

(a)  With  regard  to  the  site  for  the  proposed  construction  of  the  Culture  House, 
necessary  procedures  have  been  initiated  for  the  swapping  of  the  lands 
between  the  Hindi  and  Urdu  Speaking  Unions  and  my  Ministry  as 
recommended by the Chinese experts.  
Concerning  the  funding  of  the  Culture  House  Project,  I  am  informed  that  it 
will  be  co-financed  by  the  Government  of  Mauritius  and  the  Chinese 
authorities. In this regard, a request for funding has been made to the Ministry 
of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  in  the  forthcoming  budget.  The 
project, which is a priority of my Ministry, will be undertaken in two phases 
and will be kick-started during the Financial Year 2016/2017.  

Madam  Speaker,  the  House  may  wish  to  note  that  the  Culture  House  will 
accommodate the National Archives Department and the National Library for the time being.  
The  extension  of  the  building  to  accommodate  the  departments  and  the  parastatal  bodies 
operating under the aegis of my Ministry, will be envisaged later as Multi Carrier Mauritius 
Ltd has imposed a limit of five floors only for the construction. 

Mr Ramano: Madame la présidente, dans une interview du journal  l’Express en date 
du 29 avril 2016, le Chairman de la Bibliothèque Nationale est en train de tirer la sonnette 

 

80 

d’alarme concernant une véritable urgence de la situation. Il ajoute même que d’ici cinq ans à 
dix ans on peut se demander combien de documents valables et historiques on va perdre. Est-
ce  que  d’ici  la  construction  de  ce  centre,  y  a-t-il  des  mesures  urgentes  que  le  ministère 
envisage de prendre? 

Mr Baboo: As an urgent measure, my Ministry is considering to relocate the National 
Archives  Department  and  the  National  Library  to  a  new  rented  building.  Funds  for  the 
purpose have been requested from the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah! Yes, hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr Bérenger: For clarification, I think I heard we are talking about a new Culture 
House that will host the archives and so on, and now the hon. Minister says another building.  
Can he be more explicit? 

Mr Baboo: No, as hon. Ramano just asked: whether measures have been taken.  We 
are relocating a new building in the meantime that we set up the new building at the Triangle 
of Ebene. So, we will put an Expression of Interest in order to rent a building. 

Mr Bérenger: We have been following that for decades now.  We are committing a 
crime against our archives and the worst thing that you can do with archives is move them 
about. Everybody knows that. The worst thing is that every time you move archives from one 
building to another, you lose, I don’t know what part thereof and now we are being told that, 
in the meantime, this will be done.  There would not be any archives left in Mauritius if we 
carry on like that! 

Mr Baboo: I do agree, but the necessary precaution will be taken. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah! You want to? 

(Interruptions) 

You have got a reply to the hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Hon. Rutnah! 

Mr  Rutnah:  Can  the  hon.  Minister  state  whether  pre-construction  surveys  have 
already been carried out and when construction works will actually kick off in relation to this 
Culture House? 

 

81 

Mr Baboo:  The kick-off will be after the Budget and let me tell the hon. Member, 
even today, the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development and the Chinese Authorities 
just had a meeting regarding that matter. 

Madam Speaker:  Time is over! 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10(2) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move that all the business on today’s Order 

Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

PUBLIC BILL 

Second Reading 

THE NATIONAL WAGE CONSULTATIVE COUNCIL BILL  

(No. VI of 2016) 

Order for Second Reading read. 

The Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training (Mr S. 
Callichurn): Madam Speaker, I move that the National Wage Consultative Council Bill (No. 
VI of 2016) be read a second time. 

to  make  recommendations 

The  object  of  the  Bill  is  to  provide  for  the  establishment  of  a  National  Wage 
Consultative  Council 
the 
introduction of a national minimum wage in both the public and private sector with a view to 
establishing through a transparent and participative democratic process a dividing line which 
no worker in the Republic of Mauritius should ever fall below.  

to 

the  Government  regarding 

Madam Speaker, the House will recall that in the Government Programme 2015-2019, 
it was announced that a minimum wage Bill would be introduced for the workers at the lower 
end of the ladder.  I take pride in introducing the National Wage Consultative Council Bill for 
its second reading today which will provide for the introduction of the long awaited National 
Minimum Wage. 

 

82 

The National Minimum Wage will apply to all workers employed in the private as well 
as public sectors.  This means that the lowest paid workers covered by the NRB, the PRB, 
and also those who are neither governed by the PRB nor the NRB, will soon be entitled to a 
decent floor wage.  

Madam Speaker, we are today, under the leadership of Sir Anerood Jugnauth, making 

history by establishing a Council to introduce a National Minimum Wage  

in  the  context  of  the  reconstruction  of  our  economy  after  years  of  social  and  economic 
setbacks. A national minimum wage is a major policy decision aimed at addressing the issue 
of  poverty  and  income  inequality  with  a  view  to  improving  the  welfare  of  workers,  thus 
improving the welfare of the entire nation. It is also a major step in the furtherance of our 
economic transformation goal to make Mauritius a high-income country. The setting up of 
the National Wage Consultative Council is the historical stepping stone towards  achieving 
this goal.  

I am confident that we shall once again succeed in our endeavour as in the 80’s and 
90’s, when under the able leadership and vision of Sir Anerood Jugnauth, his Government 
transformed the country into a prosperous  economy and  an inclusive society based on  full 
employment, social mobility and the emergence of an important middle class. What we are 
aiming  today,  Madam  Speaker,  is  to  alleviate  the  suffering  of  all  those  workers  who  are 
toiling hard but still find themselves earning wages below the poverty line. 

Madam  Speaker,  with  time,  the  issue  of  Minimum  wage  has  taken  an  international 
dimension in a world of growing poverty and wage inequality and this situation has impelled 
the International Labour Organisation and the European Commission to promote, in line with 
the Decent Work Agenda, a decent and sustainable wage policy amongst their member States 
to prevent growing poverty, ensure decent job quality and better protect vulnerable workers. 

Before going into the details of the Bill, I should like to elaborate on some pertinent 
socio-economic and labour market factors which have influenced policy makers to consider 
introducing a national minimum wage in different regions of the world.   

It is encouraging to note that minimum wage is gaining ground in both developed and 
developing  countries.  Some  150  countries  have  already  adopted  some  form  of  minimum 
wage policy.  60 % of these countries have implemented a national minimum wage and 40%, 
a minimum wage based on sectors or occupations.  

 

83 

An ILO/World Bank survey revealed that, when measured in purchasing power parity, 
the average monthly wage in developed countries is more than three times that of emerging 
and developing economies. As a matter of fact, out of 209 million wage earners who worked 
in 32 developing countries and 20 million were earning below the extreme poverty line of 1.2 
US Dollar per day and 64 million earning below 2 US Dollar which is well below the relative 
poverty line between 1997 and 2006.  

There  is  at  present  no  single  wage  system  in  Mauritius  and  there  exists  no  common 
minimum  wage  for  various  occupational  jobs  across  industries  or  sectors  of  the  economy.  
The current system is based principally on Government’s intervention through the National 
Remuneration Board which is responsible for setting minimum wages on an industry basis 
for different occupational groups in the private sector.   

Additionally, the Pay Research Bureau establishes wages in the public sector whilst the 
Annual Tripartite Committee determines the cost of living allowance for both the private and 
public  sector  workers  annually.  The  system  is  rather  uncoordinated  and  hence  there  is  no 
working  relationship  between  the  existing  wage  fixing  mechanisms.  This  fragmented 
approach is responsible for the existing disparities within the private sector and also between 
the private and public sectors with respect to unduly low paid jobs.  

As regards the mode of wage fixing, we have a long established tradition of minimum 
wage on an industry based system and consultation of wage fixing since 1934. The minimum 
wage  was  first  introduced  in  the  private  sector  in  1939  and  was  applied  only  to  the 
agricultural workers in the district of Moka following the recommendations of the Minimum 
Wages Advisory Board which was set up under the Minimum Wages Ordinance of 1934.  It 
was extended to the labourers of the whole island in 1941. The minimum Wage Advisory 
Board,  however,  used  its  power  sparingly  and  covered  a  limited  number  of  sectors  and 
occupations,  namely  the  Baking  Industry,  the  Printing  Industry,  labourers  employed  on  a 
monthly  basis  in  the  sugar  industry,  shop  assistants  and  clerks.    The  Minimum  Wages 
Ordinance of 1934 was replaced by the Minimum Wage Ordinance of 1950, which itself was 
replaced by the Regulation of Workers Ordinance of Wages and Conditions of Employment 
of  1961.    With  these  changes  more  workers  were  covered,  namely  the  female  factory 
workers, workers in the shopping sector, messengers and workers in the construction and tea 
Industries.  However, as from 1965, the number of Wages Council Orders started to decrease 
dramatically  and  in  1973,  the  Industrial  Relations  Act  repealed  the  1961  Ordinance  and 
introduced the National Remuneration Board (NRB). 

 

84 

Although the NRB has undoubtedly served its purpose, but undeniably failed to provide 

the universal safety net that this Bill is going to provide. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  PRB  covers  workers  in  the  public  sector  and  its 
recommendations are generally covered to be a maximum wage which is generally above the 
poverty line and is not subject to collective bargaining.  

However,  the  PRB  structure  does  not  cater  for  the  setting  up  of  a  minimum  wage. 
Furthermore,  collective  bargaining  coverage  has  remained  significantly  low  in  the  private 
sector in view of the low union density which stands at around 12%. 

Hence,  it  will  be  practically  impossible  for  the  lowest  paid  workers  in  the  private 
sector to get out of the poverty trap if we continue to rely solely on collective bargaining and 
the present wage system. 

Madam Speaker, although by international comparison, we cut a good social picture 
in respect of the Sustainable Development Goals, the progression and extent of poverty and 
social  inequality  in  our  country  is  becoming  a  major  source  of  concern.    In  its  report 
“Mauritius: Inclusiveness of Growth and Shared Poverty” released in 2015, the World Bank 
has  highlighted  the  relative  poverty  and  the  poverty  gap  as  well  as  social  inequality  have 
increased during the period of 2007 to 2012. 

Inclusiveness of Growth and Shared Prosperity 

According to the report on “Inclusiveness of Growth and Shared Prosperity” of the 
World Bank, increasing economic vulnerability is a worrisome trend in Mauritius. The share 
of the population considered economically vulnerable increased from 10.2 percent in 2007 to 
12.7  percent  in  2012.  According  to  Statistics  Mauritius,  33,600  households  comprising  of 
122,700 persons were living in relative poverty in 2012. The proportion of the middle class 
population  has  also  declined.    Poverty  is  especially  high  among  the  unemployed.  Rising 
income inequality and lagging shared prosperity had adverse impact on relative poverty and 
inequality in Mauritius. 

It is to be noted that  absolute poverty fell  from 8.5 percent to 6.9 percent between 

2007 and 2012 whilst relative poverty rose from 8.5 to 9.8 percent.  

Income inequality, measured by the Gini-coefficient, also increased from 0.36 to 0.39. 

Madam Speaker, the National Economic and Social Council (NESC) in its report on 

“Income equality in Mauritius” published in December 2014 has highlighted the following - 

 
(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

85 

in  2012,  the  highest  20%  income  earners  in  Mauritius  were  earning  almost 
half  (that  is,  47%)  of  the  total  income  in  the  country  compared  to  44%  in 
2001; 

for the same period, the share of total income earned by the lowest 20% had 
fallen, reaching 5.4% from 6.4 in 2001; 

finally, the ratio of the highest 20% to the lowest 20% of income share has 
increased over the last past decade from 6.9 to 8.8 %. 

The analysis of the NESC, among others, portrays that those in the bottom group have 

a dwindling share of total income. 

This  also  means,  Madam  Speaker,  that  the  previous  Government  has  lamentably 
failed to address effectively the issue of poverty and income inequality. In fact, its policies, 
over the last decade had negative effect on increasing income inequality. We have noted with 
concern  that  the  poor  has  become  poorer,  and  the  rich  richer,  while  the  middle  class  has 
shrunk.  Resources and energy have been wasted, if not channelled for the benefits of just a 
few and of their close ones.  Hundreds of millions of rupees have just gone down the drain on 
useless projects. Millions of rupees that could have been, otherwise, utilised for the benefits 
of the poor have also landed in private coffers. 

Madam  Speaker,  combating  poverty  and 

this 
Government’s agenda. We have, with this perspective, taken the challenge to come up with 
the relevant legislation for the introduction of the National Minimum Wage in line with our 
Government  Programme.  We  have  not  shirked  from  our  responsibilities  in  spite  of  the 
difficult economic situation which we have unfortunately inherited.  

inequality  remains  high  on 

The introduction of the National Minimum Wage should be seen as an additional tool 
to effectively address the problem of poverty and income inequality. This Government holds 
a humanist view of the development. We believe in an inclusive society and have placed our 
people at the heart of the economic reconstruction of the country. With the introduction of the 
National Minimum Wage, we are making a paradigm shift and setting the foundation of a 
new welfare model. Our focus is on giving our people the opportunities they need to support 
themselves,  principally  through  work.  It  is  only  by  reconciling  social  justice  to  economic 
development  strategies  that  we  will  be  able  to  tackle  the  problem  of  social  exclusion  and 
structural  unemployment  in  a  sustainable  manner.  With  this  aim  in  mind,  reduction  of 
poverty and promotion of shared prosperity will be the pillars of our socio-economic agenda. 

86 

 
Madam  Speaker,  in  the  formulation  of  the  National  Minimum  Wage  Policy,  I  am 
inspired by the values contained in the message of Franklin D. Roosevelt, former President of 
the  United  States,  to  the  congress  in  1937  on  the  occasion  of  the  establishment  of  the 
minimum wage. I quote – 

“As we move resolutely to extend the frontiers of social progress, we must be guided 
by the practical reason and not by barren formulae.  We must never bear in mind that 
our objective   is to improve and not to impair the standard of living of those who are 
now undernourished, poorly clad and ill-housed (…).” 

Consultation with social partners 

Madam Speaker, some trade unionists have expressed their reservations regarding the 
setting up of the National Wage Consultative Council. They have proposed that it is for the 
Government to determine the National Minimum Wage. 

I would like to lay emphasis on the fact that this Government is firmly attached to the 
principles of social dialogue and tripartism. We are also bound, under the ILO Convention 
No. 26 on the Minimum Wage-Fixing Machinery, which Mauritius has ratified, to set up a 
tripartite institution for the determination of wages. 

Government, therefore, before deciding to set up a Council for the introduction of a 
national  minimum  wage,  has  had  extensive  consultations  with  all  social  partners.    Trade 
unions  and  Employers  do  not,  for  obvious  reasons,  share  the  same  views  on  the  proposed 
wage fixing mechanism and the mode of determining the National Minimum Wage.  It is, 
indeed, not easy and practically impossible to get a consensus on an issue as sensitive and 
complex as the National Minimum Wage. 

Hence,  in  deciding  the  way  forward  for  the  introduction  of  the  national  minimum 
wage, we have taken into consideration the recommendation contained in the report of Mr 
Francois Eyraud, who is an ILO Consultant. I must commend the report which proposes the 
mechanism  for  the  determination  of  a  national  minimum  wage.  At  this  stage,  Madam 
Speaker, I will fail in my duty as a responsible Minister on the subject of labour if I do not 
express my appreciation for this laudable initiative of my predecessor who commissioned this 
report in 2012. 

We  have  also  drawn  from  the  experiences  of  the  countries  such  as  Hong  Kong, 

Singapore, South Korea, Australia and more particularly the UK, Malaysia and Germany. 

87 

 
The House may wish to know that our decision to proceed by way of a National Wage 
Consultative Council has also been inspired by the effectiveness of the dialogue process in 
UK,  Malaysia  and  Germany.  These  countries,  like  Mauritius,  have  a  tradition  of  social 
dialogue and tripartism on labour market issues. UK set up a Low Pay Commission in 1997.  
Malaysia proceeded with the establishment of a National Wage Consultative Council in 2012 
and Germany with a National Wage Commission in 2015. 

We  have,  therefore,  in  line  with  our  democratic  tradition,  opted  to  involve  all 
stakeholders in the decision making process instead of deciding unilaterally on the National 
Minimum  Wage.  We  believe  that  the  Council  will  provide  the  appropriate  platform  and 
mechanism to facilitate interactions and constructive discussions among stakeholders. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  understand  that  questions  are  being  raised  on  the  impact  of  a 
National  Minimum  Wage  on  Employment,  particularly  on  SMEs  and  competitiveness  in 
general, on the role of the NRB, on the mode of determining the national minimum wage and 
on the issue of productivity. 

A number of studies were carried out, commissioned by the Low Pay Commission in 
the  United  Kingdom  to  explore  the  impact  of  National  Minimum  Wage  on  Small  and 
Medium sized business in 1999 and 2000.  There were heated debates in U.K, Germany and 
many  other  countries  around  the  effects  of  National  Minimum  Wage  on  employment.  
Standard  economic  theories  had  predicted  a  decline  in  employment  and  hours  of  work, 
amongst others, and also in the substitution of labour by machinery and equipment. 

However,  these  apprehensions  did  not  turn  out  to  be  true.    On  the  contrary,  it  was 
 
observed that small enterprises managed to contain adverse labour cost effects by increasing 
training  to  raise  labour  productivity.    Additionally,  they  have  cut  costs  and  increased 
efficiency  through  innovative  work  process,  modern  technologies  and  by  adopting  product 
market strategies to increase revenue. 

It has long been recognised that SMEs represent a powerful tool for economic growth 
and  employment  creation.    When  we  look  at  the  global  positive  effect  that  the  National 
Minimum Wage has had on other countries like U.K, Germany and Malaysia, I am convinced 
that the introduction of the National Minimum Wage will represent an opportunity rather than 
a risk for our country. 

88 

 
The efficiency and sustainability of the National Minimum Wage in our country will 
depend  on  the  capacity  of  enterprises  to  change  and  adapt  their  business  model  to  the 
objectives set by this Government in its Vision 2030.  

Madam Speaker, cheap labour is no longer compatible with the new business model. 
Our competitive edge and economic success hinge more on the capacity of our enterprises to 
create  value  through  innovation  and  technological  revolution.  This  is  the  new  gateway  to 
economic success. Our enlightened entrepreneurs have already embarked on this process.  

We have drawn various key lessons from these international experiences - 

(i) 

(ii) 

Following the introduction of a National Minimum Wage in UK in 1999, more 
than 1.2 million workers were paid higher wages thus, contributing to alleviate 
poverty for the poor segment of the working population. 

Aggregate employment grew up and in fact, the number of jobs increased by 
4.4  %  after  the  introduction  of  the  National  Minimum  Wage  in  the  UK  in 
1999.  The  figures  of  unemployment  were  at  its  lowest  point  in  Germany  in 
1990, one year after the introduction of the National Minimum Wage in 2015. 
In Malaysia, Madam Speaker, in 2013, Government set the National Minimum 
wage at 49.9 % of the median wage while the World Bank recommended that 
it should be set in the range of 20% to 30% of the median wage. There has 
been no significant negative impact on employment there.  Only three years 
after  the  introduction  of  the  National  Minimum  Wage  in  Malaysia,  the 
Malaysian Minister of Human Resource has announced his intention to review 
and increase the minimum wage. This clearly shows that the introduction of 
the National Minimum Wage has not impacted negatively on employment and 
on the contrary, it has benefitted both employees and businesses. 

Madam  Speaker,  questions  are  being  raised  as  to  the  role  of  the  National 
Remuneration Board (NRB) in this new set up. Let me inform the House that the NRB will, 
in the first instance, continue to co-exist with the Council. The Council will be a first step in 
the restructuring of our wage fixing mechanisms. You may wish to note that Government has 
already  taken  3  important  decisions  to  make  our  wage  system  operate  in  a  more  efficient 
manner.  First,  as  regards,  the  employees  of  the  private  sector,  all  the  core  conditions  of 
employment  would  be  harmonised  and  consolidated  in  the  Employment  Rights  Act.    The 
Remuneration  Regulations,  however,  will  continue  to  exist  and  will  provide  only  for 

 

89 

minimum  wages  and  conditions  specific  to  a  sector  of  employment.  Second,  the 
Remuneration  Regulations  will  be  revised  every  five  years  and  lastly  there  will  be 
synchronisation of the salary review in both the public sector and the private sector which 
will take place at the same interval.  

I am also considering in the context of the reform of the NRB to review completely 

the approach of wage fixing.  

Government  has  considered  it  more  appropriate  to  introduce  a  National  Minimum 
Wage  instead  of  a  living  wage.  As  we  know  the  National  Minimum  Wage  is  for  the 
individual worker, whereas the living wage is for the household. For that reason, it is difficult 
to put in place a living wage, which is also related to continuous increase in cost of living and 
in  view  of  the  fact  that  the  lower  segment  of  the  working  class  often  benefits  social  aids 
which are difficult to quantify and value for each specific worker. 

 
The national minimum wage will be calculated on a proportion of domestic median 
wage.  This method is adopted by all countries which have a national minimum wage as the 
median wage is commonly used to calculate the poverty line. 

The National Minimum Wage is generally calculated at a level which varies between 
30% and 60% of the median wage depending on the level of economic development.  For 
example in 2014, the National Minimum Wage as a percentage of the median wage was 61% 
in France, 49.9% in Malaysia, 48% in U.K and 46 % in Germany. 

Madam  Speaker,  We  are  conscious  that  the  introduction  of  a  National  Minimum 
Wage  will  cause  an  inevitable  disruption  in  wage  relativity.    The  Council  has  thus  been 
entrusted the responsibility to address this issue and  recommend a master conversion table to 
adjust wages as appropriate in the private sector and besides provisions have also been made 
for the adjustment of wages in the public sector by the PRB.  

Madam  Speaker,  there  is  actually  a  great  confusion  among  our  friends,  the  trade 
unionists,  concerning  the  calculation  of  the  National  Minimum  Wage  on  an  hourly  rate.  I 
would like to assure the workers of our Motherland that this Government does not intend to 
liberalise the hours of work and to replace the actual working period by the zero hour or a 
split hour system. The actual working hour system, be it 40/45 hours  a week or 90 hours a 
fortnight  will  not  be  changed  with  the  introduction  of  the  National  Minimum  Wage, 
calculated on  an hourly  rate. The  calculation on  an hourly  rate was meant to facilitate the 
computation for the part time workers.  In order to dispel any doubt, I am proposing to bring 

 

90 

an amendment at committee stage so that the National Minimum Wage would be calculated 
on an hourly rate for part time workers and a monthly rate for full time workers. 

I  also  wish  to  add  that  the  National  Minimum  Wage  will  be  enforced  by  way  of 
 
Regulations, which will provide for the payment of the National Minimum Wage for both full 
time and part time workers.    

Madam Speaker, the promotion of sustainable productivity  growth, competitiveness 

and job creation is a key priority for realizing decent work and reducing poverty.   

Many  countries  have  made  considerable  progress  towards  achieving  this  goal. 
Increased labour productivity in Asia has played a leading role in the region’s tremendous 
growth performance and has helped to increase competitiveness and reduce poverty. 

Accelerating productivity growth will be more urgent in the coming 10 to 20 years.  
In order to compensate for labour force trends, we will need faster labour productivity growth 
to maintain our GDP growth rate. 

A key requirement for accelerating productivity growth is an environment that allows 
enterprises  to  improve  productivity  and  remain  competitive.    Policies,  institutions  and 
regulations  that  provide  such  an  environment  for  enterprises  can  make  a  substantial 
contribution to employment creation. 

Another key factor for productivity growth is the availability of skilled workers and 
the reform of national training policies and systems. Progressive workplace practices based 
on  good  working  conditions,  continuous  workplace  learning,  good  labour-management 
relations and respect for workers’ rights, are equally important for raising productivity and 
promoting decent work. 

It  is  important  to  recognise  that  business  sector  productivity  is  primarily  the 
responsibility of the private sector and not Government.  Government creates a favourable 
framework for businesses to improve productivity.  But it is for the private sector, through its 
own actions, to determine sectoral productivity growth. 

As a nation, we need to facilitate the movement of our workforce from low to high 
productivity  activities.    Our  institutions,  both  public  and  private,  have  to  be  revisited  to 
increase productivity. 

With  the  introduction  of  the  National  Minimum  Wage  and  with  the  review  of  the 
labour  legislations  to  better  protect  workers’  rights  Government  is  creating  conditions  to 

 

91 

address the issue of productivity under new auspices. We all know that it is only when the 
fundamental rights of workers are safeguarded that they can be motivated and become more 
productive. Productivity should be a win-win policy, where workers work smarter and benefit 
from the productivity gains and where employers benefit from more value added.  

Madam Speaker, I had extensive consultation with the social partners and I have taken 
note of their concerns. I have, in a spirit of constructive social dialogue, attempted to take on 
board as far as possible the issues raised by the trade unions. In deciding on the amendments, 
I  had  to  strike  a  right  balance  between  the  workers’  rights  and  the  imperatives  of  the 
economy. I shall at committee stage, propose the following amendments -   

(i) 

In clause 2, I am amending the definition of “trade union” and replacing it by 
“workers’ organisation” and “workers’ organisation” has been redefined as “a 
registered  trade  union,  federation  or  confederation  of  workers,  having  no 
double representation”, this is with a view not to restrict the representativeness 
of workers to only one type of trade union organisation. 

 

A new definition of “young worker” has been given to mean “a person who is 
over the age of 16 but not under the age of 18.” 

(ii)  With a view to broadening the scope of the impact study and thereby better 
reflecting the evolution of the labour market following the introduction of the 
national minimum wage, the following concepts, that is, “wealth and income 
distribution,  wage  ratio,  gender  discrimination  and  employment  of  foreign 
workers”  have  been  included  in  the  list  of  the  issues  to  be  covered  in  the 
evaluation study to be carried out by the Council in clause 5 (a).   

(iii) 

To avoid confusion and misinterpretation, a provision has been made in clause 
5  (b)  (i)  and  (ii)  for  the  determination  of  the  national  minimum  wage 
calculated on an hourly rate for part-time workers and a monthly rate for full-
time workers, with a view to ensuring that the actual working hours regime 
and  the  mode  of  calculation  of  wages  and  salary  of  a  worker  would  not  be 
altered. 

(iv)  Additionally with a view to eliminating any possible notion of discrimination 
on the ground of age and to make a difference between a trainee, a full-fledged 
and qualified worker, the definition of  young worker has been removed and 
replaced by a new sub paragraph in respect of a lower rate for a trainee.  

 
(v) 

(vi) 

(vii) 

(viii) 

(ix) 

92 

 The  determination  of  additional  remuneration  will  not  fall  under  the  ambit 
and purview of the Council which will have the sole responsibility to make 
recommendation on the national minimum wage. 
In order to ensure that the trade union representatives of both the private and 
public  sector  organisations  are  adequately  represented  on  the  Board,  a  new 
provision  whereby  the  workers  of  the  private  sector,  who  constitute  the 
majority of the labour force be represented by four members and those in the 
public sector by three members have been inserted.  
 In order to preserve the autonomy and independence of the Council, I have 
provided that the Chairperson should not be actively engaged in politics. 
 To safeguard the smooth functioning of the Board, I have added, in clause 11, 
a  new  subparagraph  to  give  power  to  the  Board  to  remove  from  office  any 
member who absents himself for three consecutive meetings without the leave 
of the Board.  Any vacancy arising therein will be filled in by the appointment 
of a person for the remaining term of office.  
In  order  not  to  impede  the  freedom  of  expression  of  the  members  of  the 
Council, the Confidentiality clause has been removed.  

Madam Speaker, we are proud on this side of the House to stand with the workers 
who continue to fight for an economy that works for everyone.  Their inspirational courage 
speaks  out  for  themselves,  their  families  and  for  the  growing  share  of  the  Mauritian 
workforce whose pay is too low has captured our attention.   

My  earnest  appeal  to  Members  of  the  House  is  to  support  the  Bill  and  help  build 

consensus so that the right message is sent to the social partners.  

Madam Speaker, I must say that I am imbued with the fundamental values expressed 
in the UN Universal Declaration of Human Rights, particularly as regards those outlined in 
the following articles, among others, namely - 

Article 23 – that everyone has the right to work, to just conditions of work, to 
protection  against  unemployment,  to  sufficient  pay  to  ensure  a  dignified 
existence for oneself and one’s family. 

Article 25 – that everyone has the right to a decent standard of living adequate 
for health and  wellbeing, including  enough food, clothing, housing, medical 
care and necessary social services. 

93 

 
Madam  Speaker,  today,  I  am  convinced  that  the  Government  as  a  whole,  stands 
inspired  by  the  UN  Universal  Declaration  of  Human  Rights,  and  by  the  noble  ideals  and 
principles of the  relevant  ILO Conventions.  Accordingly,  we have taken a pledge  for our 
people,  a  pledge  to  help  shape  a  future  where  there  is  equality,  justice  and  liberty  for 
everyone;  liberty  to  live  a  life  without  hardships,  without  sufferings  and  without  adversity 
and  insecurity.    The  pledge  is,  therefore,  to  do  everything  in  our  power  to  realise  these 
ultimate objectives with a view to improving the quality of life of the working class of this 
country. We have promised it.  We cannot stand still. 

With these words, Madam Speaker, I commend the Bill to the House. 

The Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for half an hour. 

At 5.03 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 5.41 p.m. with the Deputy Speaker in the Chair. 

Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West):  Mr Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, let me start the same way as the hon. Minister starts his speech by looking at the 
Explanatory Note of the Bill, which reads – 

“The  object  of  this  Bill  is  to  provide  for  the  establishment  of  the  National 
Wage Consultative Council which shall, in the discharge of its functions, be 
mainly responsible to make recommendations to Government regarding – 

(a)  the  introduction  of  a  national  minimum  wage  in  the  private  and 

public sectors; and (…)” 

The  second  one,  of  course,  has  been  deleted  by  the  amendment  which  has  just  been 
circulated. 

So, what we are voting today? We are not voting a National Minimum Wage Act as 
there is in the UK.  We are not coming to tell the people that for certain we are going to have 
a minimum wage in this country.  What we are saying is that we are having - I will come to 
that Consultative Council later - a Council which compose of so many people - which I will 
come in details later - to make recommendation to the Minister and the Minister can do three 
things  thereafter,  whether  to  accept,  to  amend  or  to  leave  it  in  the  drawer,  the 
recommendation  of  this  Council.    So,  we  are  not  voting  today,  let  us  be  clear,  a  National 
Minimum  Wage  Act.    We  are  waiting  a  Council  which  will  recommend  at  a  certain  time 

 

94 

probably the introduction of a minimum wage and it will be at the discretion of the Minister 
to see whether he accept or disregard like we have in the case of the NRP award which I will 
come later. 

This question of National Minimum Wage has been on the agenda for quite a long 
time. We, on this side of the House, are for a national minimum wage. It was in our manifesto 
of  2005,  it  was  in  the  manifesto  of  2010  and  it  was  in  our  last  manifesto  for  a  national 
minimum wage. But the difference between our manifesto and the manifesto of L’alliance 
Lepep - if we can still call it L’alliance Lepep - is that we never promised the people that we 
will  come  with  a  minimum  wage  within  three  months!  It  was  one  of  their  priority  –  “les 
douzes  priorités  des  trois  premiers  mois  au  gouvernement”.  The  second  one  is  – 
«Introduction de salaire minimum ». So, they have got the people to believe that within three 
months there will be a ‘salaire minimum’ and today, 16 months later, we are coming with a 
Bill which does not ensure a ‘salaire minimum’ and which is controversial with regard to the 
stakeholders.  If  one  thing  this  Minister  has  managed  to  do  is  to  get  all  the  stakeholders 
against him; those working in the private sector, those working in the public sector and after 
his amendment yesterday, now the private sector. So, all those in this sector, he has managed 
to gather everyone against him and this is why I say whether we can call this Government 
‘L’alliance du Peuple’. 

So, they want us to believe that whatever the Government is doing is in accordance 
with  the  report  of  the  ILO  which  was  commended  in  September  2014  that  was  by  the 
previous Government, report of the ILO. In fact, what does the report say? The report said 
there  should  be  prior  consultation  with  all  the  parties  concerned  before  we  introduce  a 
minimum national wage and, on this side of the House, we have been in consultation with 
most of the trade unions during the last week. It has come out that there has been monthly 
consultation on all the issues regarding industrial relation, but at no time they were informed 
that there is going to be a Council and who will be on the Council. So, when the Bill was 
circulated for First Reading, they were surprised to learn about this Council which this Act is 
going  to  set  up,  that  is,  the  National  Wage  Consultative  Council.  It  is  only  after  the  First 
Reading  and  the  truth  is  that  it  is  supported  by  the  facts  that  after  the  First  Reading,  the 
Minister decided to meet the union to discuss about the Bill now. Today, at the last minute, 
whilst we are discussing about this Bill, most of the stakeholders, the Trade Unions outside 
are not aware of the amendment we have brought today. 

95 

 
When we are talking about such a thing which is fundamental to our social fabric, it is 
important to get all the stakeholders involved.  It is a Bill which should come with consensus, 
but  unfortunately,  the  procedure  used  by  the  hon.  Minister  reminds  me  of  the  previous 
Government when they decided to institute the National Wage Council unilatéralement, that 
is, the Labour Party and the PMSD Government.  Unilaterally, they decided to do away with 
the Tripartite and introduce the National Pay Council. Now, the purpose of bringing the Bill 
urgently  First  Reading  without  consultation  with  the  Unions,  the  Government  felt  that  it 
would get some political mileage out of it for the supposed meeting on the first of May. It 
was on the news on Friday afternoon “oh! minimum wages is coming ... 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Baloomoody: ... but now we have all the people, all the workers against you with 
regard  to  the  rush  you  have  got  about  and  the  Minister  is  running  four  corners  every  day 
meeting here and here – ‘teigne difé’ partout. Because there is problem with that law. One 
would expect a Minister who likes to dialogue when the ILO asked for consultation, but he 
had no time, the nation had no time to know about the Bill. One would have expected him, at 
least,  to  come  on  radio  and  have  a  débat  with  the  stakeholders.  You  know  what  he  did 
yesterday Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir!  He chose to go on one radio en solo and on the other 
radio he declined an invitation because there were two members of the Trade Unions on the 
panel. That is not the way to have consultations, especially on social issues. We should get all  

the stakeholders involved and get everybody on board so that, as I say, this is a Bill that needs 
consensus.  

Now, let me come to the Bill itself.  The main purpose of this Bill is to establish a 
Council, not to have a national minimum wage. Section 4, the establishment of the Council – 

“(1)   There  is  established  for  the  purpose  of  this  Act  the  National  Wage 

Consultative Council. 

  (2)    The Council shall be a body corporate.”  

Section 5, deals with its “Objects of Council”. 

This object again of the Bill, the Trade Unions learnt about it after the First Reading. 
There was no consultation with regard to the Unions, the stakeholders, the objects of the Bill 

 

96 

and  today  we  have  seen  some  amendments  after  consultation,  after  the  Bill  has  been 
circulated. Now, when we look at section 6 (f) of the Bill which reads as follows – 

“within 12 months of the date of its constitution, recommend a national minimum 
wage that may be introduced for the lowest paid workers in relation to the median 
wage”.  

This is imposed again by Government without consultation with the Union. And it is 
good to know that the report of the ILO identified several ways of establishing that minimum 
national wage. But he did not come to a conclusion.  Let us look at it.  It is good to read as it 
is important and we get the impression that the hon. Minister wants us to believe that what we 
are doing is in accordance with what the ILO states and I will come with the Convention of 
the ILO. After reviewing all types of calculating the national minimum wage, we come to 
that conclusion. I read page 31 of the report – 

“The objective of this report was not to present a ready-made minimum wage fixing 
machinery. To be sustainable, such a system should be the result of a large debate and 
social dialogue. Instead, the objective was to present the main dimension to take into 
account  for  such  a  debate  basically  the  fundamental  characteristic  of  the  current 
minimum wage machinery and to the wage structure. All these facts and data should 
be  used  to  start  an  examination  of  the  best  option  to  reform  the  current  system  of 
minimum wage”.  

So, the ILO gives us an example and tells us to go and discuss it with the stakeholders 
and then to come to a consensus. Here, what we have done, we create a Council, we tie its 
hands and Government decides like some Ministers use to do. Some are nice Ministers, but 
some are very arrogant who come and say: we have been elected to govern, we govern, we 
decide! This is exactly the approach they have taken in this particular case. Why tie the hands 
of the Council? Why don’t we leave it to the Council to discuss the formula to be used for the 
minimum wage? Or, if we want to put it in the law, why did we not discuss it prior to the 
drafting of this Bill. Why Government has decided upon itself? So, this is one of the main 
queries. Now, when we look at the other Section 8 of the Bill, this is the most important one. 
This is why I say that this Bill does not guarantee a national minimum wage.  Determination 
of national minimum wage, forget about additional remuneration that has been evoked.  It is 
said – 

“(1)    Where the Minister receives a recommendation under this Act, he may - 

 

97 

(a) 
(b) 

make regulations for implementing the recommendation; 
reject the recommendation and make no regulations.”  

So, there is no guarantee and we have seen it in the NRB.  The hon. Minister knows, 
there  are  around  14  Remuneration  Orders  which  have  been  revised,  still  in  his  drawer, 
because  Government  or  a  Minister  has  decided  not  to  render  it  public.  So,  where  is  the 
guarantee that the national minimum wage  will be implemented after 12 months of work? 
And, he may reject the recommendation! So, we have a Council which works for 12 months – 
later on we will come to the Board of this Council – and, at the end of the day, we are at the 
mercy of the Ministry, like many low-paid workers today are under the NRB. The work has 
been  done;  recommendations  have  been  awarded  but,  unfortunately,  no  implementation  of 
the recommendations. So, we are back again to the same situation as the NRB today.  

The issue of hourly rate has been dealt with, I must say, by the amendments, but still 
there are some questions. In Ireland, although they have all these safeguards, recent statistics 
suggest that there has been an increase in the number of workers working per hour. It might 
be a backdoor way of introducing hourly rate, especially in certain sectors like the hôtellerie, 
in restaurants, where people can be employed from 11.00 to 12.00 or 11.00 to 2.00, and then 
they are told to come back for another two hours, or like we have now at the Ministry of 
Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific Research. 

(Interruptions) 

You  still  have  300  workers  who  are  being  paid  Rs1,500  because  they  are  employed  by 
contractors!  Those who were employed by the Government have been regulated, they are 
getting  Rs8,000.    Fair  enough!  But  those  who  are  working  with  the  contractors,  they  are 
working on an hourly rate.  They come early in the morning, clean all the toilets for one or 
two hours and go back and come in the afternoon after school for one hour.  I hope that the 
hon. Minister will address these specific issues and make sure that there is no increase in the 
number  of  people  employed  on  an  hourly  rate.  In  fact,  in  Ireland  they  are  considering 
seriously of banning, making it illegal completely to employ persons on an hourly rate.  

Now,  the  most  important  part  is  the  Board.  Section  10  -  the  Board  shall  be 
administered by a President through a Chairperson appointed by the Minister.  Another job 
for the boy! And we have learned this morning how - there is an amendment, he shall not do 
politics,  but  this  amendment  makes  as  if  we  are  giving  instruction  that  now  you  can  do 
politics.  I  don’t  know  why  you  come  with  that  amendment  because  we  know  all  these 

 

98 

political appointees; we know how they are involved directly in politics behind the scene. So, 
we  will  have  a  Chairman  appointed;  this  is  the  first  Ministerial  interference  with  that 
Committee.  

The hon. Minister mentioned about UK. It is good. In UK, they have respected the 
tripartite  consultation  when  it  comes  to  that  institution  which  they  call  the  Low  Pay 
Commission. In the Low Pay Commission, there are only nine members; three chaired by one 
person, three of the Commissioners have an Employee Trade Union background, three have 
an employer background and three are independent Academic Labour Relations Specialists, 
respecting Convention 144 with regard to Tripartite Consultation which says that, in each and 
every committee which deals with wages and salaries there should be equal footing when it 
comes to representation, and even the hon. Minister referred to it. But there, you have nine 
Members,  equal  footing.  Here,  what  do  we  have?  The  Board  will  consist  of  eleven 
representatives  from  Government,  chosen  by  the  Minister.  Eleven  representatives  of 
Government!  Seven  representatives  of  employers  chosen  by 
the  Minister;  seven 
representatives  of  trade  union  workers  appointed  by  the  Minister  and  seven  others,  which 
include  two  academics  and  two  members  of  consumer  protection.  Again  appointed  by  the 
Minister!  Why  this  ministerial  mainmise  on  that  Council?  Why  not  let  the  trade  unions 
choose their seven representatives as we have in the Trade Union Trust Fund? Why should 
the Minister choose the seven representatives for the workers? Already we will have eleven 
Government officials. So, out of 32 members appointed, 18 are appointed by the Minister and 
11 are representatives of the Government.   They will be the voice of the Ministry, so they 
will be the voice of the Minister, the voice of Government. So, only 7 Trade Unionists and 
why  use  that  definition  of  trade  unionists  even  in  the  amendment?  Why  don’t  we  use  the 
same definition as we use in the Trust Fund, the eight largest confederations, and let them 
choose  their  representatives?  This  is  why  I  say  we  are  going  back  to  the  National  Wage 
Council, which the ILO, following a dispute which the GWF entered, recommended that it be 
done away with. I will come to that later.  

What  is  more  dangerous  is  in  regard  to  the  quorum;  12  members  only  make  the 
quorum with the President having a casting vote. So, tomorrow you can take whatever action 
you  want  without  any  representatives  of  the  Trade  Unions  in  the  Council.  This  is  again 
against the principle of Convention 144 which says that, in every subcommittee or committee 
there should be equal footing, equal representation of workers and employers, and here, only 

 

99 

twelve  members  can  take  whatever  decision  they  wish.  This  is  again  something  which  is 
contrary to the ILO Convention.  

Now,  with  regard  to  the  National  Pay  Council  which  was  introduced  in  2007 
following  the  Budget,  we  know  what  happened  in  that  National  Pay  Council.  The 
Government of the day decided to do away with the Tripartite Committee and they choose at 
the end of the day their own representatives from the unions when the unions refused to sit, 
because they were not happy with this composition.  So, the Government of the day decided 
to go and name political agents as entities of the trade unions. 

 
And in May 2000, there was a complaint entered by the GWF, complaining that it was 
in breach of violation of Convention 87 of 98 of the ILO and in June 2007, the committee 
asked the Government of the day to review.  So, we are back again to the same situation here, 
because the hon. Minister can choose. If tomorrow there is a dispute and the trade unionists 
refuse to sit on that committee, the hon. Minister can choose anybody. As it happened in the 
past, political agents were chosen and they sat at the Board.  But is that again in abiding to 
the Convention of the ILO? 

Now, in fact, by the way Government has handled this case, I think most of the private 
sector unions have said they are not going to sit up to now.  I don’t know if they have seen 
the  amendment,  but,  up  to  now,  at  the  last  appointment,  they  have  said  in  public.  Even 
yesterday on  radio, one  of the trade unionists said they  are not  going to sit. So, what will 
Government do?  Are we having an academic debate today because there is no consensus? 
This  Council  will  not  be  able  to  operate  or  the  Government  will  have  to  come  with  more 
amendments next week when we meet so as to get a consensus which is important in this 
particular case? 

Now, there is the issue of the funding of the Council. This Council is supposed to be an 
independent institution. It should be funded by the Government. Why should they be allowed 
to raise fund? And we know who gives fund. Not the workers! It is the private sector. And 
will this not have an influence on the independence of that Council if it is financed partly by 
the  private  sector?  Is  that  proper?  We  believe  that  this  Council  -  if  accepted,  if  there  is  a 
consensus  and  if  the  composition  is  revised,  where  the  tripartite  principle  is  adhered  to  - 
should be funded by the public. It should not be allowed to raise fund on the public market.  

We don’t want them to go and speculate in gold to raise fund. They have got an independent 
job to do. They are here to advise Government and let them be financed by the budget. 

 

100 

So,  when  the  hon.  Minister  talked  about  UK  or  if  that  Government  sincerely  had  in 
mind to come with a national minimum wage, there are two questions: why don’t we come 
with an Act like we have in UK, a National Minimum Wage Act with the specific objective 
of  fixing  the  minimum  wage?  And  if  Government  is  sincere  about  having  a  national 
minimum wage, why don’t we sign Convention 131, the Minimum Wage Fixing Convention 
1970?  Many  countries  have  signed.  There  is  a  list  of  countries  here  who  have  signed,  but 
Mauritius  is  not  on  the  list.  So,  if  sincerely  Government  wants  to  introduce  a  national 
minimum wage, I think we should start by signing the ILO Convention 131 which deals with 
Minimum  Wage  Fixing  Convention.  This  Convention  clearly  states  the  procedure  to  be 
adopted in calculating the minimum wage; the body, the Council how it should be composed, 
and  the  consultation  with  the  stakeholders.  This  is  what  we  should  do.  Start  proper 
negotiations  with  the  unions,  come  forward  with  a  National  Minimum  Wage  Act  -  in 
England,  now,  they  want  to  call  it  the  Minimum  Standard  of  Living  Act  -  and  get  to  the 
Convention.  

So, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, like I said, we agree with the principle of having a national 
minimum wage, but we don’t agree with the procedure adopted by the Government. We don’t 
agree  with  the  composition.  It  is  too  biased  towards  Government  side.  It  is  against  the 
tripartite Convention. There is no equal footing. There is too much power again given to the 
Minister.  It  should  be  an  independent  one  like  the  one  we  have  in  UK,  the  Low  Pay 
Commission which has independent people working independently from any State. And they 
report, you know to whom? Not to the Minister!  They report to the Prime Minister, to the 
Deputy  Prime  Minister  and  the  Secretary  of  State  for  employment.  So,  it  is  a  Cabinet 
decision. It is a strong body, independent which makes recommendations.  

So,  being  given  that  all  the  stakeholders  have  not  been  consulted  properly,  I  would 
advise the hon. Minister to have further consultation, try to get a consensus and make sure 
that we have a Council which is accepted by each and every one, not like we had with the 
National  Pay  Council  which  was  imposed  on  the  workers,  which  did  much  harm,  created 
much  havoc  in  the  industrial  relations  in  this  country  and  which  has  created  much 
disappointment with the workers, especially those au bas de l’échelle.  

So, this is our stand on this Bill, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, and I have done. Thank you. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Boissézon! 

  

 
(6.09 p.m.) 

101 

Mr  E.  Boissézon  (Third  Member  for  La  Caverne  &  Phoenix):  Thank  you,  Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir, for allowing me to intervene during the debates of the National Wage 
Consultative Council Bill.  

It is with pleasure that I have heard that the hon. Member who spoke before me said 
that he was, in principle, agreeable to a national minimum wage.  But, unfortunately, il n’a 
fait  que  des  reproches  mais  il  n’a  pas  fait  des  propositions  concrètes  et  je  comprends 
maintenant pourquoi ce projet de loi que nous présentons aujourd’hui n’a jamais vu le jour 
dans le passé. Ce qui me chagrine c’est qu’au cours de son intervention, il n’a fait que des 
reproches  et  des  reproches  et  nous  n’avons  pas  eu  l’ombre  des  travailleurs  au  bas  de 
l’échelle. Reproche! Reproche! Bla-bla-bla! Mais rien pour les travailleurs. Et à l’écouter, si 
nous n’avançons pas, les travailleurs attendront encore très longtemps. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the hon. Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment 
and Training has already said that this project was one of the pillars of our electoral manifesto 
and its presentation is a major achievement in our quest for social justice in Mauritius.  I shall 
congratulate the hon. Minister for the presentation of this Bill.   

Today is a great day for more than 150,000 employees.  Since 1894 when New Zealand 
introduced  and  passed  the  world’s  first  National  Minimum  Wage  Law,  employees  in 
Mauritius have been waiting for a minimum wage law.   

Employees of the public sector have the Pay Research  Bureau Award, employees of 
some  industries  are  covered  by  the  National  Remuneration  Board  which  fixes  minimum 
wages. There was a need for a global minimum wage since more than of 150,000 employees, 
who are not covered by neither institutions, are still waiting and their aspirations will turn 
into reality in less than one year since section 6(f) of the Bill stipulates – 

“(f)  within  12  months  of  the  date  of  its  constitution,  recommend  a  national 
minimum wage that may be introduced for the lowest paid workers in relation 
to the median wage;” 

And, I can say instead of ‘may’, ‘will be introduced for the lowest paid workers in relation to 
the median wage’. It is a great victory for employees and the Government.  ‘Minimum wage’ 
was written, as I said before, in many electoral manifestos but never implemented. 

102 

 
Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  on  23  April  2013,  the  then  Minister  of  Labour,  Industrial 
Relations and Employment was asked a question regarding the introduction of an across-the-
board national minimum wage. He replied among others: that has been a call from workers 
for many, many years. Now, if we do come ahead, if we are advised to do it, what form will it 
take? We want to listen from experts as to whether it can live or stand side by side with the 
National Remuneration Board or maybe we have to do away with it and come up with a new 
system altogether in the interests of the workers. We are all ears and we are ready to listen to 
experts.  So,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  the  Minister  and  the  Government  of  that  time  could  not 
pronounce themselves as they were in a listening mood. They were still in the listening mood 
in December 2014. 

L’introduction  d’un  salaire  minimum  suscite  beaucoup  d’appréhension  autant  qu’il 
suscite  la  joie  des  employés.  Le  secteur  privé  a  déjà  exprimé  ses  craintes  quant  à 
l’introduction  du  National  Wages  Consultative  Council  pour  établir  le  salaire  minimum 
arguant que Maurice a déjà des organismes pour fixer les salaires. Il se pose la question: si 
c’est nécessaire d’avoir une instance pour fixer un salaire minimum tous les cinq ans alors 
que  dans  le  pays  il  y  a  une  instance  pour  compenser  la  perte  du  pouvoir  d’achat 
annuellement,  cela  pourrait  avoir  un  impact  sur  les  entreprises.  Malgré  cette  appréhension 
tout à son honneur, le secteur privé se dit partant pour un salaire minimum. Nous pouvons 
partager  avec  le  secteur  privé  qu’il  a  été  prouvé,  de  par  le  monde,  que  les  pays  qui  ont 
introduit le salaire minimum ont vu une augmentation de la consommation et de la demande 
globale suite à une augmentation du pouvoir d’achat. 

Il  a  été  aussi  constaté  que  l’introduction  d’un  salaire  minimum  a  encouragé  des 
entrepreneurs  à  plus  d’efficience,  de  dispenser  une  formation  adéquate  d’où  un  meilleur 
rendement.  Les  entrepreneurs  devront  parier  sur  la  qualité  et  l’innovation  plutôt  qu’une 
politique de bas salaire. 

M. le président, les représentants des employés appréhendent que le salaire minimum 
soit un moyen déguisé de réintroduire le National Pay Council et plus tard faire disparaitre 
les  Remuneration  Orders.  Aujourd’hui,  le  ministre  a  donné  la  garantie  du  statu  quo 
concernant la revalorisation des salaires annuels pour la perte du pouvoir d’achat. 

Concernant  les  Remuneration  Orders,  deux  points  nous  démontrent  que  le 
gouvernement n’est pas prêt à se défaire du National Remuneration Order. Une étude de la 
composition du Board du National Wages Council nous indique à la section 10 (1) 

 
“(i) 

103 

the  Chairperson  of  the  National  Remuneration  Board  or  a  Remuneration 
Analyst designated by him;” 

D’autre part, quand nous parcourons les objets du conseil, la section 5(b)(iv) stipule – 

“(iv)  be responsible for making recommendation to the minister on the approach to 
be adopted to address the issue of wage relativity in the private sector that may 
arise  from  the  introduction  of  the  national  minimum  wage  in  Remuneration 
Regulations made under the Employment Relations Act;” 

M. le président, quant au National Pay Council, en 2007, l’opposition s’était opposée 
à sa formation et ce n’est pas le gouvernement Lepep qui revitalisera ce conseil. Nous avons 
en  mémoire  comment  des  membres  totalement  acquis  à  la  cause  du  Parti  Travailliste,  ne 
représentant  qu’eux-mêmes,  étaient  membres  du  Conseil,  ce  qui  avait  fait  le  Leader  de 
l’opposition d’alors, l’honorable Ministre Bodha, dire lors d’un échange suite à une PNQ le 
15  mai  2007,  adressée  au  ministre  du  Travail.  M.  le  président,  le  ministre  est  en  train  de 
noyer le poisson dans l’eau de l’ILO, as he was quoting the ILO – 

“Mr Speaker, Sir, may I ask him whether the way he has chosen the representatives of 
the Trade Unions for the Council, he has flouted the Convention 87 which preserves 
the Right and the Freedom of Association, and the Convention 98 which preserves the 
Principle of the Right of the Worker to organise and to bargain collectively in a Fair 
Forum” 

Ceci  dit, 

les  représentants  des 

leurs 
appréhensions et participer activement à la fixation des salaires minima dans la lutte contre la 
pauvreté, satisfaire les besoins de tous les travailleurs et de leurs familles. L’entreprise sera 
une expérience enrichissante qui vaudra la peine d’être vécue. 

travailleurs  devraient  mettre  de  côté 

Les  objectifs  et  les  fonctions  de  la  National  Wages  Council  sont  en  ligne 
contrairement à ce qu’a dit l’orateur précédent avec l’article 3 de la Convention 131 de l’ILO 
Minimum Wage Fixing Convention de 1970, c’est-à-dire, qu’il faut prendre en considération 
pour fixer un salaire minimum les facteurs d’ordre économique, y compris les exigences du 
développement économique, la productivité et l’intérêt qu’il y a à atteindre et maintenir un 
haut niveau d’emploi; le niveau général des salaires dans le pays, les coûts de la vie et ses 
fluctuations;  les  besoins  des  travailleurs  et  de  leurs  familles.  Enfin  de  faire  des 
recommandations comme il est suggéré au Low Pay Commission, instance britannique pour 

 

104 

la fixation d’un salaire minimum: to make recommendations for national minimum wages on 
what it believes the economy can bear without a significant adverse impact on employment. 

M. le président, un autre sujet qui fait débat est la méthode utilisée pour calculer le 
salaire minimum. Dans le rapport Minimum Wage Fixing Challenge in Mauritius dont a fait 
état l’orateur précédent, les experts font état de deux façons de calculer le salaire minimum. 

Premièrement, il préconise l’utilisation de l’indice des prix à la consummation. Il fait 
état du panier qui était de R23,930 en 20012 pour un ménage de quatre personnes et c’est 
pourquoi aujourd’hui les syndicats demandent un salaire minimum de R12,000 parce qu’ils 
considèrent  que  deux  personnes  travaillent  dans  un  ménage.  Malheureusement,  le  rapport 
précise qu’utiliser cette méthode n’est exempt de difficultés. D’abord, la mesure utilisée est 
basée  sur  le  revenu  d’un  ménage  et  non  sur  celui  d’un  revenu  salarial.  D’autre  part,  pour 
calculer  le  pouvoir  des  ménages  atteints  de  minimum  de  subsistance,  il  faut  aussi  prendre 
d’autres variantes comme le nombre des salariés dans le ménage, des aides sociaux perçues; 
et à Maurice, nous savons que Maurice est un Welfare State, presque tous les ménages aux 
revenus minimums touchent des prestations sociales. 

Deuxièmement, il propose le système de médian. Cette méthode a l’avantage de ne 
pas être influencée par les salaires aux extrémités. Le salaire minimum est déterminé par un 
pourcentage entre 35% et 60% du salaire median. 

Cette méthode, comme l’a dit le ministre précédemment, est adoptée dans la plupart des pays 
qui ont adopté le minimum wages.  

Le  rapport  fait  mention  qu’à  Maurice  nous  avons  deux  mécanismes  de  support  au 
salaire minimum : les Remuneration Orders et le système compensatoire annuel. Faut-il un 
autre mécanisme ? Faisant état du rapport global des salaires de l’ILO 2008-2009 qui favorise 
des  mécanismes  simples,  facile  à  comprendre  et  expliquer  aux  employés,  les  experts 
suggèrent une réforme totale et l’apport d’un mécanisme nouveau, cohérent et efficient. Cela 
prendra  beaucoup  de  temps  et  aujourd’hui  les  travailleurs  ne  peuvent  pas  attendre  encore. 
Aussi  je  recommande  le  point  suggéré  par  le  ministre  qui  propose  dans  les  objectifs  du 
conseil à la section 5 (b) qui a été amendée –  

“The Council shall be responsible for the computation of the national minimum wage 
calculated on an hourly rate for part-time (…)” 

Pas pour les full-time employees. 

105 

 
“(…) and a monthly rate for full-time workers without altering the actual working 
hours regime and the mode of calculation of wages or salary of any worker.” 

M.  le  président,  je  terminerai  en  remerciant  les  travailleurs  mauriciens  pour  leur 
dévouement  et  aurai  un  mot  spécial  pour  les  employeurs.  Il  faudrait  utiliser  le  salaire 
minimum non comme un salaire maximum mais vraiment quand il n’y a pas  

d’autres moyens de le faire.  Payment of the minimum wages should be the worst scenario 
solution. 

Merci, M. le président. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo! 

(6.24 p.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Social  Security,  National  Solidarity  and  Reform  Institutions 
(Mrs  F.  Jeewa-Daureeawoo):  Thank  you,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  It  is  indeed  a  great 
pleasure for me to address the House today on this long awaited Bill. It was high time that a 
National Wage Consultative Council be established in order to provide timely and productive 
recommendations to the Government on the national minimum wage in both the private and 
public sectors. The implementation of the minimum wage policy will, undoubtedly, lead to an 
improvement in the living conditions of workers in both the public and private sectors.  

Mauritius has always been ambitious in setting the example for the protection of the 
rights of workers in the African region. By adopting this Bill, Mauritius will be allying itself 
to more than 90 per cent of countries around the world which already have in place minimum 
wage  policy.  The  minimum  wage  policy  is  expected  to  boost  the  Mauritian  economy.  By 
improving  the  living  conditions  of  workers  such  a  policy  will  promote  a  surge  in  the 
productivity level  

of  workers.  This,  in  turn,  is  expected  to  lead  to  an  increase  in  national  income.  This  Bill 
cannot but improve the Mauritian economy and, therefore, should be welcomed. 

It  is  worth  highlighting  that  the  International  Labour  Organisation  has  always 
encouraged its member States to implement minimum wage with a view to reducing poverty 
and  providing  protection  to  vulnerable  employees.  At  its  International  Labour  Conference, 
103rd  session  in  2014,  the  general  survey  of  the  reports  on  the  Minimum  Wage  Fixing 

 

106 

Convention  and  the  Minimum  Wage  Fixing  Recommendation  1970  confirmed  that  the 
question of a national minimum wage was among the priority issues.  

In the general survey 2014 of the International Labour Organisation it was reported 
that  different  minimum  wage  rates  for  men  and  women  still  exist  in  Mauritius  in  the 
Remuneration Orders published in 2012 for the tea industry, the salt industry and the sugar 
industry where minimum wages for women are around 20 percent lower than men.  It was 
also reported that this disparity was no more present in other sectors such as those concerned 
with livestock workers. It was suggested that this issue could be resolved if the Government 
decided to introduce a national minimum wage. 

Now, when the National Wage Consultative Council Bill will be passed, this will, in 
fact, assist the Government in the introduction of a national minimum wage. I will here cite 
clause  6  (e)  (ii)  of  this  Bill  which  makes  specific  provisions  for  the  National  Wage 
Consultative  Council  to  submit  a  report  to  the  Minister  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations, 
Employment and Training on the evolution of wage distribution in respect of occupations, 
worker  status,  gender  and  sectors  every  year  by  taking  into  consideration  collective 
bargaining.  This  Bill  will  ensure  that  we,  in  fact,  implement  the  recommendation  of  the 
International Labour Organisation on the gender aspect of wage rates for workers. 

I would also draw the attention of this House to another aspect of this Bill. One of the 
objects of the National Wage Consultative Council under clause 5 of the Bill is that it would 
be responsible for making recommendations to the Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, 
Employment and Training on a lower rate of national minimum wage for young persons. It is 
important  to  note  that  it  was  highlighted  in  the  general  survey  2014  of  the  International 
Labour Organisation that in Mauritius workers were entitled to the full minimum wage from 
the age of majority only, that is, from the age of 18. This Bill, indeed, goes a step further and 
provides for the recommendations to be made by the National Wage Consultative Council of 
a lower rate of national minimum wage for young persons. The initiative behind this Bill, Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir, is laudable.  

The National Wage Consultative Council will inter alia make recommendations to the 
Minister  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and  Training  on  a  lower  rate  of 
national  minimum  wage  for  trainee  on  accredited  training,  having  no  corresponding  jobs 
experience, skills and competencies. It is true to say that the Minister of Labour, Industrial 
Relations, Employment and Training has the final say when it comes to the implementation 

 

107 

of the national wage system. It seems that in general the National Wage Consultative Council 
will only collect information, conduct research and make recommendations to the Minister on 
the national minimum wage. 

Let  me  now  come  to  clause  8  of  the  Bill.  When  the  Minister  will  receive 
recommendations from the National Wage Consultative Council, he will be endowed with the 
power to either make regulations for the implementation of the recommendations or reject the 
recommendations  and  make  no  regulations.  He  may  also  choose 
the 
recommendations and decide to make such other recommendations as he thinks fit. In such an 
event, one will obviously ask oneself the rationale behind the setting up of a National Wage 
Consultative  Council  when, 
the 
recommendations of the Council. I verily believe that clause 8 (2) has rightly been enacted to 
ensure fairness. When the Minister will reject a recommendation of the Council, he will then 
be duty bound to lay a report in the National Assembly containing a statement of the reasons 
for his decision. 

the  Minister  can  choose 

to  reject 

in 

the  end, 

to 

ignore 

Last but not least, is the composition of the Board of the National Wage Consultative 
Council. Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the Board of this Council will be made up of 29 members 
with a Chairperson having a wide experience in the field of economics, labour and industrial 
relations. It will also consist of representatives from various relevant Ministries. It will also 
pull  together  important  members  from  various  existing  bodies;  the  Chairperson  of  the 
National  Remuneration  Board,  the  Director  of  the  Pay  Research  Bureau,  the  Financial 
Secretary  and  a  representative  of  Statistics  Mauritius.  Seven  members  will  be  from 
organisations  of  employers  and  seven  additional  members  will  be  from  trade  unions  of 
workers. There will also be two academics and two members from consumer organisation.  

I  am  personally  reassured  that  the  National  Wage  Consultative  Council  will  be  a 
dynamic statutory body empowered with all the necessary resources to attain its objectives 
with the highest level of success. I wish to point out that in this respect; we are following the 
National Wages Consultative Council of Malaysia, established in 2011 having a maximum of 
29 members. 

To sum up, let me say that it was indeed high time that a new legislative framework 
be adopted for the implementation of minimum wage in Mauritius. I commend and thank the 
hon. Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training for bringing forward 
this Bill to improve, in fact, the living conditions of our local workers. I am looking forward 

 

108 

to the passing of the Bill and to the implementation of its provision in the interests of every 
worker of our country. 

Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

 (6.33 p.m.) 

Mr G. Oree (Second Member for Port Louis & Montagne Longue): I really feel 
honoured to participate in a Bill for the first time and I sincerely thank my hon. friends on 
both sides of the House. 

Let  me  start  my  telling  that  I  disagree  with  the  hon.  Members  from  the  other  side 
stating  that  this  Government  has  done  nothing.  Cleaners  were  getting  only  Rs1,800  or 
Rs2,000 and this Government fixed the minimum wage to Rs8,500 last year. Before passing 
any  Bill,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  national  wealth  is  created  by  the  economically  active 
section of our society and this Government fully values this contribution. Trade unions have 
always fought for ensuring that the purchasing power of workers is maintained and that work 
is adequately remunerated. In addition, to further secure those workers at the lower rung of 
the social ladder, unions have made minimum wage their main concern for a long time. With 
the presentation of this Bill, this Government demonstrates its commitment to the cause of 
workers  and  its  sense  of  responsibility  regarding  the  creation  of  conducive  conditions  for 
motivation,  productivity,  sustainable  development,  and  job  creation  for  young  Mauritians 
joining the labour market. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the criticisms made  against this Bill are the fruits of pure 
demagogy  while  the  Government  moves  on  to  accomplish  its  programme  and  takes  up 
challenges which the previous Government simply ignored. There have been statements as to 
Government  having  a  hidden  agenda  behind  the  Bill.  But,  if  ever  this  were  the  case  then, 
Government would have allowed things to stay where they were and opt for status quo. Mr 
Deputy Speaker, Sir, this Government means business and is action-oriented. 

Reserves have been expressed about hourly rate. But this is not new practice and we 
are adopting an approach which is already being used in so many countries. The hourly rate 
as a unit of remuneration will ensure that there is no abuse on people who are working on a 
part-time basis and who are given peanuts for the work they do. And then, whether wages are 
computed hourly or daily, it is the minimum fixed which should be the focus and this should 
be viewed as a momentous achievement of this Government. 

109 

 
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we have been used to tripartite negotiations for deciding on 
the  wage  compensation  based  on  cost  of  living  and  such  negotiations  are  one  off  and 
contextual.  We  are  used  to  salary  reports  and  remuneration  orders  which  are  periodical 
exercises.  The  establishment  of  this  Bill  provides  a  permanent  platform  where  all  relevant 
stakeholders  can  discuss  on  all  issues  pertaining  to  work  and  relative  pay,  safe  work 
environments, training, motivation, sustainable development and job creation. This is a step 
further for a Mauritian society, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

Some say that the hon. Minister may ignore a recommendation made by the Council 
and, therefore, he will have an upper hand and the Council will act as a rubber stamp. It is 
clearly stated in the Bill that if ever the Minister will take any action which is contrary to 
those recommended by the Council; he will have to justify the same. The House will have the 
opportunity  to  question  such  decision  and  ultimately  the  population  will  judge.  The 
composition of the Council is representative of stakeholders, we adhere to strong democratic 
principles and reserves expressed are grossly out of place. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, our democracy is vibrant and this is democratically elected 
Government  which  values  open-mindedness,  consensus  and  constructive  suggestions.  This 
august Assembly has the huge responsibility for making history and ensuring that the Bill is 
passed.  The  National  Wage  Consultative  Council  sees  the  dawn  of  the  day,  because, 
ultimately what matters is that the Mauritian society benefits, grows and marches forward. 

Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

 (6.37 p.m.) 

Mr T. Benydin (First Member for La Caverne & Phoenix): Mr Deputy Speaker, 
Sir,  as  a  former  trade  unionist  who  have  been  on  the  forefront  of  many  struggles  in  the 
defence and promotion of workers’ rights and welfare, I feel honoured to take the floor today 
at  this  august  Assembly  to  speak  on  the  subject  which  is  of  fundamental  importance  to 
workers. 

The establishment of a National Minimum Wage figures as one of the main priorities 
of  ‘l’Alliance  Lepep’  and  through  the  introduction  of  the  National  Wage  and  Consultative 
Council, Government is fulfilling its promises and this constitutes a major breakthrough and 
an  unprecedented  action  as  no  Government  before  has  dared  to  embark  on  such  a  project 
geared  at  providing  workers  with  a  decent  living  and  meeting  basic  social  needs  for 
themselves and their families. 

110 

 
Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  minimum  wage  is  a  means  of  protecting  vulnerable 
workers and also a way of redistributing income from capital to labour. The minimum wage 
strengthens social cohesion and contributes towards ensuring social peace and a  feeling of 
security to workers. The minimum wage reflects also Government’s willingness to pursue a 
coherent policy with regard to the Decent Work Agenda. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: No interruptions, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Rutnah! No interruptions, please! 

Mr Benydin: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the introduction of a National Minimum Wage 
in  both  the  private  and  public  sectors  through  the  setting  up  of  a  National  Wage  and 
Consultative Council is in consonance with ILO Convention No. 131 on “Minimum Wage 
Fixing” which was adopted in 1970. Furthermore, the “Global Jobs Pact” adopted at the ILO 
in  June  2009  -  I  think  hon.  Mohamed  will  remember  -  stressed  on  the  importance  of 
minimum wages in the context of global economic crisis and the recovery. The pact not only 
considers that minimum wages “can reduce poverty and inequity”, but also emphasises that 
they may “increase demand and contribute to economic stability”. 

The National Wage and Consultative Council is an instrument which will encourage 
the  social  partners  to  promote  and  strengthen  a  culture  of  social  dialogue  and  collective 
bargaining  aimed  at  leading  to  compromise  and  consensus.  Mr  François  Eyraud,  ILO 
Consultant who conducted a study on “Minimum Wage Fixing Challenge in Mauritius” in 
September 2014 stated outright in his report that and I quote – 

“There  is  no  idea  minimum  wage  system.  The  best  system  is  the  one 
elaborated through social dialogue leading to compromise”. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  in  the  wake  of  the  setting  up  of  the  Council,  different 
organisations,  particularly  trade  unions,  are  airing  the  view  that  it  is  the  responsibility  of 
Government alone to determine a National Minimum Wage. Yet it has to be underlined that 
ILO Convention No. 131 on Minimum Wage emphasises that wherever it is appropriate to 
the nature of the minimum wage fixing machinery, there should be provisions for the direct 
participation of – 

 (a) representatives of employers and workers on the basis of equality, and 

 
(b)  persons  having  the  general  interests  of  the  country  are  being  chosen  after  full 

111 

consultation with representatives of employers and workers. 

The  necessity  of  reaching  a  compromise  among  the  social  partners  may  ensure  that  the 
minimum wage is the “right minimum wage”. Social dialogue is, therefore, a pre-requisite. 

Social dialogue is, therefore, a prerequisite. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the amendment brought to remove the payment of additional 
remuneration from the scope and purview of the council is, indeed, a good decision as this 
issue will continue to be discussed at the level of the National Tripartite Committee, which 
has a long history and recognition among social partners in Mauritius. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  international  norms  and  standards  highlight  that  the  main 

indicators to take into consideration to determine a minimum wage are - 

(a)  

(b)  

(c)  

(d)  

(e)  

the needs of workers and their families; 

the general level of wages in the country; 

the cost of living; 

the social benefits, and 

the relative living standards of other social group. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  minimum  wages  are  a  nearly  universal  policy  instrument 
implemented  by  most  countries  in  the  world.  Around  70  countries  in  Africa  implement 
relatively simple national minimum wages that are economy-wide wage floors which apply to 
all workers. Some French-speaking countries in Africa apply a national SMIG. A few others 
implement more complex systems by industry or occupations. South Africa, for example, has 
recourse to “sectorial determinations” with different rates for different occupations within a 
limited number of non-unionised industries. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it is also worth mentioning, with reference to EU Member 
States that there is a national legal minimum wage in nine Member States, namely Belgium, 
France,  Greece,  Ireland,  Luxembourg,  the  Netherlands,  Portugal,  Spain  and  the  United 
Kingdom. In these countries, one of the main arguments used by those opposing a minimum 
wage is that it would have a negative impact on employment if set to a certain level. Some 
employers  have  even  put  forward  the  idea  of  anticipated  job  losses.  However,  in  these 
European  countries,  no  studies  have  proved  that  the  minimum  wage  has  had  a  negative 

 

112 

impact on employment. For example, in the UK - I think this one has been mentioned by the 
hon.  Minister  of  Labour  -  when  the  minimum  wage  was  reintroduced  by  Tony  Blair’s 
Government in 1999, the introduction of a national minimum wage has had a positive and 
favourable impact on more than one million workers and lifted them out of poverty without 
causing any rise in unemployment. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  would  like  also  to  refer  to  the  1944  Declaration  of 
Philadelphia  concerning  the  aims  and  purposes  of  the  International  Labour  Organisation, 
which reaffirmed that “Poverty anywhere constitutes a danger to prosperity everywhere” and 
that “Labour is not a commodity”. Since its creation, the ILO stressed on the need for States 
to achieve “policies in regard to wages and earnings, hours and conditions of work calculated 
to  ensure  a  just  share  of  the  fruits  of  progress  to  all  and  a  minimum  living  wage  to  all 
employed and in need of such protection”. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  in  an  article  written  by  Catherine  Saget  from  the  ILO 
Employment Strategy Department on “How to get the maximum out of the minimum wage”, 
the author highlighted that – 

 “Establishing  a  minimum  wage  may  positively  affect  employment  and  industrial 
peace and is a means of fighting poverty. States have a major role to play in this and 
certain conditions have to be met. One of them is social dialogue”.  

ILO official Catherine Saget further underlined that the potential benefits of the minimum 
wage for the economy and society are undeniable. The State has a major role to ensure that 
bargaining  on  minimum  wage  is  successful.  To  meet  this  end,  social  partners  have  to  be 
provided with updated information to allow bargaining on the basis of accurate information 
and socio-economic data.  

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, unlike the National Tripartite Forum, which was instituted 
administratively at the end of year 2010, the National Wage and Consultative Council has the 
advantage of functioning within a legal framework. Its functioning is guaranteed as it will be 
headed by an Executive Director in terms of human resources, assisted by a number of public 
officers as may be necessary to assist the functioning of the council. 

Voting  rights  at  the  level  of  the  council  are  granted  only  to  tripartite  constituents, 
namely the Government and the social partners; I mean, the worker organisations and also the 
employers. The voting rights are in accordance with the spirit and principles of norms of the 
ILO. It would, maybe, be more appropriate if resource persons from related public bodies like 

 

113 

PRB, NRB and Mauritius Statistics, academia and the civil societies could be co-opted to sit 
only on Technical Committees rather than on the Council, in order not to disturb and create 
imbalance in the numerical strength of social partners and so this will reflect also the intrinsic 
values and a sense of tripartism. 

Before I resume my seat, I would like to say a few words with regard to what hon. 
Baloomoody said.  He raised the issue of representation.  For example, on the Trade Union 
Trust Fund, it is also mentioned, I think, the eight most representative worker organisations. 
These most representative worker organisations submit their names to the Minister and, as far 
as I know, since that fund has been instituted, no Minister of Finance has rejected the names 
that are proposed by the respective worker organisations. So, I don’t think that in case here 
also  -  because  the  worker  organisations  will  have  to  submit  their  names  -  that  the  hon. 
Minister will reject the names that are being proposed by these organisations.  

With regard to the raising of public funds, I don’t know, maybe in the mind of the 
Minister and in many organisations - even I have been a member of the National Economic 
and Social Council for long - we have the right to raise funds, but I think from recognised 
institutions.  This  being  a  subject  like  minimum  wage,  I  think  we  will  have  technical 
assistance, maybe financial resources, from the International Labour Organisations. 

(Interruptions) 

So, what is wrong if we can raise fund from organisations of the UN system? I think there is 
nothing wrong in that and this is an issue that, I think, the hon. Minister has already taken 
care.  

to 

the  objects  of 

Hon.  Baloomoody,  at  the  very  outset,  stated  that  we  are  going  to  make 
the  Council,  but  we  will  make 
recommendations  with  regard 
recommendations. All organisations have to make recommendations, but Government have to 
take the decision. I have been working for international organisations, I have attended a lot of 
ILO conferences and I know that whenever you sit in any committee, in any commission, in 
any technical committee, the recommendations are sent to the governing body for a decision; 
this is the essence of tripartism. So, the decision will have to be taken by Government and 
this Government means business, and when we have said that we are going to introduce a 
National Minimum Wage, I trust this Government, and I know also under the able leadership 
of our Prime Minister and with all the collaborators with Government, there is no doubt that 

 

114 

we will implement the National Minimum Wage and set a good example even in the African 
Continent. 

 

 I would like on this note to say thank you. 

 (6.51 p.m.) 

Mr S. Abbas-Mamode (Fourth Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port Louis 
East): Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, for giving me way. If I may start with a simple 
example to give a better insight of what I wish to portray, a friend in my Constituency works 
in a shop and is paid Rs25 per hour and he has to be on his feet for 8 or 12 hours a day.  

I  know  someone  else  working  in  a  similar  shop  who  earns  three  times  more.  My 
question, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, is: is this fair? Is this equal? Is this right? But we can make 
this  fair,  we  can  make  this  right,  we  can  make  this  equal.  Today,  this  Government,  the 
Government of l’Alliance Lepep has the possibility to turn things around, especially for those 
who, right now, have been suffering for decades of indecent salary. With this National Wage 
Council, we want to act with due care and there might be hiccups along the way. Hence the 
reason  we  will  set  up  the  Council  as  a  measure  of  due  diligence  to  make  sure  the  best 
decision is taken for the welfare of the State. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we are talking about caring for the less  fortunate that can 
yield in big changes for the welfare of the latter. We all know through various management 
theories that people  want to secure their basic needs.  That is their main aim; that is their 
main objective. The objective of this Bill is to create a conducive situation for these people to 
allow them to better cater for themselves and their respective families. What we want is to 
give to wage earners a human interest in life and work and place them on a moral equality 
with every other class in this country. These lower income groups, especially in urban areas, 
are facing hard times, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, to make their ends meet due to ever increasing 
cost of living, particularly on the back of price hike in daily expenses and necessities.  

The minimum wage increase will motivate workers to be more productive and will 
benefit local industries in the long run. The wage increase will attract more local workers and 
reduce  the  reliance  on  foreign  labour  in  various  sectors.  Although  Mauritius  does  not 
expressly provide for social, economic and cultural rights, it is my humble opinion that it will 
follow the spirit of these rights that go hand in glove with the title of Mauritius as a Welfare 
State.  

 

115 

I  firmly  believe,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  that  the  correct  approach  to  this  is  a 
progressive  realisation.  As  initiated  before,  it  is  not  something  to  be  done  without  paying 
attention to the social economic damage we might cause and the Council will certainly find 
the  most  effective  and  efficient  manner  to  tackle  this  issue.  In  so  doing,  we  will  increase 
confidence in the private sector. It is important for this Government to embark on something 
like this that has never been done before.  

On  peut  avoir  les  meilleures  intentions  du  monde  mais  quand  on  a  l’opportunité, 
quand on est au gouvernement et on ne fait rien, on doit féliciter le présent ministre de ce 
gouvernement qui a eu le courage qu’au moins we are at the start, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  

So,  it  is  important  for  this  Government  to  embark  on  something  like  this  that  has 
never been seen before. We want to reduce poverty and improve our quality of life. We are 
keeping  our  promise  because  during  our  electoral  campaign,  we  did  say  that  we  will 
introduce  minimum  wage.    That  is  an  important  aspect  of  this  Government’s  mandate. 
Certainly, we want to eliminate income inequality et de donner à la classe de travailleur, qui 
est au bas de l’échelle, a chance to breathe. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I will conclude by saying that the goal of the National Wage 
Consultative  Council  Bill  is  not  to  raise  or  lower  unemployment  nor  should  it  be  because 
evidence suggests that it really can’t. Its purpose is social; it is meant, like many other laws, 
to protect those who might not have the power or resources to be able to protect themselves. 
And there is little doubt, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, who are those in need of protection in this 
context. 

Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ramful! 

 

(6.58 p.m.) 

Mr  D.  Ramful  (Third Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien): Mr  Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, I will not try to beat around the bush; I will be frank to the hon. Minister; I think 
he deserves some credit; he deserves some credit for, at least, coming today with this Bill 
before the House. We have seen him for those past few days struggling hard with the unions 
and the private sector, trying to find a consensus around this very important Bill. 

(Interruptions) 

 

As you wish.  

116 

However,  I  must  say  I  have  heard  a  few  hon.  Members,  especially  hon.  Eddy 
Boissézon, he says hon. Baloomoody has been criticising without making any propositions 
and he takes the pleasure to criticise the Labour Government as if the Labour Government 
has  been  against  minimum  wage  and  has  done  nothing.  But  he  fails  to  say  that  the  man 
behind  the  ILO  Report  in  September  2014  by  François  Eyraud  is  the  former  Minister  of 
Labour.  All  started  with  the  past  Government,  with  hon.  Shakeel  Mohamed,  requesting  a 
report from ILO and the hon. Minister rightly said that this has been helpful in the drafting of 
this piece of legislation. So, the records have to be set out straight. But then,… 

(Interruptions) 

So, as I have said, the hon. Minister deserves my congratulations for coming up with 
this Bill. Although, there have been consultations with the different stakeholders,  yet there 
has been an appeal recently, I think, yesterday by the Trade Unions to be given some more 
time for them to have a look at the amendments that the hon. Minister is going to present 
during Committee Stage for them to make further representations.  I think their request for 
more time is justified because they have been fighting on this issue for a very long time and, 
in  my  humble  opinion,  they  deserve  to  be  given  some  more  time  for  them  to  make 
representations.  

However, when I saw the amendments that are being proposed, I am glad to see at 
least that the hon. Minister has taken a lot of those propositions into consideration. It is also a 
good sign when we see that the private sector and the Trade Unions are all on the same line 
of thought, they are agreeable on the principle of having a minimum wage.  

Although they might differ as regards the process, the procedure to be put in place, but they 
all  agree  that,  at  least,  we  should  have  a  minimum  wage  so  that  we  can  bring  up  those 
families who are below the poverty line to bring them above the poverty line so that they can 
have a decent living.  

However, there have been concerns from the employers in the private sector about the 
capacity  of  certain  small  businesses,  certain  small  employers/entrepreneurs,  to  pay  the 
minimum wage. Requests have been made from the employers to take into consideration the 
guidance that has been  provided by Mr François Eyraud in his report, and also there have 
been requests from the employers to take into consideration the study that is currently being 

 

117 

carried out by the World Bank as regards the Impact Assessment Study on the introduction of 
the minimum salary which is being currently conducted.   

Now, there are also some concerns about the overlapping roles of the different bodies 
that are, in one way or the other, involved in the determination of the minimum wage. I am 
talking here, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, of the existence of different instruments such as the 
Remuneration  Orders,  the  Additional  Remuneration  Act,  the  Tripartite  Forum,  the  Pay 
Research Bureau and the National Remuneration Board. It would be interesting to know from 
the hon. Minister for sure - I know the hon. Minister has, in his speech, touched upon those 
instruments, upon those bodies; what would be their future roles - and the trade unions want 
to know what is going to happen to those institutions? Are they going to be phased out? Are 
they  going  to  be  merged?    It  would  be  interesting  to  know  what  will  happen  to  these 
institutions.  

The unions, as I have said, have made several propositions and it is good to see that the 
hon. Minister has brought these amendments. Firstly, there was this issue about the definition 
of  ‘trade  union’.    As  initially  proposed  ‘trade  union’  was  defined  as  “to  encompass  both 
recognised and unrecognised unions”. It is good to see that the hon. Minister will come up 
with  amendments.  Now,  the  hon.  Minister  is  coming  with  workers’  organisations  which 
would be restricted to registered trade unions. 

There  is  also  the  issue  about  the  determination  of  the  payment  of  Additional 
Remuneration that would be left to the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development. 
The  idea  of  creating  a  second  category  of  young  worker    has  been  abandoned.  It  is  good. 
Lastly, there was this issue about the confidentiality clause.  Again, there is also this issue 
about  the  hourly  rate  which  has  been  taken  on  board  by  the  amendments  that  are  being 
proposed by the hon. Minister.  

Again, I must place on record that these are positive gestures from the hon. Minister by 
accepting  these  amendments  because  clearly  determination  of  additional  remuneration  is  a 
completely different matter from determining minimum wage and they are based on different 
criteria, and therefore they should be kept separate. The creation of the second category of 
young workers has resulted in frustration and job losses. The issue of confidentiality is not, in 
my humble opinion, acceptable in a democratic society where freedom of expression should 
prevail. 

 

118 

However, despite these amendments, there are some pertinent issues which have been 
proposed  by  the  unions  and,  which  I  believe,  in  all  fairness  to  them,  should  have  been 
considered  by  the  hon.  Minister.  Hon.  Baloomoody  has  raised  some  of  those  issues.  I  am 
principally concerned with the independence of the Council. The idea of the hon. Minister 
choosing the members of the Board, controlling its agenda, that is, by having already set out 
the parameters which should be taken into consideration by the Council and then keeping the 
discretion  to  himself  to  make  the  final  decision  on  minimum  wage,  gives  a  very  bad 
impression that as if Government will have complete control over the Council. And this is 
bad!  This is bad because you won’t… 

(Interruptions) 

get the trust of the unions. If you don’t get the trust of the unions, if you don’t get the unions 
on board, then the whole thing will collapse. It will not work. So, when I am talking about the 
Minister controlling the Board through the appointment of its members, I am here making 
specific  reference  to  the  fact  that,  given  the  wide  representation  of  the  representatives  of 
Government  as  well  as  the  employers  on  the  Board  and  since  as  per  section  11,  only  12 
members can constitute a quorum, it may happen that for one reason or another the unions 
decide  not  to  participate.  Then,  the  Board  may  still  carry  on  its  business,  but  this  goes 
contrary to the whole idea of having a tripartite quorum.  

(Interruptions) 

So, it may happen! It may happen! There is the possibility of this happening. 

(Interruptions) 

I don’t know how the hon. Minister will secure, at least, the union being represented on the 
Board;  whether  he  should  review  the  number  of  members  to  constitute  the  quorum  or  he 
should  decrease  the  number  of  Government  representatives  on  the  Board.  I  don’t  know, 
something must be done! 

(Interruptions) 

When I am talking about the Minister controlling the agenda of the Council, I am making 
reference here to the object of the Council as set out, I think, at section 5 of the Bill. From the 
amendments  that  have  been  circulated,  I  see  that  the  object  of  the  Council  has  been  now 
widened  to  take  into  consideration,  for  example,  the  wage  ratio.    It  would  appear  that  the 

 

119 

agenda has already been dictated to the Council as regard what criteria they should take into 
consideration in determining the national minimum wage. 

In all fairness to the unions,  I think we have decided to come up with a framework. 
Let’s leave it to the Council to decide what are the criteria they think would be fit, would be 
relevant for them to take into consideration when coming to this minimum wage. Why should 
we  dictate?  Why  should  the  hon.  Minister  tell  them  what  criteria  they  should  look  at?  It 
defeats again the purpose of having the unions, the employers and the private sector. When I 
talk about the Minister retaining the final word about the quantum of the minimum salary, I 
am  making  reference  to  Section  8  where  the  Minister  can  decide  not  to  follow  the 
recommendation of the Council and come up with such other regulations as he may think fit.  

I  am  also  here  talking  about  the  appointments.  Even  the  Chairperson  is  appointed  by  the 
Minister,  not  even  with  consultation  with  the  private  sector  or  the  trade  unions.  The 
Executive  Director  and  even  the  staff  of  the  Council  are  designated  by  the  Secretary  to 
Cabinet. The Council has no say on the appointment of its own staff. 

All these issues, unfortunately, give the perception as if the Council would be under 
the complete control of Government. As it is, this leads to the inevitable impression as if the 
quantum of the national minimum wage would, in effect, be a choice of the Minister, not that 
of the Council. So, these would be my intervention. 

Thank you. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Gayan! 

 

 

 (7.13 p.m.) 

The Minister of Health and Quality of Life (Mr A. Gayan): Mr Deputy Speaker, 
please  allow  me,  first  of  all,  to  congratulate  the  Minister  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations, 
Employment and Training for bringing this very important piece of legislation to the House. 

I  think  this  is  a  landmark  piece  of  legislation  which  is  going  to  set  the  tone  for 
industrial relations in the future. But, let me also say, especially, after the intervention of hon. 
Ramful  that  it  must  be  a  matter  of  regret  for  hon.  Mohamed  not  to  have  been  the  one  to 
present this Bill to the House when he was in Government. 

 

120 

(Interruptions) 

But, on this side of the House, we have a very high respect for history and the hon. Minister 
by introducing this Bill, he did say  and he did pay tribute to what had been done by hon. 
Mohamed and I think that this is how a House should be. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Order, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Gayan: Mr Deputy Speaker, in fact, this piece of legislation is part of electoral 
promise that we made during the last campaign. A lot has been said by hon. Baloomoody and 
others that we said we were going to bring it within three months. We could have had it not 
been for the mess in which we found the Government to be. But, we did bring it within less 
than  two  years.  And  now,  what  is  hon.  Baloomoody  saying?  He  is  saying:  ‘Go  and  get 
consensus! Go and talk to the trade unions! Go and talk to all the stakeholders!” And then 
that will take five years and then he will say: ‘Look, another broken promise!” 

I agree with hon. Benydin who has been a leader of the trade union movement, who is 
supporting this Bill. I think that tells a lot about the merits of this Bill. A Bill on a national 
minimum wage is a very important tool for poverty alleviation and for ensuring that low paid 
workers get a decent living. This is the most important aspect of a national minimum wage. 
We are talking of a national minimum wage so that anybody, anywhere in the Republic of 
Mauritius  could  be  entitled  to  that  national  minimum  wage.  It  is  so  important  because  we 
hear  that  there  are  pockets  of  poverty  and  people  living  below  the  poverty  line.  So,  it  is 
important that we, as a country; we, as a Government and we, as Mauritians, are concerned 
about  the  plight  of  all  those  who  are  living  in  very  terrible  conditions.  So,  this  is  why  I 
believe that this is a piece of legislation which goes a long way towards assuring that social 
justice really happens in this country. 

Let me also say that this minimum wage debate is a debate about what we are, where 
we are and where we want to go. We want this country to be a country where no one lives in 
poverty, we want no one to go to bed hungry and we want everybody to be able to live a 
decent life. This is what this Bill is going to do. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, a Bill of this nature, I have said that we are not inventing the 
wheel. This is something which is present in most countries of the world. In fact, I’ll like to 

 

121 

quote President Franklin Roosevelt who was the first President to introduce a minimum wage 
in the United States in 1938 and that is the hard belt of capitalism and even then the President 
said: “We need to have a minimum wage because we want all Americans to live a decent 
life.” This is what he said. At the time when he said it in 1938 he set the minimum wage at 25 
cents. Adjusted to present purposes, it is 4.07 dollars. He said: 

 “(…) nobody is going to starve in this country. It seems to me to be equally plain that 
no business which depends for its existence on paying less than the living wages to its 
workers has any right to continue in this country.” 

He was not there to foment discord, but he wanted fairness to apply. 

When we are asking for a minimum wage, we are also asking for businesses to be 
sustainable, because without businesses being sustainable there won’t be any minimum wage. 
So,  there  has  to  be  a  balance  that  needs  to  be  struck  between  what  we  can  do  as  a 
Government regarding minimum wage and what can enterprises do in paying that minimum 
wage. We do not want to destroy jobs. In fact, we want to create jobs and this minimum wage 
is, in fact, going to do precisely that. 

When a Bill of this nature comes to the House, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, there are a 
few  things  that  we  need  to  take  on  board  and  I  certainly  do  not  want  to  engage  in  any 
demagogy or anything.  But we need to know exactly what is being said in this House with 
regard to what was said by hon. Baloomoody and this was also said by hon. Ramful, that, in 
fact, the Minister responsible for labour is taking complete control over the machinery for the 
setting of the minimum wage. 

There are various formulas around the world for the setting of minimum wage. The 
first  system  that  applies  in  the  world  is  the  minimum  wage  which  is  fixed  by  the  public 
authorities without consultation with the social partners. 

 (Interruptions) 

No, it happens in Bolivia and in Brazil. I have all the information here. 

The second system is the minimum wages which are fixed by the public authorities 
after consultation with the social partners. Here, we have lots of countries Kenya, Tanzania, 
Swaziland, Vietnam, Malta, Japan and other countries. 

We  also  have  a  third  group  of  countries  where  minimum  wages  are  fixed  on  a 

tripartite basis. 

 
The fourth system is minimum wages fixed by collective bargaining. 

122 

So,  there  are  various  systems  around  the  world  and  the  machinery  that  is  being 
established in this particular Bill is a machinery which takes on board the consultations with 
all the stakeholders and this is consonant with not only the ILO conventions mentioned by the 
hon. Minister when he was making his Second Reading, but it is also important to bear in 
mind  that  there  are  other  international  conventions  that  deal  with  a  decent  wage.  I  am 
referring outside the ILO conventions which have been mentioned also by hon. Baloomoody. 
There are several international instruments which recognise the right to a decent wage.  

For  example,  Article  23,  paragraph  3  of  the Universal  Declaration  of  Human 

Rights provides and I quote –  

“Everyone who works has the right to just and favourable remuneration ensuring for 
himself and his family an existence worthy of human dignity, and supplemented, if 
necessary, by other means of social protection.” 

Article 7 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights -  

“recognises the right of everyone to the enjoyment of just and favourable conditions 
of work which ensure, in particular -  

(a)  

Remuneration which provides all workers, as a minimum, with -  

(i)  
 

Fair  wages  and  equal  remuneration  for  work  of  equal  value  without 
distinction of any kind (…); 

(ii)   A decent living for themselves and their families in accordance  with 

the provisions of the present Covenant” 

All regional bodies like the African Union, the Asian Group and all the countries around the 
world and all the regional groups have adopted the principle that every worker must be paid 
adequate remuneration. We are convinced that a national minimum wage is the only way to 
proceed with regard to achieving social justice. 

There are some other things which also go in a Bill of this nature. There are always 
fears and we are not alone in the world where a Bill dealing with trade unions and the rights 
of workers creates a lot of emotions. Today, in France, there are problems because a law has 
been passed as the result of a drastic parliamentary procedure with regard to a new code, le 
Code du travail. People are demonstrating, trade unions are on the streets. Why? Because no 
one wants to change! Every change is considered to be a threat to their livelihood.  

 
It  is  significant  that  in  France  and  I  am  reading  from  the  Economist  of  5th  March 

123 

2016 –  

“The country’s ponderous labour code, currently longer than the Bible, should 
limit itself to basic protection of workers, and leave bosses and unions within firms to 
hammer out finer details. This is based on the belief that French employees—only 8% 
of whom belong to a union—are more pragmatic and flexible than the national union 
leaders  in  Paris  who  supposedly  negotiate  on  their  behalf.  At  a  car  factory  making 
Smart vehicles in eastern France, for instance, a recent deal to work 39 hours a week 
was approved by most employees, yet blocked by the firm’s unions. Under the new 
law, if no deal can be  reached with a  company’s unions, employees may  vote in a 
binding internal referendum.” 

I am saying this because, in France, the 35-hour week is said to be sacred and workers are 
saying: “no, we are going to work longer than 35-hour week because it is in our interest. We 
don’t  want  to  lose  jobs.”  And  it  is  only  8  per  cent  of  the  workforce  that  is  unionised  in 
France. 

We also have other things in other parts of the world where young people do not find 
jobs because of the closed market because in France they need to have permanent jobs and in 
order to create a permanent job, the social burden for pensions and everything is so high that 
no employer wants to create new jobs. So, there has to be a derogation. Young people must 
join the labour market and unless we are imaginative, we run the risk of not being able to 
make sure that youngsters find work for less than the statutory minimum and they need to get 
onto  the  job  market.  So,  all  these  things  are  happening  and  in  France  especially,  in  the 
banlieues there are lots of young people seeking jobs. They are not in a position to get onto 
the  job  market  and  there  is  a  movement  that  has  started  in  France  which  says:  « Nos 
Quartiers ont des Talents ».  

So, we have to look at the problems on the ground and we have to look at what really 
is happening on the labour market.  But, with regard to this  Bill and  I  am happy that hon. 
Ramful mentioned that this is something which had been triggered and initiated by the former 
Minister of Labour. But, I still wonder why it took so long for the hon. Minister to come up 
with something concrete! In April 2013 there was a question asked in the House above the 
national minimum wage and the Minister then answered and he said that –  

“we have made a request to the ILO with the experts to come(…)” 

 

And so on and he goes on to say – 

124 

“Now, if we do come ahead, if we are advised to do it, what form will it take?  We 
want to listen from the experts as to whether it can live or stand side by side with the 
National Remuneration Board, or maybe we have to do away with it (…)” 

That is en passant, but what is more exciting, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, is what comes later. 
Hon. Miss Deerpalsing asked a question –  

“Mr Speaker, Sir, talking about minimum wage and the NRB… 

You will remember that! 

You will remember! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: No crosstalking, please! 

Mr Gayan: “(…) can the hon. Minister inform the House whether he is aware that in 

schools we have women cleaning schools at a salary of, I think, Rs2,000 per month (…)” 

As far back as 2013!  

“(…)  cleaning  of  whole  school  just  by  themselves  -  and  whether  these  kinds  of 
workers would be taken into…” 

And then there are interruptions and she says –  

“Can I please ask my question in peace?” 

Mr Speaker says: Put your question!  

And do you know what she says? 

“Shut up! Shut up!” 

Because there are interruptions again! I believe that it was a matter of shame for the previous 
Government  to  learn  in  the  House  that  there  were  people  earning  Rs2,000  a  month  for 
cleaning schools. And, who has sorted out that problem? 

We did!  

(Interruptions) 

 

We did last year! 

125 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

We sorted out the problem and if we have the minimum wage, this is going to sort itself out!  

No, it is good that we do not pretend to be holier than thou in this. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: No crosstalking, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Gayan: One of the  other objectives of this  Bill, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, is to 
reduce the income disparities that exist, unfortunately, in the labour sector. And, it is a matter 
of justice that we should do that because inequalities breed a lot of resentment, it creates a lot 
of tension and we need to ensure also that while having the minimum wage, we also do not 
allow that minimum wage to be eroded by all sorts of other things. 

I also believe that all workers must share in the benefits of their economic activities. 
They must have a share in the profits and this is why it is important that together with the 
minimum wage, we must look at productivity.  We must have increased productivity and  I 
also believe that this Bill goes a long way… 

(Interruptions) 

Let me end by saying, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in the States recently the Federal Minimum 
Wage was raised to 15 dollars an hour.  

Let  me  end  by  saying,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  in  the  States  recently  the  Federal 
Minimum  Wage  was  raised  to  USD15  an  hour  and  some  employers  went  to  the  Supreme 
Court to challenge that.  The Supreme Court of the United States rejected their challenge to 
the law, because they said: “We are not going to agree to the big business lobby”.  I think this 
Bill is a matter of justice and this is why I fully exhort this Bill. 

Thank you. 

 (7.32 p.m.) 

126 

 
Mr G. Lepoigneur (Fifth Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière):  Mr Deputy 
Speaker, Sir, as a small business owner just the thought of a higher minimum wage could 
send me into a panic. After all, that money has to come from somewhere. On the other hand, 
you value employees and you know that they work hard to earn their keep. It’s a fact that a 
higher minimum wage has its advantages and disadvantages, depending on who you ask.  

Here  are  some  few  pros  and  cons  that  may  have  not  been  considered.  The  cost  of 
raising  minimum  wage  has  a  larger  potential  talent  pool  as  wages  increase  jobs,  tend  to 
become  more  attractive  to  seekers.  You  may  find  a  higher  minimum  wage  attracts  better 
qualified and more experienced workers. If so, your staff could provide more skill and more 
reliable resulting improved performance which will positively impact on your bottom line. 

Moreover, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the increase talent level of your staff could also 
mean  you  require  fewer  workers.  Lower  employee  turnover  higher  wages  can  improve 
employee  morale  and  happy  employee  is  less  likely  to  look  for  other  employment 
opportunities than an unhappy one. 

According to research, higher wages dramatically reduce employee turnover. Though 
you  may  pay  slightly  higher  hourly  wage,  reducing  turnover  reduces  your  equipment  and 
training costs, increase productivity and customer satisfaction with better qualified employees 
who are happier with their jobs, small businesses also benefit from increased productivity and 
customer satisfaction. Again, these benefits translate in a positive impact to your bottom line. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, economic stimulus minimum wage workers will have more 
money to spend with a higher minimum wage and the money is likely to be spent.  This in 
turn could lead to increased sales, but the cons of raising the minimum wage are wide. There 
are advantages to paint a rosy picture, but there are a few potential disadvantages, including 
the following – 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

other  wages  may  have  to  be  increased  if  the  minimum  wage  increases 
substantially,  workers  who  previously  earn  above  minimum  wage  may 
demand a higher rate; 

fewer financial resources for payroll with an increase in the minimum wage; 

 you may not be able to afford to promote an employee at a higher rate or be 
able to hire additional employees. 

 
(iv) 

(v) 

127 

you may  also need to scale back on benefits account to  your higher payroll 
cost; 

increase  competition  for  minimum  wage  jobs  with  a  higher  minimum  wage 
competition will likely intensify with over qualified applicants competing with 
teenagers, younger and experienced applicants; 

(vi) 

 while  your  small  business  can  certainly  benefit  from  the  shift,  younger 
workers could miss out the opportunity to acquire long life skill in a job. 

 
Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  business  owners  may  have  to  take  on  more  work  and  a 
minimum  wage  increase  will  cost  your  business  money  before  some  of  the  less  tangible 
benefits  such  as  improved  productivity  and  reduced  turnover  ultimately  kicking.  In  the 
meantime,  you  may  need  to  take  on  more  works  to  offset  the  initial  payroll  cost.    While 
pitching in the front line of enable pitch, it takes  
you  away  from  more  important  and  strategic  tasks  designed  to  growth  your  business.    In 
addition, taking on more work potential to the expenses of business, long-term growth, you 
may also need to reduce your financial investment in the business. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  if  your  business  pay  minimum  wage,  an  increase  will 
immediately  impact  your  business,  but  the  impact  could  either  be  negative  or  positive 
depending on your approach and the employees you manage to hire or retain.  While you do 
not have much of a say whether or not the minimum wage increases now in good time to 
revaluate  your  long-term  human  resource  strategy,  a  raise  of  minimum  wage  would 
particularly hurt minorities who make up more than 40% minimum wage earners according 
to ‘ThinkProgress’. 

Women would also benefit to close the gap in wages inequality.  The mark-up about 
50% of low wages workers report by the Economic Policy Institute, raising minimum wages 
will reserve trend and strengthen the policies of employers and undercut the ability of lower 
and middle wage workers to have good job and economic security. 

M.  le  président,  les  effets  positifs  d’une  augmentation  substantielle  de  salaire 
minimum  dépassent  l’amélioration  des  conditions  de  vie,  de  travail  et  des  travailleurs  au 
salaire minimum. Elle améliore la condition des personnes qui gagnent un salaire légèrement 
moins  élevé  que  le  salaire  minimum  mais  qui  sont  tout  de  même  pauvres  ou  tout  près  de 
basculer dans la pauvreté. Par conséquent, une hausse du salaire minimum à un niveau où il 

 

128 

permet minimalement l’atteinte du seuil de faible revenu s’inscrit parfaitement dans l’esprit 
de la loi visant à lutter contre la pauvreté et l’exclusion sociale.  

Rappelons que les personnes rémunérées au salaire minimum n’ont pas de réel rapport 
de  force  face  à 
l’employeur  et  dépendent  essentiellement  du  gouvernement  pour 
l’amélioration de leur situation. Augmenter le salaire minimum reflèterait donc, à mon avis, 
l’importance  accordée  par  notre  société  au  travail  et  à  la  dignité  de  l’ensemble  des 
travailleurs. 

Je vous remercie, M. le président. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Members, Madam Speaker, will now resume the seat. 

At this stage, Madam Speaker, took the Chair. 

(7.40 p.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms,  Minister  of 
Environment, Sustainable Development, and Disaster and Beach Management (Mr A. 
Wong Yen Cheong):  Madam Speaker, it is an honour for me to add my voice to the debates 
of the National Wage Consultative Council Bill.  

In its electoral manifesto, this Government has announced its intention to introduce 
the  minimum  salary  during  its  mandate.  Today,  with  the  presentation  and  debates  of  the 
National  Wage  Consultative  Council  Bill,  we  are  walking  the  talk.  It  was  just  a  mere 
announcement that Government has embarked on a new ambitious path to face the challenges 
ahead.  

This Bill, in itself, aims at making Mauritius a high income country and it is in this 

context that the Government is considering establishing a National Minimum Wage.  

It is worth saying that Mauritius rapid economic progress over the last decades has 
reduced the incidence of poverty and has contributed to reducing income inequality among 
members  of  society.  Since  independence,  Mauritius  has  been  very  active  in  economic  and 
social reforms and has been successful in upgrading the country from a low to upper middle 
income country. Based on strong economic growth, the country has developed a sound social 
welfare  system.  The  foundation  of  Mauritius  economic  success  has  been  a  provision  of  a 
stable  internationally  competitive  regulatory  environment  favouring  labour  intensive 
activities in selected sectors such as sugar, textile manufacturing and tourism. 

129 

 
Madam  Speaker,  however,  on  the  other  hand,  we  cannot  ignore  some  realities. 
Different  reports  from  the  World  Bank  have  shown  that  from  2007  to  2012,  more  than 
120,000 people were living in a state of poverty. Moreover, Mr François Eyraud, from the 
International Labour Organisation (ILO) has stated that 16% of employees faced the harsh 
reality of poverty.  

Let  me  here  stress  on  the  fact  that  30%  of  employees  of  the  private  sector  are  not 
benefiting  from  the  salary  and  working  conditions  fixed  by  the  National  Remuneration 
Board. How can we also overlook the difficult situation in which many of our compatriots 
find themselves? We all here must have heard about these employees of hotels, restaurants or 
the  construction  sector  who  do  not  appear  on  any  register  though  they  are  working  hard. 
What about those people who work for Rs18 per hour and who are not able to work for more 
than two or three hours a day? In addition, we come across so many cases where people are 
drawing a meagre salary and do not even have a pay slip. And we all know that without a 
payslip, these people are penalised. It means that – 

(i) 

(ii) 

they are not registered as employees; 

that they are not contributing to the economy, and 

(iii) 

that they cannot apply for any loan and make request for a house.  

These  are  some  examples  only.  Every  Wednesday,  as  Members  of  Parliament,  we 
receive our constituents in Citizens’ Advice Bureaux.  When the people come and seek our 
help regarding various problems and difficulties they face, upon asking many of them what 
do they do in life, the majority will simply reply that they are unemployed. So, when we ask 
them: “what do you do for a living?”  Most of the time, they will reply that they regularly 
stamp their unemployment card and that they bat bater until they get a fixed employment in 
Government or parastatal body. It is, therefore, obvious that the national minimum wage is an 
important tool in the fight against poverty and the promotion of a decent work and salary.  

First,  minimum  wage  is  the  minimum  amount  of  compensation  an  employee  must 
receive  for  performing  labour.  Minimum  wages  are  typically  established  by  contract  or 
legislation by the Government.  

Second, the minimum wage attempts to protect employees from exploitation allowing 

them to afford the basic necessities of life.  

Third, the objective of minimum wage is to address the gap between those who are 

highly remunerated and those in low-income group.  

130 

 
The  minimum  wage  machinery  is  rather  complex.  There  is  no  single  national 
minimum wage in Mauritius, but different complementary minimum wage support system, 
that  is,  the  Annual  Salary  Compensation,  the  Remuneration  Order  or  the  Pay  Research 
Bureau.  

It is also to be mentioned that the National Remuneration Board will continue to exist 
in parallel with the National Wage Consultative Council. These two entities do not have the 
same mission.  The now NRB’s role is to review the salary and condition of work and the 
National Wage Consultative Council mission is to recommend the national minimum wage 
and salary compensation. So, there won’t be any overlapping. At some point in time, different 
minimum  wage  rate  for  men  and  women  existed  marginally  in  Mauritius.  However,  the 
Employment Rights Act stipulates that – 

“Every employer shall ensure that the remuneration of any worker shall not be less 
favourable than that of another worker performing work of equal value”. 

Madam Speaker, according to ILO Global Wage Report 2008/2009 – 

(i) 

(ii) 

throughout the world an estimate of 90% of all countries have some kind of 
minimum wage setting procedure, and 

some  countries,  for  example,  UK  implements  relatively  straightforward 
national minimum wage which applies to all workers.  

There  are  also  a  number  of  developing  countries,  including  Brazil  and  China  which  rely 
relatively on simple systems.  

The ILO Global Wage Report 2008/2009 considered that it was preferable to keep the 
institutional  design  of  minimum  wage  fixing  as  simple  as  possible  so  that  it  is  easier  to 
communicate and raise awareness thereof at the general public. 

Madam Speaker, it is with intrinsic satisfaction to foresee that the minimum wage will 
be a reality in Mauritius in the near future. More so, we are all pleased together that provision 
has been made in the Bill for the introduction of minimum wage in the public sector. In that 
respect, the Pay Research Bureau shall take appropriate measures for both salary adjustment 
and implementation.  

Madam  Speaker,  this  will,  in  no  case,  put  at  stake  the  public/private  sector  pay 
priority  but  will  rather  multiply  our  synergistic  effort  to  reinforce  the  public/private 

 

131 

partnership  in  order  to  offer  a  decent  salary  to  boost  up  productivity  and  performance.  So 
goes the saying – 

“Happy bees make more honey.” 

But, unfortunately, not everybody seems to be happy. Some trade union leaders have made 
representations to that effect that they are not satisfied with some provision of the National 
Wage Consultative Council Bill. We live in a democratic State and it is absolutely normal 
that partners’ views differ.  

I would like to seize this opportunity to congratulate my colleague, the Minister of 
Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training, hon. Soodesh Callichurn and place 
on record the initiative that he has taken by not  only accepting to meet the different trade 
union leaders to take on board the views about the Bill we are debating today, but also to 
amend some clauses of the National Wage Consultative Council Bill. I am also supporting 
the hon. Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training… 

(Interruptions) 

in asking that there is no breakup on the Bill ... 

Madam Speaker: A gentle pat on the head! 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: ... in the interest of the workers at the bottom of the ladder or 

at stake.  

Madam Speaker, from what I understand, before submitting its recommendations, the 
National Wage Consultative Council Bill will have to consider the social factors such as the 
personal and familial needs of employees and other factors relating to economic growth. The 
situation regarding employment and our national competitiveness, and this is perfectly in line 
with principles spelt out in the ILO Convention No. 131. Of course, this Council will only 
have to carry  

out studies on the impact of the introduction of the minimum wage on our economy and on 
the labour market.  

It is of utmost importance to carry out these studies.  When we introduce the national 
minimum  wage,  else  we  could  find  ourselves  in  a  position  where  instead  of  combating 
poverty, we see an increasing rate of unemployment many countries like England, Germany 
or Hong Kong have adopted this approach.  

132 

 
As a caring Government, the Government ‘Lepep’ will surely not let le peuple down. I 
sincerely wish that we reach a broad consensus on the National Wage Consultative Council 
Bill and hope that this Council will soon be a reality. I thank you for your attention. 

 (7.50 p.m.) 

Mr D. Sesungkur (First Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE): Thank  you, 
Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, I am delighted to have the opportunity to intervene on this 
historical piece of legislation from the Government side.  

The national minimum wage is vital to ending the scandal of poverty pay what we 
commonly  call  salaire  de  misère.  This  is  yet  another  landmark  achievement  of  this 
Government after a series of decisions that this Government has taken ever since we came 
into power in December 2014. There were many sayings and we know that the Opposition 
has  repeatedly  been  saying  that  this  Government  will  fail  in  its  programme,  but  we  have 
repeatedly taken a series of decisions to improve the lots of people, to improve our living 
standards.    Just  to  name  a  few  of  them,  we  increased  the  old  age  pension  which  the 
Opposition  at  that  time  said  we  would  never  be  able  to  do  it.  We  even  gave  salary 
compensation.  That was another measure that the Government took to improve the lot of the 
downtrodden, of the poor people and today, coming with this important piece of legislation, 
proves that we are sincere in our approach to improve the living standards of our people.  

We  want  our  people  to  live  a  better  living,  to  have  a  better  life  and  this  Government  is 
committed  to  implement  its  plan,  to  implement  its  agenda.  We  have  had  this  high  on  our 
agenda to implement, to establish a minimum wage and today, hon. Soodesh Callichurn is 
fulfilling this promise and we must congratulate him for this.  

Before  I  go  into  details,  I  would  take  this  opportunity  to  thank  hon.  Ramful;  to  be 
frank  enough  to  admit  that  this  Government  is  doing  the  right  thing  and  that  we  are 
implementing our programme.  

(Interruptions) 

The  national  minimum  wage  became  a  major  political  issue  in  the  run-up  to  the  2014 
elections. It was indeed a manifesto commitment of the l’Alliance Lepep, that is why this Bill 
is a priority of this Government. The Opposition would like us to believe that this Bill is not 
in  the  interest  of  the  workers,  is  not  in  the  interest  of  Mauritius.  This  is  completely  false 
because we know that this Bill will put the necessary structures, the necessary mechanisms 
for the Government to decide on a minimum wage that will be the recommendation of the 

 

133 

Consultative Council. So, this Bill will address the very issue of minimum wage, let us not 
make a mistake on that.  

The minimum wage is not only about justice, it is also economically sensible. What 
we  have  been  doing  since  we  took  the  Government  is  that  we  have  been  putting  social 
stability on the priority list. Without social stability, we cannot achieve a stable growth level. 
So, that was the intention of Government to preserve social stability, to bring everybody on 
board and to ensure that people are comfortable and when they are comfortable, when they 
are happy, they can produce and we can achieve better economic performance.  

The Bill aims to provide a wage floor to prevent unduly low wages. It will establish a 
single minimum wage which applies to all workers in Mauritius and provide a statutory level 
below which pay should not fall. The Bill provides for the setting up of a Council which will 
advise Government on its minimum wage policy in the coming years. This was not existent 
before. Among the other provisions which the Bill provides is: every worker in Mauritius will 
be  entitled  to  receive  no  less  than  the  statutory  national  minimum  wage.  The  national 
minimum  wage  will  be  set  at  a  single  national  rate  with  no  variations  by  region,  sector, 
occupation or size of the firm. The National Wage Consultative Council is established as a 
permanent statutory body to advise on matters related to national minimum wage. Employers 
will be required to keep and produce records needed to establish that the national minimum 
wage is being paid and there will be enforcement measures to ensure that people are getting 
this minimum wage. Workers will have a right to recover underpayment through courts or 
industrial tribunals.  

Madam Speaker, hon. Members know that a minimum wage and practical policies to 
promote living wage are essential to building a recovery that works for working people and to 
securing rising standards of living for the future. As I mentioned, this Government has taken 
a series of measures since it took control to alleviate extreme poverty whilst we all know that 
the previous Government made this population poorer and poorer. We have walked the talk 
and I would like to pay tribute to many of the Trade Unionists who have worked hard over 
the years to improve living conditions, to improve working conditions of the workers and I 
want to tell the workers that this Government will never let them down.  I want to pay tribute 
to some of the Trade Unionists who are today with us as Members of the National Assembly. 
We  have  heard  about  hon.  Benydin.  The  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  himself,  has  had  a  big 
contribution in the struggle of workers, the hon. Leader of the Opposition has been a great 
Trade Unionist in his days. The list goes on, we have the Vice-Prime Minister, hon. Soodhun, 

 

134 

and a lot of them are here today with us which comfort the workers that we are working for 
their well-being and they can count on this Government, they can count on the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister. 

Thank you very much. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rughoobur! 

Mr Rughoobur: Madam Speaker, I move that the debate be now adjourned. 

Mr Sesungkur rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

 

 (8.00 p.m.) 

ADJOURNMENT 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  that  this  Assembly  do  now 

adjourn to Tuesday 24 May 2016 at 11.30 a.m. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun) rose 

and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned. Adjournment Matters. Hon. Jhuboo! 

(7.59 p.m.) 

MATTERS RAISED 

CHAMAREL - TORRENTIAL RAIN  

Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River): Thank you, Madam 
Speaker. I would like to raise an issue to the attention of the hon. Minister of Environment, 
Sustainable  Development,  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management  concerning  the  village  of 
Chamarel. Whenever there is a flood, a cyclone, torrential rain, the village is cut off from the 
rest of the country as it was the case recently. So, not only students, workers, but even the 
economy, everything is paralysed. I would kindly ask the hon. Minister whether he could set 
a  procedure  at  the  level  of  the  National  Disaster  Committee  to,  at  least,  provide  some 

 

135 

manpower, vehicles and equipment to alleviate the suffering of the local inhabitants of the 
village of Chamarel. 

The  Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms,  Minister  of 
Environment, Sustainable Development, and Disaster and Beach Management (Mr A. 
Wong Yen Cheong): Yes, Madam Speaker. In fact, we are working on a plan and we are 
looking into it. 

Thank you very much. 

 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

BEAU BASSIN/ROSE HILL - CORNER ARIANE & ST. MARTIN ROAD. - 

TRAFFIC LIGHTS 

Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière):  Madam 
Speaker, the point I have to make concerns the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land 
Transport, if he is listening.  

The point I want to make concerns a problem of serious threat of accident at Corner 
Ariane and St. Martin Road. This is the link road from Rose Hill to Beau Bassin and then 
onwards to Port Louis. There is a lot of traffic and there have been many accidents recently. 
So I would plead with the hon. Minister if, at the said corner, traffic lights could be installed 
within the least possible delay, if it so permits.  

Thank you. 

The  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  (Mr  N.  Bodha): 

Madam Speaker, I will certainly look into the matter. 

 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

VALLEE PITOT - BOULEVARD VICTORIA – TRAFFIC LIGHTS 

Mr R. Uteem (First Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis Central): Thank 
you,  Madam  Speaker.  I  would  like  to  raise  a  matter  concerning  the  Ministry  of  Public 
Infrastructure and Land Transport.  

 

136 

Unfortunately, it is not the first time that I am raising it in this House. It concerns the 
increase  in  traffic  especially  in  the  morning  with  cars  coming  from  the  north  and  going 
through  Boulevard  Victoria  in  Vallée  Pitot  then  through  Mahatma  Gandhi  Road  and 
Labourdonnais Street. Unfortunately, we do not have traffic lights in Boulevard Victoria so 
people from Vallée Pitot find it extremely difficult to come out from Vallée Pitot to get into 
Boulevard Victoria.  

Then,  when  we  reach  Mahatma  Gandhi  Street,  again  people  from  Tranquebar  find  it 
extremely  difficult  to  come  from  Tranquebar  to  go  onto  Mahatma  Gandhi  Street  because 
there is no traffic light and there is no pedestrian crossing.  So, for all the schools children 
who have to take buses, it is extremely difficult.  I would request the hon. Minister to liaise 
with  the  Traffic  Management  Division  of  his  Ministry  and  see  whether  we  can  put  traffic 
lights and zebra crossing along these roads. 

The Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport (Mr N. Bodha):  I will 

look into the matter, Madam Speaker, and report back later. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Ameer Meea! 

PLAINE VERTE & ROCHE BOIS – WATER SUPPLY 

Mr A. Ameer Meea (Second Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port Louis East):  
Madam  Speaker,  the  issue  that  I  would  raise  today  is  in  relation  to  the  hon.  Minister  of 
Energy and Public Utilities.  Though we have given notice of this issue, the hon. Vice-Prime 
Minister is not here.  I think maybe another hon. Minister could take the issue. It is in relation 
to irregular water supply and water shortage in Constituency No. 3, that is, Plaine Verte and 
Roche Bois.  What has happened on 04 May 2016, where many people in my Constituency 
were celebrating the night of Meraj, there was no water running in the tap and this has caused 
a lot of distress to people, more specifically in the region of Cité Martial, Rue Gorah Issac, 
Diego Garcia and also Camp Yoloff.  

My appeal to the hon. Vice-Prime Minister is that this weekend we are celebrating the 
night  of  Shab-e-Baraat,  more  specifically  on  21  and  22  of  May,  Saturday  and  Sunday,  if 
necessary action could be taken so that water runs in the tap. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun):  
Madam Speaker, a committee has been set up under my chairmanship, we are looking after it 
and I will take the suggestion of the hon. Member.  I can assure the hon. Member that we will 
do the needful because it is very important and we have already discussed this matter. 

 

137 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Baloomoody! 

MGR. LEEN, VENUS – SQUATTERS - RELOCATION 

Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West): My question 
is to the hon. Vice Prime Minister. It concerns the squatters to be found at Mgr. Leen, Venus.  
In fact, a few weeks ago they have received a letter informing them that they will have a plot 
of  land  in  Pointe  aux  Sables,  according  to  the  letter  which  I  have  seen.    But  then 
subsequently, a few days after, some of the officers went on site and they were told that the 
spot where they are will be legalised or they will move a few yards from the place where they 
are.  So, they want to know which is which.  If the hon. Vice-Prime Minister can look into the 
matter and clear issues. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun):  
Madam Speaker, we have already decided that all the squatters at Mgr. Leen to be in situ at 
Mgr Leen where they are.  There are about, I think, 13.  

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Quirin! 

 

 

BEAU BASSIN & ROSE HILL – DRAINS 

Mr.  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière):  Madame  la 
présidente, ma requête ce soir s’adresse à l’honorable ministre des infrastructures publiques 
et  concerne  le  calvaire  que  vit,  en  période  de  grosses  pluies,  une  quarantaine  de  familles 
résidant à la rue Pope Hennessy à Beau Bassin à partir des feux de signalisation allant vers 
Mont Roches et une cinquantaine de mètres plus haut vers Hugnin à Rose Hill. Alors, quand 
la route est inondée, les cours et maisons avoisinantes sont, à leur tour, inondées car il y a un 
manque de drains adéquats et les drains existants sont rarement entretenus.  

Donc, je vais déposer une pétition des habitants de la région adressée à la RDA, ainsi 
que  des  photos  prises  par  les  résidents  eux-mêmes.  Je  pense  que  cela  va  être  utile  à 
l’honorable ministre et je précise aussi qu’il y a les officiers Mohungoo et Affrasoule qui sont 
au courant de ce problème.  Donc, je fais un appel pressant à l’honorable ministre de bien 
vouloir considérer ma requête. 

 

138 

The  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  (Mr  N.  Bodha):  
Madam Speaker, this is a classified road and we have engineers who have already gone on 
the site.  I will look into the matter to see that we find a solution as soon as possible. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Rughoobur ! 

POUDRE D’OR & VALE – FOOTBALL GROUND 

Mr  S.  Rughoobur  (Second  Member  for  Grand’Baie  &  Poudre  D’or):    Madam 
Speaker, my request is addressed to the hon. Minister of Local Government.  We have got 
actually  two  projects  that  have  been  handed  over  by  the  NDU  to  the  District  Council  of 
Rivière du Rempart: the football ground at Poudre D’or and cloakroom at the Vale.  For these 
two  projects,  there  are  still  some  outstanding  works  that  need  to  be  completed.    I  would 
request the hon. Minister to please see to it that funds are made available to complete them.  

The Minister of Local Government (Dr. A. Husnoo):  Madam Speaker, I will talk to 
the Chairman of the District Council of Rivière du Rempart and get them to have a look at 
both of these cases.  

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

  

 

CAMP YOLOFF & ST FRANÇOIS REGIONS – POLICE PATROL 

Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port  Louis  East):  
Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to address two issues.  In fact, 
there is a mistake in the document.  It was my fault, I did not clarify.  It is one addressed to 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister.   

Only  yesterday,  there  was  a  meeting  in  my  Constituency  that  was  organised  by  the 
force vive, a group called ‘Defenders’ in the presence of the Police Force and that meeting 
was with regard to the fear that is felt by the inhabitants of the locality because of the rise in 
the number of robberies, the rise in the number break-ins and the elderly are being attacked in 
their own homes. It was a nice event in the sense that Police officers were present in order to 
try to explain what they could do in order to protect themselves.   

Now, the reason why I am, Madam Speaker, asking the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to try 
to see to it personally, if he could get it from the Commissioner of Police that there are more 

 

139 

patrols not only in the main roads, but in all the other subsidiary roads in the Camp Yoloff, St 
François  regions  because  this  fear  is  prevalent  there  and  more  officers  have  to  be  put, 
according to the information I am getting last night, in the Police stations in Plaine Verte and 
Roche Bois because both of them are undermanned. So, a personal intervention on the part of 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister would be much appreciated.  

GÂTEAU, MRS MARJOLAINE - EVICTION 

Mr S. Mohamed (First Member for Port Louis Maritime & Port Louis East):  The 
second issue, Madam Speaker, is with regard to the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, hon. Soodhun, 
who  is  here.    We  have  been  hearing  on  radio,  and  most  hon.  Members  of  this  august 
Assembly have heard a lady from my Constituency, Constituency No. 3 – and we are lucky 
enough that we are four Members of Parliament representing that Constituency.  Not only 
three, four! That lady is from Roche Bois.  Her name is Marjolaine Gâteau and she has been 
evicted, for some reasons, from a place where she was living for the past 25 years.  Now, she 
is not alone, she has a child with her and she is living outside, in the open. She has nowhere 
else to go. I would have addressed this issue to the hon. Minister in charge of the NEF, but 
unfortunately, I believe maybe I am addressing it to the hon. Vice- Prime Minister because it 
is an urgent situation whereby a lot of people who see themselves victims d’un incendie, they 
lose their home, they don’t have anywhere to go, they don’t have any family members. In an 
urgent situation, if there is no proper scheme to try to bring them in, if it is not a member of 
society to help them or a church or a religious organisation, then it is problematic.   

I humbly suggest that this matter will be looked into in Roche Bois urgently, but also 
maybe an extension of that programme or a new programme set up maybe to look into those 
urgent situations where no homes are available. I thank both the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and 
the hon. Vice-Prime Minister. 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, I will pass on the request to the Commissioner 
of Police, but you know this problem is not only in his Constituency.  This problem is a bit 
everywhere, in many other places and I wonder whether we have sufficient number of Police 
officers  to  go  on  patrol  everywhere,  not  only  in  main  roads,  but  even  in  subsidiary  roads.  
Well, I will pass on the message and see what can be done. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun):  
Madam Speaker, I will ask my hon. friend to give me more details, and if possible, I will talk 
to him later on that.   

 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Jhugroo! 

140 

CUREPIPE – TRAFFIC CONGESTION 

Mr  P.  Jhugroo  (Second  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien):    Madam 
Speaker, being given that we have got many driving schools’ cars operating in the centre of 
Curepipe, thus causing very serious traffic congestion,  therefore, I am asking the Minister of 
Public Infrastructure and  Land Transport, my  friend, hon. Bodha to see if a different zone 
could be found for these persons to go for driving during the day. 

The Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport (Mr N. Bodha): Well, 
the idea, Madam Speaker, was to decentralise Port Louis and to regionalise, that’s why we 
created  an  examination  centre  in  Curepipe.  I  can  understand  that  this  is  causing  some 
problems because of all the people from the South. So, we will have to find a new zone. I will 
look into the matter 

At 8.14 p.m., the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Tuesday 24 May 2016 at 

11.30 a.m. 

WRITTEN ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

BETTING (ILLEGAL) – ARRESTS 

(No. B/400) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to illegal betting, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the 
Commissioner  of  Police,  information  as  to  the  number  of  persons  arrested,  since  January 
2010 to date in connection therewith, indicating the measures that will be taken to address 
same. 

Reply: I am advised by the Commissioner of Police that 51 cases of illegal betting 
have  been  established  and  88  persons  have  been  arrested,  in  connection  therewith,  from 
January 2010 to 12 May 2016. 

A  series  of  measures  have  been  and  are  being  initiated  to  address  the  problem  of 

illegal betting. 

The  Gambling  Regulatory  Authority  Act  has  been  amended,  under  the  Finance 
Miscellaneous  (Provisions)  Act  2015,  to  increase  the  penalties,  including  fines  and 

 

141 

imprisonment terms, in respect of illegal betting.  The Gambling Regulatory Authority Act is, 
moreover, being further reviewed for this purpose. 

Concerted actions are being taken by officers of the Mauritius Revenue Authority, the 
Gambling  Regulatory  Authority,  the  Financial  Intelligence  Unit  and  ‘Police  des  Jeux’  for 
more  effective  tracking  down  of  offenders  and  for  targeted  operations  against  illegal 
activities. 

The  Inspectorate  and  Investigation  Division  of  the  Gambling  Regulatory  Authority 
and the ‘Police des Jeux’ have been reinforced both in terms of numbers and capacity.  The 
enlistment  of  experts  to  build  capacity  in  intelligence  gathering  is  envisaged  in  the  near 
future. 

As the House is aware, my Office has enlisted the services of two consultants and one 
of their major assignments is precisely to come with recommendations on how best to address 
the  issue  of  illegal  betting.    These  two  consultants  were  the  two  Commissioners  of  the 
Commission of Inquiry on Horseracing in Mauritius. 

The Mauritius Revenue Authority is currently activating the processes to implement 

the new Central Electronic Monitoring System. 

In addition, the following measures are being taken to address illegal betting – 

(i) 

 

(ii) 
(iii) 

(iv) 

(v) 

(vi) 

Close monitoring of all persons who have in the past been involved in illegal  
betting; 
Regular checks on bookmakers; 
Involvement of the Cybercrime Unit ,for cyber patrol, with a view to detecting 
illegal betting through online services; 
Sensitisation of law abiding citizens and encouraging them to reveal and share 
information  on  suspicious  gambling  activities  with  the  Police  through  the 
Police Hotline 148; 
 Introduction  of  a  reward  system  for  informers  for  providing  genuine 
information on illegal betting to the ‘Police des Jeux’, and 
Working  with  youth  clubs  to  prevent  youngsters  from  indulging  in  illegal 
gambling activities. 

I  must  add  that  one  case  of  illegal  betting  involving  a  major  licensee  has  been 

detected recently and the matter has been referred to the Police. 

EDITIONS DE L’OCEAN INDIEN – SALE 

142 

 
(No. B/401) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to the Editions de l’Océan Indien, he will, for the benefit of the House, 
obtain from the State Investment Corporation, information as to the – 

(a) 

(b) 

amount  of  money  invested  by  Government  therein  over  the  past  five  years, 
and 
procurement method used for the disposal thereof, indicating the 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 

total proceeds of the sale thereof; 
name of the purchaser thereof, and 
amount of money owed to the National Commercial Bank Ltd. as at to 
date. 

Reply: With regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed that over the last five 
years, Government has not invested any funds in Editions de L’Ocean Indien.  However, the 
State  Investment  Corporation  (SIC)  has,  between  2010  and  2015,  advanced  an  amount  of 
Rs56.4  m.  to  Editions  de  L’Ocean  Indien,  of  which  Rs15.2  m.  has  been  repaid.    The  net 
amount advanced by SIC was, therefore, Rs41.2 m. which has already been impaired in the 
accounts of the SIC. 

Regarding  part  (b)  of  the  question,  an  Expression  of  Interest  was  launched  on  27 
August 2015 to invite proposals for the acquisition of the business.  At the closing date of 11 
September 2015, three proposals were received.  Following the evaluation of the proposals, 
Hobby World Ltd was selected as the preferred bidder.  It offered to inject Rs30 m. for taking 
over the business as a going concern and agreed to maintain the employment of all the 52 
employees on same terms and conditions. 

As  at  06  August  2015,  date  on  which  the  company  was  put  under  administration, 
Editions de L’Ocean Indien owed the former National Commercial Bank a total amount of 
Rs35.9 m. 

As a result of negotiations between the Bank and Hobby World Ltd, the bank agreed 
for a settlement of the debt at an amount of Rs28 m., made up of an immediate cash payment 
of  Rs8  m.  by  Editions  de  L’Ocean  Indien  and  the  remaining  balance  of  Rs20  m.  be 
rescheduled over a period of 10 years. 

LAND DRAINAGE AUTHORITY – SETTING UP 

143 

 
(No. B/402) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to the proposed setting up of a Land Drainage Authority as announced in 
the 2015-2016 Budget Speech, he will state where matters stand, including the expected date 
of coming into operation thereof. 

Reply:  I  am  informed  by  the  National  Development  Unit  (NDU)  that  drafting 
instructions have been conveyed to the Attorney General’s office to incorporate in the Draft 
Land  Drainage  Authority  Bill  already  prepared,  comments  and  views  received  following 
consultations with its major stakeholders. 

The  Draft  Bill  is  expected  to  be  introduced  in  the  National  Assembly  in  the  last 

quarter of this year. 

The Land Drainage Authority is expected to come into operation in early 2017. 

REPUBLIC OF GHANA & REPUBLIC OF MAURITIUS – TECHNOLOGY 

PARK 

(No.  B/403)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of 
Finance and Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
whether, in regard to the Joint Project of the Government of the Republic of Ghana and of 
that of the Republic of Mauritius for the setting up of a Technology Park in the port city of 
Tema, in Ghana, he will state where matters stand as to the implementation thereof. 

Reply: Inspired by the success of the Mauritius Cybercity, the President of Ghana, in 
May 2014, requested for the assistance of Mauritius to develop a Technology Park in Ghana. 

The  Government  of  Mauritius  and  the  Government  of  Ghana  thus  signed  a 
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU), in June 2015, for the implementation of the project. 

In furtherance, a Framework Agreement was signed between the two Governments in 

August 2015, during the official visit of the President of Ghana to Mauritius. 

The  Agreement  sets  out  the  framework  of  cooperation  to  develop  and  manage  the 
Technology Park and also the respective rights and obligations of the parties.  Furthermore, 
the Agreement provides for the following – 

 
(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

144 

the setting up of a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) to be incorporated in Ghana 
to  implement  the  project.    The  SPV  shall  be  managed  by  a  Board  of  five 
Directors, three of whom shall be nominated by Mauritius and two by Ghana.  
The Chairman will be designated from among the three Directors nominated 
by  Mauritius.    The  CEO  shall  be  designated  from  among  the  two  Directors 
nominated by Ghana; 
the  Government  of  Ghana  shall  provide  the  essential  infrastructure,  the 
necessary permits and licenses, fiscal incentives and other business facilitation 
measures  for  the  implementation  of  the  project.    The  fiscal  incentives  shall 
include  a  10-year  tax  holiday,  exemption  from  customs  duties  and  Value 
Added Tax on equipment and raw materials for all companies operating in the 
Park, including the Master Developer; 
the Framework Agreement shall take effect after approval by the Parliament of 
Ghana. 

An on-site mission in Ghana was carried out in October 2015.  The objective was to 
obtain a clear visibility of the site for the setting up of the Technology Park and also to press 
for the Framework Agreement to be brought to the Parliament of Ghana for ratification. 

The  visit  revealed  that  the  site  earmarked,  which  was  within  the  industrial  zone  of 

Tema, was not suitable for the development of a Technology Park. 

A  follow-up  mission  was  organised  in  November  2015  to  explore  alternative  sites 
available to the Government of Ghana in the vicinity of Accra, and to clear impediments to 
the  implementation  of  the  project.  Among  the  alternative  sites  proposed  by  the  Lands 
Commission of Ghana, an unencumbered 20-hectare plot of land at Dawa, some 50 km east 
of  Accra,  was  identified  as  a  suitable  site  for  the  development  of  the  Technology  Park.  
Unoccupied land adjoining the 20-hectare plot was also available for future expansion. 

The Technology Park project is envisaged by the Government of Mauritius and by the 
Government  of  Ghana  as  a  mixed  development  concept  based  on  the  three  principles  of 
“Work, Live and Play”.  The project will be developed in a minimum of 2 phases. 

The Work function will be developed first through the construction of 2-anchor ICT 
clusters,  with  a  proposed  total  built  area  of  36  thousand  square  metres.    Thereafter,  a 
conference centre and a 200-room business hotel will be built.  This will conclude Phase 1 of 
the project. 

145 

 
Under Phase 2, the “Work, Live and Play” aspects will be further developed.  Firstly, 
serviced  plots  will  be  leased  for  ICT  regional  headquarters,  for  a  banking  and  financial 
services cluster, and for training and research and development.  Secondly, residential blocks 
and  apartment  buildings  will  be  constructed,  along  with  a  commercial  centre  comprising 
shopping  areas,  food  courts,  and  a  gymnasium  and  wellness  centre.    Finally,  the  entire 
Technology Park will be integrated within beautifully landscaped surroundings with plazas, 
boulevards and access to green open spaces. 

The development of the project will be privately financed through partnerships with 
infrastructure development partners, third party developers, operators themselves and other 
investors.  The total project cost is estimated at 200 million US dollars, requiring an initial 
investment of 75 million US dollars.  The Mauritius-Africa Fund Ltd, under whose aegis the 
project  is  being  undertaken,  is  actively  seeking  commitments  from  various  investors, 
including,  among  others,  private  equity  investors,  banking  and  insurance  companies,  and 
international development financial institutions. 

As at date, the following steps are yet to be completed by the authorities of Ghana – 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

issuance of an official confirmation regarding the allocation of the 20-hectare 
of land in Dawa for the Technology Park project; 
approval  of  the  required  amendments  to  the  Framework  Agreement,  to  take 
into consideration the change of site and other changes; 
submission  of  the  Framework  Agreement,  as  appropriately  amended,  to  the 
Parliament of Ghana for ratification, and 
completion  of  the  formalities  for  the  incorporation  of  the  Special  Purpose 
Vehicle to implement the project. 

With the coming general elections scheduled to be held in Ghana on 07 November 
2016 to elect a President and Members of Parliament, the implementation of the project is 
expected to be somewhat delayed. 

The Mauritius-Africa Fund Ltd and the Board of Investment are acting with diligence 
to  expedite  matters  pertaining  to  the  incorporation  of  the  SPV  and  the  ratification  of  the 
signed Framework Agreement so that on-site works can be started as soon as possible. 

NATIONAL ADOPTION COUNCIL – ADOPTED CHILDREN 

(No.  B/404)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 

 

146 

and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether,  in  regard  to  the  children,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the 
National Adoption Council, information as to the number thereof who have been adopted by 
Mauritian nationals and foreign nationals respectively over the past five years. 

Reply: I would like to inform the House that the National Adoption Council which 
has been set up under the National Adoption Council Act of 1988 is administered by a Board, 
comprising  the  representatives  of  different  Ministries  and  organisations  involved  in  the 
adoption process.  The Council has the mandate to authorise applications for the adoption of 
Mauritian children by foreign nationals only. 

Requests for adoption of foreign children by Mauritian nationals that meet the legal 
and  social  requirements  are  authorised  by  my  Office  in  accordance  with  the  Code  Civil 
Mauricien, after consultation with the Attorney General’s Office. 

As  regards  local  adoptions,  that  is,  the  adoption  of  Mauritian  children  living  in 
Mauritius by Mauritian nationals, these are dealt with by the Courts in accordance with the 
Code Civil Mauricien. 

I am accordingly informed that, from January 2011 to 13 May 2016 – 

38 Mauritian children have been adopted by foreigners; 
21 foreign children have been adopted by Mauritian nationals, and 
275 Mauritian children have been adopted by Mauritian nationals. 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
I would also like to inform the House that Mauritius had in 1998, ratified The Hague 
Convention  on  the  Protection  of  Children  and  Cooperation  in  respect  of  Intercountry 
Adoption which has established safeguards to ensure that intercountry adoptions take place in 
the best interests of children. 

As announced in the Government Programme 2015-2019, the broad lines of a New 
Adoption  Bill  to  fully  domesticate  the  provisions  of  the  Convention  have  already  been 
approved and we expect to embark on the drafting of the law with the assistance of an expert 
from The Hague Convention Secretariat very soon.  This would enable the setting up of a 
new structure and a new framework to ensure that all children are adopted in accordance with 
international norms and standards. 

BETTING – OPERATORS – LICENCE 

(No. B/405) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 

 

147 

and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to betting, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Gambling 
Regulatory  Authority,  information  as  to  the  names  of  the  new  operators  who  have  been 
issued with a licence therefor, if any, since January 2015 to date, indicating in each case, the 
– 

(a) 
(b) 

category/type of the licence, and 
number  of  outlets  authorised  to  be  operated  thereunder,  indicating  the 
locations thereof. 

(Vide reply to PQ No. B/399) 

 

 

MR N. K. S. – ARREST & BAIL 

(No.  B/406)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National 
Development Unit whether, in regard to Mr N. K. S., he will, for the benefit of the House, 
obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to the – 

(a) 

(b) 

date of – 
(i) 

arrest thereof, indicating the equipment/personal belongings which had 
been seized at the time thereof and if they have all been returned and, 
if so, when and, if not, why not, and 
release on bail thereof, and 

(ii) 
charges lodged against him. 

Reply: I am informed by the Commissioner of Police that Mr N.K.S. was arrested on 

23 January 2016 in breach of the Prevention of Terrorism Act. 

The residence and the Cyber Café of Mr N.K.S. were searched on the same date and 
five laptops, two mobile phones and other computer accessories were secured.  All exhibits 
secured are still in the possession of Police for Forensic examination. 

In regard to part (a) (ii) of the question, I am informed that Mr N.K.S. was released on 
bail on 02 February 2016, after furnishing two sureties of Rs100,000 each and entering into a 
recognizance of debt of Rs500,000. 

 
The following conditions were additionally imposed on him by the court – 

148 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

(v) 

to call at the nearest Police Station once daily between 06.00 hours and 18.00 
hours; 

not to get into contact with witnesses; 

to remain away from Indra Cyber Café; 

not to change address and, if so, to notify Police immediately, and 

not to move out of the house between 20.00 hours and 05.00 hours. 

In regard to part (b) of the question, the Commissioner of Police has informed that on 
24 January 2016, Mr N.K.S. was provisionally charged before the Bail and Remand Court for 
the  offence  of  “providing  logistics  for  an  activity,  which  he  knows  is  concerned  with 
terrorism” in breach of Section 5(b) of the Prevention of Terrorism Act 2002. 

The  Provisional  charge  lodged  against  him  was  struck  out  by  Court  on  28  March 

2016.  The main case is still under enquiry. 

COMMISSIONER OF PRISONS – APPOINTMENT 

(No. B/407) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether,  in  regard  to  the  Mauritian  Prison  Services,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House, 
obtain  information  as  to  if  consideration  will  be  given  for  the  urgent  appointment  of  a 
Commissioner of Prisons and, if not, why not. 

Reply: I am informed that the former Commissioner of Prisons, who was employed 
on contractual basis, left on 26 December 2015.  Subsequently, arrangements have been made 
for  the  duties  of  Commissioner  of  Prisons  to  be  carried  out  by  the  senior  most  Deputy 
Commissioner of Prisons. 

In this regard, Mr Jaganaden Rungadoo has been assigned the duties of Commissioner 
of  Prisons  with  effect  from  27  December  2015,  pending  the  filling  of  the  vacant  post  of 
Commissioner of Prisons, as soon as possible. 

CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY – FUNDS COLLECTED 

(No. B/408) Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  of  Finance  and 

 

149 

Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in 
regard to the Corporate Social Responsibility, he will state if – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

new  guidelines  will  be  issued  to  ensure  a  more  efficient  use  of  the  funds 
collected thereunder; 
the proposal for a review of the concept of parrainage, as announced in the 
last Budget Speech, will be implemented, and 
consideration will be given for a transfer of the funds collected thereunder to 
the  Ministry  of  Social  Integration  and  Economic  Empowerment  for  better 
management  and  monitoring  with  a  view  to  ensuring  a  more  coherent 
approach to poverty alleviation. 

Reply:  During 

the  pre-budget  consultations  with  NGOs  and  Civil  Society 
organisations, several concerns were expressed regarding the Corporate Social Responsibility 
(CSR) issue.  I am sensible to their concerns and I have informed them that consideration is 
already being given to review the CSR mechanism. 

As  regards  parts  (a)  to  (c)  of  the  question,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  the 

suggestions made will be considered in the context of the review exercise. 

MEDICINES - PRICE 

(No. B/430) Mr D. Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the selling and pricing 
of  medicines  to  the  public,  he  will  state  if  his  Ministry  has  set  up  a  committee  to  inquire 
thereinto and, if so, indicate - 

(a) where matters stand as to the work thereof, and  
(b) if copy of the report thereof will be tabled. 

Reply:  I am informed that at the level of my  Ministry, there is no such committee 

which deals with selling and pricing of medicines to the public.  

My Ministry is concerned with the registration of pharmaceutical products and issues 
clearance to registered pharmaceutical wholesalers for the import and sales of such products 
to the public.  

It is the Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection (Industry Division) 

which is responsible for the fixing of price of pharmaceutical products. 

 
Selling of medicines is independent of both my Ministry and the Ministry of Industry, 

150 

Commerce and Consumer Protection (Industry Division). 

MUNICIPAL & DISTRICT COUNCILS - CHIEF EXECUTIVE, ASSISTANT 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE & DEPUTY CHIEF EXECUTIVE - POSTS 

(No.  B/432)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port Louis East) asked the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the posts of 
Assistant  Chief  Executive,  Deputy  Chief  Executive  and  Chief  Executive  of  Municipal  and 
District Councils, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to the 
- 

(a) names of the officers promoted thereto since January 2016 to date, indicating their 

- 
(i) address;  
(ii) present and past posting, and  
(iii)  number  of  years  of  service  reckoned  in  an  acting  capacity  prior  thereto, 
indicating  if  all  those  reckoning  prior  service  in  an  acting  capacity  thereto 
were promoted and, if not, why not, and  

(b)  if  the  Scheme  of  Service  for  the  post  of  Deputy  Chief  Executive  and  Chief 
Executive would be amended to provide for promotion thereto of serving officers 
only on the basis of seniority and experience. 

Reply: I shall arrange for the information requested for at part (a) of the question, to 

be placed in the Library of the National Assembly. 

With  regard  to  part  (a)  (iii),  all  those  reckoning  prior  service  in  an  acting  capacity 

thereto were not promoted. 

• 

It is the Local Government Service Commission which selects the candidates 
on the basis of the schemes of service of the posts. 

•  The assignment of duty to higher grades is made on ground of administrative 
convenience only and does not give any claim for appointment to the higher 
grades. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed that it is not being envisaged to 
amend the scheme of service for the posts of Deputy Chief Executive and Chief Executive to 
provide for promotion thereto of serving officers only on the basis of seniority and experience 
as that would be against the recommendations of the PRB Reports. 

 

151 

GRNW & PORT LOUIS WEST - SPORTS & RECREATIONAL 

FACILITIES 

(No.  B/433)  Mrs  D.  Selvon  (Second  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Youth  and  Sports  whether,  in  regard  to  the  sports  and  recreational 
facilities, he will state if - 

(a) there are project plans for the improvement of the existing ones having regard to 

the present state thereof, including the football ground at Camp Chapelon, and  

(b)  consideration  will  be  given  for  the  provision  of  additional  ones  across 
Constituency No. 1, Grand River North West and Port Louis West and, if so, give 
details  thereof,  indicating  in  each  case,  the  time  frame  set  out  for  the 
implementation thereof, if any. 

Reply: I wish to inform the House that maintenance and upgrading works of all sports 
infrastructures  and  youth  centres  belonging  to  my  Ministry  are  an  ongoing  exercise  at  the 
level of my Ministry.  However, taking into consideration that 82 sites comprising, among 
others,  stadiums,  swimming  pools,  sports  complexes,  football  grounds,  youth  centres  fall 
under the jurisdiction of my Ministry, each financial year a list of works to be undertaken is 
drawn up and submitted to the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development for allocation 
of  funds.    On  the  basis  of  funds  being  made  available,  works  are  carried  out  accordingly.  
Maintenance and upgrading works of sports infrastructures belonging to local authorities, like 
the football ground at Camp Chapelon which belongs to the Municipal Council of Port Louis 
are not catered for by my Ministry. 

 As regards part (b) of the question, I would like to refer the hon. Member to the reply 

made to PQ A/8 of our sitting of 03 May 2016. 

HAWKERS - OPERATION 

(No.  B/434)  Mrs  D.  Selvon  (Second  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 

asked the Minister of Local Government whether he will – 

(a) state if, as in Port Louis, he will request the Police to remove from all town and 
village streets and beaches all hawkers and resettle them in dedicated places with 
adequate infrastructure and, if not, why not; 

(b)  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  Councils  and  Statistics  Mauritius,  a 

breakdown by - 

(i) licensed and unlicensed categories, and  

152 

(ii) Municipal and District Council, the number of all types of hawkers, 

 

and 

(c)  state  if  that  database  will  be  used  to  create  a  centralized  Hawkers  Authority  to 
ensure human and non-discriminatory treatment to all hawkers and to assess their 
contribution  in  various  ways  regarding,  for  instance,  unemployment  reduction 
and the invisible economy. 

Reply: As regards part (a) of the question, I would like to inform the House that a 
hawker, by definition, is someone who travels about selling goods. The question of creating 
dedicated places for hawkers does not arise. However, the Local Government Act provides 
for  Municipal  Councils  and  District  Councils  to  erect  or  open  market  or  fair  within  their 
administrative areas and the procedures for the occupation of stalls and shops within these 
premises are clearly spelt out in the Act. All the Local Authorities have such facilities within 
their jurisdiction areas and they are endeavouring to find ways and mean to discourage these 
so-called  hawkers  to  work  on  the  streets  and  advising  them  to  avail  themselves  to  such 
facilities. 

Insofar as Port Louis is concerned, the House will recall that in the statement I made 
in this House on 03 May 2016, I pointed out that the problem of hawkers on the streets of 
Port Louis has been going for over 30 years and was creating lots of problem to the public, 
the  pedestrians,  the  market  traders  and  the  shop  owners,  among  others.  Further,  there  is  a 
Court judgment that hawkers should not operate within a radius of 500m from the Central 
Market. With a view to not penalising them, this Government and the Municipal City Council 
of  Port  Louis,  have  come  up  with  a  short  and  long  term  solution  to  this  problem.  As  a 
temporary measure, two sites have been identified and placed at their disposal for them to 
operate so that they can continue earning their living. For the long term solutions, provisions 
will be made in the integrated project for traffic alleviation and redeployment of the City for 
these traders to be allocated permanent spaces to operate. 

Insofar as part (b) of the question is concerned, the information is being compiled and 
I shall arrange for same to be placed in the Library of the National Assembly as soon as the 
exercise will be completed.  

With regard to part (c) of the question, I wish to refer the hon. Member to the reply I 
made  on  03  May  2016  to  Parliamentary  Question  No.  B/387  on  this  issue  and  wherein  I 
stated  that  the  setting  up  of  a  centralised  database  for  economic  operators  will  go  in  a 
direction opposite to the decentralised process in Local Government. 

 

 

153 

MONKEYS - EXPORT 

(No.  B/435)  Mrs  D.  Selvon  (Second  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security    whether,  in  regard  to  the  live 
monkeys, he will state the complete annual statistics of the trade therein between Mauritius 
and  foreign  laboratories  over  the  past  ten  years,  including  the  number  thereof  annually 
exported, indicating the - 

(a) names of the companies involved;  

(i) therein in Mauritius and overseas and;  
(ii) in the importation thereof;  

(b) annual revenues generated therefrom, and  
(c) Government policy as regards the criticisms levelled against the trade therein by 

organisations based in Mauritius or abroad. 

Reply:  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  Mauritius  is  exporting  live  monkeys  since 
1985  and  the  species  exported  belong  to  the  long  tailed  macaque  species,  which  was 
introduced in Mauritius in the early 1700s from South East Asia. This species is listed as one 
of  the  most  invasive  and  destructive  agricultural  and  ecological  pests,  causing  human 
nuisance as well as damage to agriculture and biodiversity. 

The decision to authorise the export of monkeys was a measure to reduce the threats 

and damages caused and to control its population. 

However,  today  the  species  is  a  highly  sought  animal  model  in  the  biomedical 
research  field  and  is  very  often  at  the  forefront  of  groundbreaking  research  in  the 
development of treatment against a number of diseases. The primate (monkey) breeding and 
export  industry  is  a  well-established  one  and  is  an  important  contributor  to  the  Mauritian 
economy,  generating  foreign  exchange  earnings  and  providing  direct  and 
indirect 
employment to more than 2000 people. 

The  primate  breeding  and  export  companies  are  accredited  companies  which  are 
closely  monitored  by  the  Division  of  the  Veterinary  Service  and  the  National  Parks  and 
Conservation Service of my Ministry regarding the veterinary care and welfare of the animals 
in accordance with the policies and guidelines set by the Ministry. 

The  export  of  live  monkeys  is  subject  to  a  contribution  levy  of  USD  125  for  each 
animal exported and the contribution is paid to the National Parks and Conservation Fund to 
finance conservation projects. 

With regard to parts (a) and (b) of the question, I am tabling the relevant information. 

154 

 
As  regards  part  (c),  the  export  of  monkeys  from  Mauritius  has  been  the  subject  of 
criticisms from both local and international animal activist organisations and the Ministry is 
following up on the matter very closely. Should there be any complaint or non-compliance 
regarding  the  conditions  of  breeding  and  export,  necessary  action  will  be  taken  by  my 
Ministry. 

However, in view of the benefits which research carried out on monkeys is bringing 
to  the  international  community  at  large  and,  given  the  contribution  which  this  activity  is 
making  to  the  national  economy  in  terms  of  foreign  exchange  earnings  and  employment 
creation, my Ministry does not propose, at this stage, to review this matter. 

 

SSRN – CARDIAC SECTION - EQUIPMENT 

(No.  B/436)  Mrs  D.  Selvon  (Second  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the Sir Seewoosagur 
Ramgoolam National Hospital, he will – 

(a) state if a C-ARM machine of the Cardiac Section thereof is currently out of order 

and, if so, indicate when it will be repaired or replaced, and 

(b) give a list of other equipment currently not in working condition thereat, if any. 
Reply:    With regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed that the C-
ARM machine is out of order since 24 September 2012. We are already in the process 
of acquiring a new one. 

  As for part (b) of the question, in view of the large number of equipment in 
hospitals, I would appreciate if the hon. Member could come with a question on any 
specific equipment.  

 

LAGOONS – FISHING  

(No. B/437) Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and  Outer  Islands 
whether, in regard to the project for the prohibition of fishing in the lagoons, he will state if 
consideration will be given for a review of the regulations made in relation thereto. 

Reply:  My  Ministry  has  no  project  in  the  immediate  term  for  the  prohibition  of 

fishing in the lagoon.  

Therefore, the question of reviewing regulations does not arise. 
 
 

 

155 

BEAU BASSIN AND ROSE HILL - LANDSCAPING WORKS 

(No. B/438) Mr G. Lepoigneur (Fifth Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the Municipal Council of Beau 
Bassin and Rose Hill, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as 
to if additional labourers will be recruited thereat, in view of the complaints received from the 
inhabitants of Beau Bassin and Rose Hill in relation to the inability of the Municipal Council 
to realize the landscaping works thereat due to lack of labourers. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

MINISTRY OF YOUTH AND SPORTS - CENTRES DE FORMATION 

(No. B/439) Mr G. Lepoigneur (Fifth Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the centres de formation, he will 
state if he proposes to take back the responsibility thereof and of the budget allocated for the 
collective sports to the respective centres de formation, that is, football, volleyball, handball 
and basketball. 

 

(Withdrawn) 

ALTEO GROUP - COAL/BAGASSE POWER GENERATION PLANT 

(No.  B/440)  Mr  B.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in 
regard to the Independent Power Producers, he will state if any negotiation has now been held 
between his Ministry and the ALTEO Group for the implementation of a coal/bagasse power 
generation plant and, if so, indicate the outcome thereof regarding the price to be charged per 
kilowatt hour. 

Reply:  The  Power  Purchase  Agreement  of  F.U.E.L  (now  Alteo)  will  expire  in 
December 2018.  The Alteo Group has submitted a project proposal for a more efficient coal-
bagasse power plant which would export 66 MW in crop season and 74 MW in the intercrop 
season. The plant will be mainly fuelled by bagasse and cane trash.  It is expected to boost up 
bagasse energy generation at FUEL from current level 90 GWh to 210 GWh.   

In February 2016, a Negotiation Committee has been set up at my Ministry to start 

discussions with the Alteo Group.  

The  Committee  is  chaired  by  the  Director  General  of  my  Ministry  and  comprises 
representatives  of  the  Prime  Minister’s  Office,  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic 

 

156 

Development,  the  Ministry  of  Agro  Industry,  the  Ministry  of  Environment,  Sustainable 
Development, Beach and Disaster Management and the CEB.  

The  first  meeting  was  held  on  27  April  2016.  Discussions  have  not  yet  been 

completed.  

GLOBAL BUSINESS SECTOR - BUSINESS ENTITIES - REGISTRATION 
(No.  B/441)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 
Institutional Reforms whether, in regard to the Global Business sector, he will, for the benefit 
of the House, obtain from the Financial Services Commission, information as to – 

(a) the number of entities registered therewith in 2013, 2014 and 2015;  
(b) the growth rate thereof over the past three years, and  
(c) for each of the years 2012 to 2015, the number of new business entities that have 

been incorporated. 

Reply: When this Government took office, our Global Business Sector was facing a 
number  of  global  challenges.  Many  of  these  challenges  resulted  from  initiatives  of  supra 
international  organizations  as  well  as  a  number  of  reforms  being  driven  domestically  in 
investee countries such as the General Anti Avoidance Rule (GAAR) initiative in India. In 
the  face  of  such  challenges,  we  had  no  other  option  but  to  devise  a  new  approach  and 
business model for the future of our jurisdiction to ensure the sustainability thereof, and to 
protect jobs. Our focus therefore is on attracting quality Global Business transactions that are 
in line with our vision of a substance-based jurisdiction. 

The number of Global Business entities, mainly GBC1s, setting up in Mauritius have 
increased, resulting in improved substance requirement, value addition to the local economy 
including  job  creation.  The  number  of  entities  registered  in  2013,  2014  and  2015  are  as 
follows - 
GBC2 
 
10668 
 
10942 
 
 
10616 
The growth rate of GBC1s is as follows - 

GBC1  
9825 
 
10302   
10772   

 
2013 
2014 
2015 

 
 
 
 

• 
• 
• 

2013 : 1.7%; 
2014 : 4.9%, and 
2015 : 4.6%. 

157 

 
 
We  have  however  noted  that  the  number  of  GBC2s,  mainly  special  purpose 
vehicles, has decreased due to enhanced compliance reporting standards. The Growth rate of 
GBC2s are as follows - 

in 2013 it stood at negative 4.8%; 
in 2014 it stood at 2.6%, and  
in 2015 it stood at negative 3%. 

• 
• 
• 
With regard to part (c) of the question, the number of new businesses registered are as 

follows - 
 
 
 
 
 

 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015 

 
 
 
 
 

GBC1 GBC2 
1015 
999 
1259 
1367 

 
 
 
 

1053 
1193 
1379 
1310 

SAVANNE & BLACK RIVER – ROADS - REINSTATEMENT 

(No. B/442) Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to Constituency No. 
14,  Savanne  and  Black  River,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Road 
Development Authority, information as to – 
since January 2015 to date, the - 
(i) 
(ii) 
if there is any project for the reinstatement of the road of the Morcellement Black 
Rock in view of the impracticable and inaccessibility conditions thereof. 

number of roads that have been resurfaced thereat, and  
road infrastructural projects implemented thereat and  

(a) 

(b) 

Reply: With regard to part (a) of the question, I am tabling the information related to 
projects undertaken by the RDA, the District Councils of Savanne and Black River and the 
NDU.  The RDA has undertaken 16 projects for a total amount of Rs68.6m.. 

As to part (b) of the question, I am informed that the road of the Morcellement Black 

Rock falls under the purview of the Local Authority. 

 
CEB - VERGER COCO, BAIN DES DAMES – WORK IMPLEMENTATION 
(No. B/443) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to 

 

158 

works being carried out by the Central Electricity Board at Verger Coco, Bain des Dames, in 
Port Louis, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Board, information as to – 

(a) 
(b) 

the purpose thereof, and  
if  prior  consultations  were  held  with  the  inhabitants  of  the  region  thereof  in 
relation thereto. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

SECONDARY COLLEGES – MAURITIAN CREOLE - INTRODUCTION 

(No. B/444) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 
Research  whether,  in  regard  to  the  introduction  of  the  Mauritian  Creole  Language  in  the 
secondary colleges, she will state – 

(a) 

(b) 

if prior consultations were held with the teaching staff members of the secondary 
colleges and  
the minimum qualifications requirement for a teacher of the secondary colleges to 
teach the Mauritian Creole Language. 

 

(Withdrawn) 

 

FOOD WASTAGE – FOOD SHARING PROJECT 

(No.  B/445)  Mr  A.  Ganoo  (First  Member  for  Savanne  & Black  River)  asked  the 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security whether, with a view to encourage food waste 
reduction, he will state if consideration will be given for the introduction of a Food Waste 
Reduction  Bill  and  to  provide,  inter  alia,  for  a  prohibition  of  the  food  sellers/suppliers  to 
throw away/destroy unsold food and to donate same to the less fortunate. 

Reply: Food wastage is a worldwide problem. In fact, according to a report from the 
Food  and  Agricultural  Organisation  (FAO),  around  one  third  of  the  food  produced  in  the 
world for human consumption, i.e approximately 1.3 billion tons get lost or wasted annually. 
In  developing  countries,  food  losses  and  wastes  amount  to  around  USD  310  billion.  In 
Mauritius,  according  to  the  food  balance  sheet  statistics,  in  year  2014,  out  of  a  total  food 
production  of  2,419,685  tons  including  imports,  5281  tons  are  wasted  annually,  i.e 
approximately 1.73 %.  

Food  wastage  occurs  throughout  the  food  chain,  from  agricultural  production, 
harvesting,  sorting,  handling,  processing,  storage  and  transportation  to  consumption.  There 

 

159 

are  a  number  of  factors  which  can  potentially  lead  to  food  wastage.  These  are,  inter  alia; 
overproduction, lack of communication among stakeholders, early and late harvest, consumer 
preferences, poor marketing structures and facilities, food safety, lack of facilities for post-
harvest,  storage,  transport  and  processing,  climate  change.  Moreover,  at  times  of  falling 
prices, farmers find it cheaper to dispose of surplus food produce rather than putting it on 
sale. 

In  Mauritius,  we  do  not  have  any  records  of  people  dying  of  hunger.  We,  however, 
to 

have  cases  of  undernourishment  which  may  not  always  be  directly  related 
affordability/accessibility to food. 

To  prohibit  food  sellers/suppliers  to  throw  away  or  destroy  unsold  food  and  donate 
same to the less fortunate through a legislation is, however, very risky. In fact, leftovers of 
cooked/prepared food may pose a significant risk of food poisoning and serious disease for a 
number of reasons. Firstly, it would be very difficult to assess the impact of time, temperature 
and  defects  on  the  likelihood  of  contamination  on  the  premises  of  hotels  and  restaurants. 
Secondly, the risk of cross-contamination is amplified with the increased frequency of food 
manipulation  and  thirdly  most  ready  to  eat  foods  are  highly  perishable  and  liable  to 
contamination by pathogens which may grow rapidly depending on the nature of the food, 
time and temperature factors. We, therefore, need to be very cautious before introducing such 
legislation. 

level, 

there 

is  one  Non-Governmental  Organisation  (NGO)  which 

However,  in  spite  of  the  above,  I  am  informed  that  to  prevent  food  wastage  at  the 
consumption 
is 
benevolently and  actively  engaged in a  food sharing project.  Food which would otherwise 
have been wasted such as buffet leftovers in hotels, restaurants, caterers, hypermarkets and 
bakery  shops  are  collected  by  this  NGO  and  supplied  to  people  in  need  (local  NGOs, 
community centres, orphanages and retired homes) through a simple and no-cost food sharing 
system  .  This  NGO  assesses  and  selects  possible  food  donors  and  receivers  by  laying 
emphasis  on  food  safety.  In  addition  to  this  precautionary  measure,  the  food  is  distributed 
immediately  after  the  closure  of  buffet/restaurant/food  donors  premises  and  transported  to 
beneficiaries in hygienically sealed containers within three hours after having left the donors 
premises  ‘kitchens.  The  persons  involved  in  this  process  are  all  holders  of  a  food  handler 
certificate which legally enables them to carry the food with them until the donation point. 
Moreover,  all  the  food  donors  are  protected  through  the  use  of  a  liability  disclaimer.  This 
minimizes any risk of controversy between food donors and beneficiaries in terms of food 
safety. 

 

160 

At  the  other  levels  of  the  food  chain  we,  unfortunately  do  not  have  any  relevant 
statistics regarding the extent of wastage. However, we are assisting farmers to reduce food 
wastage through the adoption of good agricultural practices that minimize post-harvest losses. 
We are also encouraging farmers to engage in agro-processing activities so that the extent of 
wastage at the farm level can be minimized.  

The  problem  of  food  wastage  is  a  very  complex  one  and  involves  a  number  of 
stakeholders. To develop an appropriate strategy that could reduce food wastage, we need to 
carry out an extensive groundwork including a proper survey on this issue. It is only then that 
a decision can be taken regarding the opportunity of having a legal framework to address the 
problem of food wastage.  

HOUSING UNITS - ASBESTOS 

(No. B/446) Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 
Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms, Minister of Environment, Sustainable 
Development,  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management  whether,  in  regard  to  the  proposed 
pulling  down  of  houses  containing  asbestos  island-wide,  he  will  state  the  number  of  such 
houses  still  being  occupied,  indicating  if  Government  proposes  to  come  up  with  a  new 
scheme  for  the  pulling  down  and  reconstruction  of  safer  housing  units  for  the  occupiers 
thereof. 

Reply: I would wish to refer to the reply to Parliamentary Question B/921 (PQ B/921) 
made  on  17  November  2015  where  necessary  information  on  disposal  of  asbestos  and 
decision on reconstruction of housing units had been furnished. 

SADC PARLIAMENTARY FORUM - REGIONAL PARLIAMENT 

(No. B/447) Mr M. Gobin (First Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade whether, 
in regard to the regional agenda for the transformation of the Southern African Development 
Community  Parliamentary  Forum  into  a  full-fledged  Regional  Parliament  for  the  Southern 
African Development Community, he will state the stand of Government in relation thereto. 

Reply:  The  SADC  Parliamentary  Forum,  based  in  Windhoek,  Namibia,  was 
established by the SADC Summit in 1997 as an autonomous institution with an independent 
Secretariat.  It  operates  on  the  basis  of  annual  membership  contributions  from  National 
Parliaments,  among  others,  the  Mauritius  National  Assembly.   The  Forum  has  since  2004 
made  repeated  representations  for  it  to  be  transformed  into  a  SADC  Parliament  and  as  a 
legislative organ of SADC.   

161 

 
The SADC Summit 2004, held in Mauritius, expressed reservation on the request in 
view of the fact that the AU was in the process of creating a Pan-African Parliament. The 
Pan-African Parliament, which is already operational, has consultative and advisory powers 
within the AU.   

Since 2004, the SADC Councils in 2008, 2011 and 2015 have rejected all demands 

for the transformation of the Forum into a SADC Parliament.   

However, Mauritius is of the view that one could consider the idea of establishing a 
SADC  Parliament  when  the  region  has  reached  much  higher  levels  of  integration.  This 
notwithstanding,  the  Forum  continues  to  provide  an  opportunity  for  Parliamentarians  to 
collaborate with each other on matters of common interest.  

 

FLACQ – MARKET - DEMOLITION 

 
(No.  B/448)  Mr  R.  Dayal  (First  Member  for  Flacq  &  Bon  Accueil)  asked  the 
Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the former market located in the vicinity 
of the Flacq District Court, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Moka/Flacq 
District Council, information as to the reasons why same has been demolished, indicating – 
 

(a) who approved the demolition thereof, indicating the - 

(i) name of the contractor who carried out same, and  
(ii) method used therefor and, 

(b)  whether  any  demolished  materials  have  been  stored  and,  if  so,  where  and  by 

whom. 

Reply: I am informed by the District Council of Flacq that the former market located 
in  the  vicinity  of  the  Flacq  District  Court  was  demolished  as  it  was  in  a  deplorable  and 
degraded state. 

As regards part (a) of the question, I am informed that it was the then Moka-Flacq 
District Council which approved the demolition of the former market and decided to shift the 
sellers  to  the  newly  constructed  market  fair.  Quotation  was  launched  to  demolish  and  cart 
away the debris from the former market near the Flacq District Court and the structures found 
on  the  ex-market  fair  site  near  the  traffic  centre.  The  contract  was  awarded  to  the  lowest 
responsive bidder, Monesh Enterprise Ltd. for the sum of Rs556,250. 

162 

 
As  far  as  part  (b)  of  the  question  is  concerned,  I  am  informed  that  all  debris  were 
carted away except the stones which have been stored in the yard of the District Council of 
Moka at Quartier Militaire. 

 

CASE NOYALE - ROAD RESURFACING 

(No.  A/13)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether he is aware of the bad 
state  of  the  main  road  at  the  level  of  Case  Noyale  through  to  the  Le  Morne  Village,  in 
Constituency No. 14, Savanne and Black River, and, if so, state if consideration will be given 
for the urgent resurfacing thereof and, if so, when and, if not, why not. 

Reply: I am informed by the Road Development Authority that the stretch from Case 
Noyale to Le Morne Village along Black River – Savanne Road B9 is about 9 km.  Presently 
works are being carried out along B9 road by the CEB, CWA as well as RDA. 

From Case Noyale to La Gaulette over a length of 240m – excavation works are in 
progress by the CEB for underground cabling works.   The CEB has been issued a way leave 
on 21 April 2016 and excavation and temporary trench reinstatement are in progress.  The 
work is expected to be completed by 18 May 2016. 

Upon completion of the works and as per way leave condition CEB will have to carry 

out a half width milling and resurfacing. 

From La Gaulette to Cotteau Raffin over a length of 2.7km – excavation works have 
been completed by the CWA.   The CWA has been issued a way leave on 13 May 2015 and 
works were due to be completed in December 2015 with all road reinstatement carried out.   

Presently, the CWA is carrying temporary trench reinstatement works.  Discussions 
are ongoing with CWA as regards the half width milling and resurfacing as per the conditions 
of the way leave. 

I am further informed by the RDA that they are carrying out milling and resurfacing 

works from Cotteau Raffin to Le Morne Village (1km).  The cost of the project is Rs15 m. 

Additionally, the RDA has made provision for milling and resurfacing works along 
part  of  B9  Road  (Petite  Rivière  Noire,  Grand  Rivière  Noire  and  Case  Noyale)  in  their 
programme of works for the next Financial Year (2016 – 2017) and the cost estimate is Rs10 
m. 

 

