No. 13 of 2016 

1 

 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

(UNREVISED) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

 

TUESDAY 21 JUNE 2016 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2 

 

 

 

CONTENTS 

PAPERS LAID 

MOTION 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER 

BILLS (Public) 

E.S.E (6 months ended 30 June 2015) of 2016 

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

THE CABINET 

 

(Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

 
Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 
KCMG, QC  
Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 
GCSK  
Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Hon.  Ivan  Leslie  Collendavelloo,  GCSK, 
SC 
Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK 

 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 
Communications 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 
Utilities 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 
International Trade 
 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha, GCSK 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan, SC 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

of 
Minister 
Empowerment 
Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation  

Integration 

and  Economic 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 
Sinatambou 
Attorney General 
Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce  Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 

4 

Family Welfare 
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 
Institutional Reforms  
Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 
Institutions 
Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands 

 
Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms, 
Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 
Disaster and Beach Management 
Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and 
Training 

 

Perraud 
Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain, GCSK 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

 
Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 
Cheong, MSK 

Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 

 

 

 

 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Gopall, Mr Navin (Temporary Transfer to 
RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 13 of 2016 

 

Sitting of 21 June 2016 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

7 

PAPERS LAID 

  The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table –  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A.    Ministry  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 

Scientific Research ‒ 

The Annual Report 2014 of the Rajiv Gandhi Science Centre. 

 

B.    Ministry of Local Government ‒ 

(a)   The  City  Council  of  Port  Louis  (Central  Market)  Regulations  2016. 

(Government Notice No. 120 of 2016) 

(b)   The Auction Sale Site  Regulations 2016.  (Government Notice No. 121 of 

2016)  

(c)   The  City  Council  of  Port  Louis  (Decaen  Market/Fair)  Regulations  2016. 

(Government Notice No. 122 of 2016) 

(d)   The Ibrahim Abdoollah Market/Fair Regulations 2016. (Government Notice 

No. 123 of 2016) 

(e)   The Jinnah Market/Fair Regulations 2016. (Government Notice No. 124 of 

2016) 

(f)    The  City  Council  of  Port  Louis  (Marie  Elyata  Potou  Market)  Regulations 

2016. (Government Notice No. 125 of 2016) 

(g)   Père  Robert  Giraud  Market/Fair  Regulations  2016.  (Government  Notice  

No. 126 of 2016) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

8 

(h)   Pointe  aux  Sables  Market/Fair  Regulations  2016.  (Government  Notice  

No. 127 of 2016) 

(i)    The City Council of Port  Louis  (Pont de Paris  Open Market) Regulations 

2016. (Government Notice No. 128 of 2016) 

(j)    The  City  Council  of  Port  Louis  (Ruisseau  du  Pouce  Open  Market/Fair) 

Regulations 2016. (Government Notice No. 129 of 2016) 

(k)   The  City  Council  of  Port  Louis  (Transportation  Centre  Fair)  Regulations 

2016. (Government Notice No. 130 of 2016) 

(l)    District  Council  of  Grand  Port  (Fees  for  Classified  Trades)  Regulations 

2016. (Government Notice No. 131 of 2016) 

 

C.    Ministry of Agro-Industry and Food Security ‒ 

The Annual Report 2012 of the Small Farmers Welfare Fund. 

 

 

D.    Ministry of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reform ‒ 

The Securities (Brokerage Fee for Government of Mauritius Securities and Bank 
of Mauritius Securities (Amendment) Rules 2016. (Government Notice No.132 of 
2016) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

9 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10(2) 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  move  that  all  the  business  on  today’s  Order 

Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

 (11.32 a.m.) 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER 

ACP SUMMIT OF HEADS OF STATE - EMINENT PERSONS GROUP REPORT 

The  Minister  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security  (Mr  M.  Seeruttun):  Madam 
Speaker,  at  the  sitting  of  the  National  Assembly  on  Tuesday  last,  the  hon.  Leader  of  the 
Opposition,  in  his  Private  Notice  Question  addressed  to  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  raised  a 
number of issues concerning the ACP Summit of Heads of State and Government held on 30 
May and 01 June this year in Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea. 

He  made  reference  in  particular  to  the  Report  of  the  Eminent  Persons  Group,  the 

Economic Partnership Agreement, and the Post 2020 Cotonou Partnership Agreement. 

I would like, at the outset, to inform the House that Brexit was not on the agenda of the 
Summit and was never discussed. The Brexit issue was also not raised at the Joint Meeting of the 
ACP/EU Council of Ministers in Dakar, Senegal in April last. 

Madam Speaker, the Eminent Persons Group chaired by the former President of Nigeria, 
Chief Obasanjo was tasked to undertake a critical assessment of ACP Group’s performance over 
the four decades of its existence. The EPG was also asked to recommend how to restructure the 
Group as a contemporary international organisation with a new vision for an ACP fit to serve its 
people in a new global reality. 

The EPG Report was presented to the Summit as a basis for discussions on, inter alia, the 

following - 

a)    

a review of the areas of focus of the ACP Group; 

10 

the need to improve the structures and work methods of the Group, and 

 
b)    

c)    

shaping future relations between the ACP countries and the EU. 

The Summit deliberated on the report which contains a number of recommendations for 
reform  in  order  to  re-orient  the  ACP  Group  to  deliver  more  effectively  on  the  development 
ambitions of its member states. The Summit accepted the EPG Report, with an implementation 
plan  expected  by  the  end  of  2016,  subject  to  further  analysis  and  reflections  at  national  and 
regional levels. I am tabling a copy of the EPG Report. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to the Economic Partnership Agreement with the EU, the 
Summit observed that the EU was no longer showing a keen interest vis-à-vis the ACP countries, 
and,  in  fact,  seeking  new  trading  partners.  Representatives  of  the  different  regional  groups 
expressed concern that the EPAs were not functioning effectively and they were not deriving the 
benefits expected from the Agreement. On the Interim Economic Partnership Agreement signed 
by four of the eleven members of the Eastern and Southern Africa region to which Mauritius 
belongs, I voiced out our concern that the negotiations for a full and comprehensive EPA have 
been  installed  since  2011,  following  the  condition  imposed  by  the  EU  to  the  effect  that 
negotiations  would  resume  only  if  it  receives  market  access  offers  from  the  other  7  members 
which have not yet signed the Interim EPA. I highlighted, in this regard, that the ESA Ministerial 
Council at its meeting in Lusaka, Zambia in December 2015 has agreed that the four signatories 
of the Interim EPA should urgently proceed to negotiate the deepening and broadening of the 
Agreement and other ESA members can join in when they are ready. 

 Madam Speaker, the upcoming negotiation on a partnership framework with the EU after 
the expiry in 2020 of the ACP-EU Cotonou Partnership Agreement was a key  concern of the 
ACP Group. In this regard, the Summit expressed its determinations to review and enhance the 
ACP  –EU  Partnership  with  a  legally-binding  document,  building  on  the  experience  and  gains 
obtained  under  the  Cotonou  Partnership  Agreement.  The  Summit  resolved  to  jointly  identify 
issues of common interest with the EU partners to ensure that the ACP-EU Cooperation takes 
into account the implementation of Sustainable Development Goals, the promotion of regional 
trade and integration, financing for development and other identified priorities. 

Negotiations with the EU are expected to start in 2018. 

 

Madam Speaker, I thank you. 

11 

PUBLIC BILLS 

Second Reading 

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION (2015) (No. 2) BILL  

(No. XIII of 2016) 

Order for Second Reading read. 

(11.37 a.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  (Mr  P.  Jugnauth):    Madam 
Speaker, I move that the Supplementary Appropriation (2015) (No.2) Bill (No. XIII of 2016) be 
read a second time. 

Madam  Speaker,  three  weeks  ago  in  my  Speech  on  the  Supplementary  Appropriation 
(2015-2016) Bill, I stated that I would be coming forward with a Supplementary Appropriation 
Bill to cover the additional expenditure incurred during the six-month period 01 January to 30 
June 2015. 

The Bill before the House makes provision for the appropriation of an additional sum of 

one billion and six hundred and seventy million rupees (Rs1,670,000,000).  

The  National  Assembly  through  the  Appropriation  (2015)  Act  voted  a  total  sum  of 
Rs40.71 billion for the six-month Budget. I wish to inform the House that the actual expenditure 
amounted to Rs40.45 billion, that is some Rs260 m. below the total voted provision. 

Madam  Speaker,  although  actual  spending  is  below  the  total  appropriated  amount,  a 
Supplementary  Appropriation  Bill  is  required  as  spending  under  nine  Votes  has  exceeded  the 
voted  sums.  The  additional  spending  was  met  through  reallocation  of  funds  from  Vote 
“Contingencies and Reserves” and from other Votes that had unspent balances. 

The  nine  Votes  of  Expenditure  are  listed  in  the  Schedule  to  the  Bill,  and  the  items  of 

expenditure concerned are set out in the Estimates of Supplementary Expenditure (ESE).  

I will now give the details on the supplementary expenditure. 

12 

 
First,  an  amount  of  Rs1.513  billion  is  required  under  Vote  28-1  Centrally  Managed 
Initiatives  of  Government  mainly  in  connection  with  equity  investment  made  by  Government 
during the six-month period.  

These investments were as follows- 

• 
• 

Rs753 m. in the former Mauritius Post and Cooperative Bank Ltd (MPCB), and 
Rs700 m. in the former National Commercial Bank Ltd (NCB). 

In addition, Rs30 m. was invested in the National Insurance Co. Ltd and Rs30 m. in the 
NIC General Insurance Co. Ltd as seed capital to enable the two newly set up companies to start 
their operations and meet their minimum capital requirements. 

Madam Speaker, three weeks ago, we had, in fact, lengthily debated on the total amount 
of equity investment that was made by Government in MPCB, NCB and MauBank Holdings 
Limited.  As I explained, a total amount of 3 billion and 53 million rupees (Rs3.053 billion) was 
injected in these companies over the two Budget periods. We have already appropriated Rs1.6 
billion for equity investment that was made during the current fiscal year.  

Today, we are seeking approval of the House for the balance of Rs1.453 billion of equity 
investment made in the MPCB and NCB during the six-month Budget ending on 30 June 2015. 
Approval  is  also  being  sought  for  the  investment  of  Rs60  m.  made  in  the  two  insurance 
companies during that period. 

Second,  Rs56.5  m.  is  required  under  Vote  27-1  Centrally  Managed  Expenses  of 
Government essentially to cater for higher refund of accumulated sick leave and vacation leave 
due mainly to a higher number of public officers proceeding on retirement. 

Third, Rs47.8 m. is needed under Vote 11-1 Ministry of Health and Quality of Life. The 
initial  voted  provision  was  not  sufficient  mainly  due  to  higher  spending  on  medical  supplies, 
drugs, uniforms and high-tech equipment. Additional funds were also required to cater for a book 
entry in relation to the construction of a main operation theatre and wards at Victoria Hospital, 
financed from a grant from Government of China. 

Fourth, Rs30.9 m. is required under Vote 3-2 External Communications to refund to the 
Cargo  Handling  Corporation  Ltd  outstanding  claims  in  respect  of  subsidies  on  container  and 
general cargo services to Rodrigues. 

 
Fifth,  Rs8.8  m.  is  required  under  Vote  1-7  Public  and  Disciplined  Forces  Service 

13 

Commissions for completion of construction works for a New Wing.  

The remaining supplementary provision of Rs13 m. is needed in respect of the following 

four Votes - 

• 
• 
• 
• 

Office of the President; 
National Assembly; 
Electoral Supervisory Commission and Electoral Boundaries Commission, and 
Office of the Solicitor-General 

I wish to inform the House that the Budget deficit for the six-month period, after taking 
into  account  the  above  supplementary  expenditure,  is  revised  downward  to  3.3%  of  GDP, 
compared to the initial estimate of 3.9%.    

As at 30 June 2015, the Public Sector Debt, as per international definition, stood at 63.8% 
of GDP whereas the Public Sector Debt for the purpose of the Statutory Debt Ceiling, was 56.3% 
of GDP.  

With these remarks, Madam Speaker, I now commend the Bill to the House. 

The Prime Minister rose and seconded 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Bholah! 

(11.45 a.m.) 

The Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives (Mr S. Bholah): Thank you, 
Madam Speaker, for allowing me to intervene on this Bill. The consideration today, in front of 
the  House,  is  the  appropriation  of  an  additional  amount  of  Rs1.67  billion  for  the  six-month 
period ended 30 June 2015.   

It is highly understandable that the question of  asking the House to vote an additional 
amount of money in order to meet the Budget that has been used so far, leads to a passionate 
debate  as  we  are,  after  all,  talking  about  public  funds.    Whether  it  be  for  Members  of  the 
Government  or  for  those  of  the  Opposition,  we  have  all  been  elected  by  the  people  of  this 
country.    We  are  the  unbridled  advocates  of  our  respective  constituents,  and  through  the 
presentation of the Supplementary Appropriation 2015 Bill by the hon. Minister of Finance and 

 

14 

Economic Development, we are precisely talking about the people’s money. We peremptorily 
have the duty of handling and managing funds with a pronounced sense of reasonability and each 
and every additional expense is thus automatically questioned. 

However,  I  must  say  that  we  are  far  from  diving  into  an  unfamiliar  territory  with  the 
present configuration. Indeed, as it has been pointed out by hon. Bhadain and hon. Rutnah during 
their  previous  interventions,  the  Constitution  and  the  Finance  and  Audit  Act  cater  for 
supplementary appropriation whereby Governments are allowed to bring such legislation when 
any money has been spent for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated.   

This legislation is brought forward in a very fair and transparent spirit in the sense that it 
has been devised in such a way that explanations are meant to be given in the National Assembly 
regarding expenses incurred and amounts required.  This is a normal procedure that is practised 
by  Governments  all  over  the  world  to  accommodate  timing  of  expenditures  and  unforeseen 
circumstances which cannot be mitigated within current appropriations.   

We should be realistic and acknowledge that in all situations there is most of the time a 
gap between perceived needs and actual needs.  On top of that, we may have items which are not 
expected that crop up depending on circumstances. 

Madam Speaker, to the best of my knowledge, nobody, here, has a crystal ball that would 
enable him or her to transcend such limitations to have the ability of foreseeing the future. That 
is why any budget is called an estimate. And by definition an estimate is an approximation of a 
quantity based on experience and/or information available at the time with the recognition that 
other pertinent facts are unclear or unknown. It is what we commonly call ‘an educated guess’. 

We experience the fact that we can only go to some extent to estimate expenditure for the 
future, even at micro level when compared to Government business. How many people are in a 
way too familiar with the situation in which we go to the supermarket with the defined shopping 
list, only come out buying more than what expected to. It is, thus, fair to say that it is technically 
and humanly impossible to provide exactly the amount of money to be spent, not only for items 
that have been mentioned in the budget, but also as through different Governments in the past, 
those which are unpredicted. 

15 

 
This Government, being a responsible one, we feel concerned by such situations which 
justify that we deal with them promptly, even if this implies that we consequently have to spend 
public funds to find the most appropriate solutions to them. Such a line of argument is even more 
valid  given  that  it  has, up  to  now,  been  more  difficult  for  us  to  accurately  predict  how  much 
public  expenditure  will  cost,  given  that  we  undoubtedly  inherited  a  state  of  affairs  left  by  a 
Government that was on a descending path. 

As a matter of fact, for the period 2008-2013, the additional amounts appropriated were 
in the range of Rs2 billion to Rs4.2 billion, representing around 3% to 5% of the initial budget. 
In  some  cases,  the  amount,  in  relative  terms,  has  been  as  high  as  7%  of  the  initial  approved 
budget, as has been the case for the Fiscal Year 2008-2009. 

Hon.  Members  of  this  Assembly  will  recall  that,  in  that  financial  period,  the  then 
Government had to cater for, inter alia, the payment of PRB Reports.  Madam Speaker, the main 
items concerned today are the expenses related to the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life and 
their equity injection in MPCB, NCB and the National Insurance Co. Ltd. 

With  regard  to  the  Ministry  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life,  an  additional  amount  of 
Rs41.5 m. is being required for medical supplies, drugs and equipment. The trend, when it comes 
to the cost of drugs, is clear and this issue has become a topic of international concern. Patients 
and institutions, across the world, are concerned about skyrocketing drug prices. 

For instance, President François Hollande of France has called on world leaders to act 
regarding  the  issue  of  the  exponential  increase  in  the  price  of  medicines  over  recent  years, 
particularly, for new treatments, for cancer and hepatitis C. The Secretary-General of the United 
Nations, Ban Ki-moon, has also taken up the issue in November 2015. 

Hon. Members will all agree that if developed countries are raising alarm at the situation 
and are  feeling the strain on their health  care systems, middle or low-income countries suffer 
relatively, even more from the increasing cost of medicines. 

Another  Rs45  m.  is  being  sought  by  the  Ministry  of  Health  and  Quality  to  enable  the 
booking of a grant settlement from the People’s Republic of China, regarding the construction of 
a new operation theatre and was blocked over an area of about 90,000 square feet at the Victoria 
Hospital. China has agreed to fund the construction of health facilities in Mauritius to the tune of 

 

16 

USD 19 m. Following an agreement signed between the two countries in 2013, the Chinese Aid 
Project  will  be  in  the  form  of  design,  construction  and  provision  of  furniture  and  medical 
equipment.    This  includes  laryngoscope  sets  electrical  and  orthopaedic  operating  tables,  ICU 
beds and fowler beds, among others. It would, indeed, be incomprehensible if we miss on such a 
valuable collaboration from a friendly State and this Government is ready to do the investment 
required, to seek the best partners in the world, to enable us to provide quality, accessible and 
efficient health care to the population. 

Madam Speaker, the second most significant item for which the hon. Minister of Finance 
and Economic Development is asking for supplementary appropriation is for the acquisition of 
the financial assets of MPCB, NCB and NIC to the tune of Rs1.5 billion. The first question that 
needs to be addressed is whether such expenditure could have been foreseen at the time of the 
preparation  of  the  Budget  for  the  period  January  to  June  2015.  Clearly,  Madam  Speaker,  the 
answer is no. 

No one had anticipated the extent to which the ex-BAI entities and the MPCB suffered 
from  mismanagement  and  bad  governance  during  the  previous  Government  regime.  It  was  a 
moral  imperative  towards  the  people,  for  us  to  act.  Government  deserves  credit  for  having 
tackled those issues and, by doing so, that is, by saving people’s money and some 750 jobs, we 
avoided an unprecedented financial and social crisis in the country. The  issues have lengthily 
been  exposed  in  this  House  as  well  as  in  the  public.  I  will,  therefore,  Madam  Speaker,  not 
emphasise more on this matter. 

Of the remainder of the Rs140 m., 83.6% has been spent for items, such as refund of sick, 
passage benefits and so on. These are statutory obligations which have to be incurred anyway. In 
addition, Rs56.4 m. has been spent as capital expenditure. Capital expenditure, Madam Speaker, 
by  the  public  sector,  is  an  important  variable  in  the  growth  equation,  amongst  others.  Such 
expenditure, as long as it does not crowd out private investment, helps to expand the productive 
capacity of the economy, create employment and, hence, generate income and wealth. 

I would like to point out that while the extent of such expenditure matters, what matters 
more  is  how  productive  are  such  expenditure.  Though  the  current  figures  of  public  sector 
investment is lower than previous years, this is not an indication that things have been better in 
the past. A close examination of the quality of public investment under the previous Government 

 

17 

would reveal otherwise. Allow me, Madam Speaker, to highlight some of these past figures and 
projects. 

For the fiscal year 2007-2008, the amount of around Rs4.5 billion or 1.7% per cent of 
GDP was spent on capital expenditure. This, in both absolute and relative terms, is lower than 
their estimates for the Fiscal Year 2015-2016. The amount of capital expenditure then increased 
significantly during period 2007-2013 to reach around Rs15 billion in the Fiscal Year 2013. This 
amount  includes  Rs3.9  billion  spent  from  the  various  special  funds.  The  increase  in  capital 
expenditure over the period 2007-2013 represents an average annual increase of around 200%. 

The  key  question  is:  how  productive  has  been  such  significant  increase  in  capital 
expenditure, financed at the expense of increasing public debts? Have we not seen the various 
projects mishandled from conception to completion during the same period? Some of them are, 
in fact, yet to be completed. Others have been delivered with major structural defects, resulting 
in additional pressure on public finances, while these inflated capital expenditure figures could 
be interpreted as achievements. This is definitely not the case from a qualitative point of view. 
Take the example of the Bagatelle Dam. The project was awarded for a contract value of Rs3.3 
billion in July 2011. The project cost increased to Rs6.2 billion. 

Madam Speaker: No, hon. Minister! I am sorry! Don’t go to Bagatelle Dam! Come to 

the specifics of the Bill today! 

Mr Bholah: Okay, Madam Speaker! 

I believe we need to adopt the proper process for the conceptualisation, implementation 
and  monitoring  of  projects,  in  the  first  place.  This  is  what  is  being  done  at  the  level  of 
Government.  The  emphasis  is  not  on  spending  only,  but  rather  on  creating  the  most  enabling 
conditions  for  the  implementation  of  capital  projects,  that  is,  what  is  taking  time  and,  thus, 
explains the lower figures for capital expenditure. 

Hon. Members would also agree that our capacity to attract private investment is sine qua 
non to have balanced and sustained growth that will bring innovation, productivity and growth in 
the economy.  The mandate of the previous Government was marked by stagnant or decreasing 
private  investment.    This  has  necessitated  sustained  public  investment  at  the  expense  of 
increasing public debts at an alarming rate of over 60% of GDP, which is well beyond the target 

 

18 

of 15%.  With a view to addressing the increasing public debt, this Government has come up 
with a number of initiatives to boost private investment, including the recently introduced Build 
Operate Transfer Framework for Public-Private Partnerships. 

It is to be noted that things have started to move in the right direction with a number of 
projects in the pipeline. As a matter of fact, private investment for year 2016 is expected to grow 
by 1.2%. 

Madam  Speaker,  variances  in  budget  estimates  are  usual,  but  they  should  be  fair, 
reasonable, and we should be able to justify those variances.  We must know why there has been 
excess  expenditure,  and  in  this  perspective,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development  has  constantly  provided  the  House  with  all  relevant  figures  in  a  spirit  of 
transparency and in good faith.  What really matters is not the why of this Bill, but rather what 
the  Bill  is  for.    I  would  thus  urge  everybody  in  the  House  to  give  this  endorsement  to  the 
proposal of the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Sesungkur! 

(11.59 a.m.) 

Mr  D.  Sesungkur  (First  Member  for  Montagne  Blanche  &  GRSE):    Thank  you, 
Madam Speaker, for allowing me to contribute in this debate. I am thankful to the Minister of 
Finance and Economic Development for presenting this Bill, which is, as per the provision of the 
Constitution, the Finance and Audit Act. 

I think there is no issue about this Bill, because by convention this is the way funds are 
allocated  from  the  Consolidated  Fund  whenever  the  Government  needs  finances.  The 
Consolidated  Fund  is  the  bank  account  of  the  Government,  and  it  is  normal  that  the  House 
approves any allocation of budget whenever this is required. 

I think it is important to explain that whenever there is a Supplementary Appropriation 
Bill which is presented before the House, the impression that it gives to the public is that the 
Government  is  overspending.  I  am  thankful  to  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development who has dissipated this doubt because he has confirmed that overall expenditure of 
the  budget  is  not  increasing.    It’s  only  certain  items  of  the  budget,  principally  the  nine  items 

 

19 

where he requires the approval of this House, which is having an excess, but overall the budget 
deficit  has  decreased,  which  means  that  Government  is  containing  its  expenses.    This  is  very 
fundamental  because  budget  deficit  indicates  that  we  are  living  beyond  our  means,  but  this 
Government knows well that we have to make special effort to not put additional burden on the 
people and to ensure that money is well spent and where it is important. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  think  we  have  in  Mauritius,  in  our  country,  a  financial  control 
architecture which is robust and which allows Members of this House to query any expenditure 
which they  feel is in excess. There is  a time where those expenses  are  queried.  But over and 
above, we have the Auditor General, which normally carries out an audit on an annual basis and 
makes  a  report  which  is  presented  to  the  House  and  which  is  scrutinised  by  each  Member. 
Members are allowed to put questions wherever they feel there are certain excesses or certain 
areas where they feel there have been abuses. 

My hon. friend Bholah has made an elaborate speech on the whole issue of financial and 
budgetary matters.  The only point which I would like to make, and I would be very brief, is the 
single item, which is on the Schedule, and which caters for over 90% of the appropriation which 
is required, is in relation to capital expenditure.  Capital expenditure is money well spent because 
it is investment which Government is making, and those investments will generate return in the 
future.  It will also provide capital gains in case we are to sell those investments in the future. 

I heard the Minister of Finance saying that the bulk of the investment has gone into the 
shares  of  the  MauBank  and  of  the  NCB.    In  addition  to  the  investment  aspect,  I  feel  that 
Government had a duty to ensure social stability, because those two institutions were in a very 
bad shape and Government had to allocate funds to ensure that depositors were not deprived of 
their  savings.    So,  it  was  meant  to  preserve  social  stability  for  us  all  to  live  in  peace  in  this 
country.  It was also meant to preserve the financial stability of our banking system because if 
Government  had  not  intervened  into  the  system,  the  collapse  of  those  two  banks  could  have 
created havoc and it would have caused Mauritius into disrepute, especially the financial services 
sector. 

So, I think, on one side, we see that there is legal requirement for the Minister of Finance 
to get the approval of the House, but at the same time, we have had the opportunity to ventilate 
the other issues whereby why those additional funds were spent. I have explained that the largest 

 

20 

item  was  an  item  of  capital  nature  and  it  is  not  money  which  goes  to  the  drain,  but  it  is  an 
investment which will generate return in the future. It was well necessary for Government to do 
that  for  the  social  stability  and  maintaining  the  banking  system  into  equilibrium.    Everything 
having been said now, I am going to support this Bill. 

I thank you very much for your attention. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon Bhadain! 

(12.06 p.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms 
(Mr  S.  Bhadain):  Madam  Speaker,  I  shall  restrict  my  intervention  to  vote  28-1,  Centrally 
Managed Initiatives of Government, where an amount of Rs1,513,000,000 is being appropriated.  
Included in this amount, Madam Speaker, are two sums of Rs30 m., which relates to National 
Insurance Co. Ltd (NIC) and NIC General Insurance Co. Ltd. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  Central  Bank  took  the  decision  to  revoke  the  banking  licence  of 
Bramer Bank on the night of 02 April 2015, in accordance with section 17 of the Banking Act, 
for reasons which I have already been expatiated before this House.  The next day, the Stock 
Exchange of Mauritius had no alternative but to suspend the listing of the bank to protect the 
interests of investors trading on the Stock Exchange of Mauritius.  In its communiqué dated 03 
April 2015, it was stated, and I quote – 

“The  Stock  Exchange  of  Mauritius  Ltd  (SEM)  wishes  to  inform  the  shareholders  of 
Bramer Banking Corporation Ltd (BBCL) and the public in general that, following the 
communiqué issued by the Bank of Mauritius, on 02 April 2015, on the revocation of the 
banking licence of BBCL in accordance with section 17 of the Banking Act 2004, the 
SEM  has  decided,  with  the  approval  of  the  Listing  Executive  Committee,  to  suspend 
dealings  in  the  securities  of  BBCL,  with  immediate  effect,  pursuant  to  Listing  Rule 
3.9(a).” 

On the same day, Madam Speaker, 03 April 2015, the Board of the Financial Services 
Commission met and took the decision to appoint Conservators as a result of the revocation of 
the banking license of Bramer Bank pursuant to Section 106 of the Insurance Act 2005. The FSC 
acted prudently and did not abruptly  revoke the  license of BAI Co. Mauritius Ltd., but rather 

 

21 

appointed Conservators with the objective of preserving the value of the insurance business and 
its related companies. At this stage, Madam Speaker, the first diagnosis which was made was 
that, the BAI had two major components; one was the recurring insurance policies, life insurance 
policies and pensions which affected 135,000 families in Mauritius. That was a vital organ.  

On the other hand, there was the Single Premium Policies, commonly known as Super 
Cash Back Gold; that was the cancer which had already spread. That was the Ponzi. So, what 
was initially decided rightly, was, to take out the Ponzi as part of the financial surgery and the 
structural surgery which was being effected, take out the Ponzi, Super Cash Back Gold, park it 
on one side, deal with this problem separately, but protect the 135,000 families who had their life 
insurances and pensions into that organisation and it is for that reason that the National Insurance 
Company  was  quickly  set  up  and  also  the  general  insurance  side,  and  for  that,  as  the  hon. 
Minister  of  Finance  has  stated  to  the  House,  seed  capital  was  required  to  meet  the  minimum 
capital requirements.  

By law, when you set up an insurance company, you need to have the minimum capital 
requirement and those two sums of Rs30 m. represent the equity stake of Government in setting 
up  those  two  insurance  companies  so  that  we  could  salvage  that  situation  which  was,  as  my 
friend hon. Bholah has stated, it could not have been anticipated those expenditure and, as hon.  
Sesungkur has mentioned, it is an investment which will generate dividends and capital  gains 
going forward. But I believe it is very important at this stage, Madam Speaker, to realise what 
would have happened, had we not set up the NIC at this moment in time to conduct this surgery 
and take those 135,000 life insurance policies and put it in that vehicle.  

What would have happened, Madam Speaker?  Firstly, an inevitable crash of the banking 
and the insurance sector, with 300,000 depositors and 135,000 policy holders losing their hard 
earned savings and pensions. This is how bad it was! Unprecedented social crisis with over half 
of  the  working  population,  who,  would  directly  or  indirectly,  suffer  from  significant  financial 
losses as a result of that BAI scam!  

Thirdly, the risk of 4,000 people losing their jobs, people who were employed in the BAI 
structure, the insurance company and all the related companies which fell under that group and 
then,  of  course,  the  risk  of  contraction  in  economic  growth  as  a  result  of  the  BAI  Ponzi  and 
unscrupulous  scheme  which  was  designed  to  defraud  innocent  victims  and,  this  week,  we  are 

 

22 

sitting down with all the victims and finding solutions to bring an end to the Super Cash Back 
Gold dilemma and go ahead and repay those victims to the extent possible.  

So,  as  a  responsible  Government,  there  is  no  way  that  we  could  have  allowed  this 
situation  to  unfold  in  a  manner  which  would  have  brought  down  the  whole  economy.  Hon. 
Sesungkur was lenient in saying that the financial stability and the social stability would have 
been at stake. This would have brought down the whole economy. This is how bad it was and it 
is important that people in this country realise how this issue has been addressed and, today, with 
those two sums of Rs30 m. which have been injected by Government in NIC, NIC is working.  
Where has it reached, Madam Speaker? It is important also to know what NIC has achieved. So, 
with a minimum capital injection of Rs60 m., the staff of National Insurance Company Ltd., NIC 
General Insurance Company Ltd. have worked relentlessly to bring up the value of the insurance 
company with the following achievements as at date – 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Market leadership position with 38% of the market share of life insurance policies 
in Mauritius;  
NIC  General  Insurance  Company  Ltd. holds 11% market share of  accident and 
health segment;  
NIC  General  Insurance  Company  Limited  introduced  new  lines  of  business: 
motor  insurance,  travel  insurance,  property  insurance,  liability  guarantee, 
engineering insurance and so on;  
Monthly recurring premiums of Rs112 m. every month is being contributed with 
an annual recurring premium of Rs1.3 billion for life insurance policies;  
increase  in  monthly  life  recurring  premium  of  Rs9.2  m.  Rs600  m.  of  total  life 
insurance benefits paid out to date, and 
reduction in operational cost from Rs660 m. annually to Rs225 m. annually.  

This shows, Madam Speaker, if you are to do things properly, how much money can be 
saved. This company was operating with a total expenditure of Rs660 m. every year. Staff cost, 
overheads! We have reduced that to Rs220 m. and it is achieving so much. Decrease in expense 
ratio from 36% to 11%, which is well within industry norms and, above all, Madam Speaker, 
NIC has been the  recipient of the Africa best employer brand award in testimony of the bold 
business restructuring that it has undergone since August 2015.  Best employer for Africa! How 

 

23 

did they achieve that, Madam Speaker? They wrote down what had happened to their company 
and how it had been salvaged.  Because when we went there, we told these employees, look, we 
can’t safeguard all the jobs unless we are to take salary cuts, wages cuts and if you are all willing 
to make a sacrifice we will be able to salvage those jobs.  And they all agreed. When they wrote 
down  their  story  and  they  sent  it  to  the  Committee  in  Africa,  they  were  awarded  the  best 
employer of the year award for Africa. 

Madam  Speaker,  both  the  National  Insurance  Company  Ltd.,  NIC  General  Insurance 
Company Ltd. have turned into national jewels, with a mere capital injection of Rs600 m. and a 
lot  of  hard  work  and  sacrifice  which  went  down  in  that  project. What  is  also  very  important, 
Madam Speaker, is that, very often, we hear that public funds are being utilised to repay Super 
Cash Back Gold or to repay Bramer Asset Management. This has never happened. Never! When 
Rs60 m. have been injected in those two companies, they were equity contribution to meet the 
minimum capital requirements so that insurance companies could operate and, through the hard 
work and everything which has been done, value has been created and this is now an investment.  

Now, when we repay the other side, we have protected the life insurance policy holders - 
now when we are repaying the Super Cash Back Gold this week, it will be announced.  At the 
end of the day, there are going to be two assets which are going to be left. One is the insurance 
company itself, National Insurance Company, the life side and then the general insurance side, 
and also the bank, MauBank. These two assets have value, regardless of what valuation exercise 
is conducted by whom, we know that it has value and, at the end of the day, whatever remains to 
be  paid,  the  loan  which  has  been  taken  by  the  then  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development  from  the  Central  Bank  for  Rs3.5  billion,  will  be  repaid  out  of  the  capital  of 
MauBank and the NIC with the value which has been created. 

All  of  that,  Madam  Speaker,  has  been  done  in  less  than  one  year  and  everybody  in 
Government has taken bold decisions, of course, at Cabinet level but, over and above everything, 
none  of  this  would  have  been  possible  if  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  had  not  taken  swift 
decisions as and when required every single time he was asked to take a decision. And every 
time I went to see him and proposed a solution to a problem after having listened and assessed in 
the space of no time, he said to me: go ahead and do it. This is why we’ve achieved what we 
have achieved with NIC.  

 
Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

24 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development! 

(12.17 p.m.) 

Mr Jugnauth: Well, let me thank all the hon. Members who have intervened on this Bill, 
who have expressed their views, in fact, their contribution has been very valuable and since there 
is no dissent, well, I shall end on this note. 

Thank you. 

(Interruptions) 

Question put and agreed to. 

Bill read a second time and committed. 

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

ESTIMATES OF SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE  

(6 MONTHS ENDED 30 JUNE 2015)  

OF 2016  

The following votes were called and agreed to - 

• 
• 
• 

Vote 1-1 Office of the President (Rs4,800,000). 
Vote 1-3 National Assembly (Rs5,400,000).  
Vote 1-4 Electoral Supervisory Commission and Electoral Boundaries 
Commission (Rs500,000). 

Vote 1-7 Public and Disciplined Forces Service Commissions was called. 

The Chairperson:  Yes, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.  On  page  7,  under  item  31112  Non-
Residential Buildings - Provision required to meet contractual obligations i.c.w. completion of 
construction works for the New Wing at the Public and Disciplined Forces Service Commissions, 
there was no provision for this for the six months and we see an appropriation of about Rs10.8 

 

25 

m. Will the Minister concerned give us some idea as to why we have this Rs10.8 m.? Is it a claim 
after the contract, of this construction? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Chairperson,  I  have  been  told  provision  was  required  to 
meet contractual obligations in connection with completion of construction works for the New 
Wing  at  the  Public  and  Disciplined  Forces  Service  Commissions.  The  contract  for  the 
construction  of  the  New  Wing  of  a  project  value  of  Rs35,075,000  was  awarded  to  Kistnen 
Enterprises Company Ltd. on 21 August 2013. The construction was completed in June 2015.  

As  at  to  date,  the  total  amount  paid  on  the  project  amounts  to  Rs32,043,000.  As  no 
provision was made in the Estimates January 2015 to June 2015, additional provision is required 
to effect payment to the contractor. 

Vote  1-7  Public  and  Disciplined  Forces  Service  Commissions  (Rs8,800,000)  was,  on 

question put, agreed to. 

Vote 3-2 External Communications (Rs30,900,000) was called and agreed to. 
Vote 11-1 Ministry of Health and Quality of Life was called. 
The Chairperson:  Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. On page 11, item 22200 Overseas Travel 
(Treatment & Incoming Medical Teams) Additional provision required to meet accommodation 
costs for medical teams from abroad, may we know from the hon. Minister how many teams 
came and how many patients were operated by those teams? 

Mr Gayan: Madam Chairperson, from the notes that I have, it appears that there were 
quite  a  number  of  foreign  visiting  teams  and  the  amount  was  disbursed  for  hotel 
accommodations for the foreign teams.  

There was also an item for Professor Owens for the period 12/03/14 to 15/03/14 which 
was paid in June 2015 and also another item for Professor Sood and his team for period 04 to 12 
April  2015.  But  it  was  all  in  respect  of  additional  provision  which  was  required  to  meet 
accommodation costs for the medical teams from overseas. 

Dr. Sorefan: The hon. Minister has not answered my question.  How many patients were 

operated during that period? 

Mr Gayan: I am afraid, I don’t have this information. 
The Chairperson:  Hon. Ganoo! 

 

26 

Mr Ganoo: Madam Chairperson, I wish to intervene on item 22140 Medical Supplies, 
Drugs and Equipment - Additional provision required due to increase in cost of drugs.  We are 
being asked today to vote Rs41,467,075.  

Year in and year out, Madam Chairperson, this is an item which comes up even during 
Budget time and today for the supplementary expenditure, and we know that year in and year out 
also,  the  Director  of  Audit  makes  very  severe  criticisms  about  this  item.  In  fact,  in  the  last 
Director of Audit’s report, there are so many nasty remarks which have been made against the 
Ministry. I know that even the Minister has, at one time, publicly expressed his concern about 
this  item  of  Medical  Supplies,  Drugs  and  Equipment.  We  hear  very  often  that  the  Central 
Supplies Division, the control at the CSD is not satisfactory in the report. Drugs were procured at 
higher prices at hospital level. Drugs were procured at different prices. 

The  Chairperson:    Hon.  Ganoo,  can  you  ask  your  question?  You  have  sufficiently 

explained, I think. 

Mr Ganoo: So many severe criticisms are made year in and year out by the Director of 

Audit; can the hon. Minister, therefore, explain this supplementary expenditure? 

Mr Gayan: Madam Chairperson, this supplementary amount was required, first of all, for 
the  increase  in  the  cost  of  drugs  and  there  were  also  sub  items  on  which  money  was  spent: 
medicines,  drugs  and  vaccines,  CT  scans  and  MRI  fees  and  materials,  dental  materials  and 
equipment,  orthopaedic  materials  and  equipment,  medical  disposables  and  minor  equipment, 
Ayurvedic  and  other  traditional  medicines,  renal  dialysis  consumables  and  fees,  and  the 
additional  amount  comprises  an  additional  amount  of  Rs29,967,828  for  the  payment  of 
medicines, drugs and vaccines. Again, it was due to the increase in the price of drugs and the 
fluctuation  in  foreign  currencies  and  an  additional  amount  of  Rs11,499,247  was  required  for 
payment  of  outstanding  contracts  which  had  been  awarded  in  2014  with  regard  to  Ayurvedic 
medicines. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Ramano! No, hon. Dr. Sorefan,  I give hon. Ramano the floor 

first! 

Mr  Ramano:  Madame  la  présidente,  à  la  page  13  sous  l’item  31112,  concernant  la 
construction  du  Main  Operation  Theatre.  Nous  voyons  que  la  dépense  additionnelle  a  été 
augmentée de plus de 50%.  Est-ce qu’on peut avoir des éclaircissements  du ministre s’il vous 
plaît? 

27 

 
Mr Gayan: The additional sum, Madam Chairperson, was required for the adjustment in 
respect of the fluctuation in foreign currency for the grant/loan from the People’s Republic of 
China  for  the  construction  of  the  Main  Operating  Theatre  and  the  procurement  of  medical 
equipment. 
93 million Renminbi which was equivalent Rs462,386,037.   It consisted  of a loan component 
and a grant component, but it was mainly as a result of fluctuation in foreign currency. 

  The  loan  agreement  which  was  dated  17  February  2009  amounted  to                         

The Chairperson:  Hon. Rughoobur! 

Mr Rughoobur:  Madam Chairperson, at page 12, under the same item as hon. Ganoo 
just  mentioned,  item  22140  Medical  Supplies.  May  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  the 
procurement  method  used  and  whether  there  has  been  any  part  of  it  that  has  been  effected 
through direct procurement? 

Mr Gayan: Well, not from what I have, but I understand that most of the procurement is 
made by way of tender.  Exceptionally when there is a shortage of drugs which are not available 
from the list of available drugs in the central stores, then local purchases are made. 

The Chairperson:  Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan:  Page 13, item no. 31122 regarding Additional provision required for the 
acquisition of High Tech Equipment.  May we know from the hon. Minister what are those High 
Tech equipment, please? 

Mr  Gayan:    The  additional  amount,  Madam  Chairperson,  was  for  the  purpose  of  the 
purchase of contracts which have been awarded in 2014, but for which payment was made in 
2015 namely – 

one autoclave for Flacq Hospital, Rs5.5 m.;  
automated defibrillator for JNH, Rs350,000;  
coagulator for Goodlands Mediclinic, Rs340,000;  
surgical table for new Souillac Hospital, Rs2.1 m., and  
other IT equipment Rs2.3 m. 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The Chairperson:  Yes, hon. Ramano! 

Mr Ramano: Madame la présidente, toujours à la page 13, sous l’item 26313 concernant 
The Trust Fund for Specialised Medical Care.  Il y a une augmentation du budget prévu de R10 

 

28 

million pour cette période de Janvier à Juin.  Est- ce qu’on peut savoir du ministre la nature des 
outstanding claims et de quoi il en retourne? 

Mr  Gayan:  Well,  the  additional  amount  was  paid  to  make  payments  to  outstanding 

creditors for the supply of drugs and consumables and for the increase in operational costs. 

The Chairperson:  Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr.  Sorefan:    Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson!  On  page  14,  item  no.  22090  Security 

Services. May we know if this process is still going on in the five Mediclinics? 

Mr Gayan:  Well, the Mediclinics are not opened 24 hours now, after the pilot period.  

Decision was taken to close them at about 20.00 hours. 

The Chairperson:  Hon. Rughoobur! 

Mr  Rughoobur:    Thank  you,  Madam  Chairperson.    On  page  13,  item  31122.  May  I 
know from the hon. Minister what is the amount that has been provided for the maintenance out 
the sum that is being voted? 

Mr Gayan: The item is no. 31112? 

The Chairperson:  Item 31122! 

Mr Gayan: I have answered this! 

The Chairperson:  Page 13, item 31122.  

(Interruptions) 

Mr Gayan:  There is no maintenance in this one. 

The Chairperson:  It is acquisition of High Tech Equipment. 

Mr Gayan:  Now I understand! I think your question is with regard to the maintenance of 

the equipment.  

Mr Rughoobur:  Yes. 

Mr  Gayan: 

I  don’t 

see  anything  here,  but  what 

I  can 

say 

to 

the 

 

 

29 

House is that now instructions have been given that for the purchase of any new equipment, there 
must be a separate contract for the maintenance of that equipment. 

The Chairperson:  Hon. Ganoo! 

Mr Ganoo:  Madam Speaker, can I come back at page 13, item 26313, concerning the 
Trust  Fund  for  Specialised  Medical  Care,  the  supplementary  appropriation  of  Rs10  m.  My 
question is different to the previous one.  Can I ask the hon. Minister whether he can confirm if 
the Trust Fund for Specialised Medical Care  caters also for the Cardiac  Centre in Rose  Belle 
Hospital, Victoria Hospital in addition to the one at SSR Hospital? Are angioplasty operations 
conducted at Jawaharlal Nehru Hospital and Victoria Hospital, and also is there still a waiting list 
for angioplasty operations? 

Mr  Gayan:    Madam  Chairperson,  the  Trust  Fund  for  Specialised  Medical  Care  deals 
only  with  neurosurgical  operations,  cardiac  surgery,  angioplasty  and  all  these  things,  but  I 
understand that there are no waiting lists at the cardiac centre because it is a referral centre.  The 
maximum waiting time for cardiac surgery is now about two weeks.  It used to be months before.  
There  is  also  the  provision  for  the  opening  of  a  branch  of  the  Cardiac  Centre  in  one  of  the 
operating theatres at Victoria Hospital and it going to happen once all the procurement problems 
are gone through. 

Vote 11-1 Ministry of Health and Quality of Life (Rs47,800,000) was, on question put, 

agreed to. 

Vote 15-1 Office of the Solicitor General was called. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Ramano! 

Mr Ramano: Madame la présidente, à la page 17 sous l’item 22120. Est-ce que je peux 

savoir de l’honorable ministre les cas précis qui sont concernés? 

Mr  Yerrigadoo:  Madam  Chairperson,  the  additional  provision  was  required  to  effect 
payment to Royds Socilitors in respect of Privy Council cases.  Payments were made in respect 
of the following cases – 

 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

30 

Rainbow Insurance Co. Ltd v Financial Services Commission and Ministry of 
Finance and Economic Development, the sum of Rs496,692,000; 
The second case is Sport Data Feed Ltd v Stevenhills Ltd in presence of the 
Gambling Regulatory Authority, the sum of Rs100,051;  
The third case is that of Compagnie Sucrière de St Antoine Limited against the 
State of Mauritius and the Ministry of Housing Lands for the sum of Rs1,325,000; 
The fourth case is that Shophold (Mauritius) Ltd. against the Assessment Review 
Committee for the sum of Rs38,500, and 
the fifth case is that of Société des Chasseurs and State of Mauritius for the sum 
of Rs139,150.    

That accounts for the Privy Council cases.  That accounts up to Rs2,099,393.  Rs600,000 
were used as fees for training.  Fees to Consultants, Rs500,000 and fees for legal outsourcing as 
and when required was Rs200,000. 

Vote 15-1 Office of the Solicitor General (Rs2,300,000) was on question put, agreed to. 

Vote 27-1 Centrally Managed Expenses of Government was called. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan: On page 21, under item 31121 Transport Equipment - Additional provision 
required for the purchase of official cars, may we know from the Minister concerned how many 
cars were bought, for which department, from whom and whether it was by tender? 

Mr Jugnauth: Madam Chairperson, which page is it? 

The  Chairperson:  It  is  on  page  21,  under  item  31121  Transport  Equipment.  It’s  on 

Centrally Managed Initiatives of Government. 

Mr Jugnauth: Yes. These are additional provisions required for the purchase of official 
cars for Senior Civil Servants following promotion exercise and for Ministers. Civil Servants: 25 
cars; Ministers: 4 cars. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Rughoobur! 

Mr Rughoobur: On page 21, under item 32155055 National Commercial Bank Ltd, may 

we know from the hon. Minister the amount of non-performing loans to date? 

 
Mr Jugnauth: Well, I don’t have these details, but they are available. I can circulate the 

31 

amount maybe later on, I will not circulate details on the different account holders. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan: Madam Chairperson, on page 21, under item 32155033  Mauritius Post and 
Cooperative Bank Ltd, Provision required for equity injection in Mauritius Post and Cooperative 
Bank Ltd made up of Rs500 m. cash injection and conversion of a subordinated loan of Rs253 
m., may we know from the hon. Minister about this subordinated loan and as to why there has 
been a conversion?  Can he enlighten us on this issue, please? 

Mr Jugnauth: Well, that was part of a loan that was still outstanding and, therefore, it 

was converted into equity. 

The Chairperson: Yes, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Madam  Chairperson,  I  would  like  to  talk  on  item  32155055  National 
Commercial Bank Ltd. On 13 April 2015, there was an equity injection of Rs200 m. and, at the 
same  time,  on  02  April,  Bramer  Bank  lost  its  licence.  May  we  know  from  the  hon.  Minister 
whether the NCB - at the time when Rs200 m. were injected, the  adequacy capital ratio which 
Bramer could not satisfy, whether with this Rs200 m, the NCB could satisfy the adequacy capital 
ratio? 

Mr Jugnauth: Well, I cannot say with precision at one time, but it is clear that in time 
that it could not meet its regulatory minimum capital adequacy ratio of 10% which is, according 
to the regulations, to the banking law. Therefore, money had to be injected. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Ramano! 

Mr  Ramano:  Madame  la  présidente,  toujours  à  la  page  21,  sous  l’item    32155033 
Mauritius Post and Cooperative Ltd.,  nous parlons d’une injection de R 753 million. Est-ce que 
je peux savoir du ministre si le montant de toxic loans a été recouvert ? 

Mr Jugnauth: Well, for MPCB, as at 31 December 2014, the level of non-performing 
loans  was  to  the  tune  of  Rs3.078  billion  and  impaired  assets  to  the  tune  of  Rs1.7  billion. 
According to Ernst & Young, the accumulated loss as at 31 December 2014, was Rs1.2 billion. 
Just for being transparent, I can give some additional information that the value of security of 
Rs2.2 billion were not even enough to cover loan facilities of Rs3.1 billion. 

 
The Chairperson: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

32 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Madam  Chairperson,  I  will  talk  on  the  same  item.  The  hon.  Minister  of 
Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms mentioned that it will be a good 
investment.  May  we  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development 
whether this amount of Rs1.3 billion that has been given as equity to those two banks will be 
recouped, in what way and whether is it a share or how come that will be recouped? Can the hon. 
Minister enlighten the House on this? 

Mr Jugnauth: Well, again, time will tell. We have a very good management which is 
doing well. They have to work hard, they have to see to it that the bank is well managed so that it 
goes in size, in terms of its wealth and that, eventually, there comes a time when Government 
will decide, if it so decides, to sell either part or whole - I don’t know - of the shares, whereby 
Government will be able to recoup that amount. So, keep fingers crossed, let’s hope that it goes 
the way we expect it to go. 

(Interruptions) 

The Chairperson: Another question, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan: Madam Chairperson, on page 22… 

(Interruptions) 

Last page. Anyway ! Amount Underspent - Rs17.8 m.  

The Chairperson: No. Hon. Dr. Sorefan, we are still on Vote 27-1 and you are asking 

questions on Vote 28-1. You are a little bit ahead. 

Vote 27-1 Centrally Managed Expenses of Government (Rs56,500,000 ) was, on question 

put, agreed to. 

Vote 28-1 Centrally Managed Initiatives of Government was called. 

The Chairperson: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan: Madam Chairperson, I think we have gone a bit far. We have already talked 
about Vote 28-1, about the banks. That’s why I went on the last page, page 22. There has been a 
confusion before. Anyway!  On page 22, under the same Vote 28-1 - Amount Unspent Rs 17.8 
m., may we know from which code this has been underspent? 

 
The Chairperson: On which specific item are you talking? 

33 

Dr.  Sorefan:  On  page  22.  There  is  no  item  number,  just  on  the  summary  -  Amount 

Underspent. 

Mr  Jugnauth:  Well,  I  am  told  that  there  are  under  expenditure  in  various  items  of 

expenditure. Of course, we have all the details. I can provide… 

(Interruptions) 

Well, I think I will better circulate this document. Everybody can see how big it is. 

The Chairperson: Yes, another question! No! 

Vote  28-1  Centrally  Managed  Initiatives  of  Government  (Rs1,513,000,000)  was,  on 

question put, agreed to. 

 

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION (2015) (No. 2) BILL 

(NO. XIII OF 2016) 

The Schedule was agreed to. 

Clauses 1 and 2 were called and agreed to. 

The Schedule was agreed to. 

The title and enacting clause were agreed to. 

The Bill was agreed to. 

E.S.E.  (6  Months  ended  30  June  2015)  of  2016  and  the  Supplementary  Appropriation 

(2015) (No. 2) Bill (No. XIII of 2016) were agreed to. 

On the Assembly resuming with Madam Speaker in the Chair, Madam Speaker reported 

accordingly. 

Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for one and a half hours. 

At 12.52 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 2.31 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair 

 

34 

Second Reading 

THE ANTI-PERSONNEL MINES AND CLUSTER MUNITIONS (PROHIBITION) BILL 

(NO. VIII OF 2016) 

Order for Second Reading read. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move that the Anti-Personnel Mines and Cluster 

Munitions (Prohibition) Bill (No. VIII of 2016) be read a second time. 

The main objects of the Bill are to domesticate the Convention on Cluster Munitions and 
at  the  same  time  to  have  a  single  legislation  which  incorporates  both  the  Convention  on  the 
Prohibition of the Use,  Stockpiling, Production  and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on 
their Destruction, and the Convention on Cluster Munitions.  

The existing Anti-Personnel Mines (Prohibition) Act which incorporates the prohibition 

of anti-personnel mines only, will consequently be repealed. 

Antipersonnel mines are explosive devices designed to incapacitate, injure or kill one or 

more persons.  

Anti-personnel mines are “victim-activated”, meaning they are designed to be detonated 
by the presence, proximity or contact of a person. According to experts in the field, more than 80 

countries worldwide, including African countries, are affected by anti‐personnel mines and other 

explosive  remnants  of  war  which  have  incapacitated  hundreds  of  people  including  children, 
women and old persons. 

Mauritius  ratified  the  Ottawa  Convention  on  the  prohibition  of  the  use,  stockpiling, 
production  and  transfer  of  anti-personnel  mines  and  on  their  destruction,  in  December  1997. 
However, it is only in 2001 that the Anti-Personnel Mines Act was enacted to domesticate the 
Convention so as to make it effective under our law. 

As  regards  the  Convention  on  Cluster  Munitions,  it  is  an  international  Treaty  that 
prohibits the use, transfer and the stockpile of cluster munitions. The commonest type of cluster 
munitions  takes  the  form  of  air-dropped  or  ground-launched  explosives  weapons  that  eject 
explosive  bomblets  which  are  dispersed  over  a  wide  area  and  are  used  to  hit  several  targets 
through one launch. Certain cluster munitions are even designed to destroy runaways and electric 
power lines whilst others can disperse chemical and biological weapons.  Therefore, the risk of   

 

35 

excessive loss of life and injury to civilians and civilian infrastructure is very high with these 
types of weapons.  

Madam  Speaker,  the  Convention  on  Cluster  Munitions  is  yet  another  International 
Convention which was lying in the drawers, for I do not know, how many years. It is only after I 
took  Office  in  December  2014  that  I  was  made  aware,  of  several  conventions  related  to 
disarmament, regional peace and security that Mauritius has not acceded to, or  if they have been 
acceded to, then they have not been domesticated, making them ineffective under our national 
law. I get the impression that the interest of the previous Government was elsewhere rather than 
striving to protect the interest and security of the country and the region. 

As soon as I was made aware of the situation, and given my Government commitment to 
national and regional peace and security, I gave the necessary instructions that all the relevant 
conventions be processed without delay with a view to their adoption and domestication. And as 
you know, one of them, namely, the Arms Trade Treaty has recently been domesticated by the 
introduction  and  passing  of  the  Firearms  (Amendment)  Act,  in  this  August  Assembly.    This 
present Bill will domesticate yet another Convention which Mauritius has acceded to last year, 
upon my instruction.   

Madam Speaker, in Mauritius, we are very fortunate not to  possess or  manufacture any 
cluster munitions; however, my decision to accede to this Convention follows  the continuous 
encouragements  from  friendly  countries,  like  France  and  Zambia,  as  well  as  international  and 
regional  organisations  such  as  the  International  Committee  of  the  Red  Cross  and  the  African 
Union  to  do  so,  with  a  view  to  promoting  the  universal  adherence  of  this  international 
Humanitarian  Law  Instrument  and  as  a  sign  of  solidarity  towards  several  countries  of  sub-
Saharan Africa which are affected by this scourge due to many years of internal and cross-border 
conflicts. 

This adherence is also in line with my Government policy on disarmament and support to 
the promotion of peace and security in Africa, as I am convinced that the promotion of peace in 
the region also means securing our own peace and security.  

It  is  in  this  context  that  I  personally  deposited  the  instrument  of  Accession  to  the 
Convention on Cluster Munitions on 01 October 2015 at the United Nations’ Headquarters in 
New York, during my participation in the UN General Assembly. The Convention has entered 
into  force  in  Mauritius  as  from  01  April  2016,  but  given  our  dualist  legal  system,  for  the 

 

36 

Convention to become effective under our law, we need to incorporate its provisions into our 
national legislation. 

Madam Speaker, we have, moreover, thought it fit to incorporate the provisions of the 
Convention  on  Cluster  Munitions  and  the  Anti-Personnel  Mines  Ban  Convention  in  a  single 
legislation  because,  according  to  available  reports  from  international  experts,  both  cluster 
munitions and anti-personnel mines have been found to cause similar humanitarian consequences 

in the immediate and long‐term. 

In  fact,  studies  have  revealed  that  a  significantly  large  number  of  the  sub-munitions 
dispersed by a single cluster munition fail to explode on impact and  thereby endangering the 
lives of civilians long after the conflicts ended.  

Handicap  International,  the  founder  of  the  Landmine  and  Cluster  Munition  Monitor 
Programme  which  monitors  the  implementation  of  these  two  international  treaties,  has  stated 
that there is evidence that land mines, including anti-personnel mines and cluster bombs, are a 
significant  cause  of  disability.  These  weapons  instil  fear  in  whole  communities  and  act  as  a 
barrier  to  socio-economic  development,  thereby  worsening  the  problem  of  poverty  in  many 
countries. 
 
the Anti-Personnel Mines and Cluster Munitions (Prohibition) Bill -  

Madam Speaker, let me now highlight some of the provisions that are being proposed in 

Under clause 1 - Short title 
The short title will be the Anti-Personnel Mines and Cluster Munitions (Prohibition) Act, 

as this Bill incorporates the provisions of both Conventions. 

Under clause 2 - Interpretation 
The  definition  of  ‘cluster  munition’  has  been  included  in  this  clause  as  well  as  a 
description  of  those  sub-munitions  which  are  considered  as  cluster  munitions  under  the  said 
Convention. 

Also the definition of the word ‘transfer’ has been extended in this new Bill to include, 
among others, the transfer of title to and control over cluster munitions, explosive bomblets or 
anti-personnel mines. 

Under Section 4 - Prohibition acts 

37 

 
This  clause  has  been  inserted  to  include  the  prohibition  to  develop,  produce,  acquire, 
stockpile, retain, use or transfer to anyone, directly or indirectly, any anti-personnel mine, cluster 
munition or explosive bomblet. 
 
Moreover,  a  few  additional  provisions  are  being  proposed  in  the  Bill  to  reinforce  the 
prohibition of the use, stockpiling, production and transfer of anti-personnel mines and cluster 
munitions. These are as follows - 

Clause 6 - Request for information 
This  clause  provides  that  the  Minister  may,  by  notice  in  writing,  require  any  person 
whom he has reason to believe has any information or document relevant to the administration or 
enforcement of the Bill, to provide such information or document to the Minister within such 
period of time as may be specified in the notice. 

Clause 9 - Jurisdiction 
Under this section, a court in Mauritius shall have jurisdiction in respect of any offence 

committed under this Bill, if the person to be charged, inter alia - 

- is a citizen of Mauritius; 
- is ordinarily resident in Mauritius; 
-  was  arrested  in  Mauritius  or  in  its  territorial  waters  or  on  board  a  ship  or    aircraft 

registered in Mauritius at the time the offence was committed, or 

- is a company registered in Mauritius or operating in Mauritius. 

I shall, at Committee Stage, be moving for minor amendments, as circulated. 

Madam  Speaker,  with  these  words,  I  commend  the  Anti-Personnel  Mines  and  Cluster 

 
Munitions (Prohibition) Bill to the House. 

 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun) rose and 

seconded. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Lepoigneur! 

 

 

 

 
(2.40 p.m) 

38 

Mr  G.  Lepoigneur  (Fifth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière):  Madam 
Speaker, I must begin by saying how warmly I welcome this Anti-Personnel Mines and Cluster 
Munitions (Prohibition) Bill which is being presented by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister. 

It is so welcome because the world is too little aware of the waste of life, limb and land 
which anti-personnel landmines are causing among some of the poorest people on earth. For the 
mine is a stealthy killer. Long after conflict is ended, its innocent victims die or are wounded 
singly, in countries of which we hear little. Their lonely fate is never reported. 

Madam Speaker, now I would like to highlight some actions of Lady Diana, in her fight 
against anti-personnel mines, who was a prominent supporter to eradicate anti-personnel mines. 
According to her say, Madam Speaker, the world, with its many other preoccupations, remains 
largely  unmoved  by  a  death  roll  of  something  like  800  people  every  month  -  many  of  them 
women  and  children.  Those  who  are  not  killed, around  another  1,200  a  month,  suffer  terrible 
injuries and are handicapped for life. 

Madam Speaker, some people chose to interpret her action as a political statement. But it 
was not. She was not a political figure.  As she said at the time, and she reiterated it, her interests 
were humanitarian. That is why she felt drawn to this human tragedy. This is why she wanted to 
play down her part in working towards a worldwide ban on these weapons. 

During  her  days  in  Angola,  she  saw  some  aspects  of  this  scourge  in  the  hospitals  of 
Luanda, the capital, and Huambo, scene of bitter fighting not long ago. She visited some of the 
mine victims who had survived, and saw their injuries.  

Madam Speaker, what is so cruel about these injuries, is that they are almost invariably 
suffered, where medical resources are limited.  One of her main objectives in visiting Angola 
was to forward the cause to those like the Red Cross, striving in the name of humanity to secure 
an international ban on these weapons. Since then, she was glad to see some real progress has 
been made. There are signs of a change of heart - at least in some parts of the world. For that, we 
should be cautiously grateful. If an international ban on mines can be secured, it means, looking 
far ahead, that the world may be a safer place for this generation's grandchildren.  But for this 

 

39 

generation in much of the developing world, there will be no relief, no relaxation. The toll of 
deaths and injuries caused by the mines already there, will continue. 

This  tracing  and  lifting  of  mines  in  Angola  is  a  desperately  slow  business.  So,  in  her 
mind, a central question remained. Should we not do more to quicken the de-miners' work, to 
help the injured back to some sort of life, to further our contribution to aid and development? 

The country is enriched by the work done by its overseas agencies and non-governmental 
organisations who work to help people in Africa and Asia to improve the quality of their lives. 
Yet mines cast a constant shadow over so much of this work. Resettlement of refugees is made 
more hazardous. Good land is put out of bounds. Recovery from war is delayed. Aid workers 
themselves are put at risk. The more expeditiously we can end this plague on earth caused by the 
landmine, the more readily can we set about the constructive tasks to which so many give their 
hand in the cause of humanity. 

Madam  Speaker,  all  honourable  Members  will  be  aware  of  the  immense  contribution 
made by Lady Diana, Princess of Wales, to bring to many countries the human cost to landmine. 
A few months after Diana’s death in 1997, the international campaign to ban landmines won the 
Nobel  Peace  Prize.  The  best  way  in  which  to  record  our  appreciation  of  her  work  and  her 
campaign  against  landmine  is  to  pass  the  Bill  and  to  pave  the  way  towards  a  global  ban  on 
landmine. 

Thank you Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Boissézon! 

(2.45 p.m.) 

Mr E. Boissézon (Third Member for La Caverne & Phoenix): Madame la présidente, 
merci  de  me  permettre  de  participer  aux  débats  relatifs  au  Anti-Personnel  Mines  and  Cluster 
Munitions (Prohibition) Bill. 

Le présent projet de loi remplace le Anti-Personnel Mines (Prohibition) Act de 2001 et 
inclut  les  obligations  et  les  champs  d’application  de  la  Convention  sur  les  armes  à  sous-
munitions,  aussi  appelées  bombes  à  sous-munitions,  cluster  munitions. Je  remercie  le  Premier 
ministre pour l’introduction de ce projet de loi, qui démontre que ce gouvernement a aussi un 

 

40 

souci  internationaliste  et  nous  avons  un  devoir  de  conscience  non  seulement  envers  nos 
compatriotes mais envers tous les habitants de la planète terre. 

Nous  avons  un  devoir  moral  d’intervenir,  dans  la  mesure  de  nos  moyens  limités, 
d’atténuer la souffrance là où elle se trouve, et surtout de prévenir tout acte pouvant amener la 
souffrance physique ou morale et de nous assurer de la sécurité dans la région. 

En  1996,  j’ai  été  en  Afrique,  plus  précisément  à  Windhoek,  quand  j’ai  rencontré  des 
membres  d’une  organisation  internationale  qui  militaient  pour  l’arrêt  de  l’utilisation,  la 
fabrication, vente et stockage des mines anti-personnel. 

Lors des 22ème et 23ème sessions de l’Assemblée paritaire des parlementaires ACP-UE, 
au  nom  du  Parlement  mauricien,  j’ai  voté  pour  l’adoption  des  résolutions  conjointes  pour  le 
bannissement  des  mines  anti-personnel.  Le  trois  décembre  1997,  j’étais  heureux  quand  l’Etat 
mauricien  signa  et  ratifia  la  Convention  sur  l’interdiction  des  mines  anti-personnel  à  Ottawa, 
mais  malheureusement  nous  dûmes  attendre  trois  ans  pour  l’introduction  d’une  loi  relative 
suivant les provisions de la Convention. 

 
En 2001, les débats lors de la présentation du projet de loi furent d’un très haut niveau. 
Nous  savions    que,  lors  de  la  présentation  de  ce  projet  de  loi  sur  les  mines  antipersonnel, 
beaucoup  a  été  dit  sur  ces  millions  de  mines  enfouies.    Des  millions  de  personnes  souffrent 
directement  ou  indirectement  des  méfaits  de  ces  armes  de  destruction  qui,  aujourd’hui  même, 
après la fin des conflits,  sont aux aguets pour poursuivre la tâche morbide qui leur fut confiée 
lors de leur production.  

Madame la présidente, les mines antipersonnel sont des engins non explosés qui sont un 
fléau pour le Moyen-Orient, l’Asie du Sud-Est, l’Afrique, l’Amérique du Sud et nombreuses sont 
les  régions  polluées  par  ces  engins  mortels.  Il  faut  se  rappeler  qu’entre  2000  et  2010,  une 
personne était blessée ou mutilée toutes les 20 minutes suite à un accident de mine. Pendant cette 
période, 117 pays furent pollués, plus de 82 000 morts au Cambodge et 35 000 amputations. Il y 
a encore des millions de mines antipersonnel actives restant enfouies dans le sol d’environ 70 
pays. Certains sont particulièrement atteints, notamment plus de 20 millions en Afrique du Sud, 
posées surtout en Angola, dont le précédent orateur en a parlé, au Mozambique, l'Érythrée et le 
Soudan, 21 millions au Moyen-Orient, en Irak, en Afghanistan, au Cambodge, au Vietnam et en 
Birmanie.  

 

41 

Les pays les plus sévèrement touchés sont l’Afghanistan, où, sur une population de 20 
millions d’habitants, nous avons répertorié cinq à sept millions de mines, soit une mine pour trois 
personnes. En Angola, 6 millions de mines pour une population de 11 millions de personnes, soit 
une mine pour deux personnes. En Bosnie-Herzégovine, 1 million de mines pour 3.5 millions de 
personnes ; au Cambodge, quatre à six millions de mines sur une population de 10 millions de 
personnes et plus de 35 millions d’amputations. Le Premier ministre, lors de sa présentation, a 
parlé de l’aspect social et  économique des dégâts causés par les mines. Dans les pays africains, 
de vastes étendues de terres agricoles ne peuvent être exploitées parce qu’elles sont infestées de 
mines.  Le déminage coûte cher et les Etats ne se bousculent pas pour le financer.  

Madame la présidente, si une mine antipersonnel coûte entre 3 à 30 dollars, elle coûte 

 
300 à 1, 000 dollars pour son enlèvement.  

Madame la présidente, où en est-on aujourd’hui, du chaud et du froid ? Lors du  Mine 
Ban Treaty’s interssessional meetings à Genève du 19-20 mai 2016 et du suivi de l’action de 
Maputo, cette organisation a pris la décision de  faire de la terre une planète sans mines en 2025 - 
nine  years  to  finish  the  job.  Un  panel  emmené  par  le  Canada,  comprenant  l’Afghanistan,  le 
Mozambique, la Nouvelle-Zélande et  l’International Campaign to Ban Landmines, étudie les 
moyens de forger la motivation politique pour faire de la terre une planète sans mines. 91 Etats 
ont officiellement déclaré avoir complété la destruction de leurs stocks.  Ainsi furent détruites 
plus  de  50  millions  de  mines !  Pour  la  première  fois,  un  représentant  du  gouvernement  de  la 
Birmanie s’est joint au International Campaign to Ban Landmines. Le Sri Lanka a signifié son 
intention de signer la Convention. Mais quand je vois ce qui a été fait et ce qui est fait en ce 
moment, j’ai le cœur lourd, très lourd même ; quand je pense que nous passons une loi sur notre 
territoire  mauricien  et  que  notre  souveraineté  sur  Diego  Garcia  est  refusée.  Nous  savons  que 
l’océan indien est pollué de mines antipersonnel et nous devons lutter, sans relâche, pour qu’il 
n’y ait plus de mines et d’armes à sous-munitions dans l’océan indien.  

Une étude est faite pour étudier les possibilités d’aide aux pays en situation économique 
et  politiquement  faible  à  maintenir  leur  obligation  envers  les  victimes  des  mines  et  autres 
personnes dans le besoin. Le manque de ressources se fait sentir dans les Etats qui enregistrent 
encore des victimes comme l’Afghanistan, la République du Congo, l’Angola, etc., de même que 
dans les Etats qui ont complété le nettoyage comme l’Albanie, l’Ouganda, le Mozambique. Il y a 

 

42 

un effort à faire pour revoir le financement et s’assurer que le programme d’aide humanitaire 
atteigne les victimes. Bien souvent, les intentions sont bonnes mais quand le moment vient pour 
l’implémentation de la coopération, peu d’efforts sont faits pour atteindre les objectifs.  

Madame la présidente, la Convention sur armes à sous-munitions fut adoptée à Dublin le 
30 mai 2008 et a pris effet à partir du 01 août 2010. Lors de son adoption, le Secrétaire général 
des Nations Unies a dit ceci, et je cite - 

“(…) not only the world’s collective revulsion at these abhorrent weapons, but also the 
power  of  collaboration  among  Governments,  civil  society  and  the  United  Nations  to 
change attitudes and policies on the threat faced by all humankind (…).” 

Nous  aussi,  en  tant  que  nation,  même  si  nous  ne  sommes  pas  touchés  par  les  armes  à 
sous-munitions, nous devons être solidaires avec les nations qui ont besoin d’aide. L’histoire se 
répète, comme le Premier ministre l’a dit auparavant.  La Convention fut signée en 2008, rien n’a 
été  fait.  Heureusement  que  ce  gouvernement  a  ratifié  la  Convention  en  octobre  2015  et  son 
entrée en force en 2016 et, aujourd’hui, nous sommes présents dans cet hémicycle pour débattre 
de ce sujet.  

Les  armes  à  sous-munitions  ont  un  large  champ  d’action,  ce  qui  fait  qu’elles  sont 
fondamentalement imprécises lors de leur utilisation. De plus, les minutions ayant raté et non 
explosées,  qui  sont  au  sol,  constituent  des  risques  létaux  pour  les  civils  longtemps  après  le 
conflit. Les armes à sous-munitions sont pointées du doigt par les actions humanitaires comme 
Handicap  International,  la  Croix-Rouge,  les  organisations  internationales  telle  l’ONU.  Selon 
Handicap  International,  parmi  13,306  victimes  d’armes  à  sous-munitions  recensées  par  ses 
soins, 98 % sont des civils, dont 27 % des enfants. Une proportion importante allant jusqu’à 30 
%  des  sous-munitions  n’explosent  pas  à  l’impact  et  constituent  un  danger  durable  pour  les 
populations locales, surtout les enfants qui les prennent pour des jouets et ce jusqu’à plusieurs 
décennies après les conflits. Il y avait, en 2006, plusieurs millions de sous-munitions en stocks à 
travers  le  monde,  représentant  une  menace  de  prolifération  colossale.  L’ONU  estime  qu’au 
Kosovo,  en  Afghanistan,  en  Irak  et  au  Sud-Liban,  se  trouvent  plusieurs  millions  de  ces  sous-
munitions sur les terrains qui sont aujourd’hui responsables de trois à quatre blessés ou décès 
quotidiennement, même en cas de cessation des hostilités. 

 

43 

L’OTAN, elle-même, est parfois mise en cause pour son utilisation massive de ces objets des 
morts.  Celle-ci a utilisé massivement, pour le bombardement de la Yougoslavie, une proportion 
n’ayant pas encore explosé.  

Madame la présidente, la convention sur les armes à sous-munitions et à tous ces essais 
est  un  instrument  de  prévention  ainsi  que  de  traitement  pour  les  dommages  dérivant  de  tels 
engins. 

Aujourd’hui encore, en effet, nous assistons au grave et inacceptable impact humanitaire 
sur  les  armes  à  sous-munitions  qui  coûte  la  vie  à  plusieurs  personnes  et  à  plusieurs 
communautés. L’un des aspects les plus novateurs de la convention est celui de placer au centre 
de  ses  préoccupations  la  personne  humaine  et,  en  particulier,  les  victimes  des  armes  à  sous-
munitions.    En  parcourant  le  projet  de  loi,  c’est  la  première  fois  qu’une  convention  fait  état 
d’assistance aux victimes.  

L’Article  5  de  la  convention  on  cluster  munitions  fait  mention  et  oblige  les  États  à 
respecter  les  victimes  du  cluster  munitions.  Les  États  sont  obligés  de  garder  un  registre  des 
personnes qui ont été affectées de leur âge, de leur genre et de noter toute assistance sensible qui 
leur est accordée, et ils doivent faire mention des besoins des victimes du cluster munitions.  Ils 
doivent aussi mettre en place des lois et une politique de développement et de s’assurer du bien 
de ces personnes. Cette convention ne tolère aucune discrimination entre les victimes de cluster 
munitions et de la population civile. C’est un grand pas en avant que maintenant nous prenons en 
compte le besoin de nous occuper des victimes de ce fléau.  

D’autre part, Madame la présidente, c’est la première fois qu’une convention fait mention 
de l’universalisation. L’Article 21 de cette convention parle des relations entre les États qui ne 
sont pas partis de la convention. C’est la première fois qu’une convention encourage les États 
membres qui ont signé la convention de faire de la promotion pour une convention et les Nations 
Unies pensent que ce faisant, les pays participeront à cette grande entreprise que nous avons de 
rendre le monde libre, sans mines et sans objet capable de tuer à n’importe quel moment. 

Je terminerai en faisant référence à Mgr Paolo Borgia, Chef de la délégation du Saint-
Siège, faite à Beyrouth, le 13 septembre 2011 lors de la première conférence sur le bannissement 
des armes capables de tuer les gens sur le terrain, et il disait ceci – 

44 

 
“La  paix  et  la  sécurité  sont  des  préoccupations  centrales  et  légitimes  qui  attendent 
continuellement une réponse adaptée qui va bien au-delà de la seule dimension militaire. 
Elles ne peuvent pas être stables et durables dans le temps si elles ne sont pas orientées 
vers la justice, vers la solidarité et vers la fraternité à l'intérieur et entre les États. Voilà 
l'esprit qui fonde la Convention sur les armes à sous-munitions, en plaçant la personne 
humaine au centre, et qui doit être à la base de nos délibérations dans son processus de 
mise en œuvre.” 

Merci, Madame la présidente. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Mrs Selvon. 

 (3.03 p.m.) 

Mrs D. Selvon (Second Member for GRNW & Port Louis West): Merci, Madame la 

présidente.   

Madame  la  présidente,  tout  d’abord,  je  n’ai  pas  boycotté  la  séance  parlementaire 
d’aujourd’hui  avec  certains  collègues  députés  bien  que  je  suis  contre  toute  la  violation  de  la 
liberté de la presse et je vous lance dans le contexte de cette conviction inébranlable un appel à 
revoir votre décision d’interdiction… 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Mrs Selvon, please!  

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Mrs Selvon, please, please!  I have to interrupt you on this issue.  You are intervening on a 
Bill.    The  Bill  which  is  before  us  is  the  Anti-Personnel  Mines  and  Cluster  Munitions 
(Prohibition) Bill.  So, your intervention has to be on the clauses of the Bill and you cannot go 
outside the premises of the Bill. Please, bear with me!  

Mrs Selvon:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  It was only two sentences that I wanted to 

say.  

Je suis présente à cette séance parlementaire parce que je vais soulever une question très 
importante concernant l’intérêt national à la veille de la signature par la Grande-Bretagne et les 
États-Unis  d’un  accord  sur  les  Chagos,  territoire  mauricien  où  sont  entreposées  des  armes  en 
violation  de  deux  conventions  auxquelles  Maurice  s’est  jointe  aujourd’hui  contre  des  armes 

 

45 

extrêmement  destructrices  des  vies  humaines  innocentes.  Je  prends  la  parole  sur  ces  deux 
conventions  internationales  surtout  que  j’étais  très  choquée  par  l’attitude  des  États-Unis 
d’Amérique qui retrouvent toujours en 2016… 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Mrs Selvon, sorry, I have to interrupt you again.  Attached to the 
Bill, you have got a convention.  Is your intervention based on the convention which is attached 
to the Bill? 

Mrs Selvon:  Yes, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker:  Or are you going outside the premises of the Bill? 

Mrs Selvon:  No, it is not outside, Madam Speaker. 

 Madam Speaker:  Because if it is outside, I will have to stop you. 

(Interruptions) 

Mrs  Selvon:    I  have  just  started  my  speech,  Madam  Speaker  and  I  think  you  need  to 

listen to where I want to come. 

Madam Speaker:  If it is outside… 

 

Mrs Selvon: Yes, Madam Speaker… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please, sit down!  Please sit down for one minute! 

(Interruptions) 

If  it  is  outside  the  premises  of  the  Bill,  I  will  not  be  able  to  allow  you  to  intervene  on  that.  
Please, come back to the clauses of the Bill and the convention which is attached to the Bill. 

Mrs Selvon:  Madam Speaker, I think that my speech is on the Bill and I will continue 

my speech.   

Je demande formellement à l’honorable Premier ministre et au All-Party Parliamentary 
Committee sur les Chagos d’écrire  aux Nations Unies et aux autorités  responsables des deux 
conventions  pour  demander  que  soient  bloquées  les  négociations  actuelles  entre  Londres  et 
Washington… 

(Interruptions) 

46 

 
Madam Speaker:  No! Hon. Mrs Selvon, I am really sorry. I am really sorry to tell you 
that I will not be able to allow you to continue on this issue.  I have told you that we can give 
some leeway, but then you are intervening completely outside the premises of the Bill. 

Mrs Selvon:  No, Madam Speaker, I think that is… 

(Interruptions) 

I will continue my speech, Madam Speaker.   

According to the Non-Governmental Network International Campaign to ban landmines, 
the United States has kept major quantities of anti-personnel landmines on supply vessels in the 
BIOT.    Some  10,000  mines  in  cluster  bomb  units  such  as  the  Aerojet  Gator,  the  use  and 
stockpiling of which is strictly prohibited by the 1997 Ottawa Landmines Convention to which 
both the UK and Mauritius, though not the USA, are parties.  The Foreign and Commonwealth 
Office  claims,  however,  that  there  are  no  US  anti-personnel  mines  on  Diego  Garcia.  We 
understand that the US stores munitions of various kinds on US warships anchored off Diego 
Garcia. 

Madame la présidente, à ces accusations, le Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) a 

répondu - 

“Such vessels enjoy State immunity and are therefore outside the UK’s jurisdiction and 
control.” 

Mais, ce n’est pas vrai, selon Peter Sand qui ajoute – 

“Along  the  same  lines,  the  UK  representative  at  the  Ottawa  Convention’s  Standing 
Committee meeting in May 2003 affirmed that landmines on US naval ships inside British 
territorial waters ‘are not on UK territory provided they remain on the ships’.” 

Cela n’est pas vrai selon Peter Sand parce que c’est là, je cite – 

“A unilateral interpretation flatly contested by the International Committee for the Red 
Cross (ICRC). As a matter of fact, much of the ordnance in the Diego Garcia lagoon (i.e., 
in  British  internal  waters)  is  not  stored  on  board  US  warships  but  on  commercial 
freighters time-chartered by the US Navy’s Military Sealift Command (MSC).” 

Sand ajoute – 

47 

 
“The same is true for cluster bomb (sub-munitions ordnance) stockpiles prohibited under 
the new 2008 Dublin Convention (ratified by the UK on 4 May 2010, in force as from 1 
August 2010). In response to parliamentary questions, however, the FCO has refused to 
disclose information on the amounts – I say on the amounts - of US cluster munitions in 
Diego  Garcia,  on  the  grounds  that  ‘disclosure  would  or  would  be  likely  to  prejudice 
relations between the United Kingdom and the United States’.” 

Mr Yerrigadoo: Madam Speaker… 

Madam Speaker: Mrs Selvon, sorry! Let me tell you,  you are having an intervention. 

Can you say how what you are saying is related to the Bill, precisely? 

Mr Yerrigadoo: Madam Speaker, if I may! I was about to raise a point of order under 

Standing Order 42 ‘Relevancy in Debate’ and I believe, Madam Speaker, has already ruled. 

Madam Speaker: Look, hon. Mrs Selvon! When there is a Bill in front of us, we have to 
make our interventions on the Bill, on the clauses of the Bill. In this Bill, you will see there is 
attached to it a Convention which can be used as guidance. Okay! I can give you some leeway so 
that you can make mention of other countries, etc., but if you are going too much outside the 
premises of the Bill, I can’t allow you. 

Mr  Ganoo:  Although  there  is  a  rule  that  Members  of  this  House  cannot  criticise  the 
conduct of friendly countries, but I think what the hon. Member is saying is that there are other 
countries which are not  respecting the provisions of the Convention we  are concerned with.  I 
think she is allowed to do that. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo, let me say that whatever she is saying, the content of her 
speech today should be related to the Bill. If she has got a problem with other countries or things 
which are outside the premises of the Bill and, as the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has just said, she 
can come and see the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for these other things, but I have given my ruling 
that she has to respect the premises of this Bill. 

Mrs Selvon: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Then, I will end my speech because I think 

that my speech is related, as hon. Ganoo was saying.  

So I will end  my speech. Thank you very much. 

(3.11 p.m.) 

48 

 
The  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of Life  (Mr  A.  Gayan):  Madam  Speaker,  after 
having listened to the previous orator, I think there is a rule in this House that when somebody 
has spoken, that person must stay and listen to the next orator, but I understand that this person is 
leaving. 

But, for the sake of the record, Madam Speaker, I think it is important that we establish 
certain basic rules of international law. It is common ground that the United States is not a party 
to the Landmine Convention and is not a party to Cluster Convention. Under international law, it 
is  only  States  that  are  parties  to  the  Convention  that  are  bound  by  the  provisions  of  the 
Convention. So, I think this is something that has to be made very clear because there may be 
some misunderstanding on the part of some people that once there is a Convention everybody is 
bound by it. You are only bound if you sign it and ratify it, and this is the purpose for which this 
Bill  has  come  to  this  House.  In  fact,  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  was  very  clear.  When 
introducing  this  Bill,  he  said  that  the  purpose  of  this  Bill  is  to  domesticate  in  our  law  the 
provisions of this Convention. But anyway, let me come back to what I wanted to say. 

Now, he understands. 

Madam Speaker: No comment! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

No comment! Hon. Soodhun, don’t make any provocation, please! 

Mr Gayan: I think, Madam Speaker, it is important that I mention that there was a recent 
report from the Global Peace Index which ranks Mauritius 10th on the list of peaceful nations. 
We are lucky in a sense to live in a country where we do not have landmines and we don’t have 
cluster munitions; and it is not because we are in that situation that we should not be concerned 
about what is taking place in other parts of the world. It is also interesting that in 2001, the same 
Prime Minister who introduced this Bill, introduced the Anti-Personnel Prohibition Treaty Bill. 

(Interruptions) 

In  2001!  And  the  new  Bill  tried  to  incorporate  both  the  Landmine  Treaty  and  the  Cluster 
Munitions Treaty. I think it is good that it comes under the umbrella of one single law. When the 
debates  were  held  in  2001,  lots  of  people  spoke  and  I  think  it  was  a  wonderful  debate.  We 

 

49 

addressed the main concerns of the Landmine Treaty. I don’t want to travel back in time, but 
Hansard is there for anybody to consult that it was a good debate on the issues and everybody 
addressed the House in a very responsible manner. Hon. Ganoo was there, he knows that. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please! Don’t make comments! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Gayan: We are here, Madam Speaker, for this Bill because we know that landmines 
and cluster munitions kill and maim thousands and thousands of people every year. At this stage 
of the debate, it is right that we should pay tribute to the work of the International Red Cross and 
to other NGOs that have been campaigning relentlessly for the banning of these landmines and 
these weapons of mass destruction. 

A lot has been achieved over the years with regard to the banning of landmines, but a lot 
has yet to be achieved and one of the achievements that we need to work towards and this is why 
we appealed in 2001 for all the States, particularly the major powers to become parties to the 
Convention. They have not! We have had to appeal again to them because landmines and cluster 
munitions  are  not  really  weapons  of  war  that  major  powers  really  need  because  they  kill 
civilians,  they  maim  civilians  and  they  destroy  the  livelihood  of  lots  of  farmers  all  over  the 
world.  The  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  said  it’s  good  business  for  them  because  it  is  easy  to 
manufacture, it is easy to stock, it is easy to sell regardless of what damage and destruction it 
may cause. They must have a conscience and concern for the pain landmines keep causing. 

Madam Speaker, I am sure that almost everybody in this House has been to Geneva. In 
front of the Palais des Nations, there is a wooden sculpture.  That sculpture is a broken chair. 
One of the legs is broken. It is there for a symbol. It was put there in 1997 because that’s when 
the Treaty was being signed - the then  Land Mine Treaty and it was thought then that all the 
countries in the world were going to become parties to that Convention.  

It  was  supposed  to  have  stayed  there  for  only  three  months  to  give  time  to  States  to 
become parties. It is still there today, but it symbolises the destruction that landmines can cause.  
I think it is a very vivid reminder of the havoc and carnage that landmines cause and have caused 
over  the  world.  That  sculpture  was  put  there  in  1997  only  for  three  months,  but  its  presence 

 

50 

reminds us all of the fact that conflicts have not stopped in the world, and as long as there will be 
conflicts,  countries  will  be  tempted  to  use  cluster  munitions  and  also  landmines  to  protect 
themselves and to delay the advance of the enemy army.   

Landmines  have  caused  a  lot  of  damage  in  Africa  and  Asia.  I  am  sure  many  hon. 
Members in this House who have been to Africa, have seen people who are crippled, people who 
are handicapped and they have lost the quality of life, not for what they did, but simply because 
they were walking in the areas or farms where they used to walk or they were travelling along a 
road  where  they  used  to  travel  and  then  there  was  an  explosion  with  landmine  and  they  got 
crippled or died. 

(Interruptions) 

It is a sad fact of life in Africa, in the Middle East, in Asia and in many countries of the world.  It 
is disheartening to realise the damage and destruction that can be caused.   

Landmines have been with us since the Second World War and all countries have used 
them  in  all  the  conflicts.    I  have  said  that  manufacturing  a  landmine  costs  a  maximum  of  30 
dollars, but it can cost between 3 dollars to 30 dollars.  But if we need to demine and to make 
safe the place where the landmines have been planted and placed, it costs 1,000 dollars per mine.  
The UN has estimated that if they have to remove all the landmines in the world which have 
been placed at the present cost and provided that there are new landmines placed, it is going to 
take 1,100 years to clear.  It is mindboggling, but it is a fact. This is why we have to make sure 
that landmines are banned and totally eliminated as well as cluster munitions. 

Hon.  Boissézon  spoke  about  gender-based  disability.    Last  week,  in  this  House,  we 
debated  the  Protection  from  Domestic  Violence  Act.    In  countries  of  Asia,  there  are  lots  of 
people who get maimed by landmines, but what happens in the lives of those people is really 
appalling.    It  has  been  shown  by  evidence  that  when  a  man  gets  maimed  or  disabled  by  a 
landmine, the woman stays with him, but when it is the other way round, the man simply leaves 
the woman and goes away.  This is again an unwanted consequence of landmines. 

Madam Speaker, when somebody dies as a result of an explosion of a landmine, okay, 
that  person  is  dead,  that  is  the  end  of  the  matter.  But  it  still  has  a  toll  on  the  family,  on  the 
relatives and on society.  When that person does not die, he needs medical care, he needs to be 

 

51 

hospitalised and if he needs to be given a prosthesis, it costs a minimum of USD1,000 and very 
often, the people who are maimed do not have money to buy this.  Most countries do not have 
universal healthcare free of delivery that we have in Mauritius.  So, it is also important that we 
bear all this in mind when we discuss the Anti-Personnel Mines.  Nobody can undo the damage, 
which once done cannot be undone.   

Unfortunately,  it  affects  not  only  people,  but  it  affects  agriculture.    In  Cambodia,  for 
example,  Madam  Speaker,  half  of  the  agricultural  land  cannot  be  used  because  there  are  still 
landmines and the clearance of the mines is going to take, I do not know how many years. So 
much of fertile land is not being put to any economic use because of what happened as a result of 
conflicts during the Vietnam War. This is why I believe that everybody must be careful in not 
doing what the previous orator did in beating about the bush and playing cheap politics.  We 
have to be concentrated and focussed on this campaign to ban landmines and cluster munitions. 

The Rt. hon. Prime Minister said that cluster bombs are missile-like devices that upon 
being  released  fragment  into  multiple  smaller  explosive  bomblets  and  since  the  bombs  break 
apart before detonation, controlling where they land is impossible.  It is also estimated that 98% 
of all cluster bomb victims are civilians and one third of those are children.  They could be your 
children  or  my  children,  but  they  are  the  children  of  somebody.    This  is  why  we  need  to  be 
concerned.   

Again, it has been mentioned that the cluster munitions can be air-dropped or ground-
launched  and  they  cause  two  major  humanitarian  problems  and  risks  to  civilians.    They  are 
spread over a wide area and there is no distinction made between military targets and civilians, 
especially  when  they  are  dropped  near  heavily  populated  areas.  Many  submunitions  fail  to 
detonate on impact and they become de facto Anti-Personnel Mines killing and maiming people 
long after the conflicts have ended and long after the cessation of hostilities. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  Bill  that  is  before  us  contains,  in  my  humble  submission,  all  the 
ingredients of making sure that we can eliminate cluster bombs provided that all countries are 
committed to doing so. Countries under the Convention have the obligation to separate munitions 
and to mark them for destruction. There is a time limit that is given to countries to do so, eight 
years after the entry into force of the Convention. And if the countries are not able to destroy the 
munitions, then they can request for an extension and if they do so, then again the States parties 

 

52 

or the Review Conference can have a look at the reasons for the request and they can propose 
benchmarks if they grant the extension.  Apart from the cluster bombs, we also have, as the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister mentioned, the remnants of the cluster bombs.  These also can cause a lot of 
damage and this is strictly regulated under the Convention.   

The  transfer  of  cluster  munitions  from  one State  to  another  that  also  is  covered  in  the 
Regulation.  There are compliance requirements and countries have to comply with International 
Mine  Standards.    There  is  also  a  time  limit  for  the  destruction  of  cluster  munitions  remnants 
which have to be destroyed within ten years after the entry into force of the Convention.   

There is also provision for victim assistance.  There is an obligation to provide assistance, 
medical  care,  rehabilitation  and  psychological  support.  There  is  International  Corporation  for 
those countries that do not have the means or the equipment or the technology to destroy cluster 
bombs.  In the event that there is a problem, the United Nations Secretary-General is called upon 
to ensure compliance or is the body to whom representations can be made for the monitoring of 
compliance for this particular Convention. 

Madam Speaker, I said earlier on that, as long as we will have conflicts, the likelihood of 
cluster bombs and also landmines staying with humanity will be there. We all know that all the 
refugees fleeing from Syria are trying to find refuge in Europe.  In Afghanistan, in Iraq and in 
other parts of the world there are conflicts. So, what we should try to do is to ensure that the 
major powers do not use this kind of munitions or weapons whenever there are risks to civilians. 
It has been said that these landmines and cluster bombs are weapons of mass destruction in slow 
motion.  In fact, they are a terrible danger to anybody who, unfortunately, can come into contact 
with them.  

Madam Speaker, assuming that we resolve the problems in the Middle East, there will be 
other areas where there will be problems and we should be careful also about not letting what is 
happening in the South China seas to get out of hand. Maritime disputes in the south China seas 
can degenerate into conflicts and that will be another hot spot for international relations, but we 
need to be careful that we do not allow any small dispute to degenerate into a major conflict. 
Arms  trafficking  is  another  problem  that  we  need  to  face.  We,  ourselves,  in  Mauritius,  know 
about the risk of arms trafficking. In fact, there is a case ongoing regarding some Russians, but I 
don’t want to say anymore on that except to say... 

 
Madam Speaker: Please don’t! Don’t go into it. 

53 

Mr Gayan: Except to say that arms trafficking is part and parcel of what we are talking 
about. So, that also has to be banned and I am sure that this Bill contains provisions regarding 
violations under the Convention to be visited by the punishment for 15 years imprisonment and 
all this. It is possible with this kind of punishment to deter anybody who might be thinking of 
getting into the arms trade. 

Madam Speaker, let me end by saying that weapons will be with us forever.  In Orlando 
last week 50 people got killed as a result of the use of a gun, but let us, at least, work towards a 
world  where  there  will  be  zero  land  mine  and  zero  cluster  munitions.  I  thank  you,  Madam 
Speaker. 

(3.30 p.m.)  

Mr  R.  Dayal  (First  Member  for  Flacq  &  Bon  Accueil):  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  the 
selected few in this country who had the opportunity, thanks to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, to be 
trained in the handling of live anti-personnel mines and land mines together with cluster bombs 
and I can tell you that it is damn dangerous and if we can get rid of them, it is the best solution. 
This is what we, as a Government, are trying to do. 

This Government under the leadership of the Rt. hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth is displaying 
its political will and vision to enhance the safety and security of the people of Mauritius through 
this Bill. The object of which is to give effect to – 

(a) 

(b) 

the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and 
Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on their Destruction, and  
the Convention on Cluster Munitions.  

This Government is addressing numerous issues pertaining to an État De Droit in terms of its 
international and regional obligations within the United Nations. The International Committee of 
the Red Cross (ICRC), and I am a consultant at the ICRC and the Cluster Munition Coalition and 
numerous other non-governmental organisations. The banning Convention was activated on 18 
September 1997, it was done in Dublin on 30 May 2008. It was high time for the Republic of 
Mauritius to harmonise its legal framework for safeguarding the highest interest of mankind. 

54 

 
More so, with the urgency imposed by cross-border crime and terrorism in our region, we 
all know that Mauritius is a gateway to Africa. To protect the rights and liberties of the average 
citizen and democracy, it aims to harmonise existing legal framework at national level in terms 
of its credibility for sustainable development while managing manmade disasters to save life and 
property whilst prohibiting the use, production, transfer and stockpiling of cluster munitions that 
cause unacceptable harm to civilians and that too consonant with the concern of the Convention 
on  cluster  munitions,  remnants  that  kill  our  main  civilians  including  women  and  children, 
obstruct economic and social development including the loss of livelihood, impede post conflict 
rehabilitation and reconstruction, delay or prevent the return of refugees and internally displaced 
persons  can  negatively  impact  national  and  international  peace  building  and  humanitarian 
assistance and efforts and have other consequences that can persist from many  years after use 
and here I have a photo of a munition that we found in Rodrigues.  

It is now in our naval museum and so therefore, we have not made a survey in Mauritius, 
we have got various munitions depot in the country. So, keep our fingers crossed, we are not 
immune  to  that.  Therefore,  it  was  high  time  to  put  an  end  for  all  time  to  the  suffering  and 
casualties  caused  by  cluster  munitions  at  the  time  of  the  use  when  they  fail  to  function  as 
intended  or  when  they  are  abandoned.  The  Republic  of  Mauritius  is  party  to  the  Geneva 
Conventions of 1949 and its additional protocols and is an active player in enforcing the rule of 
law  in  the  theatre  of  military  operations  by  the  ICRC  as  enshrined  in  the  IHL  (International 
Humanitarian Law) in Anglophone and Francophone countries throughout the world. 

Therefore, it is of paramount importance to ensure proper capacity building at national 
level,  empowering  all  stakeholders  for  the  efficient  discharge  of  dedicated  roles  and 
responsibilities in the community of nations. It is fitting to note that many Mauritians Officers 
have undergone training with the support of trainers from ICRC periodically with officer from 
friendly countries in peace keeping and enforcement of the various code of practice as spelt out 
in  the  Geneva  Convention  in  conflict  prone  areas.  Under  the  aegis  of  the  United  Nations,  in 
Morocco, I was delegated by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister as the Chief Operation Officer for the 
referendum of Western Sahara, Darfur in Somalia, elections in Comoros, Kosovo, Sierra Leone, 
Haiti and Djibouti. Much goodwill has been gained in the community of nations in terms of our 
outstanding contribution in delivering the goods and this is thanks to the vision of the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister of making capacity building the priority in our security forces.  

55 

 
It  is  opportune  to  request  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  to  provide  avenues  for  such 
contributions, that more police officers benefit from operational capacity building in the national 
interest and here I have in mind hard enough targets in terms of risk and vulnerabilities, is the 
order of the day in the fast changing security environment of the region and certain parts of the 
world.  Strategically,  with  far  flung  territories,  with  a  vast  EEZ  (Exclusive  Economic  Zone), 
Mauritius as a SIDS (Small Island Developing States) must make sure it has the protection of the 
law and, in this spirit, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has to be commended for bringing the Bill to 
the National Assembly and this should comfort hon. Mrs Selvon. 

In the wake of climate change, the reality is the threat posed by anti-personnel and cluster 
munitions to the environment by exacerbating the vulnerability of countries like Mauritius with 
limited land mass bearing in mind the technological improvement in the means of delivery of 
anti-personnel cluster munitions and Mauritius enough immune to it. The US never thought of an 
attack on its twin towers, but it happened.  

Mauritius is not immune to what fundamentalists and terrorists are preaching and putting 
into practice, and the MV Benita scenario is there. Through enlightened legal framework like the 
amended Explosives Act in 1991, we have kept at bay the criminal use of explosives, so much so 
that the security experts have commended the Mauritian approach to protect life and property by 
stringent regulations. 

It  is  important  to  highlight  that  several  daring  initiatives  were  taken  by  prominent 
personalities like our Prime Minister, and one of them was Lady Diana, to clear minefields that 
traumatised and created a sinister atmosphere of lurking danger in different parts of the world. 
This is, Madam Speaker, what we are striving, with our limited means, to achieve. 

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Prime Minister! 

(Interruptions) 

(3.39 p.m.) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I wish to thank all the hon. Members who have 
contributed  to  this  debate.  It  seems  that  there  is  consensus  that  Mauritius,  a  Small  Island 
Developing State, with all the vulnerabilities that characterise the SIDS, has no other alternative 

 

56 

than to form part of the global movement for disarmament and the promotion of universal peace 
and  security.  This  legislation  will  cover  the  whole  territory  of  Mauritius,  including  Mauritian 
waters,  which  is  defined  as  the  territorial  sea,  internal  waters,  the  Archipelago,  the  historic 
waters, the EEZ of Mauritius and the water adjacent to the continental shelf. So far as assistance 
to victims is concerned, it has not been included in the Bill as this is too far-reaching. 

As the debates have proved that there is consensus, there is no dissent - I have a long 

speech for summing-up, I think I will end here and I say thank you to the House. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

(Interruptions) 

Question put and agreed to. 

Bill read a second time and committed. 

COMMITTEE STAGE 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

THE ANTI-PERSONNEL MINES AND CLUSTER MUNITIONS (PROHIBITION) BILL 

(NO. VIII OF 2016) 

Clause 1 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 2 (Interpretation) 

Motion made and question proposed: ‘that the clause stand part of the Bill’. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Chairperson, I move for the following amendment -  

“in clause 2, in the definition of “Cluster Munitions Convention”, to delete the words “set 
out in the Schedule”;” 
Mr Ganoo: Madam Chairperson, I would like to ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister just one 
question.  In the Schedule of the Bill, the Convention on Cluster Munitions has been attached, as 
we can see, which is a very good thing. I think it is the first time that we are doing that when we 
are domesticating a Convention. So, we are including the Convention as a Schedule to the Bill. 
Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, since the other Convention has also been included, why 
the first Convention, that is, the Anti-Personnel Mine Ban Convention, the 1997 Convention on 

 

57 

the prohibition of the use, which we domesticated in 2001 and which was referred to by hon. 
Gayan, has also not been annexed in the Bill? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I suppose it was not necessary to bring it in together. 

Mr Ganoo: In clause 11, the 2001 Bill is now being repealed by the Bill the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister is now introducing. So, this Bill is repealing the other Bill of 2001, which dealt 
with the 1997 Convention. This is why I am putting this question. It is a good thing that the new 
Convention  on  Cluster  Munitions  is  there,  but  I  was  just  willing  to  know  why  the  other 
Convention has also not been included and attached in the Schedule. 

The Prime Minister: The Schedule is being repealed. Frankly, we have not thought it 

necessary to bring it in here. 

Mr Ganoo: In clause 2, Interpretation, reference is made to this 1997 Convention - 

“Anti-Personnel Mine Ban Convention” means the 1997 Convention on the Prohibition 
of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on their 
Destruction;” 

So, reference is made to this 1997 Convention in the Interpretation section. This is the 

purpose of my question. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  I  understand  there  is  no  problem  as  regards  this  in  the 

Interpretation section. 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 2, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clauses 3 to 11 stand part of the Bill. 

Schedule 

Motion made and question proposed: ‘that the Schedule stand part of the Bill’. 

The Prime Minister: I move that the Schedule be deleted. 

Amendment agreed to. 

The title and enacting clause were agreed to. 

 

The Bill, as amended, was agreed to. 

 
On the Assembly resuming with Madam Speaker in the Chair, Madam Speaker reported 

58 

accordingly. 

 

Third Reading 

On  motion  made  and  seconded,  the  Anti-Personnel  Mines  and  Cluster  Munitions 

(Prohibition) Bill (No. VIII of 2016) was read the third time and passed. 

ADJOURNMENT 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that this Assembly do now adjourn 

to Tuesday 28 June 2016, at 11.30 a.m. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 

Collendavelloo) rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned.  

At  3.50  p.m.,  the  Assembly  was,  on  its  rising,  adjourned  to  Tuesday  28  June  2016,  at 

11.30 a.m. 

