No. 14 of 2016 

 

 

 

1 

 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD)  

(UNRE VISE D)  

 

FIRST  SESSION  

 

TUESDAY 28 JUNE  2016  

 

 

 

 

 

 

2 

 

CONTE NTS  

PAPERS LAID 

QUESTIONS (Oral) 

MOTION 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER 

BILLS (Public) 

ADJOURNMENT 

QUESTIONS (Written) 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

THE CABINET 

 

(Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

 

 

Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  

KCMG, QC  

Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 

Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 

Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External 

GCSK  

Communications 

Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon.  Ivan  Leslie  Collendavelloo,  GCSK, 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 

SC 

Utilities 

Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 

Minister of Finance and Economic Development 

Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 

 

International Trade 

 

Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha, GCSK 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan, SC 

Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 

Education and Scientific Research 

Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Minister 

of 

Social 

Integration 

and  Economic 

Hon.  Marie  Joseph  Noël  Etienne  Ghislain 

Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation  

Empowerment 

Sinatambou 

Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 

Attorney General 

Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  

Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 

Hon. Santaram Baboo    

Minister of Arts and Culture 

Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  

Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 

Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 

Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 

Perraud 

Family Welfare 

Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain, GCSK 

Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 

Institutional Reforms  

 

4 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 

Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 

Institutions 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources,  Fisheries, 

Shipping and Outer Islands 

 
Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 

 
Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms, 

Cheong, MSK 

Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 

Disaster and Beach Management 

Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 

Minister  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and 

Training 

 

 

 

 

 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

 

Madam Speaker 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Deputy Speaker 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Clerk Assistant 

Gopall, Mr Navin (Temporary Transfer to 

RRA) 

Hansard Editor 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 14 of 2016 

 

Sitting of 28 June 2016 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7 

PAPERS LAID 

 The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table – 

 

A.   

Prime Minister’s Office ‒ 

 

Certificate  of  Urgency  in  respect  of  the  Independent  Police  Complaints 

Commission Bill (No. XIV of 2016).  (In Original) 

B.    Ministry  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 

Scientific Research ‒ 

 

(a)   

(b)  

(c)   

(d)  

The Annual Reports 2013 and 2014 of the Tertiary Education Commission. 

The Annual Report 2014 of the University of Mauritius. 

The Annual Report 2011 of the Rajiv Gandhi Science Centre. 

The Annual Reports 2013 and 2014 of the Mauritius Institute of Education. 

C.    Ministry of Local Government ‒ 

The  City  Council  of  Port  Louis  (Admission  Charge)  Regulations  2016. 

(Government Notice No. 133 of 2016) 

 

D.    Ministry of Arts and Culture ‒ 

(a)   

(b)  

The  Annual  Reports  2011,  2012,  2013  and  2014  of  the  Urdu  Speaking 

Union. 

The Annual Report and Financial Statements of the English-Speaking Union 

for the year ending 31 December 2015. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

8 

E.    Ministry of Gender Equality, Child Development and Family Welfare ‒ 

 

The  Convention  on  the  Civil  Aspects  of  International  Child  Abduction 

(Amendment  of  Schedule)  Regulations  2016.  (Government  Notice  No.  134  of 

2016) 

 

 

 

 

 

9 

ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

BREXIT - MAURITIAN ECONOMY - ASSESSMENT 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger)  (by Private Notice) asked the Rt. 

hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 

National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Brexit and the risk of a deterioration in 

our relations with the United Kingdom and United States of America, he will state - 

(a) 

what  measures  are  now  being  taken  to  deal  with  the  impact  on  Mauritius  of 

Brexit, and  

(b) 

how  we  intend  to  handle  our  relationship  with  the  United  Kingdom,  with 

which we will now have to deal with in lieu of the European Union and with 

the United States of America on the eve of elections thereat. 

The  Prime  Minister:    Madam  Speaker,  in  reply  to  the  Private  Notice  Question  on 

14 June 2016, I stated that an exit of Britain from the EU will surely have consequences, not 

only  for  Mauritius  but  for  the  whole  world,  especially  those  countries  which  have  direct 

cooperation arrangements with the EU including the UK. 

I also stated that informal consultations have been held with the Private Sector on the 

possible fall-out of Brexit.  These discussions are still ongoing and this issue is on the agenda 

of the next Joint Public-Private Sector Committee which I chair. 

Madam Speaker, at the meeting of Cabinet held on Friday last, it was decided to set 

up  a  Ministerial  Committee  chaired  by  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 

Development to look into the whole Brexit issue. 

Immediately  after  the  referendum  results  were  announced,  the  hon.  Minister  of 

Finance and Economic Development called a meeting with representatives of the Public and 

the Private Sectors to assess the likely impact of the exit.  

During  the  meeting,  the  possible  consequences  of  Brexit  on  various  sectors  of  the 

Mauritian  economy  were  discussed  at  which  the  Technical  Committee  made  an  initial 

assessment of the sector-wise implications of Brexit. The Committee is expected to come up 

with proposals to deal with any negative impact of Brexit on the Mauritian economy. 

The  Technical  Committee  is  also  examining  the  five  principal  options  of  Economic 

Partnership which UK may choose as a model for negotiation during the two-year transition 

period. 

 

These five options are as follows - 

10 

 

 

 

 

 

First,  the  Norway  Model  which  would  imply  that  the  UK  will  join  the 

European Economic Area; 

Second,  the  Swiss  Model  where  the  UK  would  be  expected  to  negotiate  a 

bilateral agreement with the EU States; 

Third,  the  Turkey  Model  under  which  the  UK  may  negotiate  a  bilateral 

Customs Union with the EU; 

Fourth, the World Trade Organisation Model under which the UK would rely 

on the WTO rules for access, and 

The  fifth  option  would  be  for  the  UK  to  negotiate  a  special  deal  that  would 

retain free trade with the EU. 

Madam Speaker, however, I wish to highlight that the effective date of UK’s exit from 

the EU does not start until - 

(a) 

the UK notifies the EU of its intention to withdraw, and 

(b) 

a two-year period from such notification lapses. 

So  far,  the  UK  has  not  notified  the  EU  of  such  intention  and  that  the  UK’s  Prime 

Minister is reported to have stated that UK is in no rush to trigger the withdrawal process. 

Madam Speaker, so far no policymaker in the UK or the EU has given any indication 

as to which option is the preferred one among the five options I have referred to. 

Moreover, the outgoing UK Prime Minister has stated that no negotiations proper will 

start until his successor has been appointed.  

The Technical Committee will continue to monitor and assess the impact of Brexit on 

various sectors of our economy and the macroeconomic fundamentals. 

Madam  Speaker,  notwithstanding  the  scenario  that  will  govern  the  EU/UK  trade 

relations, Mauritius will need to have a bilateral trade agreement with the UK to safeguard its 

trade  interests.    In  the  event  UK  decides  to  maintain  the  EU  commitments  towards  the 

Member  States  which  have  signed  the  Interim  Economic  Partnership  Agreement,  namely 

Madagascar, Mauritius,  Seychelles,  Zimbabwe, there may not  be any need for  a fresh trade 

agreement.   

 

11 

In the eventuality that the UK would wish a change from the current Interim Economic 

Partnership Agreement model, Mauritius would have to enter into consultations with the UK 

over a new agreement safeguarding our trade interests. 

Madam  Speaker,  in  the  meantime,  we  will  continue  with  the  diversification  of  our 

export and export markets.  Our aim is to move further from being a Euro-centric exporter to 

a more diversified export and tourism-based economy. 

This  diversification  strategy  was  initiated  by  the  present  Minister  of  Finance  and 

Economic Development  in  2010 in  the wake of the Euro crisis  while he was occupying the 

same  portfolio.    At  that  point  in  time,  it  had  become  necessary  to  come  up  with  bold  and 

farsighted decisions. 

Madam Speaker, as I stated in the reply to the PNQ on 14 June last, my Government 

is  putting a lot of emphasis on the development  of an air  corridor between Africa and  Asia 

using  Mauritius  and  Singapore  as  hub.    This  strategy  will  broaden  our  market  base  and 

provide new exciting opportunities for trade and business. 

Madam Speaker, in regard to part (b) of the question, relations between countries are 

of  a  permanent  nature  regardless  of  elections.    Our  relations  with  the  UK  and  the  United 

States of America remain strong despite the communiqué issued by both sides on the Chagos 

Archipelago. 

Let me reiterate that we have always had friendly relations with both the UK and the 

US.    When  I  met  Mr  Patrick  F.  Kennedy,  Under  Secretary  for  Management  at  the  US 

Department  of  State,  and  Mr  Neil  Wigan,  Africa  Director  at  the  UK  Foreign  and 

Commonwealth Office, on 23 June 2016, I again underscored that Mauritius enjoys excellent 

relations with both the UK and the US.  I stressed that the Chagos Archipelago should not be 

used as a trade-off for cooperation between Mauritius and the UK and the US for assistance 

from the UK and the US to Mauritius. 

I also mentioned that the intention of Mauritius to seek an Advisory Opinion from the 

International  Court  of  Justice  should  not  be  viewed  as  an  unfriendly  act  since  Mauritius  is 

fighting for a legitimate cause. 

I  further  made  it  clear  to  Mr  Kennedy  and  Mr  Wigan  that  Mauritius  considered  the 

threat  from  the  UK  and  the  US  that  the  request  for  an  Advisory  Opinion  from  the 

International  Court  of  Justice  would  cause  lasting  damage  to  the  bilateral  relations  of 

 

12 

Mauritius with both the UK and the US to be hostile and totally unacceptable and in breach 

of their obligations under international law. 

Since  Independence,  the  conduct  of  our  foreign  relations  with  the  United  Kingdom 

has  always  been  on  a  country-to-country  basis,  namely  at  bilateral  level  and  not  simply 

through the European Union. 

Our relations with the UK will not, therefore, be in lieu of our relations with the EU.  

In  fact,  we  intend  to  consolidate  our  relations  both  with  the  UK  and  the  EU.    Our  trade 

relations with the EU will still be governed by the Interim Economic Partnership Agreement 

with  the  Eastern  and  Southern  African  countries  (ESA).    However,  since  the  UK  will  no 

longer  be  part  of  the  EU,  but  may  have  a  different  relationship,  we  will  need  to  have  a 

separate trade agreement with the UK as I have already indicated. 

Similarly,  Madam  Speaker,  we  have  always  shared  very  good  relations  with  the 

United  States  which  is  this  year  celebrating  its  240th  Independence  Day.    I  intend  to  be 

present  at  the  US  Embassy  Celebrations  this  week.    I  have  also  written  to  the  President 

Obama to congratulate him on this occasion. 

Our  trade  with  the  United  States  is  principally  governed  by  the  Africa  Growth  and 

Opportunity Act (AGOA). 

I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  I  have  asked  for  a  meeting  with  both  the  Prime 

Minister  of  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  President  of  the  USA  as  I  firmly  believe  that  it  is 

only through a frank and constructive dialogue that we may find meaningful solutions.  In the 

meantime,  our  High  Commission  in  the  United  Kingdom,  our  Embassy  in  Washington  and 

the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade will continue to 

work  towards  the  consolidation  of  our  relationship  with  these  two  countries,  whether  at 

economic, cultural or political levels. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Mr Bérenger: I thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for the answer. If I can start with 

Brexit,  Madam.  From  what  I’ve  heard,  we  now,  therefore,  will  have  three  different 

institutions, different bodies where the whole Brexit issue will be discussed. One in the Joint 

Public-Private Sector Steering Committee chaired by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister; secondly, a 

Ministerial Committee chaired by the Finance Minister and we had, last Friday, this meeting, 

which  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  referred  to  with  the  private  sector,  chaired  again  by  the 

Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development.  Can  I  know  from  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 

 

13 

Minister when the next joint meeting that he chairs is meeting and whether the Minutes will 

be made available to the House? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  the  meeting  has  not  yet  been  fixed,  but  it  will  be  very 

soon. Insofar as the Minutes are concerned, well, I have no difficulty in having it deposited in 

the House. 

Mr  Bérenger:  Thank  you.  As  far  as  the  Ministerial  Committeee  chaired  by  the 

Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  is  concerned,  I  read  that  the  terms  of 

reference are to look into and make recommendations on the repercussion of the exit of the 

United Kingdom from the European Union. Can we know the composition of that Ministerial 

Committee,  the  members  thereof,  and  whether  those  recommendations  also  will  be  made 

public? 

The Prime Minister: We appointed it, but I can’t remember all the names. Well, we 

will circulate the list. But, insofar as the recommendations are concerned, it all depends, there 

may be matters which we can’t make public  at  this juncture and, therefore,  I  can’t  give the 

assurance that this will be communicated. 

Mr  Bérenger:  Madam  Speaker,  I  listened  to  the  hon.  Minister  of  Finance  and 

Economic Development presently, his very cool attitude as if we had plenty of time and even 

the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, today, gave the impression: ‘Okay, the UK Prime Minister said 

this  and  this  is  the  rule!’  Apparently,  no!  Is  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  aware  that  only 

yesterday  the  President  of  France,  the  Head  of  Germany,  the  Chancellor  and  the  Prime 

Minister  of  Italy  put  the  pressure  and  all  the  Leaders  of  the  European  Union  have  been 

putting the pressure that there is no question of informal discussions before notification under 

Section 50, is formally given, and that all of them have requested that, that issue, that is, the 

pulling out - there are two different things, pulling out and then negotiating a new deal with 

the  European  Union,  but  the  pulling  out,  they  have  all  said  that  nothing  will  start  until 

formally they are informed by the UK. Therefore, will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree with 

me that we must not continue with this attitude. There is urgency because, right now, if UK 

refuses to go that way, things can become very difficult between the European Union and the 

UK. So, there is urgency. Will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree with me? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  I  can’t  totally  agree  with  the  hon.  Leader  of  the 

Opposition.  On  the  side  of  the  European  Union,  they  may  bring  pressure,  but  the  Prime 

 

14 

Minister  of  UK  has  made  it  very  clear  that  they  are  not  in  a  rush  and  any  discussions  will 

only start after notification that they are withdrawing. So, I don’t see this urgency. 

Well, the Leader of the Opposition is trying to let us believe that he is the only one to care… 

(Interruptions) 

for Mauritius… 

 (Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! Order! 

Order, please! 

Order! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister: We are a serious Government and... 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan, please! 

The Prime Minister: We will take our responsibilities. 

Mr Bérenger:  You should do some penmanship as well! 

Okay! You finished! 

The Prime Minister: Yes. 

Mr Bérenger: Take your time!  I am sure Madam Speaker will give us time!  As the 

Rt. hon. Prime Minister has just said, we will now have to deal with both the UK, which is 

going out of the European Union, and the European Union without the UK, plus a new UK 

Prime Minister derrière la porte and most probably general elections in the UK, plus, as far 

as France and Germany are concerned, elections fixed for next year.  Can I ask the Rt. hon. 

Prime  Minister  whether  our  missions,  not  only  in  London  and  Paris,  but  also  in  Germany, 

will be put to full use - because we are in a complicated situation - not only to deal with the 

political parties in Government, but also with the Opposition parties preparing for the future, 

including  Germany?    In  the  case  of  Germany,  two  allies  will  be  fighting  each  other  in  the 

 

15 

election  next  year,  that  is,  the  SPD  and  Mrs  Merkel’s  party.    Therefore,  will  the  Prime 

Minister  agree  with  me  that  our  three  missions,  including  Germany,  which  we  stand  to 

underestimate and which is  now going to  take all  its importance, will have to  be put to  full 

use? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  we  will  do  everything  that  is  necessary.    They  will 

closely follow up with all parties which we consider will be necessary. 

Mr  Bérenger:  If  I  can  have  one  last  question  on  the  Brexit  issue.    In  the  past, 

Mauritius  used  to  play  a  role  of  avant-garde  in  the  ACP  group  in  Brussels.    Can  I  know 

whether  Government  has discussed what  initiatives, we, Mauritius, should  take in  Brussels, 

being given the situation we are in, motivating the ACP group and playing that role of avant-

garde which we played in the past? 

The Prime Minister: Well, we will certainly do that.  But, of course, everything will 

be done step by step when the time is opportune.  I  do not  think we should  rush.    It  is  true 

there has been a referendum in UK, but UK is not yet out of the European Union. 

Mr Bérenger: If I can move on the Chagos issue and our relations with the UK and 

US.  I listened correctly, of course, to what the Rt. hon. Prime Minister had to say, but on 17 

May,  replying  to  my  PNQ,  he  insisted  that  his  intention  is  to  bring  a  Resolution  before  the 

General  Assembly  this  year  –  he  insisted.    That  is  in  a  few  weeks’  time,  in  September.  

Therefore, being given that we are two days away from the deadline which the Rt. hon. Prime 

Minister  has  himself  set  for  the  US  and  the  UK  to  give  us  certain  guarantees,  can  I  know 

whether the procédures have been enclenchées at the United Nations, and whether we are in 

contact  with  the  new  General  Assembly  President  from  Fidji  who  will  be  chairing  as  from 

September?  Can  I  also  know  whether  we  have  started  the  lobbying  of  all  our  friendly 

countries,  if  we  are  going  to  have  a  Resolution  in  a  few  weeks’  time,  or  is  Government 

prepared to  consider  going back to  the 2001 initiative that we developed  when the Rt.  hon. 

Prime Minister was Prime Minister and I was Deputy Prime Minister and which he and I, as 

Prime Minister, discussed right up to the level of the White House with President Bush? 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  I  would  like  to  know  what  was  the  outcome  of  the 

discussion.  We were nowhere insofar as Chagos is concerned.  From my discussions with the 

representatives  of  the  British  Government  lately,  it  is  very  clear  that  the  Britishers  have  no 

intention  of  giving  back  Chagos.    Therefore,  we  have  to  take  all  measures.    We  have  to 

struggle  and  fight  hard  insofar  as  Chagos  is  concerned  because  we  are  fighting  for  a 

 

16 

legitimate cause, and this should not affect our relationship with the US and the UK.  That is 

my  opinion.    We  are  not  going  to  bow  down  before  these  people  who  pretend  to  support 

justice, human rights, rule of law, but are behaving in the most dictatorial way, giving me the 

impression that their philosophy is: “might is right.”  Therefore, I am not going to capitulate 

myself.  We are going forward.  Our representative in the United States is doing the needful, 

and we are not going to bow down. 

Mr  Bérenger:  We  are  -  I  am  sure  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  is  already  aware  - 

already dans l’ère post Cameron and post Obama.  Mr Cameron is on his way out in a few 

weeks’ time; for Mr Obama, there will be new elections next year.  When the Rt. hon. Prime 

Minister replied to my PNQ of 17 May, he said that he had written to Mr Obama on 14 April 

2015.  Can I know whether this letter has been replied to  and whether, in  this case also,  he 

will agree with me that our missions in Washington and in London will have to be put to full 

use on this issue of Chagos? 

The Prime Minister: There has been no reply. Certainly, we are going to make full 

use by all our representatives, with all efforts that will be possible. 

Mr Bérenger: It is very disturbing to hear that.  The Rt. hon. Prime Minister rightly 

said in his communiqué of last Friday afternoon that the comments by UK and US are hostile 

and totally unacceptable. We, on the MMM side, have agreed with that totally.  Being given 

the tone adopted in that communiqué by the US and the UK, can I know, in the case of the 

US,  whether  there  has  been  any  hint  of  a  threat  that  US  might  use  the  African  Growth  and 

Opportunity Act (AGOA) to get what they want at this stage? 

The Prime Minister: No, they have not given any details. The threat has been made 

public, and it is just this threat and nothing more. 

Mr Bérenger: My last question before the final, final one on the Chagos.  I am sure 

the Rt. hon. Prime Minister must be aware that tomorrow the new Supreme Court of the UK - 

because there is no longer the House of Lords, Law Lords -  will be ruling on the 2008 ruling 

that was three to two - the Rt. hon. Prime Minister will remember - and which was in favour 

of Government; three against two.  Can I know whether our mission has kept watching brief 

and  reported  to  headquarters  here,  and  have  we  prepared  ourselves  to  react,  whatever  the 

ruling? 

 

17 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  naturally,  our  representative  has  been  following.  I  have 

been told that it is very likely that Chagossians are going to lose this case.  But, then, we have 

to wait for the verdict, and it is only then that we can think of what stand we must take. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah! 

Mr  Rutnah:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  Is  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  agreeable 

with  me  that,  further  to  the  referendum  in  relation  to  Brexit,  the  House  of  Commons  will, 

firstly, have to  either repeal  or  amend the European Economic Communities Act  1972  and, 

thereafter, activate Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty 2009, in order to start exit, and according 

to many Constitutional and European Union Law experts, like Professor Micheal Dougan, it 

might take at least 10 years to realise that ... 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah, can you be very brief, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Rutnah: ...and that we will have enough and ample time to negotiate, renegotiate 

and negotiate further our position with the EU, with the British and with  all other countries 

that are affected with this issue?  

The Prime Minister: Well, I have not looked upon the laws and all that is being said, 

but if the hon. Member is correct, then, of course, there will be plenty of time and I hope that 

it is so. But I must say, from what I am reading, in UK, very enlightened lawyers with great 

experience  have  stated  that  in  their  law  there  is  no  Referendum  and  that  whatever  decision 

had been taken under the Referendum, it’s not binding and that it will have to be approved or 

rejected  by  the  House  of  Commons  in  UK  and  it  is  only  then  that  the  decision  will  be 

binding; we know also that several million of English people have made a petition for a new 

Referendum and, apparently, from the laws in force in UK, being given what proportion has 

made  this  application  of  a  new  Referendum,  then  the  Government  is  bound  to  have  a  new 

Referendum. 

Mr  Mohamed:  I  am  happy  to  note  that  the  Rt.  hon.  Minister  is  getting  his 

information  on  Facebook  regularly.  With  regard  to  the  European  Parliament  and  the  Brexit 

issue, European Parliament is meeting on next Tuesday in an emergency session to debate the 

fallout from Brexit and there will be a special Motion urging immediate activation of Article 

50, and what we have heard, Prime Minister Cameron will also next Tuesday be briefing the 

European leaders with regard to the after-Referendum. 

 

18 

(Interruptions) 

Tuesday, today! So, in the light of this and that the hon. Prime Minister of Great Britain has 

decided to leave it to the next Prime Minister to activate Article 50 and Article 50, therefore, 

could  be  activated  anytime  as  from  the  month  of  October  of  this  year,  doesn’t  the  Rt.  hon. 

Prime  Minister  consider  that  it  is  necessary,  therefore,  to  call  for  a  special  meeting  of  the 

ACP  countries  not  simply  to  meet  in  Windhoek,  as  the  hon.  Minister  of  Agro-Industry  and 

Food Security most probably would have met, as said two weeks ago by the Rt. hon. Prime 

Minister or by any other Minister, but the Heads of State of ACP countries... 

Madam Speaker: Be brief, please! 

Mr Mohamed: ....to meet in order to discuss the urgency facing the new agreements 

that have to be negotiated, possibly as from the month of October and maybe, if the scenario 

is  very  favourable  to  Mauritius  in  10  years’  time,  but  the  possibility  is  that  the  emergency 

situation is as from October? 

Madam Speaker: Please, be brief, hon. Shakeel Mohamed! Others also  want to ask 

questions. 

The Prime Minister: Well, we will certainly consider that and if we have to meet, we 

will be meeting. 

Madam Speaker: The last question is for the hon. Leader of the Opposition. 

Mr Bérenger: Thank  you, Madam Speaker. I am not playing politics, but I will ask 

the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  at  a  time  when  the  country  is  facing  two  huge  challenges,  the 

fallouts from Brexit and, secondly, the risk - I use the word ‘risk’ - of a deterioration in our 

relations with the UK and US at such a crucial moment, does not the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 

agree with me that the Foreign Minister of Mauritius must be very much more present, heard 

than lately? 

The Prime Minister: Well, the Foreign Minister will certainly do what is necessary. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! Hon. Baloomoody! We can’t hear what the Rt. hon. Prime 

Minister is saying. 

The Prime Minister: I think he knows what are his responsibilities. 

Madam Speaker: Time is over! Hon. Uteem! 

 

19 

Deb. No.14 of 28.06.16 

PREVENTION OF CORRUPTION ACT – CONFLICT OF INTEREST - 

OFFENCES 

(No.  B/606)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 

Central) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for 

Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit  whether,  in  regard  to  the  offence  of  conflict  of 

interests under section 13(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, he will, for the benefit of 

the  House,  obtain  from  the  Independent  Commission  against  Corruption,  information  as  to 

the number of – 

(a) 

cases  relating  thereto  which  are  currently  being  investigated  by  the 

Commission; 

(b) 

cases that have been lodged before the courts, and  

(c)  

convictions secured to date. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  Independent 

Commission against Corruption that there are … 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

The Prime Minister: …20 cases relating to conflict of interest under section 13(2) of 

the Prevention of Corruption Act which are currently being investigated by the Commission. 

 

In regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed that, from 2007 to date, 20 cases 

relating to conflict of interest have been lodged before the Courts. 

 

Regarding  part  (c)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  eight  convictions  have  been 

secured to date for offences related to conflict of interest. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  Following  the  Supreme  Court  decision  in 

the Appeal by hon. Jugnauth against the ICAC, is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister aware whether 

any  investigation  by  ICAC  has  been  discontinued  in  the  light  of  the  ruling  given  in  that 

decision? 

 

20 

The Prime Minister: Well, I suppose the people in charge there at ICAC know what 

they are doing. I don’t dictate them. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Thank you. In the light of the interpretation given by the Supreme Court 

to  section  13  (3)  of  the  Prevention  of  Corruption  Act,  it  would  be  very  difficult  under 

definition of personal interest. Is the Government intending to come forth with amendments 

to make it easier to convict someone for conflict of interest, for example, replacing ‘personal 

interest’ by ‘direct’ or ‘indirect’ interest? 

The Prime Minister: There is an Appeal to the Privy Council. We will have to wait 

for the decision and then, if necessary, we will certainly amend the legislation. 

Madam Speaker: Next question! Hon. Bhagwan! 

HORSE RACING – MESSRS PAUL SCOTNEY & BEN GUNN REPORT 

(No.  B/607)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 

asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 

Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Report of Messrs Peter 

Scotney and Ben Gunn on Horse Racing in Mauritius, he will state when same was handed 

over to his good self, indicating –  

(a) 

if copy thereof will be tabled; 

(b) 

the amount of fees paid to Messrs Peter Scotney and Ben Gunn therefore, and  

(c) 

the  main  recommendations  thereof  regarding  the  setting  up  of  a  Mauritius 

Horseracing Turf Authority, indicating if a draft of the Mauritius Horseracing 

Turf  Authority  Bill  was  included  therein  and,  if  so,  indicate  when  it  will  be 

introduced in the House. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  with  your  permission,  I  shall  reply  to 

Parliamentary Question Nos. B/607 and B/611 together. 

Madam Speaker, I do not know and have not heard about any Mr Peter Scotney.  

Who is that Peter Scotney? 

As  the  House  is  aware,  the  services  of  Messrs  Paul  Scotney  and  Benn  Gunn  were 

enlisted as Consultants by my Office to assist in the implementation of the recommendations 

 

21 

of  the  ‘Report  of  the  Commission  of  Inquiry  on  Horse  Racing  in  Mauritius’,  known  as  the 

Parry Report. 

The  two  Consultants  started  their  assignment  on  25 January  2016  and  on  Friday,  03 

June  2016,  at  around  10.30  a.m.,  Mr  Benn  Gunn  submitted  the  co-signed  Report  to  the 

Chairperson of the Strategic Management Group, as myself and the Secretary to Cabinet and 

Head of the Civil Service were both taken up in the Cabinet Meeting of the day. 

The  Report  was  accompanied  by  a  covering  letter  (in  a  separate  sealed  envelope) 

addressed to me.  Both the letter and the Report were handed over to me, on the same day, at 

the first available opportunity which was around 14.00 hours. 

In  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  the  Report 

submitted by the Consultants is a working document, executed at the request of my Office, to 

facilitate  and  assist  in  the  implementation  of  the  recommendations  of  the  ‘Report  of  the 

Commission of Inquiry on Horse Racing in Mauritius’.  As it contains a number of sensitive 

information  with  regard  to  structuring  intelligence  gathering  and  strategic  directions  on 

fighting illegal betting, I do not deem it fit to render it public. 

As  regards  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  am  advised  that  the  Consultants  have,  each, 

charged a fee of £ 750 per day, as consultancy fee for five days a week.  As at today, a sum of 

around Rs32 m. (£ 62,175) has been paid to Mr Paul Scotney and a sum of around Rs32 m. 

(£ 61,387.50) to Mr Benn Gunn.  A sum of £ 24,150 remains to be paid to Mr Paul Scotney 

and a sum of £ 25,012.50 to Mr Benn Gunn.  

With regard to part (c) of Parliamentary Question B/607, the Consultants advocate the 

creation of an independent Mauritius Horse Racing Authority, outside the ambit and purview 

of  the  Gambling  Regulatory  Authority,  accountable  to  a  separate  independent  Governing 

Board,  which  should  consist  of,  inter  alia,  a  non-executive  Independent  Chairman,  from 

abroad, a Chief Executive Officer enlisted from abroad and two other nominees, from abroad.  

They  have,  further,  recommended  that  the  employees  of  the  Mauritius  Turf  Club  be 

transferred directly to the proposed Mauritius Horse Racing Authority. In addition, they are 

also  of  the  view  that  some  8  to  10  foreign  resource  persons  be  recruited  by  the  proposed 

Mauritius Horse Racing Authority.  No draft Bill has been included in the Report.  

As  I have stated before,  the Report is  a working  document to  facilitate and assist  in 

the implementation of the recommendations of the ‘Report of the Commission of Inquiry on 

 

22 

Horse Racing in Mauritius’. “The recommendations,” per se, are only functional guidance as 

to the ways and means through which the Parry Report can be best implemented.  

I wish to inform the House that a Committee composing of officers of my Office, the 

Gambling  Regulatory  Authority  and  the  State  Law  Office  has  been  set  up  to  look  into  the 

Report and map out the practical and feasible course of action in the best interest of the horse 

racing industry. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  can  assure  the  House  that,  upon  assessment  of  the  Report, 

everything will be done to ensure the integrity of horseracing in Mauritius in the best possible 

way. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: Since it is public knowledge that things are getting worse with regard 

to  illegal  betting  and  cheating  at  the  level  of  the  Mauritius  Turf  Club  and  the  horseracing 

business, will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister at least make sure that this Committee which has 

been  set  up  works  rapidly  and  at  least  legislation  be  brought  as  rapidly  as  possible  for  the 

setting  up  of  this  Horse  Racing  Authority  in  the  interest  of  all  the  population,  turfistes  at 

large? 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I must correct, I made a mistake when I said 

Rs32 m.; it is Rs3.2 m. I am sorry.  

Now,  insofar  as  the  question  of  the  hon.  Member  is  concerned,  first  of  all,  I  don’t 

agree with many things that have been recommended by the Consultants. I do not agree that 

we have all strangers here; I believe that there are competent Mauritians who can do the job. 

Therefore, we will have to work and come to a conclusion as to what we want in order that 

there  is  no  repetition  of  what  the  hon.  Member  has  just  said.  We  want  to  make  sure  that 

horseracing  in  Mauritius  is  something  that  is  serious,  there  will  be  no  cheating,  no  illegal 

betting, we must get rid of all that, and there must, therefore, be an independent body to look 

after all this. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: So, pending the implementation of the decisions mentioned by the Rt. 

hon.  Prime  Minister,  we  are  witnessing  the  state  of  affairs  with  regard  to  illegal  betting, 

cheating and so on, can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister at least inform the House whether he will 

give  directives  to  the  GRA  -  as  it  is,  the  GRA  is  a  bulldog  sans  dent,  it  is  known  by 

 

23 

everybody - and even the Commissioner of Police that the  Police des Jeux and the GRA be 

more effective as far as sanctions are concerned? 

The Prime Minister: Well, the Commissioner of Police is doing his job. I don’t think 

that I will have to give him instructions as to what he should do there. 

Insofar as the second part of the question is concerned, the GRA has been acting and 

monitoring  the  situation  closely  and,  obviously,  as  things  are,  we  won’t  be  able  to  achieve 

what we want. That is why we are working to have a special independent body that can really 

be effective and take actions that are necessary. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Osman Mahomed! 

Mr  Mahomed:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  No  doubt  we  have  local  competencies 

that will be up to the level of the job required but does not the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree 

to  the  proposition  that  has  been  made  in  the  Report  to  the  effect  that  at  the  Head  of  the 

proposed authority should be foreigners for the sake of independence so that we can curb the 

present malaise that is hovering over the domain at the moment? 

 The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, these foreign consultants and foreign people 

cost a lot to this country and I have come to the conclusion that most of the time they have 

been useless, and I don’t see why we can’t have independent persons in Mauritius… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please, don’t interrupt! 

(Interruptions) 

Order, please! Don’t interrupt!  We won’t be able to hear what the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is 

saying. 

The Prime Minister: In our Courts of law, we have independent… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: You should not start interrupting! 

(Interruptions) 

No comments! Hon. Rutnah, no comments, please! No comments! 

(Interruptions) 

 

24 

The  Prime  Minister:  As  I  was  saying,  in  our  Courts  of  law,  we  have  independent 

people; in other bodies, we have independent people who are Mauritians, why can’t we have 

Mauritians? 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: The hon. Member has got a last question. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  I  totally  agree  with  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  that  we  have  honest 

Mauritians. 

(Interruptions) 

But we have also dishonest Mauritians.  

(Interruptions) 

Can I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister - and I will ask him to enquire, last time I raised 

the  issue  here  -  that  there  is  connivance  between  high  civil  service  officials,  people  at  the 

MTC, the Police des Jeux and the GRA with regard to illegal betting and the sort of mafia, 

because people are owners of horses. I can send to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister the names of 

senior civil servants where their families are owners of horses and they deal themselves with 

the permits. 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Bhagwan,  well,  you  take  entire  responsibility  for  what  you 

have said. 

Okay. 

(Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister: But we will have to set right all this. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  Yes,  the  hon.  Member  has  asked  his  question,  allow  the  Rt.  hon. 

Prime Minister to reply. 

The Prime Minister: Okay, I will ask them to inquire and report to me. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Bhagwan! 

GAMBLING REGULATORY AUTHORITY - JOCKEY T. – ALLEGED CASE OF 

CHEATING 

 

25 

(No.  B/608)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 

asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 

Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Jockey T., he will – 

(a) 

for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Gambling Regulatory Authority 

or the Police des Jeux, information as to if the Mauritius Turf Club has 

reported thereto that he has allegedly committed cheating during the race 

meeting of 16 April 2016 and, if so, indicate the actions taken in relation 

thereto and, if not, will the GRA or the Police des Jeux inquire from the MTC 

why it has not reported the said case, and  

(b) 

state if he will consider ordering an inquiry to find out whether there has been 

any act of connivance in relation thereto. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  as  regards  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I  am 

advised, both by the Gambling Regulatory Authority and the  Police, that the Mauritius Turf 

Club  did  not  inform  and  has  not  informed,  until  date,  any  of  these  two  institutions  of  any 

alleged case of cheating committed by Jockey T. during the race meeting on 16 April 2016. 

It  is  only  on  receipt  of  the  Racing  Stewards’  Report,  on  21  April  2016, for  the  race 

meeting of 16 April 2016, that the Gambling Regulatory Authority became aware that Jockey 

T. was sanctioned for his ride, in the 7th race, in the race meeting on 16 April 2016, as a result 

of which a 6-week suspension was imposed on him. Thus, he would not be allowed to ride in 

race meetings from 04 June 2016 to 09 July 2016, both days inclusive. 

Consequently,  the  Gambling  Regulatory  Authority  sought  an  explanation  from  the 

Mauritius Turf Club, as to whether there was any suspicion of cheating, to which the General 

Manager of the MTC averred that there was not enough material or ground to prompt a Police 

enquiry and eventually sustain a legal case before a Court of Law. 

In view of the averments of the Mauritius Turf Club, an inquiry into the matter would 

lead  to  nowhere.    However,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  the  Gambling  Regulatory 

Authority is in the process of setting up an Integrity Unit which would be provided with the 

necessary  expert  resources  and  logistics  to  be  able  to  probe  further  into  such  matters  and 

eventually initiate Police enquiry and subsequent legal action. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Bhagwan! 

 

26 

Mr Bhagwan:  Madam Speaker, since it is not the first time that this Jockey has been 

involved in illegal matters.  We have 2008, 2013 and even in 2015, and also the rule makes it 

clear that –  

“No  jockey  who  has  been  suspended  for  more  than  12  weeks  either 

consecutively  or  cumulatively  during  the  same  season  shall  be  authorised  to 

ride for the remaining part of the season and next season.”  

Can I make a request to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, at least, to direct the GRA to see to it 

that  there  is  no  pressure  from  the  MTC  or  any  other  body  that  rules  be  changed  pending 

Police enquiry if need be? 

The Prime Minister:  I will certainly do that. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem:  Thank  you, Madam Speaker.  I heard with a lot of concern that the Rt. 

hon. Prime Minister said that the Police went to the MTC and, acting on what the MTC told 

the Police, they came to the conclusion that no enquiry needs to be made.  I think cheating is 

an offence and, the very least, the Police should have interviewed each Commissioner or the 

Stewards, all those involved and not just relied on the MTC. So, may I ask the Rt. hon. Prime 

Minister  to  ask  the  Commissioner  of  Police  to  look  into  the  matter  to  see  whether  all  the 

procedures have been taken and if he is satisfied with the way the Police have conducted their 

enquiry thereto? 

The  Prime  Minister:    Well,  I  will  ask  the  Commissioner  of  Police  to  look  into  it 

again. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, Hon. Bhagwan! 

MAURITIUS TURF CLUB - JOCKEY C – BREACH OF MTC RULE 

(No.  B/609)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 

asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 

Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to Jockey C., he will – 

(a) 

for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Gambling Regulatory Authority 

(GRA), information as to if the Mauritius Turf Club (MTC) has reported 

thereto that the Steward found him guilty of breach of MTC Rule 160(A) in 

Race 8 of the 9th Meeting of Saturday 21 May 2016 and, if so, indicate if-  

(i) 

he was suspended and, if so, give details thereof  

 

27 

(ii) 

the case was referred to the Police des Jeux and thereto for further 

inquiries and  

(iii) 

the MTC had informed the GRA of the departure thereof on Friday 27 

May 2016, and  

(b) 

state if he will consider ordering an inquiry to find out whether there has been 

any act of connivance to allow the jockey leave the country. 

The  Prime  Minister:    Madam  Speaker,  as  regards  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I  am 

advised by the Gambling Regulatory Authority, that the Mauritius Turf Club did not notify, 

forthwith,  as  per  the  Directive  issued  on  16  October  2015,  the  Authority  that  the  Racing 

Stewards found Jockey C. guilty of breach of MTC Rule 160(A) in Race 8 of the 9th Meeting 

of Saturday 21 May 2016.  

The  information  was  obtained  by  the  Gambling  Regulatory  Authority  through  the 

Racing Stewards’ Report which reached the Authority on 25 May 2016.   

In respect of part (a) (i) of the question, I am informed that Jockey C. was suspended 

for 12 weeks (3 months) and fined Rs100,000, on 24 May 2016, for having breached Section 

160 A (a) of the Rules of Racing of the Mauritius Turf Club. 

With regard to part (a) (ii) of the question, the Commissioner of Police has informed 

that no declaration or complaint has been made against Jockey C., to date, by the Mauritius 

Turf Club. 

Concerning part (a) (iii) of the question, I am advised that the Mauritius Turf Club did 

not  inform  the  Gambling  Regulatory  Authority  of  the  departure  of  Jockey  C.  on  Friday,  27 

May 2016.  

With regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed that the Gambling Regulatory 

Authority took the initiative to carry out an inquiry into the matter.  

On 07 June 2016, the Mauritius Turf Club was convened at the Gambling Regulatory 

Authority to show cause, to the Board, as to why it did not comply with Directive 4, issued 

on  16  October  2016,  by  the  Gambling  Regulatory  Authority,  under  Section  100  of  the 

Gambling Regulatory Authority Act 2007. Directive No 4 reads, I quote - 

 

 

28 

“Where  the  Mauritius  Turf  Club  has  decided  to  apply  sanctions  against  a 

jockey,  it  shall,  forthwith,  notify  the  Gambling  Regulatory  Authority,  the 

Mauritius Revenue Authority and the Passport and Immigration Office.” 

According  to  the  Mauritius  Turf  Club,  the  Stewards’  Report,  dispatched  to  the  Gambling 

Regulatory  Authority,  on  25  May  2016,  was  self-explanatory  and  they  did  not  deem  it 

necessary or compulsory to address a formal letter to the Authority. 

Following  the  hearing,  the  Board  of  the  Gambling  Regulatory  Authority  took  the 

decision that henceforth, the Mauritius Turf Club should notify the Authority by  way  of  an 

official  and  duly  signed  letter  immediately  after  it  takes  the  decision  to  apply  a  sanction  to 

any Jockey. A letter was accordingly issued thereon, on 10 June 2016, to the Mauritius Turf 

Club, through special despatch. 

Madam Speaker, my Office has inquired on whether there has been any connivance to 

allow  Jockey  C.  to  leave  the  country.  I  am  informed  that  the  Mauritius  Turf    Club,  upon 

query by the Police des Jeux, provided its no objection to the Jockey leaving the country.  On 

that  basis,  the  Police  des  Jeux  provided  their  no  objection  as  well  to  the  Passport  and 

Immigration Office. The Mauritius Revenue Authority also issued a no objection letter after 

the Jockey paid his tax dues. 

Therefore,  it  has  been  ascertained  that  all  the  clearances  had  been  obtained  by  the 

Jockey to leave the country.  No connivance could be established. 

However,  the  Gambling  Regulatory  Authority  has  initiated  action  to  plug  the 

loopholes at the level of its Directives and other regulations to ensure stricter compliance and 

closer collaboration among institutions to prevent recurrence of such happenings. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: It is clear that there has been – if I can use the word – conspiracy; les 

mains  invisibles  qui  ont  aidé  Jockey  C.  à  quitter  l’île  Maurice.      Can  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 

Minister, at least, ask the relevant authorities, the Police and Central CID to enquire whether 

there  has  been  a  transfer  of  Rs15  m.  on  the  name  of  that  Jockey  C.  on  the  same  day  to 

Singapore, when he left Mauritius? 

 

29 

The  Prime  Minister:    Whether  he  has  transferred  Rs15  m.  to  Singapore,  well  the 

Police  can  enquire  about  that.  But  where  does  the  Rs15  m.  come  from?    I  wonder  whether 

there will be any evidence forthcoming.  We will try to do it. 

Madam Speaker:  Yes, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Bhagwan:    One  last  question,  Madam  Speaker.    The  GRA  itself  has  found  out 

that there are loopholes. Can I ask again the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he will discuss 

with the Commissioner of Police that the Police des Jeux be beefed up? From what we know, 

they  don’t  have  sufficient  qualified  staff;  even  the  consultant  has  recommended  same.  

Pending  the  report,  the  GRA  and  Police  des  Jeux  should  be  beefed  up  so  as  there  is  no 

repetition of such things which have happened concerning Jockey C? 

The Prime Minister:  Certainly the GRA is looking after that. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, from the answer of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, it would 

appear  that  according  to  the  GRA,  at  least,  there  is  potentially  an  offence  that  has  been 

committed  in  Mauritius  -  the  only  circumstances.  May  I  ask  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  to 

see  with  the  hon.  Attorney  General  whether  he  can  trigger  assistance  under  the  Mutual 

Assistance in Criminal Matters to track where Mr C is and get the cooperation of the foreign 

authorities to bring him to justice? 

The Prime Minister: Okay, I’ll ask the Attorney General to do the needful. 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  the  numerous  reported  cases  of 

cheating  during  horseracing  for  the  past  years,  would  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  consider 

toughening  the  law  and  sentencing  to  jail  all  jockeys  who  are  involved  in  cheating  in  this 

country? 

The Prime Minister: Well… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Prime Minister! 

The  Prime  Minister:  We  will  have  to  legislate,  but  we  will  see  whether  it  is 

reasonable to legislate. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Rughoobur! 

MBC – TELEVISION LICENCE FEES 

 

30 

(No. B/610) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or) 

asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 

Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Mauritius Broadcasting 

Corporation, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to the – 

(a) 

net revenue collected in terms of television licence fees since November 2015 

to date, and 

(b) 

expected net deficit thereof for the financial year ending  2016. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  in  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I  am 

informed  by  the  Director-General  of  the  Mauritius  Broadcasting  Corporation  that  the  net 

revenue collected from television licence fees, from 01 November 2015 to date, amounts to 

Rs362.5 m. 

 

Concerning  part  (b)  of  the  question,  the  House  would  recall  that,  in  my  reply  to 

Parliamentary Questions B/85 and B/86 on 05 April 2016, I had indicated that the Report of 

the Public Sector Efficiency Bureau had shed light on the mismanagement of the MBC by the 

former  Director-General  who  had  the  blessing  of  the  then  Prime  Minister  and  the  previous 

MBC Board which condoned all his wrongdoings. 

 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  annual  expenditure  of  the  MBC  has  always  exceeded  its 

annual  revenue  over  the  last  ten  years.    The  annual  deficit  registered  by  the  Corporation  in 

June  2006  which  stood  at  Rs18.9  m.  had  increased  to  Rs309.1  m.  at  the  end  of  December 

2013. 

In my reply to Parliamentary Question B/139 on 12 April 2016, I had also pointed out 

that  I  had  personally  given  instructions  to  restructure  the  MBC  for  better  efficiency  to  turn 

around the prevailing situation. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  am 

informed  by 

the  Director-General 

that,  with 

the 

implementation  of  a  series  of  in-house  measures  to  optimise  the  use  of  resources,  the 

Corporation  will  after  more  than  ten  years,  register  an  expected  operating  profit  of  around 

Rs80.4  m.  for  financial  year  ending  30  June  2016.    However,  the  financial  situation  of  the 

Corporation  remains  highly  precarious  with  an  accumulated  operating  deficit  of  Rs1.15 

billion over the last 10 years and debts amounting to Rs709 m. 

Madam  Speaker,  with  the appointment of the new MBC  Board  and  a new Director-

General,  the  implementation  of  the  recommendations  made  by  the  Public  Sector  Efficiency 

Bureau  for  improving  the  financial  situation  of  the  Corporation  will  be  accelerated.    In 

 

31 

addition, new strategies will be devised to maximise revenue and decrease expenditure whilst 

at the same time modernising the Corporation to better meet the needs and aspirations of the 

public. 

As already indicated in the Government Programme 2015-2019, the Corporation will 

have the full support of Government  for the timely completion of its restructuration plan to 

make it more efficient, service oriented and less dependent on Government funding. 

Mr  Rughoobur:  Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Prime  Minister  rightly  pointed  out  the 

urgent need for restructuring of the MBC. The Auditor’s Report of August 2015 mentioned 

the  fact  that  there  was  non-submission  of  the  Annual  Report  of  the  MBC  in  2014.  In  this 

whole  process  of  restructuring,  the  hon.  Prime  Minister  would  agree  that  there  is  an  urgent 

need and the very first document that would be needed would be the Annual Report. May  I 

know from the hon. Prime Minister if that report is ready now? 

The Prime Minister: I will pass on the request to the MBC Board. 

Mr Jhugroo: Madam Speaker, after having listened to the answer given by the hon. 

Prime  Minister  with  regard  to  the  mismanagement  by  the  previous  Director  for  the  past  10 

years and a deficit of above Rs700 m., would the hon. Prime Minister consider seeing if any 

legal  action  could  be  taken  against  that  Director  who  had  been  involved  in  this 

mismanagement? 

(Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister: Well, I wonder whether it won’t be a waste of time. 

Mr  Rughoobur:  Madam  Speaker,  a  CEO  as  well  as  a  Chairman  have  just  been 

appointed.  The  Statutory  Bodies  (Accounts  and  Audit)  (Amendment)  Act  puts  the  full 

responsibility on the CEOs to submit the Annual Reports of those Statutory Bodies within a 

time period. Let me quote the law as it is and  you can read this bit in the last Audit Report 

that I just mentioned – 

 

“Where, in the opinion of the Board, the Chief Executive Officer or any other officer 

of  a  statutory  body  has  not  properly  performed  his  duties  with  the  result  that  the 

above requirements of the Act cannot be complied with within the prescribed time, 

the  Board  may,  after  giving  an  opportunity  for  the  officer  to  be  heard,  take 

appropriate disciplinary action against the officer.” 

 

32 

May I request the hon. Prime Minister, since there is a new CEO now at the Statutory Body 

of the MBC, to ensure that the Annual Report is laid on time so that we can have an idea of 

the performance of the Statutory Body year after year? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I will convey that to the relevant authority. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo, I’ll give  you the next  question, but, please, don’t be 

lengthy in your questions! 

HORSE RACING - MESSRS PETER SCOTNEY & BEN GUNN REPORT - 

RECOMMENDATIONS 

(No. B/611) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 

Central) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for 

Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Report of Messrs Peter 

Scotney  and  Ben  Gunn  on  Horse  Racing  in  Mauritius,  he  will  state  the  main 

recommendations thereof. 

(Vide reply to PQ No. B/607) 

HAGUE CONVENTION ON THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN AND CO-

OPERATION IN RESPECT OF INTERCOUNTRY ADOPTION – RATIFICATION 

(No. B/612) Mr A. Ganoo  (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 

Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and 

National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Hague Convention on the Protection of 

Children and Co-operation in Respect of Intercountry Adoption, he will state if Government 

is considering the ratification thereof. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  Mauritius  has  acceded  to  the  Hague 

Convention  on  the  Protection  of  Children  and  Co-operation  in  respect  of  Intercountry 

Adoption  on  28 September  1998,  with  the  aim  to  improve  the  adoption  framework  in  the 

country and to ensure that intercountry adoptions are done in the best interests of children, in 

accordance with  international norms and standards.  There is,  therefore,  no need for further 

ratification. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  would  like  to  inform  the  House  that,  in  September  2005,  the 

National Adoption Council which operates under the purview of my Office was designated as 

the  Central  Authority  for  Mauritius,  in  accordance  with  Article 6,  Chapter  III  of  the 

Convention.  It acts as the Focal Point with regard to intercountry adoptions. 

 

33 

Since  then,  wide  consultations  have  been  held  between  the  various  stakeholders  to 

develop  the  best  adoption  procedures  and  various  proposals  have  been  made  for  the 

domestication of the provisions of the Convention in our national legislation. 

Madam Speaker, I would also like to point out that my Government is very sensitive 

to the issue of intercountry adoption.  It is in this perspective that we had announced in our 

Government  Programme  of  2015-2019,  the  introduction  of  the  necessary  legislation  to 

domesticate  the  provisions  of  the  Hague  Convention  and  we  are  moving  quickly  in  this 

direction. 

 

In  this  regard,  on  05  February  2016,  Cabinet  has  approved  the  proposals  for  the 

setting  up  of  the  appropriate  legal  and  administrative  structure  and  the  introduction  of  new 

policies on adoption matters in line with the provisions of the Convention. 

Furthermore, the Permanent Bureau of the Hague Conference on Private International 

Law has deputed an Expert, who arrived in Mauritius last week, to assist Government in the 

drafting  of  a  new  Adoption  Bill  to  incorporate  the  provisions  of  the  Convention.    She  is 

expected  to  submit  her  recommendations  and  the  broad  lines  of  the  new  legislation  within 

one month. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo, any question! No! Time is over!  The Table has been 

advised  that  PQ  B/625  in  regard  to  the  construction  of  a  waterfront  at  Grand’  Baie  Public 

Beach will now be replied by the hon. Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms, 

Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development,  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management.  

PQ B/650 in regard to the cleaning and maintenance of the beaches of Pointe aux Sables and 

of Tombeau Bay will now be replied by the hon. Minister of Local Government.  PQ B/654 

in regard to the real estate agencies will now be replied by the hon. Minister of Finance and 

Economic Development. PQ B/639 has been withdrawn.  Hon. Sesungkur! 

EMPLOYEE REAL ESTATE INVESTMENT TRUST - UNIT HOLDERS 

(No.  B/618)  Mr  D.  Sesungkur  (First  Member  for  Montagne  Blanche  &  GRSE) 

asked  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  whether,  in  regard  to  the 

Employee  Real  Estate  Investment  Trust,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain 

therefrom, information as to – 

(a) 

the  number  of  Unit  Holders  thereof  to  date,  indicating  the  number  thereof 

having been redeemed since the setting up thereof to date;  

(b) 

the name of the Manager thereof;  

 

34 

(c) 

the evolution of the net value of the assets thereof since the setting up thereof 

to date, and  

(d) 

if any dividend has been paid and, if not, why not. 

Mr Jugnauth: Madam Speaker, I wish to refer the hon. Member to the reply made to 

PQ B/281 of 26 April 2016 wherein the House was informed that the Employees’ Real Estate 

Investment Trust does not belong to Government and therefore it would not be appropriate to 

provide the information then requested. 

However, given that the information requested is of a general nature, I am providing 

exceptionally the information sought for. 

With  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  as  at  23  June  2016,  the 

Employees’  Real  Estate  Investment  Trust  had  206,786  Unit  Holders.    In  fact,  when  the 

Employees’ Real Estate Investment Trust was set up in March 2005, there were 352,340 unit 

holders.  As per the Trust Deed, the Unit Holders are entitled to redeem their units as from 31 

March 2010.  During the period 31 March 2010 till date, therefore, 145,554 units have been 

redeemed. 

Concerning  part  (b)  of  the  question,  EREIT  Management  Ltd.,  a  fully  owned 

subsidiary of the State  Investment  Corporation  Ltd  (SIC), was appointed as Manager of the 

Trust  in  March  2005  while  the  State  Insurance  Company  Ltd.  is  the  Trustee  for  the  Unit 

Holders of the Trust.   

Regarding part (c) of the question, the Net Value of Assets of the Trust as at 30 June 

2006  was  Rs383.8  m.  and  as  at  31  March  2016,  the  Net  Value  of  Assets  has  increased  to 

Rs1.1 billion. 

As regards part (d) of the question, there is no provision for the payment of dividend 

in the Trust Deed.  However, in the amended Trust Deed of January 2011, provision has been 

made for any financial benefits accruing to the Unit Holders to be payable only at the time of 

redemption of the units. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Uteem! 

AGUSTAWESTLAND VVIP CHOPPER DEAL SCAM - INQUIRY 

(No.  B/619)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 

Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional 

Reforms whether, in regard to the AugustaWestland VVIP chopper deal scam, he will, for the 

 

35 

benefit of the House, obtain from the Financial Services Commission and from the Financial 

Intelligence  Unit  respectively,  information  as  to  if  they  have  initiated  inquiries  in  relation 

thereto and, if so, indicate the outcome thereof in each case. 

Mr  Bhadain:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  the  FIU  is  working  on  the 

AgustaWestland case - in fact, it is ‘Agusta’ and not ‘Augusta’ - and has been collaborating 

with  the  Indian  authorities  since  July  2015.    By  virtue  of  section  30(2)  of  the  Financial 

Intelligence and Anti-Money Laundering Act 2002, the FIU is unable to divulge information 

publicly at this stage. 

With regard to the FSC, Madam Speaker, I am informed that following several press 

articles in the Indian press in February 2013 with respect to alleged bribery involving Indian 

nationals  for  the  purchase  of  helicopters  by  the  Indian  Government,  the  FSC  started  a 

preliminary enquiry into the matter in April 2013, which was subsequently terminated in June 

2013 by the then Director of Surveillance as there was no substantive evidence to support the 

allegations of bribes having been channelled through Mauritius global business companies. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  AgustaWestland  VVIP  chopper  deal  alleged 

scam is in relation to a contract entered into in 2010 for the purchase of 12 VVIP helicopters 

by  the  Indian  Government  from  AgustaWestland,  whose  parent  company  is  an  Italian  arms 

firm, Finmeccanica.  I am further informed that on 09 April 2016, a Milan Court, convicted 

the former CEO of Finmeccanica, Mr Giuseppe Orsi and the Head of its Helicopter Division 

Mr Bruno Spagnolini for bribery and false accounting. 

Madam  Speaker,  on  24  May  2016,  one  Indian  News  Channel,  Indian  Today, 

broadcasted  a  televised  documentary  following  a  sting  operation  in  relation  to  the 

AgustaWestland  VVIP  Chopper  alleged  scam.    In  the  sting  operation  interview,  two  Indian 

authorities,  one  Mr  Shakil  Fakeermahamod,  a  Director  of  ML  Administrators  Ltd.,  a 

management company licenced by the FSC, made serious allegations that one Mr Gautam … 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Minister, if you could mention initials rather than names! 

Mr  Bhadain:  That  one  Mr  G.  K.  allegedly  the  mastermind  behind  the  infamous 

AgustaWestland  VVIP  Chopper  deal  scam,  was  adviser  of  the  FSC  and  formed  part  of  the 

Joint  Working  Group  negotiating  the  India-Mauritius  Double  Tax  Avoidance  Convention.  

The one Mr S. F. also made allegations how proceeds of bribery may be channelled through 

the Mauritius global business companies. 

 

36 

Madam  Speaker,  on  26  May  2016,  the  current  management  team  of  the  FSC  acted 

promptly and issued an interim direction under section 46 of the Financial Services Act 2007 

for ML Administrators Ltd. to remove with immediate effect Mr S.F. as director and MLRO 

of  ML  Administrators  Ltd.  based  on  prima  facie  evidence  against  Mr  S.  F.  who  may  have 

been indulged in  financial  crime and money laundering and the  averments  of Mr S. F. that 

one Mr G. K. was the adviser/consultant of the FSC which was completely false, misleading 

and ill- motivated.  

I am informed that the FSC had also provided both ML Administrators Ltd. and Mr S. 

F.  seven  days  to  provide  written  representations  as  to  why  a  final  direction  should  not  be 

issued by the FSC against them. 

Madam Speaker, on the same day, 26 May 2016, the FSC started a new investigation 

on the matter which is currently ongoing.  On 08 June 2016, the FSC issued a direction under 

section 46 of the Financial Services Act,  confirming its interim direction issued on 26 May 

2016 given that submissions made by Mr S. F. were considered to be unsatisfactory. 

As  of  today,  I  am  informed  by  the  FSC  that  the  preliminary  findings  of  the 

investigations  are  that  Interstellar Technologies  Ltd  and  InfoTech  Design  Systems  Ltd,  two 

companies  allegedly  involved  in  channelling  bribe  money  to  India,  held  a  JBL2  and  JBL1 

licence  respectively.  I  am  further  informed  that  Interstellar Technologies  Ltd.  was  removed 

from  the  Registrar  of  Companies  as  far  back  as  28  March  2013  while  Info  Tech  Design 

Systems  Ltd  surrendered  its  license  on  17  October  2013  and  was  subsequently  removed  by 

the Registrar of Companies.   

It  has  also  come  to  the  attention  of  the  FSC  during  its  investigation  that,  from  the 

period  01  August  2007  to  09  November  2012,  some  EUR  18  million  was  transferred  from 

IDS  Tunisia  in  the  bank  accounts  of  InfoTech  Design  Systems  Ltd,  held  at  ex-Bramer 

Banking Corporation Limited. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No comment, please! 

Mr Bhadain:  Out of these, payments of EUR 18 million  made by  InfoTech Design 

Systems Ltd to various recipients for consultancy services, engineering services and loans, all 

of which is considered to be suspicious by the FSC. It has also come to the attention of the 

FSC  that  the  MLRO  of  ML  Administrators  Ltd,  Mr  S.  F.,  had  never  raised  any  suspicious 

 

37 

transaction  report  to  the  FIU  and  never  notified  the  FSC  despite  adverse  press  reports  of 

alleged bribery being channelled through Mauritius in this particular case. 

Madam  Speaker,  I wish  to  reassure the House that the  FSC is  taking all  appropriate 

enforcement actions on the basis of evidence gathered during the course of this investigation. 

Mr Uteem:  Madam  Speaker, the hon. Minister mentioned that, as far back as 2013, 

the  Financial  Services  Commission  was  aware  of  this  scandal  and  investigated  and  found 

nothing.  Has the FSC now carried out an inquiry to find out why, in 2013, the enquiry was 

not  properly done and this  management  company and the director who has been suspended 

was allowed to continue operation? 

Mr Bhadain: I do agree with the hon. Member that it is very strange as to why, when 

these transfers of 18 m. euros had gone through Bramer Bank, in 2013 the FSC did not act on 

it, and terminated their investigation.  I am told that this was done under the instructions of 

Mr Max Fulton, the then Director of Surveillance.  But, now, the FSC is basically doing what 

should have been done back then and investigating the matter properly. 

Mr  Uteem:  The  hon.  Minister  mentioned  the  article  that  appeared  in  the  newspaper 

and news channel India Today, which used very hard words against Mauritius.  For example 

– 

“(...) the Mauritian kickbacks factory blossoms with hundreds of consultants suddenly 

available to work the scam. A brilliant, well-oiled nexus between local money hustlers 

and overseas law dodgers.” 

So, in the light of this very strong, defamatory statement levelled against Mauritius as 

a  financial  sector,  may  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  what  action  has  been  taken  by  his 

Ministry or the FSC or the FSPA against India Today to rectify this perception that Mauritius 

is being used as a platform for money laundering? 

Mr  Bhadain:  The  FSPA  has  certainly  been  in  touch  with  the  relevant  people  to 

ensure that the proper communication of the right facts is given.  But, after the FSC finishes 

its  investigation,  of  course,  there  is  going  to  be  further  action  from  the  authorities  in 

Mauritius to make sure that these articles are rectified.  I must also say, Madam Speaker, that 

since this Government has come in, what we have been doing on the financial services side is 

ensuring  that  there  is  a  clean,  transparent  platform  of  substance  for  investment  to  be 

channelled  through  Mauritius,  and  whatever  has  happened  in  2013-2014,  these  cases  are 

coming to light and we are dealing with them. We are not responsible for these cases. 

 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed! 

38 

Mr  Mohamed:  Thank  you  very  much,  Madam  Speaker.  The  hon.  Minister  has  - 

before being asked by you, Madam Speaker, to just refer to initials - referred to the name of 

Mr Khaitan, and if I am not mistaken, during one of the alleged reports by Mr S. F., there was 

reference made to that Mr Khaitan as being an advisor or consultant of the Financial Services 

Commission,  which  was  promptly  denied  by  the  FSC.    However,  would  the  hon.  Minister 

confirm whether this gentleman, in fact, was never at the FSC but at the Board of Investment, 

acting as a consultant or adviser, and had indeed been present during negotiations with India 

concerning the DTA? 

Mr Bhadain: Well, I can certainly assure the House that, at the level of the FSC, they 

have done all the rigorous verifications to ensure that this Mr K. was never involved in any 

way, shape or form with the activities of the FSC, be it in relation to the DTA or with India or 

otherwise. Now, if the hon. Member has information as to that person having been involved 

somehow  with  another  organisation,  then,  as  Minister  of  Good  Governance,  I’ll  certainly 

look into that. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  Will  the  hon.  Minister  confirm  to  this 

House that there was judicial request from the agency looking after the bribery things, a letter 

rogatory - what they call from court to court - in the past, and that recently, on 03 June of this 

year, there was a fresh request?  Now that the FSC is doing the work, can the hon. Minister 

state whether any correspondence has been addressed to those who have called for this fresh 

judicial court to court information? 

Mr  Bhadain:  I  am  informed  by  the  FSC  that  all  the  relevant  legal  procedures  are 

being  followed  and  all  requests  are  being  dealt  with.  As  I  have  said,  we  want  to  show  that 

Mauritius  is  collaborating  and  we  don’t  have  anything  to  hide,  and  if  ever  there  are  certain 

global  business  companies  which  have  been  involved,  they  are  going  to  be  taken  to  task.  

This is how we are marketing ourselves on the international front these days. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Last  year,  I  asked  a  Parliamentary  Question  concerning  dirty  money 

coming from Indian firms channelling through Mauritius.  One particular firm in Ebene was 

mentioned  -  the  hon.  Minister  might  know  -  and  the  hon.  Minister  told  the  House  that  it  is 

confidential;  the  FIU  did  not  give  the  names.  Can  the  hon.  Minister  inform  the  House 

whether  any  action  has  been  taken,  whether  any  result  has  been  obtained  following  these 

 

39 

official allegations which were made in the Lok Sabha by the Leader of the Opposition at the 

end of last year? 

Mr  Bhadain:  Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Member  can  come  with  a  substantive 

question and I will gladly answer. Now, with regard to the FIU, they disseminate report to the 

investigatory bodies, namely ICAC and the Police, and then the investigation is done by those 

bodies.  I would not  know at  what  level  investigation has progressed at  ICAC or the Police.  

But, as far as the FIU is concerned, if a substantive question is put, I will certainly answer. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Uteem! 

MAURITIUS POST LTD – AGGREGATE ASSETS & LIABILITIES 

(No.  B/620)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 

Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Technology,  Communication  and  Innovation  whether,  in 

regard  to  the  Mauritius  Post  Ltd.,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  therefrom, 

information  as  to  the  current  financial  situation  thereof,  indicating  in  respect  of  each  of  the 

financial years 2014 and 2015, the – 

(a) 

aggregate assets thereof  

(b) 

aggregate liabilities thereof, and  

(c) 

profit thereof. 

The  Minister  of  Business,  Enterprise  and  Cooperatives  (Mr  S.  Bholah):  Madam 

Speaker, I will reply to this question, with  your permission. As regards the current financial 

situation  at  the  Mauritius  Post  Limited,  according  to  its  unaudited  accounts  for  period  01 

January 2014 to 30 June 2015, that is, 18 months period, the company has incurred a loss of 

Rs646.6  m.,  out  of  which  an  operating  loss  standing  at  Rs136.4  m.  Given  the  fact  that  the 

company had 44.22% of the share capital of the Ex-Mauritius Post and Cooperative Bank, the 

remaining loss is due to the impairment of investment to the tune of Rs510.2 m. as a result of 

financial difficulties of the latter and the writing off of the non-performing loans. 

Madam Speaker, as regards to the financial information sought for the years 2014 and 

2015  respectively,  the  House  may  wish  to  note  that  Government  budgeting  period  that  has 

been changed as from 2015 from the calendar year basis to period July to June, consequently, 

the financial year of the Mauritius Post Limited, which was previously from 01 January to 31 

December,  has  changed  from  01  July  to  30  of  June,  as  from  year  2015.    Hence,  the  last 

 

40 

audited  financial  statements  for  the  Mauritius  Post  Limited  are  for  the  year  ending  31 

December 2013. 

I am informed that the financial statements for the 18 months period, 01 January 2014 

to 30 June 2015, are currently being audited. In consequence, financial information sought for 

the year 2014 is not available.  I, therefore, propose to provide information for parts (a), (b), 

(c)  of  the  question,  for  financial  years  ending  31  December  2013  and  30  June  2015 

respectively. 

As regards part (a) of the question, the aggregate assets as at 31 December 2013 and 

30 June 2015 were Rs926,692,214 and Rs640,815,925 respectively. 

As regards part (b) of the question, the aggregate liabilities as at 31 December 2013 

and 30 June 2015 were Rs775,222,532 and Rs1,052,830,706 respectively. 

As  regards  part  (c)  of  the  question,  the  Mauritius  Post  Ltd.  realised  a  profit  of 

Rs3,330,064  for  the  year  ending  31  December  2013  and  made  a  loss  of  Rs646,657,843  for 

the 18 months ended 30 June 2015 before other comprehensive income. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  I  understand  the  hon.  Minister  is  not  the 

substantive Minister, but may I know from the hon. Minister, with respect to the operational 

loss,  for  years  now  Mauritius  Post  Ltd.  has  been  making  loss  of  over  Rs100  m.,  so,  may  I 

know from the hon. Minister, as at today, whether this loss is still ongoing or there has been 

any measure to redress the operational situation? 

Mr  Bholah:  Well,  I  am  not  aware.  I  don’t  have  any  information  if  the  loss  is 

persisting but, anyway, I do have some information as to what measures are being taken and 

this I can tell you, inter alia, the following are being implemented - 

(i) 

introduction of non-postal products and services in its diversification strategy 

which generate some 25% of its total revenue; 

(ii)  modernisation  of  the  parcel  and  courier  business  in  the  wake  of  growing  e-

commerce; 

(iii)  distribution on advertising mails on a door-to-door basis; 

(iv)  additional  business  from  the  National  Transport  Authority  for  the  issue  of 

motor vehicle licences for all categories of vehicles; 

 

41 

(v)  new  business  from  other  Government  departments  and  parasatal  bodies  such 

as the Beach Authority and Small Planters Welfare Fund; 

(vi) 

increase in the number of payments for social aid; 

(vii)  introduction  of  financial  services  in  collaboration  with  insurance  companies 

like SICOM and New Island Insurance for collection of premiums and sale of 

new insurance. 

With regard to  cost  curtailment as well, as the salaries of  employees represent  some 

75%  of  the  total  operational  cost,  the  following  measures  have  also  been  implemented  by 

Mauritius Post Ltd. - 

(i)  filling of vacancies are being made strictly on needs basis; 

(ii)  secondly,  recourse  to  lower  grade  employees  wherever  possible,  including 

enlistment of training under the Youth Employment Programme, and  

(iii) thirdly, introduction of flexitime to curtail payment of overtime. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  The  hon.  Minister  mentioned  that  the  investment  of  Mauritius  Post  in 

Mauritius  Post  and  Cooperative  Bank,  44%,  has  now  been  diluted  totally  in  MauBank.  So, 

may  I  know  in  the  circumstances,  being  given  that  the  asset  has  been  considerably  eroded, 

whether  the  Mauritius  Post  Office  had  made  any  formal  request  from  the  Government  for 

financial assistance? 

Mr  Bholah:  From  information  that  I  do  have,  there  has  been  a  request  from  the 

Mauritius Post Ltd. for injection of an amount of Rs510 m., that is, Rs255 m. as equity capital 

and  another  Rs255  m.  as  contribution  towards  past  service  liability  for  ex-Government 

employees  who  joined  the  Mauritius  Post  Ltd.  I  don’t  have  it  had  been  acceded  to,  but 

requests have been made. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Can  the  Acting  Minister  confirm  to  the  House  whether  services 

provided  by  Mauritius  Post,  like  the  public  can  pay  their  water  bills,  CEB  bills,  NTA  bills 

etc., is it free of charge or do they pay these institutions to the Mauritius Post Ltd.?  

 

42 

Mr  Bholah:  Well,  as  far  as  I  know,  there  is  a  fee  which  is  being  paid.  This  is  why 

there  are  more  requests  from  the  Mauritius  Post  Ltd.  to  secure  more,  I  mean  for  other 

authorities to come to the Mauritius Post counters for servicing of such payments. 

Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for one and a half hours. 

At 1.06 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 2.36 p.m. with the Deputy Speaker in the Chair. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Uteem! 

RESIDENTIAL CARE INSTITUTIONS/SHELTERS FOR CHILDREN - FUNDS 

(No.  B/621)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 

Central)  asked  the  Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and  Family  Welfare 

whether, in regard to the Residential Care Institutions/Shelters for Children, she will state the 

- 

(a) 

number thereof, indicating the number of - 

(i) 

children residing thereat, and  

(ii) 

employees thereof, and  

(b) 

total amount of funds provided thereto by Government in respect of the years 

2014 and 2015 respectively. 

Mrs  Perraud: 

  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir, 

in  regard 

to  Residential  Care 

Institutions/Shelters for Children, I am informed that 19 Residential Care Institutions/Shelters 

are in operation.  As at 24 June 2016, 544 children are residing thereat and 339 employees are 

employed therein. 

In regard to part (b) of the question, the amount of funds provided thereto in respect 

of the years 2014 and 2015 are Rs62,570,945.56 and Rs70,425,946.51 respectively. 

Mr  Uteem:    Thank  you,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.    In  November  2015,  there  was  a 

report  of  the  Fact-Finding  Committee  on  Residential  Care  Institutions/Shelters  for  Children 

chaired by Mr Vellien and the very first recommendation at paragraph 1.1 related to shelters 

being  overcrowded.    So,  may  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  in  the  seven  months  that  has 

followed  this  report  what  action  has  been  taken  specifically  with  regard  to  overcrowded 

shelters? 

 

43 

Mrs Perraud:  Indeed, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the Fact-Finding Committee was set 

up on 17 April 2015 and the report was published on 05 November 2015.  Concerning this 

recommendation,  we  made  a  call  for  tender  for  the  management  of  shelters,  but  it  was  not 

successful.    We  are  now  reviewing  our  requirements  and  fresh  tenders  will  be  called  soon. 

We  have  also  opened  l’Oasis  for  children  who  are  sexually  abused  and  we  have  already 

transferred about – I don’t have the exact figure – 26 children to l’Oasis.  

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem:  With regard to the answer which the hon. Minister has just given to us, is 

the  tender  for  new  shelters  or  is  it  for  the  provision  of  management  services’  contract  to 

existing shelters? 

Mrs Perraud:  It is for both. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Ganoo! 

Mr  Ganoo:    In  addition  to  the  many  criticisms  which  the  Fact-Finding  Committee 

made  against  the  management  of  the  shelters,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  can  I  ask  the  hon. 

Minister - there was another very serious feature which this report underlined, it was the fact 

that  many  of  the  employees  employed  by  the  shelters  were  persons  who  had  a  criminal 

record, including record of assaulting and even possession of dangerous drugs – whether it is 

not time once for all to legislate as it obtains in other countries that people who intend to be 

recruited  in  places  where  there  are  children,  that  is,  schools,  crèches  or  shelters  that  their 

criminal  records  should  be  cleared  first  before  they  are  employed  in  such  places  of 

employment? 

Mrs Perraud:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, indeed I do agree with the hon. Member and 

we  are  working  in  this  direction.  Also,  we  have  already  trained  92  caregivers  who  are 

working in our shelters. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr  Bérenger:    If  I  can  add  to  what  hon.  Ganoo  has  just  said,  in  the  report,  names 

were named of people who should not be there and clearly it calls for their removal.  Can I 

know  whether  any  of  the  people’s  names  in  that  report,  have  been  replaced,  have  been 

removed? 

Mrs  Perraud:    Indeed,  there  is  one  person  who  was  named  in  this  report  who  no 

longer works in the shelter. 

 

44 

Mr Bérenger:  I heard – and I thank the hon. Minister for that reply - that the tender 

that came out - and I understand was non-responsive, the institution is being removed - calls 

for both, if I got it right, managing existing shelters and new shelters.  Can I know how many 

new  shelters  are  planned  by  the  Ministry  and  whether  that  has  moved  on  with  the 

forthcoming budget to finance? 

Mrs  Perraud:   Actually, at  the level  of the Ministry, we  are working more towards 

the  re-integration  of  children  who  are  in  our  shelters  and  also  placing  the  children  in  foster 

care, and also working on mentoring rather than building or opening many other shelters. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Jhuboo! 

Mr Jhuboo: Merci, M. le président.   Many of these institutions have benefitted in the 

past  from  the  CSR  guidelines.    May  we  know  from  the  hon.  Minister,  in  the  light  of  the 

forthcoming  budget,  will  she  make  any  recommendations  towards  the  better  use  of  CSR 

guidelines? 

Mrs  Perraud:    In  a  general  manner,  I  can  say  that  for  the  forthcoming  budget,  the 

Ministry is seeking more resources to give a better service to the children in shelters. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Uteem, last supplementary! 

Mr  Uteem:    Thank  you,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.    Bouncing  on  what  the  hon. 

Minister just mentioned, one of the main recommendations in the report was that there was a 

need for substantial increase in resources for the Child Development Unit (CDU).  So, may I 

know  from  the  hon.  Minister,  in  light  of  the  forthcoming  budget,  whether  a  study  has  been 

carried out in her Ministry to find out what are the needs and to quantify the needs in terms of 

monetary terms?  

Mrs Perraud: We have already recruited officers for the CDU last year and then we 

are looking forward to re-organise, to re-structure the CDU.  

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Bhagwan! 

MINISTER OF HEALTH AND QUALITY OF LIFE – OVERSEAS MISSIONS 

(No.  B/622)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 

asked the  Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the overseas missions 

he has undertaken since his appointment as Minister of Health and Quality of Life to date, he 

will state the number thereof, indicating – 

 

(a) 

in each case, the - 

45 

(i) 

countries visited, purpose and duration thereof, and  

(ii) 

total  cost  thereof  in  terms  of  travel  expenses,  per  diem  and  other 

allowances drawn, indicating the travel  agency which supplied the air 

ticket, and  

(b) 

the number of times he was accompanied by Mrs V. S., Executive Director of 

the Trust Fund for Specialised Medical Care, indicating in respect thereof and 

in each case, the - 

(i) 

reasons therefor, and  

(ii) 

total  cost  thereof  in  terms  of  travel  expenses,  per  diem  and  other 

allowances drawn, indicating which authority funded same. 

Mr  Gayan:    Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  with  your  permission,  I  am  tabling  the 

information with regard to part (a) of the question.   

The  House  may  wish  to  note  that  travel  fares  were  as  per  rates  applicable  and  all 

allowances payable were in accordance with established rates. 

As regards part (b) of the question, the answer is nil.  The other parts of the question, 

therefore, do not arise. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan: Can the hon. Minister give the total sum spent with regard to the total 

number of missions? 

Mr Gayan:  I have replied to the question; I have nothing more to add. 

Mr Bhagwan:  The hon. Minister said that he is circulating.  Can he inform the House 

whether he is tabling the reply? 

Mr Gayan:  It has been tabled. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem:  Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  May I know from the hon. Minister 

the name of the travel agency which organises his trips being given that in the past there has 

been an inquiry in relation to past travelling? 

Mr Gayan:  The information is on the Table, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

46 

Dr.  Joomaye:    Thank  you,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.    I  would  like  to  ask  the  hon. 

Minister  if  he  has  been  sponsored  by  any  pharmaceutical  company  or  international 

organisation to attend any conference or forum abroad. 

Mr Gayan:  Not by any pharmaceutical company, but the WHO does sponsor at times. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Rughoobur, next question! 

(Interruptions) 

CENTRAL PROCUREMENT BOARD – BOARD MEMBERS  

(No. B/623) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or) 

asked  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Board 

Members  of  the  Central  Procurement  Board  (CPB),  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House, 

obtain from the CPB, information as to – 

(a) 

in each case, the - 

(i) 

qualifications held, and  

(ii) 

terms  and  conditions  of  contract  thereof,  including  the  salaries  and 

other benefits  drawn, number of  working hours required  and duration 

of contract, and  

(b) 

if the contract of any one thereof has been renewed despite his having held the 

maximum two terms  of three  years office  as Board Member, as provided for 

under the Public Procurement Act. 

Mr Jugnauth:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in accordance with Section 8… 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker:  No interruptions, please! 

Mr  Jugnauth:  …of  the  Public  Procurement  Act,  the  Central  Procurement  Board  is 

composed of a Chairperson, two Vice-Chairpersons and three other members.   

Presently, the constitution of the Central Procurement Board is as follows - 

  Chairperson: 

Mr Madhukarlal Baguant, C.S.K. 

  Vice-Chairpersons: 

 

47 

Mr Hirendranath Rambhojun, and 

Mr Krishna Menon  Mauremootoo 

  Members: 

Mrs Sharda Devi Dindoyal; 

Mr Dawood Ally Mamode Zmanay, and 

Mr Kirsley Errol Bagwan 

With regard to part (a) of the question, the information requested is being tabled.  The 

House may wish to note that the members of the Central Procurement Board are employed on 

a full-time basis.  

Concerning part (b) of the question, I am informed that no member has been in office 

for more than two consequent terms of three years. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Rughoobur! 

Mr Rughoobur:  Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  As Section 8 (2) of the Public 

Procurement Act clearly stipulates, and I quote – 

“Every  member  shall  hold  office  for  a  period  not  exceeding  3  years  and  shall  be 

eligible for re-appointment for one additional term.” 

According to information that I have and I would kindly request the hon. Minister of 

Finance  and  Economic  Development  to  please  check,  Mr  D.  Z.  presently  serving  as  Board 

Member  for  a  third  term,  he  was  firstly  appointed  prior  to  2007,  but  he  served  2007  until 

2010 on first term; 2010 until 2013 on a second term and he resigned.  Now, he is presently 

serving a third term. I would kindly request the hon. Minister to please check this and try to 

look into the matter. 

Mr Jugnauth:  No, the information is incorrect  because Mr Zmanay has not served 

from 2011 to 2013; he served only from 2008 to 2010 and, in fact, all the members continued 

to serve for two more months and then he resigned.  He resigned on 31 January 2011.  That is 

one term and now he was re-appointed in 2015 and, therefore, that is the second term. But he 

did not serve in between those two terms. 

Mr  Rughoobur:  I  would  kindly  request  the  hon.  Minister  to,  please,  check  on  this 

because my information is that he served. Anyway  I have got  a second supplementary. The 

hon.  Minister  spoke  about  the  conditions  of  employment  of  Board  Members.  They  are  on 

 

48 

full-time basis. May I request if the weekly hours of work for the full time members can be 

tabled for the consideration of the House. 

Mr  Jugnauth:  Well,  I  won’t  have  the  details  of  weekly  attendance,  but,  as  I  have 

replied,  they  are  employed  on  a  full-time  basis.  Of  course,  I  do  expect  them  to  be  at  their 

office  during  the  working  hours’  time.  But,  again,  with  reference  to  the  first  part  of  the 

question, I can reassure the hon. Member that, in fact, before answering this question, I have 

doubly checked and this is the information that I have. The member has not been serving for 

more than two terms, according to law. So, we are within the parameters of the law. 

The Deputy Speaker: Next question, hon. Rughoobur! 

GRAND GAUBE, PEREYBERE & GRAND’ BAIE – WATER SUPPLY 

(No. B/624) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or) 

asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to 

Grand Gaube, Pereybère and Grand’Baie, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from 

the Central Water Authority, information as to the measures that are being taken to improve 

domestic water supply thereat. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 

Collendavelloo):  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  on  14  June  2016,  I  tabled  a  directory  of  all  water 

supply  improvement  projects,  which  includes  projects  to  be  undertaken  by  the  CWA  in  the 

regions  referred  to  by  the  hon.  Member.  I  invite  the  hon.  Member  to  consult  this  directory 

which contains all information which he requires. 

In  addition,  since  April  2016,  the  CWA  has  put  into  use  two  new  boreholes  to 

improve  water  supply  in  the  region  of  Grand  Gaube  with  the  injection  of  an  additional 

volume of 2,000 m3 per day. 

Mr  Rughoobur:  In  the  regions  that  I  have  mentioned  in  my  question,  during  the 

recent months, there have been acute shortage cuts in water supply and we have been trying 

to  find  the  reasons,  but,  unfortunately,  officers  have  not  been  in  a  position  to  give  valid 

reasons  for  which  these  regular  cuts  in  water  supply  have  been  effective  for  a  couple  of 

months.  May  I  know  from  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  what  are  the  measures  that  have 

been envisaged for the coming months and if he has a report from his officers of the problem 

that is being faced by these people in Grand’Baie, Grand Gaube and the other regions I have 

mentioned in my question. 

 

49 

Mr Collendavelloo: The question relates to measures that are being taken. This is on 

the directory which I have produced. 

Now,  with  regard  to  the  regions:  Roche  Terre,  Grand  Gaube  and  Calodyne  receive 

water from old Goodlands reservoirs. They used to be supplied from 4.00 a.m. to 8.00 a.m. 

and  from  4.00  p.m.  to  8.00  p.m.  Now,  the  CWA  has  commissioned  two  new  boreholes: 

Mapou borehole and Bahadur borehole and an additional volume of 2,000 metre cube water 

is being injected in the cistern as from April 2016, as I have said. 

Péreybère  is  supplied  with  water  from  Mon  Loisir  Rouillard  reservoir.  Hours  of 

supply are from 4.00 a.m. to 8.00 a.m.; from 4.00 p.m. to 8.00 p.m. Grand’Baie water from 

Rouge Terre or Terre Rouge - I don’t know – reservoir and being supplied on an average of 

21  hours  depending  on  the  topography.  All  these  matters,  of  course,  lead  to  new  projects 

being  implemented  and  the  new  projects  will  be  implemented.  If  there  are  any  punctual 

problems, the hon. Member can always contact me and I will forward to the CWA. 

Mr Rughoobur: I would reiterate my concern to the hon. Vice-Prime Minister on the 

urgency  of  the  situation.  Only  this  morning,  I  have  got  calls  from  Grand’Baie  that  water 

supply is now only once per day instead of two or three times per day that it used to be. The 

hon. Vice-Prime Minister would agree that, during the last decade, there has been an increase 

in  population  to  more  than  50,000  heads,  but  there  has  hardly  been  investment.  There  is  a 

serious  mismatch  and  I  know  that  she  has  been  here  only  for  one  and  a  half  years.  I,  once 

again, request the hon. Vice-Prime Minister to please look into the matter and try to see if, in 

the coming  Budget,  funds can be made available  for a  reservoir of, at  least,  25 metre cube, 

because  these  two  boreholes  that  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  has  been  talking  about  add 

only 2,000 metre cube of water per day. 

Mr Collendavelloo: Well, there has been a speech, I just take note. 

Mr  Mahomed:  Is  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  satisfied  that  other  than  the  2,000 

metre  cube  of  water  that  is  being  pumped,  storage  and  water  treatment  capacities  are 

adequate,  because  I  am  trying  to  reconcile  from  what  the  hon.  Member  has  just  said, 

notwithstanding the 2,000 metre cube additional, water is rare in the region. 

Mr Collendavelloo: So, that is why I took the trouble of tabling a complete directory 

of all projects which are ongoing for the whole of Mauritius. Anyone who is interested just 

goes  up  to  the  Library,  opens  the  page  for  his  Constituency  and  he  gets  it.  I  can’t  do  more 

than that. 

 

50 

Mr Mahomed: So, the hon. Vice-Prime Minister is satisfied that everything there is 

okay in terms of storage and… 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  I  never  said  so.  I  never  said  that  I  was  satisfied  or  that  I  was 

happy. Of course, I am not! This is why all this time what I have been doing is to prepare the 

new structure which I will announce in the Budget. Of course, I am not satisfied! 

The Deputy Speaker: Next question, hon. Rughoobur! 

GRAND’ BAIE PUBLIC BEACH - WATERFRONT 

(No. B/625) Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or) 

asked  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  whether,  in  regard  to  the 

Grand’Baie Public Beach, he will state if consideration will be given for the construction of a 

waterfront thereat under the Build Operate Transfer Scheme. 

The  Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms,  Minister  of 

Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management  (Mr  A. 

Wong  Yen  Cheong):  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  with  your  permission,  I  will  reply  to  the 

Parliamentary Question. 

The  implementation  of  a  project  for  the  construction  of  a  waterfront  at  Grand  Baie 

Public Beach under the Build Operate Transfer Projects Act 2016, is not within the scope of 

the Beach Authority. 

I would also wish to inform the House that - 

 

 

the Grand  Baie Public Beach is very small with an area of only 1.22 Ha and is 

highly frequented, and  

the  beach  faces  acute  erosion  problem.  In  fact,  coastal  protection  and 

rehabilitation  works  have  already  been  undertaken  on  various  occasions,  the 

last  one  being  in  2011,  comprising  the  construction  of  rock  revetment  over 

250  metres  over  the  existing  gabions,  reconstructions  of  drains  and 

construction of a slipway. 

Furthermore,  being  given  that  the  set  back  from  the  high  watermark  is  less  than  30 

metres, even the implementation  of basic infrastructural  projects  to  provide for  amenities is 

not recommended. 

Mr Rughoobur: I would make a request to the hon. Minister if he could look at the 

deplorable  state  of  the  beach  at  Grand’Baie  and  the  importance  of  the  site  to  see  to  it  that 

 

51 

consideration may be given for the upgrading of the site. There was a proposal like this to the 

former  Minister,  so  if  he  could  look  into  this  issue  of  upgrading  the  beach.  And,  if  I  could 

add… 

The Deputy Speaker: One question at a time, hon. Rughoobur! 

Mr Rughoobur: Okay! 

Mr  Wong  Yen  Cheong:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  regarding  the  upgrading  of  the 

beach at  Grand’Baie, the funds are already earmarked and we are looking into  it  and it  is a 

continuous  even  for  the  other  beaches  around  Mauritius.  We  are  looking  to  the  reprofiling, 

remanagement of all public beaches around Mauritius. 

Mr  Rughoobur:  I  had  the  opportunity  to  raise  this  issue  of  subletting  of  permits  to 

hawkers and alcoholic drinks being commercialised on beach till very late in the nights for La 

Cuvette,  now  the  same  problem  is  for  Grand’Baie  public  beach.  I  would  request  the  hon. 

Minister to please look into this very serious issue. 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: I replied to this question not long ago that there have been 

various crackdown operations and no case of subletting has been detected.  However, there 

was one complaint that was received, the Police have been conducting an enquiry and we are 

waiting for it. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Ameer Meea! 

HERITAGE CITY CO. LTD - BOARD MEMBERS 

(No.  B/626)    Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 

Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 

Institutional Reforms whether, in regard to the Heritage City Project, he will, for the benefit 

of the House, obtain from the Heritage City Project Company Limited, information as to the 

– 

(a) 

terms and conditions of appointment of the Board Members thereof, including 

the salaries and other benefits drawn, and  

(b) 

number  of  staff  posted  thereat,  indicating  the  respective  post  occupied  and 

salaries and other benefits drawn. 

Mr Bhadain: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, there is no company known as Heritage City 

Project  Company  Limited.    However,  if  the  hon.  Member  is  referring  to  Heritage  City  Co. 

 

52 

Ltd.,  which  is  a  state-owned  company  and  was  incorporated  on  04  January  2016  for  the 

implementation of the Heritage City Project.  

With regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed by Heritage City Co. Ltd. that 

Board members are paid a monthly fee of Rs17,000 and the Chairperson a fee of Rs20,000.  

They are not paid any other salary or benefits. 

With regard to part (b), there is no staff posted or recruited at this stage. 

Mr Ameer Meea:  May I ask the hon. Minister how many sittings of the Board there 

have been since the creation of this company? 

Mr  Bhadain:  There  have  been  many  sittings.  I  do  not  have  the  exact  number,  Mr 

Deputy Speaker, Sir.  I know that the Board is meeting regularly and the project is advancing.  

Apart from  the  concept  Master Plan, the detailed designs have already been received and it 

looks very beautiful, I must say, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. International tenders are going to 

be  issued  shortly,  in  a  matter  of  days,  to  Indian  companies  as  per  our  agreement  with  the 

Government of India. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  The  hon.  Minister  mentioned  that  tenders  would  be  issued  to 

Indian  companies.  But  in  relation  to  the  project,  firstly,  it  was  announced  that  Dubai  will 

finance  the  project,  then  it  was  Saudi  Arabia  through  redeemable  preference  shares,  and 

suddenly we do not hear anything coming from Saudi Arabia.  So, what is the option of Saudi 

Arabia? Has it already been redeemed? 

Mr  Bhadain:  No,  there  has  been  no  such  redemption,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  

Everything  is  going  according  to  plan.    We  have  received  a  specific  sum  from  the 

Government of India for three distinct things - 

(i) 

the new Parliamentary building; 

(ii) 

the Prime Minister’s Office, and 

(iii) 

the International Convention Centre. 

which comes to, if I am not mistaken, USD156 m.  So, everything else is on course as stated 

before  and  as  we  have  stated  before  this  House,  the  project  will  be  starting  in  August  this 

year. 

Mr Mahomed: We are talking about the development of a City Complex, large scale.  

May I know from the hon. Minister what is the process that has been followed in appointing 

 

53 

these  members  on  the  Board?    Is  it  simply  by  name  or  on  competencies  because  we  are 

talking about something that requires competencies here? 

Mr Bhadain: Certainly on competencies, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

Mr  Bérenger:  I  think  I  heard  the  hon.  Minister  said  that  tenders  will  be  out  in  a 

matter  of  days  for  the  construction  of  three  dedicated  buildings.  Can  I  know  where  matters 

stand as far as infrastructure is concerned, that is, roads, water and electricity that will have to 

be there for those buildings to be of any use? 

Mr  Bhadain:    The  engagement  letters  have  already  been  received  in  terms  of  the 

detailed requirements for the infrastructure site.  But as I have stated to the House before, the 

High Powered Committee which looks at the Heritage City Project had already approved two 

phases  which  went  to  Cabinet  and  Cabinet  gave  its  approval.    The  detailed  designing  has 

already been done.  Now, the next phase is on the infrastructure part. Again, this will follow 

the normal legal procedure before any services are retained on that and I very much believe 

that  according  to  what  the  State  Law  Office  has  stated  so  far,  it  can  follow  the  same 

procedure which has been followed so far according to section 3 of the Procurement Act, if I 

am not mistaken. 

Mr  Uteem:  May  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  to  date  how  many  subscription 

agreements  have  been  signed  by  this  company,  with  which  country  it  has  signed  any 

subscription agreement, how much money has been injected in that company and whether it 

is by Government or foreign countries? 

Mr Bhadain:  Of course, to start the company needs a minimum capital requirement 

and if I am not mistaken, it is a sum Rs50 m. which has been put so far for the basic structure 

and administrative works to be done. And then, of course, we are going to receive the finance 

from the Government of India.  We have also negotiated with banks in terms of a syndicated 

loan, as I have stated to  the House before, from three main banks which I believe comes to 

USD80 m.  This is all on track, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

Mr  Mahomed:    Recently,  there  were  press  articles  to  the  effect  and  a  letter  was 

tabled about the electricity requirement being 80 megawatts, but in fact, it was corrected and 

revised  downwards.    So,  my  question  is:  would  the  hon.  Minister  be  prepared  to  table  the 

name of the Board members with their qualifications so that we have an idea of what kind of 

competencies they have? 

 

54 

Mr Bhadain:  Well, I certainly don’t have any issue with that. I mean we operate in 

full  transparency.    In  relation  to  the  megawatts,  I  can  say  that  there  has  been  a  meeting 

between  CEB  and  Heritage  City  Co.  Ltd.  in  terms  of  the  energy  requirements.    There  are 

proposals  which  have  been  made  by  CEB  as  to  whether  a  substation  needs  to  be  placed 

within Heritage City and there are also options of renewable energy which are being looked 

at.  Similarly, there have been meetings with CWA, Wastewater and TMRSU and we should 

also bear in mind that there is a project consultant, Luxconsult (Mtius) Ltd, who is basically 

working on that and conducting all those together with the Board of Heritage City. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Ameer Meea, a last supplementary question! 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  idea  of  Saudi  Arabia  financing  the 

project  was  largely  canvassed  by  the  hon.  Minister  himself  and  his  colleague  hon.  ‘Sheik’ 

Soodhun.  Now that we are given to understand that there is a new player, India financing the 

project, may we know what is happening with the financing? Because from day one, we have 

asked  for  the  financials  regarding  the  project  to  be  tabled  on  the  Table  of  the  National 

Assembly with regard to the cash flow forecast and as to who is financing the project.  Can 

the hon. Minister enlighten the House? 

Mr  Bhadain:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  we  very  much  believe  in  a  participative 

approach.  One does not preclude the other.  If the Government of  

India has decided to  assist  the Government  of Mauritius with  this project, it does not  mean 

that  what  we  have  discussed  with  the  Government  of  Saudi  Arabia  is  no  longer  on.    The 

‘Sheik’ is meeting the Prince, as we speak, and we will know more. 

FINANCIAL SERVICES PROMOTION AGENCY – STAFF - OVERSEAS 

MISSIONS 

(No.  B/627)    Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 

Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 

Institutional Reforms whether, in regard to the Financial Services Promotion Agency, he will, 

for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, a list of the staff attached thereto, indicating in 

each case the – 

(a)  

post occupied;  

(b)  

terms  and  conditions  of  appointment,  including  the  salary  and  other  benefits 

drawn, and  

 

55 

(c) 

number of overseas missions undertaken, indicating in each case the  

(i) 

countries visited, purpose and duration thereof;  

(ii) 

composition of the accompanying delegation, and  

(iii) 

total cost thereof in terms of air tickets, per diem and other allowances 

drawn, if any. 

Mr  Bhadain:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  am  informed  by  the  Financial  Services 

Promotion  Agency  that  the  information  is  being  compiled  subject  to  certain  elements  for 

which legal advice has been sought and will be put in the Library of the National Assembly 

in due course. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Last week, answering to a question put by me on the FSC, the hon. 

Minister was not  present  in  the House and his  friend, the ‘Sheik’ was representing him and 

answering the question.   

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Ameer Meea, please, do not carry on with the ‘Sheik’. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Okay, I remove the ‘Sheik’.  Answering to a question on the FSC, 

he again stated: ‘I am advised by the Legal Division of the Commission and we will decide as 

to  whether  the  information  sought  would  be  released.’    Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  hon. 

Minister,  every  time  he  got  the  occasion,  flattered  himself  about  transparency,  good 

governance and accountability. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Ameer Meea, don’t give your opinion! Ask the question. 

Mr Ameer Meea:  My question is: we are talking public funds, we are talking about 

information  which  is  paid  out  of  taxpayers’  money,  why  the  hon.  Minister  cannot  give  the 

information to the House? 

Mr Bhadain: With regard to public funds, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, if we just have a 

look at the question, it is asking for: post occupied, terms, conditions of appointment, salary, 

other benefits, number of overseas missions undertaken indicating in each case the countries 

visited, purpose, duration, composition of accompanying delegation, total cost, air tickets, per 

diem, other allowances. I mean this information needs time. The FSPA has informed me that 

they are compiling the information. They are compiling the information plus there are certain 

issues in relation to which there are legal predicaments. They’ve asked for advice, once they 

get  it,  all  the  information  will  be  placed  in  the  Library  of  the  National  Assembly,  in  all 

transparency.  There  is  nothing  to  hide,  but  it  is  rhetoric  to  say  that  public  funds  are  being 

 

56 

used  all  the  time.  At  the  end  of  the  day,  public  funds  are  being  utilised  properly  for  the 

betterment of Mauritius. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Thank  you. I heard the hon. Minister saying that he is  going to compile 

all  the  information  sought,  but  is  he  in  a  position  today  to,  at  least,  indicate  out  of  all  the 

missions  carried  out  by  the  FSPA  whether  there  has  been  any  mission  carried  out  on  the 

African Continent to date? 

Mr Bhadain: Yes. I believe there have been missions conducted especially in South 

Africa with regard to the family office concept which the FSC is going to issue a license for 

and there are high-net-worth families in Durban who have already been approached. There is 

a list  of 10 which have  already  expressed their intention  of setting up their overseas family 

corporations in Mauritius.  

I must also say, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that the approach being taken by the FSPA is 

a result oriented approach. I have told them that I don’t believe in road shows, I don’t believe 

in  going  into  missions  overseas  just  for  the  sake  of  going  and  making  speeches.  Basically, 

everything has to be dealt with in terms of results. So, we’ve got a targeted approach, FSPA 

is operating with a new methodology unlike BOI  because the Chief Executive of FSPA was 

working,  I  think,  as  the  number  2  of  BOI  before.  But  we’ve  asked  him  to  change  the 

methodology,  to  change  the  approach,  to  make  sure  that  when  we  are  targeting  certain 

specific areas, whether it is high net worth individuals, overseas family corporation, law firms 

or  fund  managers,  asset  managers,  that  we  need  to  have  concrete  results  in  terms  of  the 

figures,  in  terms  of  how  many  companies  have  come  and  invested  in  Mauritius,  set  up  in 

Mauritius, created jobs in Mauritius. This is the new approach.  

Mr Ameer  Meea:  One  of the main  objectives of the  FSPA is  to attract  investors in 

the field of financial services. So, can I ask the hon. Minister since the setting up of such an 

agency, what concrete have we achieved up to now? The more so that we know that the FDI 

is en chute libre. 

Mr  Bhadain:  Well,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  must  say  the  FSPA  has  been 

reactivated last year and they have been doing a tremendous job in terms of number of new 

innovative  ideas  and  offerings  that  they  have  come  up  with  and  the  missions  have  been 

targeted in relation to bringing people in those new fields, I must say. The results are going to 

show in a short space of time, but we also have to bear in mind, as the hon. Uteem had stated 

 

57 

this morning, that the role of the FSPA is also to make sure that Mauritius is looked at as a 

clean, transparent jurisdiction which is in line with the vision of Government and they have 

been  responding  to  a  number  of  queries,  like  a  question  which  was  put  this  morning. 

Mauritius is being portrayed at international level as the place to do business for Africa. As I 

have  stated  before,  for  all  the  right  reasons  unlike  what  was  happening  with  the  previous 

regime. 

The Deputy Speaker: Next question, hon. Ameer Meea! 

STATE LANDS - RETRIEVAL 

(No.  B/628)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 

Port Louis East) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in 

regard to State lands retrieved by his Ministry since December 2014 to date, he will give a list 

thereof,  indicating  where  matters  stand  in  relation  to  the  cases  which  have  not  yet  been 

resolved. 

The Minister of Youth and Sports (Mr Y. Sawmynaden): Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, 

I am informed that the requested information is being compiled and the list will be placed in 

the Library of the National Assembly.  

The list  will, however,  exclude cases which are still under police/ICAC enquiry and 

other cases which are pending before Court. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Thank  you  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  In  a  past  Parliamentary 

Question by hon. Uteem - No. B/422 dated 17 May 2016, the substantive Minister stated to 

the House – 

“Since 2015, Mr L.A. also known as R. A. Barrister at Law is employed on contract 

as  legal  advisor  and  has  contributed  in  retrieving  more  than  400  hectares  of 

undeveloped  State  Land  from  promoters  and  in  forfeiting  deposits  and  recouping 

arrears of more than Rs400 m.”  

The  substantive  Minister  stated  this  to  the  House  in  relation  to  that  Parliamentary  Question 

and  further  to  that  I  asked  a  supplementary  question  about  a  list  of  these  400  hectares  and 

their extent and owner etcetera. The hon. Minister stated to the House – 

“I will ask the hon. Member to contact our website and he will get all the information. 

I have no objection for that”. 

 

58 

Well I have contacted the website and there are no information in relation to what the 

hon. Minister stated. So, may I... 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Please ask your question hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer  Meea:  May  I  ask the hon. Minister if  I  can  get  any other means how to 

contact the website or any phone numbers. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Let’s  hope  he  contacted  the  right  website.  Anyway  it  is  400 

hectares, you said it is a lot of land. So, that is why the information is being compiled. It will 

soon be placed in the library. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mahomed! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mahomed: Thank you Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. The hon. Minister, although not 

the  substantive  Minister,  in  his  reply,  mentioned  about  Court  cases.  May  we  have  an  idea 

from him whether the State is being sued in  any of the cases for which State land has been 

retrieved and, if so, in how many cases and to give an idea for the amount for which the State 

is being sued? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Unfortunately,  I  don’t  have  this  information  with  me.  The  hon. 

Member will have to wait for the substantive Minister. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer  Meea:  In a  statement by the substantive Minister dated 10  March 2015, 

relating to State land allocation, the hon. Minister stated to the House that, I quote – 

“My Ministry has reported 12 cases to the Police for investigation and also  11 cases 

where  reservation  had  been  issued,  12  cases  where  lease  agreements  have  been 

concluded and two cases of .....” 

I don’t know what all this means! 

“... letters of intent had been issued or currently the subject of further action”. 

 

59 

May  I ask the hon. Minister - even if he does not have the list with him  - if we can 

have a list of all these 12 cases at the Police and the other cases currently being investigated 

and also two cases at the ICAC? 

Mr Sawmynaden: I will take note and pass it on to the substantive Minister. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea, next question! 

 (Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea, next question, please! 

ISLAMIC CULTURAL CENTRE - BOARD - COMPOSITION 

(No.  B/629)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 

Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Arts  and  Culture  whether,  in  regard  to  the  Islamic 

Cultural Centre, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to – 

(a) 

the composition of the present Board thereof; 

(b) 

the reasons why the former Chairperson thereof resigned, and  

(c) 

  where matters stand as to the preparation of the forthcoming Hajj Pilgrimage. 

Mr  Baboo:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  with  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I  am 

tabling the composition of the Board.  

Regarding  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  the  former  Chairperson  has 

resigned due to personal reasons.  

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  concerning  part  (c)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that 

preparations  are  under  process.  In  fact,  my  colleague,  the  hon.  Soodhun,  Vice-Prime 

Minister,  who  has  been  entrusted  with  the  responsibility  for  the  organisation  of  Hadj,  is 

monitoring all arrangements. 

Mr Ameer Meea: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, just a clarification. I am asking the hon. 

Minister whether he is answering the question as substantive Minister or he is replacing the 

Minister because the ICC fall under the Ministry of Arts and Culture. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea, this is public information. It does not have 

to be asked through a question. Next question please! 

(Interruptions) 

 

60 

Mr Ameer Meea: All cultural centres fall under the ambit of the Ministry of Arts and 

Culture.  I am  just asking him.  In relation  to  the composition  of the Board, according to  the 

ICC Trust  Act  of 1989,  the Board must constitute of  a representative of  Rabita al-Alam  al-

Islami, five representatives to be designated by Islamic Socio Cultural or Organisation after 

consultation with Rabita office in Mauritius. So, therefore may I ask the hon. Minister why is 

it that the current Board is not in order according to the law, according to ICC Trust Act? 

Mr  Baboo:  Well,  regarding  Rabita,  I  would  like  to  thank  the  hon.  Member  for 

drawing  my  attention  to  this  matter.  Let  me  assure  the  hon.  Member  that  my  Ministry  is 

looking into the matter. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: In relation to Rabita, is the hon. Minister aware that, last year, in March 

2015, two representatives of Rabita,  Dr.  Farhan  and Mr Sami  Al Harbi,  came to  Mauritius, 

had meeting with the then Chairman of the ICC and the Vice-Prime Minister, where Rabita 

indicated their willingness to appoint members to the Board? So, did the hon. Minister meet 

up  with  these  two  representatives  of  Rabita  and,  if  not,  would  the  hon.  Minister  make  a 

follow-up with Rabita for the appointment of the representatives in the Board? 

Mr Baboo: It is true, I did not meet him, but I will look into it. 

Mr  Bérenger:  I  think  I  heard  the  hon.  Minister  say  that  he  is  going  to  circulate  the 

membership,  the  members  of  the  present  Board.    Can  I  know,  at  least,  who  is  the  present 

Chairperson? 

Mr Baboo: The present Chairperson is Dr. Hussein Subratty. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you.  Again,  according  to  the  ICC  Trust  Act,  there  are  five 

representatives to be designated by Islamic socio-cultural organisations. So, may I know from 

the  hon.  Minister  what  are  the  Islamic  socio-cultural  organisations  that  designated  the  five 

members and which member represents which socio-cultural organisation? 

Mr Baboo: I will circulate the list to you. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea, last supplementary! 

Mr Ameer Meea: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the hon. Minister stated to the House that 

that he would look into the matters.  Can I ask him if he can also look into the recent Board 

 

61 

meeting that  has been chaired by hon. Soodhun  himself, where other members who are not 

Board members were also present?  May he also look into this matter as well and inform us 

of the outcome? 

Mr Baboo: Well, okay, I will look into it. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Dr. Joomaye, next question! 

MINISTRY OF HEALTH & QUALITY OF LIFE/ LUZERNER KANTONSSPITAL - 

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING  

(No.  B/630)  Dr.  Z.  Joomaye  (Second  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 

Souillac)  asked  the  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  whether,  in  regard  to  the 

Memorandum  of  Understanding  signed  between  the  Luzerner  Kantonsspital  of  Luzern, 

Switzerland, and his Ministry, he will state the - 

(a) 

criteria used for the choice of the said hospital; 

(b) 

names  of  the  officials  from  the  said  hospital  who  were  involved  in  the 

negotiations in relation thereto, and 

(c) 

scope  of  involvement  in  the  decisional  process  as  far  as  strategy,  choice  of 

treatment  and  specific  equipment  for  the  management  of  cancer  patients  are 

concerned. 

Mr Gayan: Mr Deputy  Speaker, Sir, I wish to inform the House that, since January 

2013, Dr. T. C., co-chief in the Department of Radio-Oncology in Luzern, Switzerland, had 

made  a  request  to  the  then  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  for  possible  areas  of 

cooperation between Mauritius and Switzerland regarding Oncological Health Science,  inter 

comparable studies, transcontinental tumour board and exchange of specialists. 

In  April  2015,  Dr.  T.  C.,  during  a  private  visit,  paid  a  courtesy  call  on  me  and  the 

Director  General  Health  Services,  and  reiterated  his  request  of  collaboration.  It  was 

considered  that  this  was  a  matter  worth  pursuing  as  it  was  consistent  with  the  policy  of 

involving the Mauritian diaspora on national priorities. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  in  the  margins  of  the  World  Health  Assembly  2015,  a 

delegation  headed  by  myself  and  comprising  the  Senior  Chief  Executive  and  the  Director 

General Health Services of my Ministry, visited the Centre for Radiation Oncology in Luzern 

on 20 and 21 May 2015. 

 

62 

Discussions were held with Doctor P. T., who was the Head of the Centre, Dr. T. C., 

Radio-Oncologist,  H.  V.,  Vice-Head  and  other  Vice-Heads  and  Consultants  of  different 

departments  of  oncology  on  technical  support  and  capacity  building  in  relation  to  cancer 

issues. 

At its 24th Meeting held on 05 June 2015, Cabinet was informed of the proposal of the 

Ministry to sign a Memorandum of Understanding with the Centre for Radiation Oncology in 

Luzern. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  as  at  date,  no  MoU  has  been  signed  between  the  Ministry 

and  the  Luzerner  Kantonsspital  of  Switzerland.  Only  a  draft  MoU  for  collaboration  in  the 

field of cancer has been prepared and vetted by the Office of the Attorney General. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, the main objectives of this MoU would be to 

provide  technical  support  for  capacity  building  and  hands-on  training,  sharing  of  protocols 

and  guidelines  in  defining  evidence-based  treatment.  In  addition  to  providing  for  technical 

input  for  the  setting  up of  a  national  state  of  the  art  cancer  centre,  specific  training  courses 

and exchange of medical and health professionals as well as for nurses would be organised. 

I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  in  addition  to  the  above  collaboration  on  issues 

relating to cancer, several other avenues are being explored, namely – 

 

 

during my recent visit to India, discussions were held with the Shanti Mukund 

Hospital Curie Cancer Centre of New Delhi for cooperation in the setting up 

of a new Cancer Centre in Mauritius, and 

a Memorandum of Understanding already exists with le “Groupe Hospitalier 

Pitié-Salpêtrière-Charles-Foix”, Paris, on cancer-related issues. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  as  regards  part  (c)  of  the  question,  I  have  to  inform  the 

House  that  the  equipment  required  for  the  treatment  of  cancer,  namely  the  Linear 

Accelerator,  is  a  very  specialised  one,  and  there  are  very  few  manufacturers  worldwide  for 

this  equipment.  With  a  view  to  ensuring  absolute  transparency  and  accountability,  my 

Ministry has initiated an international  market  sounding exercise in  that respect.  The closing 

date  for  the  submission  was  27  June  2016  -  that  was  yesterday  -,  and  the  documents  are 

available  on  the  Public  Procurement  Office’s  portal  -  and  I  am  sure  that  this  portal  is 

working. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

 

63 

Dr.  Joomaye:  Thank  you.  I  would  like  to  ask  the  hon.  Minister  what  is  the  state  of 

implementation of the National Cancer Plan, which was started by Professor Khayat of Pitié 

Salpêtrière, and if this draft Memorandum of Understanding from Luzerner Kantonsspital is 

in line with that National Cancer Plan which is supposed to be going on. 

Mr  Gayan:  In  fact,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  some  of  the  recommendations  of 

Professor Khayat are already in place.  In fact, I read the report yesterday again, and I must 

say  that  we  are  on  the  right  track  with  regard  to  the  recommendations  made  by  Professor 

Khayat. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr Bérenger: I heard the hon. Minister say that that Memorandum of Understanding 

has not yet been signed. I will stick to cancer.  The Cabinet Memo says that the intention was 

to sign a Memorandum of Understanding with that institution, which is a very reputed, a very 

good one.  But, to support, to provide technical support for the establishment of the National 

Cancer  Centre,  including  the  design  and  construction  of  bunkers  -  as  I  said,  this  is  a  very 

respectable  institution,  and  we  welcome  overseas  help  in  matters  like  that  -  this  is  not  an 

institution in any way specialised in cancer; not at all. So, can I know why we are going  to 

these people whereas we know who are the best cancer establishments in London, in Paris, in 

India and so on.  Why go to an institution, which is supposed to advise us on the construction 

of bunkers, which is not at all specialised in cancer treatment or research? 

Mr  Gayan:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  certainly  do  not  share  the  views  of  the  hon. 

Leader of the Opposition on that. I have been to that hospital and I have seen what they can 

do, and  I spoke to  the Head and to  other people.  They were even prepared to  come and to 

advise us on how to set up the new bunkers.  

I  must  say,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  that  we  are  dealing  with  equipment  which  will 

cost about Rs250 m. 

(Interruptions) 

And the bunker has to be specially designed because of the escape of radioactive materials. 

So, we are making sure that we get all possible advice from  all quarters. I mentioned that I 

have also been to India, and we are also working with experts from the UK. So, we are trying 

to get all possible technical advice, so that when we set it up, we will do it in the light of the 

best advice available.  It is not something that we are taking lightly. This is why I said in my 

reply,  with  regard  to  the  purchase  of  equipment  and  also  for  the  turnkey  project,  a  market 

 

64 

sounding  exercise  has  been  started  both  for  the  turnkey  project  and  for  the  purchase  of  the 

equipment. We want to make sure because we do not have the expertise in Mauritius. In fact, 

when I was in India, I asked whether India could help us with an Architect and an Engineer 

who  can  design  the  bunker  and  to  supervise  the  work  for  the  bunker.  They  are  prepared  to 

help  because we do not  have that kind  of expertise in  Mauritius. Cancer is such a sensitive 

and  life  destroying  issue  that  we  want  to  be  absolutely  certain  that  we  are  taking  the  right 

decision. 

Mr Bérenger:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, of course, we don’t have the know-how here 

in  Mauritius,  but  when  we  choose  overseas  we  must  choose  the  best.  I  repeat,  this  is  a 

respectable, first class medical institute - the clinic or hospital that we are talking about - but 

it is not specialised in cancer. I am glad that a Memorandum – because we are talking about 

Memorandum according to the Cabinet communiqué - between Mauritius and one institution 

will help us set up the whole cancer centre here. So, looking right left in India and so on for 

advice  is  great,  but  before  we  sign  a  Memorandum  with  one  institution  for  setting  up  the 

cancer centre, will the hon. Minister give me the guarantee that we are going to choose really 

the best, and the best are in London, Paris and also India, Washington is a long way away, but 

in London and Paris? 

Mr Gayan:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the House can rest assured that we have not yet 

signed  the  MoU.  The  MoU  is  being  studied  by  both,  on  our  side  and  on  the  side  of 

Switzerland, but we are not tied to anybody. We have not made up our mind on anything. We 

are open and this is why we are getting the best  possible advice from anywhere, and this is 

how we are going to proceed. No decision has been taken and the market sounding exercise is 

precisely  to  give  to  the  world  knowledge  and  awareness  about  this  particular  project  in 

Mauritius and anybody can bid and anybody can express an interest. There is an Expression 

of Interest, anybody can do that. Not only Switzerland, anybody! 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Dr. Joomaye, a last supplementary! 

Dr.  Joomaye:  Thank  you,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  I  would  like  to  ask  the  hon. 

Minister  if  he  can  confirm  that  our  new  cancer  centre  will  be  equipped  as  far  as  linear 

accelerator  is  concerned,  with  the  latest  equipment,  that  is,  the  intensity  modulated 

radiotherapy linear accelerator. 

Mr Gayan:   Well, I can confirm to the House, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that we are 

going for the best, the state-of-the-art technology for that purpose. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Dr. Joomaye, Next question! 

65 

CANCER - RISK FACTORS 

(No.  B/631)  Dr  Z.  Joomaye  (Second  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 

Souillac)  asked  the  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  whether,  in  regard  to  the  risk 

factors  of  cancer,  he  will  state  the  strategies  developed  by  his  Ministry  to  create  awareness 

thereof and, incidentally, the prevention thereof. 

Mr Gayan:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with your permission, I shall reply to P.Q. Nos. 

B/631 and B/632 together as they relate to the same subject matter. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, factors known to  increase the risk of cancer are varied and 

include –  

(a) 

age  - cancer can take decades to develop; 

(b) 

the intake of tobacco and alcohol, unhealthy lifestyle, physical  inactivity and 

exposure to cancer-causing substances; 

(c) 

the environment, and 

(d) 

unpredictable factors. 

In  view  of  these  multiple  risk  factors,  my  Ministry  has  adopted  a  wide  ranging 

approach to create awareness and to prevent cancer. This includes the adapting of legislation 

to  address  new  concerns  about  cancer,  formulation  of  strategies  like  strengthening  of 

vaccination  programmes  and  more  aggressive  screening  and  media  campaigns.  We  are  also 

working very assiduously to provide better accommodation and treatment facilities for those 

who suffer from cancer. We are moving ahead with the implementation of a National Cancer 

Centre at Vacoas.  

A  plan  focusing  on  primary  prevention  such  as  early  diagnosis,  especially  amongst 

adolescent  girls  and  young  women  for  cervical  and  breast  cancer,  treatment  palliative  care, 

cancer surveillance and research, training of specialised personnel, a programme for end-of-

life care is under preparation. 

As far as the incidence and mortality rate of cancer are concerned, I am informed that 

according to the National Cancer Registry (2014), the incidence per 100,000 population was 

136.6 for males and 151.1 for females.   

The mortality rate per 100,000 population was 100.4 for males and 95.9 for females. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

66 

Dr. Joomaye:  Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  I would like to know whether the 

hon. Minister is contemplating to implement the systematic screening for prostatic cancer in 

males  and  breast  cancer  in  females,  that  is,  doing  systematic  prostate  specific  antigen  and 

radiological mammography for females systematically in the public hospitals? 

Mr  Gayan:    Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  with  regard  to  breast  cancer  there  is  a  lot  of 

awareness campaigns and screening being done by the NCD department of the Ministry.  A 

lot of work is already being done at the Oncology Centre at VH but, of course, more needs to 

be done.  But regarding  systematic prostate cancer screening, I  cannot say  that this is being 

done as systematically as it ought to be.  

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed:  Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  As regards the risk factors, is 

the use of agrochemicals or the excessive use of it considered as one of them and, if so, what 

are the strategies being adopted by the Ministry to address the issue? 

Mr Gayan:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I think last week there was a question on this 

aspect  which  was  addressed  to  my  colleague,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food 

Security  and  the  reply  was  given.  But,  of  course,  it  is  a  concerted  effort  on  the  part  of  all 

stakeholders, including all the relevant Ministries to ensure that there is a reduction in the use 

of  pesticides  and  to  give  more  awareness  to  people  who  are  using  pesticides  not  to  cause 

unnecessary risk to the population. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr Bhagwan:  Can I know from the hon. Minister whether within the establishment 

of  the  Ministry  there  are  enough  specialists  with  regard  to  palliative  care,  especially  at  the 

Oncology Centre? 

Mr Gayan:  Well, this is an area, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, where we have a shortage 

of  manpower.    In  fact,  we  are  giving  facilities  for  doctors  to  be  trained  in  these  areas.    Of 

course,  what  we  do  not  have  is  the  end-of-life  kind  of  palliative  care.    This  is  something 

which  is  lacking,  but  we  need  to  work  on  it  because  there  are  more  people  suffering  from 

cancer.  

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed:  The use of agrochemical, is it a risk factor or not? 

 

67 

Mr Gayan:  In a reply I gave earlier on, I spoke of unpredictable factors.  I take it that 

this should be an unpredictable factor. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr Bérenger:  Just a point of clarification which is of special interest to me, but I am 

sure we all want to know.  I heard the hon. Minister say that the number of cancer cases is 

increasing.  Now, there are a number of cancer cases being detected.  Can I request the hon. 

Minister to have the experts concerned to look into that, whether indeed the number of cancer 

cases is increasing? Before we used to say ‘inn mort veillesse’, now we know the ‘inn mort 

veillesse’  is  past,  here  ‘inn  mort  veillesse,  inn  gagne  cancer’.    So,  can  I  request  the  hon. 

Minister to see with the experts to look carefully at the figures, whether the number of cancer 

cases is indeed increasing and, if yes, give us the figures? 

Mr Gayan:  Well, I will certainly look into that.  But from the trend we see, maybe 

we  have  better  detection  and  better  screening  today  and  that  is  why  more  people  are  aware 

that they are suffering from cancer.  The statistics are compiled and if necessary I can make a 

statement in the House. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Dr. Joomaye. 

Dr. Joomaye:  Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir.  As we all know, two major risk 

factors of cancer are tobacco smoking and alcohol consumption.  I would like to know if the 

hon.  Minister  has  ongoing  awareness  programmes,  especially  in  collaboration  with  the 

Ministry of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific Research to 

create awareness, to prevent consumption of tobacco and alcohol in the schools. 

Mr Gayan: Well, we have ongoing campaigns. Only a couple of weeks ago, we had 

the “World No Tobacco Day” and that was an occasion to sensitise people about the harmful 

effects  of  tobacco  and  we  are  seriously  considering  having  plain  packaging  for  cigarette 

packs.  

With  regard  to  alcohol,  of  course,  there  is  no  advertising,  nothing  is  being  done  for 

sponsorship,  but  I  do  not  know  how  big  is  the  problem  in  the  schools.  My  colleague,  the 

Minister of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific Research, is 

not here; I’ll certainly pass on this concern to her. 

Dr. Sorefan: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the hon. Minister has given general incidence 

and  mortality  rate  of  cancer.  Will  the  hon.  Minister  consider  complying  a  list  of  different 

 

68 

types  of  cancer,  their  incidence  and  mortality  that  has  a  bearing  on  the  strategies  that  the 

Ministry of Health and Quality of life will take? I know he won’t have the answer, but he can 

compile  the  list  for  other  people  to  look  into  it  and  may  make  strategies  to  the  Ministry  of 

Health and Quality of Life for a typical cancer. 

Mr  Gayan:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  have,  in  my  file,  a  comparison  of  age 

standardised cancer mortality rates from a selected list of countries. They deal with males and 

females, prostate  cancer, breast  cancer, lung cancer and colorectal cancer.  I think it may be 

good if I just table this particular information for the hon. Member. 

Mr Bérenger: This is the last one. I heard both sides agreeing that insecticides and so 

on  that  are  still  being  inquired  into,  but  it’s  agreed  by  everybody  that  two  major  causes  of 

cancer are cigarettes and alcohol. Now, can I ask the hon. Minister whether, in Mauritius or 

internationally, we can be advised by the experts that a difference is made between different 

alcohols consumed? 

(Interruptions) 

It  is  not  a  joking  matter  because  there  is  a  difference  between,  for  example,  wine  and  very 

strong whisky that some people, including myself, use too. 

(Interruptions) 

Straight.  No,  it’s  a  very  serious  matter!  Whether  studies  have  been  carried  out  here  and 

overseas to  make  a difference  - of course, we would  like all alcohol consumption to  stop  – 

but  whether  any  study  has  established  a  difference  in  terms  of  cancer  impact  between 

different types of alcohol? 

Mr Gayan: Well, I am not aware whether there has been any study as mentioned by 

the hon. Leader of the Oppostion, but I am sure he is talking from experience because I am 

just given to understand that it all depends on the amount that one consumes, the number of 

units  that  one  takes,  it  is  a  bit  like  undergoing    an  alcotest,  if  you  take  just  one  glass,  it  is 

negative. But anyway! This is something that we have to look into. But I can also say to the 

House that with regard to cigarette sticks, the trend is going down. It was going down, but it 

has  just  gone  up  again.  So,  we  have  to  monitor  what  is  happening  in  the  population  with 

regard to cigarette smoking. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Dayal, last supplementary! 

 

69 

Mr Dayal: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, can I know from the hon. Minister whether  any 

study  has  been  carried  out  concerning  carbon  ash,  a  byproduct  for  the  industry  and,  if  not, 

whether he is planning to have one? 

Mr Gayan: Well, this one is a difficult one. I’ll need a substantive question for that. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mahomed, next question! 

CANCER – MORTALITY RATE 

(No.  B/632)  Dr.  Z.  Joomaye  (Second  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 

Souillac)  asked  the  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  whether,  in  regard  to  cancer,  he 

will state the latest statistics regarding the – 

(a) 

incidence thereof, and 

(b) 

mortality rate by the said disease in Mauritius. 

(Vide reply to PQ No. B/631) 

PORT LOUIS SOUTH & PORT LOUIS CENTRAL – STATE LAND - SALE 

EXERCISE 

(No. B/633) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 

Central) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in regard 

to Constituency No. 2, Port Louis South and Port Louis Central, he will state the total number 

of plots of State land earmarked for residential purposes, indicating the number thereof – 

(a) 

in respect of which neither a letter of intent nor a deed of lease was issued, 

indicating the respective location thereof, and 

(b) 

which can be purchased, indicating the – 

(i) 

number of applications for the purchase thereof received as at to date; 

(ii) 

number thereof that have reached the stage of final deed, and 

(iii) 

time frame for the completion of the sale exercise. 

The Minister of Youth and Sports (Mr Y. Sawmynaden): Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, 

with regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed that building sites within State land for 

residential  purposes  are  surveyed  district  wise,  not  constituency  wise.    As  regards 

constituency  No.  2,  the  two  main  localities  concerning  building  sites  of  Vallée  Pitot  and 

Tranquebar/Ward  IV where there are presently 38 and 10 occupiers respectively and where 

 

70 

neither a  Letter of  Intent nor a deed of sale have been issued as their occupation cannot  be 

regularised on the following grounds, inter alia – 

(i) 

occupiers  have  passed  away  and  the  Ministry  of  Housing  and  Lands  is 

awaiting the necessary documents from the heirs; 

(ii) 

documents have not yet been submitted by occupiers; 

(iii) 

dispute between occupiers regarding ownership of houses; 

(iv) 

houses over State land above 20% slope where development is not permissible 

under the Planning Policy Guidance; 

(v) 

encroachment on private properties; 

(vi) 

abandoned houses, and 

(vii) 

occupation by private landowners who have erected their houses on State land 

instead of their private land next to the State land. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, regarding part (b) subsection (i) of the question, applications 

for  the  purchase  of  building  sites  under  section  5  subsection  (5)  of  the  State  Lands  Act  are 

processed  on  a  district  wise  basis.  I  am  informed  that  as  at  17  June  2016,  out  of  2,194 

building site leases in the region of Port Louis, 1,540 applications have been received for the 

purchase of State land over which stands a housing unit. 

Regarding  part  (b)  subsection  (ii)  of  the  question,  out  of  these  1,540  applications 

received, 1,009 applications have been examined and the remaining 531 applications are still 

under process.  

Out  of  the  1,009  applications  which  have  been  examined,  977  have  been  found 

eligible for sale under section 5 subsection (5) of the State Lands Act. The deeds of sale have 

been finalised for 158 cases and the deeds for the remaining 819 cases have been drawn up 

and will be finalised in due course. 

As regards part (b) subsection (iii) of the question, a building site lessee can apply at 

any point in time for the purchase of the State land subject to the conditions as stipulated in 

section 5 subsection (5) of the State Lands Act. 

I am informed that the sale of State land is an ongoing process and the time taken to 

finalise the sale of building sites depends on various external factors, such as the drawing up 

 

71 

of the lease agreements, collection of information on lessee, finalisation of the social report 

enquiry by the relevant Ministry. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mahomed, next question! 

CEB – LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION – LAID DOCUMENT 

(No. B/634) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 

Central) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in 

regard to the letter dated 08 0ctober 2015 tabled by the hon. Leader of the Opposition on 03 

November  2015,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Central  Electricity 

Board, information as to if a Board of Inquiry was set up to inquire into the purported leakage 

thereof and, if so, indicate the – 

(a) 

process that was followed for the setting up thereof, and 

(b) 

composition thereof, indicating the fees drawn by each member thereof. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 

Collendavelloo): Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with regard to part (a), I am informed by the CEB 

that an enquiry was conducted by a Board which was set up by the General Manager. 

The Board was composed of Messrs K. S. Colunday, Barrister-at-law, as Chairperson, 

S.  Vythilingum,  Barrister-at-law  and  former  Permanent  Secretary  and  S.  Narain,  former 

Deputy General Manager of CEB. 

Up to now, no invoice has been submitted to CEB and, therefore, no fees have been 

paid as at to-day. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr  Bérenger:  Can  I  know  from  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  whether  all  that  was 

read that somebody has been suspended, that No. 2 at the CEB has been suspended, is it on 

the  basis  of  a  report  from  that  Committee  by  whatever  name  called  and,  if  yes,  suspended 

until when? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  Well,  my  understanding  is  that  this  suspension  is  under  the 

disciplinary  procedures  of  the  CEB.  I  suppose  the  disciplinary  proceedings,  if  any,  must 

follow their course, but I am not aware of more than that. 

Let  me  just  check!  No,  I  have  no  more  information  than  that.  I  have  no  more 

information, but I assume that the disciplinary procedure is being followed. 

 

72 

Mr  Bhagwan:  The  question  is  about  inquiry.  Can  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister 

inform the House whether the CEB has set up an inquiry following the Stop Order issued by 

the Municipality of Port Louis with regard to St. Louis Power Station where normally there 

will  be  delays  and  additional  expenses,  whether  an  inquiry  has  been  set  up  by  the  CEB  to 

look into the reasons thereof and who was the culprit? 

Mr Collendavelloo: I do not know. 

Mr  Mahomed:  Bouncing  from  the  question  of  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition, 

what has been the ultimate outcome of this inquiry so far? What has it led to? 

Mr Collendavelloo: First of all, I do not want to know and I do not know.  Secondly, 

I do not think it would be in order to disclose any matter which is still being considered in the 

context of a disciplinary procedure.  This is a matter for the management of CEB to decide.  

Afterwards, we shall see what happens. 

Mr  Mahomed:  Is  maître  Kalunday  presently  working  on  any  other  Disciplinary 

Committees or things of the sort at the CEB at the moment? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  Well,  perhaps  yes,  perhaps  no.    I  am  not  aware  of  any 

Committee  in  which  he  is  working.  I  have  been  asked  a  question  on  this  Committee,  I 

obtained  the  information,  but  if  the  hon.  Member  comes  with  a  question,  I  will  give  the 

answer, of course. 

Mr Uteem: In the light of the report of this Board of Inquiry, has there or will there 

be any Disciplinary Committee being set up or is it premature at this stage? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Make no mistake! I am not the General Manager of the CEB.  I 

do not interfere in this sort of business as I have said so many times.  The General Manager 

with the Board, they will take the action and if I am informed, I will let you know. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Dr. Sorefan, last supplementary! 

Dr. Sorefan: May we know from the hon. Vice-Prime Minister whether it is in order 

for  the  CEB  to  inquire  on  a  purported  leakage  of  document  that  was  not  signed,  that  was 

tabled in this House and whether it was in order for CEB to carry on and suspend the number 

two of CEB? 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  It  is  a  question  of  opinion  on  which  I  am  not  in  a  position  to 

pronounce myself. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Mohamed, last supplementary! 

73 

Mr  Mohamed:  Could  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  confirm,  following  his 

intervention on questions that were put by hon. Leader of the Opposition that talked about the 

possibility of information leaking or not, that he is the one, who, in fact, instigated this whole 

inquiry  and  now  he  is  saying  that  he  does  not  know  anything  when  he  is  the  one  who 

instigated it? 

Mr Collendavelloo: That is not true.   

HADJ 2016 - HADJ ORGANIZERS - LICENCE 

(No. B/635) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 

Central) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands  whether, in regard 

to  the  Hajj  2016,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Islamic  Cultural 

Centre, information as to the conditions that the hajj organizers need to fulfill in order to be 

eligible for the issue thereto with a licence for the organization thereof, indicating the – 

(a)  

number of applications therefor received, and  

(b)  

number of licences issued as at to date. 

The Minister of Youth and Sports (Mr Y. Sawmynaden): Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, 

the conditions that the Hadj Organisers need to fulfil are two-fold namely – 

(a) 

requirements of Saudi Authorities, and 

(b) 

criteria established by the Islamic Cultural Centre. 

The requirements for the Saudi Authorities are that all Hadj Organisers should not be 

under any sanction or disqualification and should be over 22 years old but below 60 years. 

The  criteria  which  the  Islamic  Cultural  Centre  considers  for  assessment  of  Hadj 

Organisers are – 

(a) 

past performance,  

(b) 

experience in Hadj organisation; 

(c) 

leadership skills; 

(d) 

pricing, structure for current and previous Hadj; 

(e) 

track record in relation to - 

 

complaints received from Hadjis; 

74 

 

 

 

 

breaches committed; 

sanctions received, and 

attitudes towards Hadj mission in difficult times. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, with regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed by the 

Islamic Cultural Centre that 21 applications were received by the Hadj Committee following 

a press communiqué inviting companies, jamaats, organisations, travel agencies interested in 

serving Hadjis to register themselves with the Islamic Cultural Centre. 

After an assessment conducted by Islamic Cultural Centre, 16 out of the 21 applicants 

were shortlisted and granted a provisional licence. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed that no licence has been issued 

for the Hadj 2016 so far.  

It is to be noted that the selection process will be carried out by the Hadjis themselves 

with  the  overriding  condition  that  only  those  Hadj  Organisers  who  managed  to  get  a 

maximum of 50 pilgrims will be licenced by the Islamic Cultural Centre. All those, who fail 

to reach the threshold of 50, will automatically be disregarded. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mahomed! 

Mr  Mahomed:  I  have  additional  questions,  but  given  the  hon.  Minister  is  not  the 

substantive Minister, I’ll reserve the right to put them later in another question. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan, next question! 

SICOM LTD. – EMPLOYEES - PRODUCTIVE BONUS 

(No.  B/636)  Dr.  R.  Sorefan  (Fourth  Member  for  La  Caverne  &  Phoenix)  asked 

the Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and  Institutional Reforms  whether, in 

regard  to  the  State  Insurance  Company  of  Mauritius  Ltd.,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the 

House, obtain therefrom, information as to why the employees thereof have not been paid the 

productive bonus over the past two years. 

Mr  Bhadain:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  am  very  much  aware  of  the  situation 

prevailing  at  the  SICOM  with  regard  to  the  non-payment  of  the  productivity  bonus  to 

employees for the years 2013/2014 and 2014/2015. 

In  fact,  some  time  back,  I  have  met  with  the  employees.  I  also  met  with  the  union 

representatives and I believe that the situation prevailing is very unfair. 

 

75 

Now,  what  I  have  been  informed  is  that  the  philosophy  of  granting  a  profit  related 

performance  bonus  is  to  motivate  employees  to  deliver  high  performance  whilst  not 

necessarily loading the salary and related expenses year on year. 

Payment of this bonus at SICOM is based on the underlying premise that there is an 

increase  in  profitability  and  on  targets  including  new  projects  being  met  or  exceeded.  The 

basis  of  granting  the  bonus,  performance  and  KPIs  which  impact  directly  on  the  group’s 

profitability  are  the  elements  around  which  the  productivity  bonus  is  based.    These  are 

monitored through action plans and balance forecasts. Employees are appraised through their 

performance and other several criteria which include contribution in meeting the targets. 

Now, I believe what has happened during those two years is that they have missed out 

by  a  few  per  cent  on  the  target  which  they  should  have  achieved  and  because  of  that 

management has taken the decision not to pay any productivity bonus.   

I  had  meetings  with  the  employees  and  also  with  the  trade  union  representatives. 

When  you  look  at  the  salaries,  benefits,  allowances  and  other  payments  which  are  made  to 

the  management  team,  it  is  mirobolant  and  it  is  really  unfair  that  these  employees  are  not 

being paid these two years productivity bonus. 

I have made representations to the Board. I have asked the Board to look into that and 

to ensure that even though a few persons have not been met in terms of the target which was 

set that, on a humanitarian basis, they do proceed and they do pay post productivity bonuses. 

Now,  I understand that management is  not  willing to  do that even though the Board 

has  decided  that  they  should  go  ahead  and  do  it.    So,  this  is  une  situation  inédite  where 

management  does  not  want  to  follow  what  the  Board  is  saying  for  the  benefit  of  the 

employees.  So,  we  will  see  how  this  is  going  to  unfold  shortly  with  legal  advice  and 

everything which is going to be obtained. 

Dr. Sorefan: Can the hon. Minister inform the House whether the CEO, who is the 

management, is paid a monthly salary of above Rs1 m. and has been paid productive bonus? 

Is she a Director of the MCB Ltd.? 

Mr Bhadain: Yes, it is not a salary of Rs1 m. which is paid, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 

In  fact,  it  is  a  monthly  package  of  Rs1  m.  including  free  first  class  ticket  to  London  every 

year and so on and so forth.  It is not only the CEO but the management team. When we look 

at  the  monthly  package  that  they  are  being  paid,  we  are  talking  about  probably  Rs400,000-

Rs500,000 a month for a number of people who are working in top management.  So, this is a 

 

76 

State-owned  enterprise  and  what  is  happening  is  that  dividends  are  not  being  paid  to 

Government,  the  reserves  are  going  up.    I  think  it  is  about  Rs4.3  billion  in  reserves.    Huge 

salaries  are  being  paid  to  the  management  team  and  the  employees  are  not  being  paid  their 

productivity bonus.   It  is  a completely unacceptable situation.  At the end of the process,  if 

things do not change then action will have to be taken.  I can assure the House that action will 

be taken. 

Dr. Sorefan: Is the hon. Minister aware that there is a report that the CEO has kept in 

her custody for the last three years not letting it out because it should be to the advantage of 

the  employees  and  the  CEO  is  just  keeping  it  and  not  implementing  what  is  in  the  report? 

Will the hon. Minister look into it and, if possible, table that report in the near future? 

Mr Bhadain: Yes, I am aware, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, that, in fact, there is a report 

which  was  prepared.    These  employees  should  have  been  paid  in  accordance  with  some  of 

the recommendations of the report and it is true that this has not been made available to either 

the employees or their representatives or for some obscure reasons management has decided 

to keep that report in a drawer somewhere. But these issues are being looked at and we will 

do everything to ensure that these employees are dealt with in fairness and in accordance with 

all the principles of natural justice. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr Uteem: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, may I know from the hon. Minister whether his 

Ministry  has  carried  out  a  survey  to  find  out  about  the  management  package,  the  CEO 

package compared with the private sector in the insurance or banking like the State Bank of 

Mauritius so that we have an idea about how overpaid that person is or not? 

Mr Bhadain: Well, not only I very much believe it is much more than what is in the 

private sector but here, we are talking about Government and we are talking about the work 

that SICOM is doing and the services which they are providing because in the pipeline they 

are  getting work from  Government  entities.  When they are  getting work from  Government 

entities,  we  don’t  need  to  go  and  market  as  much,  we  don’t  need  to  advertise  as  much,  we 

don’t  need  to  open  retail  outlets  because  I  think  SICOM  is  operating  only  in  Port  Louis  as 

compared to other insurance companies, NIC for instance, which has 14 retail outlets across 

Mauritius.  So,  when  you  look  at  how  things  are  happening  here,  it  is  very  much  similar  to 

what  is  happening  in  many  parastatal  bodies  in  Mauritius  where  people  are  using  their 

position to, basically, earn a lot of money.  When we look at the delivery, the expectations are 

 

77 

not  being  met  and  this  has  to  be  rectified.  I  will  also  say,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  that  the 

issue regarding MCB, I very much believe that there is a serious problem there because I was 

inform  that  the  Chief  Executive  of  SICOM  is  a  Director  on  the  Board  of  MCB  and  this 

would,  of  course,  give  rise  to  potential  issues  of  conflict  because  MCB  has  got  insurance 

companies under the structure. So, how can you be the Chief Executive of SICOM and you 

sit on the Board of MCB, you are taking decisions there as a Director and then, you are taking 

decision here for SICOM. This is unacceptable. 

Mr  Bérenger:  After  all  I  have  heard,  can  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  the 

composition of the SICOM Board, especially, its Chairperson and when that Chairperson and 

the present Board were appointed? 

Mr  Bhadain:  I  will  certainly  provide  the  information  if  the  hon.  Leader  of  the 

Opposition comes with a substantive question on that. I must say... 

(Interruptions) 

I’ll answer! There are several  Boards in SICOM. That is something which is amazing. You 

have  a  Board  for  SICOM  Ltd,  a  Board  for  SICOM  Financial  Services  Ltd,  a  Board  for 

SICOM Secretarial Services Ltd and a Board for SICOM in terms of the property side.  When 

you look at how much was paid to Board Directors in 2014, I can tell you... 

Let me tell you! 

(Interruptions) 

 (Interruptions) 

The  figure  was  Rs28  m.  for  people  sitting  on  these  Boards.  Now,  these  were  Executive 

Directors. If you were to add non-Executive Directors, it would be a further Rs8 m. making it 

a total of Rs36 m. 

(Interruptions) 

Well, I can assure you that the situation has been dealt with. 

(Interruptions) 

I will table the information. I don’t have the information with me, I will certainly table it. But 

I can tell you that it is not the kind of abusive fees which were being paid to Board Directors 

under  the  previous  regime,  including  senior  members  of  the  DPP’s  Office  and  other 

organisations who are actually sitting on the Board of SICOM and advising at the same time. 

 

78 

Mr  Bérenger:  Well,  obviously,  the  hon.  Minister  does  not  know  who  is  the 

Chairperson  of  the  main  Board  and  other  Boards  and  for  the  members  he  says  he  will 

circulate.  Can  we  have,  therefore,  the  composition  of  all  those  different  Boards  which  the 

hon. Minister has referred to and the date of appointment? 

Mr Bhadain: We will certainly have that, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in all transparency 

so that we can see how much abuse was going on before? 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed: Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. We have heard the hon. Minister 

say  that  he  has  listened  to  the  question  of  the  hon.  Member  with  regard  to  the  situation  of 

those  employees  and  he  believes  in  what  he  says  in  his  answer,  that  the Chief  Executive  is 

wrong  in  her  approach.  If  that  is  the  case,  he  has  said  that  he  would  look  into  it,  that  he  is 

aware of it. What does he propose to do in reality and what are the actions he proposes to take 

to remedy the situation? Because looking into it, everyone can look into it; it does not sort out 

the matter. What does he propose to do? Has he considered the possibility of asking the Rt. 

hon.  Prime  Minister  to  take  those  members  to  task,  whom  he  believes  are  so  much  on  the 

wrong? 

Mr Bhadain: I have already answered that, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. I said that it was 

a situation inédite in the sense that the matter has been raised with the Board members and 

taken  up  at  Board  level.  It  has  been  minuted,  it  is  on  record  and  still  the  management  of 

SICOM  has  refused  to  follow  the  instructions  of  the  Board  and  goes  ahead  and  acts  in  the 

best interest of the employees. Now, when you have a situation like that, I can’t, as Minister, 

go  there  and  put  the  house  in  order.  Then,  you  would  say  I  would  be  interfering  with  an 

organisation. The Board is doing its job, but management does not want to follow the advice 

and they have been running around for legal advice on issues which, basically, do not  even 

require  seeking  legal  advice.  It’s  just  to  delay  the  process  so  that  they  don’t  implement  the 

decision of the Board. This is the situation right now. 

Mr  Bérenger:  A  last  one  from  my  part.  Now,  we  have  been  told  that  the  General 

Manager  is  flouting  the  decisions  of  the  Board.  Then,  can  I  know  why  does  not  the  Board 

take action? 

(Interruptions) 

 

79 

Exactement! But nothing is happening, except bla-bla-bla in Parliament, under Parliamentary 

immunity.  If there are decisions of the Board that are being flouted, can we have the dates, 

the cases concerned and why the Boards or the Board is not acting? 

Mr Bhadain: Of course, the hon. Leader of the Opposition can have the dates and all 

the  details.  I  have  no  problems  giving  all  the  details  because  I  am  also  on  the  same 

wavelength that the Board should take action and I am waiting for the Board to take action. 

What more can I do? The Board has said that this needs to be done and management has said: 

‘I am not going to follow what you said.’ What can I do? Let the Board decide whether they 

are going to seek legal advice and whether they are going to take even more drastic actions 

now. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Can  the  hon.  Minister  enlighten  the  House  by  informing  us  who 

decided about the package of the Chief Executive Officer of the Bank and the packages of the 

different Chairpersons of the different Boards and Directors of the previous Boards? 

Mr Bhadain: Well, to be honest I don’t know who has decided because it looks like 

the salaries which were there at that material time, when you look at the package which has 

been offered it goes back to a number of years. 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Bhadain, answer the question! 

Mr Bhadain: Well, it was certainly not the DPM who was then Minister of Finance 

because the Board ... 

(Interruptions) 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mohamed! 

Mr  Bhadain:  I  can  tell  the  hon.  Member  why.  Because  these  decisions  have  been 

taken far back before he became Minister of Finance and I can tell you that these people have 

been there for donkey number of years. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan, a last supplementary! 

Dr. Sorefan:  Thank  you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. The hon. Minister said that he is 

going to table all the Directors of the different holdings of SICOM. Very good! We hope we 

 

80 

get it! But with this, can we have all the lucrative salaries, allowances, fees and so on for each 

of the Board of the SICOM holdings? 

Mr Bhadain: Yes, in line with all the best practices of good governance, I will table 

that too. 

The Deputy Speaker: Next question, Dr. Sorefan! 

PUBLIC HEALTH – UROLOGISTS – RECRUITMENT 

(No.  B/637)  Dr.  R.  Sorefan  (Fourth  Member  for  La  Caverne  &  Phoenix)  asked 

the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the public health sector, he 

will  state  the  number  of  urologists  employed  as  specialist  and  consultant  respectively, 

indicating – 

(a) 

the qualifications requirements therefor and the qualifications that are held by 

the incumbents, and  

(b) 

if his Ministry is proposing to have recourse to international advertisement for 

the recruitment thereof. 

Mr  Gayan:  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  am  informed  that  presently  there  are  two 

specialists  in  general  surgery  who  have  followed  subspecialty  training  in  urology  from 

Germany. There is also a general surgeon with subspecialty training in renal transplantation. 

The training period was conducted at Hôpitaux Universitaires de Genève for a period of six 

months. Furthermore, all general surgeons have training in urology during their studies.  They 

are in a position to treat patients with urological problems. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, the answer is in the negative as all patients are 

being treated locally. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan: Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. Will the hon. Minister inform the 

House that so far we don’t have a well-qualified urosurgeon in the different hospitals and the 

general  surgeons 

think 

they  can  do  everything,  but 

today  we  are  being  very 

compartmentalised  and  speciality  orientated  and  this  department  is  very,  very  sensitive  in 

terms of life and death because there are so many problems arising from kidney down to the 

urethra  and  everything.  Will  the  hon.  Minister  see  to  it  that  we  get  more  urosurgeons, 

urologists also, to be in different hospitals?  

 

81 

Mr  Gayan:  Well,  we  will  certainly  try  to  pass  on  the  message  to  all  those  who  are 

specialising  and,  in  fact,  this  is  one  of  the  scarcity  areas  and  I  know  specialists  are  being 

trained in that field. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

Dr. Joomaye: Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. In line with what hon. Dr. Sorefan 

has been saying, are you contemplating to amend the Medical Council Act 1999 in order to 

recognise well demarcated specialities now like urology, gastroenterology, paediatric surgery, 

paediatric anaesthesia, because we can no longer afford to have general practitioners, general 

physicians and general surgeons practising in these specialities? 

Mr Gayan: Well, this is a matter that should be addressed as a substantive question 

because it covers lots of things. 

The Deputy Speaker: Last supplementary, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Thank  you.  I  am  sure  the  hon.  Minister  is  aware  that  all  the  renal 

failures that we are having in Mauritius because of diabetes, etc., we are contemplating doing 

renal transplants in Mauritius. At one time it was done, because we did have urosurgeons and 

they attempted a few cases.  Will the hon. Minister really see to it that we get people trained 

to  be  renal  transplant  specialist  in  Mauritius,  if  we  are  talking  about  Mauritius  being  a 

medical hub? 

Mr Gayan: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, renal transplant is being performed in Mauritius 

right now. We are having a workshop on organ transplant  generally some time next month, 

there  will  be  doctors  and  specialists  coming  from  other  parts  of  the  world  and  we  will  be 

guided by what they say with regard to further training on this. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mohamed! 

Mr  Mohamed:  I  have  not  heard  if  any  other  hon.  Member  put  that  question  -  so,  I 

apologise  if  someone  else  has.  I  just  wanted  to  know  whether  -  since  we  are  talking  about 

renal transplant - the hon. Minister could, not only since  January 2015, but for the past five 

years, he could table a list of the success rate of those renal transplants that will enable us to 

fare how we are doing or whether we are improving or not, what are the success rates, what 

are the rejection rates, what are the failure rates? 

Mr Gayan: Well, I have no difficulty. In fact, I have the information right now from 

1993 until 2015. I can table it. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

82 

Dr.  Joomaye:  I  would  like  to  know  whether,  in  the  Urology  Department,  if  the 

lithotripsy  equipment  is  functional  and  is  functioning  properly  with  the  appropriate 

specialist? 

Mr Gayan: Well, I need a substantive question for this. 

The Deputy Speaker: Next question, hon. Dr. Sorefan!  

HOSPITALS - CT SCANNERS 

(No.  B/638)  Dr.  R.  Sorefan  (Fourth  Member  for  La  Caverne  &  Phoenix)  asked 

the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the CT Scanners found in the 

regional hospitals, he will state the number thereof which are operational, indicating - 

(a) 

in each case, the age and lifespan thereof, and  

(b) 

if  consideration  will  be  given  for  the  outdated  ones  and  the  ones  beyond 

repairs to be replaced in financial year 2016/2017 and, if so, if the 64 slices or 

more model CT Scanners could be procured. 

Mr  Gayan:  Mr Deputy  Speaker, Sir,  I  wish to  inform  the House that  presently  four 

CT Scanners are operational at regional hospitals, two at Victoria Hospital and one Dr. Jeetoo 

Hospital and one at Jawaharlall Nehru Hospital. Their ages range from 2 to 14 years and their 

approximate lifespan is 10 to 15 years. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, I wish to refer the hon. Member to the reply I 

made to PQ B/351 at the sitting held on 03 May 2016. Action has already been initiated for 

the replacement of the CT Scanner at SSRN Hospital. Moreover, action will be taken for the 

procurement of a new CT Scanner to replace the existing one at Jawaharlal Nehru Hospital in 

the next financial year. 

I  am  also  informed  that  a  CT  Scanner  with  64  detectors  capable  of  acquiring  128 

slices has been proposed for the SSRN Hospital. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

Dr. Sorefan: The hon. Minister has said that the lifespan of the CT Scanner is up to 

15 years. Well, I totally disagree with this because reading from all the website of the… 

The Deputy Speaker: Don’t give your opinion, ask your question! 

 

83 

Dr. Sorefan: Well, that follows, that it is only eight years to get the maximum image 

quality, after that the quality goes down. So, 15 years, you are spending a lot of money. Will 

the  hon.  Minister  really  see  to  it  that  we  must  be  proactive,  if  after  eight  years  we  start  to 

think of renewing it, even if it looks good, but the images are not good for diagnosis? 

Mr  Gayan:  Well,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  in  fact,  this  is  something  that  ought  to 

have  been  done  under  the  previous  regime.  What  we  are  doing  now  is  to  ensure  that 

whenever we acquire new equipment,  we have not  only a maintenance agreement that goes 

with  the  equipment,  but  also  to  ensure  that  we  have  a  provision  for  the  replacement  of  the 

equipment  at  the  end  of  its  lifetime.  Right  now,  we  wait  for  the  equipment  to  break  down, 

then we start looking for money to purchase the new equipment. We are not going to do that, 

we are going to provide for the time when the equipment will have to be replaced. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  The  hon.  Minister  just  mentioned 

that there are only four CT Scanners. So, may I know from the hon. Minister the amount of 

money paid to the private sector, to the private clinics whenever this facility is not available 

in hospitals and patients are required to go to private clinics to do the scan? 

Mr  Gayan:  Well,  it  is  my  understanding,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  that  all  the  CT 

Scanners required to be in the public hospitals are being done in the public hospitals. If a scan 

has broken down in one, the patients are taken to another public hospital. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

Dr.  Joomaye:  Thank  you.  I  would  like  to  ask  the  hon.  Minister  if  he  is  aware  that 

internationally renewal programmes for CT Scanners is not based on lifetime, it is based on 

the  number  of  slices  that  an  equipment  has  produced  and  it  is  based  on  the  activity  of  the 

equipment.  So,  I  would  like  to  know  if  he  will  look  into  it  to  see  whether  this  can  be 

implemented  in  Mauritius  in  order  to  prevent  breakdown  and  to  have  a  better  renewal 

programme for equipment? 

Mr Gayan: Well, we will certainly look  into that.  In fact,  that is  one of the reasons 

that I normally get when I ask: why do they break down in the public hospitals and they don’t 

break down in the private clinics? And then, the answer that I get is: of course, we have more 

CT  scans  in  the  public  hospitals  than  they  do  in  the  private  clinics.  But,  the  point  is  well 

taken. 

 

84 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan, last supplementary! 

Dr. Sorefan: Will the hon. Minister contemplate - in the near future, instead of having 

CT  Scanners  in  different  regional  hospitals  –  to  have  a  centralised  department  with  one  or 

two scanners or even three scanners in that Unit to cater for Mauritian patients? 

Mr  Gayan:  I  do  not  think  that  would  be  feasible.  We  have  regional  hospitals  and  

each regional hospital must have its own facility. 

MINISTRY OF HEALTH & QUALITY OF LIFE - SPECIALISTS - RECRUITMENT 

FROM ASIAN COUNTRIES 

(No.  B/639)  Dr.  R.  Sorefan  (Fourth  Member  for  La  Caverne  &  Phoenix)  asked 

the  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  whether,  in  regard  to  the  qualified  specialists 

recruited from the Asian countries since 2010, he will state if any consultant/patient has filed 

any complaint against any one of them and, if so, give details thereof, indicating the actions 

taken in relation thereto and the outcome thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

The Deputy Speaker: The Table has been advised that the following PQs have been 

withdrawn: PQ Nos. B/644, B/647, B/648, B/649, B/650, B/661 and B/658. Time is over. 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10(2) 

The Prime Minister: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I move that all the business on today’s 

Order Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 

Collendavelloo) rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER 

ELEVENTH ALL AFRICA GAMES – MAURITIUS PERFORMANCE  

The Minister of Youth and Sports (Mr Y. Sawmynaden): Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, 

following the conclusion of the enquiry into the Anti-Doping Violation by athletes during the 

Eleventh All Africa Games held in Brazzaville, Republic of Congo from 02 to 19 September 

 

85 

2015,  the  Nigerian  Gold  Medallist  Weightlifter,  Miss  Elizabeth  Onuah,  has  been  tested 

positive.  

Consequently, the  International Weightlifting Federation has reviewed the allocation 

of medals in the women 53 kg category.  Our athlete, Ms Roilya Ranaivosoa, who won two 

Silver and one Bronze medals, has now been attributed the two Gold medals and One Silver 

medal in this Category.  Mauritius has, therefore, … 

(Interruptions) 

…improved  its  position  from  8th  to  7th  in  the  overall  ranking  among  the  52  participating 

countries.    Mauritius  obtained  seven  Gold  medals  during  the  11th    Edition  of  the  All-Africa 

Games. 

I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  this  is  the  best  performance  ever  achieved  by 

Mauritius in the All-Africa Games. Mauritius won only one Bronze medal at the 9th Edition 

of the Games held in Nigeria in 2007 and obtained four Gold medals at the 10th Edition of the 

Games held in Maputo. 

On behalf of the House, I wish to extend my congratulations to Ms Roilya Ranaivosoa 

for her excellent performance. 

PUBLIC BILLS 

First Reading 

On motion made and seconded, the Independent Police Complaints Commission Bill 

(No. XIV of 2016) was read a first time. 

Third Reading 

On motion made and seconded, the Supplementary Appropriation (2015) (No. 2) Bill 

(No. XIII of 2016) was read the third time and passed. 

The Deputy Speaker:  I suspend the sitting for 30 minutes. 

At 4.20 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 4.59 p.m. with Madam Speaker in Chair. 

Second Reading 

THE UTILITY REGULATORY AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL 

(No. XII of 2016) 

 

Order for Second Reading read. 

86 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 

Collendavelloo):  Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  that  the  Utility  Regulatory  Authority 

(Amendment) Bill (No. XII of 2016) be read a second time. 

The Principal Act, which was enacted in November 2004, set up a Board to manage 

the Authority. The Board consists of a Chairperson and three Commissioners. 

At  that  time,  the  mode  of  appointment  of  the  Board  was  through  an  Appointments 

Committee modelled on that of the Independent Commission against Corruption. 

In  2006,  the  Prevention  of  Corruption  Act  was  amended  to  review  this  mode  of 

appointment. 

And, as a consequence, in 2008, the Utility Regulatory Authority Act was amended to 

follow what had been adopted for the ICAC. The amended Act prescribed that the President 

would appoint the Chairperson and Commissioners on the advice of the Prime Minister given 

after consultation with the Leader of Opposition. 

In the course of the debates on the 2008 Bill, all participants agreed that the setting up 

of the Authority was a matter of urgency. The then Minister stated that the setting up of the 

Authority was one of the performance indicators of the Development partners, and I quote – 

“It  is  expected that the  Act  will  be proclaimed  around September this  year targeting 

that the Authority will become fully operational by June 2009.” 

Unfortunately,  despite  all  commitments  taken  since  2004,  the  Board  could  not  be 

appointed, and the fault cannot be laid at the door step of anyone in particular, because  as I 

stand  informed,  in  2009,  an  international  advertisement  was  carried  out  to  identify  a 

Chairperson who satisfied the specific criteria set in the legislation and one person had been 

identified to be the Chairperson of the Board, but no decision was taken on his appointment. 

Since my appointment in December 2014, I have been trying to identify persons who 

satisfy these criteria. These criteria are spelt out in section 10 of the Act, which is the object 

of the amendment proposed.  The section reads as follows - 

“The  Chairperson  and  Commissioners  shall  be  persons  of  high  moral  and 

professional integrity, having relevant qualifications, expertise and experience in 

either law, economics, business, finance, accountancy or engineering.” 

 

87 

Subsection (2) (a) of that section further provides that the Chairperson shall be a 

holder of a university degree, have not less than 5 years’ proven professional, academic 

or  managerial  experience  with  the  provision  of  any  utility  service  (Utility  service 

meaning electricity services as per Part B of the First Schedule); and he should also have 

experience  and  expertise  in  a  managerial  capacity  in  relation  to  electricity  or  water  or 

wastewater services. 

Subsection  (3)  (a)  provides  that  the  Commissioner  shall  be  a  holder  of  a 

university  degree  and  have  sufficient  experience  and  expertise  in  relation  to  electricity, 

water or wastewater. 

In addition to these requirements, the Act provides that a person cannot be appointed 

as  Chairperson  or  Commissioner  if  “he  has  been  a  director,  an  officer,  a  shareholder  or  an 

employee of, or has otherwise held an active role or had an interest in, an undertaking at any 

time during a period of 2 years immediately preceding the proposed appointment.” 

The  specific  provisions  in  the  Act  are  highly  restrictive.  Other  regulatory  bodies  in 

Mauritius  do  not  contain  such  specific  criteria  in  their  respective  legislation.  And  we  have 

looked into a number of utility regulatory bodies in other countries. We have not found such 

detailed degree of specification for the appointment of members.  To be fair, when I imparted 

that  difficulty  to  the  House,  the  idea  was  shared  with  the  Leader  of  the  Opposition  who 

suggested at Question Time that an amendment would be possible to remove this obstacle. 

I am, therefore, proposing that section 10 of the Utility Regulatory Authority Act be 

amended by repealing subsections (2) (a) and (3) (a). 

The  provision  that  the  Chairperson  and  Commissioners  shall  be  “persons  of  high 

moral and professional integrity (…)” will remain in the Act. 

This  precise and clear requirement will act  as a strong safeguard to  ensure that only 

persons  with  the  necessary  professional  experience  and  competence  and  independence, 

persons of high level of respectability and with a clean track record would be considered for 

appointment. 

I believe that we can safely rely on the wisdom and discernment of the holders of such 

high offices as the President, the Prime Minister and the Leader of Opposition for the use of 

sufficient discernment in the appointment of the Board.  

 

88 

Upon  the  Bill  coming  into  force,  I  intend  to  make  my  recommendations  to  the  Rt. 

hon. Prime Minister for the appointment of the Board. 

With these words, I commend this Bill to the House. 

Mr Sawmynaden rose and seconded. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

(5.03 p.m.) 

The  Leader  of  the  Opposition  (Mr  P.  Bérenger):  Madam  Speaker,  what  we  are 

looking at is 11 wasted years since 2005.  I heard the hon. Vice-Prime Minister say that the 

setting up of such an Authority was a matter of urgency.  Indeed, but we are talking 11 years 

later.  There was nothing, in  fact,  stopping the  Bill  from  coming into operation as from  the 

end  of  2005.    In  2004,  we  had  just  voted  the  law;  it  took  some  time.  But,  as  from  2005,  I 

don’t accept this point that, with the qualifications that were in the law, les oiseaux rares ne 

purent être trouvés.  I don’t buy that one, Madam Speaker. 

Eleven wasted years under the previous Government, but one and a half wasted years 

under this Government!  One and a half years it took to come with a ridiculous amendment. I 

find it ridiculous. Just doing away completely with qualifications!  This is the result.  If we 

had  amended  the  required  qualifications,  if  you  tell  me  that  what  was  in  the  law,  that  the 

chairperson to be appointed must be a university degree holder, is done away with!  The other 

qualifications could have been amended, but it took this Government one and a half years to 

do away with qualifications completely. Because what the hon. Vice-Prime Minister quoted 

is  that  the Chairperson  and  Commissioners  shall be  persons  of  high  moral  and  professional 

integrity. This is not qualification. 

So, my point is that the paragraph that we are deleting, 2(a), the result is that there are 

no  longer  any  qualifications  required.  There  are  only  disqualifications.  Somebody  will  be 

disqualified  if  this  and  that,  but  there  are  absolutely  no  qualifications  left.  We  wasted  11 

years. This Government has wasted one and a half years and this is a ridiculous amendment. 

We could have made it, I mean doing away with the requirement for the Chairperson to hold 

a University Degree, but I think l’oiseau rare sera à l’envers là.  You won’t find somebody 

who qualifies and who does not have a University Degree. You  will find a problem finding 

that. So, I don’t agree at all. We wasted 11 years; this Government has wasted one and a half 

years!    I  agree,  we  should  have  amended  the  qualifications,  but  not  done  away  completely 

with all qualifications. 

 

89 

Having listened to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, I’ll say a few words on the past as he 

has  gone quite at  length  on the 2008  amendment.  It’s worth  going.  I’ll say  a few  words on 

that  -  hon.  Alan  Ganoo  is  present.  The  2004  Bill  was  a  superb  piece  of  legislation.  The 

MMM/MSM  Government  brought  it  forward.  Hon.  Ganoo  was  the  Minister  of  Public 

Utilities.  It  was  a  superb  piece  of  legislation  and  a  complete  one.    That  we  should  have 

wasted  -  not  waited  -  11  years  although  the  2004  legislation  was,  I  repeat,  a  superb  and 

complete  piece  of  legislation.  Hon.  Ganoo,  then  Minister  of  Public  Utilities,  presented  the 

Bill. You know who spoke for Labour Party? Our good friend, Dr. Arvin Boolell! He made a 

great speech, all in favour, completely.  That was in 2004 and I, as Prime Minister, gave all 

my support to hon. Ganoo who was then the Minister of Public Utilities. While the best parts 

of  that  piece  of  legislation  was  the  Appointment  Committee,  which  the  hon.  Vice-Prime 

Minister  has  referred  to,  it  was  great.  Therefore,  who  would  appoint  the  Chairperson  and 

Directors?    An  Appointment’s  Committee  composed  of:  the  President  of  the  Republic,  the 

Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition. We had learned our lessons from the case 

of  ICAC,  the  law  setting  up  l’ICAC.  There,  we  went  really  too  far.  We  had  the  same 

Appointment’s  Committee,  but  all  decisions  had  to  be  taken  in  unanimity.  So,  the  then 

Leader of the Opposition said what he had to say. So, we kept the Appointment’s Committee, 

but we said a majority will take a decision. If the President and the Leader of the Opposition 

are  in  agreement,  the  decision  is  on.    It  was  real  democracy  at  work.  Why  did  we  do  that? 

Because  we  wanted  to  give  its  full  role  to  the  President  of  the  Republic  -  we  were  in 

Government  - and its full role to the Leader of the Opposition. That is  why  I said that, that 

piece  of  legislation  of  2004  was  complete,  a  superb  piece  of  legislation.  But  it  did  not  last 

long after the elections of 2005, unfortunately.  

 

In 2008, came the amendments which the hon. Minister has mentioned. Already four 

years had been wasted. The law was passed; the Bill was passed at the end of 2004. As from 

2005, four  years wasted and then 2008, amendments brought by the Labour Government of 

those  days.  I  must  say  that  -  my  friend  Nandcoomar  Bodha  is  not  here  –  my  friends  in  the 

MSM opposed the amendments brought forward by the Labour Party in 2008. The orator for 

the  MSM  was  hon.  Nandcoomar  Bodha.  Nice  speech,  and  opposed  that  change  to  the 

Appointment’s Committee and to other parts of the Bill. Yet, today, the opportunity was there 

to  reintroduce  that.  Instead  of  this  ridiculous  small  amendment  that  just  does  away  with  all 

qualifications, nothing prevented the Government, the hon. Minister concerned going back to 

the situation that it was prior to 2008. 

 

90 

The opportunity to reintroduce that has been missed but, unfortunately, I have to say, 

it is not surprising after what we heard when ‘la loi Bhadain’ was discussed at the end of last 

year and first days of this year, after we’ve heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister now thinks of 

presidential powers, as compared to prime ministerial power; I am not surprised that there has 

been a missed opportunity when we are amending the law to bring back the Appointment’s 

Committee  to  give  its  due  role  to  the  President  of  the  Republic  and  to  the  Leader  of  the 

Opposition.  That opportunity has been missed and it’s very sad. I take note that hon. Bodha 

is not present. 

So,  Madam  Speaker,  2005-2016,  11  wasted  years,  including  one  and  a  half  years 

wasted by this Government to come with this ridiculous piece of amendment. I find all this 

very, very sad. I have doubts whether this small amendment will bring with it the coming into 

operation of this very important piece of legislation that was voted in 2004 and it is not often 

that there is unanimity on a piece of legislation. There is unanimity in this case from what  I 

hear, but I have my doubts whether this small amendment - I am in total disagreement with - 

will allow the Authority to start functioning; but I will give the benefit of the doubt. 

At least, what is left in the Bill is that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister will have to consult 

the  Leader  of  the  Opposition  before  advising  Government  on  whom  to  appoint,  without,  I 

repeat, any qualifications in the law as from that amendment today. But, as I said, I’ll give the 

benefit  of  the  doubt.  An  urgent  matter  has  resulted  into  11  wasted  years  since  2005.  Better 

late than never, as we say, but it is very, very late. 

I  hope  that  when  I  am  consulted  for  the  Chairperson  and  Commissioners  to  be 

appointed, that due consideration will be given before the President is advised by the Rt. hon. 

Prime Minister, now that there are no longer any qualifications left. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Sesungkur! 

(5.14 p.m.) 

Mr  D.  Sesungkur  (First  Member  for  Montagne  Blanche  &  GRSE):  Thank  you, 

Madam  Speaker,  for  giving  way.  I  intend  to  speak  in  support  of  the  amendment  which  is 

proposed today. 

 

91 

I  think  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  is  right  that  it  is  a  piece  of  legislation  of 

utmost  importance  which  was  presented  by  the  then  MSM/MMM  Government  in  their 

foresightedness and in the vision of the Prime Minister of that time.  

This  legislation is  of utmost importance because it looks at  utilities which deal  with 

the  day-to-day  requirements  of  people.    It  is  important  that  there  is  good  management  of 

those, so that we can provide a good service to the public.   

The amendment today deals with a section which is of utmost importance because it 

touches the apex of the Utility Regulatory Authority.  It is the body which is so important for 

the  functioning  of  the  whole  set  up  that  I  think  it  requires  some  attention  of  this  House.    I 

think the hon. Vice-Prime Minister is right that he is bringing this to the House on a matter of 

urgency  because  we  know  that  there  has  been  a  long  delay  in  the  appointment  of  the 

Chairperson and the Commissioners, and it is of urgent necessity that we address this issue.   

The amendment is talking about qualification. It  is important for the House to know 

what  is  the  international  trend  today.    The  international  trend  today  is  about  searching  for 

talents.  It is not about taking people on the basis of qualification only.  Talent is much more 

than qualification.   Talent is about something which we often call it aptitude, some will call 

it special skills, knowhow, capabilities, expertise or even genius.  So, qualification only is not 

sufficient for such important position.  I think a Board which is central in the implementation 

of the strategy of Government policy, of the Minister’s vision and we should have someone 

who goes beyond mere qualification that has been put in the Bill. I think what the hon. Vice-

Prime  Minister  has  been  doing  is  to  correct  the  provision  of  the  Principal  Act,  which  is 

basically  tying  his  hands  and  he  is  unable  to  implement  the  policy  he  wants  to  implement.  

So, that is why, he has come before this House today. 

We  need  to  ensure  that  all  our  institutions,  all  the  parastatal  bodies  have  talented 

people, have competent people who can implement the policies of Government.  This is what 

we  should  aim  at.    We  should  not  restrict  ourselves;  put  in  the  law  restrictions,  boundaries 

which will block the whole policy making decision and which will block the whole decision 

process.  This is what I want to say.   

The issue today is: ‘we should put the right man in the right place.’ We should give 

liberty to the Minister to do it because the Minister knows what will work best for the country 

and for the people.  All round the world, the trend is about searching for talented people and 

 

92 

gradually there is less and less importance given to qualification only.  This is a trend in law 

firms; it is a trend in accounting firms. Everywhere!  I will just mention three cases.   

There is the case of Ernst & Young.  Ernst & Young is an accounting firm which has 

removed  all  academic  and  education  details  whenever  somebody  wants  to  take  an 

employment with  that firm.   They want  to  ensure that they are not  biased by looking at  the 

CV; by looking at the school that candidate has attended.  They want to choose in their own 

deliberate  judgment  and  they  want  to  choose  freely  by  looking  how  the  candidate  reacts.  

This is what they are doing.   

It  the  same  thing  for  PricewaterhouseCoopers,  a  firm  where  I  made  my  career,  they 

are  not  looking  at  qualification,  they  want  to  attract  the  best  people  in  the  organisation; 

people who can contribute in adding value to the clients’ service, people who are committed, 

people who can take responsibility, and not only the piece of paper which they present. 

There  are  many  researches  which  have  been  done  and  which  prove  that  the  best 

academically  qualified  person  does  not  give  a  guarantee  that,  that  person  will  be  a  high 

performer  in  the  future.    So,  I  think  the  Minister  is  right.    Same  for  a  leading  law  firm, 

Clifford Chance. Clifford Chance goes far beyond.  They have introduced an approach of CV 

blind, which means that they do not even know what kind of studies that person has done.  It 

meant  that  the  interviewers  would  not  be  given  any  information  about  which  university  the 

candidate has attended.  So, it is about choosing the right person.   

I think the Minister has a very good reason for proposing this amendment because we 

should get this regulatory body at work and we should not waste more time. There are issues 

which go beyond petty politics. I believe that the Opposition, by the way the hon. Leader of 

the Opposition has expressed, has unanimity on this Bill and it is very good for the country.  I 

think on major issues there should be a convergence of use because I feel the Opposition is a 

shadow Government and whatever good decision the Government is going to take, will also 

benefit the other side of the House. 

On this note, I thank you very much for your attention. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Mahomed! 

(5.23 p.m.) 

Mr  O.  Mahomed  (Third  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis  Central):  

Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak on this Amendment Bill 

 

93 

today.  The point of my intervention is to make a case as to why the law needs further review 

before  the  setting  up  of  the  Utility  Regulatory  Authority  which  I  shall  refer  to  in  short  as 

URA. 

Madam Speaker, I had no idea when I pressed the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, Minister 

of Energy and Public Utilities on the subject of the appointment of the Board of URA during 

my PQ No. B/116 of 05 April 2016 that things will move that fast and I am glad about it. 

Indeed,  in  his  reply  to  me,  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  did  explain  how  if  he  is 

unable  to  find  a  proper  composition,  he  would  ask  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  to  consider 

altering the law to make it more flexible.  So, I am glad to see that the Bill before us today, 

seeks to amend the URA Act in order to adjust the qualifications required for the appointment 

of the Chairperson and Commissioners of the Board of the URA. 

Madam  Speaker,  we  are  here  talking  about  the  qualifications  required  for  the 

appointment of a Chairperson and three Commissioners by the President of the Republic on 

the  advice  of  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  after  consultations  with  the  Leader  of  the 

Opposition in accordance with Section 9 of the Act. 

Pour  la  petite  histoire,  Madam  Speaker,  this  came  about  following  amendments 

brought  to  the  URA  Act  in  2008  during  the  days  of  the  Labour  Party  in  order  to  have  the 

three  most  important  officers  in  the  country  to  participate  in  the  decision-making  process 

related  to  the  appointment  of  the  Chairperson  and  Commissioners  of  the  URA.  This  was 

purposely done so that with  this mechanism in place the authority  will have a distinct legal 

mandate free from ministerial control. The regulatory body will be insulated against improper 

influences  and  will  be  protected  from  arbitrary  considerations.  Thus,  the  incumbents  of  the 

positions of Chairpersons and Commissioners will be able to exercise their functions without 

any hindrance and possibly without any fear or favour. 

Madam Speaker, at paragraph 6.323 of the Maurice Ile Durable Policy, Strategy and 

Action  Plan  of  May  2013,  provision  has  been  made  for  the  setting  up  of  the  Utility 

Regulatory Authority which it recognised as a core element of the institutional architecture. 

Ceteris Paribus, we had endeavoured to set up this key institution once the Singaporean team 

that was appointed to advise Government on the strategic reform options for the water sector 

including legal and regulatory framework would have completed its work. 

 

94 

Members will recall how the former  Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Energy 

and Public Utilities, Dr. Beebeejaun, in his reply to hon. Lesjongard during PQ No. B/143 of 

16 April 2013, explained how, due to the fundamental reform required in the water sector… 

Madam  Speaker:  Sorry,  I  am  interrupting  you  hon.  Osman  Mahomed.  Don’t  open 

the  debate  too  much  because  you  will  see  the  object  of  the  Bill  is  only  to  review  the 

qualifications for the appointment of the Chairperson. So, I gave you some leeway but please 

don’t open the debate too much. 

Mr Mahomed:  Thank  you Madam  Speaker but  I started by saying that  I think with 

this amendment the operation of the URA will come into place soon but I am making a case 

why  the  law  needs  further  review.  I  continue  the  quotation  when  the  former  DPM  was 

addressing the hon. Lesjongard – 

“Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the Utility Regulatory Authority cannot be set up on 

a piecemeal  basis. A responsible and effective  regulatory body must oversee 

the high level planning and development of infrastructure and utility services 

in a holistic manner.” 

As a consequence of this, new appointment was however made by the previous Government 

and thus the authority could not be made operational. As a matter of fact, while preparing my 

last  Maurice  Ile  Durable  Progress  Report  in  October  2014,  a  copy  I  had  laid  before  this 

august Assembly last year, I had consulted the Ministry of Energy and Public utilities and I 

was officially informed that the appointment of Chairman and Members is under way and the 

operationalisation of the URA will follow. No real explanation was given and this is captured 

as Policy Code A6 of the report. Then came the general election of 2014. 

Madam  Speaker,  in  debating  on  the  amendment  being  brought  to  Section  10  of  the 

Principal  Act  which  provides  that  the  Chairperson  must  have  such  qualifications  that  they 

have become des oiseaux rares, a first question that I would like to raise is whether the issues 

that were considered as serious to the former Deputy Prime Minister with respect to the water 

sector,  with  respect  to  the  work  of  the  Singaporean  team  would  have  been  sorted  out 

meanwhile. 

Madam  Speaker, the Principal URA act  is  a  loi-cadre which makes provision of the 

general principle of a regulatory body. The objects of the Bill in 2004 were to – 

(i) 

ensure the sustainability and viability of the utility services; 

 

95 

(ii) 

protect the interests of both existing and future customers; 

(iii) 

promote  efficiency  in  both  operations  and  capital  investment  in  respect  of 

utility services, and 

(iv) 

to  promote  competition  so  as  to  prevent  any  unfair  and  anticompetitive 

practices in the utility services industry. 

Since  2004  up  to  now,  the  utility  services  landscape  for  electricity,  water  and 

wastewater  has  dramatically  changed.  We  are  increasingly  being  called  to  walk  on  a  tight 

rope  insofar  as  our  utilities  are  concerned  -  energy,  water  and  water  disposal  sectors  due 

mainly  to  our  population  growth  and  the  increasing  level  of  economic  activities  and  the 

several new projects being envisaged example of which are the Heritage City project and the 

several smart cities being envisaged. So much so that I deem it appropriate to point out that 

the operationalisation of the URA has been considered as a key performance indicator by the 

development partners for many years, the hon. Minister said it himself. 

Furthermore,  through  Maurice  Ile  Durable,  renewable  energy  has  found  its  way  in 

Mauritius. 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Osman  Mahomed,  we  are  not  debating  the  Act.  We  are 

concentrating  on  the  review  of  the  qualifications  of  the  appointment  of  the  Chairperson, 

please look at the Explanatory Memorandum and come back to the main clauses of the Bill. 

Mr Mahomed: Okay. Thank you. I was just making a point about pricing of energy 

prices but I will quit that rather. 

Madam Speaker: It is not appropriate! 

Mr Mahomed: Sorry? 

(Interruptions) 

Okay.  Like  I  said  the  mood  point  of  my  speech  is  to  make  a  case  why  we  need  to  further 

review the law. 

Madam Speaker: Yes but you have to refer to the main premises of the Bill. Relate it 

to  the  main  premises  of  the  Bill.  You  can’t  discuss  the  whole  Utility  Regulatory  Authority 

Act as it was. You relate it to the amendment that is in front of the House today. 

Mr Mahomed: Well, it is very freaky for me but I will try to. Even the hon. Leader of 

the  Opposition  he  mentioned  that  the  amendment  being  brought  to  us  is  -  he  used  a  very 

 

96 

strong word but I am not going to use it and it is a very important reform that you are talking 

about. But then I will abide. 

Madam Speaker: I have to be consistent in my Ruling. 

Mr Mahomed: Okay. I wanted to talk about pricing, I wanted to make a case about 

why should we not entrust the pricing of utility sectors be it wastewater, electricity and water 

to the URA. 

Madam Speaker: You can still come with a specific matter on adjournment. 

Mr Mahomed: Okay. So, I will table this, not the speech it’s part of the Maurice Ile 

Durable Policy Strategic and Action Plan for the information of the hon. Minister about how 

we  wanted  to  go  about  revamping  the  utility  regulatory  business  further  from  what  is 

stipulated in the law in 2004. 

Madam  Speaker,  times  have  changed  and  we  need  to  adapt  but  I  do  urge  the 

Government to ensure that one of the first tasks of the authority, once set up, is to developed 

a detailed plan for implementation of the regulatory framework with special reference to – 

(i) 

licensing and permitting; 

(ii) 

tariff and price control; 

(iii) 

technical and commercial codes of practice; 

(iv) 

customer protection as reflected in the URA Act, and  

(v) 

quality standards.  

These  are  the  five  principal  points  I  would  wish  the  Government  to  consider  to 

improve the Utility Regulatory Authority (Amendment) Bill.  

Let  me  close,  Madam  Speaker,  by  urging  the  Government  to  ensure  that  the 

operationalisation of the URA, at long last, will strike the judicious balance in resolving the 

triple-headed  policy  trilemma.  By  that,  I  mean  that  the  URA  should  pursue  the  three 

combined  objectives  of;  firstly,  securing  the  improved  security  of  supply  of  the  utility 

services  combined  with,  secondly,  greater  affordability  and  last,  but  not  least,  lower 

environmental  impact.  Madam  Speaker,  the  past  heavy  ecological  footprint  of  our  utility 

services is  just not  sustainable if we want  to  preserve a healthy environment for our people 

and for tourists who  continue to  seek an island paradise  and increasingly  expect  to  find the 

benefits of a smart system of utility management. 

 

On this note, I thank you for your attention. 

97 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah! 

(5.36 p.m.) 

Mr  S.  Rutnah  (Third  Member  for  Piton  &  Rivière  du  Rempart):  Thank  you, 

Madam  Speaker.  Madam  Speaker,  this  is  yet  another  Bill,  another  piece  of  legislation  that 

this Government  is  bringing in  this House to  demonstrate really  that democracy is at  work, 

that  there  is  a  recognition  of  the  principle  of  democracy,  a  recognition  of  competence,  a 

recognition of value-based education. Those who are educated are not necessarily university 

graduates,  but  those  educated  people  come  from  any  background,  provided  that  they  can 

deliver results. And, what is section 10 all about?  It is about qualifications. I have not read 

the whole legislation, the 2004 legislation, but it appears to me, only reading section 10, that 

this is a legislation that was brought in in a rush and as a result of the rush, it has become a 

bad  legislation  with  bad  drafting.  I  am  sorry  to  say  that,  but  this  is  what  I  would  say  very 

candidly.  Why I say so is that if we look at section 10, it starts like this - 

“The Chairperson and Commissioners shall be persons of high moral and professional 

integrity,  having  the  relevant  qualifications,  expertise  and  experience  in  either  law, 

economics, business, finance, accountancy or engineering.” 

So, the very  first  part of this legislation stipulates that the person should be qualified. 

What level of qualification? It does not say. Then, if we look further, subsection 2 says - 

“A person shall not be appointed as Chairperson - 

(a)  unless he - 

(i) 

is the holder of a university degree.” 

What  is  this  drafting?  If  you  have  already  stipulated  in  subsection  (1)  that  the  person 

should  hold  certain  competence,  certain  level  of  education,  certain  qualification,  then  what 

was the point of mentioning that the person needs a university degree? What was the point? 

Now, if we look further, there are two subsections - 

“(ii)  

has  not  less  than  5  years’  proven  professional,  academic  or  managerial 

experience in connection with the provision of any utility service; and 

 

98 

(iii) 

has sufficient experience and expertise in  a managerial  capacity in  relation 

to electricity or water or wastewater services.” 

So, what these two other subsections do, in effect, is to restrict many people who can be 

effective, competent in the job but they would not be considered because they don’t have that 

kind of managerial exposure and experience. Why, obviously, they would not have that? It’s 

because Mauritius is a small island. We are not like in the United Kingdom where there are 

many utility  agencies. We have, in  Mauritius, only  the CEB, the CWA and the wastewater, 

three. So, by restricting it, it was, basically, disdaining many people’s chances. That is why 

because of legislations like these, for example, when we look for someone to go and head the 

State Trading Corporation, we get difficulties. When we want someone to head the Mauritius 

Broadcasting Corporation, we are faced with difficulties. Eventually what happens, we tend 

to get only a bunch of people who as if monopolises intelligence and they, themselves, would 

be,  at  all  material  time,  controlling  main  institutions  of  our  country  and  this  should  stop.  I 

congratulate the hon. Vice-Prime Minister who is bringing this amendment, because it is, in 

effect, democratising the chances of many competent Mauritian citizens… 

(Interruptions) 

…some  competent  Mauritian  citizens  will  have  the  opportunity  to  be  considered  to  run  our 

utility sector. 

Madam Speaker, coming to the comments made by the hon. Leader of the Opposition, 

he  has  said  some  good  things,  but  I  don’t  agree  with  him  at  all,  that  the  qualification 

requirements now has been lifted, because he says: no qualification required. No, it is not the 

case.  If  we  look  at  section  10,  subsection  1,  there  is  that  mention  of  qualification,  fields  in 

law, in economics, etc. At that time in 2004, when the hon. Leader of the Opposition was the 

Prime Minister, he had a lot of good things to say about the Bill, but he, himself, did not pick 

up on section 10, subsection 2.  If I may, this is what he had to say, partly, about the Bill, just 

a  few  quotations.  This  is  what  he  has  to  say  about  my  very  able  and  learned  friend,  hon. 

Ganoo.  He presented the Bill at that time, and he congratulated hon. Ganoo and went on to 

say  like  this:  I  am  sure  he  is  very  happy  that  the  Opposition  is  for  this  Bill.  At  the  time, 

Labour Party in Opposition, a very good speech by the then hon. Dr. A. Boolell. But that very 

happiness did not last long because in 2008 - because of lack of foresight - we had to bring 

further amendments. Happiness reminds me of Thomas Hardy -  

 

99 

“Happiness was but the occasional episode in a general drama of pain.” and the pain 

continued  up  to  now  and  now  we  are  trying  to  resolve  this  conundrum  in  which  people, 

competent  people  were  put  into,  many  people  who  have  missed  their  chance  of  being 

considered for the position of Chairperson and Commissioners.  

11  years  wasted!  Who  wasted  the  11  years?  I  like  this  when  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister 

(Interruptions) 

makes some remarks. 

(Interruptions) 

Why? Because, it is true! Who wasted the 11 years? Who? The same people with whom the 

hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  was  trying  to  negotiate  an  alliance  and  negotiated  that 

impugned alliance to rule this country, but eventually we know what happened, we know the 

results,  I  am  not  going  to  go  into  all  these,  but  let  me  give  a  few  examples.  My  very  able 

friend, hon. Sesungkur, gave a few examples about Clifford Chance, about accountancy firms 

and so on. But let us take one simple example; Richard Branson who heads Virgin Atlantic, 

he  has  no  big  qualifications,  yet  he  is  managing  one  of  the  best  airlines,  one  of  the  best 

financial institutions, supermarkets and many other big macroeconomic businesses. 

John Major, the former Prime Minister of Britain, when he took over from Margaret 

Thatcher – at least Margaret Thatcher was a chemist and a barrister-at-law – with barely few 

O levels, he ran the United Kingdom until he lost the elections.  

(Interruptions) 

Yes, he was the real Major!  Now, that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has triggered this, he was 

a real Major. 

(Interruptions) 

Why  Alexander  the  Great  is  called  Alexander  the  Great?    Alexander  the  Great  is  called 

Alexander the Great because he was a real Major.  He was the person who was able to go into 

various other jurisdictions and  conquer easily  and he  was one of the most powerful  man in 

Ancient Asia and Ancient Sub-Saharan part of the world.  That is what made Alexander the 

Great great because he was a great Major.  He was a great guerrier as we say.  

Madam Speaker, I have said what I had to say about section 10 and really speaking I 

endorse  everything  that  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  and  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 

Utilities has said. I also endorse everything that hon. Sesungkur has said.  I also endorse all 

 

100 

the good things that hon. Mahomed has said. On this note I again congratulate the hon. Vice-

Prime  Minister  for  bringing  this  piece  of  legislation  to  give  a  kick-start  looking  at 

competence, looking at people who can really, effectively manage our Utilities Sector. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Ganoo! 

(5.47 p.m.) 

Mr  A.  Ganoo  (First  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River):    Madam  Speaker,  I 

shall be very brief. 

But, unfortunately,… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

… my wish is being hampered by the fact that I introduced this Bill in 2004 when for the first 

time the URA Bill was introduced.  Many orators before me had already made reference to 

that.  Of course,  I have listened to  the advice  or the directives that  you have given before  I 

took  the  floor  that  we  should  not  engage  ourselves  into  a  debate  about  the  Utility  Sector 

today.  The Bill is very restrictive indeed. It is only amending section 10 of the principal Act, 

Madam Speaker.  This is true. I think your ruling is good, correct and wise, but nevertheless 

without  going  thoroughly  into  a  debate  about  the  Utility  Sector,  we  just  have  to  remind 

ourselves  as  it  has  been  done  before  me  that  the  Act  which  was  passed  in  2004  by  the 

MSM/MMM  or MMM/MSM Government,  in  whatever form  we  call the then Government, 

was in fact, very avant-gardiste when we decided to do that. 

This  Act  provided  for  the  establishment  of  this  body  for  -  in  two  words  -  the  better 

regulation of the utility services in the interest of the customers and also of the providers of 

such services. This is why the Act made general provisions for the licensing of operators, the 

tariff setting, the standard of service delivery, protection of consumers and so on in the three 

sectors: electricity, water sector and wastewater sector. 

So, the debates, in fact, took place on 09 November 2004.  The Bill was adopted on 

that  day  with  all  the  provisions  which  were  amended  later  by  the  Labour  Government  in 

2008. It was in the original Bill that we provided for the recruitment of the Chairman of the 

Board  and  the  Commissioners  along  the  lines  which  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  has 

just explained. In fact, it was the second opportunity after the provisions in our Prevention of 

 

101 

Corruption Act about the recruitment of the Chairman or of the Director of the ICAC.  Then, 

the  second  case  was  that  of  the  Chairman  and  the  Commissioner  of  the  Utility  Regulatory 

Board, that is, it should have been by the President, the Prime Minister and the Leader of the 

Opposition.    With  the  small  change  that  we  made  in  this  Bill,  that  is,  the  majority  would 

prevail in the case two of the three decided who should become the Chairman on the Board 

and so on.  And all this was done away with in 2008 and today the hon. Vice-Prime Minister 

is  asking  the  question:  why  today  the  Government  shouldn’t  have  taken  this  opportunity  to 

come back on what we proposed in 2004? 

But, be that as it may, Madam Speaker, this legislation in 2004 was a good piece of 

legislation. Not because I presented it, in fact it was done by Cabinet.  I remember I had to go 

four or five times before Cabinet.  I had to change the Bill on several occasions until we had 

the fine print that we had.  

Hon. Bodha, when he was intervening in 2008 when the Labour Government was in 

power and came with the proposals to amend the legislation of 2004, in fact, this is what I can 

read from hon. Bodha’s speech – 

“Mr  Speaker,  Sir,  when  we  go  through  the  speech  of  my  hon.  colleague  –  he  is 

referring  to  me  when  I  presented  the  Bill  –  then  we  see  what  was  the  political  will 

behind our legislation.” 

This is hon. Bodha speaking – 

“We  really  wanted  to  set  up  an  institution  in  the  best  interest  of  the  country  of  the 

sector  or  sectors  and  then  as  well  as  we  have  taken  measures  to  insulate  the 

institution.” 

Look at the words which were chosen, Mr Speaker, Sir. The words were, and he was quoting 

me in my speech of 2004 – 

“This  is  precisely  why  Government  is  committed  to  providing  the  Authority  with  a 

distinct  legal  mandate  free  from  ministerial  control.    This  measure  will  insulate  the 

Authority from improper influences.” 

And he went on to say – 

“The  couching  of  the  words  is  brilliant.    It  was  a  very,  very  beautiful  speech,  Mr 

Speaker, Sir.  We said also this is why the Bill makes provision for the Authority to 

 

102 

be  run  along  the  concept  of  good  governance  covering  principles  such  as 

transparency, participation, independence and accountability.” 

So, Madam Speaker, this is why I totally disagree with hon. Rutnah when he said that 

this Bill pèche for its bad drafting.  It was a Bill made in a pressé manner.  It was not a pressé 

manner!   

I  am  sorry,  I  don’t  want  to  pick  up  a  quarrel  with  the  hon.  Member,  but  if    he  had 

gone through the speech or the speeches!  In fact, we have consulted the IFC.  We consulted 

all the international experts before this Bill came to the House.  It took a long time because it 

was for the first time that we were introducing a Regulatory Authority for the Utility Sector.  

True be it that today we do not agree with the provisions of section 10 to which I am coming, 

but  to  say  that  this  Bill  was  a  Bill  made  en  catimini  or  it  was  rushed  to  the  House,  is 

completely not true as hon. Bodha himself has explained as regards the contents of the Bill.  

He was so praiseworthy of the contents of the Bill, Madam Speaker. 

But let me also explain to the House why did we not, the MMM/MSM Government, 

finally  proclaim  the  Bill  and  why  the  Bill  didn’t  become  operational.    The  answer  is  very 

simple,  Madam  Speaker.  In  fact,  this  Bill  cannot  become  operational  unless  we  have  the 

specific  sector  legislation,  and  this is  why,  when  we  go  through  the  Bill,  even  when  we  go 

through the most important provisions of this Bill regarding the Objects of the Authority, the 

Functions and powers of the Authority, sections 5 and 6 read as follows - 

“5.  Objects of Authority  

 

Subject to the relevant Utility legislation, the objects of the Authority shall be 

to – 

ensure the sustainability and viability of utility services; 

protect the interests of both existing and future customers;” 

Section 6 – 

“6. 

Functions and powers of Authority  

(1) 

Subject to the relevant Utility legislation, the Authority may –  

(a) 

implement  the  policy  of  Government  relating  to  applicable 

utility services; 

(b) 

grant, vary and revoke licences in respect of a utility service;” 

 

103 

So, we had to have this relevant Utility legislation, that is, the law concerning the electricity 

sector, the water sector or the wastewater sector had to be passed in order to be able for this 

Bill to become operational. 

Therefore, the Electricity Bill was passed by the MSM/MMM Government in March 

of  2005,  one  month  before  the  National  Assembly  was  dissolved,  and  then  we  went  in 

general  elections,  I  think,  in  July  of  2005.  After  having  adopted  the  Utility  Regulatory 

Authority Bill, then the Ministry started to work on the Electricity Act.  We finally succeeded 

in  repealing  the  old  Electricity  Act  of  1939,  I  think,  and  in  2005,  we  adopted  a  new 

Electricity Bill, which became an Electricity Act, which is in our Statute Book, but which has 

never been proclaimed so far. When you set up a regulatory body, it must regulate the sector 

and which sector to regulate. Therefore, this is why in the First Schedule of the Bill, Part A 

and Part B, the Bill talks of the Electricity Act and the Electricity Services because the Bill 

regarding water sector or wastewater sector was not by then ready. 

So,  after  we  left  in  2005  up  to  2014,  it  is  true,  during  those  long  nine  years,  the 

Electricity  Act  was  never  proclaimed.  It’s  still  in  our  Statute  Book.  A  new  Water  Act  to 

enable the new market to evolve in the water sector has never been adopted in this House and 

things have been allowed to rest as they were since 2005, when we left Government, except 

for  the  fact  that,  in  2008,  a  few  amendments  were  brought  and  there  were  debates  on  this 

Utility Regulatory Authority Act. Therefore, in 2008, the Labour Government brought a few 

amendments  and  after  those  amendments  were  brought  and  adopted  unanimously  in  the 

House,  just  as  it  happened  in  2004,  nothing  happened.  This  is  why,  therefore,  up  to  now, 

unfortunately, this new body has never become operational. 

There is, therefore, this question, Madam Speaker, that, even if we solve the problem 

of  finding  l’oiseau  rare,  after  the  amendments  will  have  been  adopted  today,  there  still 

remains the problem of proclaiming the new Electricity Act.  Government has to go through 

it, correct it, and amend it if the Minister thinks it should be amended.  Will we come with a 

new  Water  Act  with  regard  to  the  water  sector?    Because  a  lot  has  been  said  recently  on 

management contract in the water sector, privatisation and so on. So, Government will also 

have to take a decision on these questions. 

Madam Speaker, therefore, the Utility Regulatory Authority Act was a loi cadre, was 

a  framework  legislation,  and  linked  to  this  framework  legislation  were  other  pieces  of 

legislation concerning the different utility sectors which had to be adopted, voted and inserted 

 

104 

in  the  Schedule  of  the  present  Bill  which  we  are  amending,  but  only  part  of  this  has  been 

done. So, the rests have to be done. 

In the Utility Regulatory Authority Act, there is also another question with regard to 

new legislation.  It is the Tribunal. Because if somebody is not in agreement, if a promoter is 

not  in  agreement  with  the  decision  of  the  Utility  Regulatory  Authority,  he  has  the  right  to 

appeal  to  a  Tribunal,  and  this  is  the  Regulatory  Authority  Tribunal  Bill  that  had  also  been 

adopted during the MSM/MMM Government, but not proclaimed yet.  This also will have to 

be  proclaimed  to  allow  the  Authority  to  become  operational.  Therefore,  my  point  is:  Okay, 

we  are  solving  one  problem  today,  in  the  hope  that  when  we  amend  section  10,  as  we  are 

doing  today,  it  will  be  possible  to  ensure  that  the  Authority  will  start  operating.    But 

amending  section  10  by  itself  is  not  the  solution.  We  have  other  issues  also  to  tackle,  as  I 

have  said,  the  other  specific  sector  legislation  and  the  setting  up  of  a  Regulatory  Authority 

Tribunal. 

Madam Speaker, having said this, I come to section 10. Very briefly, I will say that I 

endorse the provisions of this Bill because my wish, like everybody in this House, is to see 

this body operating once for all. If the Minister thinks that this is the problem, this is the real 

problem  for  the  Authority  to  start  operating,  so  be  it!  Let’s  give  it  a  chance.  Now, 

Government wishes to amend what we had proposed in section 10 at that time concerning the 

qualifications. Okay, if you want to give the Authority a chance, let us amend it. 

But, what we must bear in mind, Madam Speaker, is that the original section which is 

being amended today was drafted in good faith. We wanted to make an independent body; we 

wanted  to  have  the  best  cadres,  the  best  professionals  to  head  that  Utility  Regulatory 

Authority. On a péché peut-être par bonne foi, but that was the reason why we perhaps over 

restricted  the  qualifications  and  the  track  record  of  the  Chairman  of  the  Board  and  the 

Commissioners.  Therefore,  the  hon.  Minister  and  his  predecessor,  during  many  years,  have 

had to answer this question in the House about when the regulatory body will start operating, 

because it has been voted twice in this House unanimously, it has even been proclaimed, but 

it has not yet started its operation. 

So,  Madam  Speaker,  let  us  hope  that  by  amending  section  10  today  and  repealing 

paragraph  (a)  in  subsection  (2)  of  section  10  or  subsection  (3)  with  regard  to  the 

Commissioners by repealing paragraph (a), that the hon. Minister will find the right persons 

and the Bill  will start  operating.  Madam  Speaker, as  I said,  I have also  tried to  go through 

 

105 

other similar legislation in other countries.  It is true; I have not found the qualification that 

we have prescribed  for the Chairman of the  Board or the Commissioners of the Regulatory 

Authority Board.  But as I said, Madam Speaker, when we did that in 2004, it was because 

we  wanted  to  make  sure  that  this  body  would  become  a  truly  autonomous  and  independent 

body.  We will see that in  the 2004 legislation, Madam  Speaker.   In  fact, for the first  time, 

this Bill made it imperative, for example, for the Commissioners to declare their assets.  For 

the first time, I think, it is one of the rare legislation where it was provided, Madam Speaker, 

in section 7 of the Act, and I quote – 

“Subject to this Act, the Authority shall not, in the exercise of its functions under this 

Act or a Utility legislation, be subject to the direction or control of any other person or 

Authority.” 

Therefore,  to  invest  this  body  with  all  its  independence,  nobody  had  the  power  to  direct  or 

control  the  Board  of  the  Utility  legislation.    So,  these  are  the  specific  features  of  this 

legislation, Madam Speaker. This is why, according to me, we committed ourselves to set up 

this truly independent and autonomous authority which would provide full assurance to utility 

service providers, to the consumers and to the stakeholders in general.  So, it was going to be 

an Authority free from Ministerial control; to insulate the Authority from improper influence 

and the protection of the Chairman and the Commissioners from arbitrary removal in a real 

spirit of accountability and transparency, Madam Speaker. 

To  me,  I  have  no  quarrel  with  this  amendment.    I  would  have  hoped  that  the  hon. 

Vice-Prime Minister should have come back to the original propositions in the law of 2004; 

he  decided  not  to  do  so.    He  allowed  the  amendment  that  was  brought  by  the  Labour 

Government in 2008 with regard to the appointment of the Commissioner and the members 

of  the  Board.    I  think  we  missed  an  opportunity  to  give  this  Regulatory  Authority  a  real 

independence.  But be that as it may, Madam Speaker, as I said, the hon. Vice-Prime Minister 

has decided to amend section 10 in the hope that this will help the Regulatory Body to take 

off.   Let  that be so.   I, therefore, wish that once  for all, by this amendment,  the Regulatory 

Authority will become operational and will start, in fact, helping our utility sectors   dans le 

cadre d’une transformation of our utility sector.  

I have done, Madam Speaker.  Thank you. 

(6.08 p.m.) 

 

106 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  Mr  I. 

Collendavelloo): Madam Speaker, I have the honour to stand up and to speak after the father 

of the original Utility Regulatory Authority (URA) Act has taken the floor.   

Let me say for what the hon. Leader of the Opposition calls a ‘ridiculous amendment’, 

there has been a very high level of debate all through the discussions today. 

At the end of my closing address, all the Members of the House will be in a very good 

position to decide, who, between the Leader of the Opposition and me, is the more ridiculous 

than the other, because that is how he has put the key note.  It is a very good thing and very 

symptomatic that he was not followed in this unfair, incoherent, but very characteristics tone 

that he gave, because this is an important amendment.   

Hence, whatever hon. Ganoo may say, hon. Rutnah is proved to be exactly right.  Yes, 

this legislation was a perfect piece of legislation, except for section 10.  And when we read 

section 10, it is obvious that an evil pen has inserted its red ink after subsection 1 - and those 

who were there in 2004 and the records show it. In 2004 in the original draft, subsections (2) 

and (3) did  not  exist, this university  degree  and  5  years, and  what  have  you  and what  have 

you not. 

At  the  latest  stages  of  the  day,  the  Advisor  of  the  then  Prime  Minister  rushed  and 

imposed subsections (2) and (3).  This is why when hon. Ganoo took the floor in 2004, not 

one word he breathed on subsections (2) and (3) because, in those days, foreigners  were the 

order of the day.   

 

At the CEB, we needed  to  look  for a Canadian to  come to  the Head and  paid  huge 

sums of money along with three others foreigners.  Everything was done to stop Mauritians 

from  dealing  with  the  URA  and  this  is  why  hon.  Ganoo  kept  quiet.    I  am  sure  now  that  I 

speak, his memory is joggled.  Those who were working on this file in 2004 remember this.  

The records speak for it.  Politicians had dealt with the file. The evil man with the evil pen 

came  in.  And  this  is  why  with  these  uncanny  knack  as  a  lawyer,  hon.  Rutnah,  without 

knowing, of course, hits the problem on the nail. 

The unfair, outrageous and uncalled for remarks to call this amendment ‘ridiculous,’ I 

am sorry he is not there, but I hope that tomorrow morning when he wakes up and he looks 

himself  at  the  mirror  and  then  he  pronounces  that  word  ‘ridiculous’,  and  then  he  will 

understand who is the more ridiculous of the two. 

(Interruptions) 

 

107 

He will digest? No! He won’t be able to digest, he stops taking his little … 

Madam Speaker: Don’t make comments on persons’ characters! 

Mr Collendavelloo: That is why the whole process has been stored for 11 years. The 

delay,  even  in  2008,  when  hon.  Bodha  took  the  floor,  he  is  the  one  who  started  the  term 

‘l’oiseau rare’ for the members of this Committee.  When we come to the nomination of ce 

qu’on a souvent appelé les oiseaux rares, because by 2008, everybody had realised that we 

were looking for l’oiseau rare the whole word over.  

When  I  took  office,  our  files  on  the  nomination  were  empty.    In  2009,  the 

Government  had  indeed  advertised  internationally,  it  did  not  do  anything.  It  was  after  hon. 

Mahomed, whom I thank a lot, had raised this question in April that I said  - contrary to my 

predecessor  we  have  to  take  the  bull  by  the  horns.  Everyone  was  scared  of  touching  this 

section  for  fear  of  being  told:  ‘you  are  doing  a  ridiculous  amendment’,  and  they  have  been 

proved right, but I don’t care and I don’t mind. I have to do my job and I am doing my job 

and my job implies trying to put in place an authority. Not with Nobel Prize winners, but, at 

least, with people who can operate that authority and the matter is urgent.  

Of  course,  it  is  urgent.  What  do  they  say?  Well,  what  does  the  Leader  of  the 

Opposition say: ‘Ah, they have taken 11  years; we’ve  lost all that time and  you’ve lost one 

year.’ Well, I have lost one year, yes, but, at least, I am doing it. At least, we are doing it and 

I hope we are doing the right thing. The phrase ‘mieux vaut tard que jamais’ which came out 

of  the  –  how  do  we  call  it  -  intelligent  mind  of  the  Leader  of  the  Opposition  because 

everybody  in  this  country  is  ridiculous.  There  is  only  one  person  who  is  not  ridiculous. 

Everybody  is  a  crétin,  except  the  Leader  of  the  Opposition  and  he  uses  these  words  to 

describe this amendment. Yes, I see you holding your mike but this came from the Leader of 

the Opposition and I am going to reply to him.  

Madam Speaker: No… 

Mr Collendavelloo: I am going to reply to him. 

Madam  Speaker:  I  am  only  appealing  to  you  not  to  make  any  character 

assassination, not to attack the character of a person. You can make your comments, alright, 

but not to attack the character. That is why you saw me sign to you. 

Mr Collendavelloo: I am not attacking his character; I am describing his character. 

(Interruptions) 

 

108 

That is the fact.  History has proved him so wrong so many times in so many places and he 

comes today and he calls this a ridiculous amendment!  Shame on him! I am upset yes and I 

have got every right to be upset.  

Now, let me come back to more intelligent – I am sorry - to less ridiculous persons, I 

am  talking  of  hon.  Mahomed.  He  had,  on  many  occasions,  very  good  ideas  which  he  has 

imparted,  I  am  sure  he  will  have  no  problem  about  letting  me  have  a  copy  of  his  speech 

which he was unable to deliver because it was outside the scope.  

Let  me  reassure  him  on  one  thing.  Water!  A  new  Water  Bill  is  being  prepared 

currently at the moment that we speak, but we have to see about the future strategies which 

we  will  be  adopting  in  Government  in  order  to  know  exactly  what  are  the  contours  of  the 

water legislation. My training for 38 years has been to always well reflect on a point before I 

come with it. Whatever small point it is, and that is a  déformation professionnelle and I am 

making sure that when we do it, we do the right thing and not as has been done in the past, 

catastrophic  results.  Hon.  Ganoo  is  a  bit  like  me;  this  is  why  he  did  that  URA  Act,  but, 

unfortunately, with subsections (2) and (3) added, as I have said.  

Let me just rejoin on what hon. Sesungkur, hon. Rutnah and hon. Ghana… 

Ganoo have said about the Bill. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

I am very sorry! I will say why I used “Ghana”.  In a moment, it will become clear because of 

the paper that I have in my hand.  

Hon. Sesungkur is so right. How many great men have we had in Mauritius, starting 

with  Guy  Rozemont?  Did  they  have  University  Degrees  and  what  have  you?  What  is  this 

thing  about  qualification?  Ridiculous!  I  have  a  list  of  countries  where  similar  regulatory 

authorities exist. Vanuatu: Qualification for this appointment is based on the knowledge and 

experience of electricity and water sectors as well as in commerce, economics, law and public 

administration. Doesn’t it remind us of what there is in our section 10 subsection (1)?  Ghana 

– this is how the slip occurred. Ganoo! 

(Interruptions) 

I am really sorry.  

 

109 

(Interruptions) 

I can assure you that it is entirely unintended.  

The persons appointed by the President – so, qualifications! For the UK: Office and Gas and 

Electricity Markets, non-executive members who bring experience and expertise from a range 

of  areas,  including  industry,  economics,  consumer  science,  finance  and  European  energy 

issues. Where are the degrees?  Where are the PhD’s?  

(Interruptions) 

No, I will go because I want to show that the whole world is ridiculous, except for the Leader 

of  the  Opposition.  There  is  only  one  bright  man  in  this  world  who  knows  everything.  He 

should  be  the  Chairperson  and  the  Commissioners  of  this  Authority  because  he  has  got  the 

widest  experience  in  everything,  but  all  these  countries  like  Tanzania,  Jamaica  and  France, 

the Board of the Commission is composed of five members appointed for their skills in the 

legal,  economic  and  technical  fields.  Malta,  Canada  and  Italy:  qualified  acknowledged 

professionals  who  are  experts  in  the  sector.  Internationally,  therefore,  it  is  section  10, 

subsection (1) which obtains. What are we trying to do here? It is to set the clock right, not 

back in  time but  to  set  it right.  To remove from this  law, the  evil pain  which paralysed the 

Regulatory Authority for 11 years and, this, the Leader of the Opposition, don’t tell me that 

he does not remember because if there is one thing he has, it is a good memory. Don’t tell me 

he does not recall that it was his advisor who went and inserted these two subsections. This is 

why  in  order  to  attack  this  amendment  he  has  to  trade  in  insults.  He  has  to  use  the  term 

‘ridiculous’ because once he is uncovered, Madam Speaker, who is the more ridiculous of the 

two: the world over or the Leader of the Opposition? 

Let me conclude by thanking everyone who took part in these debates. I am sorry if I 

have not been able to go over each and every point raised, especially the points raised by hon. 

Sesungkur which merit more careful consideration that I have given it, but it would take too 

much of the time of the House. I had said 10 minutes in opening, but nobody asked me how 

much in closing. So, I took the liberty of it.  

Thank you, Madam Speaker. I commend the Bill to the House. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Bill read a second time and committed. 

So, I took the liberty of it. Thank you, Madam Speaker. I commend the Bill to the House. 

 

110 

(Interruptions) 

Question put and agreed to. 

Bill read a second time and committed. 

COMMITTEE STAGE 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

THE UTILITY REGULATORY AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL 

(NO. XII OF 2016) 

The Utility Regulatory Authority (Amendment) Bill (No. XII of 2016) was considered 

and agreed to. 

On  the  Assembly  resuming  with  Madam  Speaker  in  the  Chair,  Madam  Speaker 

reported accordingly. 

Third Reading 

On  motion  made  and  seconded,  the  Utility  Regulatory  Authority  (Amendment)  Bill 

(No. XII of 2016) was read the third time and passed. 

ADJOURNMENT 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  that  this  Assembly  do  now 

adjourn to Tuesday 05 July 2016 at 11.30 a.m. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 

Collendavelloo) rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Madam  Speaker:  The  House  stands  adjourned.  We  have  got  some  Adjournment 

Matters. Hon. Jhuboo! 

(6.27 p.m.) 

MATTERS RAISED 

CHAMOUNY, CHEMIN GRENIER & SURINAM - WATER SUPPLY 

Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black  River):  Thank  you, Madam 

Speaker. I would like to raise an issue concerning my Constituency and it is addressed to the 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities.  

 

111 

It  is  in  relation  to  the  shortage  and  cuts  in  the  supply  of  water  in  the  region  of 

Chamouny, Chemin Grenier and Surinam. I am given to understand that there is a new tank 

that is under construction, but, in the meantime, especially during Ramadan, if the hon. Vice-

Prime Minister could see to it that water is supplied in the region.  

Thank you. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 

Collendavelloo):  If  I  may.  Yes,  we  are  receiving  complaints  from  many  areas  around 

Mauritius.  These  complaints  have  existed  not  ever  since  I  have  been  a  Minister  but  for  20 

years or more. Every effort is being done to alleviate the problems faced by the inhabitants at 

least so that they get some level of water either through direct water pipes or by water tankers 

to palliate whatever failings there may be.  

The  situation  is  only  medium  term.  I  have  put  before  the  House  all  the  projects, 

Constituency by Constituency, which are  recurrent.  If any Member of the House wishes to 

have a personal copy, this can be arranged by email. The CWA has done it. A copy is open 

for public inspection equally at the CWA where everyone can look  at his own area and see 

what is being done.  

Pipes  are  not  repaired  in  one  day,  it  is  like  Rome,  and  we  will  do  it.  As  you  know, 

there  is  a  lack  of  resources,  lack  of  technology  and  the  question  demands  a  more  general 

answer  which  nobody  has  dared  to  come  to  grips,  because  all  sorts  of  demagogical  talk. 

Luckily,  I  am  immune from  all these lobbies, pressures, whatever, so,  I am  confident  that  I 

am going to push this further. I smile like you. We hope that it is true because then we will be 

able to have 24 and 7 at least within a narrow forecast. 

 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem! 

112 

(6.30 p.m.) 

RAMADAN – PRIESTS - VISA 

Mr R. Uteem (First Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis Central): Thank 

you, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise an issue, it concerns the Rt. hon. Prime Minister. 

It relates to the priests who come temporarily in Mauritius for the period of Ramadan. They 

come because they have special prayers. Most of them are from India, Pakistan and they are 

typically given one month visa when they arrive in Mauritius.  

However,  the  whole  month  of  Ramadan  takes  one  month.  So,  very  often,  most  of 

them are having to leave the country before Eid celebration or on the eve of it. So, I would 

make an appeal to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister if these priests ask for a few days extension or 

two days extension, needful can be done so that they can - having spent the whole month in 

prayers - celebrate Eid in Mauritius as well. 

The Prime Minister: Thank you. I will look into it. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody! 

(6.31 p.m.) 

PAILLES & CAMP CHAPELON - FOOTBALL GROUNDS - LIGHTING 

Mr  V.  Baloomoody  (Third  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West):  I  was 

supposed  to  address  the  hon.  Minister  of  Local  Government,  I  don’t  know  to  whom  do  I 

address now. It is a question concerning the Municipality of Port Louis, and most especially, 

two football grounds in my Constituency; one at Pailles at Morcellement Rey and the other 

one at Camp Chapelon. 

For many months now, the lights have gone off. The inhabitants have approached the 

Councillors, they have approached the Mayor. Every time there is a reply either that there is 

no bulb, there is no transport. When they get the transport there is no technician. When they 

get  the  technician  there  is  no  bulb.    So,  may  I  appeal  to  the  hon.  Minister  to  look  into  the 

matter.  I am sure the hon. Wong Yen Cheong knows very well about it, so that matter can be 

taken up urgently because our youngsters today, unfortunately, do not have much leisure, and 

football is one of their leisure in the evenings, whenever they can use the football ground in 

the evening.  

 

Thank you. 

113 

The  Minister  of  Social  Integration  and  Economic  Empowerment  (Mr  P. 

Roopun): I shall convey to the hon. Minister the concern of the hon. Member. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

(6.32 p.m.) 

SUPER CASH BACK GOLD POLICIES - PAYMENT 

Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port  Louis 

East):  Madam  Speaker,  the  issue  I  am  raising  tonight  relates  to  the  payment  of  the  Super 

Cash  Back  Gold  policies  and  is  addressed  to  the hon.  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good 

Governance and Institutional Reforms. I have given prior notice to that, but he is not here. I 

think some other colleague can take this issue.  

The  hon.  Minister  went  on  MBCTV  and  announced  two  options  for  policies  more 

than  Rs1  m.  Our  concern  is  the  lack  of  communication  between  the  NPFL  and  the  clients 

which resulted in a cafouillage at the NPFL since no communiqué has been issued yet. There 

are  long  queues  actually  at  the  premises  and  since  yesterday,  many  clients  are  not  aware 

where to go to exercise the options.  

Presently, if a client  does not  opt  for deduction of bonuses till tomorrow, he will be 

automatically diverted into option two, that is, losing the 25%, etc. Questions are being asked 

as to if debentures will be issued for those opting for the cut in bonuses. Therefore, there is 

another issue regarding the bonuses, I would like the hon. Minister to clarify to the public for 

the  deduction  of  bonuses  whether  it  will  include  bonuses  already  paid  since  the  beginning 

where the bonuses have been capitalised.  

Therefore,  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  requesting  the  hon.  Minister  if  he  can  extend  the 

delay in a reasonable lapse of time so that all the clients are given ample time before they can 

take a decision.  

Thank you. 

The  Attorney  General  (Mr  R.  Yerrigadoo):  Madam  Speaker,  I  shall  convey  the 

concerns of the hon. Member to the substantive Minister. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ramful! 

(6.34 p.m.) 

 

114 

PRIMARY SCHOOLS - TEXTBOOKS 

Mr  D.  Ramful  (Third  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien):  Thank  you, 

Madam Speaker.  

I have an issue concerning the Minister of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary 

Education and Scientific Research. I think she is not here, if one of the colleagues can convey 

the issue to her.  

I have been informed by parents with regard to some primary schools - I don’t know 

if in  all of them, but  I know for some  - students  have not  received their  part two textbooks 

yet.  These  students  would  be  going  on  holidays  in  July.    They  will  be  back  in  August  and 

they  will have only about  two months to  complete those Part  II  textbooks which,  I believe, 

are quite thick.   

Therefore,  I  am  making  a  humble  request  to  the  hon.  Minister  of  Education,  and 

Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific Research to, please, kindly look into the 

matter. 

The  Minister  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security  (Mr  M.  Seeruttun):    Madam 

Speaker, I would like to have some clarifications with regard to the subjects and the classes 

concerned, please. 

Mr  Ramful:    Well,  for  example,  at  Sir  Veerasamy  Ringadoo  Government  School, 

which is in Sodnac, Standard III pupils don’t have their Maths, French, Science and History 

textbooks. But I don’t know if it is the case for other Primary Schools. 

Mr Seeruttun:  Okay, I take note of that request and I will pass on the message to the 

hon. Minister when she is back.  

At 6.39 p.m., the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Tuesday 05 July 2016, at 

11.30 a.m. 

WRITTEN ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

SEA – SAFETY MEASURES 

 (No.  B/613)  Mr  D.  Sesungkur  (First  Member  for  Montagne  Blanche  &  GRSE) 

asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 

Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to disappearance of persons at 

sea, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police – 

115 

 

(a) 

(b) 

the list thereof on a yearly basis since 2009 to date, and 

information  as  to  the  measures  taken  to  improve  safety  at  sea,  indicating  the 

investments made in equipment and technology therefor. 

Reply:  In  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  by  the  Commissioner  of 

Police that since 2009 up to 23 June 2016, fifteen persons have disappeared at sea.  The list 

thereof is being tabled. 

In  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  the  Police  have  taken  several  measures  to 

improve  safety  at  sea,  including  procurement  of  additional  vessels,  improvement  of  the 

communication  network  for  the  reinforcement  of  the  coastal  surveillance  and  provision  of 

continuous  training  to  divers  and  lifesavers,  in  respect  of  the  National  Coast  Guard.  

Additionally,  in  the  various  public  beaches  a  portion  of  the  lagoon  has  been  declared  boat 

free zone and swimming zone. 

Furthermore,  the  Police  conduct  sensitisation  campaigns  with  skippers,  fishermen, 

tourists and seafarers on safety at sea.  Particular emphasis is placed on the precautions that 

have to be taken by owners and skippers in terms of seaworthiness of pleasure crafts and the 

need for passengers to wear life jackets prior to venturing into the sea. 

Regular  offshore  patrols  are  carried  out  by  National  Coast  Guard  to  prevent  any 

accident in our coastal areas. 

I also wish to inform the House that for the period January 2015 to June 2016 some 

Rs2.1  billion  have  been  spent  by  the  Police  Department  towards  the  maintenance  and 

acquisition of equipment for the National Coast Guard and the Police Helicopter Squadron as 

compared to around Rs2 billion for the period January 2009 to end 2014.  Thus, the fleet of 

the  National  Coast  Guard  has  been  increased  and  reinforced  with  the  acquisition  of  one 

Offshore  Patrol  Vessel,  the  “CGS  Barracuda”  which  has  an  endurance  of  5,000  Nautical 

Miles;  and  the  procurement  of  10  Fast  Interceptor  Boats  with  a  maximum  speed  of  35 

Nautical Miles. 

I  am  informed  that  the  Police  Helicopter  Squadron  has  a  fleet  of  five  helicopters  to 

carry  out  aerial  patrol  and  to  undertake  search  and  rescue  mission  at  sea.    Five  Coastal 

Surveillance  Radar  Systems  have  been  installed  at  various  locations  around  the  island  of 

Mauritius, one in Rodrigues, one in St Brandon and one in Agaléga. 

Moreover, the acquisition of the following is in the pipeline – 

116 

 

(i) 

two Water Jet Fast Patrol Vessels with endurance of 2,000 Nautical Miles are 

at various stages of construction, one will be delivered in September this year 

and the other one in June 2017, and 

(ii) 

one new Dornier equipped with state-of-the-art sensors onboard for detection 

and  assistance  at  sea,  has  been  delivered  and  will  be  commissioned  by  mid 

July 2016. 

ROAD – FATAL ACCIDENTS 

(No.  B/614)  Mr  D.  Sesungkur  (First  Member  for  Montagne  Blanche  &  GRSE) 

asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 

Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to fatal road accidents, he will, 

for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to the 

number of reported cases thereof since March 2015 to date. 

Reply:  I  am  informed  by  the  Commissioner  of  Police,  that  from  March  2015  to  23 

June 2016, 174 fatal road accidents have been reported to  the Police, in  which 189 persons 

have lost their lives. 

BELL VILLAGE – POLICE QUARTERS – RENOVATION 

(No. B/615) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 

asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 

Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Police Quarters situated 

at Bell Village, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, 

having regard to the deplorable conditions thereof, information as to if consideration will be 

given for the renovation/upgrading thereof and, if so, indicate – 

(a) 

(b) 

when same will be carried out, and 

the  actions  taken,  if  any,  to  ensure  the  maintenance  of  the  yard  and  of  the 

common areas thereof. 

Reply: I wish to point out at the very outset that the Police Quarters at Bell Village 

which were constructed as far back as 1964 are maintained by the Police and the Ministry of 

Public Infrastructure and Land Transport. 

As regards part (a) of the question, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police that 

at  present  no  major  renovation  or  upgrading  work  is  being  contemplated.    However,  minor 

repairs to the Quarters are carried out as and when required. 

 

117 

In  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  the  yard  and  the  common  areas  within  the 

precincts  of  Bell  Village  Police  Quarters  are  cleaned,  bushes  and  grasses  trimmed,  solid 

wastes  and  unserviceable  items  dumped  within  the  compound  are  carted  away  to  dumping 

grounds by the Police Department, on a monthly basis. 

Moreover,  household  wastes  and  detritus  are  removed  by  the  Garbage  Collection 

Department of the City Council of Port Louis twice a week. 

In  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the  Police  Standing  Orders,  the  occupants  of 

Police  Quarters  have  a  duty  to  ensure  that  the  premises  are  kept  clean  and  tidy,  hedges  are 

trimmed, gutters and drains are clean and free of obstructions. 

CUSTOMS TARIFF – TRUE HEMP – IMPORT & EXPORT 

(No. B/616) Mrs D. Selvon (Second Member for GRNW &Port Louis West) asked 

the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and 

National Development Unit whether, in regard to True Hemp, he will state if he is aware that 

the  Customs  Tariff  Schedules  of  the  Mauritius  Revenue  Authority  describes  same  as 

Cannabis  Sativa  L,  raw  or  processed  but  not  spun,  that  it  is  imported  and  exported  by 

Mauritius  as  per  the  United  Nations  Statistics  Division  and  an  Enterprise  Mauritius 

international  trade  brochure  distributed  in  South  Africa  in  March  2016  and  that 

internationally  customs  services  label  same  as  Cannabis  Sativa  L,  and,  if  so,  indicate  if  he 

will  address  the  issue  of  why  importers  and  exporters  thereof  and  of  Armani’s  cannabis 

products should not be prosecuted under the Dangerous Drugs Act which imposes a blanket 

ban on all Cannabis Sativa L and, if not, why not. 

Reply:  I  am  informed  by  the  Mauritius  Revenue  Authority  that  under  the  Tariff 

Heading  53.02  of  the  First  Schedule  of  the  Customs  Tariff  Act,  True  Hemp,  which  is 

commonly known as Cannabis Sativa L, is classified as raw or processed hemp fibres and is 

used in the textile industry. 

The  above  Tariff  Heading,  under  which  Mauritius  imports  and  exports  True  Hemp 

fibres,  is  in  accordance  with  the  International  Convention  on  the  Harmonised  Commodity 

Description and Coding System of the World Customs Organisation. 

Moreover, under the same Tariff Heading, importers and exporters of True Hemp are 

required to obtain the clearance of the National Plant Protection Officer prior to the import or 

export of True Hemp, as the case may be. 

 

118 

I  have  also  been  informed  by  Enterprise  Mauritius  that  no  mention  was  specifically 

made that Cannabis Sativa L is imported or exported by Mauritius, in the brochure that was 

distributed during the Buyers Sellers Meeting held in March 2016 in South Africa. 

In light of the above, therefore, the prosecution of importers and exporters of raw or 

processed  hemp  fibres  which  are  used  in  the  manufacture  of  textile  products  including  the 

Armani’s  textile  products,  in  full  compliance  with  international  and  domestic  regulations, 

does not arise. 

SHIP MV BENITA – GROUNDING – LE BOUCHON 

(No. B/617) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg and Plaine Magnien) 

asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  for 

Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to the ship MV Benita, he will, 

for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to – 

(a) 

the date, time and how the National Coast Guard was informed of the presence 

thereof within our territory, indicating the – 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

initial location thereof; 

date and time the first call was received therefrom; 

number of Police Officers deployed thereat, and 

number of persons who were on board, and 

(b) 

where matters stand as to the inquiry being carried out thereinto. 

Reply:  In  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  by  the  Commissioner  of 

Police  that,  on  16  June  2016  at  23.50  hours,  the  National  Coast  Guard  (NCG)  Operations 

Room  was  apprised  by  the  Mauritius  Radio  Services,  which  operates  under  the  Shipping 

Division  of  the  Ministry  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and 

Outer Islands, that they had received a Very High Frequency (VHF) call from the Captain of 

MV  BENITA  to  the  effect  that  a  crew  member  on  board  was  injured  and  needed  to  be 

evacuated.  At that time, the vessel was positioned at 17 nautical miles (nm) off Mahebourg, 

which is outside the territorial waters of Mauritius. 

I  am  also  informed  that,  on  16  June  2016  at  23.51  hours,  when  the  National  Coast 

Guard established communication with the Captain of the vessel, the latter stated that the ship 

had  an  engine  breakdown  and  he  reiterated  that  there  was  a  casualty  who  needed  medical 

evacuation. 

 

119 

I am further informed that, on 17 June 2016 at around 07.30 hours, the Captain of MV 

BENITA reported to the National Coast Guard that the vessel had lost both its anchors and had 

gone aground off Le Bouchon. 

On the same day, that is, on 17 June 2016, 84 Police officers were deployed on site.  

23 crew members, including its Captain, were on board MV BENITA. 

As regards part (b) of the question,  I  am  informed that an enquiry into the matter is 

being carried out by CID Southern Division. As at now, a member of the crew is detained in 

Police cell on a provisional charge of “Assault with Aggravating Circumstances” in breach of 

section 228 of the Criminal Code Act. 

RIO OLYMPIC GAMES – ATHLETES & DISCIPLINES 

(No.  B/640)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 

asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in  regard to  the forthcoming Rio  Olympic 

Games, he will – 

(a) for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Mauritius Olympic Committee the list 

of athletes, discipline-wise, qualified therefor, and  

(b)  information  as  to  the  composition  of  the  Club  Maurice,  indicating  the 

responsibilities of each member thereof.  

Reply:  I  am  informed  by  the  Mauritius  Olympic  Committee  (MOC)  that  a  total  of 

eight athletes have qualified so far. They are - 

  Jonathan Drack and David Carver – Athletics 

  Kate Foo Kune – Badminton 

  Kennedy St Pierre and Merven Clair – Boxing 

  Yannick Lincloln – Cycling 

  Christianne Legentil – Judo 

  Fabienne St Louis - Triathlon 

As regards part (b) of the question, I am advised that Club Maurice is a company and 

that  it  would  not  be  appropriate  to  disclose  information  relating  to  the  internal  matters  of  a 

company. 

RIO OLYMPIC GAMES – ATHLETES - FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE 

(No.  B/641)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 

asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in  regard to  the forthcoming Rio  Olympic 

 

120 

Games,  he  will  give  a  breakdown  of  the  financial  assistance  given  by  his  Ministry  to  the 

athletes who have been qualified/invited thereto.  

Reply:  As  at  to  date,  a  total  eight  of  (8)  athletes  have  already  obtained  their 

qualification to participate at the forthcoming Olympic Games scheduled in Brazil from  05 

to 21 August 2016. Four invitations have also been received for participation - 

 

 

 

One in weightlifting; 

Two in Swimming, and 

One in Athletics. 

Nominations  of  athletes  in  respect  of  invitations  received  are  being  finalised  at  the 

level of the respective National Sports Federation. 

Since  January  2016,  my  Ministry,  through  the  High  Level  Sports  Unit,  is  giving  an 

additional allowance of  Rs10,000 over  and  above their actual  allowance  to  all athletes who 

have  qualified  on  basis  on  their  performance  and  Rs5,000  to  those  who  will  participate  on 

basis  of  an  invitation  from  the  International  Olympic  Committee  (IOC).      The  House  may 

also wish to note that all training camps have been financed by my Ministry. 

I am tabling a breakdown of the financial assistance given by the High Level Sports 

Unit  of  my  Ministry  to  the  athletes  who  have  been  qualified  to  participate  at  the  Olympic 

Games 2016. 

The granting of the special allowance by the Ministry of Youth and Sports is subject 

to  confirmation  from  respective National  Sports Federation that the athlete has obtained his 

or her qualification for these Games.      

FOOTBALL - DIRECTEUR TECHNIQUE NATIONAL - RECRUITMENT 

(No.  B/642)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 

asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the recruitment of a Directeur 

Technique National for football, he will – 

(a)  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Mauritius  Football  Association, 

information as to the actions taken in relation thereto, and  

(b) state the actions taken by his Ministry in relation thereto, if any. 

Reply: I am informed by the Mauritius Football Association that the post of Directeur 

Technique  National  is  actually  vacant  and  that  it  is  prospecting  for  the  best  candidate  from 

foreign countries.  

 

121 

As regards part (b) of the question, I would like to inform the House that my Ministry 

via the Mauritius Embassy in Germany, has approached the German authorities with a view 

to seeking technical assistance in football. Last April, under the cooperation agreement with 

Germany  in  the  field  of  sports  we  received  three  proposals  for  football  coaches,  as 

recommended  by  the  German  Football  Association,  for  possible  assignments  in  Mauritius. 

These proposals have been transmitted to the MFA for consideration. 

MINISTRIES & PARASTATAL BODIES - CONFERENCES & SEMINARS  

(No.  B/643)  Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 

Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Arts  and  Culture  whether,  in  regard  to  the  holding  of 

Conferences and Seminars, he will give a list of the venues approved by his Ministry for use 

therefor by Ministries, Departments or parastatal companies indicating in each case the – 

(a) number of times the said venues have been used since January 2015 to date, and  

(b) rates charged for the use thereof.  

Reply: I wish to inform the House that it is not within the mandate of my Ministry to 

approve venues for the holding of conferences and seminars by Ministries, departments and 

parastatals bodies. 

However, two theatres, namely the Serge Constantin Theatre and Pointe Canon Open 

Air Theatre are managed by my Ministry and are used for artistic and cultural activities.   

As regards parts (a) and (b) the information is being compiled in respect of these two 

theatres.  

LANDLORD AND TENANT ACT – AMENDMENT 

(No.  B/644)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 

asked  the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  whether,  in  regard  to  the 

Landlord  and  Tenant  Act,  he  will  state  if  he  proposes  to  bring  any  amendment  thereto  in 

relation to the applicability of the Act after 31 December 2017. 

(Withdrawn) 

SUGAR ESTATES – LAND DISPOSSESSION  

(No.  B/645)  Mr  G.  Lesjongard  (Second  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River) 

asked  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications 

whether,  in  regard  to  the  five  sugar  estates  which  are  allegedly  concerned  with  the 

dispossession  of  the  lands  of  the  slaves  and  of  the  indentured  labourers,  he  will,  for  the 

 

122 

benefit of the House, obtain from the Land Research and Mediation Unit, information as to 

the names thereof, indicating the – 

(a) names of the families of the slaves and indentured labourers concerned therewith, 

and  

(b) total extent of land involved therein. 

 Reply:  I am informed by the Land Research and Mediation Unit that there are five 

cases which relate alleged land dispossession by Sugar Estates.  

 

I am hereby tabling the information relating to the above-mentioned cases. 

 

CHILD MARRIAGE - LEGISLATION 

(No.  B/646)  Mr  M.  Gobin  (First  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  &  Souillac) 

asked the Minister of Gender Equality, Child Development and Family Welfare whether, in 

regard to child marriage, she will state if consideration will be given for the  introduction of 

proposed amendments to the existing legislation to prohibit the marriage of children below 18 

years of age, following the international commitments taken by Mauritius in relation thereto.  

Reply: The Code Civil Mauricien states in Article 144 that the age of marriage shall 

be 18 years. However, under Article 145, it is also possible for a child over 16 but under 18 to 

get married with the consent of his parents or if they do not give such consent, the Judge in 

Chambers  may  grant  the  dispensation  to  the  minor  if  it  is necessary  to  do  so  in  the  latter's 

interest.  

As regards the 'international commitments', it is noted that Article 21 of the African 

Charter  on  the  Rights  and  Welfare  of  the  Child,  which  came  into  force  on  29  November 

1999, states that - 

“Child marriage  and the betrothal  of  girls  and boys shall be prohibited and 

effective  action,  including  legislation,  shall  be  taken  to  specify  the  minimum  age  of 

marriage to be 18  years and make registration of all marriages in an official  registry 

compulsory." 

Furthermore, the Committee on the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) in 

its last report in 2015, urged State party to ensure that the minimum age of marriage, set at 18 

years, is strictly enforced, in line with the State party’s obligations under the African Charter 

on  the  Rights  and  Welfare  of  the  Child.  The  Committee  recommended  that  the  State  party 

 

123 

carries  out  comprehensive  awareness-raising  programmes  on  the  negative  consequences  of 

child marriage, targeting in particular parents, teachers and community leaders. 

Sensitisation  campaigns  on  the  CRC  are  carried  out  by  the  National  Children’s 

Council under the ‘Ecole des Parents and School Child Protection Clubs’ projects, whereby 

parents  and  children  are  respectively  made  aware  of  the  provisions  of  the  CRC  and  the 

negative effects on the child development following early child marriages. 

It is proposed that the present provision of the Code Civil Mauricien be maintained 

due to the cultural unique specificity of the country. 

PIGS – PRODUCTION & IMPORTATION 

(No.  B/647)  MrJ.  C.  Barbier  (Fifth  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 

asked  the  Minister  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security  whether,  in  regard  to  pigs,  he  will 

state, in respect of the past five financial years, the total value and quantity thereof – 

(a) imported, and  

(b) produced locally.  

(Withdrawn) 

CATTLE BREEDERS - GRANTS 

(No.  B/648)  Mr  J.  C.  Barbier  (Fifth  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 

asked  the  Minister  of  Agro-Industry  and  Food  Security  whether,  in  regard  to  the  cattle 

breeders, he will state if they are entitled to a yearly grant per head of cattle or otherwise and, 

if so, indicate why some breeders have not yet received their grants over the past two years. 

(Withdrawn) 

BEACHES - IRON-SHEET STRUCTURES 

(No.  B/649)  Mr  J.  C.  Barbier  (Fifth  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 

asked  the  Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms,  Minister  of  Environment, 

Sustainable  Development,  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management  whether,  in  regard  to  the 

beaches, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Beach Authority, information 

as to if consideration will be given for the advisability of stopping the proliferation of the use 

of iron-sheet  structures  by  commercial  traders thereat and making provision  for  appropriate 

buildings to be erected in dedicated areas for the location of the said traders. 

 

(Withdrawn) 

 

BEACHES - POINTE AUX SABLES & TOMBEAU BAY - MAINTENANCE 

 

124 

(No.  B/650)  Mr  J.  C.  Barbier  (Fifth  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 

asked  the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  whether,  in  regard  to  the 

beaches of Pointe aux Sables and of Tombeau Bay which do not  fall within  the purview of 

the  Beach  Authority,  he  will  state  the  measures  taken  by  his  Ministry  for  the  cleaning  and 

maintenance thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

CITÉ BRIQUETTERIE - WATER SUPPLY 

(No. B/651) Mrs M. C. Monty (Third Member for Port Louis North & Montagne 

Longue) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in 

regard to Cité Briquetterie, in Sainte Croix, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from 

the  Central  Water  Authority,  information  as  to  the  causes  of  the  severe  water  supply 

problems thereat, indicating if remedial measures will be taken in relation thereto. 

Reply:  I  am  informed  by  the  Central  Water  Authority  that  the  region  of  Cité 

Briqueterie, Sainte Croix is supplied from the Priest Peak reservoir for about 12 hours daily.  

I  am  further  informed  that  all  cases  of  no  water  or  insufficient  hours  of  supply 

reported to the CWA have been attended to. 

I would request the Hon. Member to advise me of any case of severe water problem 

which I will refer to the CWA for appropriate remedial action. 

 

MINISTRY OF GENDER EQUALITY, CHILD DEVELOPMENT AND 

FAMILY WELFARE - FAMILY WELFARE AND PROTECTION UNIT - 

 

TRAINING SESSIONS 

(No. B/652) Mrs M. C. Monty (Third Member for Port Louis North & Montagne 

Longue)  asked  the  Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and  Family  Welfare 

whether, in regard to the Domestic Violence Unit, she will state when training sessions were 

carried out thereat for the Enforcement Officers in relation thereto, indicating the – 

(a)  number  of  Police  Officers  who  have  equally  benefitted  therefrom,  and 

(b) resource persons having conducted same. 

Reply:  I  am  informed  that,  in  regard  to  Domestic  Violence  which  is  under  the 

responsibility of the Family Welfare and Protection Unit of my Ministry, Family Welfare and 

Protection Officers, also known as Enforcement Officers, underwent training as follows - 

(i) 

from 17 to 21 August 2015, 18 Family Welfare and Protection Officers and 14 

Police  Officers  attended  a  workshop  on  Multi-Agency  Response  to  fight 

 

125 

against Domestic Violence organised by my Ministry in collaboration with the 

US Embassy.   

The training was conducted by high calibre Consultants from the US 

Embassy;   

(ii) 

 from 28 September to 02 October 2015 and from 08 to 15 October 2015,  24 

Family Welfare and Protection Officers followed an in-service training course 

on effective responses to cases of domestic violence.  Resource Persons were 

from  the  Attorney  General’s  Office,  Office  of  the  Director  of  the  Public 

Prosecution and Officers of my Ministry, and   

(iii) 

from  March  to  April  2016,  268  Police  Officers  and  9  Family  Welfare  and 

Protection  Officers  of  my  Ministry  benefitted  from  a  training  programme  on 

Domestic Violence which was conducted by a pool of Resource Persons from 

the  Police  Department  as  well  as  by  Psychologists  and  Family  Welfare  and 

Protection Officers of my Ministry. 

 

STC - RATION RICE - TENDER 

(No. B/653) Mr A. Ganoo  (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 

Minister of  Industry, Commerce  and Consumer  Protection  whether, in  regard to  ration rice, 

he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the State Trading Corporation, information 

as  to  if  the  procurement  thereof  through  bidding  exercises  has  been  abolished  and,  if  so, 

indicate – 

(a) when;  

(b) the method currently being used for the procurement thereof, and  

(c) if he  will table a list of the suppliers thereof. 

Reply: I am informed by the State Trading Corporation (STC) that the procurement of 

ration rice, through bidding exercises, has not been abolished. 

Prior to 2011, the STC was carrying out an annual tender exercise for the procurement 

of rice. 

Thus,  in  November  2009,  following  a  tender  exercise,  a  contract  was  awarded  to  a 

supplier  for  supply  of  rice  for  period  February  2010  to  January  2011.  However,  after 

February  2010,  the  average  price  of  rice  on  the  world  market  decreased  considerably.    The 

STC  requested  the  supplier  to  change  its  price;  but  the  latter  refused  to  do  so.  The  STC, 

therefore, terminated the contract and launched another tender exercise.  A new supplier was 

awarded the contract at a price cheaper by some 33.5%. 

 

126 

However,  towards  the  end  of  the  contract,  the  rice  supplied  was  found  to  be  of  bad 

quality. 

Consequently,  since  2011,  the  STC  has  been  resorting  to  Request  for  Quotations 

(RFQ) every 3 to 4 months instead of annual tenders, so as to benefit from price fluctuations 

on the world market and to ensure supply of rice of the best quality. 

For  each  exercise,  the  STC  launches  RFQs  to  the  list  of  suppliers  of  rice  registered 

with  the  STC  as  at  date.    For  example,  the  RFQ  launched  in  May  2015,  STC  invited  173 

suppliers, whereas for the last one, on 21 June 2016, the STC invited 198 suppliers, to submit 

quotations. 

The RFQs are also posted on the website of the STC, giving the opportunity to other 

interested parties to register themselves with the STC and participate in the bidding exercises.  

I am tabling a list of the 198 potential suppliers registered with the STC as at today. 

LA VALETTE, BAMBOUS - HOUSING ESTATE PROJECT 

(No. B/655) Mr A. Ganoo  (First Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 

Minister  of  Social  Integration  and  Economic  Empowerment  whether,  in  regard  to  the 

Housing Estate Project of La Valette and Bambous, he will state the – 

(a) amount of funds invested therein, and  

(b) number of housing units built, indicating the;  

(i)  number thereof which are occupied, and  

(ii)  terms  and  conditions  regarding  the  devolution  of  the  ownership  of  the 

housing  units  as  per  the  agreement  signed  between  the  occupiers  thereof 

and Government, indicating if Government will consider a review thereof 

to  enable  the  occupiers  honour  their  financial  commitments  towards  the 

Mauritius Housing Company Ltd. 

Reply:  With  regard  to  parts  (a)  and  (b)  of  the  question,  the  project  value  of  the 

housing  project  at  La  Valette,  Bambous,  amounted  to  around  Rs205  m.  199  housing  units 

were constructed .  

With  regard  to  b  (i),  according  to  the  National  Empowerment  Foundation,  197 

housing units are presently being occupied. 

With regard to b (ii), the Lease Agreement was in fact signed between the MHC and 

the beneficiary.  

According to the terms and conditions, as from date of signature of the agreement, the 

housing unit would be rented for  an  initial  period of 3  years   against payment  of an initial 

monthly  amount  of  Rs800  in  the  first  year,  Rs1,000  in  the  second  year  and  Rs1200  in  the 

 

127 

third year .Upon expiry of the 3 years of rental and provided that all the terms  and conditions 

have been satisfied as well as compliance to the social contract and “cahier des charges” as 

provided in the Agreement, the beneficiary would have the option to buy “under conditions 

suspensives” the said housing unit . After signature of the option to buy, the monthly rental 

will  be  converted  into  monthly  repayment  to  meet  the  cost  of  the  housing  unit  and  will 

continue to increase by Rs200 each year until it reaches Rs3000 in the 12th year. 

With regard to the devolution of ownership , it had been reported that only 12 out of 

the 197 beneficiaries have abided by the terms and conditions of the Agreement and none of 

them have signed the option to buy . 

On  the  other  hand,  to  date,  no  representation  for  the  review  of  the  terms  and 

conditions has been received at the MHC . 

CEB - HIGH VOLTAGE CABLES 

(No.  B/656)  Mr  D.  Sesungkur  (First  Member  for  Montagne  Blanche  &  GRSE) 

asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to 

the  high  voltage  cables  of  the  Central  Electricity  Board  (CEB)  network,  he  will,  for  the 

benefit of the House, obtain from the CEB, information as to the number of reported cases of 

lives  having  been  lost  and  of  casualties  having  resulted  following  electrocution  therefrom 

since 2012 to date, indicating – 

(a) the number of prosecutions initiated against the CEB and the quantum of damages 

paid in connection therewith, and  

(b)  if  the  main  causes  thereof  have  been  investigated  into  and,  if  so,  indicate  the 

actions taken to prevent the recurrence thereof. 

Reply: I am informed by the Central Electricity Board that since January 2012 there 

have been reports of 30 cases of electric shocks and electrocution out of which 10 were fatal 

occurrences.  .  

No  criminal  prosecution  has  been  instituted  against  the  Central  Electricity  Board.  

There is only one Judicial Enquiry regarding one accident which occurred in February 2012. 

CEB has informed its insurer of all these occurrences.  It  will be up to  the insurer to 

deal with any claims that may be made.  

With regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed by the Central Electricity Board 

that most of the accidents were as a result of negligence on the part of the victims.  

Measures taken by the Central Electricity Board  include – 

(i) 

thorough investigation of all reported cases of accidents to identify the causes 

and assess risks; 

 

 

128 

(ii) 

publication of press notices and communiqués to advise the  public to exercise 

caution while performing works near any electricity network; 

replacement of bare conductors by insulated cables islandwide, and 

regular  inspections  of  network  and  warning  letters  are  issued  to  customers 

(iii) 

(iv) 

who do not comply with safety clearances. 

RIVÈRE DES GALETS – INHABITANTS – RELOCATION   

(No. B/657) Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River) asked the 

Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in regard to the inhabitants of 

Rivère des Galets, he will state where matters stand as to the proposed relocation thereof. 

Reply: Following the sea swells of 12 and 13 May 2007, a Technical Committee was 

set  up  at  the  Ministry  of  Environment  in  June  2007  comprising  officers  of  the  Ministry  of 

Housing  and  Lands  to  propose  appropriate  measures  to  protect  the  shoreline  and  the  46 

residences on seaward side at Rivière des Galets/Petit Bien Ex-CHA Housing Estate. 

Subsequently in 2008, Coastal Rehabilitation works were carried out whereby gabions 

were  placed  along  the  shore.    An  inland  retaining  wall  over  some  450m  was  erected  at  the 

cost  of Rs19 m.  to  protect  the  vulnerable  communities from  frequent  flooding due to  storm 

surges  and  bad  weather  conditions  where  evident  risk  of  damages  to  the  housing 

infrastructure exists. 

 

Following a recent mission by UN expert Coastal Scientist from 21 June to 24 June 2016, it 

has  been  decided  after  consultation  with  the  UNDP  to  move  ahead  with  coastal  zone 

upgrading  work.  The  bid  document  is  being  finalised.  After  approval  by  the  Departmental 

Bid Committee of the Ministry of Environment, Sustainable Development, and Disaster and 

Beach Management,  it is expected that  the project  estimated at Rs60 m.  and of 12 months’ 

duration, may be awarded by September 2016.  

Nevertheless,  there  is  a  need  to  relocate  the  families  occupying  the  housing  units 

falling on the seaward side. 

In this connection, a portion of land of an approximate extent of 7 Arpents at Rivière 

des Galets belonging to  Saint Felix Sugar Estates Company  Limited has  been identified for 

the relocation exercise and action has been initiated for the acquisition of the land. 

Government  may  also  consider  having  the  housing  units  of  these  families  evaluated 

and paying a compensation to them for relocation. 

 

 

129 

STATE OWNED & BEC COLLEGES – ACADEMIC COLLEGES - 

CONVERSION 

(No. B/658) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 

asked  the  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and  Scientific 

Research whether, in regard to the Nine Year Basic Schooling Programme, she will state the 

number of State Owned  Colleges and  Bureau d’Education Catholique  Colleges  respectively 

which will be converted into Academic Colleges. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

VALLÉE DES PRÊTRES – ROAD SAFETY 

(No.  B/659)  Mr  G.  Oree  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  North  &  Montagne 

Longue) asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to 

Vallée des Prêtres, he will state if additional speed breakers will be installed to reinforce road 

safety thereat as requested by the inhabitants and the road users thereof and, if so, when and, 

if not, why not. 

Reply: The Vallée des Prêtres region is serviced by the Bernardin de St Pierre (B143) 

Road,  which  starts  at  its  junction  with  the  Abercrombie  –  SSR  St.-  Queen  Elizabeth  (B32) 

Road up to the Chitrakoot Government School.  

 

The Bernardin de St. Pierre Road has the following characteristics - 

(i) 

It  is  about  4  kms  long,  and  extends  from  the    junction  up  to  the  Chitrakoot 

Government School; 

(ii)  It is 6.0m wide on the average and is a two-way road; 

(iii)  There is provision of a footpath on both sides of the road; 

(iv)  The authorised speed limit along that road is 60 km/hr, and 

(v)  The  road  condition  is  relatively  good  and  has  on  its  frontage  commercial  and 

residential buildings. 

 

It is not in the policy of my Ministry to install speed breakers because of the following 

negative impacts - 

(i) 

the highest noise level recorded at night and when empty lorries pass over them 

are  well  above 

the  permissible 

limits  of 

the  Environment  Protection 

(Environment Standards for Noise) Regulations 1997;  

130 

 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

(v) 

Delayed response for emergency vehicles; 

Serious discomfort especially for people with illnesses, injuries and for pregnant 

women; 

Increased carbon dioxide as vehicles have to decelerate and accelerate again; 

Accelerated wear and tear of vehicles thus increasing maintenance costs and in 

the long run  causing premature ageing of vehicles. Such vehicles also  become 

more polluting, and 

(vi) 

Traffic  congestion  with  the  repeated  slowing  down  of  a  high  number  of 

vehicles. 

 

However, with a view to enhancing road safety at Vallée des Prêtres a number of road 

safety measures are being implemented - 

(i) 

the 

setting 

up 

of 

3 

additional 

pedestrian 

crossings 

at  

(a) 

near 

the  Kovil  at  Carreau  Lalo,  Lower  Vallée  des  Prêtres;  

(b) 

near A+ Snack at Cipailles Brulée, Lower Vallée des Prêtres, and  

   

(c) 

near Ideal Supermarket at Upper Vallée des Prêtres; 

(ii) 

the fixing of handrails and the painting of double yellow lines near School Street 

at Upper Vallée des Prêtres, and 

(iii)  the fixing of 60 km/hr speed limit traffic signs at the following five locations - 

 

  Near NHDC in the direction of Upper Vallée des Prêtres; 

  Near Caro Lalo Mosque in both directions in Lower Vallée des Prêtres;  

  Near  the  Junction  of  Reverend  Snepp  St.  in  both  directions  at  Upper  Vallée  des 

Prêtres, and  

  Near Ideal Supermarket at Upper Vallée des Prêtres. 

 

DISABLED PERSONS – EMPLOYMENT 

(No.  B/660)  Mrs  D.  Selvon  (Second  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 

asked the Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions whether, in 

regard to the disabled persons, she will state – 

(a) 

the measures taken - 

(i)  to improve the employability prospects thereof, and  

 

131 

(ii) against the employers for breach of the existing legislation in relation thereto, 

and  

(b) 

if  proposed  amendments  to  the  existing  legislation  in  relation  thereto  will  be 

introduced in the House to increase the standards of protection and the rights 

thereof as obtain in countries of North America and Western Europe. 

Reply:  In my reply to PQ No. B/588 on Tuesday 14 June 2016, I informed the House 

of  measures  taken  by  the  Training  and  Employment  of  Disabled  Persons  Board  to  improve 

employability prospects of persons with disabilities to give a better visibility and create more 

awareness of the services and facilities offered by the Training and Employment of Disabled 

Persons Board. 

I have, now, to inform the House that persons with disabilities who are interested to 

undergo training or to secure employment have been invited, through a broadly disseminated 

communiqué  over  the  radio  and  in  the  written  Press  as  well  as  through  posters  displayed 

conspicuously in public places to apply for registration so that their names could be included 

in the new database. Persons with disabilities will be able to submit an application to register 

themselves  with  the  Training  and  Employment  of  Disabled  Persons  Board  at  a  number  of 

Social Welfare Centres, the Head Office and the sub-centres of the Training and Employment 

of Disabled Persons Board and the Disability Unit of my Ministry. The communiqué has also 

been uploaded on the website of the Disability Unit. The creation of a reliable database will 

allow  for  the  Training  and  Employment  of  Disabled  Persons  Board  to  become  more 

responsive  to  the  requests  of  Employers  for  potential  candidates  for  either  training  or 

employment. 

As regards part (a) (ii) of the question, in my reply to PQ No. B/588, I informed the 

House  that  I  am  currently  reviewing  the  operations  of  the  Hearing  Committee,  which  is 

responsible  to  deal  with  companies  which  are  non-compliant  with  the  legal  requirements 

regarding employment of persons with disabilities. The objective of the Hearing Committee 

is to determine, after a hearing, whether an employer cannot reasonably be expected, having 

regard to  the nature of his  business,  to  provide suitable employment to  or to  create suitable 

employment opportunities for the employment of disabled persons.  

I  wish  to  add  that  the  Committee  on  Employers,  which  is  operational  since  August 

2013,  liaises  with  employers  who  are  not  compliant  with  the  legal  requirement.  That 

Committee  meets  employers  once  monthly,  sensitises  them  on  the  main  provisions  of  the 

Training  and  Employment  of  Disabled  Persons  Act,  particularly  on  their  obligations  and 

encourages them to inform the Training and Employment of Disabled Persons Board of any 

 

132 

job  opportunity  available  in  their  respective  organisations.  The  Employers  are  also  briefed 

about  the  process  of  recruitment  of  persons  with  disabilities  through  the  Training  and 

Employment  of  Disabled  Persons  Board  and  they  are  provided  with  the  CVs  of  candidates 

who match their job specifications. 

Regarding part (b) of the question, the House is aware that Mauritius has signed and 

ratified  the  UN  Convention  on  the  Rights  of  Persons  with  Disabilities  (UNCRPD)  which 

aims at promoting, protecting and ensuring the full and equal enjoyment of all human rights 

and  fundamental  freedoms  by  all  persons  with  disabilities  and  promoting  respect  for  their 

inherent  dignity.  Consequently,  Mauritius  has  a  legal  obligation  to  incorporate  the  various 

articles  of  the  Convention  in  its  domestic  legislations.  This  is  in  line  with  one  of  the  main 

objectives of my Ministry to integrate persons with disabilities in the mainstream of society. 

Currently, services are provided to persons with disabilities in a dispersed manner by 

different  institutions  often  resulting  in  the  duplication.  Such  a  state  of  affairs  cannot  but  be 

detrimental to persons with disabilities. It has become imperative that a consolidated piece of 

legislation be put up for the promotion and protection of the rights of persons with disabilities 

and which will work towards the elimination of any form of discrimination against them. My 

Ministry has reached an advanced stage on work for the production of a Disability Bill which 

will take on board the activities of the Training and Employment of Disabled Persons Board, 

the National Council for the Rehabilitation of the Disabled and the Loïs Lagesse Trust Fund. 

The  Bill  is  still  at  final  drafting  stage  and  once  completed,  it  will  be  subject  to  broader 

consultations  involving  all  stakeholders.  The  Bill  makes  provision  for  the  setting  up  a 

National  Disability  Authority  which  will  bring  under  a  single  umbrella  the  roles  and 

responsibilities  of  the  three  organisations,  with  a  view  to  better  answer  to  the  needs  and 

aspirations of persons with disabilities.  

My  Ministry  is  also  working  on  the  finalisation  of  a  National  Strategy  and  Action 

Plan  on  Disability  2016-2020  which  charts  out  the  way  forward  for  an  ambitious  string  of 

disability  policies  and  programmes  for  the  coming  five  years  with  the  vision  of  creating  a 

disability-inclusive society. Its implementation will help to leapfrog the disability sector and 

bring  about  transformational  change  in  the  lives  of  persons  with  disabilities  where  their 

talents and potential are valued on an equal basis with others. 

 

BELLE ETOILE – ROADS RESURFACING 

(No. B/661) Mr G. Lepoigneur (Fifth Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) 

asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to 

 

133 

Belle  Etoile,  in  Beau  Bassin,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Central 

Water Authority, information as to if consideration will be given for the complete resurfacing 

of the roads thereat  following the completion of the works carried out thereat to change the 

water pipes. 

(Withdrawn) 

SHIP MV BENITA – SALVAGE OPERATIONS 

(No. B/662) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 

asked  the  Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms,  Minister  of  Environment, 

Sustainable Development, and Disaster and Beach Management whether, in regard to the ship 

MV  Benita,  he  will  state  the  measures  that  are  being  taken  to  prevent  potential  damages  to 

the lagoon during the pumping of fuel and bailing out exercise. 

Reply:  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  on  Saturday  18  June  2016,  the  National 

Coast Guard (NCG) informed my Ministry that following the grounding of bulk carrier MV 

Benita at Le Bouchon, an oil spill was detected and the shoreline of Le Bouchon was affected 

by the spill. However, no spill was detected outside Le Bouchon area.  

Accordingly,  the  Operation  Oil  Spill  Cell  and  the  National  Oil  Spill  Coordination 

Committee (NOSCP) were immediately activated and an emergency meeting was held on site 

on  Saturday  to  coordinate  the  oil  spill  response  and  take  necessary  preventive  measures.  In 

addition, a Crisis Committee under the chairmanship of the Director of Shipping was set up 

to take stock of the situation and coordinates the salvage operations of the MV Benita. So far, 

the  following  actions  have  been  and  are  being  taken  to  minimize  potential  damages  to  the 

lagoon- 

(i)  the  site  has  been  cordoned  off  by  the  regular  Police  to  control  access  to  Le 

Bouchon Public Beach and its surroundings; 

(ii) a  total  of  780  m  of  oil  spill  booms  have  been  obtained  from  different  agencies 

namely the NCG, the Special Mobile Force (SMF), the Mauritius Ports Authority 

and Vivo Energy Mauritius. These have been deployed and are being maintained 

and  monitored  by  the  NCG  and  the  SMF  and  are  used  to  contain  the  oil.  

Moreover an additional 500 m of booms and skimmers have been acquired by the 

Salvage Company to be used whenever required;  

(iii)sorbent  booms  have  been  placed  at  strategic  areas  to  absorb  the  oil  reaching  the 

shore.  These  booms  are  also  protecting  the  mangrove  patches  within  the  le 

Bouchon lagoon; 

 

134 

(iv) the  National  Coast  Guard,  the  SMF,  my  Ministry  and  the  District  Council  of 

Grand Port started a clean-up operation as from Saturday 18 June 2016 itself and 

is ongoing. So far, approximately 880 bags of oily debris and textile rags provided 

by the Compagnie Mauricienne de Textile used as sorbent have been collected and 

temporarily  stored  pending  arrangement  for  recovery  by  recyclers.  The  clean-up 

operation on the shoreline and on Ilot Brocus is ongoing; 

(v) a  team  of  personnel  of  my  Ministry,  the  NCG,  the  SMF,  the  Ministry  of  Ocean 

Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and  Outer  Island  and  other 

authorities are on a state of preparedness for immediate response together with the 

International Salvage Team and are also monitoring the transfer of the oil from the 

vessel to land; 

(vi) the pumping of the oil contained in the ship started since Monday 20 June 2016 in 

the  afternoon.  So  far,  118  metric  tonnes  of  heavy  fuel  oil  has  been  pumped  out 

and  has  been  transferred  ashore  and  sent  for  treatment  at  Virgin  Oil  Company, 

Montagne Blanche; 

(vii) 

sampling of sea water is ongoing by the National Environment Laboratory and 

Fisheries  Division.  Moreover,  arrangements  are  being  made  for  laboratory  test 

with the International Tanker Owners Pollution Federation Limited (ITOPF). The 

aim  of  this  exercise  is  to  determine  the  level  of  the  seawater  pollution  at  Le 

Bouchon and the vicinity following the oil spill;  

(viii)  an  ecological  survey  to  assess  the  environmental  damage  has  already  been 

initiated  by  the  Ministry  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries, 

Shipping and Outer Island (Fisheries Division), Mauritius Oceanography Institute 

(MOI)  and  my  Ministry  in  collaboration  with  the  International  Tanker  Owners 

Pollution Federation Limited (ITOPF). The findings of this study will be used to 

rehabilitate the environment and also to claim compensation; 

(ix) the  submission  and  implementation  of  a  Pollution  Prevention  Plan  by  ITOPF 

during  the  transfer  of  the  oil  from  the  ship  to  shore  and  during  the  salvage 

operation  by  the  salvage  company.  The  plan  provides  for  additional  response 

measures in case of any eventual oil spill incident. Necessary precautions as well 

as provision of materials, such as handheld skimmers, absorbent pads, booms, and 

shovels, are being made; and 

(x) a  platform  of  size  100  m2  made  of  metal  base  and  wooden  deck  is  being 

constructed by the Salvage Company to have a safe working place for oil removal 

 

135 

and  clean-  up  operations  on  Ilot  Brocus.  Additionally,  measures  to  protect  the 

Blue  Bay  Marine  Park  which  is  located  some  2  km  from  the  incident  site  have 

also been catered for. 

The  National  Oil  Spill  Contingency  Plan  (NOSCP)  Coordination  Committee  and  the 

Crisis  Committee  are  meeting  regularly  to  monitor  the  situation  and  take  appropriate 

measures as and when required. 

MV BENITA – RISKS ASSESSMENT 

(No. B/663) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 

asked  the  Minister  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and  Outer 

Islands whether, in regard to the ship MV Benita, he will state if his Ministry has carried out 

a study to assess the risks that may be caused to the fish and to the natural resources thereat, 

indicating if he has met the fishermen operating thereat and, if so, indicate the- 

(a) 

(b) 

quantum of compensation that will be paid thereto, and  

number of fishermen who will benefit therefrom. 

Reply:  With regard to the first part of the question, I wish to inform the House that 

sampling  of  sea  water  has  already  been  undertaken  by  my  Ministry  and  the  National 

Environment Laboratory which will be referred to the International Tanker Owners Pollution 

Federation Ltd for analysis by an appropriate laboratory.  

Furthermore,  I  am 

informed  by 

the  Ministry  of  Environment,  Sustainable 

Development,  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management  that  an  ecological  survey  to  assess  the 

environmental  damage  would  be  carried  out  by  the  International  Tanker  Owners  Pollution 

Federation Ltd in collaboration with my Ministry, the Mauritius Oceanography Institute and 

the  Ministry  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development,  and  Disaster  and  Beach 

Management.   

The outcome of these surveys would enable my Ministry to  assess the  impact of the 

wreckage  on  the  marine  ecosystem  including  the  risks  that  may  be  caused  to  the  fish  and 

natural resources at Le Bouchon.  

I also wish to inform the House that I have already met the fishermen community of 

Le Bouchon. 

With regard to  part (a) of the second part of the  question,  I wish to  inform 

the House that the quantum of compensation which would be paid to fishermen will 

be based on the recommendations of the Committee on ‘Grounding of MV Benita’ for 

 

136 

the  salvage  of  wrecked  vessel.  The  quantum  has  not  been  determined  yet.  This 

exercise will be done in consultation with the fishermen.  

With  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  it  is  to  be  noted  that  there  are  11 

registered fishermen at Le Bouchon Fish Landing Station. 

 

MAHEBOURG & PLAINE MAGNIEN - SCAVENGING SERVICES - 

CONTRACTORS 

(No. B/664) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 

asked  Minister  of  Local  Government  whether,  in  regard  to  each  of  the  villages  of 

Constituency No. 12, Mahebourg and Plaine Magnien, he will, for the benefit of the House, 

obtain from  the District  Council of Grand Port, a list  of the contractors presently appointed 

for the provision of scavenging services thereat, indicating in each case the – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

regions covered;  

days of service;  

duration of contract, and  

total amount of money paid thereto. 

Reply: I am making necessary arrangement for the information requested by the hon. 

Member to be placed in the Library of the National Assembly. 

