No. 18 of 2016 

 

 

 

1 

 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

 

FRIDAY 29 JULY 2016 

 

 

 

 

 

2 

CONTENTS 

 

PAPERS LAID 

MOTIONS 

BILL (Public) 

 

The Appropriation (2016-2017) Bill 2016 (No. XVII of 2016) 

BUDGET SPEECH 

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

 

 

3 

THE CABINET 

 

(Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

 
Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 
KCMG, QC  
Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 
GCSK  
Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Hon.  Ivan  Leslie  Collendavelloo,  GCSK, 
SC 
Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK 

 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 
Communications 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 
Utilities 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 
International Trade 
 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha, GCSK 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan, SC 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 
Sinatambou 
Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 
Perraud 
Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain, GCSK 

of 
Minister 
Empowerment 
Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation  

Integration 

and  Economic 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 
Family Welfare 
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 
Institutional Reforms  

 
Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

 
Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 
Cheong, MSK 

Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 

4 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 
Institutions 
Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands 

 
Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms, 
Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 
Disaster and Beach Management 
Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and 
Training 

 

 

 

 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Gopall, Mr Navin  

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 18 of 2016 

 

Sitting of 29 July 2016 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 5.00 p.m. 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7 

PAPERS LAID 

 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table – 

A.   

B.   

 

 

 

 

 

Prime Minister’s Office ‒ 

Certificate of Urgency in respect of the Appropriation (2016-2017) Bill 
2016 (No. XVII of 2016) (In Original). 

Ministry of Finance and Economic Development ‒ 
Estimates 2016-2017. 

 
 

 

 

 

 

8 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10(2) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move that all the business on today’s Order 

Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to 

PUBLIC BILL 

First Reading 

On motion made and seconded the Appropriation (2016-2017) Bill 2016 (No. XVII of 

2016) was read a first time. 

Second Reading 

THE APPROPRIATION (2016-2017) BILL 2016 

 (No. XVII of 2016) 

Order for Second Reading read. 

BUDGET SPEECH  

A NEW ERA OF DEVELOPMENT 

 

 

 
 

The Minister of Finance and Economic Development (Mr P. Jugnauth): Madam 

Speaker, I move that the Appropriation 2016/17 Bill be read a second time.  

 

INTRODUCTION 

 
2. 

I would like to begin by thanking the Prime Minister for entrusting me the task 
of  managing  the  finances  of  the  nation  and  steering  the  economic  development  of  our 
country.  This Budget, which I am presenting today, will bear out my determination in living 
up to the trust that has been put in me.  

 
3.  Madam  Speaker,  many  organizations  and  professional  groups  have 
participated in pre-budget consultations.  Men and women from all walks of life have made 
numerous proposals and shared their insights.  Their contributions have been very helpful in 
the preparation of this Budget and I wish to express my deep appreciation to all of them.  

 

 
4.  We have analysed the current domestic and global context in which we had to 

prepare the budget.  

 

 
5. 

 
6. 

certainly pull us back.   

 
7. 

top.      

The  background  is  indeed  fraught  with  uncertainty,  adversity  and  tough 

challenges, while the expectations are many and the aspirations are high.  

If we stay the course, the confluence of adversities and challenges will most 

If we decide on a new course, we can change things for the better and come on 

The choice is clear.  

 
8. 
 
9. 
 
10.  Today we choose to break with the past that has stifled development for the 

Today we choose to come on top - to move forward and up.  

last decade and see the future in a new light. 

 
11.  The  challenges  of  tomorrow  cannot  be  met  with  our  mind-set,  policies  and 

actions locked in the paradigm of yesterday.  

 
12.  The current development model can no more deliver on our aspirations as a 
nation. This Government started its mandate with troubling economic and social indicators. It 
will take more than just traditional policies and approaches to turn them around.  

9 

 
13. 
much better.  

In the past year, our economy has shown good resilience. But we need to do 

 
14.  The GDP growth rate for the year 2015/16, would be 3.4 percent.   
 
15.  The unemployment rate went down to 7.6 percent in the first quarter of 2016 

from 8.7 percent a year earlier.  

 
16.  The  inflation  rate  is  significantly  down  to  0.9  percent  for  2015/16  and  is 

forecast to be 2 percent for 2016/17.  

 
17.  The  overall  Balance  of  Payments  was  in  surplus  of  Rs 20 billion,  with  the 

current account deficit, as a ratio of GDP, reduced to 4.6 percent for 2015/16.  

 
18.  The official reserves increased from 6.2 months of imports in December 2014 

to reach 8.5 months at end June 2016.  

 
19.  And  the  Budget  Deficit  for  the  financial  year  2015/16  is  estimated  at  3.5 
percent, with total revenue and grants amounting to Rs 88.2 billion against a total expenditure 
of Rs 103.1 billion.  

 
20.  Madam  Speaker,  I  would  like  to  announce  here  that  I  am  circulating  a 
supplement to the Budget Speech that includes a comprehensive review of the economy and 
social indicators.   

 

 

10 

21. 

I would also like to announce that I am including   an Annex as an integral 
part of the Budget Speech. It provides greater details on some of the measures, schemes and 
legislative amendments in this Budget. 

 
22.  Madam  Speaker,  it  is  clear  that  our  economic  performance  has  been  an 
honourable  one,  considering  the  unfavourable  international  economic  setting.  Global  GDP 
has in fact grown by 3.1 percent in 2015.  For 2016, the IMF is now predicting that global 
growth will stay at 3.1 percent, down from its initial forecast of 3.7 percent.  This reflects 
mostly lower than expected growth in the USA, Europe and OECD countries.  

 
23.  There  are  many  reasons  to  think  that  the  pressures  of  global  trends  on  our 
economy  will  become  more  acute.    The  Brexit  event  is  another  staunch  reminder  of  this 
reality. 

 
24.  We must therefore lift up the growth path before the 3 to 3.5 percent growth 

trend of recent years becomes the ‘new normal’.    

 
25.  Without  stronger  economic  performances,  the  challenges  on  the  social  and 

environmental fronts will also become even more daunting.  

 
26.  However, moving to a higher growth path will require major changes in the 

way we do things as well as in the things we do.    

 
27.  Where we have to be bold we must be bold.  
 
28.  Madam  Speaker,  I  have  decided  that  Budget  2016/17  must  indeed  be  about 

ushering in A NEW ERA OF DEVELOPMENT.  

 

29.  This new era of development will be centred on ten key strategies:  

exports and private investments; 

 

First, fostering a wave of modern entrepreneurs; 
 
Second, creating more job opportunities for all;   
 
Third,  entering  a  new  economic  cycle  focusing  on  innovation,  boosting 

 

 
Fourth, moving towards a fully-fledged digital society; 
 
Fifth,  fundamentally  reforming  business  facilitation  and  expanding  our 

economic horizons;  

 
Sixth, building the infrastructure that fits into the future; 
 
Seventh, lifting the quality of life for one and all;  
 
Eighth, addressing the root causes of poverty; 
 
Ninth, launching a major public sector reform programme;   

 

11 

 
And tenth, ensuring macroeconomic stability and sound public finances.  

 
II.  STRATEGY ONE: FOSTERING A WAVE OF MODERN 

ENTREPRENEURS 

 
30. 

entrepreneurs.    

I  now  turn  to  our  first  strategy,  which  is  about  fostering  a  wave  of  modern 

 
31.  Madam Speaker, an economy that is ripe for change and entering a new cycle 
requires a class of entrepreneurs that is equal to the challenge, and who can succeed in the 
most sophisticated of markets.   

 
32.  To  that  end,  I  am  suspending  the  payment  of  trade  fees  for  licences  of    Rs 
5,000 and below,  for a period of three years for all SMEs, except those engaged in activities 
such  as  gambling,  and  sales  of  liquor  and  cigarettes.  This  measure  will  benefit  new 
businesses and some 75,000 existing businesses.   

 
33.  Second, we are broadening the fiscal incentive given to SMEs as follows:  
 
a) 

The 8-year tax holiday in respect of business income is being extended to new 
enterprises set up by individuals or co-operative societies qualifying under the 
scheme and registered with SMEDA; 
 
Existing enterprises registered with SMEDA with a turnover of less than Rs 10 
million  and  engaged  in  qualifying  activities  under  the  same  scheme  will  be 
given a 4-year tax holiday in respect of their business income.  The tax holiday 
will start as from the year of assessment 2016/17.  

b) 

34.  Third,  a  National  SME  Incubator  Scheme  will  be  created  under  which  a 
matching grant of Rs 50 million will be offered with the aim of supporting and mentoring 
young entrepreneurs.  

 
35.  Fourth,  to  promote  modern  production  techniques,  we  are  setting  up  new 

industrial parks as follows:  

  

 

 

 

 

• 

• 

•  a pilot Agri-Business Park will be set up at Highlands over an area of 100 acres; 

two new SME Industrial Parks will be constructed at Plaine Magnien and Vuillemin; 
and 

the DBM Industrial Zone at Coromandel will be converted into a modern integrated 
SME industrial park. 
 

36.  Fifth,  to  improve  access  to  finance  the  SME  Financing  Scheme  will  be 
continued  for  another  three  years  and  extended  to  individual  entrepreneurs  as  well.  I  am 
pleased to announce here that the interest rate under that scheme will be brought down from 
7.4 to 6 percent. 

 

12 

37.  Sixth,  the  Leasing  Equipment  Modernisation  Scheme  (LEMS)  will  be 

reintroduced to provide greater access to leasing finance.   

38.  Seventh, the DBM will set up a dedicated fast track desk for micro enterprises.  

 

 

39.  Eighth, the NRF Equity Fund and the SME Partnership Fund will be merged 
into a single SME Venture Capital Fund.  I am providing Rs 150 million to bring its capital to 
Rs 500 million. 

 
40.  And ninth, Government will set up a line of credit of Rs 100 million to be used 

towards providing factoring services to small businesses.  

III. 

STRATEGY TWO:  CREATING MORE JOB OPPORTUNITIES FOR ALL 

 
41.  Madam  Speaker,  I  now  turn  to  the  second  strategy  of  the  Budget  which  is 
about better matching of skills and creating more job opportunities for our youth, women and 
men.  

 
42.  Government will enlist 4,000 persons under the National Skills Development 
Programme  for  training  in  technical  skills  that  are  in  high  demand.        This  will  include 
training  for  1,000  young  people  in  each  of  the  following  sectors:    ICT,  tourism  and 
hospitality; nursing and paramedics and construction and other industries. These trainees will 
be paid a monthly stipend of Rs 5,000.      

 
43.  Second, we are providing for the training of 1,200 seafarers for cruise jobs and 

in shipping companies.    

 
44.  Seafarers will be exempted from the payment of income tax.  
 
45.  Third, we are allowing for the training levy to be used for meeting consultancy 

costs in the training of staff in new technologies.  

 
46.  Fourth,  we  have  received  requests  from  many  young  engineers  who  cannot 
pre-register as professional engineers because they are not getting an opportunity to gain the 
experience required. Madam Speaker, we cannot let their efforts and talents go to waste.  I 
am therefore launching a special scheme for the placement of 200 trainee engineers in public 
sector bodies.     

 
47.  Fifth, we are providing for employment of 2,000 unemployed under the YEP.    
 
48.  Sixth, Government will fill 7,200 vacancies and new posts in the civil service. 
 
49.  Moreover, we expect that the new policies to boost up economic growth and 

employment in this Budget would generate some 7,000 new jobs in the short term.    

       
50.  Madam Speaker, with these measures, some 21,400 youths, men and women 

will be taken out of unemployment.  

 

 

13 

51.  To  ensure  the  successful  implementation  of  this  endeavour,  Government  is 
setting up an umbrella National Employment Agency with wide-ranging responsibilities and 
powers.  

 
52.  Moreover,  the  legal  framework  for  the  Technical  and  Vocational  Education 
and Training (TVET) will be reinforced, and a Skills Development Authority will be set up as 
an independent regulator.   

 
53.  We are making these special efforts because we are convinced that job seekers 

must be able to find employment that meet their aspiration.  

 
54.  At the same time we are addressing forcefully the problem of skills mismatch 

which is a key cause of unemployment.  

 

IV. 

STRATEGY THREE: ENTERING A NEW 
ECONOMIC CYCLE FOCUSING ON 
INNOVATION, BOOSTING EXPORTS AND PRIVATE INVESTMENTS 

I now come to our third strategy.  

 
55. 
 
56.  To enter a new economic cycle focussing on innovation, and boosting private 
investment,  exports  and  productivity,  it  is  imperative  that  our  productive  sectors  make  a 
significant leap forward in embracing new activities and modern ways of doing business.  

Advancing the manufacturing sector to new frontiers  

 
57.  The manufacturing sector which is the largest contributor to GDP must take 

the lead in this new cycle.  

I would like therefore to announce the launching of three new niches.  

 
58. 
 
Diversifying the manufacturing base 
 
59.  Firstly, an international private consortium is setting up a modular near shore 
mobile  oil  refinery  and  onshore  storage  facilities  at  Albion.    Besides  its  impact  on 
employment and growth, the project can make of Mauritius the first source of low sulphur 
bunker fuel (LS380) in the Indian Ocean region.  

 
60.  Secondly, we are opening our country to gold business that will encompass a 
wide spectrum of high value-added activities, ranging from refinery of gold, producing gold 
bars, setting up top-end jewellery processing units, vault facilities and to trading of gold and 
bullions on our new commodity exchange. The exchange will also facilitate trade in diamond 
and other precious metals.  

 
61.  Moreover,  an  Indian  Delegation  presently  in  Mauritius  has  expressed  an 
interest  in  setting  up  several  manufacturing  projects  in  Mauritius,  one  of  which  is  the 
production of bicycles and motorcycles.  This project aims mainly at exports to the African 
market and has the potential for creating a significant number of jobs. 

 

 

 

 

14 

 
64. 

62.  To further diversify our manufacturing sector, a Pharmaceutical Village will 

be set up at Rose Belle to cater for local as well as African markets.   

 
63.  We  must  also  embrace  the  new  era  of  3D  printing  that  will  transform 
manufacturing and other industries in the future. To this end, Government will introduce the 
application  of  3D  printing  technology,  by  equipping  the  two  technopoles  at  Rivière  du 
Rempart and Rose Belle with 3D printers.   

I  am  also  removing  VAT  on  3D  printers  and  providing  customs  duty 

exemptions on materials used in the manufacture of medical devices.  

  
Modernising the manufacturing sector  
 
65.  As the manufacturing sector diversifies, it must also modernise.  
 
66.  The investment tax credit whereby a specified manufacturing company is able 
to offset against its tax liability 5 percent of the investment in new plants and machinery over 
3  years,  is  being  overhauled.  The  minimum  eligibility  requirement  of  Rs 100  million 
investment in a year is being removed to allow more businesses to benefit.  And the tax credit 
can be recouped over a longer time period.  

 
67.  For manufacturers of textiles, wearing  apparels, ships and boats,  computers, 
pharmaceuticals and for film production the tax credit will be increased from 5 to 15 percent.  
This represents 45 percent of capital expenditure incurred on new plants and machinery over 
three years.   

 
68.  Madam Speaker, as we  face the challenges of  Brexit, we need to  reposition 
our textile and apparel sector, improve its competitiveness and bring Mauritius nearer to the 
European markets.  I am therefore announcing a major Air Freight Rebate Scheme which will 
entail a 40 percent reduction by our national carrier of the air freight cost to Europe.  This 
significant  reduction  in  cost  will  be  a  major  game  changer  to  give  a  new  impetus  to  that 
industry.  The scheme will be underwritten by Government over a two-year period. 

 
69.  To support the ‘Made in Moris’ initiative of the manufacturing industry, the 
Bid Price-Preference of 10 percent is being increased to 20 percent for locally manufactured 
goods in respect of the procurement exercise by public sector bodies. This will apply to such 
goods as shoes, uniforms, school books, printing materials and furniture which will be listed 
in a Schedule. 

 
70.  And I am also taking new measures to boost activities in the Freeport.  These 

measures are described in the Annex.   

 
Agri-business: Branching out 
 
71. 

I  now  come  to  our  plan  to  transition  the  agri-business  sector  from  the 

traditional mould to the new economic cycle.     

 
72.  First, we must put agricultural land to modern and more productive use.  In 
that  context,  the  Mauritius  Cane  Industry  Authority  will  set  up  an  Agricultural  Land 

15 

 
Management  System  to  bring  unutilised  abandoned  cane  lands  of  small  planters  under 
productive use.   

  
73.  Second,  the  grant  facility  for  sheltered  farming  is  being  increased  from  Rs 
250,000 to Rs 400,000 to encourage planters to undertake crop production under protected 
structures.  
 
74. 

In  the  same  vein,  I  am  providing  Rs  20  million  for  the  setting  up  of  an 
exclusive Bio-Farming/Organic zone with comprehensive modern infrastructural facilities at 
Britannia.  
 
75.  And  a  feasibility  study  will  be  undertaken  on  the  setting  up  of  a  Bio-

Technology Institute. 

 
76.  With regard to the tea industry, we are providing for subsidy on fertilizers for 

a tea nursery and free seedlings to growers. 

 
77.  Moreover, the ex-Dubreuil tea factory which was closed in the late 1990s will 

be reopened to promote tea and other agro-processing activities.  

 
78.  To boost dairy production, Rs 10 million are being earmarked for the setting 
up of a heifer farm at Melrose by the Ministry of Agro-industry, and for a cash incentive of 
Rs 5,000 to farmers for every new female calf (heifer) reared up to lactating phase.  

 
79. 

 
80. 

 

 
• 

 

I am making an additional provision of Rs 10 million to enable industrial milk 
processors to provide small cow keepers with essential support such as artificial insemination 
and other veterinary services, milk collection and animal husbandry.  

I  am  providing  Rs  7  million  to  support  bee-keepers  through  the  creation  of 

bee-keeping zones in different regions.   

 
81.  To encourage exports, the subsidy on freight costs for horticultural products is 

being extended to flowers and exotic vegetables.  

82.  Let me announce our actions to support the men and women who are taking 

risks, making efforts and yet have to struggle to run their farms and agri-businesses.      

   
83.  Government  is  renewing  all  the  schemes  that  are  meant  to  support  some 

11,000 sugarcane planters.  Thus, for the sugarcane crop year 2016:   

 
•  Planters  producing  up  to  60  tonnes  of  sugar  will  benefit  from  an  additional 

revenue of Rs 1,820 per tonne of sugar; and 

 The  80  per  cent  advance  provided  to  sugar  cane  planters  will  be  maintained 
through arrangements with the Mauritius Sugar Syndicate. 

 
84.  We are providing Rs 25 million for acquisition of sophisticated equipment for 
the testing of fruits and vegetables by the Food-Tech Lab of the Ministry of Agro Industry 
and Food Security.   

 

 

 
89. 

85. 

I am also pleased to announce that fifty per cent of the outstanding balances on 
loans, together with interest due, which were contracted by pig breeders, under the Pig Sector 
Re-structuring Programme, will be waived, if they pay back the remaining balance before 30 
June 2017. 
 
86. 

In  the  same  vein,  all  outstanding  interests  will  be  waived  on  start-up  loans 
taken by planters, breeders and fishermen prior to 1st July 2012, under certain schemes, if 
they pay back all capital balance before 30 June 2017. 

87.  Rs 30 million are being earmarked for setting up a new unit for mass rearing 
and sterilization of fruit flies; and Rs 16 million to litchi and banana growers for the purchase 
of protective nets and bags.  

 
88.  Concerning the cooperatives sector,  I am providing for the upgrading of the 

building of the National Institute of Cooperative Entrepreneurship at Bois Marchand.  

I am also exempting cooperative societies from the payment of corporate tax 

on all non-sugar agricultural activities.  

 
90.  And I am providing Rs 10 million to set up a contributory insurance scheme 

for non-sugar crops. 

 
91.  Madam Speaker, agricultural produce must be safe and clean for consumption. 
 
92.  To curb the excessive use of specific pesticides, herbicides and fruit ripeners, a 

15 percent levy is being introduced on those products.  

 
93.  Moreover, the Ministry of Agro-Industry and Food Security will implement a 
system of quantitative restrictions coupled with a more rigorous and intensive testing of fresh 
produce.  
 
Financial services: reaching out to new markets  
 
94.  Madam Speaker, the financial services industry also needs to branch out and 

reach out to new markets with a wider spectrum of products.  

16 

 
95. 

services sector. 

I  am therefore  announcing a new thrust to the development of our  financial 

 
96.  First, GBC2 companies will now be allowed to invest in listed securities. 
 
97.  Second,  companies  holding  a  ‘Global  Headquarters  Administration  Licence’ 

issued by the FSC will be granted an 8-year tax holiday.  

 
98.  Third,  companies  with  the  following  licences  issued  by  the  FSC  will  be 

provided with a 5-year tax holiday:  

 
(a) 

a ‘Treasury Management Centre License’;  

 

17 

an Asset and Fund Managers license and managing a minimum asset base of 
USD 100 million; 

international law firms with a Global  Legal Advisory Services  License.  To 
that effect, a ‘Limited Liability Partnership Bill’ will be introduced;  

an ‘Investment Banking and Corporate Advisory License’;    

an ‘Overseas Family Corporation License’. 

 

(b) 

(c) 

 
(d) 
 
(e) 
 

 

 

99.  Foreign Ultra High Net  Worth Individuals investing a minimum of USD 25 

million in Mauritius will be provided with a 5-year tax holiday. 

 
100.  These  tax  holidays  will  be  subject  to  meeting  conditions  of  employment 

creation and substance. 

101.  Furthermore,  the  ‘Rose  Belle  Business  Park’  will  host  the  new  ‘Mauritius 
International  Derivatives  &  Commodities  Exchange’  (MINDEX).  I  am  allocating  Rs  50 
million as seed capital for its initial setup. 

 
102.  In  pursuit  of  that  diversification  thrust,  we  will  also  develop  Mauritius  as  a 
full-fledged  International  Arbitration  Centre  with  the  capacity  and  expertise  to  resolve 
disputes.    
 
103.  As regards the banking sector, the Bank  of Mauritius Act and Banking 

Act will be reviewed in the light of recent events and to adapt to change.  

 
Tourism: blazing new trails 
 
104.  Madam  Speaker,  the  tourism  sector  must  ride  on  the  crest  of  the  wave  of 
regained dynamism and  seize the opportunity to  blaze new trails and sustain its long term 
development.    This  entails  the  development  of  out-of-hotels  activities,  attraction-based 
tourism, the duty-free island, and a more open air-access policy.   

 
105.  At  the  same  time,  Government  wants  to  achieve  a  greater  integration  of 
tourism  development  with  the  growing  aspirations  of  our  own  population  for  more  leisure 
activities and wider shopping opportunities.  

 
106.  To  this  end,  the  Ministry  of  Tourism,  the  Ministry  of  Arts  and  Culture, 
together  with  relevant  private  sector  organisations  will  work  out  an  annual  calendar  of 
national events to be known as the Mauritius Calendar.  

 
107.  To  give  an  impetus  to  the  duty  free  island  while  diversifying  our  tourism 
sources, we will intensify the marketing of Mauritius in Africa, in particular targeting the new 
rich.  And  we  will  also  build  up  our  marketing  efforts  in  the  Gulf  regions,  Scandinavian 
countries and Eastern Europe.   

 
108.  The  newly 

launched  Africa-Mauritius-Singapore-Asia  Air  Corridor 
positioning Mauritius as an aviation hub in the region will greatly contribute to improving 

18 

 
accessibility for visitors from new markets in Asia and Africa.  I am providing an additional 
Rs 40 million for marketing the Air Corridor initiative.   

 
109.  Government  will  also  facilitate  the  setting  up  of  a  world  class  aquarium,  a 

national museum and other new leisure attractions.  

 
110.  With  a  view  to  promoting  access  to  leisure  and  leisure  facilities,  I  am 
removing admission charges leviable by local authorities.  The Local Government Act will be 
amended accordingly. 

 
The Film Industry: Setting the Stage 
 
111.  Madam  Speaker,  the  film-making  industry  is  showing  good  potential  for 

growth and for creating exciting new opportunities for our young people and artists generally.    

 
112.  To  harness  that  potential  we  are  increasing  the  refund  on  qualifying 
production expenditure under the Film Rebate Scheme up to a maximum of 40 percent and 
clarifying that production of films for export will be zero-rated for VAT purposes.  

 
113.  I am providing an amount of Rs 10 million to the Mauritius Film Development 

Corporation for the purchase of equipment which it will lease to film-makers. 

 
114.  I  am  also  exempting  the  importation  of  lighting  equipment  for  use  in  film-

making from customs duty. 

 
115.  As part of the development of the Omnicane smart city project, Mauritius will 
be endowed with its first film city which will be located in the south of the island. The project 
also includes the setting up of a Film Training facility.    

 
Realising the blue economy 
 
116.  Concerning the blue economy, the following initiatives will be undertaken: 
 
117.  First, the 31 sites which have been identified for aquaculture development will 

be fully surveyed by the Mauritius Oceanography Institute.  

 

 

118.  Second,  Government  will  provide  incentives  for  the  setting  up  of  common 

facilities on land for aquaculture and fish processing.  

119.  Third,  two  studies  are  being  concluded  with  regard  to  the  production  of 

electricity through ocean waves and offshore wind.   

 
120.  Fourth,  Government  is  signing  an  MOU  with  the  National  Institute  of 
Oceanography  Goa  towards  the  setting  up  of  a  World  Class  Research  Institute  of 
Oceanography in Mauritius.  

 
121.  Fifth, to encourage outer-reef and bank fishing:  
 
o 

I am providing Rs 20 million for the purchase of a multi-purpose vessel for 
research, surveys and training of fishermen and skippers.  

 

 

19 

And  a  grant  of  50  percent,  up  to  a  cap  of  Rs  4  million  will  be  given  to 
cooperative societies to enable them to acquire semi-industrial vessels.  

o 
 
122.  Sixth, a new incentive scheme with a tax holiday of 8 years will be introduced 

to attract industrial fishing companies to operate from Mauritius and contribute to the 
development of our seafood hub.    

 
123.  Seventh,  to  promote  small-scale  aquaculture,  a  provision  of  Rs  12.5  million 
has been made in the  Budget for the purchase of 10 floating cage structures to allocate to 
Fishermen Cooperatives.  

 
124.  Eighth,  the  Mauritius  Ports  Authority  will  construct  breakwaters  at  Fort 

William to provide shelter for approximately 120 fishing vessels.   

 
125.  And ninth, to address the human resources constraint, the Mauritius Maritime 

Training Academy will increase its intake by 50 percent to 1,200 trainees annually.  

 
Green economy: maximising investment opportunities  
 
126.  Madam Speaker, Government’s policy emphasis on developing local sources 
of renewable energy offers a unique potential for launching a green economy, with new high 
value-added jobs, while at the same time addressing environmental issues and reducing future 
oil import bills.  

 
127.  To  this  end,  the  CEB  will  create  a  renewable  energy  company,  which  will 
ultimately become a special vehicle for the production of electricity from solar photovoltaic 
systems of up to 15 MW. It will subsequently open its shareholding to SMEs, cooperative 
societies and small investors.  

 
128.  Second, a feasibility study will be carried out on the production of electricity 
through  solar  panels  placed  on  roof  tops  of  houses.    The  aim  is  to  involve  some  10,000 
households,  over  the  next  five  years,  who  are  benefitting  from  the  social  electricity  tariff.  
The cost will be fully met by the public sector.  These households will get the first 50 kwh 
monthly free of charge. All surplus production will go to the CEB.   

 
129.  Third,  to  accommodate  the  production  of  more  electricity  from  intermittent 
renewable sources, it is necessary to increase the capacity of the grid for absorption of such 
power  generation.    To  this  end,  the  CEB  will  invest  Rs  400  million  to  increase  the  grid 
absorption capacity of intermittent energy from 148 to 160 MW by 2018.  

 
130.  Fourth, furthermore, the CEB proposes to procure battery storage systems so 

as to become resilient to the intermittent nature of renewable energy.  

 
131.  Fifth, I am removing VAT on Photovoltaic Inverters and batteries.  
 
132.  Sixth,  as  regards  hydro  power,  the  CEB  will  invest  Rs 200 million  for  the 
upgrading of the Sans Souci plant capacity and it has identified twelve sites on private land 
with potential hydro power generation.   

 

20 

133.  Seventh, a major waste-to-energy project is expected to add up to 30 MW of 

electricity on the grid by 2019.   

 
134.  Eighth,  Government  will  facilitate  production  of  energy  from  bio-mass, 
including cane tops and trash and at the same time ensure that small planters will get their fair 
share of the revenue.    

 
135.  The Electricity Act and the CEB Act will be amended to accelerate the permit 

approval process of renewable energy investment projects.  

 

V. 

STRATEGY FOUR: MOVING TOWARDS A  FULLY-FLEDGED  DIGITAL 
SOCIETY  

 
136.  I  will  now  articulate  our  plan  to  move  Mauritius  towards  a  fully-fledged 

digital economy and society.    

 
137.  Madam Speaker, in the year 2000, we launched the concept of Cyber Island 
with the strong  conviction that the future of Mauritius would be tightly  entwined with the 
evolution  of  digital  technologies.  We  crossed  significant  milestones  in  the  history  of  our 
development when we built the first Cyber Tower and connected the country to the Internet 
with the SAFE fibre optic cable. 

 

 

 
138.  Today, we take this endeavour to the next lap.   
 
139.  To this end, I am announcing the following measures: 

140.  First, the Ministry of Technology, Communication and Innovation is making 
operational  the  Information  Highway  for  sharing  of  information  among  public  sector 
agencies,  in  a  first  instance.    On  the  other  hand,  50  new  e-services  will  be  launched  to 
facilitate citizens interaction with public sector agencies. And each ministry will appoint a 
Dedicated Chief Information Officer to oversee its e-government projects.   

 
141.  Second, the Bank of Mauritius will come up with a National Payment Switch. 
This will reduce transaction costs and give a boost to e-commerce.   A National Payment Bill 
will be introduced to better regulate e-payment transactions.  

 
142.  Third,  Government  will  join  hands  with  MEXA  to  develop  a  national  e-
commerce platform to connect consumers from the rest of the world directly to our exporters.   

 
143.  Fourth, we will encourage the development of mobile applications by start-ups 
to  provide  information  on  Government  services  such  as  transportation,  traffic  and  weather 
forecast, amongst others.  
 
144.  Fifth, to reduce the digital divide and promote connected communities, 250 additional 
free  Wifi  Hotspots  will  be  set  up  around  the  island,  in  major  public  areas  such  as  traffic 
centres, hospitals, municipalities and district councils. This will bring the total to 600.  

 
145.  Sixth,  to  further  build  human  capital  and  develop  digital  literacy,  we  are 

investing in our students: 

 

 

a) 

 
b) 

 
c) 

21 

At the primary level, digital tablets and relevant education software will be 
given to students in Grades 1 and 2. 

At  secondary  level,  modules  on  communication  skills  and  creativity  & 
innovation will be included in the curriculum for Grades 7 to 9.   

At  the  tertiary  level,  a  dedicated  Faculty  of  Digital  Technology  &  ICT 
Engineering will be set up by the University of Mauritius. 

146.  Seventh,  major  investments  will  be  made  on  connectivity  that  will  significantly 
improve the deployment of broadband infrastructure and its quality.  These include: 
 

investment  in  a  ‘Third  Undersea  Cable’  project  by  a  consortium  led  by 
Mauritius Telecom.  
 
investment  in  a  fibre-optic  undersea  cable  by  a  consortium  of  regional 
telecom operators. This will link Mauritius, Reunion, Madagascar with an 
international backbone through South Africa.   
  
the  acceleration  of  the  Fibre  To  The  Home  (FTTH)  programme  by 
Mauritius Telecom to cover every town and village by December 2017; and 

an  investment  of  Rs  200  million  by  the  CEB  to  provide  high  speed 
broadband to Internet Service Providers through its island-wide fiber optic 
cable network.  

 

 

i. 

ii. 

iii. 

 

iv. 

VI. 

STRATEGY FIVE: FUNDAMENTALLY REFORMING BUSINESS 
FACILITATION AND EXPANDING OUR ECONOMIC HORIZONS  

 
147.  Madam  Speaker,  I  now  come  to  strategy  number  five:  fundamentally 

reforming business facilitation and expanding our economic   horizons.  

 
148.  For too long our economy has operated in an environment where obtaining 

approvals and permits to start and grow a business is complex, lengthy and onerous.   

 
149.  We have to free our economy from the stifling bureaucracy and get it out of 
the  constraining  mould  of  laws,  regulations  and  administrative  procedures  that  have  not 
been able to adapt to the new exigencies.     

 
150.  Our  first  measure  therefore  is  to  cut  drastically  the  time  it  takes  to  deliver 
Building and Land Use Permits (BLPs) and clearances for all construction related projects.  
To this end,  

the  requirement  for  approval  by  the  Executive  Committee  of  the  Local 
Authority concerned when determining a BLP is being abolished; 

the  Local  Authority  will  have  only  8  working  days  to  seek  any  additional 
information from an applicant; and    

 
i. 

 
ii. 

 

22 

 

iii. 

  
(a) 

(b) 

 
(c) 

we  are  requiring  that  all  applications  for  constructions  with  a  floor  area 
exceeding 150 square meters  be made on-line.   

 
151.  Second,  the  Property  Development  Scheme  will  be  reviewed  and  the  PDS 

regulations will be amended to: 

remove the maximum size limit of 50 arpents; 

 

remove  the  requirement  to  sell  at  least  25  percent  of  residential  units  to 
Mauritian buyers; and 

review the current maximum permissible land size for a villa, from half an 
arpent  to 1.25 arpent.   

 
152.  Third,  we  will  take  onerous  paper  work  out  of  the  system.    An  e-licensing 
platform  will  be  set  up  to  provide  a  single  point  of  entry  for  applications  for  permits  and 
licences. This will bring down submission of documents in some cases from around 48 copies 
to just one copy.  

 
153.  Fourth, the Investment Promotion Act will be amended to authorise the BOI 
to  issue  the  necessary  clearances  and  approvals  for  a  business  to  start  operation  in  cases 
where the statutory deadlines for processing applications have lapsed.   This is in line with 
the Silent Agreement Principle.  It should unlock a significant number of projects which are 
in the pipeline, accelerate job creation, turn around the declining trend in private investment, 
increase FDI and boost up economic growth.  

 
154.  Fifth, some countries like the UK, Singapore and Australia have applied the 
concept  of  a  Regulatory  Sandbox  Licence  (RSL)  which  allows  companies  to  invest  in 
innovative projects within an agreed set of terms and conditions, even in the absence of a 
formal  licencing  framework.    This  can  be  an  effective  mechanism  to  speed  up  strategic 
investments.    We  are  therefore  introducing  the  Regulatory  Sandbox  Licence  in  Mauritius. 
The  Board  of  Investment  (BOI)  may  issue  approvals,  permits  and  licences  to  start  an 
innovative project after consulting relevant ministries.  

 
155.  Sixth,  to  further  open  the  economy  we  are  allowing  non-citizens,  registered 
with  the  BOI,  subject  to  security  clearances,  to  acquire  apartments  and  business  spaces  in 
buildings. The Non-citizens (Property Restriction) Act will be amended accordingly.  

 
156.  In the new era of development, where openness will be a core feature of our 
economic  strategy,  economic  diplomacy  will  have  a  crucial  role  to  address  cutting-edge 
issues in foreign policy, in particular in the areas of trade, finance and investment, so as to 
open new opportunities for Mauritian businesses.  

  
157.  Now  that  the  issue  of  DTA  with  India  has  been  resolved,  Government  will 
revive  and  finalise  the  negotiations  with  New  Delhi  on  the  Comprehensive  Economic 
Cooperation and Partnership Agreement (CECPA) including a Preferential Trade Agreement.   

 
158.  And  we  will  continue  to  build  on  our  Africa  strategy  where  we  have  made 
concrete progress in the past year, with the signing of agreements with Senegal, Madagascar 
and Ghana for the establishment and management of Special Economic Zones.   

23 

 

 
159.  Regarding  the  Special  Economic  Zone  project  in  Senegal,  I  am  pleased  to 
announce that 40 hectares of land have already been allocated by the Government of Senegal.  
The project will be executed by a joint SPV where Mauritius Africa Fund holds 51 percent of 
the shares. 
 

160. 
In 2014, the Honourable Prime Minister took the commitment that once elected, high 
priority will be given to the establishment of an Embassy in Saudi Arabia. I am pleased to 
announce that we are now going beyond this promise by setting up, not only an Embassy in 
Riyadh,  but  also  a  Consulate  in  Jeddah.  This  will  significantly  raise  the  visibility  of  the 
Republic  of  Mauritius  in  Saudi  Arabia.  These  two  diplomatic  representations  will  further 
improve  communication  and  contribute  in  providing  greater  security,  comfort  and 
opportunities to our citizens travelling to Saudi Arabia.  
 
161.  We are also proceeding with the opening of a consulate in Reunion Island to further 
facilitate trade and business relationships.  
 

162.  To support economic diplomacy, seven Counsellors (Economic Matters) will 

be recruited in addition to those already serving in Paris, New Delhi and Johannesburg.    

 
Industrial Property Framework 
 
163.  With  a  view  to  modernising  our  Industrial  Property  Framework  and 
consolidating the institutional arrangement to administer Industrial Property, a consolidated 
Bill will be introduced. It will encapsulate all aspects of industrial property as well as provide 
for  the  protection  of  patents,  plant  breeders’  right,  industrial  designs  and  marks  including 
geographical indications and trade names. 

 
164.  In the same vein, Mauritius will adhere to a number of the World Intellectual 
Property  Organisation  (WIPO)  Administered  Treaties,  namely,  Patent  Corporation  Treaty 
(PCT), the Hague Convention and the Madrid Protocol to facilitate the registration of Patents, 
Trademarks and Industrial Designs.  

 
165.  Both the enactment of new legislation and the adherence to the Treaties will 
be  completed  by  December  2016.  Government  will  then  come  up  with  an  attractive  fiscal 
package to encourage innovation.  

VII.  STRATEGY SIX: BUILDING THE  INFRASTRUCTURE  THAT  FITS  INTO 

THE FUTURE  

 
166.  Madam Speaker, I now come to our sixth strategy which is about engineering 

 

 

the infrastructure that fits the future.  

growth and raise productivity.   

We must look beyond the short-term and make investments that would strengthen 

 
167.  These investments must come from both the public and private sectors.  
 
168.  Government will, therefore, significantly raise its capital expenditure to Rs 19 

billion in this Budget.  

24 

 

169.   In  all,  the  public  sector  will  invest some Rs  34.5  billion  in  2016/17  and  Rs 

97.6 billion over the next three years.  

 
Our plan for urban and rural regeneration  
 
170.  The existing towns and villages are suffering from a sustained period of poor 

land use planning.    

 
171.  We cannot let the situation continue.  
 
172.  For years, the transport strategy of Mauritius has been disconnected from its 
urban and rural planning strategy. In fact, the current transportation system is a major source 
of pressure on our towns and villages.   The building of new roads is not in itself a solution to 
the traffic jam.  

 
173.  It has become manifestly clear that a holistic and coherent urban planning and 

development strategy is imperative.  

 
174.  What Mauritius needs is an affordable new mass transit system along with a 
network  of  modern  integrated  urban  terminals  comprising  parking  facilities,  food  courts, 
commercial spaces, dedicated hawker areas and green spaces.  

 
175.  Such a project will be a game changer, as it will totally redesign our towns, 
create new growth poles around the terminals, drastically reduce the commuting time for our 
citizens,  raise  productivity,  eliminate  the  inconvenience  of  traffic  congestion,  save  on  our 
petroleum import bills and significantly cut down pollution.  

 
176.  We certainly cannot deny our citizens and future generations the benefits of 
such  a  project.      We  have  therefore  decided  that  the  country  deserves  a  new  mass  transit 
system with its network of Urban Terminals to be known as the Metro Express.  

 
177.  We  will  be  kick-starting  this  project  with  the  construction  of  the  Victoria 

Terminal under the BOT model.  A space will be reserved for 1,000 hawkers.   

 
178.  Concurrently,  Port  Louis  will  undergo  a  major  transformation  with  the 

implementation of several development projects to rejuvenate its skyline.    

 
179.  This  will  include  world  class  arts,  recreation  and  culture  zones  for  the 

residents of Port-Louis and for other Mauritians as well as tourists.   

 
180.  Concerning the smart cities, three will start construction this year.  
 
181.  The HERITAGE CITY will create a new urban space for present and future 
generations.      Phase  one  of  the  project  includes  the  construction  of  the  new  Parliament, 
offices and other infrastructure.   

 
 
 
 

 

 

A New National Transport Network 
182.  Under  the  Road  Decongestion  Programme,  the  Phoenix-Jumbo-Dowlut 
roundabouts and the A1M1 Bridge linking Coromandel to Sorèze will be constructed with the 
assistance of the Korean Expressway Corporation.  

 
183.  Our  next  strategy  in  infrastructure  development  is  focused  on  sea  and  air 

connectivity.  

 
184.  As  regards  the  airport,  around  Rs  770  million  will  be  invested  in  a  new 
Integrated Government Clearance Centre in the Cargo Village and a modern Control Tower.  

 
185.  Another Rs 425 million will be invested by the  CEB in a sub-station in the 

airport vicinity to cater for Cargo and Freeport power requirements.  

186.  Government is working with the Chinese Government on the setting up of a 
Regional  Aviation  Training  Academy  that  will  serve  the  African  and  Indian  Ocean  Rim 
region.   

 
Boosting Sea Links with the Outside World 
 
187.  As regards the sea port, Rs 6 billion will be invested over the next 5 years to 

enhance port infrastructure.  

 
188.  The  Cargo  Handling  Corporation  Ltd  will  acquire  two  additional  Ship-to-

Shore cranes and other equipment to service container vessels more efficiently.  

 
189.  There  will  also  be  strategic  investments  to  boost  the  development  of  the 

petroleum hub which holds the potential of becoming a major economic pillar.  

 
190.  Hence, some 35 hectares of reclaimed land are being earmarked for petroleum 

storage, logistics and fishing activities.  

25 

 
191.  And a new petroleum port will be developed at Albion.  
 

ALL  

VIII.  STRATEGY SEVEN: LIFTING THE  QUALITY  OF  LIFE  FOR  ONE  AND 

 
192.  Madam Speaker, I now turn to strategy seven which is about lifting the quality 
of life for one and all.  This strategy is about dealing with an assortment of factors that weave 
together to make up the quality of life.    

 
Investing In Round the Clock Water Supply 
 
193.  Madam  Speaker,  a  round  the  clock  supply  of  water  is  one  of  these  factors.  
The problems of water supply should not be left to linger – the more so that it affects mostly 
families in the lower income bracket.  

 
194.  Government is investing Rs 3.4 billion in this financial year towards solving 

the water problem.  These investments will be made to:   

26 

Replace some 180 kilometres of old and defective pipes across the island, in 
Beau-Bassin, Rose Belle, Rivière du Rempart, Lallmatie, Roche Bois, Plaine 
Verte and Surinam. 
 
Upgrade and increase Treatment Plants capacities. 

 

 
(i) 

(ii) 
 
(iii) 

Increase storage by constructing Strategic Service Reservoirs and new dams.  

 
195.  The CWA will also be investing in trenchless technology to reduce costs as 

well as inconvenience to the citizens. 

  
196.  In  the  meantime,  we  will  subsidise  the  purchase  of  water  tanks.    This  will 

benefit some 7,000 families and Rs 35 million have been provided for that purpose. 

 
Law and Order  
   
197.  Law and Order is another vital determinant of the quality of life. 
  
The Judiciary 
 
198.  For  a  long  time  now,  the  court  infrastructure  has  been  needing  major 

upgrading and repairs.  These cannot wait anymore.  

 
199.  I am, therefore, providing funds for the following projects: 
 

First, a new Supreme Court Tower will be constructed in Port-Louis with a 

project value of Rs 1.1 billion.  

Second, the Pamplemousses and Souillac District Courts will be relocated at 

the SIFB buildings in the same regions. 

Third, the New Court House in Port Louis is being renovated.  
Fourth, the District Courts of Moka, Mahebourg, Rose-Hill and Flacq will 

undergo repairs and upgrading.  

 

The Mauritius Police Force 
 
200.  I 

come 

now 

to 

the 

Police 

Force, 

an 

amount 

of  

Rs 8.7 billion is being allocated in this Budget to that Department. 

 
Investing in and Expanding the Human Resources  
 
201.  Provision has been made for recruiting 900 additional Police Constables and 

30 additional cadet officers.   

 
202.  A new training strategy will also be elaborated and provision has been made 

for a modern Police Academy at the Réduit- Ebene area.    

 
Investing in modern vehicles and equipment 

 

27 

 
203.  I am allocating Rs 292 million for modernising the fleet of vehicles. 
 
204.  Over the next two years, we will allocate Rs 115 million to equip all police 

officers and vehicles with modern equipment.  

 
205.  A  new  integrated  emergency  Response  Management  System,  linked  with 
SAMU, Fire Services and other agencies will be implemented with a project value of Rs 50 
million.  

 
Safe City Project 
  
206.  Government  is  coming  up  with  a  Safe  City  Project  on  a  pilot  basis.  In  that 
context,  smart  cameras  would  be  installed  with special  focus  on  major  public  areas,  along 
main roads and motorways, pedestrian walkways and principal traffic centres. These cameras 
would be  a powerful  and effective tool to combat crimes  and drugs proliferation, assist in 
more effective traffic and road safety management. 

 
Intensifying combat against drugs 
 
207.  To further intensify the combat against drugs, we are providing for:  
 

• 

• 

Two drone cameras with night vision capabilities; and  
 
Equipping MRA Customs with interceptor boats, mobile low bed scanners and 
other x-ray scanners. 
 

208.  At  the  same  time,  Government  will  ensure  there  is  seamless  collaboration 
between  the  National  Coast  Guard,  ADSU,  MRA  Customs  and  the  Fisheries  Protection 
Service for joint intervention.  

 
Strengthening the infrastructure  
 
209.  Government  is  also  investing  to  strengthen  the  law  and  order  infrastructure.  

These will include: 

 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 

six new police stations;  
a New Divisional Headquarters;  
two more Detention Centres; and 
a  new  laboratory  for  the  Forensic  Science  Department  at  a  cost  of  Rs  235 
million.  
 

210.  Let me also add that we are removing VAT on CCTV camera systems, burglar 

alarm systems and other home security and surveillance equipment.  

211.  The Budget also provides for the recruitment of 100 fire and rescue officers.   
 
Road Safety 
 

28 

 

212.  Madam Speaker, we have given deep thoughts to the problem of road safety 

and decided to come up with a comprehensive National Road Safety Strategy.   

 
213.  First, a Central Traffic Watch and Management System will be set up to better 

guide, coordinate and manage traffic flows especially in congested areas.   

 
214.  Second,  there  will  be  tougher  penalties  for  road  offenders;  more  stringent 
procedures for issuing driving licences; tighter conditions regarding the issue of motor cycle 
riding licence; and each police vehicle will be equipped with an alcometer.   

 
215.  The law will be amended to provide for the introduction of ‘Moto Ecoles.’   
 
216.  Moreover, modern methods of testing the road worthiness of vehicles will be 

introduced to minimise testing time. 

 
217.  It has been announced in the past that the fees for a fitness test would undergo 
an  increase  of  50  percent,  from  Rs  400  to  Rs 600.      I  am  pleased  to  announce  that  this 
projected increase has been frozen until finalisation of the restructuring process.   

 
218.  Third, we are providing: 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 

Rs 100 million for the construction of pavements across the island 
Rs 80 million for rehabilitation works for hard shoulder  
Rs 56 million for the setting up of handrails   
Rs 50 million to restore all road markings and signage  
And, Rs 30 million for repairing lighting along motorways  
 

A cleaner environment and greater resilience to climatic change 

 
219.  Madam  Speaker,  I  will  now  announce  some  of  the  measures  to  address  the 
challenges of climate change which are getting more complex every year, even resulting in 
natural disasters.  

 
220.  Our  main  aim  is  to  effectively  deal  with  them  and  build  greater  resilience 

while honouring our country’s commitment to COP21.  This Budget provides:  
 

Rs 110 million for rehabilitation works to address the issue of beach erosion 
and coastal land degradation; and  
 
Rs 22 million for modern equipment to improve command and coordination on 
ground during National Emergency Operations.   

- 

- 

 

221.  A  dedicated  Land  Drainage  Authority  will  be  set  up.    It  will  work  in  close 
collaboration with the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Centre to identify 
priorities for drainage work.  

 
222.  And Community Disaster Response Training Teams will be set up to improve 

preparedness of families living in 6 disaster prone areas. 

 
 
Waste Management 

29 

 
223.  As regards hazardous waste, let me announce four actions.  
 
224.  A new system will be introduced for the collection, disposal and recycling of 
some  8,000  tonnes  of  electronic  and  electrical  wastes.      In  this  respect,  the  appropriate 
legislation will be made for the introduction of an Advance Recycling Fee at the importation 
of electronic goods to be listed in a Schedule.   

 
225.  A centralized Hazardous Waste Facility will be created at La Chaumière.  
 
226.  An Expression of Interest will be floated to invite potential operators to set up 

a system for recycling of waste tyres.  

 
227.  Compost  Bins  and  Mixing  Tools  will  be  provided  to  7,000  households  and 

3,000 small planters to encourage them to produce their own compost. 
 
Health Care 

 
228.  Madam Speaker, I now come to the health sector. Health is vital to happiness, 
prosperity and productivity.  In this Budget, we are earmarking a sum of Rs 10.9 billion for 
the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life, that is, an increase of 12 percent over last year’s 
allocation.  Let me announce some of the actions to secure an efficient and effective health 
care system. 

 
229.  First,  Government  will  invest  in  the  expansion  of  the  Cardiac  Centre  at  the 

Victoria Hospital to reduce the waiting list for heart surgery. 

 
230.  Second, a new ENT hospital will be constructed at Vacoas. 
 
231.  Third, we are providing Rs 121 million for major renovation and upgrading 

works at the SSR National Hospital. 

 
232.  Fourth,  technical  studies  will  be  carried  out  on  the  construction  of  a  new 

modern eye hospital at Moka and of a regional hospital at Flacq. 

 
233.  Fifth,  Government  is  providing  new  services  to  improve  palliative  care  for 
cancer  patients  and  introducing  a  new  vaccination  programme  as  a  preventive  measure 
against cervical cancer. 

 
234.  Sixth, we are earmarking funds for consultancy  work on the setting up  of a 

state-of-the-art National Health Laboratory Services.  

 
235.  Seventh,  we  are  providing  Rs  250  million  for  new  high  tech  medical 
equipment  and  Rs  25  million  for  setting  up  three  new  dialysis  units  at  Long  Mountain 
Community Hospital, SSR National Hospital and Dr A.G.Jeetoo regional hospital. 

 

 

30 

236.  And  eighth,  we  are  providing  for  the  recruitment  of  310  additional  doctors, 

255 paramedical staff and an additional 570 supporting personnel.  

 
237.  I should here stress that we are also promoting private health care, in particular 

medical tourism, for they have a significant spill over on overall health care in our country. 

 
238.  In the same vein, we will encourage the setting up of residential care homes 

for foreign retirees.     

 
Education 
 
239.  Madam Speaker, I now come to Education which has been and will continue 

to be the foundation of our success as a nation. 

 
240.  We are providing Rs 16.1 billion in this Budget for the Ministry of Education 
and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific Research, representing an increase 
of 11 percent over last year’s allocation.  

 
241.  This Government had announced the Nine Year Continuous Basic Education – 
a  fundamental  reform  that  lays  emphasis  on  the  early  years  of  schooling,  new  modes  of 
assessment for a seamless progression of learners across the levels, a revamped technical and 
vocational education sector and a vibrant Polytechnic Education.  

 
242.  This ambitious reform will cost around Rs 2 billion over the next 5 years. 
 
243.  In this Budget, provision is being made for:  
 
(i) 

Recruitment  of  340  Trainees  Educator  for  holistic  development  and  75 
Support Teachers for remedial education for the primary education sector; 
 
A vast training programme for quality teaching; 
 
Infrastructure development that will support pedagogical innovations;  

(iii) 
 
(iv)  Major upgrading of technical and vocational training centres; and   

(ii) 

 
Launching 3 new Polytechnics.  

(v) 
  
244.  In  addition,  600  educators  will  be  recruited  for  both  primary  and  secondary 

schools. 

 
Youth and Sports 
 
245.  I now come to youth and sports.  
  
246.  Madam Speaker, as demonstrated in the last Indian Ocean Games, our athletes 
are performing better and better.  They are often our best ambassadors and their effort and 
enthusiasm should be further supported. We need to provide them with more opportunities to 
participate in international competition. 

 

 

31 

 

 

247.  To this end, we have made provision for 
 
(i) 

(ii) 

participation in the next games of the Commission de la Jeunesse et des Sports 
de l’Océan Indien, which start tomorrow in Madagascar,  and  
 
for  the  upgrading  and  construction  of  necessary  sports  infrastructure  to  host 
the next ‘Jeux des  Iles’  in Mauritius in 2019.   In this context, a new  multi 
sports  complex  including  a  swimming  pool  of  international  norm  will  be 
constructed  at St Pierre. The  Anjalay Stadium,  George V Stadium,  Germain 
Comarmond Stadium and Quartier Militaire Stadium will be upgraded.  

 
248.  Furthermore,  we  are  providing  for  the  technical  design  of  a  new  swimming 

pool at Rivière des Anguilles.  

 
249.  I  am  also  pleased  to  announce  the  setting  up  of  a  scheme  to  support  the 
professional  development  of  our  best  athletes.  We  will  provide  them  with  a  contract  of 
employment as coach to young sportsmen and sports women. The centre for excellence in 
sport, funded by a newly established Lotto Fund, will run the scheme.  

 
250.  Our  local  football  is  showing  a  steady  improvement  which  needs  to  be 
encouraged.  An amount of Rs 26 million is being earmarked from the new Lotto Fund to 
further support the professionalization of football.  

 
251.  Furthermore, I am providing Rs 17 million for upgrading the Pointe Jérome 
Residential Youth Centre in Mahebourg and the Anse La Raie Residential Youth Centre and 
Rs 5 million for the development of sports programmes to be made accessible to the public, 
specially the youth.  

 
252.  We  are  also  providing  for  the  upgrading  of  sports  infrastructure  in  existing 

schools and colleges and making them accessible to the general public after school hours. 

Arts, Culture and Leisure 

 
253.  Our efforts to usher in a new era of development will also play out in the fields 

of arts, culture and entertainment.  

 
254.  To revamp that sector, we need first an appropriate legal framework.  To this 
end, a new legislation – The Status of Artist Bill will be introduced in the National Assembly.  

 
255.  We  are  earmarking  Rs  50  million  to  rehabilitate  our  historical  and  cultural 

heritage sites and structures listed under the National Heritage Fund Act.  

 
256.  We are also providing for a study to be carried out prior to the setting up of a 

Slavery Museum at the ex-Labourdonnais Military Hospital, in Port Louis.   

 
257.  I am also providing for the creation of a Mauritius National Troupe and the 

launching of a Bachelor Degree course in Music at the University of Mauritius.  

32 

 

258.  Government  is  providing  an  additional  amount  to  the  Rights  Management 
Society  to  meet  its  contribution  to  WIPO  and  other  international  intellectual  property 
protection agencies, so that artists can benefit from a higher distribution of the royalties.   

 
259.  The new Lotto Fund will also provide for financing of projects submitted by 

artists within a number of new schemes to be worked out.  

 
260.  Madam Speaker, next year Mauritius will be celebrating the 25th anniversary 
of  the  Republic.    An  additional  amount  will  be  earmarked  to  prepare  for  this  momentous 
event.  

  
Reforming the Gambling Sector 
 
261.  Madam Speaker,  I now  come with measures to  reform the  gambling sector. 

Our strategy is to provide the framework for responsible gambling.   

 
262.  To this end, we are setting up a Responsible Gambling and Capacity Building 

Fund. This Fund will be used for the purpose of: 

Developing  and  implementing  a  responsible  gambling  programme  targeting 
the public at large; 
 
addressing and curbing the ills associated with the Gambling Industry; and 

capacity building especially as regards expertise and logistics, to address the 
issue of illegal betting, and ensuring integrity and best practices in the 
industry, including  the horse racing industry. 

 
263.  To finance the Responsible Gambling and Capacity Building Fund, a 2 percent 
levy will be charged on the net stakes of all gambling operators. Any CSR amount paid will 
be deductible from that levy.  

 
264.  I  am  also  increasing  betting  duty  for  bookmakers  operating  outside  the 

racecourse from Rs 16,000 to Rs 30,000 in respect of each race meeting.  

 
265.  The Gambling Regulatory Authority will be further restructured to enable it to 

effectively play its role as a fully-fledged licensing and regulatory Authority.   

 
266.  Moreover, a Horse-Racing Division and an Integrity and Intelligence Unit are 

being set up within the Gambling Regulatory Authority. 

 
267.  The ‘Police des Jeux’ will also be reinforced with appropriately trained human 
resources  and  equipped  with  the  latest  technology  to  enable  effective  tracking  of  illegal 
betting and conduct enquiries diligently.  

 
268.  Government  will  limit  its  role  to  regulating  the  Gambling  sector,  and  will, 
therefore, gradually divest itself of its businesses in the gambling sector.  To this end, both 
the ownership and management of casinos in Mauritius will be reviewed.  

 
(i) 

(ii) 
 
(iii) 

 

33 

 

269.  In  line  with  the  new  tourism  policy  focusing  on  maximising  earnings  per 
tourist  and  promoting  new  tourist  attractions,  hotels  will  be  allowed  to  organise  regulated 
betting games. This measure will be restricted to non-residents and foreigners only.  

 
270.  On-line betting will henceforth be allowed but restricted to non-residents and 
foreigners.  The Gambling Regulatory Authority will set up the necessary framework with the 
assistance of consultants. 

Consumer Protection 
 

271.  Madam Speaker, I now come to an important commitment of this Government 

which is about continually enhancing consumer protection and their purchasing power.  

 
272.  I  am  pleased  to  announce  that,  in  line  with  our  ambition  to  transform 
Mauritius  into  a  duty-free  island,  I  am  abolishing  customs  duty  on  some  368  tariff  lines, 
bringing the percentage of duty-free tariff lines from 89 to 95 percent.  As from tomorrow, 
the following products will be duty free: 

 

 

 

•  Clothing items such as suits, jackets, trousers, dresses, shirts and t-shirts; 
•  Baby diapers and wipes; 
•  Table, kitchen and household articles of aluminium and porcelain; 
•  Drinking glasses; 
•  Motor vehicle engines and parts thereof; 
•  Primary cells and batteries; and 
•  Electric heating apparatus 

 
273.  Second, I am also pleased to announce that I am removing VAT on breakfast 

cereals as from 1st September 2016.  

 
274.  Third, the retail price of cooking gas will be reduced from Rs 330 to Rs 270 

for a 12-kilo cylinder as from tomorrow.  

 
275.  Fourth,  concerning  hire  purchase,  the  law  will  be  amended  to  make  it  clear 
that charges include interest and therefore interest cannot be claimed on any amount that has 
been prepaid.   

 
276.  Fifth, the recommendations of the Commission of Enquiry on Sale by  Levy 
are  presently  being  examined  by  stakeholders  along  with  the  proposal  to  set  up  an  Asset 
Management  Company  by  the  Bank  of  Mauritius.      In  the  meantime  I  am  increasing  the 
threshold for cases to be referred to the Commissioner for Protection of Borrowers from Rs 2 
million to Rs 3 million.  

Outer Islands.  

Rodrigues, Agalega, St Brandon, Chagos Archipelago and Tromelin 

 
277.  Madam Speaker, I now come to our policies and measures for Rodrigues and 

 
278.  Allow me to spell out some of the measures concerning Rodrigues Island. 
 

34 

 

279.  Earlier this month, the Honourable Prime Minister and myself proceeded on 
separate official missions to Rodrigues where we had lengthy discussions on matters related 
to the development of the island. 

 
280.  The  people  of  Rodrigues  may  rest  assured  of  the  firm  commitment  of  this 

Government to consolidate the development of Rodrigues.  

 
281.  Indeed, I am increasing the Budget for Rodrigues Regional Assembly (RRA) 
to  Rs  3.3  billion  and  allocating  a  further  amount  of  Rs  1.1  billion  under  the  votes  of  the 
different Ministries and Departments, bringing the total amount to Rs 4.4 billion.   

 
282.  Furthermore, the project value for the extension of the runway is estimated at 
Rs  2  billion.  The  design  is  currently  being  prepared  and  construction  should  start  by  next 
year.    In  the  meantime,  I  am  providing  Rs  40  million  in  2016/17  for  the  extension  of  the 
Rodrigues Airport Terminal.   

283.  As regards the Port Mathurin harbour, the consultant will be finalising the Port 

Master Plan by the end of this year.  

 
284.  Provision is also made for the construction of a new Warm Up Track at the 

Camp du Roi stadium.  

 
285.  Concerning internet connectivity, we are finalising the guaranteed purchase by 

the RRA over a period of ten years of bandwidth through undersea cable.  

 
286.  Meanwhile, we are increasing the purchase of the satellite bandwidth from 200 

to 500 megabytes per second until the end of 2018.  

  
287.  As  regards  law  and  order,  we  are  providing  for  two  Police  stations  at  Petit 

Gabriel and Grande Montagne.    

 
288.  In view of the Marshall Plan implementation in the Republic of Mauritius, we 

will ensure that Rodrigues is not left behind.  

 
289.  I am providing Rs 50 million for the construction of social housing units. The 

plan is to construct 1,000 units in the next three years.    

 
290.  For  Agalega,  we  are  providing  Rs  4  million  for  the  acquisition  of  two  new 

generators to secure continuous electricity supply for the population.  

 
291.  We have also earmarked Rs 6.5 million for a cold room to store food items 

and their fish catch for exports to Mauritius.  

 
292.  Madam Speaker, I would now like to speak on an issue which is very close to 
the heart of Mauritians. It is about our territorial sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago.  
The  Prime  Minister  has  clearly  voiced  his  stance  on  the  issue  and  it  will  take  intense 
negotiations  and  legal  action  to  achieve  our  goal  of  getting  effective  control  over  the 
archipelago.  Funds are being provided for that purpose.  

 

 

 

35 

 
IX. STRATEGY EIGHT:  DEALING WITH THE ROOT 

CAUSES OF POVERTY  

 

293.  I  now  turn  to  strategy  eight  which  is  about  dealing  with  the  root  causes  of 
poverty.  I have chosen this strategy because this Government has pledged to fight poverty 
and empower families at the lower rung to move up the ladder. This commitment underpins 
the core philosophy of this Government.      

 
294.  I am therefore pleased to announce that this Budget is concretely launching the 
Marshall Plan Against Poverty. It includes a variety of programmes and actions that interlock 
to assist and empower poor families.  

 
295.  Madam Speaker, it is an aberration that in an upper-middle income economy 
like ours, aspiring to become a high-income country, there are some 6,400 families still living 
below the absolute poverty threshold of USD 3.10 per day per individual, calculated on the 
basis of purchasing power parity set out in the latest World Bank Report.    

 
296.  Absolute poverty is a condition of life where families suffer from malnutrition, 
low  level  of  education,  even  illiteracy,  and  poor  shelter  quality,  that  perpetuate  a  sense  of 
permanent letting up and create a vicious circle.  

 
297.  Today, as we enter a new era of development, we must as a nation stand firm 
on  our  feet  to  say  no  more  –  no  more  children,  men  and  women  living  in  conditions  of 
absolute poverty in our country.   

 
298.  Today, I am taking an unprecedented decision to eradicate absolute poverty in 

Mauritius by acting urgently and directly.   

 
299.  Indeed, Madam Speaker, I am introducing a new scheme under which every 
adult on the Social Register will be entitled to a monthly subsistence allowance based on a 
minimum threshold of Rs 2,720 with a maximum threshold of Rs 9,520 for a family of two 
adults and three children. This is higher than our current threshold of Rs 6,200 and 40 percent 
higher than that of the World Bank. 

 
300.  There will thus be no person living in conditions of absolute poverty in our 

country.   

 

301.  To  implement  this  historic  measure  will  require  Rs  500  million  over  the 

transition period of two years.  This measure will be effective as from December 1st 2016.  

 
302.  At the same time, we are introducing a major programme to empower these 

families to break away from the poverty cycle and stand on their own feet.     

 
303.  First, on improving educational achievements. 
 
304.  To  encourage  students  from  poor  families  to  achieve  higher  levels  of 

education, Government will give them a cash award as follows:  

 
-  Rs  15,000  for  successfully  completing  the  grade  9  level  under  the  nine  year 

schooling.  

-  Rs 25,000 for successfully  completing the school certificate level or equivalent 

-  And Rs 35,000 for those successfully completing the Higher School Certificate or 

equivalent technical qualification.  

 
305.  We are also giving a second chance to students from poor families for exam 
resit at the School Certificate and Higher School Certificate levels.  Their examination fees 
will be borne by Government. 

 
306.  The monthly grant under the crèche voucher scheme for poor families is being 
increased from Rs 1,500 to Rs 2,000 per child.  This will allow these children to get a good 
start in life. 

 
307.  It is now widely recognised that community schools where academic teaching 
and community engagement are integrated can lead to improved student learning.    We will 
apply this new concept in 5 ZEP schools as a pilot project.  

 
308.  I am increasing the meal allowance for students attending ZEP schools by 50 

percent, from Rs 40 to Rs 60 per day.  

 
Decent Housing    
 
309.  Madam Speaker, I now come to the housing policy of Government.  
 
310.  Underpinning  our  approach  is  a  deep  conviction  that  a  decent  shelter  is  the 

next most important lever to lift families out of poverty.  

 
311.  In the context of the Marshall Plan, we are launching a programme of decent 
shelters for the absolute poor that will comprise the construction of at least 800 housing units 
over the next three years.  

 
312.  For low income families we are providing in this Budget:  

36 

 

 

vocational certificate.  
 

 

 

- 

- 

 

Rs  1  billion  for  the  construction  and  completion  of  1,900  units  of  up  to  50 
square meters each, on 16 sites across the island;  and  

Rs 155 million for the rehabilitation programme of NHDC housing estates. 

313.  Furthermore,  I am raising the monthly income limit for eligibility under the 

NHDC social housing scheme from Rs 10,000 to Rs 20,000.   
 

 

 

314.  A great number of families own a house on municipal land. They were given 
the  opportunity  to  purchase  the  land  but  have  not  been  able  to  do  so.  I  am  pleased  to 
announce that these families will be given the opportunity to buy the land at a nominal cost of 
Rs 2,000. The relevant legislation will be amended accordingly.  

 
315.  I am also pleased to announce that all arrears of interest on loans contracted by 
individuals  from  NHDC  and  MHC  Ltd,  and  whose  monthly  household  income  does  not 
exceed Rs 15,000 are being waived, provided the capital amount outstanding is duly repaid.  
This  should  protect  these  families  from  facing  the  tough  and  traumatising  Sale  by  Levy 
experience. 

 
316.  My next measures reflect our commitment to support families in their efforts 

to invest in constructing and acquiring their residences.  

 
317.  A  Mauritian  citizen  acquiring  a  new  house  or  a  new  apartment  during  the 
period 1st September 2016 to 30th June 2020 for an amount not exceeding Rs 6 million will 
be eligible to full exemption from registration duty. There will be no age restriction.   

 
318.  A  first  time  buyer  will  now  be  allowed  to  buy  bare  residential  land  free  of 
registration duty, on the first Rs 2 million, provided the acreage does not exceed 20 perches.   

 
319.  There will be no age restriction and a person who did not own a residential 

property as at 29 July 2016 will also qualify for the above initiative.   

 
320.  We are also revamping the VAT refund scheme regarding the construction of 
a new dwelling or acquisition of a newly built apartment. Henceforth, the MRA will refund 
VAT on submission of relevant receipts, up to a cap of Rs 500,000 instead of the current Rs 
300,000.    
 
321.  I  am  also  removing  the  maximum  floor  area  eligibility  criteria  under  that 
scheme; increasing more than three-fold the household income eligibility to Rs 2 million per 
annum; extending the eligibility to construction on top of an existing building; and extending 
the scheme to 2020.  

 
322.  In  addition,  the  upper  limit  of  Rs  2.5  million  in  relation  to  the  construction 

37 

value is being raised to Rs 4 million.   

 
323.  As regards promoters, they  will be allowed to  build and sell residential units 
of up to Rs 6 million, free of land transfer tax, instead of Rs 4 million currently. The scheme 
is being extended to 2020. 

 
324.  Furthermore, no registration duty will be payable on a secured housing loan 

not exceeding Rs 2 million, instead of the current threshold of Rs 1 million. 

 
325.  A  first-time  home-owner  is  allowed  to  deduct  from  his  taxable  income,  the 
interests paid on a secured housing loan that was contracted on or after  01 July 2006.  As 
from the income year 2016/17, this date restriction is removed. 

 
326.  My next measures concern the vulnerable persons and families.  
 

 

38 

 

 

327.  First,  Madam  Speaker  only  persons  above  15  years  who  suffer  from 
disabilities are currently entitled to the Basic Invalidity Pension.  I am pleased to announce 
that this age discrimination is being removed. Henceforth, children below 15 years of age and 
with disabilities will also be entitled to this pension.   I am providing an additional sum of Rs 
100 million for around 3,130 cases. 

 
328.  Second, Government is launching a special scholarship scheme for 5 students 
with disabilities for pursuing tertiary studies locally.   The scholarship will cover the fees as 
well as a monthly stipend of Rs 5,000.    

 
329.  Third, concerning Special Education Needs, I am increasing the grant-in-aid to 

NGOs in that sector by more than 50 percent to Rs 90 million.  

 
330.  Moreover,  the  Ministry  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 
Education and Scientific Research will come up with a strategic paper to review the Special 
Education Needs sector in the wake of the 9-year schooling.   

 
331.  Fourth,  to  relieve  victims  of  accidental  fire,  I  am  providing  for  a  monthly 
rental allowance of up to Rs 5, 000 for a period of up to 6 months so that they may rapidly 
secure a shelter.  

 
332.  Fifth, the funeral grant under social aid will be increased from Rs 4,950 to Rs 

 
333.  Sixth,  we  are  providing  for  nine  additional  staff  for  the  Child  Protection, 

Welfare and Development Unit to give psycho-social support to children in distress.   

 
334.  In  line  with  the  recommendations  of  the  Marshall  Plan  against  Poverty,  the 
National Empowerment Foundation will be restructured for effective service delivery to the 
poor and vulnerable groups. There will be a shift of focus to proactive case management and 
sustainable empowerment programmes.   

10,000.  

Corporate Social Responsibility Framework 

 
335.  Madam  Speaker,  I  now  come  to  the  issue  of  CSR.  There  have  been  many 
representations  on  the  way  the  CSR  money  are  being  used  following  the  removal  of 
guidelines.  I found the concerns that have been voiced justifiable. We have therefore decided 
to revisit the use of the CSR funds to ensure greater transparency and better outcomes.  

 
336.  Accordingly, a National CSR Foundation will be set up and managed jointly 

by the public and private sectors.  

 
337.  Businesses  will  be  required  to  contribute  at  least  50 percent  of  their  CSR 
money to that National Foundation.  This will go up to at least 75 percent the following year.  

 
338.  The remaining balance may be used to implement their CSR programmes in 
accordance with their existing framework.  The NGOs will therefore continue to benefit from 
contributions from the private sector.  

 

CSR Foundation.   

39 

339.  Any unspent balance from the 50 percent will be channelled to the National 

 
340.  We  have  also  decided  that  the  money  endowed  to  the  Foundation  will  be 

allocated to support civil society actions in six priority areas: 

 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

• 

Poverty alleviation  
Educational support  
Social housing  
Supporting persons with severe disabilities  
Dealing  with  health  problems  resulting  from  substance  abuse  and  poor 
sanitation;  
And family protection. 
 

341.  As  regards  poverty  alleviation,  educational  support  and  social  housing,  the 

CSR support will be for families in the SRM.  

 
342.  Madam  Speaker,  I  would  like  to  pay  a  special  tribute  to  all  the  men  and 
women  who  are  dedicating  their  time  and  efforts  with  deep  commitment  to  helping  and 
supporting  others,  especially  those  who  are  suffering  and  who  need  a  helping  hand.  I  can 
assure  these  NGOs  that  this  Government  will  always  stand  by  their  side  as  they  carry  out 
their mission. 

 
343.  Madam  Speaker,  Mauritius  is  one  of  the  few  countries  that  are  fortunate  to 
have a mosaic of cultures and religious beliefs where all citizens have deep mutual respect.  
We have to acknowledge the formidable work and dedication of socio-cultural and religious 
organisations in preserving and promoting our cultural, linguistic and religious values.  I am 
pleased to announce that I am increasing the subsidies for religious bodies by ten percent.     

 
344.  I now come to gender equality.  
 
345.  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  pleased  to  announce  here  that  as  a  first  step  we  will 
require that public companies listed on the Stock Exchange have at least one woman on their 
Board of Directors.     

 
346.  I am providing the necessary funds to set up a Parliamentary Women Caucus 
regrouping women MNAs from all political parties to discuss on issues and policies relating 
to women in our society.   

 
347.  Five  main  Ministries  will  be  allocated  Rs  200,000  each  to  conduct  gender 

analysis of services offered and formulate policy responses.   

 
348.  Government will also introduce a Gender Development Index for Mauritius to 

measure progress in gender equality.   

 

X. 

STRATEGY NINE:  A MAJOR PUBLIC SECTOR REFORM PROGRAMME   

 
349.  Madam Speaker,  I will now articulate the main thrusts of our ninth strategy 

which is to bring about a major public sector reform programme.   

 

40 

 
350.  The  success  of  the  new  era  of  development  hinges  on  effective  and 
expeditious  implementation  of  numerous  reforms,  new  policies,  vital  national  projects  and 
modern ways of doing things.  To make them happen requires a public sector that is more 
efficient and that is nimble enough to adapt fast to change.   

 
351.  To  this  end,  we  will  start  with  fundamental  reforms  of  public  sector 
institutions, in particular those on which Government, the population and businesses depend 
the most for services.  

 
352.  First,  the  supporting  institutions  in  the  SME  sector,  namely,  SMEDA, 
Enterprise Mauritius and National Women Entrepreneur Council   will be merged into one 
organisation for greater coherence, more efficiency and effectiveness.  

 
353.  Second,  all  organisations  managing  the  public  sector  real  estate  assets, 
namely, the  SPDC, BPML, SLDC, the Belle Mare Tourist Village Ltd, Le Val Development 
Ltd  and  Les Pailles Conference Centre Ltd  will be merged into one single institution.  

 
354.  Third,  in  the  ICT  sector,  the  role  and  functions  of  the  National  Computer 

Board will be reviewed and adapted to the evolving needs of the sector. 

355.  Fourth,  the  Central  Informatics  Bureau,  the  Central  Information  Systems 

Division and the IT Security Unit are being merged into a single unit. 

  

 

356.  Fifth,  the  regulatory  bodies,  namely,  the  Information  Communication  Technology 
Authority (ICTA) and the Independent Broadcasting Authority (IBA) will be merged to adapt 
to the convergence of technology.   

 
357.  Sixth, the Registrar General Department will be incorporated into the MRA to 

have one single revenue collection agency and for better enforcement.  

 
358.  Seventh,  the  MRA  will  act  as  a  collecting  agent  for  contributions  to  the 
National  Pension  Fund,  the  National  Savings  Fund,  the  HRDC  training  levy  and  the 
Workfare Programme Fund.   

 
359.  Eighth,  the  SIC  Group  is  being  restructured  and  will  focus  on  disposing  its 
matured  investments  and  channelling  the  proceeds  in  new  projects,  in  particular  in  export 
industries, for job creation and development.   

  
360.  Ninth, the DBM is being reorganised to focus on creating and running SME 
parks  and  managing  government  financing  schemes  for  micro  enterprises  and  small 
establishments.  

 
361.  Tenth,  the  MHC  and  the  NHDC  will  be  merged  to  provide  a  platform  for 

better planning, financing and effective service delivery to meet demand for social housing.  

 
362.  Eleventh, the National Art Gallery and the Mauritius Museum Council will be 

merged to benefit from synergies under common management.  

  

41 

 

363.  Twelfth,  the  National  Development  Unit  along  with  the  thirty-five  Citizens 

Advice Bureaus around the island will be reorganised.   

 
364.  Thirteenth,  all  public  sector  bodies  that  have  been  making  losses  and 
accumulating debt will be required to submit their plan to turn around their financial situation 
to the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development by the end of October this year.  This 
includes the MBC, the Mauritius Post, the National Transport Corporation, Rose Belle Sugar 
Estate and the Mauritius Meat Authority, amongst others.   

 
365.  Fourteenth, the Department of Civil Aviation will be transformed into a Civil 

Aviation Authority to enhance our regulatory and air navigational services.  

 
366.  Fifteenth,  all  Welfare  Funds  will  be  grouped  under  one  roof  to  provide  a 

common set of facilities for all.    

 
367.  Sixteenth,  the  Town  and  Country  Planning  Board  will  be  revamped  into  a 

modern National Planning Commission with wider functions.  

 
368.  Seventeenth,  the  National  Transport  Authority,  the  Road  Development 

Authority and the Traffic Management Road Safety Unit will be restructured.  

 
369.  Eighteenth, to speed up implementation of capital projects in the Government, 
the Technical Division of the Ministry of Public Infrastructure will be restructured to focus 
on implementation of large and complex projects.  Line Ministries will henceforth be able to 
procure  directly  the  services  of  consultants  and  contractors  to  undertake  projects  up  to 
Rs 25 million.  

 
370.  Nineteenth,  we  are  also  amending  the  Public  Procurement  Act  to  allow  for 
direct  negotiations  between  public  sector  bodies,  while  ensuring  value  for  money.  
Accordingly,  the  Finance  and  Audit  Act  and  the  Capital  Project  Process  Manual  will  be 
amended and the Project Plan Committee restructured.  

 

 

371.  And twentieth, the Public Sector Efficiency Bureau will be reengineered and 

located in the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development.   

 
372.  Let me also announce that for greater transparency and accountability in the 
allocation of State lands and renewal of lease agreements, the list of allocation and renewal is 
being regularly posted on the website of the Ministry of Housing and Lands.  

 

XI. 

STRATEGY TEN: ENSURING MACROECONOMIC 
STABILITY AND SOUND PUBLIC FINANCES 

 
373.  Madam Speaker, I now turn to the tenth strategy which is centered on macro-

economic stability, sound public finances and sustainable public debt.   

 
374.  Madam Speaker, the macroeconomic and fiscal policy choices we make today 

- or fail to make - will be crucial to determining the performance of all other policies.  

 
375.  We will, therefore, move on responsibly and prudently.  
 

 

42 

376.  The Government Budget for 2016/17 will amount to Rs 117.4 billion of which 

Rs 103.3 billion for recurrent expenditure, and Rs 14.1 billion for capital expenditure.  

 
377.  Total revenue will be Rs 102.4 billion, of which tax receipts will be Rs 84.7 

billion and external grants Rs 6.4 billion.   

 
378.  This  will  leave  us  with  a  budget  deficit  before  net  acquisition  of  financial 
assets of Rs 15 billion, representing 3.3 percent of GDP against 3.5 percent for 2015/16.   I 
should  add  here  that  we  are  expecting  a  real  GDP  growth  rate  of  4.1 percent  in  2016/17, 
while the nominal GDP would amount to Rs 451.4 billion. 

 
379.  Madam  Speaker,  let  me  express  our  deep  gratitude  and  recognition  to  the 
Government of India for the exceptional financial support of USD 353 million, that is some 
Rs 12.7 billion, which we shall be receiving over a four-year period, starting in this Budget.  

 
380.  Madam Speaker, we can use the money to finance our recurrent expenditure – 

but this amounts to financing consumption. 

 
381.  Or we can use the money to invest in development priorities where there will 

be the highest return in terms of economic and social benefits.  

 
382.  For  us  the  choice  is  obvious.    We  have  decided  that  the  money  should  be 

invested so that our children and their children as well can benefit.  

 
383.  Thus,  the  grant  of  Rs  12.7  billion  has  been  earmarked  for  development 

priorities as follows:  

 

384.  Madam Speaker, I now turn to public sector debt.  
 
385.  Public sector debt, for the purpose of the statutory debt ceiling, will be 55.6 
percent of GDP and, if measured by IMF standards, it will be 62.8 percent for 2016/17 down 
from 65 percent in 2015/16.   

 
386.  With a view to reducing our exposure to foreign currency risk, we are making 

early repayments of some USD 120 million of external debt, that is, around Rs 4.3 billion.    

 

 
• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

 

 

 

Rs 7.2 billion to part finance the Metro Express Project; 
 
Rs 500 million to provide our primary school children in grades 1 and 2 with a 
digital tablet each, along with the necessary software and educational content;   
 
Rs 1.1 billion to construct a new Supreme Court Tower in Port Louis; 

Rs  2.7  billion  to  part  finance  the  construction  of  the  new  Parliament  House 
and Government offices at the Heritage City;  

Rs 500 million for the construction of the new ENT hospital at Vacoas; and  

Rs 700 million for social housing in the context of the Marshall Plan.   

 

end of 2018.  

43 

387.  It will take further efforts to achieve the statutory debt target of 50 percent by 

 
388.  Let me now announce our tax administration reforms. 
 
389.  An Alternative Dispute  Resolution mechanism will be set up at the level of 

MRA so as to expedite tax appeal cases exceeding Rs 10 million.   

 
390.  An  Alternative  Dispute  Resolution  Panel  of  3  members  will  be  set  up, 

including a representative of the Attorney General’s Office. 

 
391.  Provision  will  be  made  to  enable  the  MRA  to  request  high  net  worth 

individuals to submit a statement of their assets and liabilities.    

 
392.  The Mauritius Revenue Authority Act will be amended so that the definition 
of  ‘fraud’  for  the  purpose  of  administering  revenue  laws  includes  non-submission  of  tax 
returns.   
 
393.  Non-remittance of VAT, PAYE and other tax deduction at source collected by 
economic operators on  behalf of the State  will constitute a criminal offence.  At the same 
time, the penalty provision will be strengthened.   

 
394.  I now come to our tax policy. 
 
395.  The  taxation  of  motor  cars  is  being  reviewed  to  reflect  market  realities  and 
remove  distortions  in  the  car  market.  The  following  changes  are  being  made  and  will  be 
effective as from tomorrow. 

 
396.  First, the CO2 levy/rebate scheme introduced in 2011 is being suspended due 

to major operational and litigation issues that have hindered its proper functioning. 

  
397.  Second, the rates of excise duty on motor cars between 1,001 to 1,600 cc are 

being lowered from 55 per cent to 50 percent. 

 
398.  Third, I am also lowering duty on hybrid motor cars by 30 percentage points 
for all cylinder capacity. Consequently, the rate on a hybrid car below 1,600 cc will decrease 
from 55 to 25 percent.   

 
399.  Fourth, I am abolishing duty on electric cars of up to 180 KW.  
 
400.  Fifth, the adjustment factor used at customs in the determination of the import 

value of a second hand car is being lowered to 5 percent.  

 
401.  Madam Speaker, consumption of alcohol and cigarettes is still strikingly high. 

In order to fight these social evils, I am increasing the rates of excise duty as follows:-  

 
- 

- 

by 5 percent for beer and 10  percent for all other alcoholic products; and 
 
by 25 percent for all tobacco products. 

44 

 

 
402.  In  the  same  vein,  the  customs  duty  on  spirituous  products  such  as  rum  and 

whisky is being raised from 15 to 30 percent.  

 
403.  Another  alarming  health  issue  is  the  very  high  rate  of  Non-Communicable 
Diseases affecting our population. I am extending the coverage of the tax on the sugar content 
of soft drinks to other sugar sweetened drinks, such as juices and milk-based drinks, as from 
1st October 2016. 

 
404.  A 15 percent customs duty is being introduced on sugar.   
 
405.  In  order  to  further  encourage  consumers  to  move  towards  more  energy 
efficient products, I am extending the coverage of the 25 percent levy on inefficient products 
to include washing machines and lamps of mercury vapour and metal halide.  

 
406.  In addition, to ensure that the appliances on the market are more efficient, the 

threshold for the application of the levy will be revised upwards. 

 
407.  I will now announce our income tax measures.  
 
408.  I  am  increasing  the  income  exemption  thresholds  for  all  categories  of 

taxpayers by Rs 10,000 for the income year 2016/17. 

 
409.  The  minimum  amount  of  tuition  fee  eligibility  criteria  to  benefit  from  the 
additional deduction in respect of a dependent pursuing tertiary education is being reduced 
from Rs 44,500 to Rs 34,800. 

 
410.  The Rs 2 million income eligibility criteria for a taxpayer to benefit from the 
interest relief on secured housing loan and the additional deduction for tertiary education of a 
dependent is being increased to Rs 4 million. 

 
Pension Reform 
 
411.  Madam Speaker, I will now speak about the issue of pension.  
  
412.  Ageing population is putting significant pressure on the pension system.     
 
413.  Today, there are 6 employees to support a pensioner and by 2030, there will be 

only 3.  This is a challenge that we cannot ignore.  

 
414.  I am therefore setting up a high level Committee to look into the issue, hold 

wide consultations and come up with recommendations.  

 
415.  Moreover,  the  high  level  Committee  will  also  look  into  ways  and  means  to 

improve the contributory retirement pension benefits of private sector employees. 

 
416.  Before concluding, let me express my deepest gratitude to the Prime Minister 

for his precious advice during the preparation of the Budget.  

 

 

417.  I  am  also  indebted  to  my  colleague  ministers  and  parliamentarians  for  their 

valuable support and cooperation all along.  

 
418.  I  should  also  thank  all  the  staff  of  my  Ministry  who  have  shown  great 

dedication in preparing this Budget.  

45 

 

XII. 

CONCLUSION 

 
419.  Madam Speaker, let me now conclude.  
 
420.  The  Budget  I have presented today  states very  clearly that this Government 

does not live in the past.  

 
421.  This is a Budget that boldly plans the future while at the same time addresses 

the present day to day concern of the population.   

 
422.  It is a budget that proposes powerful actions to deal with complex issues.  
 
423.  Budget 2016/17 will indeed set our country on a course to full employment by 

taking some 20,000 youths, men and women from unemployment and soon.  

 
424.  It reignites economic growth and alleviates poverty in an unprecedented way.  
 
425.  It  makes  the  necessary  investment  to  reconstruct  the  water  system,  ensures 

more fluidity and safety on our roads, and builds greater resilience to climatic change.  

 
426.  This Budget gives a high priority to spending on a modern education system 
that is more responsive to the aspirations of our young people and to the future needs of the 
economy.  
 
427.  It creates a more secure, cleaner and better country to live in.   
 
428.  Looking  to  the  future,  Budget  2016/17  sets  the  stage  for  a  new  era  of 
development and prosperity for the whole nation. It puts our country firmly on the path to 
vision 2030 and paves the way to a high income and inclusive nation.   

 
429.  Government 

is 

in  modern 
infrastructure, in a digital society, and in the skills and talents of our youth, men and women 
for the future.  

spending  courageously  and 

judiciously 

 
430.  It  is  a  Budget  that  creates  far  wider  economic  space  and  further  opens 

Mauritius to the rest of the world. 

 
431.  This  Budget  does  all  these  while  at  the  same  time  maintaining  strict  fiscal 

discipline, and eliminating wastage and inefficiencies in the use of taxpayers’ money.     

 
432.  Madam  Speaker,  Budget  2016/17  states  very  clearly  that  prosperity  will  get 

back in its stride.  

 

46 

 

433.  Madam  Speaker,  at  times  in  our  nation’s  history  we  must  dare  to  push  the 
boundaries.  This time has come for us.  Let us all join hands and come together as a nation to 
take our country to this new era of development.  

 
434.  I now commend the Bill to the House. 
 

(Applause) 

 
The Prime Minister rose and seconded.  
The debate stood adjourned to the next sitting of the Assembly, in accordance with 

S.O. 73(2). 

MOTIONS 

URGENT BUSINESS UNDER S.O. 17(3) 

The Minister of Finance and Economic Development (Mr P. Jugnauth): Madam 
Speaker, in terms of Standing Order 17(3), I move to take the time of the House for urgent 
financial business. 

The Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 29(1)  

The Minister of Finance and Economic Development (Mr P. Jugnauth): Madam 
Speaker, having obtained your permission, I beg to move the suspension of Standing Order 
29(1) in order that I may present two Financial Resolutions without notice. 

The Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

FINANCIAL RESOLUTIONS 

FIRST RESOLUTION 

The Minister of Finance and Economic Development (Mr P. Jugnauth): Madam 

Speaker, having obtained your permission, I now present the two Resolutions.  

 

Madam Speaker,  I move that this Assembly resolves that, with effect from 30 July 
2016, customs duty shall, in respect of the goods falling under their respective H.S. Codes, as 
specified in the Schedule to this Resolution, be levied at the rate corresponding to those H.S. 

47 

 
Codes  and  goods  and  not  at  the  rate  corresponding  to  those  H.S.  Codes  and  goods  as 
specified in Part I of the First Schedule to the Customs Tariff Act. (APPENDIX II) 
 

The Prime Minister rose and seconded. 
Question put and agreed to. 

 

 

SECOND RESOLUTION 

The Minister of Finance and Economic Development (Mr P. Jugnauth): Madam 

Speaker, I move that this Assembly resolves that, with effect from 30 July 2016 – 
 

(a) 

(b) 

 

 

excise  duty  shall,  in  respect  of  the  excisable  goods  falling  under  their 
respective  H.S.  Codes,  as  specified  in  Part  A  of  the  Schedule  to  this 
Resolution,  be  levied  at  the  rate  corresponding  to  those  H.S.  Codes  and 
excisable  goods,  as  specified  in  Part  A  of  that  Schedule  and  not  at  the  rate 
corresponding to those H.S. Codes and excisable goods as specified in Part I 
of the First Schedule to the Excise Act; 

section 3C of the Excise Act relating to CO2 levy or CO2 rebate on motor cars 
shall be suspended, subject to the transitional provision specified in Part B of 
the  Schedule  to  this  Resolution,  until  the  suspension  is  lifted,  or  other 
provisions relating thereto are made, by an Act of Parliament.  (APPENDIX 
III) 

The Prime Minister rose and seconded 
Question put and agreed to. 

ADJOURNMENT 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  that  this  Assembly  do  now 

adjourn to Wednesday 03 August 2016 at 11.30 p.m. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Madam Speaker:  The House stands adjourned. 

At  7.15  p.m.,  the  Assembly  was,  on  its  rising,  adjourned  to  Wednesday  03  August 

2016 at 11.30 p.m.  

