No. 05 of 2016 

 

1 

 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

 

TUESDAY 26 APRIL 2016 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

2 

CONTENTS 

PAPERS LAID 

QUESTIONS (Oral) 

MOTION 

STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS 

BILLS (Public) 

ADJOURNMENT 

QUESTIONS (Written) 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

THE CABINET 

 

 (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

 
Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 
KCMG, QC  

Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 
GCSK  
Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

 
Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development, Minister 
for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 
Communications 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon.  Ivan  Leslie  Collendavelloo,  GCSK, 
SC 
Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 
Utilities 

 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

International Trade 
 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha, GCSK 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan, SC 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 
Sinatambou 
Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 
Perraud 
Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain, GCSK 

Minister 
of 
Empowerment 
Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation  

Integration 

and  Economic 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 
Family Welfare 
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 

 

4 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

 
Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 
Cheong, MSK 

Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 

Institutional Reforms  
Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 
Institutions 
Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands 
 
Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms, 
Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 
Disaster and Beach Management 
Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and 
Training 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Gopall, Mr Navin (Temporary Transfer to 
RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 05 of 2016 

 

Sitting of 26 April 2016 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

7 

PAPERS LAID 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table – 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

A.    Office of the Speaker  ‒ 

Declaration of Interest by the Honourable First Member for Rivière des Anguilles and 
Souillac (Mr M. Gobin) in regard to Parliamentary Question B/320. (In Original) 

B.    Prime Minister’s Office ‒ 

Certificate of Urgency in respect of the following Bills (In Original) – 
(i)       The National Women’s Council Bill (No. V of 2016); and 
(ii)      The National Wage Consultative Council Bill (No. VI of 2016). 

C.    Ministry of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport ‒ 

The Road Traffic (Bus Fares) Regulations 2016. (Government Notice No. 99 of 2016) 

D.    Ministry of Local Government ‒ 

(a)    The  District  Council  of  Flacq  (Market)  Regulations  2016.  (Government  Notice  

No. 96 of 2016) 

(b)    The District Council of Flacq (Fair) Regulations 2016. (Government Notice No. 97 

of  2016) 

E.    Ministry of Arts and Culture ‒ 

The National Heritage Fund (Amendment of Schedule) Regulations 2016. (Government 
Notice No. 98 of 2016)  

F.    Ministry of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives ‒ 

The  Report  of 
the  
Cooperative Development Fund for the years ended 31 December 2010, 31 December 
2011 and 31 December 2012. (In Original) 

the  Financial  Statements  of 

the  Director  of  Audit  on 

 

 

8 

ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

CARGO HANDLING CORPORATION LTD - DUBAI PORTS WORLD – INTER-

MINISTERIAL TECHNICAL COMMITTEE 

The  Leader  of  the  Opposition  (Mr  P.  Bérenger)  (by  Private  Notice)  asked  the 
Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External  Communications    whether,  in 
regard to the Cargo Handling Corporation Ltd., he will state –  

(a) 

(b) 

the  proposals  of  Dubai  Ports  World  for  its  shareholding  therein  and  for  the 
management  thereof,  indicating  if  Government  has  reached  a  decision  in 
relation thereto, and  

how  the  dismissal  of  Alain  Edouard,  President  of  the  Port  Louis  Maritime 
Employees  Association  (PLMEA),  relates  to  the  opposition  of  the  Trade 
Union to the ‘privatisation’ of the Cargo Handling Corporation Ltd. through 
Dubai Ports World, indicating if the latter will be re-instated. 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, with your permission I shall reply to 

the Private Notice Question together with Parliamentary Question B/305. 

In regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed that in early June 2015, the Sultan 
 
Ahmed Bin Sulayen, Chairman of DP World, together with a team of experts, effected a visit 
to Mauritius and had meetings, inter alia, with the Prime Minister, the Minister of Finance 
and Economic Development, the Minister of Housing and Lands and myself to elaborate on 
the avenues of co-operation. 

 
In September 2015, a technical team from DP World carried out a prospection visit to 
Mauritius  to  discuss  with  stakeholders  and  to  collect  information.    Working  sessions  were 
held with different stakeholders in Government and the private sector.  The delegation also 
visited the Mauritius Container Terminal and the proposed logistics park. 

DP World submitted its preliminary proposals on 30 November, followed by a visit of 
 
its  technical  team  to  Mauritius  on  10  and  11  February  of  this  year.  Subsequently,  on  25 
February, DP World submitted more detailed proposals on the Special Economic Zone (SEZ) 
and Port Operations as a basis for further discussions.   

 

The proposal of DP World comprises three main aspects, namely - 

(i) 

The development and marketing of a state-of-the-art Special Economic Zone 
(SEZ) on 325 acres of Land at Riche Terre, through a Joint Venture with the 

 

 

9 

Government  of  Mauritius  with  a  99-year  lease  based  on  the  Jebel  Ali  Free 
Zone model. 

This would involve an initial investment of US$23 million over the first six 
years, for the construction of industrial and business units, office premises as 
well as serviced plots. Thereafter, an additional investment of US$37 million 
is expected bringing the total investment to the  tune of US$60 million. The 
SEZ will have the potential to attract US$450 million of FDI and generate up 
to 8,000 jobs. 

Madam Speaker, the second aspect of the proposal comprises a 40% shareholding in 
Cargo Handling Corporation Ltd with a Management Agreement whereby DP World would 
be responsible for management of Port Operations over a period of 30 years. 

DP World is proposing to invest at the initial stage, some US$25 m. in the Mauritius 
 
Container Terminal in terms of improvement of IT infrastructure and purchase of container 
handling  equipment  to  enhance  operational  performance  and  increase  the  capacity  of  the 
Terminal to 1.3 million TEUs. 

(ii)  The  third  aspect  of  the  proposal  concerns  an  investment  of  US$500m.  for  the 
development of the Island Terminal by 2030, when the container traffic is expected 
to exceed 1.3 million TEUs. 

The proposal of DP World could be interesting and innovative, insofar that, it is not 
 
solely based on increasing Container Transshipment Traffic at Port Louis, but more geared on 
increasing captive traffic to be generated from the development of the free port activities. 

Madam Speaker, in addition, the port would be in a position to offer a range of other 

services to ships, including bunkering, ship chandling and ship repairs. 

 
My  Ministry  has  set  up  an  Inter-Ministerial  Technical  Committee  to  examine  the 
proposals and hold discussions with the DP World. The MPA has retained the services of Mr 
Marc  Juhel,  a  retired  World  Bank  Consultant  in  Port  and  Transport  Advisory  Services,  to 
assist in the discussions.  

 
Furthermore, on 28 March 2016, Messrs BDO Ltd have been appointed, following a 
tender  exercise,  to  carry  out  a  financial,  legal  and  technical  examination  of  the  proposals. 
Their work is ongoing. 

10 

 
 
With  a  view  to  safeguarding  the  interest  of  the  Nation,  Government  will  seek 
guaranteed  KPIs  from  DP  World  over  the  period  of  the  Port/SEZ  concessions,  amongst 
others, in terms of - 

(i) 

(ii) 

volume of SEZ traffic generated; 

investment  made  by  DPW  at  Riche  Terre  and  amount  of  FDI/employment 
generated; 

(iii) 

transshipment/Freeport Container throughput; 

(iv) 

Port productivity and Port connectivity; 

(v) 

investment in Port operations and equipment; 

(vi) 

job creation, and 

(vii) 

other matters as may be determined. 

 
Madam Speaker, there are important and potentially deal-breaking issues that need to 
be  discussed  and  agreed  before  proceeding  further.  I  wish  to  inform  the  House,  in  no 
uncertain terms, that as at now there is no decision and agreement. We are awaiting the report 
of the Consultants to make counter proposals to DP World which will be the basis for further 
discussions. 

Madam  Speaker,  Government  will  ensure  that,  should  the  project  go  ahead,  the 
employee’s  rights  and pension benefits of Port  workers  will be fully safeguarded.  I  would 
like to reassure the House that the Government cares about the welfare of all employees of 
the Port. 

 
 Let me once more reassure the House that Government is committed to releasing full 
information and providing full disclosure on the project in due course as we are all dealing 
with public assets. 

DP World is the third largest Port operator in the World with control of approximately 
 
70  Terminals.  They  have  a  justified  reputation  for  efficient  Port  operations  and  they  have 
established  relations  with  all  the  world’s  major  shipping  lines.  They  also  operate 
approximately 20 free zones with the much largest being Jebel Ali Free Zone in Dubai.  

Madam  Speaker,  the  proposal  of  DP  World,  should  it  go  ahead,  will  have  the 

following the benefits -  

 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 
• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

11 

DP World’s vision for Mauritius is to become a business hub for Southern and 
Eastern Africa. Mauritius will be the gateway to Africa;  
Mauritius will host multinationals companies looking to carry out value added 
activities and light manufacturing for export to SADC and Comesa countries;  
The Riche Terre Free  Zone is envisioned to be the largest Free  Zone in the 
Indian  Ocean  and  will  reinforce  Mauritius’s  position  as  the  investment 
Hotspot in the region; 
DP  World  through  its  subsidiary  will  bring  its  global  experience  in  zone 
development management marketing and branding; 
SEZ success requires higher port connectivity than currently available; 
shipping  lines  require  a  productive  reliable  Port  to  justify  a  wider  range  of 
services; 
increased deep sea calls for the main shipping lines on the south–south routes 
between south Asian markets and south African markets; 
improved productivity will reduce the cost of shipping goods, increased trade 
and economic growth; 
DP World requires control of both, the Port and SEZ operations to make the 
project a success; 
international  best  practices  will  ensure  that  the  SEZ  can  compete  with 
potential  other  economic  free  zones  that  may  arise  or  be  constructed  in  the 
future; 
the  Riche  Terre  Free  Zone  will  be  the  focal  point  for  local  and  foreign 
investment;  
the  Riche  Terre  Free  Zone  will  be  developed  and  managed  by  DP  World 
which has a unique integrated port and free port zone development capacity;  
Riche  Terre  Free  Zone  present  an  opportunity  to  replicate  the  highly 
successful Jebel Ali free zone; 
DP  World  has  relevant  experience  in  large  scale  logistics  and  industrial 
infrastructure, and 
enhanced  connectivity  linking  Mauritius  directly  with  key  Southern  and 
Eastern African markets; 

12 

 
Madam  Speaker,  in  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  as  I  have  already  indicated, 
nothing has yet been decided nor finalized in respect of DP World. Hence, the dismissal of 
Mr Alain Edouard is not related whatsoever with the DP World issue. 

I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  Mr  A.  Edouard  joined  the  Cargo  Handling 
Corporation Ltd (CHCL) on 18 April 1991 as Clerical Assistant and prior to his dismissal, he 
was  employed  with  effect  from  01  July  2014,  as  Ship  to  Shore  Gantry  Trainer.    His 
responsibilities  as  Trainer  were  to  monitor  the  performance  of  workers,  also  known  as 
“Portiqueurs”.  

Madam  Speaker,  as  the  House  may  be  aware,  we  are  today  evolving  in  a  very 
competitive  market  and  competition  from  other  Regional  Ports  is  increasing.    Following 
requests from Shipping Lines, with regard to the provision of services during the festive and 
end of year period, Management made the following working arrangement for 24 December  
and 31 December - 

(i) 

(ii) 

First shift – normal operation will be between 7.00 a.m. to 3.00 p.m., and 

Second shift – operation will be between 3.00 p.m. to 6.00 p.m.. 

Madam Speaker, on 17 December  all employees at the Mauritius Container Terminal 

(MCT), including Mr Edouard, were notified of the working arrangements . 

In  accordance  with  the  concession  agreement  signed  with  the  Mauritius  Ports 
 
Authority (MPA), the Port provides a round-the-clock service throughout the year, except on 
the following dates - 

• 
• 
• 
• 

01 January; 
02 January; 
01 May, and 
25 December. 

 
On 04 January 2016, the Senior Terminal Manager reported that Mr Edouard had left 
his site of work on 31 December 2015 at 12 06 hours without authorisation in spite of having 
been detailed to work until 3.00 p.m. 

 
Management viewed the matter with concern and on the same day, Mr Edouard was 
notified  thereof  and  was  informed  that  this  may  be  considered  as  a  serious  breach  of 
discipline and gross misconduct.  He was requested to submit his written explanation. 

 
On 11 January 2016, Management of CHCL received a reply from Mr Edouard.  The 

 
explanations submitted by Mr Edouard were not to the satisfaction of Management. 

13 

Madam  Speaker,  on  12  January  2016,  the  Human  Resource  Manager  informed  Mr 
Edouard that Management was not satisfied.  He was suspended from work and was called 
upon to appear and depone before an Independent Disciplinary Committee to show cause as 
to why, despite being detailed to work on the 1st shift, he had left his site of work without 
authorisation. 

The Disciplinary Committee received all submissions and completed hearings by 22 
March 2016.  The Disciplinary Committee submitted its report on 24 March 2016 wherein it 
was concluded that, in light of the evidence adduced before it, the charge against Mr Edouard 
was proved. 

Madam Speaker, accordingly, the Board took note of the findings of the Disciplinary 
Committee whereat Mr Edouard had been found guilty of the charge “leaving his site of work 
without authorisation”.  The Board also noted that Mr Edouard had in the  year 2015 been 
warned for misbehaviour and misconduct as follows - 

•  on 02 February 2015, he was warned for misbehavior in connection with an 
incident  which  occurred  at  the  Multi-Purpose  Terminal,  whereby  he  had 
verbally molested another employee; the Head of Logistics. In respect of the 
said case, he was given a warning letter, and 

•  on  14  May  2015,  he  was  given  another  warning  letter  and  was  warned  for 
misconduct for failing to attend an operation meeting held on 05 March 2015 
without  informing  or  justifying  his  absence  and  leaving  his  place  of  work 
without authorisation on 05 March 2015. 

 
In the light of the findings of the Disciplinary Committee, the Board concluded that 
Mr  Edouard  is  guilty  of  misconduct  and  resolved  that  he  be  dismissed.    Mr  Edouard  was 
conveyed of the Board decision on the same day. 

Madam  Speaker,  as  regards  the  reinstatement  of  Mr  Alain  Edouard,  the  Union 
representing the employees of Cargo Handling has formally requested a meeting with me to 
discuss, among other issues, the reinstatement of Mr Alain Edouard. 

I will be meeting them on Thursday next to discuss and see if and when, and under 

 
what conditions the case of Mr Alain Edouard may be reviewed. 

14 

 
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, these last days, we have had several statements - in 
the absence of the hon. Deputy Prime Minister - from the Cargo Handling Corporation Ltd.  
For example, in ‘L’Express’ of 28 March, it was said – 

“On a reçu seulement une offre préliminaire.” 

Then, the following day, it said - 

“Il n’y a même pas un brouillon de contrat.” 

And yet, I thank the hon. Deputy Prime Minister, because he has given us a good amount of 
details.  Therefore, from what I have heard, am I right in saying that, in fact, DP World is 
asking for control of both the Cargo Handling Corporation  Ltd., that is, the Port, and of a 
Special Economic Zone in Mauritius and, therefore, they have proposed a 30-year contract 
with  the  Cargo  Handling  Corporation  to  manage  the  Port  and  a  99-year  lease  for  land  at 
Riche Terre, where Jin Fei is at present? 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  Yes,  Madam  Speaker,  that  is  the  situation.    I  have 
given  the  full  chronology  of  events.    The  present  situation  is  that  we  have  more  detailed 
proposals  from  DP  World.    They  are  not  final  proposals.    We  have  not  made  counter 
proposals  yet  because  we  have  appointed  a  consultant  who,  within  the  next  few  weeks,  I 
gather, will submit its recommendations. But there is a proposal, and the proposal is a three-
pronged project.  The main thing is the Special Economic Zone, which is 325 arpents, and 
which  will  be  the  basis  for  investment  by  DP  World  and  attracting  this  USD450  m. 
investment  from  other  companies  in  state-of-the-art  premises  for  use  as  a  Logistics  and 
Industrial Park. 

They have asked that they get a 99-year lease, and I can see that is quite reasonable, 
because  if  we  want  quality  infrastructure,  people  will  not  build  quality  expensive 
infrastructure  over  only  a  short-term  lease.    That  is  the  first  thing;  the  Special  Economic 
Zone. 

They made the point that they cannot operate a Special Economic Zone of that size 
and amplitude without having a properly efficient Port to operate traffic going into that SEZ.  
So, their proposal is now a 40%-share in Cargo Handling Ltd. coupled with a Management 
Contract.  We do not have the details of the Management Contract yet. You can take it to 
resemble, maybe, Mauritius Telecom or something like that.  We have not got details of that 
yet, but that is the second proposal. 

15 

 
The third aspect of the agreement is their famous Island Terminal, which will come 
online once container activity reaches 1.3 million TEUs per annum.  We have 550,000 TEUs 
at the moment.  So, you can see that it is more than doubling the number of TEUs, that is, 
when DP World proposes to invest a large sum, I think, USD 500 m., in the Island Terminal. 

Mr Bérenger:  It is confirmed, therefore, that they are requesting for the control of 
both the harbour and the Jin Fei, Riche Terre Special Economic Zone.  At Jin Fei, I heard the 
hon. Deputy Prime Minister agree with the request that it will be a 99-year old lease.  If I 
remember correctly, the land there is already leased to a Chinese company.  So, what is going 
to  happen?    Is  it  going  to  be  taken  back  from  that  Chinese  company?    Has  that  Chinese 
company been warned?  What is their reaction?  Or, as has been the case with certain others 
companies, will there be subleasing? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: I will respond, Madam Speaker, but Jin Fei is under the 
Ministry of Finance and Economic Development.  I will give the information that I have.  Jin 
Fei was originally much bigger.  With the new Government coming into power, it was split 
into  two;  part  of  it  remaining  with  the  Chinese  and  the  other  part  being  taken  back  by 
Government.  This is the 325 acres that we are talking about.  That is now with Government, 
and that is what is being talked about for concession to DP World.  We are not talking about 
the remainder, which is remaining with the Chinese. 

Mr Bérenger: I heard the Deputy Prime Minister say that the Management Contract 
has not  yet been finalised - the details thereof.    But  I  read  an interview  which he  gave to 
‘L’Express’ very recently, on 12 April, where he said, and I quote – 

“Il  y  aura  des  garde-fous.  Si  dans  trois  ans  le  projet  ne  progresse  pas  à  notre 
satisfaction, nous pourrons revenir en arrière.” 

Is it, therefore, intended that this clause will be in the Agreement between Dubai Ports World 
and the Government of Mauritius? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I did not respond about the 99-year 
lease.    Obviously,  we  cannot  expect  someone,  say,  to  build  a  20-floor  building  without 
having sufficient time to recuperate his investment.  That is the point of the 99-year lease. 

As far as the Management Agreement is concerned, we do not have the details yet, 
but what we are interested in doing is inputting in the Agreement sufficient Key Performance 
Indicators to ensure that any representations that are made by DP World as to the future - and 
I did take that into my main answer - is, in fact, abided to.  Now, what will be the penalty, if 

 

16 

ever any KPI that is agreed between the two parties is not respected, is also something which 
will be set in the Agreement. 

Mr Bérenger: I heard the hon. Deputy Prime Minister say that BDO again has been 
appointed as consultant, but I think I heard through a tender procedure.  Can I know which 
other such consultancy firms reacted and how much BDO is going to be paid for that? 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  answered  a  specific  question.    I 
understand  though  that  they  were  the  lowest  and  that  they  also  submitted  an  excellent 
proposal.  I think the other main firms also responded, but I can get that information. 

The Deputy Prime Minister: I think the other main firms also responded, but I can 

get the information.  

Mr Bérenger:  I think I heard the hon. Deputy Prime Minister say that concerning 
BDO, its work is ongoing. Am I not right in saying that, in fact, they submitted their report on 
the  financial  situation  of  the  Cargo  Handling  Corporation  on  15  April,  that  it  is  therefore 
already available? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Not on 15 April, I think, but they have submitted draft 

preliminary, not final, and we are discussing on the draft. 

Mr  Bérenger:  Madam  Speaker,  I  did  not  hear  any  reference  to  Singapore.  Is 
Singapore Port Authority out of the picture completely, because I would wish to remind the 
hon. Deputy Prime Minister, if you will allow me, before I put my question, is that on 25 
November 2015, the then Minister of Finance stated that the Singapore Port Authority would 
be involved. I quote – 

« Les Singapouriens veilleront surtout à ce que les développements dans le port soient 
dans l’intérêt de Maurice. » 

As  if  Singapore  is  going  to  come  and  watch  over  Dubai  Ports  World!  Is  there  any 
development there? Is Singapore out of the picture completely? 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  to  respond  to  the  earlier  question, 
Ernst and Young and PWC were also part of the tender process, submitted their responses to 
attend their request. As far as Singapore Port Authority is concerned, I know they are not part 
of the discussions and we have, as I have mentioned, other Consultants that we are using. 

Mr Bérenger: I can go on to the second part of my question. I heard the hon. Deputy 
Prime Minister say that there is no link at all between the dismissal of Mr Alain Edouard and 

 

17 

the possible coming  into the harbour of Dubai Ports World, but will the hon. Deputy Prime 
Minister agree with me that the perception is already there? We know the reputation of Dubai 
Ports  World  across  the  world.  They  are  very  tough  on  trade  unions  and  it  is  a  strange 
coincidence that disciplinary action is taken just before they came, as if to create a mood and, 
specially  that  this  trade  union  and  this  President  have  been  actively  canvassing, 
demonstrating against the coming - the privatisation, as they call it - of the harbour through 
the coming of the Dubai Ports World. 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I stated clearly that the dismissal of 
Mr Alain Edouard was not in any way related to the Dubai Ports World, and I am not given to 
lying  in  the  House  and  I  maintain  this.  The  second  thing,  Madam  Speaker,  I  think  Dubai 
Ports World operates in 65 countries; I think 70 ports overall. No point in scaremongering, 
Madam Speaker. The idea is to find a better future, more prosperity, better conditions for not 
only the existing Port workers, but all potential workers who may be interested in working 
either in the Port in the future and the Special Economic Zone and, indeed, in a large number 
of the related activities that would be coming up. Mr Edouard’s case has been given to an 
Independent Disciplinary Committee, headed by a former Magistrate. I hope the hon. Leader 
of the Opposition is not putting into doubt the competence or the independence of that former 
Magistrate and this is the conclusion that has been taken. The Board has taken its decision.  
On a humanitarian basis, I can consider it again but, obviously, Madam Speaker, I must say 
this, Port workers are extremely well paid and that makes me very happy. Nothing more in 
life makes me happier than when  employees  are well paid  and Mr Edouard, maybe, earns   
Rs170,000  as a Trainer. He should give the right example as a Trainer. You don’t give a 
wrong example. And he was the only one having left his work! What would have happened if 
all of them had gone, followed the Trainer? That is the first thing. And second thing, Madam 
Speaker, with rights come responsibilities. You are well paid, we are all so happy, but, let’s 
have  decent  productivity  and  decent  work  standards  in  the  Port.  The  whole  future  of  this 
country  depends  on  our  Port  working  up  to  the  satisfaction.    Whether  Dubai  Ports  World 
comes or not, we still have to get our Port to work to international standards because there is 
competition all over.  

Mr  Bérenger:  Madam  Speaker,  when  I  am  listening  to  the  hon.  Deputy  Prime 
Minister, he gives the impression that the Disciplinary Board, chaired by a former Magistrate, 
in fact, I think it is by a Magistrate, but if a former Magistrate or Magistrate, independent, I 
agree.  I am not challenging the Disciplinary Board. But the hon. Deputy Prime Minister is 

 

18 

giving the impression, maybe, without that intention, but the impression that the Disciplinary 
Board concluded and recommended the dismissal, which is not the case. They found that he 
has been guilty of leaving his site of work without authorisation and did not recommend the 
dismissal,  and  it  is  the  Board,  in  a  very  messy  way,  that  decided  on  the  basis  of  that 
independent  report  to  dismiss  him,  whereas  dismissal  was  not  recommended  by  the 
Disciplinary Board. 

The Deputy Prime Minister: It is not a question of not recommended or not. The 
ambit of the Disciplinary Committee was to find whether the charges are proven. They found 
that the charges were proven. The decision as to what the disciplinary action would be taken 
was left to the Board and the Board took that decision. Now, Madam Speaker, let’s be clear 
on one thing. The Board of Cargo Handling Corporation, if my memory serves me right, has 
three members from the Union. One of the few Boards in Mauritius that have three members 
from the Union and we have a particular active Union. So, to say it was messy and all that, 
that is not true. If you want to make a Board meeting messy, you make it messy. So, it does 
not hold water to say that the Board was messy. The decision was taken, and properly taken 
and anyway, Madam Speaker, the decision has been taken, as I already mentioned. We can 
look at it again and we will look at it again, but we will see what decision has been taken 
once we have met with the trade unions, but we are not taking any commitment at this stage. 

Mr  Bérenger:  From  what  I  have  heard  from  the  interview  of  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister is that they would be given consideration to take him back after so many years of 
service in the harbour. Can I remind he hon. Deputy Prime Minister, therefore, that he, in ‘Le 
Defi Quotidien’ of 01 April, and I am sure it was not a joke, he himself said: “La question 
portant sur sa réintégration n’est pas à écarter.  Il y a une bonne volonté. Je suis disposé à 
agir sur une base humanitaire.» 

Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Deputy  Prime  Minister  to  confirm  that  he  will  also  take  into 
consideration  expectations  raised,  because  not  only  him,  but  the  Chairperson  of  the  Cargo 
Handling Corporation has also made public statement that the dismissal will be reconsidered 
and, therefore, expectations have been created. 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, it takes two to tango. So, in fact, we 
are  going  to  look  at  the  case  of  Mr  Edouard,  but  let’s  hope  that  everybody  comes  to  his 
senses at the same time and, I must say, Madam Speaker, I will never, ever put the interest of 
the  country  and  the  Port  aside.  This  is  my  major  concern.  I  don’t  know  Mr  Edouard 

 

19 

personally, I have nothing against him, but the interest of the Port, the efficiency of the Port, 
the  interest  of  all  the  workers  of  the  Port,  the  interest  of  Mauritius  is  paramount  to  this 
Government, Madam Speaker. 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, the hon. Deputy Prime Minister mentioned for Cargo 
Handling it would be 40% shareholding of Dubai. But with respect to the Special Economic 
Zone, where there would be a joint venture, I understand, between Dubai Ports World and a 
Mauritius agency - I don’t know whether it would be Cargo Handling or anyone else - may I 
know from the hon. Deputy Prime Minister what would be the shareholding of that Mauritius 
Government entity in that special purpose vehicle and what would be the commitment given, 
financial or otherwise, by the Government to that special purpose vehicle?  

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  there  would  be  a  joint  venture  in 
practice because you cannot run a Special Economic Zone without the permits, without the 
business facilitation, etc. So, in practice there is a joint venture.  Whether there will be a joint 
venture in terms of shareholding - this is what the hon. Member has asked - is another issue 
and is under discussion. It could be; some people think there ought to be some percentage of 
Government invested – because  you have to invest to get shares – in the company, maybe 
part of the lease payments can be capitalised;  future lease payments can be capitalised into  a 
shareholding for the joint venture is still under discussion. 

Mr  Jhuboo:  Still  concerning  the  Special  Economic  Zone,  being  given  that 
Government  is  introducing  the  BOT  concept,  why  not  consider  for  the  Port,  which  is  of 
strategic importance, a rather Build and Operate Transfer than a straight 99-year old lease? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: For the 99-year lease it is not for the Port, it is for the 
SEZ. It is a straight lease for a concession. There is no need for a BOT. It is like everybody 
leases land everywhere for hotels or whatever. It is just a lease, but the lease could be turned 
into a concession because we need to put KPIs so that, in fact, penalties arise if the KPIs are 
not met. So, that is for the SEZ.  I don’t know, but maybe something in terms of BOT can be 
incorporated in there, but it is not as complicated as that because we are talking about a piece 
of land which happens every day in Mauritius when you lease land.  

As far as the Board is concerned, that is another issue. We are talking about the DP 

World entering into the share capital of Cargo Handling Corporation Ltd. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Lesjongard! 

 

20 

Mr Lesjongard:  Madam Speaker, with regard to the SEZ, especially when the hon. 
Deputy Prime Minister mentioned the creation of serviced plots, do we understand that the 
present  Government  is  adopting  the  same  policy  as  the  previous  Government,  that  is, 
allowing DP World to sublease land to third parties on terms and conditions to be decided by 
them? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Yes, to the first part of the question, definitely, they 
will  sublease  because,  in  fact,  we  are  talking  about  investment  of  US$450  m.  in  SEZ, 
whereas  in  fact  I  mentioned,  I  think,  that  the  DP  World  investment  over  the  whole  time 
would not amount to more than US$60 m. So, definitely it is a sublease, but the question is as 
to  what  the  terms  and  conditions  are.  This  is  the  whole  issue,  there  will  be  different 
incentives, maybe DP World may wish to have the highest rate, maybe we don’t want to have 
the highest land rate because what is interesting to Government is the activity rather than a 
lease premium. So, this is something that we need to discuss with them and agree, but yes and 
no, to the hon. Member’s question. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr  Mohamed:  Madam  Speaker,  I  have  listened  with  much  interest  to  the 
forthcoming answers from the hon. Deputy Prime Minister. There have been some serious 
allegations made against the company known as DP World on the world arena, and if we are 
to limit ourselves let alone the United States of America where there are serious allegations 
for corruption and fraud against DP World, there are also serious allegations on the African 
Continent.  Let  us  start  with  Senegal  where  recently  in  the  Panama  Papers,  the  son  of  the 
former President of Senegal has been accused of secret contracts of several millions of US 
Dollars that have been exchanged following a contract with DP World and also in Djibouti 
recently.  So,  in  the  light  of  all  those  scandals  for  corruption  and  in  light  of  all  those 
Ministerial visits to Dubai very, very recently - not the hon. Deputy Prime Minister - what 
does the Government propose to do to play the game of transparency since we have not at all 
seen any document whatsoever that establishes clearly in a transparent manner what exactly 
is going to be given away? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, the hon. Member, himself, said I was 
quite transparent at the start of his question. But, I must say, Madam Speaker, that firstly I am 
not aware of the USA, but I understand that as far as Djibouti is concerned, the High Court in 
London, in fact, was in favour of DP World.  

 

21 

As far as Senegal is concerned, I am told that with the World Bank involved, things 
have been sorted out. This is what I am told. Now, that may be what it is, we are here in 
Mauritius,  we  have  the  laws  in  Mauritius  and  DP  World  does  not  only  operate  in  these 
countries, DP World operates in Australia, UK, France, etc. We, Madam Speaker, have taken 
the commitment - I have taken here formally - that everything will be disclosed, there will be 
full disclosure, including the contracts will be disclosed. Obviously, you cannot disclose once 
you  are  now  discussing  with  the  potential  agreement,  but  everything  will  be  done 
transparently  and,  Madam  Speaker,  I  would  like  to  assure  the  House  that  as  far  as  I  am 
concerned, also for my colleagues, nothing illegal, nothing untoward, nothing underhand will 
be done. What we have in mind if and when we deal with DP World is the utmost interest of 
the nation. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr Bérenger: My last question; I think I heard the hon. Deputy Prime Minister say 
that he will be meeting - and it is a very good thing - the Trade Union next Thursday. I take it 
that it is two days from… 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Next Thursday. 

Mr Bérenger: …then if it is after 01 May, I was going to appeal to the hon. Deputy 
Prime  Minister,  I  think  in  the  spirit  of  01  May  something  should  be  done  even  before  01 
May, but can I request from him that special consideration be given to the reintegration of 
that President of the Trade Union on the occasion of 01 May? 

The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, on a lighter note, as the hon. Leader 
of the Opposition is not holding his own meeting on 01 May, he may wish to come to Vacoas 
and maybe there we will make some announcement.  

Madam Speaker: Time is over! Hon. Members, the Table has been advised that PQ 
No.  B/286  in  regard  to  Cannabis  will  now  be  replied  by  the  hon.  Minister  of  Health  and 
Quality of Life. Hon. Dr. Sorefan!  

BANKS - LICENCES - REVOCATION 

(No. B/272) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in 

 

22 

regard  to  banking  licences,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius, information as to the number thereof revoked since 1967 to date, indicating if the - 

(a) 

(b) 

consideration of the capital adequacy ratio has been the prime reason for the 
revocations;  

revocations have been made equally in the public interest under section 17 of 
the Banking Act, and  

(c) 

banks concerned therewith have been allowed time to redress the situation. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Bank of Mauritius that, 

since 1967, the banking licences of the following five banks were revoked, namely - 

(a)  Bank of Credit and Commerce International; 

(b)  Mauritius Co-operative Central Bank Ltd; 

(c)  Union International Bank Ltd; 

(d)  Delphis Bank Ltd, and 

(e)  Bramer Banking Corporation Ltd. 

The  House  may  wish  to  note  that  the  Banking  Act  provides  the  reasons  for  the 
revocation of a banking licence.  The Bank of Mauritius is empowered to revoke a banking 
licence under various circumstances as set out in Section 11(1) of the Banking Act 2004 and, 
in cases of urgency and public interest, under Section 17 of the Act.  Failure to meet capital 
adequacy ratio is one of the reasons for the revocation of licence in the above cases, being in 
breach of a guideline issued by the Bank of Mauritius. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  am  further  informed  that  all  revocations  of  licences  were  made 
with  the  public  interest  in  mind.  In  addition,  the  banks  were  given  an  opportunity,  where 
applicable, to take corrective/remedial actions before revocation of their licences. 

Dr.  Sorefan:  With  regard  to  the  Bramer  Bank,  will  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister 
inform  the  House  if  he  gave  instruction  to  the  ex-Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development and the Governor of the Central Bank to give ample time to Bramer Bank to 
redress the financial situation and to my information, the Central Bank did opt to give facility 
up to April 30, 2015, but on 02 April the letter was sent, or probably verbally, to Bramer 
Bank,  but  on  the  same  day,  within  six  hours,  whereas  it  was  given  one  month  facility  to 
redress, the licence was revoked for Bramer Bank? 

 

23 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, the hon. Member is utterly wrong. The time 
that  was  given  was  not  end  of  April,  but  31  March  and  insofar  as  the  other  part  of  the 
question is concerned, I must inform the House that the matter is sub judice and I am not 
going to give any other information. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Osman Mahomed! 

Mr  Mahomed:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  With  regard  to  the  Bramer  Banking 
Corporation  matter,  the  latest  US  Human  Rights  Report  qualifies  the  BAI  Affair  -  it  is 
publicly  articulated  now  -  as  a  political  vendetta  thereby  tarnishing  our  image  as  an 
investment destination. So, may I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether anything is 
being done to repair this damage? 

The  Prime  Minister:  I  don’t  care  about  what  this  organisation  thinks.  There  is  no 
political vendetta. Everybody knows how  BAI  was being operated, how money  was being 
swindled.  These organisations abroad, they give lessons to others, they must look after their 
own businesses. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

(Interruptions) 

It is his question, hon. Mohamed! I give priority to the one asking the question first! 

(Interruptions) 

Sorry!  Hon. Mohamed, I will decide on the number of questions to be asked! 

Hon. Mohamed, are you still challenging the authority of the Chair?   

(Interruptions) 

I am sorry. 

You may, after I have sat down. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed:  I am not challenging.  I am just saying I am not very pleased. 

Madam Speaker:  But the hon. Member cannot be pleased or not.  It is for the Chair 

to decide on whom to give the floor.  It is his question. I have decided to give him the floor. 

24 

 
Dr. Sorefan:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The Rt. hon. Prime Minister said that the 
redress was  given up to 30 March, but the Governor of the Central Bank, in an interview, 
said: “30 April 2015.”  Well, that is what the Governor said in an interview.  May we know 
about the capital adequacy ratio?  The prime reason concerning Bramer was the capital ratio.  
Are we not facing the same situation with Rs5 billion public money injected in MauBank and 
that we are not going to face more capital injection, creating same problem as Bramer? 

The Prime Minister:  I have said the time limit was 31 March and I maintained that 
this is correct.  I don’t know where the hon. Member gets his information from.  Insofar as 
the other part is concerned, I have said I am not going to enter into any other matters that may 
reflect on Bramer Bank because the whole matter is sub judice. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed:  I have one question. 

Madam Speaker:  I have called you! 

Mr Mohamed:  That’s nice of you.  Thank you very much. 

I am sure… 

Just one question…. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Unless you are not hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed:  Not at all.  I am just so shocked. 

(Interruptions) 

I thank you.  But I just wanted to have one question to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister on what he 
just said about the report; he said, if I am not mistaken or heard correctly, that he does not 
care about.  Is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister aware that the organisation that he says he does not 
care about is actually the Government of United of States of America and not a NGO of any 

 

25 

sort, but the State Department report of the Government of the United States of America?  Is 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister saying that he does not care about that report? 

The Prime Minister:  The United States is not governing the world. 

Madam Speaker:  Next question, hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

BANKS & FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS - LEGISLATION - AMENDMENT 

 (No. B/273) Dr R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in 
regard to the banks in which Government is a shareholder, he will state if he will consider 
introducing amendments to the existing legislation with a view to prevent the recurrence of 
the state of affairs that prevailed thereat regarding the toxic loans and the writing off of debts 
and, if so, indicate if provision will also be made for the – 

(a) 

(b) 

possibility of recouping the loans, and  

said amendments to have retroactive effect over the past seven years. 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, I wish to assure the House that we will not 
tolerate any malpractices in banks and financial institutions, whether or not, Government is a 
shareholder.  We  are  determined  to  have  a  clean  financial  system  and  we  are  considering 
appropriate  legislative  amendments  to  plug  any  regulatory  gaps  as  well  as  strengthening 
banking supervision. 

A review exercise is currently being undertaken jointly with the IMF and the World 
Bank based on the recent report of the Financial Sector Assessment Programme (FSAP) on 
Mauritius. 

Government  will  ensure  that  State–controlled  banks  operate  as  good  corporate 
citizens in full compliance with the existing prudential guidelines and upholding the highest 
ethical standards.  In this respect, the process for appointing Chairpersons, Directors and top 
management has been reviewed and will be improved further.  

Furthermore, strong measures for recovery of the toxic loans are ongoing and police 
enquiries have already been initiated against the former CEO, General Manager and Finance 
Manager of the ex-Mauritius Post and Cooperative Bank Ltd. 

26 

 
As regards the last part of the question, the Bank of Mauritius is finalizing the setting 
up  of  an  Assets  Management  Company  which  will  take  over  non-performing  Loans  from 
banks and launch vigorous measures for recouping the loans. This specialized institution will 
thereby assist to clean up clogged balance sheets, release capital ascribed as provisions on 
non-performing  loans  and  address  the  adverse  impact  of  such  loans  on  the  stability  of  the 
financial system. 

Regarding the proposal to have amendments with retroactive effect to cover the past 

seven years, the advisability thereof will be considered in the legislative review exercise. 

Dr. Sorefan:  Madam Speaker, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister will agree with me on all 
the  saga  we  had  recently  on  loans  and  toxic  loans,  debts,  BAI  with  SBM,  Gooljaury  and 
Samlo with MPCB. Will the Rt. hon.  Prime Minister really consider urgently to come with 
full reform in our banking system especially in the setting up of –  

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

an independent Commission of Banking; 

introduction of a criminal sanction for reckless misconduct, and 

a Parliamentary Commission on banking standards? 

The  Prime  Minister:    I  don’t  think  it  is  necessary  to  do  all  this.    We  are  already 
taking measures and we are satisfied that this will meet the ends of what we are looking for.  

REGISTRAR GENERAL’S DEPARTMENT - SERVERS/IT SYSTEMS 

(No.  B/274)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National 
Development Unit whether, in regard to the Registrar General’s Department, he will state if 
he  has  been  apprised  of  the  inconveniences  caused  to  the  members  of  the  public  when 
attending thereto for registration purposes, especially, when breakdowns occur in relation to 
the  Servers/IT  Systems  and,  if  so,  obtain  from  the  Registrar  General,  information  as  to  if 
remedial measures will be taken in relation thereto. 

27 

 
The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  the  Registrar-General’s  Department  has 
moved  from  a  paper-based  system  involving  voluminous  books  to  an  electronic  system  as 
from 30 June 2015. 

The objective behind the introduction of the new computerised system is to provide 
stakeholders and the general public with an improved and more rapid service on a 24-7 basis 
through the provision of online services. 

It  is  unfortunate  that  despite  the  preventive  measures  put  in  place  at  the  Registrar- 
General’s Department to prevent system failures, including a dedicated generator to cater for 
power cuts, there have been 6 downtimes in the system from 01 January 2016 to date.  I am 
informed that one of the system downtime was for a full day  while the other 5 have been 
remedied within 2 hours. 

In accordance with the established protocol at the Registrar General’s Department, all 
stakeholders  within  the  premises  are  informed  within  15  minutes  of  a  downtime.    If  the 
situation is expected to exceed 2 hours, the general public is informed through the radio and 
an update is provided when normal service has been restored. 

I  am  further  informed  that  a  full  audit  of  the  system,  including  the  hardware  was 
carried out and the main source of these problems was due to internet connectivity. Action 
has already been initiated to replace certain networking equipment to provide for a dedicated 
internet access. Works are expected to be completed by mid-May 2016. 

I am also informed that, by the end of June 2016, with the implementation of the e-
payment facilities, completion of all the steps for registration will be possible from office and 
home. 

Mr Ameer Meea:  There have been breakdowns in the server and in the IT system of 
the  Registrar-General’s  Department  which  have  been  quite  often,  as  mentioned  by  the  Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister.  But in my question, it is also stipulated: what are the remedial measures 
that  the  Registrar  General  is  taking  so  that  to  avoid  undue  delays?    So,  therefore,  if  I  am 
allowed, can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to consider the parallel running of the system, 
that is, each time when there is a breakdown in the system, they return to the books that were 
being used before because there has been a case last week whereby erasure of inscription did 
not appear on the system and they had to go to the old books to approve what has been done 
by notaries and lawyers.  So, therefore, can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to look into the 
matter?  

 
The Prime Minister:  We will convey that to the Registrar General.  

28 

Mr Uteem: In light of what the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has just mentioned - I don’t 
know  if  he  has  the  figures  –  can  we  know  what  is  the  amount  that  has been  spent  by  the 
Government in this new IT system and in its maintenance? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I don’t have the figures. Come with a specific question, 

the hon. Member will be given the information. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Sesungkur! 

NON-CITIZENS – PERMANENT RESIDENCE – APPLICATION 

(No. B/275) Mr D. Sesungkur (First Member for Montagne Blanche & GRSE) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to the investors, self-employed non-citizens and the retired non-citizens, 
he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Passport  and  Immigration  Office, 
information  as  to  the  number  of  applications  received  therefrom  for  the  issue  thereto  of  a 
permanent residence for a validity period of ten years, since January 2015 to date, category-
wise, indicating in each case, the – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

nationality thereof; 

total investments brought in, and 

outcome thereof. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  Sections  5A  and  9  of  the  Immigration  Act 
provide  for  the  grant  of  a  permanent  residence  permit  to  non-citizens,  including  investors, 
self-employed and retired persons.  This permit allows an eligible non-citizen to work and 
reside in Mauritius for a period of ten  years.  The main objective of Permanent Residence 
Scheme  is  to  attract  and  retain  foreign  talent,  know-how  and  investment.    It  also  provides 
opportunity for high net-worth non-citizens to spend their retirement in Mauritius. 

For  the  period  January  2015  to  23  April  2016,  the  Prime  Minister's  Office  has 
received  36  applications  for  permanent  residence  permit  from  foreign  investors,  self-
employed non-citizens and retired non-citizens. 

In regard to part (a) of the question, the information is as follows - 

 
(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

29 

fourteen applications were received in respect of investors, out of whom seven 
are French nationals, three South Africans, one Belgian, two Indians and one 
Zimbabwean; 

one  application  was  received  in  respect  of  a  self-employed  non-citizen  of 
French nationality, and 

twenty-one applications were received in respect of retired non-citizens, out of 
whom  17  are  French  nationals,  one  German,  one  South  African,  one  Dutch 
and one Swiss. 

In regard to part (b) of the question, the successful investors should either have made 
a  turnover  of  at  least  Rs15  m.  annually  for  three  years  preceding  the  application  for 
permanent  residence  permit,  or  should  have  transferred  from  abroad  at  least  500,000  US 
dollars for investment in a qualifying business activity.  Furthermore, a self-employed non-
citizen  having  held  an  occupation  permit  for  three  years  immediately  preceding  the 
application and whose income exceeded Rs3 m. during each of the three years, qualifies for a 
permanent residence permit. 

As  regards  a  retired  non-citizen,  he  should  have  held  a  residence  permit  for  three 
years  and  transferred  to  Mauritius  40,000  US  dollars  annually  during  each  of  these  three 
years to qualify for a permanent residence permit. 

I am informed by the Board of Investment that the total investment brought in by non-
citizens  having  obtained  their  permanent  residence  permit  for  the  period  2015  to  2016 
amounts to around Rs98 m.  The breakdown is as follows - 

• 
• 
• 

Investor: Rs39.6 m.; 
Retired non-citizen: Rs57.5 m.; 
Self-employed: Rs1.2 m. 

In regard to part (c) of the question, the outcome of the 36 applications is as follows - 

(i) 

concerning  the  investors,  ten  applications  from  non-citizens  who  had 
previously  been  issued  occupation  permit  for  three  years  have  already  been 
approved,  one  application  has  been  turned  down,  and  three  are  still  being 
processed; 

(ii) 

as regards self-employed non-citizens, the application has been received on 25 
February 2016 and is being processed, and 

 
(iii) 

30 

concerning  the  retired  non-citizens,  13  applications  have  already  been 
approved and the remaining eight applications are still being processed. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  each  application  for  permanent 
residence permit is scrupulously examined and a due diligence is carried out by the Board of 
Investment and the Passport and Immigration Office before a permit is delivered. 

EBENE – SICOM TOWER - OFFICE SPACE  

(No.  B/276)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs, 
Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National 
Development Unit whether, in regard to the proposed transfer of offices of the Ministry of 
Finance and Economic Development to the State Insurance Company of Mauritius Tower at 
Ebene, he will state the – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

departments/sections that will be housed thereat; 

extent of office space being rented thereat, indicating the – 

(i) 

duration, and 

(ii)  monthly rent payable therefor 
expenditure incurred in terms of – 

(i) 

(ii) 

partitioning; 

office furniture and equipment, and 

(iii) 

telephone and networking systems therefor, and 

(d) 

use that will be made of the offices at the Government Centre that are being 
vacated as a result thereof. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic 

Development will not move to the SICOM Tower at Ebene. 

The  Ministry  of  Finance  identified  office  space  from  Ground  to  7th  floor  at  the 
SICOM Tower, Ebene, covering an area of 88,504 square feet at a monthly rental fee of Rs34 
per square foot, inclusive of VAT, syndic charges, amenities and parking facilities. 

31 

 
The  monthly  rental  fee  payable  amounts  to  Rs3  m.  for  a  period  of  ten  years. 
Expenditure relating to partitioning works and office furniture amount to Rs4.4 m. and Rs4.5 
m. respectively. 

The  telephone  and  networking  system,  with  internet  facilities  as  well  as  wireless 

network are being installed at a cost of Rs8.9 m. 

I  am  informed  that  other  Ministries  have  expressed  their  interest  to  occupy  the 

available space at SICOM Tower and the matter is being considered. 

Mr Ameer Meea: So, we understand that the move has been frozen and the Minister 
of Finance and Economic Development is not moving there. Therefore, can I ask the Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister what about the rental? Since the decision has been taken, is the rental still 
being paid and the spaces there are not being occupied? 

The Prime Minister: Well, I don’t know whether the rental is still being paid. 

Well, rental will start when other Ministries will move in. 

 (Interruptions) 

MAUBANK – GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT 

(No.  B/277)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to the Maubank, he will – 

(a) 

(b) 

state the amount of money invested therein by Government as at to date, and 

obtain from the Bank of Mauritius, information as to if the – 

(i) 

(ii) 

capital adequacy ratio has been complied with, and 

Bank of Mauritius has issued any directive as regards the ineligibility 
of the directors of the former Bramer Bank and the former MPCB Ltd., 
if any, to hold any post of responsibility thereat. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, Government has invested an amount of Rs1.3 
billion in MauBank Ltd on 13 January 2016.  No further investment was subsequently made. 

32 

 
Last year, Government has invested an amount of Rs1.05 billion and Rs700 m. in the 
former Mauritius Post and Cooperative Bank Ltd and the former National Commercial Bank 
Ltd, respectively. 

As regards part (b) (i) of the question, commercial banks are required to submit to the 

Bank of Mauritius prudential returns on a quarterly basis. 

I  am  informed  that  MauBank  Ltd  submitted  on  21  April  2016  to  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius its first quarterly prudential return on Capital Adequacy Ratio since its coming into 
operation on 04 January 2016.  Its Capital Adequacy Ratio was above the required minimum 
of 10 per cent prescribed under section 20(2) of the Banking Act 2004. 

With respect to part (b) (ii) of the question, pursuant to Section 46 of the Banking Act 
2004, no person can be appointed or reappointed as a director of a financial institution falling 
under the purview of the Bank of Mauritius unless he or she meets the test of being a fit and 
proper person as outlined in a guideline issued by the Bank of Mauritius in this regard. 

No director, who was on the last Board of ex-Bramer Bank, is presently on the Board 

of MauBank Ltd. 

None of the directors, who were sitting on the Board of the former MPCB as at 31 

December 2014, is presently sitting on the Board of MauBank Ltd. 

I  am  informed  that  the  question  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  not  issuing  any  specific 
directive  as  regards  the  ineligibility  of  the  directors  of  the  former  Bramer  Bank  and  the 
former MPCB Ltd, does not arise in view of the fact that, the Bank of Mauritius has issued a 
Guideline  on  Fit  and  Proper  Person  Criteria  applicable  to  all  financial  institutions  falling 
under its purview. 

Mr Ramano: Madame la présidente, lors de l’inauguration de la première succursale 
de la MauBank le 27 janvier 2016, le ministre des Finances à l’époque avait déclaré être en 
pourparlers avec un partenaire de Dubaï. Est-ce que je pourrais savoir de l’honorable Premier 
ministre où on en est avec la situation ? 

The Prime Minister: Well, as far as I know, I am not on with the pourparlers. 

(Interruptions) 

Dr. Sorefan: Madam Speaker, will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister confirm to this House 
whether he is aware if money has been siphoned through the MauBank to a private account 
recently? 

 
The Prime Minister: From MauBank to a private account? 

33 

(Interruptions) 

External account!  What does that mean? 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Can the hon. Member give precision as to his question? 

Dr. Sorefan: Will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister confirm to this House whether money 
from  MauBank  has  been  transferred  to  a  foreign  bank  upon  the  instructions  of  a 
parliamentarian? 

 (Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister: Well, hon. Member, if you want to be honourable, please, you 

have such information, go to the Police! 

Make a complaint! Let them inquire! 

Take your responsibility! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Next question! 

FDI – AMOUNT 

(No.  B/278)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of 
Finance and Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
whether,  in  regard  to  the  Foreign  Direct  Investments,  he  will  state  the  aggregate  amount 
thereof brought into Mauritius since January 2015 to date, indicating in respect of each entity 
concerned therewith, the – 

(a) 

(b) 

country of origin thereof, and  

sector benefitting therefrom. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed … 

(Interruptions) 

 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed, please don’t interrupt the House! 

34 

The Prime Minister: …that the Bank of Mauritius is carrying out a survey to collect 
data on Foreign Direct Investment for the year 2015 and the information will be available on 
completion of the survey. 

However,  I  would  like  to  emphasise  that  data  pertaining  to  individual  entities  are 
treated as confidential and cannot be released. The data on gross direct investment flows are 
disseminated by the Bank of Mauritius in aggregated form by sector in line with the United 
Nations’ International Standard of Industrial Classification. 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister aware that, in the monthly 
statistical bulletin of the Bank of Mauritius, they have stated that foreign direct investment 
for 2014 was USD441 m. and the forecast for 2015 will only be USD197 m., down by more 
than 55%? 

The Prime Minister: Well, if that is so, what do you expect from me?  We will do 

our best and try to remedy the situation as far as possible. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Osman Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed: Well, this is precisely what I was referring to just now.  It has to do 
with our international image, which has been tarnished because of certain things that have 
been happening in the country. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

Mr  Mahomed:  My  specific  question  is  as  follows:  the  last  Budget  exercise  made 
provision  for  the  opening  up  of  Board  of  Investment  (BoI)  antennas  in  certain  key 
destinations like Paris and India.  May we know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister where we 
are with this? 

The Prime Minister: Well, we will go step by step. We have started; we have opened 

in Paris. 

Mr Uteem: Reacting from what the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has just said, as Minister 
of  Finance,  we  want  to  know  precisely  what  he  intends  to  do  to  attract  foreign  direct 
investment, which is down now by 55%, since his Government took office! 

 
The Prime Minister: Well, let’s wait when we have the figures for this year.  Then, 

35 

we can make comment. 

Mr  Mohamed:  Madam  Speaker,  could  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  look  into  the 
possibility of explaining this débâcle as far as the foreign direct investment is concerned ever 
since his Government is in power, whether it has nothing to do with the fact that the Board of 
Investment is being depleted of very able and efficient human resource and professionals and 
being  siphoned  off  to  other  new  departments  opened  up  by  the  hon.  Minister  of  Financial 
Services? Is that possible? 

The  Prime  Minister:  The  débâcle,  if  there  is,  I  would  say,  is  more  due  to 

consequences of what had been done by the previous Government. 

It does not date to yesterday. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! Order, please! 

Hon. Shakeel Mohamed!  

Let the Rt. hon. Prime Minister reply! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Time is over! The Table has been advised that Parliamentary Question … 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Jhugroo, when I am on my feet, you don’t talk! 

(Interruptions) 

The Table has been advised that Parliamentary Question No. B/329 in regard to Universities 
which  had  been  set  up  in  Mauritius  and  which  had  not  been  allowed  to  deliver  diplomas, 
degrees to their students will now be replied by the hon. Minister of Education and Human 
Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific Research.  

The Table has also been advised that Parliamentary Question Nos. B/294 and B/295 

have been withdrawn. Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

 

36 

AUTOCYCLES & MOTORCYCLES - DRIVING LEARNER’S LICENCE 

(No. B/290) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the provisional 
driving learner’s licence for autocycles and motorcycles, he will, for the benefit of the House, 
obtain from the National Transport Authority, information as to if consideration will be given 
for the classification thereof according to the – 

(a) 

(b) 

respective engine capacity thereof, and  

age group of the potential holders thereof. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun): 
Madam Speaker, I am informed that section 4 of the Road Traffic Act already provides for 
the subdivision of a class of motor vehicles. 

In  view  of  the  increasing  number  of  road  crashes  involving  motorcyclists,  which 
represents  40%  of  the  total  number  of  fatal  and  serious  injury  accidents,  the  Ministry  is 
initiating a series of measures to address this issue. 

Accordingly,  new  regulations  are  being  worked  out  for  the  purpose  of  granting 
provisional driving licence and to subdivide auto/motorcycles into the following categories 
according to their engine capacities – 

Category 

Engine Capacity 

Age Group of Licence Holders 

First Category 

not exceeding 50 cc 

Second Category 

between 50 and 125 cc 

17 to 18 years 

18 to 21 years 

Third Category 

between 125 cc and 300 cc 

21 years and above 

Fourth Category 

exceeding 300 cc 

21 years and above 

In addition, the regulations will also provide for – 

(i) 

(ii) 

the introduction of driving schools for auto/motorcycles and training of 
driving instructors for auto/motorcycles as well, 
a mandatory training in an approved driving school for all learner drivers of 
auto/motorcycles. 

Sensitisation  campaigns  will  also  target  auto/motorcyclists,  as  they  are  the  most 

vulnerable road users. 

 
Madam Speaker: Next question, Dr. Sorefan! 

37 

REGIONAL HOSPITALS - CEREBRAL VASCULAR ACCIDENTS - TREATMENT 

(No. B/291) Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix) asked 
the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the patients admitted in the 
Casualty  Department  of  the  Regional  Hospitals  with  provisional  diagnosis  of  cerebral 
vascular accidents, he will state the established treatment protocol therefor. 

Mr  Gayan:  Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  inform  the  House  that  all  cases  of  cerebral 

vascular accidents are being looked after by Consultants/Specialists in Internal Medicine. 

I am also informed that the existing established protocols are as follows -  

Patients with provisional diagnosis of cerebral vascular accidents are seen on a fast 
track basis and are admitted to medical intensive care units, surgical intensive care units and 
high  care  or  medical  wards,  depending  upon  the  severity  of  the  conditions.  Immediate 
management and appropriate investigations are also done. CT scan and other investigations 
are carried out, and treatment is determined depending on the reports of the investigations. 

Presently, when the case of stroke is due to aneurysm or arteriovenous malformation, 

the patient is sent overseas for aneurysm clipping and coil embolization or surgery. 

Arrangements  are  being  made  for  the  procurement  of  appropriate  equipment  and 
training of staff so that, in future, we do not send patients overseas and such treatment will be 
available in Mauritius. 

Madam Speaker, in the first instance, a Stroke Unit will be set up at Victoria Hospital 
where two wards have been identified and are being renovated for this purpose.  This Stroke 
Unit will be operational by December 2016.  Subsequently, a Stroke Unit will be set up in 
each of the remaining four regional hospitals to provide thrombolysis treatment for specific 
cases. 

Dr.  Sorefan:  The  hon.  Minister  has  mentioned  CT  scan  is  being  done  after  the 
incidence.    Will  the  hon.  Minister  inform  the  House  what  is  the  standard  worldwide,  is  it 
within four hours of a patient attending casualty that a CT scan should be done and whether 
this is done in Mauritius? 

Mr Gayan: I do not know what is the prevailing protocol in other countries, but, what 
I can say, Madam Speaker, is that the waiting time for any patient going to our hospitals is 
much less than in any other developed countries. 

 
Dr. Sorefan:  Do we have a CT scan at Jeetoo Hospital? 

38 

Mr Gayan:  Well, if the hon. Member comes with a substantive question, I will reply 

to that. 

Dr.  Joomaye:  I  would  like  to  ask  the  hon.  Minister  the  number  of  qualified 

Neurologists that are actually in post in the public hospitals? 

Mr Gayan:  That also, I will need to have a substantive question, Madam Speaker. 

Dr. Sorefan: Will the hon. Minister of Health confirm to this House whether at the 
casualty department, we have a specialist on duty during office hours and on call after office 
hours to look after those emergency cases? 

Mr  Gayan:  Well,  we  have  just  introduced  a  shift  system  in  all  the  Accidents  and 
Emergency in all the hospitals.  There are specialists or consultants on call.  But I am also 
informed that there is one doctor who is actually undergoing training in neurology and stroke 
medicine at Hôpitaux Universitaires de Genève in Switzerland.  He is expected to be back by 
the end of the year by the time when the Stroke Unit will become operational. 

Dr. Joomaye:  I would like to ask the hon. Minister - since he has told us that we do 
not  have  equipment  right  now  -  whether  he  knows  that  actually  in  all  our  hospitals,  like 
Jawaharlal Nehru Hospital, Jeetoo Hospital and Victoria Hospital, we have CT scans and that 
it  is  possible  technically  for  the  doctors,  interventional  radiologists  to  perform  cerebral 
angiography?  I would like to know from his point of view why this is not being done right 
now. 

Mr Gayan:  Well, Madam Speaker, I am guided by what the doctors tell us to do.  In 
all cases where operations cannot be performed in Mauritius, they have been sent overseas.  
This is why we are now changing the process so that we can have everything done locally.  
But each time I ask the question, why are we sending these patients overseas, the answer is 
that we do not have the equipment.  So, we are getting the equipment now.  We have got the 
doctors themselves to say what are the types of equipment that they will require so that they 
will not be able to come up with that excuse anymore. 

NATIONAL INSURANCE COMPANY LTD. - ASSETS AND LIABILITIES 

(No. B/292) Mr A. Ameer Meea (Second Member for Port Louis Maritime and 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 

 

39 

Institutional Reforms whether, in regard to the National Insurance Company Ltd., he will, for 
the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to the – 

(a) 

(b) 

total assets and liabilities thereof as at to date;  

name of the external auditor thereof, indicating the, and 

(i) date on which the last audit exercise thereof was carried out, and  

(ii) fees paid thereto, and  

(c) 

where matters stand as to the proposed sale of the shares thereof to the,   

(i) National Pensions Fund;  

(ii) State Insurance Company of Mauritius Ltd., and  

(iii) State Bank of Mauritius Ltd.  

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, I refer the hon. 

Member to the response to PQ B/580 of 29 September 2015. 

With regard to part (b), on 14 May 2015, National Insurance Company Ltd. invited 

proposals from five firms, namely – 

Deloitte; 
Ernst & Young; 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii)  Mazars; 
(iv)  Baker Tilly, and 
(v)  Moore Stephens. 

At  the  deadline,  only  Baker  Tilly  had  not  responded.  Evaluations  of  the  offers 
received were conducted by a Bids Evaluation Committee and its recommendations were sent 
to the NIC Board for approval on 21 May 2015.  By written resolution, Ernst & Young was 
appointed  as  Auditor  and  approval  was  also  obtained  from  the  Financial  Services 
Commission in line with section 40(2) of the Insurance Act. The fees of the Auditors are of a 
commercial nature, which is determined by the Board of the NIC. 

With regard to part (b) (i) of the question, the company was incorporated on 15 April 
2015 and the first accounting period is for 15 months.  Therefore, financial statements will be 
prepared for the period ending 30 June 2016, in line with section 216(3) of the Companies 
Act. 

 
With regard to (b) (ii) of the question, I am informed that no fees have been paid to 

40 

date to the Auditors. 

With regard to part (c) of the question and its subparts, the current offer to acquire a 
percentage of the shareholding of the National  Insurance Company  Ltd.  has been made to 
Sicom  Ltd.  and  SBM  Holdings.    This  offer  is  of  a  commercial  nature  and  there  is  a  non-
disclosure agreement signed between the relevant parties, I am informed, Madam Speaker.   

Moreover, in the case of SBM Holdings, it will have to comply  with the provision 

included in the listing rules made by the Stock Exchange of Mauritius. 

Mr Ameer Meea:  Madam Speaker, again, there is the same opacity like the Heritage 
City  in  relation  to  this  sale  of  shares.    May  I  quote  from  PQ  B/31  which  I  put  this  year, 
whereby the hon. Minister stated, and I quote – 

“(…) NIC’s capital is being opened, QED Actuaries have worked on it, independent 
consultants,  financial  consultants,  BDO  have  worked  on  it.  We  have  asked  for  a 
further  report  from  Deloitte  which  we  are  about  to  get,  I  think,  today  or  tomorrow 
(…).” 

So,  clearly,  there  has  been  valuation  of  shares  that  has  been  done  by  those  independent 
consultants.    So,  can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  if  he  really  means  good  governance  and 
transparency, will he table all these valuation so that we can assess the price of Rs5.6 billion 
that has been mentioned in the case of NIC, and whether it is of genuine nature or is it only 
wishful thinking and creative accounting? 

Mr Bhadain:  Madam Speaker, a lot of words have been used by the hon. Member, 

like opacity, creative accounting and so on, which is completely unfounded and unfair.   

Firstly, in relation to Heritage City, there is no opacity.  The answer was given last 

week. 

In  relation  to  NIC,  true  it  is  that the  share  capital  has  been  opened  to  SICOM  and 
SBM Holdings. This has been done in all transparency and has been communicated to the 
House on numerous occasions.  We said that when you look at the whole BAI affair, apart 
from the recovery of assets, we will have to create value.  We talked about increasing the 
value of the insurance company and this has been done, Madam Speaker, through a lot of 
hard work by the Board and the management of the new NIC. 

41 

 
I  can  inform  the  House  that  the  monthly  recurring  premium  of  NIC  is  Rs112  m., 
which  is  annually  Rs1.3  billion  now;  increase  in  monthly  recurring  premium  of  Rs9.2  m. 
every  month;  total  benefits  paid  to  date,  that  is,  life  insurance  which  have  matured,  and 
people have been paid Rs600 m. since August to now.  Operational cost of what was then 
BAI,  which  is  now  NIC,  has  been  reduced,  Madam  Speaker,  from  Rs660  m.  annually  to 
Rs225 m. The expense ratio of that company has decreased from 36% to 11%, which is well 
within  the  industry  norms.    NIC  has  also  been  the  recipient  of  the  Africa  Best  Employer 
Brand  Award  2015  in  testimony  of  the  bold  business  restructuring  it  has  undergone  since 
August 2015. 

I  am  also  informed,  Madam  Speaker,  that  NIC  presently  holds  market  leadership 
position with 38% of the market share of Life Insurance Policies in Mauritius and based on 
the number of enforced policies, whilst NIC General holds 11% market share … 

Madam Speaker: No cross-talking! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhadain: … of the accident and health segment with its health insurance line of 
products.  NIC is now also licenced to conduct general insurance business and the company 
intends  to  build  on  its  existing  client  base  and  distribution  channels  to  promote  seven 
additional  classes  of  business,  including  motor  insurance,  travel  insurance,  property 
insurance, liability guarantee, engineering and so on. 

Madam Speaker, the company has value and the value is not only based on the assets 
which are there, in terms of a property and, in terms of other assets which are on its balance 
sheet. An insurance company is valued based on what it is going to generate as future income 
also,  which  is  discounted  to  present  value.  The  hon.  Member  should  know  that,  he  is  an 
accountant. 

Now,  on  the  basis  of  evaluation  which  has  been  conducted  by  the  actuaries  QED 
which  has  been  looked  at  by  the  Accountants  BDO,  which  has  also  been  looked  at,  at 
Deloitte,  there  is,  of  course,  an  offer  which  has  been  made  by  NIC  to  SICOM  and  SBM 
Holdings  to  participate  in  the  share  capital.  The  Boards  of  those  institutions  are  working.  
They have, of course, looked at all the figures which have been forwarded and they will make 
a decision accordingly and I see no reason as to why they should not invest in NIC like I have 
said before. 

42 

 
Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Minister  has  given  us  so  much 
information about how many policies, assets and liabilities. What we are asking is only to 
table the valuation that has been done so that we can assess this Rs5.6 billion, whether it is 
genuine or not. Because the hon. Minister is saying that the companies have a forecast. The 
companies  are  not  even  one  year  born;  we  have  companies  which  have  been  here  for 
decades… 

Madam Speaker: The hon. Member must ask his question. 

Mr Ameer Meea: … like the Swan Insurance Company which today is only valued at 

Rs2.9 billion and yet the hon. Minister... 

Madam Speaker: So, what is your question, hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: My question to the hon. Minister is that we insist, for the sake of 

good governance and transparency, to table all these valuation reports. 

Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, he can insist as much as he wants; he has a grievance 
agenda; we have a governing agenda. A non-disclosure agreement has been signed and the 
hon. Member should know. 

He should know... 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

 (Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Bhadain:  He  should  know  what  a  non-disclosure  agreement  means.    SBM  is 
listed  on  the  Stock  Exchange.  What  would  happen  if  we  were  to  go  and  table  all  this 
commercially sensitive information now when SBM Holdings has to take a decision and then, 
of course, it will have an impact on the share price under Stock Exchange?  

Talking about SICOM, let me just give some further details as compared to how NIC 
is operating and other insurance companies are operating. I am told that the Chief Executive 
of SICOM has a monthly package, when you add it up, to Rs1 m.  a month. When you look at 
NIC... 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

43 

 
Mr Bhadain: When you look at NIC, it is Rs200,000 package a month. Yet, NIC has 
got 140,000 life insurance policies as compared to 70,000 life insurance policies which are 
being handled by SICOM. So, as a sensible Government, as a responsible Government, we 
are taking the decisions we are taking in the interest of the people.  We have been cheated 
and defrauded by the Labour Party under the BAI regime.  

(Interruptions) 

That is what is happening and the issue of political vendetta which was mentioned before – 
what  political  vendetta?  Where  is  political  vendetta?  It  is  a  Ponzi  scheme,  a  fraudulent 
scheme which has been operated by the... 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Come back to the reply! 

Order, please!  

Order! 

I have said order! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Members, I am on my feet.  I have said order! Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Hon. Fowdar, no!  Hon. Uteem! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  I  am  really  impressed  by  how  the  hon. 
Minister believes in this company because last year, six months ago, he came here, he said 
exactly: “There are two international English insurers; they are here; they are doing their due 
diligence; they are going to put money in this superb or mutual”, he said. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! There is a hon. Member who is asking a 

question; you should not interrupt. 

44 

 
Mr Uteem: Six months later, everything that was said in this House by the same hon. 
Minister, six months later nothing has happened and today isn’t that the case that because 
they  are  not  able  to  get  anyone  to  invest  into  NIC  that  they  are  putting  pressure  on  NPF, 
SICOM and others to invest in that company? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhadain: It is certainly not true, Madam Speaker.  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! 

Mr Bhadain: The issue of NPF does not even arise. I have mentioned SICOM and 
SBM Holdings. Now, this is a clear example of how the Opposition can get everything wrong 
and I will state it now. An offer from Prudential plc UK has been received on 24 February 
2016. The offer will lapse in 180 days on 22 August 2016.  

When we say... 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea, I am on my feet! 

Hon. Ameer Meea, please! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Minister Bhadain, please sit down! 

Hon. Jhugroo! 

Can you please remain silent! I have... 

Hon. Members, let me tell you... 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

Hon. Ameer Meea, please! I am on my feet! 

45 

I have observed… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Please!  I  am  on  my  feet!  And  when  I  am  on  my  feet,  you  should  remain  silent!  Hon. 
Members, I have observed that several times when I am on my feet and I am calling for order 
that  you  continue  to  discuss  among  yourselves,  thus  ignoring  that  I  am  on  my  feet.  I  am 
warning hon. Members of both sides of the House that it is an elementary rule of conduct that 
when the Speaker is on her feet, there should be silence in the House so that order can be 
restored.  

(Interruptions) 

Can we proceed now?  

 

 

Mr Bhadain: Yes, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister just said... 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea, I have already said, next question! 

Mr Ameer Meea: I have not yet finished. 

Madam Speaker: I have said next question! 

(Interruptions) 

I have said no question.  This is my ruling. 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Ameer Meea, please sit down! I have already ruled out that we should move to the next 
question. Please move to the next question! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Madam  Speaker,  with  due  respect.  We  are  talking  about  public 

funds; this is important, pensioners’ money. I have only... 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea, this question has been sufficiently canvassed 

both by the Opposition and the hon. Member. 

 

46 

(Interruptions) 

I have ruled out that you should move on to the next question. 

Hon. Leader of the Opposition, please! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

I am being very patient with you. Next question! Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: This is very disgusting! PQ No. B/293! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order, please! Order! 

Order! 

Hon. Ameer Meea, please! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Minister Bhadain, please calm down! 

Can I ask… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Leader of the Opposition, please! 

 

Mr Bérenger: The Minister stands up and threatens! 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Order, please!  Order! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Minister Bhadain, did you threaten? Did you?  If you did, then ... 

(Interruptions) 

 
Mr Bhadain: Definitely not. 

47 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please, sit down! If you did... 

Order please!  

You cannot say that he is a liar. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Leader of the Opposition, you cannot say that! 

No! I am on my feet, I said. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

I am on my feet! Would you continue?  

(Interruptions) 

I suspend the sitting for one and a half hours. Go on! I suspend the sitting for one and a half 
hours.  

(Interruptions) 

At 1.00 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 2.34 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

Madam Speaker: Please, be seated! Hon. Ameer Meea! 

DEEP OCEAN WATER APPLICATION PROJECT - IMPLEMENTATION 

(No.  B/293)  Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  & 
Port  Louis  East)  asked  the  Minister  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands whether, in regard to the Deep Ocean Water Application Project, 
he will state where matters stand as to the implementation thereof - 

(a)  

(b)  

listing the buildings that will be connected thereto, and  

indicating the - 

 

(i)  

cost thereof;  

48 

(ii)  

name of the company implementing same, and  

(iii)  

expected date of coming into operation thereof. 

Mr Koonjoo: Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that a Deed of Concession 
between the Government of the Republic of Mauritius and Urban Cooling Ltd was signed on 
the 23 December 2015, for the implementation of the Deep Ocean Water Application Project, 
which  entails  pumping  deep  cold  sea  water  for  air  conditioning  of  residential,  commercial 
and  industrial  facilities  in  Port  Louis  region,  including  the  area  stretching  from  Baie  du 
Tombeau to Pointe aux Sables, through networks of insulated pipes.  

I  am  informed  that  Urban  Cooling  Ltd  is  currently  in  the  process  of  obtaining  an 
Environmental  Impact  Assessment  Licence,  in  compliance  with  section  21  (b)  of  the 
Maritime Zones Act.  

Madam  Speaker,  in  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  Urban 
Cooling  Ltd  has  given  its  written  commitment  to  the  effect  that  any  agreement  with 
Government for the provision of the conditioning of buildings would be valid only as long as 
Government would occupy the respective buildings.  

Madam Speaker, concerning part (b) of the question, I am further informed that Urban 
Cooling  Ltd  has  already  been  notified  that  Government  buildings,  under  the  aegis  of  the 
Prime Minister’s Office, Ministries and Departments, will connect to the Deep Ocean Water 
Application Project on the condition that this will represent a saving to the Government.  

The list of the Government buildings to be connected to the DOWA system has not 

yet been finalised.  

Madam Speaker, in regard to part (b) (iii) of the question, I am informed that DOWA 

system is expected to be operational in March 2018. 

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Madam  Speaker,  in  the  question  there  is  mention  made  to: 
indicating the cost thereof, (b)(i).  I  did not hear the hon. Minister  give  any  answer to this 
specific one. 

Mr Koonjoo: Regarding the cost of the project, a cost estimate on air conditioning 
incurred by the Government buildings in the region of Port Louis will be carried out by the 
Ministry  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport.  UCL  Ltd  shall  provide  necessary 
technical details and expertise to the Ministry and obtain its approval for the connection to 

 

49 

DOWA  air  conditioning  system  with  the  existing  air  conditioning  system  of  Government 
buildings.  It  is  understood  that  for  buildings  already  equipped  with  a  chiller  system  of  air 
conditioning  no  additional  cost  will  be  incurred  for  connection  to  DOWA  since  the  two 
systems are compatible. MPI can be contacted for more details. This is what I have got. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Osman Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed: Thank you. The DOWA project dates back to 2013. In fact, it is part 
of  the  Maurice  Ile  Durable  Policy,  Strategy  and  Action  Plan,  paragraph  6.5.4.  Now,  in 
January 2014, a DOWA Advisory Council was set up; several meetings took place and a list 
of buildings was finalised. At that time… 

Madam Speaker: No. The hon. Member should come with his question! Now that 

the hon. Member has explained, he should ask his question! 

Mr  Mahomed:  Yes.  At  that  time  the  project  was  sized  at  44  megawatts  worth  of 

cooling and last year it dropped to… 

Madam Speaker: Ask your question! 

Mr Mahomed: I am coming to the question, Madam Speaker. 

Madam  Speaker:  Yes,  but  I  have  given  the  hon.  Member  sufficient  leeway,  he 

should ask his question! 

Mr  Mahomed:  ...to  35  megawatts.  How  much  is  it  today?  In  the  face  of  several 
buildings are being moved out of Port Louis, Governmental buildings to the Heritage City, 
how much is it today? What is the amount of cold that you are working on? 

Mr  Koonjoo:  Madam  Speaker,  I  don’t  have  the  information.  If  the  hon.  Member 

comes with a substantive question, I can give all the details, please. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

Mr Bérenger: The question about the cost - we know what we are talking about: you 
go and pick this water deep down there, the pipe costs a fortune, it is a lot of money. So, the 
question was roughly what will be the cost of building all that system to bring that cold water 
to Port Louis, the rest will vary with the different buildings - but the cost of setting up the 
system to go and pump, carry it up to Port Louis? 

 

50 

Mr  Koonjoo:  I  am  sorry,  Madam  Speaker,  but  I  don’t  have  the  exact  cost  of  the 

project as such. 

Mr Bérenger: Since the hon. Minister does not have a rough estimate of cost, do we 

know where the money, the funding thereof is going to come from at least? 

Mr Koonjoo: This is a private company, Madam Speaker, so I don’t have the details. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea! 

Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Speaker, I have specified clearly in the question about the 
cost. The hon. Minister has been given advance notice; he should have done his homework 
before coming here. He stated that, for further information we should contact the MPI, may 
we have a contact number, please? 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Ameer  Meea,  please,  don’t  be  ironical!  No!  Don’t  be 
ironical!  For  the  good  order  of  the  work  in  the  National  Assembly  here,  please,  don’t  be 
ironical. We are losing the time of the House. Hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Koonjoo: The hon. Member can put questions to MPI, yes.  

Dr. Joomaye:   Madam Speaker,  I would like to ask the hon. Minister if the specialists 
for the protection of coral reefs of the Mauritius Oceanography Institute have been consulted 
before allocating this contract? 

Mr Koonjoo:  Yes, Madam Speaker.  They have been consulted. 

Mr Jhuboo: Madam Speaker, being given that the promoter has clearly indicated that a 
project would go ahead since Government buildings, public buildings would be connected, 
and now we know that part of these buildings are moving to Heritage City, can we assume 
that this project is not going ahead? 

Mr  Koonjoo:    I  said  in  my  answer,  Madam  Speaker,  that  we  will  see  to  it  that 

Government is making a profit, not a loss.  

Mr  Ameer  Meea:  The  hon.  Minister  mentioned  about  Government  buildings  that 
already have chillers, these will be easily connected.  But according to my information, there 
is  only  one  Government  building  that  has  chiller  air-conditioner  and  more  so,  it  is  not 
working. So, how the hon. Minister wants us to believe that this project would be worthy to 
the Government as there is only one chiller that is being used and even it is not working? 

 

51 

Mr Koonjoo:  I don’t have that answer, Madam Speaker.  But I can say one thing to 
the House that the project has been taken up by this cooling company and I believe that they 
have done enough research and they have done the cost benefit analysis before coming to the 
Government to ask for the implementation of the project. 

Mr  Uteem:    Madam  Speaker,  may  I  know  from  the  hon.  Minister  whether  the 
promoters have been granted an EIA licence to see the impact on the water resources, but 
also on the inhabitants of Port Louis? Because I don’t even know where they are going to put 
their pump, whether there will be noise pollution and any impact on the environment?  So, 
have they been provided with an EIA licence? 

Mr Koonjoo: I just said, Madam Speaker, and I can give some more information to the 

House.  According to the UCL Limited, the next phase of the project is the following – 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

the conduct of a marine survey in the Port by September 2016, UCL informed 
that as ADB has now approved its loan for the offshore survey; 
application of the EIA licence, as requested by the hon. Member, by 
November 2016, and 
they will start construction working in the first quarter of 2017 and the 
operation of DOWA by March 2018. 

Mr Ganoo:  The hon. Minister has told us that this is a private investment, a private 
project, but does the hon. Minister have any idea - because his Ministry must have contacted 
the company – about the total project value of this project?  What is the amount which the 
company will be investing in order to realise this project? 

Mr Koonjoo: Madam Speaker, I just answered that I don’t have the exact sum that they 
are putting in this project, but I can assure the House one thing, that this project has been 
laying there for more than ten years.  More than ten years with the last Government! And this 
Government within one year, we have been able to give all the clearances from our side and 
they are starting the project very soon. 

SUGAR CANE INDUSTRY - HIGH LEVEL IMPLEMENTATION COMMITTEE & 

LANDELL MILLS REPORT – RECOMMENDATIONS 

(No.  B/294)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security whether, following the approval of 
the  recommendations  of  the  High  Level  Implementation  Committee  (HLIC)  and  of  the 
Landell Mills Report on the sugar cane industry by Government, he will state – 

 
(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

52 

the actions taken, if any, for the protection of the interests of the sugar cane 
planting community;  
if he has received a request from the Alliance of Sugar Cane Planters 
Association to be furnished with a full set of measures finalized by the HLIC 
and, if so, indicate if it has been acceded to, and  
where matters stand as to the proposed closure of weighbridges, indicating the 
number thereof which are presently in operation and the respective location 
thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

TERRE ROUGE/VERDUN LINK ROAD - REHABILITATION WORKS 

(No.  B/295)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the Terre 
Rouge/Verdun  Link  Road,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the  Road 
Development  Authority,  information  as  to  where  matters  stand  as  to  rehabilitation  works 
being carried out thereat, indicating the – 

(a) 
(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

payable thereto, and  
paid as at to date  

cost thereof, indicating the amount thereof paid as at to date, and  
names of the consultants therefor, indicating the fees-  
(i) 
(ii) 
name of the contractor thereof, indicating the amount paid thereto as at to date, 
and  
expected - 
(i) 
(ii) 

completion date thereof, and  
date of coming into operation thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

SIGNAL MOUNTAIN - JOGGING TRACK – UPGRADING WORKS 

(No.  B/296)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms, Minister of Environment, 
Sustainable  Development,  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
Jogging Track at Signal Mountain, in Port Louis, he will state – 

(a) 
(b) 

if urgent upgrading works will be carried out thereat;  
if lighting facilities and additional parking space will be provided thereat;  

 
(c) 

53 

if consideration will be given for the construction of public toilets thereat and, 
if so, indicate when will it be implemented, and  
since when it is operational. 

(d) 
Mr  Wong  Yen  Cheong:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  upgrading  works  at 
Signal Mountain Health Track were carried out in November 2015 and comprise, inter alia, 
the  installation  of  wooden  hand  rails,  construction  of  low  masonry  wall  to  contain  soil 
erosion, painting and varnishing of metallic shelter and gate posts, replacement of basket bins 
and installation of indicative sign boards.   

I am further informed that maintenance works are carried out regularly and upgrading 
works are normally scheduled every 12 or 18 months interval.  The next survey, in respect of 
upgrading works, is scheduled for October 2016. 

Madam Speaker, in respect of part (b) of the question, I am informed that prior to the 
launching of tenders for solar street lighting system, my Ministry was informed of potential 
hazards namely - rock falls, slopes, failure and flooding in the area surrounding the health 
track  by  the  National  Disaster  Risk  Reduction  and  Management  Centre  and  the  Landslide 
Management Unit of the Ministry of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport.  

The project has, therefore, been put on hold following a risk assessment report since 
October-November  2015.    The  Landslide  Management  Unit  of  the  Ministry  of  Public 
Infrastructure and Land Transport was requested to look into the issue.  

The engineers of the Landslide Management Unit in collaboration with experts of the 
Japan  International  Corporation  Agency  known  as  JICA,  have  proposed  to  carried  out 
consolidation on stabilisation work to ensure safety of persons making use of the health track.  
The implementation of these rehabilitation measures is estimated at around Rs50 m. In view 
of the expenditure involved, I would like to inform the House that the improvement works 
have been earmarked among the priority projects to be implemented.  

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (c) of the question, consideration would be given 
for the provision of additional parking facilities, the construction of toilet facilities and the 
lighting systems, once mitigating measures have been implemented in the area surrounding 
the health track.  

With respect to part (d) of the question, I am informed that the Signal Mountain Health 
Track was already being used by joggers well before health track project was completed in 
August 2006.  

 

54 

Mr Bhagwan: Can I ask the hon. Minister that pending this major rehabilitation work, 
that minor urgent rehabilitation be done? Dans certains endroits, il y des affaissements due to 
heavy rainfalls and hundreds of people are using this health track in the morning and in the 
afternoon.  So, for safety reasons, can we know whether these urgent works can be carried 
out? 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong:   Madam Speaker, in fact, I have taken this on board that due 
consideration be given so that this does not pose a risk to public safety, that is, to the people 
using the track.  Lots of people in Port Louis, namely the region of Ward 4, are using this 
track and I have asked the officers to put a notice board there so that people can be careful 
while using it for the time being.  

Mr Bhagwan:  Since there are lots of problems concerning the parking zone, can the 
hon. Minister discuss with the Traffic Management Team or the Municipality of Port Louis 
so that the traffic arrangements - especially in the morning and also in the afternoon - be re-
organised, like the road markings and so on, so that the delimitation of the parking zone could 
be well defined? 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Madam Speaker, I am taking good note of the propositions 
and I will see to it that we make all the necessary arrangements, even when there is heavy use 
of the health track. We can also arrange that all the vehicles do not use these roads at the 
same time. 

Mr Mahomed:  Madam Speaker, thank you.  In reply to my PQ B/86 of last year, the 
then hon. Minister told us that the specifications had been finalised for the solar PV street 
lighting and now we learn that there is a problem of landslide.  May we have a time frame 
from  the  hon.  Minister  for  JICA  to  submit  its  report  and  the  remedial  work  implemented 
because, at the moment, there is a dire need for lighting as people jog there at night. 

Mr  Wong  Yen  Cheong:    Madam  Speaker,  I  have  already  taken  on  board  that  we 
should do that in speedy manners as I just said.  It poses risk to the safety of users and I am 
aware of that. I will see to it that we do it as immediately as possible.   

PORT LOUIS THEATRE - RENOVATION 

(No.  B/297)  Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the Port Louis Theatre, he will, 
for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Municipal Council of Port Louis, information as 
to – 

 

55 

(a)  where matters stand as to the renovation thereof, and  
(b) 

if he has received a request from the Ministry of Arts and Culture for the vesting 
thereof in his Ministry and, if so, indicate the  
(i) 
(ii) 

reasons given by the said Ministry in support of the said request, and  
if the request has been acceded to. 

Dr. Husnoo:  Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed 
that the Municipal Council of Port Louis has approved the project for the renovation of the 
Port  Louis  Theatre  and  an  amount  of  Rs79  m.  has  been  earmarked  for  the  phase  1  of  the 
project. 

The consultant is presently working on the bidding documents for the Phase I for the 
project. The draft bidding document, along with all the drawings, will then be submitted to 
the Central Procurement Board for vetting prior to invitation for bids. 

As  regards  part  (b)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  there  has  been  no  official 

request from the Ministry of Arts and Culture for the vesting of the Theatre in the Ministry. 

Mr Bhagwan: Is the hon. Minister aware that the Minister of Arts and Culture has 
made public statements to the effect that his Ministry or himself wants to take possession of 
the Port Louis Theatre, which is a very wrong signal which the Ministry is sending to the 
Local  Government?  Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  whether  he  has  discussed  same  with  his 
colleague? 

Dr. Husnoo: As I said, we had no official request about this. 

Mr  Bhagwan:  Can  the  hon.  Minister  say  whether  he  has  discussed  with  the 
Municipality of Port Louis and, at least, give us a time frame when work is scheduled to start, 
according to the plan of the municipality? 

Dr. Husnoo: The invitation for the bid is going to be launched in June 2016 - in a 
couple of months - and by the time the bid is evaluated and the contract is given, hopefully, 
by the end of the year, we will start the construction. 

Mr  Mahomed:  Until  such  time,  is  the  Theatre  operational  or  the  building  is  not 

practical? 

Dr. Husnoo: As you know, it is actually not operational. 

 

 

 

56 

BELLE ROSE/OLLIER AVENUE MARKET FAIR – TRAFFIC CONGESTION 

(No.  B/298)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 
asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to Belle 
Rose/Ollier Avenue Market Fair, he will state if he is aware of the chaotic traffic situation 
prevailing thereat and in the vicinity thereof on Sunday mornings caused by the holding of 
the  market  fair  thereat  and,  if  so,  indicate  if  remedial  measures  will  be  taken  in  relation 
thereto. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister  &  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun): 
Madam  Speaker,  I  am  aware  of  the  chaotic  traffic  situation  prevailing  along  the  Belle 
Rose/Ollier Avenue during the market fair on Sunday mornings. 

As regards the measures taken, I am informed that the Traffic Management and Road 

Safety Unit has prohibited parking at the following places – 

(a) 

(b) 

On both sides of the bus stops found near the market fair along Remy Ollier 
Avenue. 
Near road junctions (Cnr Lees Ave/Ollier Avenue, Ithier Avenue /Ollier 
Avenue and Mareemootoo Avenue /Ollier Avenue). 
Near pedestrian crossings and junction Ollier Avenue/Pasteur Avenue. 

(c) 
I am also informed that four loading bays will be introduced along Ithier Avenue, near 

the market, to address the problem caused by loading and unloading activities. 

Furthermore, the Traffic Management and Road Safety Unit is taking necessary action 
to undertake all yellow road markings along Ollier Avenue with a view to preventing savage 
parking and thus ensuring traffic fluidity. 

Mr Ramano: Le ministre n’est pas le substantive Minister. Est-ce que le ministre est 
d’accord à considérer la possibilité de décréter un no-parking zone de la rue Pasteur, où se 
trouve la mosquée, jusqu’à l’avenue Marimootoo ? Parce que la route est tellement exigüe, 
prévoir des parkings tout le long de ce chemin aggrave ce problème. 

Mr Soodhun: I am going to inform my hon. colleague that the Traffic Management 
and the Road Safety Unit is also working seriously with the Municipality of Quatre Bornes to 
see to it that the wish of the hon. Member be taken into consideration. 

Mr Ramano: Peut-être aussi, M. le ministre, d’assurer la présence policière les jours 

de foire d’une façon systématique, de 7 heures du matin jusqu’à midi au moins. 

 
Mr Soodhun: Madam Speaker, I am going to refer the matter to the Rt. hon. Prime 

57 

Minister who is in charge of the Police. 

ROAD ACCIDENTS – RISK FACTORS 

(No. B/299) Mr J. Leopold (Second Member for Rodrigues) asked the Minister of 
Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to road accidents which occur in 
mainland Mauritius, he will state the key risk factors which have been identified therefor, if 
any, indicating the actions taken by his Ministry to the address the issue. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister  &  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun): 
Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  the  Traffic  Management  and  Road  Safety  Unit  has 
identified four key risk factors that contribute to road crashes as follows – 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 

poor driver behaviour, including drink driving and over speeding; 
poor inter-visibility between road users; 
roadworthiness of motor vehicles, including motorcycles, and 
existence of accident prone areas due to non-compliance to posted speed 
limits. 

Madam Speaker, road safety is an issue of national importance. Consequently, a series 
of bold measures have been taken by the Ministry with a view to reducing the number of road 
crashes. I am tabling a series of measures taken so far in this respect. 

I am confident that, with all these measures enunciated, we will be able to respond to 
the aspirations of the Mauritian population by providing one of the safest road traffic systems 
in this region of the world. 

ROAD ACCIDENTS – HOSPITALS – EMERGENCY RESPONSE SERVICES 

(No. B/300) Mr J. Leopold (Second Member for Rodrigues) asked the Minister of 

Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to road accidents, he will state – 

(a) 
(b) 
(c) 

(d) 

if his Ministry is involved in the prevention thereof and, if so, indicate how; 
the common types of injuries associated therewith; 
the number of persons who have become disabled as a result thereof, since 
2015 to date, and 
the measures being taken to improve the emergency response services of the 
public hospitals to cope with the increasing incidence thereof. 

58 

 
Mr  Gayan:  Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  my  Ministry 
works 
the  Ministry  of  Public  Infrastructure,  National 
in  close  collaboration  with 
Development  Unit,  Land  Transport  and  Shipping  for  the  prevention  of  road  accidents  in 
Mauritius.  In this context, a National Road Safety Strategy for Mauritius 2016-2025 is being 
elaborated by the MPI.  In this plan, there is emphasis on the prevention of road accidents. 

My Ministry is also represented on the National Road Safety Council set up under the 
aegis of the MPI.  The Council’s remit is to provide technical input and suggestions in view 
of the preparation of the National Road Safety Strategy 2016-2025. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, the most common types of injuries associated 

with road accidents, which are referred to regional hospitals, are as follows – 

sprains, lacerations with external bleeding, fractures and amputations; 
internal bleeding; 
concussion and head injury; 
spinal injuries, and 
multiple injuries. 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
With  regard  to  part  (c)  of  the  question,  2,338  persons  involved  in  road  traffic 
accidents  were  admitted  to  regional  hospitals  in  2015,  and  depending  on  the  nature  and 
gravity  of  the  injuries  sustained,  their  length  or  stay  varied  from  one  day  to  over  three 
months.  As some of these persons are still under treatment following injuries sustained in 
road traffic accidents as well as for other medical problems, no distinction is made between 
them and other patients following treatment at hospitals. In view thereof, it is difficult to have 
a specific data on the number of disabled persons and the degree of their disability. 

With regard to part (d) of the question, I would like to inform the House that a series 
of  measures  are  being  adopted  by  the  SAMU  to  improve  response  in  emergency  medical 
services as follows – 

• 

• 

the  setting  up  of  a  Resuscitation  Unit  at  the  level  of  the  Accident  and 
Emergency Department in each regional hospital to enhance the provision of 
medical services in cases of vital emergencies; 
25  medical  staff  have  been  selected  to  reinforce  the  SAMU  team  after 
appropriate  training  and  22  nurses  have  already  been  trained  in  emergency 
medicine; 

 

• 

• 

• 

59 

the country has been divided into five regions to enable SAMU to intervene 
more promptly to requests, thereby improving the response time for referral to 
casualties to the nearest regional hospital; 
fhe fleet of ambulances has been increased from 5 to 10, and upgrading of all 
non-SAMU ambulances has been effected. There will be a further increase in 
the Fleet planned for 2016-2017, and lastly 
a SAMU Emergency Preparedness Response Communication and Recovery 
Plan has been established to provide emergency medical services in cases of 
mass casualties and disasters. 

Mr Leopold: With the increasing number of injuries caused by road traffic collision, I 
just want to ask the hon. Minister whether he considers the problem as a public health issue. 
My  second  question  is  whether  his  Ministry  is  considering  airlifting  patients  to  hospitals, 
because of road congestion. 

Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, with regard to the first question, I would like to express 
the wish that we have fewer road accidents, so that there won’t be that much of a problem in 
the hospital services. With regard to airlifting, I know all the fuss there is about helicopter 
use, but that is something that we can consider. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Joomaye! 

Dr. Joomaye: My question pertains to the services of the SAMU.  The hon. Minister 
is certainly aware that in remote areas of more than 15 km from regional hospitals the delay 
of intervention of SAMU is sometimes very high and this can be very prejudicial to some 
people having road traffic accident. I would like to know if the hon. Minister would consider 
to have delocalised posting of SAMU vehicles, for example, at Souillac Hospital and Cantin 
Hospital at Tamarin in order to enable the delay of intervention to be decreased? 

Mr  Gayan:  Madam  Speaker,  we  can  certainly  look  into  that,  but  I  must  say  that 
SAMU  deals  with  specific  cases.  For  example,  SAMU  intervened  in  1,066  cases  of  road 
traffic accidents out of the 1,706 cases which transited through the 114, which is the SAMU 
number. SAMU does not respond to every phone call. It asks certain questions and there is a 
protocol. It is only when they are satisfied that the intervention of SAMU is required that they 
go. But, ideally, of course, SAMU should be located within each part of the country, but, we 
are trying to improve the service as much as possible. 

 
Madam  Speaker:  The  Table  has  been  advised  that  Parliamentary  Question  Nos. 

60 

B/308 and B/309 have been withdrawn. Next question, hon. Quirin! 

MUNICIPAL COUNCIL OF BEAU BASSIN AND ROSE HILL – SPORTS 

ACTIVITIES 

(No. B/301) Mr  F. Quirin  (Fourth Member for Beau Bassin & Petite Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the financial year 2015-2016, 
he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Municipal Council of Beau Bassin and 
Rose Hill, information as to the – 

(a) 

quantum of the grants allocated to each – 

(i) sports clubs performing at national level, and  

(ii) each regional sports clubs and table a list thereof, and  

(b) 

overall budget allocated for sport activities.  

Dr. Husnoo: Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) (i) of the question, I shall, with 
your permission, arrange for the information pertaining to the quantum of grants allocated by 
the  Municipal  Council  of  Beau  Bassin/Rose  Hill  to  each  sports  club  performing  at  the 
national  level  for  the  financial  year  2015  to  be  placed  in  the  Library  of  the  National 
Assembly. 

As regards the grants for financial year 2016, I am informed by the Municipal Council 
that  a  policy  decision  has  already  been  taken  by  its  Welfare  Committee  and  same  will  be 
ratified at its next Council Meeting scheduled on 28 April 2016. 

As regards part (a) (ii)  of the question,  I  am informed that no  grant is  allocated to 

regional sports clubs. However, municipal and sports facilities are made available to them.  

As far as part (b) of the question is concerned, I am informed that the overall budget 
allocated  for  the  financial  year  2015  from  January  to  December  2015  was  Rs3,130,000, 
whereas for the financial year 2016, that is, from January to June 2016, it is Rs1,550,000. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Quirin! 

Mr  Quirin:  Madame  la  présidente,    j’ai  bien  compris  que  l’honorable  ministre  va 
déposer  la  liste  des  clubs  de  l’élites  qui  bénéficient  d’une  contribution  financière  de  la 
municipalité.  Je ne pense pas qu’il y ait des centaines, mais  peut-être une dizaine tout au 

 

61 

plus.  Il peut très bien, je pense, nous donner les noms de ces clubs et la somme que chaque 
club a reçu pour l’année financière 2015-2016.  

Dr. Husnoo: As I have just mentioned, Madam Speaker, this is going to be placed in 

the Library. I don’t have the answer. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Osman Mahomed! 

Mr Mahomed: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As regards part (b) for the question, the 
question  relates  to  overall  budget  for  sports  activities,  meaning  for  the  whole  panoply  of 
activities taking place at the Council. Now, there is a decision at the beginning of this year to 
transfer all football grounds from the Mauritius Sports Council to the Municipal Council of 
Port  Louis  and,  at  this  moment  in  time,  they  are  in  a  deplorable  state  and  the  Municipal 
Council… 

Madam Speaker: Ask your question, hon. Mahomed!  

Mr Mahomed:...says that there is no budget. In fact, they are quite frank in saying 
that there is no budget. Can there be a reallocation of funds to this budget so that things can 
be remedied as a matter of priority? 

Dr. Husnoo: I think we are talking about Beau Bassin/Rose Hill. 

Not Port Louis! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Quirin! 

Mr  Quirin:  Madame  la  présidente,  peut-on  savoir  si  effectivement  -  si  j’ai  bien 
compris  la  réponse  du  ministre  -  les  petits  clubs  de  quartier  n’ont  rien  reçu  comme 
contribution financière pour l’année financière de 2015-2016 ? 

Dr. Husnoo: There are two different budgets, 2015 and 2016. As far as the policy is 
concerned - I have just mentioned it - the regional clubs don’t get any grant, but they can get 
other facilities apart from direct grant every year. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Quirin, next question! 

FOOTBALL - FOREIGN PLAYERS - WORK PERMIT 

62 

 
(No.  B/302)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and  Training  whether,  in 
regard to football, he will give a list of the foreign players who have been issued with work 
permits and who are performing in the National Football Leagues since January 2015 to date, 
indicating in each case, the – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

 respective club in which the foreign player is performing; 

date of arrival in Mauritius thereof, and  

nationality thereof. 

Mr Callichurn: Madam Speaker, according to the records available at my Ministry, 
39  work  permits  have  been  issued  to  foreign  players  who  are  performing  in  the  National 
Football  Leagues,  that  is,  the  Premier  League,  First  Division  and  Second  Division 
Championship since 2015 to date. 

I am tabling the information requested for. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Quirin! 

Mr  Quirin:  Madame  la  présidente,  peut-on  savoir  du  ministre  s’il  existe  des 
règlements  par  rapport  aux  recrutements  des  joueurs  étrangers  et,  si  c’est  le  cas,  de  bien 
vouloir nous dire lesquels ? 

Mr  Callichurn:  Madam  Speaker,  all  football  clubs  desirous  of  recruiting  foreign 
players should be affiliated with the Mauritius Football Association and are allowed to recruit 
a maximum of five foreign players. I would also add that at a meeting of Cabinet held on 18 
January 2008 Cabinet had agreed to local football clubs recruiting a maximum of five foreign 
players so as to enhance the performance level of local teams. However, in the same vein, a 
policy of allowing for the recruitment of only two foreign players for other collective sports 
was maintained. 

Mr Quirin: Madame la présidente, l’honorable ministre peut-il nous dire, en ce qui 
concerne le recrutement de ces joueurs étrangers, si cela se fait par le club demandeur ou bien 
par l’intermédiaire d’agents recruteurs ?  

Mr Callichurn: Le club demandeur.  

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Quirin! 

 

 

63 

INDIAN OCEAN ISLAND GAMES 2019 – MAURITIUS HOSTING 

(No.  B/303)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the preparations for the holding 
of the Indian Ocean Island Games in Mauritius in 2019, he will state where matters stand.     

Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that the two-pronged 
approach is being adopted with regard to the preparation for the holding of the Indian Ocean 
Island Games in Mauritius in 2019. 

On  the  one  hand,  an  organising committee  (Comité  d'Organisation des  Jeux  des 
Iles (COJI) which has been set up and duly registered with the Registrar of Association will 
be  responsible  for  the  overall  organisation  of  the  games.  12  subcommittees  have  been 
appointed to assist the COJI in its tasks.  

On  the  other  hand,  a  Comité  de  Suivi  comprising  representatives  of  the  Mauritius 
Olympic Committee, Club Maurice, Trust Fund for Excellence in Sports, the Sports Medical 
Unit as well as senior officials of my Ministry has also been set up. This Committee will be 
responsible to monitor closely the preparation of athletes of different sports. 

Both COJI and the Comité de Suivi as well as the different subcommittees are already 
working  in  full  swing  in  close  collaboration  with  all  stakeholders,  including  the  National 
Sports Federation concerned. 

Mr  Quirin:  Madame  la  présidente,  vu  l’état  déplorable  dans  lequel  se  trouve  bon 
nombre d’infrastructures sportives dans l’ile, de ce fait le ministre peut-il nous dire quels sont 
ses  projets  en  terme  de  rénovation  d’infrastructures  existantes  mais  aussi  en  terme  de 
nouvelles infrastructures pour les jeux de 2019 ? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Le Comité de Suivi et le COJI sont en train de faire une évaluation 
de toutes les infrastructures afin de voir que tout soit aux normes au niveau international pour 
qu’on  puisse  accueillir  les  jeux.    Concernant  des  nouveaux  projets,  le  Comité  de  Suivi 
soumettra son rapport bientôt.   

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhuboo! 

Mr  Jhuboo:  Merci  Madame.  Les  jeux  des  îles  est  un  moment  privilégié  pour  les 
peuples  de  l’Océan  Indien  mais  aussi  un  grand  évènement  sportif.  On  pourrait  savoir  du 
ministre pourquoi une discipline, le tennis en l’occurrence, qui a été introduite en 1979, n’a 

 

64 

pas été retenue par le Comité Olympique ? Est ce qu’on est en train d’assister à un règlement 
de compte entre la Fédération et le Comité Olympique ? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:  Non,  en  fin  de  compte  c’est  le  CIJ  qui  prend  la  liste  des 
disciplines. Ils ont arrêté une liste de disciplines mais tout n’est pas encore définitif, il y a une 
représentation de la Fédération du tennis. Si c’est le cas le CIJ va l’étudier, et pourquoi pas ? 

Mr  Quirin:  Madame  la  présidente,  si  j’ai  bien  compris  la  réponse  de  l’honorable 
ministre des Sports, la liste des disciplines qui seront au programme pour les jeux de 2019, 
n’est pas finalisée encore. Donc, il est bon de savoir - d’après mes informations - que le choix 
des disciplines revient au pays organisateur, c’est-à-dire, à l’État, au gouvernement. C’est le 
ministère des Sports qui choisit les disciplines à être programmées pour les jeux. Donc, je 
demanderai à l’honorable ministre de prendre en considération le fait que le handball est une 
discipline  pratiquée  par  bon  nombre  de  jeunes  et  de  s’assurer  que  le  handball  figure  au 
programme des jeux. 

Mr Sawmynaden: Madame la présidente, c’est le CIJ, en fin de compte, qui organise 
les  jeux  et  qui  met  toutes  les  réglementations  en  place.  De  toute  façon,  la  liste  n’est  pas 
encore définitive; il y a des représentations de tous les pays pour inclure une discipline et ce 
n’est pas encore final. On attend. 

Mr Bhagwan:  Can I know from the hon. Minister whether a new Village des Jeux va 
être construite avec les hébergements et tous les accessoires entourant les Villages des Jeux? 

Mr Sawmynaden: Actually, we have many different options regarding les Villages 
des Jeux.  On veut avoir des Villages des Jeux vraiment de bon standard pour les athlètes 
surtout que ce sera le 10ème Jeux des Iles.  Il y a plusieurs propositions. Je suis en train de voir 
avec  les  ministères  des    infrastructures  publiques,  des  terres  et  de  la  good  governance  for 
Heritage City. Il y a d’autres propositions encore qui ont été amenées devant le COJI. On est 
en  train  de  faire  une  étude  et  de  là  quand  j’aurai  une    décision  finale,  j’informerai  la 
Chambre. 

MAURITIUS SPORTS COUNCIL – CLIPS & LOGOS - CONTRACT 

(No.  B/304)  Mr  F.  Quirin  (Fourth  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière) 
asked the Minister of Youth and Sports whether, in regard to the Mauritius Sports Council, he 
will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  therefrom,  information  as  to  if  it  has  awarded  a 
contract to one Mr N. K. for the production of clips and for the vectorisation and animation of 
logos for the National Sports Award held in January 2016 and, if so, give details thereof. 

65 

 
Mr Sawmynaden: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Mauritius Sports Council 
that the contract for the production of clips for vectorisation and animation of logos for the 
National Sports Award held in January 2016 was awarded to ANK Video Production. 

Regarding  the  second  part  of  the  question,  I  wish  to  inform the  House that,  at  this 
stage,  I  cannot  give  any  detail  on  the  award  of  the  contract  as  the  matter  is  subject  to  an 
inquiry by the ICAC. 

Mr Quirin: Madame la présidente, est-ce que l’honorable ministre est en train de dire 
qu’il ne peut pas informer la Chambre s’il y a eu un exercice d’appel d’offres avant que le 
contrat soit alloué à Monsieur N. K.? 

Mr Sawmynaden: As I mentioned, there is an inquiry by ICAC and I won’t give any 

further comment on that. 

Mr Bhagwan:  Can the hon. Minister inform the House and also the country whether 
his  Adviser  on  public  relation  matters,  who  is  a  member  of  the  Sports  Council,  has  been 
involved in that particular case and subject to inquiry by ICAC? 

Mr Sawmynaden:  He is a member of the Board, but I do not know whether there is 

any inquiry or he has been involved in any case like that. 

Mr  Uteem:    Has  the  Mauritius  Sports  Council  conducted  an  inquiry  to  find  out 
whether there has been any maldonne in this case and taken any action against anyone who 
may be involved? 

Mr  Sawmynaden:    At  the  moment,  ICAC  is  inquiring.    So,  we  will  wait  for  the 

inquiry from ICAC. 

Mr Quirin:  Madame la présidente, l’honorable ministre peut-il nous dire s’il avait 
demandé  à  Monsieur  N.  K.  d’étouffer  cette  affaire  alors  que  ce  dernier  était  venu  le 
rencontrer  pour  dénoncer  son  PRO  pour  tentative  de  corruption ?  Est-ce  que  l’honorable 
ministre peut nous répondre ? 

Mr Sawmynaden: I will say I will not comment further.  There is an inquiry going 

on. 

Mr  Bhagwan:    Madam  Speaker,  last  time,  I  asked  a  question,  PQ  B/911,  on  17 
November 2015 concerning this Adviser, Mr R. M.  I asked the Minister whether that person 
was  on  bail;  he  had  a  Police  case:  assault  against  the  Police.    The  Minister  informed  the 
House – 

 
“The information is wrong.  That person is not on bail.” 

66 

I can state to the House that the hon. Minister misguided the House.  That person is on bail.  
The case is actually being taken at Court.  So, misleading the House on such an important 
matter is very, very serious.   I will come later on with a Motion as stated in the Standing 
Orders.    Can  the  hon.  Minister,  at  least,  through  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  see  that  that 
person be sacked as he is not fit to be an Adviser in Government? 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Bhagwan,  can  I  understand  that  you  are  coming  with  a 

Motion soon on this issue? 

Mr Bhagwan: I am coming with a Motion. I am asking whether he is still an Adviser, 

that habitual criminal. 

Madam Speaker: Okay. 

Mr Sawmynaden: At the moment, he is still in post and his contract is expiring in ten 

days’ time. 

Mr Uteem:  The hon. Minister says that ICAC is conducting an inquiry.  There has 
been a recording that has circulated on the website all over the place which purports to have a 
conversation,  which  purports  to  involve  the  hon.  Minister.  May  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister 
whether he has been interrogated in connection with this case, and if he has not, whether he is 
prepared to go and help and collaborate with the Police and ICAC fully on this matter? 

Mr Sawmynaden: As I mentioned, there is an inquiry being carried out.  If tomorrow 

they call me, I will answer. 

Madam Speaker:  Last question, hon. Bhagwan! 

Mr  Bhagwan:  If  I  heard  the  hon.  Minister  correctly,  he  stated  that  his  contract  is 
being terminated in some weeks.  Can he inform the House whether that person is still active 
as a member of the Mauritius Sports Council, whether he is acting within the Ministry and 
have access to files? 

Mr Sawmynaden: As I told you, he is still a member of the Mauritius Sports Council 

and so far, until his contract is expired, I cannot answer any question. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Mohamed:  I  will  ask  one  question  to  the  hon.  Minister.    From  what  hon. 
Bhagwan has said, there was this issue about, at one point in time, the hon. Minister saying 

 

67 

that his Adviser was not on bail.  If I put the question again and that is the question that I am 
putting:  does  the  hon.  Minister  want  to  correct  his  initial  answer  or  does  he  maintain  his 
initial answer? 

Mr Sawmynaden: This is the information that I had at this time.  Until now, I cannot 

say whether he is on bail or not. 

PORT - DUBAI PORTS WORLD - CONTRACT 

(No.  B/305)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central)  asked 
the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External 
Communications whether, in regard to the proposed signature of a contract with Dubai Ports 
World for port operations, he will state where matters stand. 

(Vide reply to PNQ) 

PAS GÉOMÉTRIQUES - LEASE 

(No.  B/306)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in regard 
to Pas Géométriques, he will state, since January 2015 to date, the number of – 

(a) 

(b) 

new leases thereof that have been awarded, and  

existing leases that have been renewed, indicating in respect of the above, in 
each case, the - 

(i) 

(ii) 

name of the lessee thereof;  

location thereof, and  

(iii) 

extent and value thereof. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun):  
Madam  Speaker,  since  January  2015  till  date,  81  new  leases  have  been  approved  and 
awarded. During this same period, 68 existing leases have been renewed. 

With respect to parts (a) and (b) (i), (ii) & (iii), I am tabling a copy of the list of the 81 
new  leases  and  68  existing  leases  that  have  been  renewed,  together  with  the  name  of  the 
lessee, the location, the extent and the rental. 

The House will note that I have also included in the list the purpose and period of the 

lease. 

68 

 
Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, may I know from the hon. Vice-Prime Minister what is 
the  procedure  and  time  period  for  the  renewal  of  lease  and  the  application  of  new  lease?  
How are these treated at the level of his Ministry and what is the time frame for doing that? 

Mr Soodhun:  The procedure has been well set up on the website of the Ministry and 
it  is  for  the  public  to  go  and  find  out  this.    If  the  hon.  Member  comes  with  a  substantive 
question, I am ready to give all the information. 

Mr Jhugroo: As the hon. Vice-Prime Minister is well aware, we had cases in the past 

at the NHDC, where minors have acquired directly or indirectly immovable properties … 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Jhugroo, please! 

Hon. Jhugroo!   

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Jhugroo:  Wait, I am coming with the question. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Jhugroo, please!  I am just reminding you that this question 

is in regard to Pas Géométriques.  Your question will relate to Pas Géométriques. 

Mr Jhugroo:   As  you know, we had minors before who acquired NHDC in State 
land.  So, can the hon. Vice-Prime Minister assure the House that in the case of State land, no 
lease has been granted or transferred to minors, and if this is so, can he give details thereon? 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Soodhun:  Concerning the NHDC, I will ask the hon. Member to come with a 
substantive question, whereas for the State land, Madam Speaker, I am given to understand 
that under the existing legislation, minors are not eligible to hold a lease. However, I have 
been informed of a case where a company which is a Trustee of a Trust, has acquired the 
leasehold  rights  in  a  campement  site  lease  wherein  all  the  beneficiaries  of  the  Trust  are 
minors. The Trustee… 

(Interruptions) 

Let me finish! The Trustee Company has a sole shareholder who is also the protector of the 
Trust. The campement site lease, which is of an extent of 634 square metres at Quatre Coco 

 

69 

‘pieds dans l’eau’, has been acquired at the price of Rs14 m. in February 2013. I am informed 
that the sole shareholder of this company is one, the person named Muhammad Reza Cassam 
Uteem and the minors are the children of Reza Uteem and their children to be. In the light… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Soodhun! Please ... 

(Interruptions) 

Order please! Order! Hon. Soodhun, just please refrain from giving names.  Usually we give 
the initials.  

Hon. Soodhun, please! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Refrain from giving names, please give the initials. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Soodhun: The case is like this in the question and let me inform: in the light of 
the  various  apparent  breaches  of  the  laws  and  established  procedures  in  this  matter,  I  am 
proposing to refer the case to the Good Governance for complete review. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: I am really sorry ... 

Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Order please, I am on my feet! Order! Hon. Leader of the Opposition I heard you saying that 
zot aranzer avec the Speaker. 

Did you mention the Speaker? 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

But did you say that they have aranzer avec le Speaker?  Because I don’t want to be a party 
to this… 

 

This is … 

70 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

I am asking you whether you said it. You have to tell me whether you said it or not.  

I want to know from you whether … 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

I am asking you because it is very dangerous if you say that zot ine aranzer. That is why I am 
asking you whether you said it. If you say that you did not mingle the Speaker… 

Hon. Leader of the Opposition … 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Leader of the Opposition you have mine now …. 

(Interruptions) 

Wait, I have said several times that you should mind your tone when you talk to me. Don’t 
get excited when you talk to me. 

(Interruptions) 

Don’t get excited when you talk to me. I will not accept that. 

(Interruptions) 

Are you challenging my authority, hon. Leader of the Opposition? 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Shakeel Mohamed, I am on my feet! Hon. Shakeel Mohamed I am on my feet! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Shakeel Mohamed, I have said that when I am on my feet the House has to be silent. I 
have said that several times. 

Hon. Ameer Meea! 

(Interruptions) 

71 

 
Mr  Ameer  Meea:  Can  I  ask  the  hon.  Minister  what  is  the  procedure  for  a  Pas 
Géométriques  to  be  changed  from  residential  to  industrial  lease.  What  is  the  procedure  at 
your Ministry because we are coming back with something like this? 

Mr Soodhun: You have to go and apply and when you apply there is a Committee 

and there is… 

You go and you have it. 

 (Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order please! 

Order I said. 

Order, I am on my feet! 

Should I leave you!  

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Should I leave you to decide and do cross-talking … 

(Interruptions) 

I  said order! Now, the hon. Member has  asked  his question; the hon. Minister has replied 
already. Hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  I  would  like  to  know  how  come  on  06 

February  2015, after the election, one Société Mohamed Umeeir Ibne Showkut whose… 

(Interruptions) 

...  actionnaire is your son.  

Mr Soodhun: My son. 

Mr Uteem: On 06 February 2015, he applies for a new industrial lease, 60 years. Not 
even four months later, in May 2015 this is approved. So, I want to know what influence has 
the hon. Minister done in facilitating this. 

72 

 
Mr Soodhun: Madam Speaker, the fact that I am Minister and I am going to give all 
about  the  Compagnie  de  Culture  de  Tabac  Ltée  and  the  Société  Mohamed  Umeeir  Ibne 
Showkut. On 18 November 2008, the company Culture de Tabac Ltée signed a campement 
site lease agreement for the period of 31.10.2008 to 30.10.2068 and in consideration to an 
annual of Rs193,068 and a premium amounting to Rs5,800,001 m.  

On 16.12.2010, the Société Culture de Tabac Ltée applied for the excision of 1,782 
square metres in favour of Société Mohamed Umeeir Ibne Showkut. On 10 February 2011, 
when I was not Minister at all, the excision was approved and the Société was informed that 
subject to the submission of a notarial deed witnessing the excision, a 60-year industrial lease 
will be drawn in favour of Société Mohamed Umeeir Ibne Showkut.  

On  15  February  2011,  the  letter  of  intent  was  issued  by  the  Ministry  -  I  was  not 
Minister - to the effect that an industrial lease was of period of 60 years will be granted to the 
company upon the submission of a notarial deed. I give guarantee, if anybody has any proof, 
to go to Central CID, to go to ICAC; if I, as a Minister of Housing, have intervened on that. I 
accept to pay the price and I am going to resign. I give you my guarantee, if anybody can 
prove that I have been involved I am going to resign. I give my word and you go and tell 
that… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Soodhun! Calm down! 

Calm down! 

Don’t get excited. Order please! 

Order, order! 

Can we have some order in the House! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

73 

Please, I am appealing to both sides of the House not to get excited and not to get carried 
away by the debates.  

We have to be careful in what we say and there is an orderly way of proceeding.  

 (Interruptions) 

Order, I have said! Next question! Hon. Uteem! 

(Interruptions) 

TRAINING AND EMPLOYMENT OF DISABLED PERSONS BOARD - TRAINING 

COURSES 

(No.  B/307)  Mr  R.  Uteem  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  South  &  Port  Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions 
whether, in regard to the Training and Employment of Disabled Persons Board, she will, for 
the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  therefrom,  information  as  to  the  type  of  training  courses 
offered to the disabled persons, indicating the number of – 

(a)  

(b)  

disabled persons enrolled therefor, and  

trainers thereof, indicating their respective qualifications. 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Madam  Speaker,  the  Training  and  Employment  of 
Disabled Persons Board is set up under the Training and Employment of Disabled Persons 
Act 1996.  

Under section 4 of the Act, the functions of the Training and Employment of Disabled 
Persons Board include the operation and promotion of schemes and projects for the training 
and employment of persons with disabilities.  

Accordingly,  a  number  of  training  courses  are  dispensed  by  the  Training  and 
Employment  of  Disabled  Persons  Board  or  by  other  institutions  in  collaboration  with  the 
Board. From January 2015 to date, a total of 158 persons with disabilities have been or are 
being  offered  training  in  courses  such  as  Basic  IT,  CV Writing,  Housekeeping  and  Henna 
Application dispensed by the TEDPB in collaboration with other institutions.  

As  regards  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that,  for  example,  for  2015,  20 
persons with disabilities have been trained in office and communication skills, 37 in Basic IT 
Skills, 1 in Housekeeping, 16 in CV Writing,  Interview and Confidence Building and 5 in 
Henna  Applications.  In  addition,  20  persons  have  started  a  course  in  Basic  Literacy  and 

 

74 

Numeracy  in  October  2015  to  end  in  June  2016.  27  new  trainees  have  also  started  their 
course  in  Basic  IT  Skills.  Over  and  above  these  training  courses,  the  Training  and 
Employment of Disabled Persons Board is, itself, presently providing training courses to 18 
persons with disabilities at its Centre in Calebasse and 14 at its Centre in Rose Belle.   

With a view to enabling persons with disabilities to acquire working experience and 
becoming employable, the Training and Employment of Disabled Persons Board also funds 
and operates a Skill Government Programme. There  are 14 persons with disabilities under 
this  programme.    In  March  this  year,  a  new  Skills  Development  Programme  has  been 
introduced  by  the  TEDPB  whereby  the  latter  and  the  receiving  institution  share  the  cost. 
Under this programme, four persons with disabilities have started on-the-job training which is 
being  provided  in  collaboration  with  BDO  International  Financial  Services  and  the  Loïs 
Lagesse Trust Fund.  

As regards part (b) of the question, I am tabling the information. 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, answering to PQ No. B/353 last year, the hon. Minister 
stated that the number of persons with disabilities registered with the Board is 2,436 and now 
we hear that there  is between 20 to 27 people who are trained by the Board. So, may I know 
from the hon. Minister what is being done to encourage people with disabilities to be trained 
so that they can get an employment more easily? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: We are providing them with structured training and, at the 
same  time,  we  have  set  up  a  Committee  on  employers  which  has  launched  a  massive 
sensitisation  campaign.  The  Committee  meets  non-compliant  employers  to  give  them  an 
insight of the Training and Employment of Disabled Persons Act and, at the same time, see to 
it that the quota of 3% is being respected. So, we are also working towards urging employers 
to provide employment to them. 

Mr Uteem: The hon. Minister mentioned that she is tabling the information (b) about 
the trainers, but is she aware that many of the trainers who are actually providing training at 
the  Training  and  Employment  of  Disabled  Persons  Board  today  do  not  have  sufficient 
qualification,  they  are  not  properly  trained  and  the  courses  that  are  being  run  are  totally 
mismatched with the market demand.  

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  The  courses  dispensed  at  TEDPB  do  not  warrant  the 
recruitment of degree holders because the courses which are being dispensed are in jewellery, 

 

75 

in embroidery, in henna applications. If the trainees need high-level traineeships, then they 
are sent to appropriate institutions. 

Mr Uteem: The hon. Minister is aware probably that there is a special training called 
Skills  Development  Training  Programme  that  is  run  by  the  Training  and  Employment  of 
Disabled Persons Board and this training provides for financial assistance to the attendees. 
So, may  I know  from the hon. Minister what are the criteria  for  eligibility into that Skills 
Development Training Programme? 

Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo:  Well,  as  rightly  said,  the  trainees  are  under  the  Skills 
Development Programme. They are being paid a stipend of Rs6,000. There was no criteria 
before.  Now we have same criteria for eligibility such as age limit, proof of literacy, able and 
willing to work, etc. 

Well, they will have to be registered with the TEDPB. 

(Interruptions) 

Dr.  Joomaye:  Madam  Speaker,  as  the  hon.  Minister  is  surely  well  aware  that  the 
number of persons with very severe impaired vision is on an increase due to diabetes, I would 
like to know how many braille trainers are employed currently by the Ministry or is it only 
trainers from the Loïs Lagesse Trust Fund who are giving this service? 

Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Well, the Ministry of Social Security, National Solidarity 
and  Reform  Institutions  does  not  employ  people.  People  with  impaired  vision  are  being 
trained at the TEDPB by trainers from the Loïs Lagesse Trust Fund. 

Madam Speaker: The Table has been advised that PQ Nos. B/332 and B/337 have 

been withdrawn! Next question, hon. Jhugroo! 

LIGHT RAIL TRANSIT SYSTEM - COST BENEFIT ANALYSIS 

(No. B/308) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to 
the  Light  Rail  Transit  System  Project,  he  will  state  if  the  decision  of  Government  not  to 
proceed with the implementation thereof for economic reasons was based on a long term cost 
benefit analysis and, if so, indicate when same was carried out and by whom. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

 
LIGHT RAIL TRANSIT SYSTEM PROJECT - LAND EARMARKED 

76 

(No. B/309) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central) asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to 
the Light Rail Transit System Project, he will state if a Committee has been set up to look 
into the aspect of the land earmarked therefor and, if so, indicate - 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

when the said Committee was set up;  

 the Chairperson thereof, and  

 the terms of reference thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

EBENE CYBER CITY – BUILDINGS - PURCHASE 

(No. B/310) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation whether, in regard to the 
purchase  of  buildings  by  Government  in  the  Business  Parks  of  Mauritius  Limited  in  the 
Ebene Cyber City, since July 2005 to date, he will state the number and respective names 
thereof, indicating in each case - 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

the extent of space available thereat;  

the purchase price thereof; 

the names of the previous owners thereof, and  

if the Valuation Office had carried out a prior assessment of the said building 
and, if so, table copy of the valuation report in relation thereto. 

Mr Sinatambou: Madam Speaker, since July 2005 to date, Government, as such, has 

purchased no building in the Ebene Cyber City.  

However,  during  that  period,  three  Government  or  Government  controlled  agencies 
have purchased four buildings in all. Two buildings were purchased by the National Pension 
Fund, one by the Financial Services Commission and one by SICOM. 

As  regards  parts  (a),  (b)  and  (c)  of  the  question,  with  your  permission,  I  shall  be 

tabling the relevant information with respect to these four buildings.  

Moreover, I am informed by the Business Parks of Mauritius Ltd that two out of ten 
floors in a building, on a plot of land of one acre, have been sold to the Human Resource 

 

77 

Development Council  (HRDC) by the previous owner, namely, Société Civile Immobilière 
D’attribution Nundun Gopee Tower.  

With regard to part (d) of the question, I am informed that the services of a private 
professional  valuer  were  retained  for  the  purchase  of  the  two  buildings  by  the  National 
Pension Fund. Thereafter, the Valuation Department was consulted regarding the rental to be 
claimed by the National Pension Fund for those two buildings.  

With regard to the building purchased by the  Financial Services Commission,  I am 
informed  that  a  representative  of  the  Valuation  Department  formed  part  of  the  Evaluation 
Committee  which  evaluated  the  bids  that  were  received  through  the  Central  Procurement 
Board.  

As  regards  the  building  purchased  by  SICOM,  I  am  informed  that  the  company 

appoints its own consultant for property projects. 

BATELAGE ROAD, SOUILLAC - MUDSLIDES 

(No.  B/311)  Mr  B.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard 
to Batelage Road, in Souillac, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Road 
Development Authority, information as to where matters stand as to the works being carried 
out to prevent the recurrence of mudslides thereat. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No comments! 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun): 
Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Road Development Authority (RDA) that following a 
localised  slope  failure  that  occurred  at  Batelage,  Souillac,  in  the  early  morning  of  23 
December 2015, the Land Management Unit (LMU) of the Ministry of Public Infrastructure 
and  Land  Transport,  in  collaboration  with  the  Japan  International  Corporation  Agency   
(JICA) submitted a preliminary plan for counter measures in respect of slope stabilisation.  

Madam  Speaker,  furthermore  the  LMU  and  experts  from  JICA  together  with  a 
delegation from Korean Expressway Cooperation (KEC), have studied the problem and have 
recommended  a  detailed  geo-technical  investigation  of  the  concerned  segment  of  the  road 
prior to proposing any permanent solution. In this connection, the RDA is currently preparing 

 

78 

the  Request  For  Proposal  (RFP)  for  the  enlistment  of  specialised  contractors  for  the  geo-
technical investigation which is expected to be launched in mid May 2016. 

GRAND BOIS - MEDICLINIC 

(No.  B/312)  Mr  B.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to Grand Bois, 
he will state if his Ministry proposes to construct a mediclinic thereat and, if so, when and, if 
not, why not. 

Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, the answer is no.  

With regard to the second part of the question, I will request the hon. Member to refer 

to the reply I made to PQ No. 928 on 17 November 2015. 

Dr. Joomaye: Madam Speaker. I would like to appeal to the hon. Minister of Health 
and Quality of Life to reconsider his decision because there is real need in that region for a 
mediclinic. It is highly densely populated, especially in the period of Maha Shivaratri when 
the  pilgrims  walk  down  from  Grand  Bassin,  the  first  Medical  Centre  is  the  Rose  Belle 
Hospital. So, there is real need for a mediclinic in Grand Bois. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Ramano! 

Mr Gayan: Can I reply to this question? Well, Madam Speaker, I am afraid that it 
will not be possible to accede to the request of the hon. Member because for mediclinics, if I 
go according to the established norms, the normal annual attendance should be over 100,000 
whereas at the place where we are talking about the annual attendance is 36,000. So, it does 
not meet the norms that are established. 

BROWN SEQUARD HOSPITAL – SYNTHETIC DRUG ADDICTS 

(No.  B/313)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 
asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the Brown Sequard 
Hospital,  he  will  state  the  number  of  patients  who  are  presently  admitted  thereto  and 
undergoing treatment following consumption of/addiction to synthetic drugs, indicating the – 

respective age thereof, and  
number of staff attending thereto. 

(a) 
(b) 
Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, I am informed that there is no patient at present who is 
admitted and undergoing treatment at the Brown Sequard Hospital following consumption or 
addiction to synthetic drugs. 

 
Mr Ramano: Est-ce que je peux savoir, sur un month-to-month basis, le nombre de 

79 

patients qui sont admis là-bas pour ces cas de drogue? 

Mr Gayan:  I have the annual number for 2015, Madam Speaker.  It is 49 at the BSH 

and about 70 in the other regional hospitals. 

Mr  Ramano:  Madame  la  présidente,  est-ce  que  je  peux  savoir  du  l’honorable 

ministre l’âge des patients qui sont admis pour des cas de synthetic drugs? 

Mr Gayan:  Madam Speaker, for the year 2015, it would appear that the age group 
for 18 years was 18; age group 18 to 30 was 19; 30 to 40 was 8, and over 40 was 3.  The 
numbers that I have given are with regard to the males.  For the females, it was hardly any; 
one or two.  

Mr Ramano: Madame la présidente, valeur du jour, il n’existe aucune infrastructure 
séparée en ce qui concerne les patients qui sont traités pour les cas de synthetic drugs.  Ils 
sont internés ensemble avec ceux qui sont déjà là-bas pour les troubles mentaux. Est-ce qu’il 
y a cette possibilité de séparer complètement ces deux types de patients ? 

Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, I think that the very complex cases are admitted to the 

BSH, but otherwise they go to the regional hospitals. 

PAILLES - BONNEFIN ROAD - BUS SERVICE 

(No. B/314) Mr P. Armance (First Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to  Bonnefin 
Road,  in  Pailles,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the House,  obtain  from  the National  Transport 
Authority, information as to if consideration will be given for the advisability of providing a 
new bus route to service same. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun): 
Madam Speaker, I am informed that, on 10 December 2012, a request was received at the 
National  Transport  Authority  from  the  residents  of  Bonnefin  Road,  Pailles,  for  a  new  bus 
route.    The  request  was  not  entertained  on  safety  grounds,  on  the  advice  of  the  Traffic 
Management and Road Safety Unit as follows - 

(i) 

Buses would not have to accede to Bonnefin Road from the Motorway 1.  The 
junction of Bonnefin Road with the Motorway is of very poor geometry and 
buses would encounter difficulties to manoeuvre both when entering Bonnefin 
Road as well as when emerging from it on the Motorway. 

80 

 
(ii)  When entering the junction of the Bonnefin Road from the Motorway, buses 
would have to encroach completely on the opposite lane of traffic on Bonnefin 
Road.    This  might  create  hazardous  situations  as  buses  would  occupy  the 
opposite  lane  and  would  conflict  with  vehicles  coming  in  the  opposite 
direction along the road. 

(iii)  Buses would not be able to enter Bonnefin Road in the event that vehicles are 
waiting at the junction to emerge on the Motorway, as they would not have 
sufficient  space  to  manoeuvre.    This  would  require  buses  to  wait  on  the 
Motorway for the junction to be cleared, and this situation could give rise to 
serious traffic and safety problems. 

Mr Armance: Will the hon. Vice-Prime Minister consider extending the existing bus 
route from Guibies through DWC lane to serve the Bonnefin region?  It is on the opposite 
side of Bonnefin Road. 

Mr Soodhun:  I am going to convey the request to the substantive Minister. 

MUNICIPAL COUNCIL OF PORT LOUIS - PLAYGROUNDS & FOOTBALL 

PITCHES - RENOVATION 

(No. B/315) Mr P. Armance (First Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the Minister of Local Government whether, in regard to the children playgrounds and football 
pitches, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Municipal Council of Port Louis 
– 

(a) 

(b) 

a list thereof which are vested in the said Council, indicating if any renovation 
project is being envisaged in respect thereof, and  
information as to if the maintenance and cleaning thereof are carried out at 
regular intervals. 

Dr.  Husnoo:  Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question,  I  shall,  with 
your permission, arrange for the list of children playgrounds and football pitches, which are 
vested in the Municipal Council of Port Louis, to be placed in the Library of the National 
Assembly. 

 
I am further informed that a project for the renovation and upgrading, as well as fixing 
of new children’s play equipment in the children’s playgrounds mentioned in the list, which 
is being placed in the Library of the National Assembly, is under way.  Tenders have already 

 

81 

been launched for same and contracts are being signed.  The renovation works, as well as 
fixing of new equipment, will start shortly. 

As regards part (b) of the question, I am informed that maintenance works are carried 

 
out as and when required, whereas cleaning works are carried out regularly. 

Mr Armance: I have been told that several children’s playgrounds in the constituency 
have no owners.  Unfortunately, they are in a very bad condition and are neither under the 
maintenance  nor  the  management  of  the  Municipality.    Will  the  hon.  Minister  consider 
looking into this? 

Dr. Husnoo: The work is being done.  We are going to submit the list and the work, 

as you see, is being done.   

Mr Ameer Meea: In relation to the renovation project which is being envisaged, is 

the Stade Mamade Elahee, which is found in Cité Martial, Port Louis, also on the list? 

Dr. Husnoo: With regard to the Mamade Elahee Stadium, it is being taken care by 

NDU. 

Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, in relation to children’s playground in Vallée Pitot, is 
the  hon.  Minister  aware  that,  for  now  one  month,  the  Police  have  put  padlock  in  the 
children’s  playground?    If  he  is  not  aware,  can  he  look  into  the  matter  and  talk  to  the 
Municipal Council of Port Louis so that same can be re-opened and children can start using 
the playground again? 

Dr. Husnoo: Yes, Madam Speaker, I will look into that. 

PROFESSIONAL LAND SURVEYOR’S COUNCIL – SETTING UP 

(No.  B/316)  Mr  K.  Ramano  (Third  Member  for  Belle  Rose  &  Quatre  Bornes) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands whether, in regard to the land 
surveyors,  he  will  state  if  his  Ministry  is  proposing  to  set  up  a  Land  Surveyor’s  Council 
therefor and, if so, when. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun): 
Madam Speaker, my Ministry will set up a Professional Land Surveyor’s Council under the 
Professional  Land  Surveyor’s  Council  Act  2014,  which  caters  for  the  regulation  of  the 
profession of Land Surveyors. 

82 

 
Section 52 of the Act makes provision for the Act to come into operation on a date to 
be  fixed  by  Proclamation  or  on  different  dates  for  the  coming  into  operation  of  different 
sections of the Act. 

The  Professional  Land  Surveyor’s  Council  will  act  as  a  mechanism  to  ensure  that 
there is a more professional approach in the handling of land issues by Land Surveyors, in 
accordance  with  the  Cadastral  Survey  Act  2011.  This  Act  will  provide  for  standards  and 
procedures to carry out land survey in the context of the island-wide cadastre. 

In order to prevent malpractices in the use of Parcel Identification Number in survey 
reports and memoranda of survey, I have approved, early this year, that other sections of the 
Cadastral Survey Act 2011 be proclaimed together with the preparation of new Regulations, 
as a result of which new work processes will be developed. 

Thereafter, the Professional Land Surveyor’s Council will be set up to regulate and 
control  the  profession,  ensuring  that  land  surveys  are  carried  out  in  accordance  with  the 
provisions  of  the  Cadastral  Survey  Act  and  Regulations  and  promote  advancement  in  the 
field of land surveying, while at the same time preventing fraudulent land transaction. 

A  team  has  been  constituted  to  work  out  all  implications  involved  for  the  eventual 
proclamation of the relevant sections of the Professional Land Surveyor’s Council Act, which 
will be proclaimed after consultation with the State Law Office. 

It is expected that the Regulations establishing the Council will be finalised by the end 

of this year. 

Mr Ramano: Madame la présidente, est-ce que je peux connaître la composition de 

ce comité qui a été constitué? 

Mr Soodhun: I don’t have it with me.  The hon. Member can come with a substantive 

question.  It is not yet set up. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Osman Mahomed! 

Mr  Mahomed:  Would  the  hon.  Vice-Prime  Minister  be  able  to  enlighten  us  about 
who is currently certifying land surveyors?  Because my understanding is that, as the Council 
is supposed to be set up, land surveyors are no longer required to be sworn land surveyors, as 
previously required by the Land Surveyors Act. 

Mr Soodhun: There has been a last question raised by hon. Ramano. We are looking 

at it because it has been a complete mess. We are coming with this anyway. 

 
Mr Ganoo: Can the hon. Minister inform the House whether the Council will have 

83 

jurisdiction on Government Land Surveyors also? 

Mr Soodhun: Yes. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

CEB - METER READERS – RECRUITMENT 

(No.  B/317)  Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis East) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, 
in regard to the Meter Readers, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Central 
Electricity Board, information as to the number thereof recruited district-wise since January 
2016 to date, indicating the procedure followed for the recruitment thereof. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  by  the  CEB  that  there  has  been  no 
recruitment of Meter Readers since January 2016. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Shakeel Mohamed! Do you have got another 

question on this question? 

Mr Mohamed: Well, I’ll come with a substantive question for the other month then. 

Madam Speaker: Okay! So, next question, then! 

Mr Mohamed: If the hon. Vice-Prime Minister wishes, if he has other recruitments 

from January 2016 onwards, I will be very grateful. 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  I  have  recruitments,  because  I  foresaw  that  it  was  probably  a 

mistake on the hon. Member’s part. So, I have brought from 2001 to 2015…. 

I shall just table it and then you will have a look at it. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Mohamed:  With  regard  to  recruitment  exercise  that  was  carried  out  in  2015, 
maybe it was a mistake; instead of ‘16’, it should have read ‘15’. Could the hon. Vice-Prime 
Minister  confirm  whether  66  people  were  recruited  as  Meter  Readers  by  the  Central 
Electricity Board in 2015? 

84 

 
Mr Collendavelloo: Of course, it does not arise out of the question. So, I need my 
paper.  For  2015,  it’s  71.  I  will  give  the  hon.  Member  the  districts.  This  is  what  he  is 
interested in. 

Black River 

Flacq 

Grand Port 

Moka 

Pamplemousses 

Plaines Wilhems 

Port Louis 

Rivière du Rempart 

Savanne 

Rodrigues 

: 

: 

: 

: 

: 

: 

: 

: 

: 

: 

0 

0 

2 

2 

5 

43 

6 

4 

4 

5 

Total 

 

71 

Let’s just say that, over the years, Plaines Wilhems is the majority from which Meter 
Readers are recruited. Black River, we see almost nil, except in one or two years. There is a 
great disparity district by district. I have asked CEB now to see what can be done about it, but 
I’ll put in the list so that the hon. Member can compare. I agree that there is something to be 
done about it. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

HOSPITALS – HEALTH CARE ASSISTANTS – RECRUITMENT 

(No.  B/318)  Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis East) asked the Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the Health 
Care Assistants, he will state the number thereof recruited district-wise since January 2016 to 
date, indicating the procedure followed for the recruitment thereof. 

 
Mr  Gayan:  Madam  Speaker,  I  am  going  to  give  the  information  being  requested 

85 

district-wise. 

With  regard  to  the  other  part,  under  delegated  powers  of  the  Public  Service 
Commission to my Ministry, recruitment of Health Care Assistants is done firstly from in-
service officers of my Ministry and, secondly, from the list of candidates who were registered 
with the Ministry of Labour and Industrial Relations, Employment in Training. 

Madam Speaker, the procedures followed for the recruitment exercise are as follows – 

Internal recruitment 

• 

Issue of an internal circular, inviting applications from in-service officers of 
my Ministry; 
Interview of qualified candidates by a Selection Board; 
Public Service Commission is apprised of the report of Selection Board, and  
PSC makes the offer of appointment. 

• 
• 
• 
External recruitment 

• 

• 

Interview of qualified candidates from the list obtained from the Ministry of 
Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training; 
Public Service Commission is apprised of the report of the Selection Board 
and after receipt of all the clearances, the offer of appointment is made to the 
selected candidates. 

With regard to the district-wise recruitment – 

Black River 

Flacq 

 

Grand Port 

Moka   

 

 

 

 

Pamplemousses 

Plaines Wilhems 

 

 

 

 

 

(Upper & Lower) 

Port Louis 

 

Rivière du Rempart 

 

 

: 

:  

: 

: 

:  

: 

: 

: 

9 

31 

23 

23 

26 

64 

15 

29  

 

86 

Savanne 

 

 

: 

16 

Mr Mohamed: Madam Speaker, could the hon. Minister just confirm following the 
information he has given us, that with regard to the recruitment of Health Care Assistants, the 
fact that the list of those who were recruited that has been publicised in several press organs, 
how  does  he  explain  that  a  majority  of  those  who  have  been  recruited  are  as  helpers  and 
cleaners have come from two constituencies only, Constituencies No. 19 and No. 20? Is there 
a possible explanation with regard to that? 

Mr Gayan: Well, I think the hon. Member is confused. The question is raised with 
regard to Health Care Assistants and the question is with attendants or something else. It is 
not the same thing at all. 

Mr Mohamed: With regard to Health Care Assistants, could the hon. Minister tell us 

how many come from Constituencies No. 19 and No. 20? 

Mr Gayan: Well, if the hon. Member were to ask a substantive question, I’ll certainly 

give the answer. The question was only on districts. 

Mr Mohamed: Is the hon. Minister tabling the list of those for us to be able to verify 

and then come with a substantive question? 

Mr  Gayan:  Well,  I  did  not  say  I  am  going  to  table  any  list,  but  if  there  is  a 

substantive question, we will certainly consider it. 

Mr  Jhugroo:  Madam  Speaker,  can  the  hon.  Minister  consider  to  table  a  list  of  all 
those  recruited  since  July  2005  till  14  December  2014  and  the  number  recruited  from 
Constituencies No. 3 and No. 5? 

Mr Gayan: If there is a substantive question, we will certainly do that. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

CEB – LEGAL ADVISERS - APPOINTMENT 

(No.  B/319)  Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port 
Louis East) asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, 
in regard to the legal advisers whose services have been retained by the Central Electricity 
Board  since  January  2015  to  date,  he  will,  for  the  benefit  of  the  House,  obtain  from  the 
Board, information as to the – 

(a) 

mode of selection thereof, and 

87 

terms and conditions on which their services have been retained. 

 
(b) 
The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo): Madam Speaker,  I  am informed by the Central Electricity  Board that, in 
April  2015,  it  retained  the  services  of  Mr  Sheffick  Sookia,  Attorney  at  Law  and,  in  June 
2015, the services of Mr Ravindra Chetty, Senior Counsel, to be its legal advisers.  They were 
selected by the General Manager after consultation with the Chairman. 

Mr Sookia is in receipt of a monthly retainer of Rs40,000 while Mr Chetty’s retainer 

amounts to Rs34,783. 

In consideration of this retainer, the legal advisers are at hand to provide routine legal 
advice to management.  They are also debarred from acting in any matter which may conflict 
with CEB’s interests.  Over and above routine legal advice, the legal advisers are paid legal 
fees on a case to case basis. 

Mr  Mohamed:  Among  those  who  are  well-known  Attorney-at-Law  and  Barristers 
and well-respected, are there any other lawyers who are acting for the CEB, not necessary on 
a retainer, but on an ad hoc basis? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Yes, I will give the names. I understand the question is 2015 to 

date. 

Mr Mohamed: Yes. 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  Thank  you.  Between  January  2015  to  date,  there  is  a  sum  of 

Rs5,428,774 which has been paid in various amounts to Attorneys – 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

Sewraj,  
Ragavoodoo,  
Y. Bissessur,  
Jankee,  
André Robert,  
Guy Rivalland, Senior Attorney,  
Rungasamy,  
Counsel Unuth,  
Subash Lallah,  
Yousouf Mohamed, SC,  
Zakeer Mohamed,  

 

• 
• 
• 
• 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

88 

Jamsheed Peeroo,  
S. Garrim,  
S. Ramsagur,  
Riesling – I thought Riesling was an Alsatian wine, but it is Riesling Legal 
Services, 
Mr D. Basset S.C.; 
Mr Murday; 
Mr Mitilesh Lallah; 
Mr Yusuf Aboo Bakar S.C.; 
Mr Dhanjee; 
Mr Colunday; 
Mr Namdarkhan; 
Mr Jahangeer; 
Mrs Urmila Boolell; 

(Interruptions) 

There is also a sum of £75,743 which was paid to a foreign law firm. Let me just say one 
thing - I am not sure it is in order for me to disclose the amount which each of these law 
practitioners  have  received  because  of  the  Data  Protection  Act.  I  have  asked  the  Solicitor 
General for advice if there is additional information whether it is in order for me to disclose 
it. But, I am disclosing global amounts. 

Further, these counsels were not necessarily retained as from January 2015. Some of 
them were retained from years past, as we know it is the practice, they put in their bill and 
they are paid.  

On an average, I have asked CEB to compute it. Between June 2010 and December 
2014, legal fees for CEB averaged some Rs5 m. per year. So, it is roughly the same amount 
that is being paid year by year allowing for inflation. 

We must also state that counsels who are retained are normally retained on instruction 
of instructing Solicitor and not of the CEB. It is the choice of the Solicitor and they come to 
an engagement as to the amount of fees which they will claim for their case. 

Lastly, last comment, surprisingly, when we go through the amounts, it is not true that 

senior counsels claim necessarily more fees than junior counsels, when we go through it. 

(Interruptions) 

89 

 
Mr Ameer Meea: Can I ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister since January 2015, has 
there been any exercise to recruit an in-house legal adviser for the CEB, and, if yes, what has 
been the outcome up to now? 

Mr Collendavelloo: Well,  yes, that is a  completely different question.  I  have been 
asked about legal advisers, for in-house; please, come with a substantive question and I shall 
be happy to oblige. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo! 

Mr Jhugroo: Can the hon. Vice-Prime Minister inform the House if he can table - if 
he has not got the answer now - who are the legal advisers who have been recruited since July 
2005 until December 2014? What were the procedures for recruitment and, if there have also 
been ad hoc, as mentioned by my hon. friend, who are those legal advisers who have been 
recruited ad hoc and what amount has been paid to each of them? Table it! 

Mr  Collendavelloo:  Let  me  just  settle  one  thing  on  procedure,  I  have  asked  and  I 
have  been  told  that  from  time  immemorial  it  is  always  the  General  Manager  who  decides 
after consultation with the Chairman, whoever is the General Manager and whoever is the 
Chairman. It does not go through the Board. It does not go through any sort of process. 

Mr Jhugroo: You know who was the Chairman before! 

Mr Collendavelloo: Yes. Now, we are not going to question the propriety of such and 
such legal adviser. We are going to see the facts as they are. With regard to the list, I have not 
worked it out and I have not gone into it but, if the hon. Member comes with a substantive 
question I am sure we can try and work out the details. Let me make one reservation, I again 
stress that I do not think it is in order for me to disclose the amount of fees which have been 
paid to individual lawyers from whatever political background they may be. I don’t think this 
is correct. 

Madam Speaker: Next question, hon. Gobin! 

Mr Gobin: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Question No. B/320! I wish to say it for the 
record, Madam Speaker, that I have disclosed my interest in this question which concerns the 
legal profession and I am a member of the Bar Council. 

 

 

 

90 

INTERNATIONAL LAW FIRMS - LEGAL SERVICES ADVISORY LICENCE  

(No. B/320) Mr M. Gobin (First Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked  the  Attorney-General  whether,  there  is  a  policy  decision  to  establish  a  separate 
licensing regime for foreign firms to operate in Mauritius and, if so, will he state if – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

consultations  have  started  with  all  the  stakeholders  concerned  therewith, 
including the Judiciary and the Council of Vocational and Legal Education; 

the proposed regime  will operate outside the ambit of the  Law Practitioners 
Act and, if so, indicate the proposed terms and conditions thereof; 

the foreign law firms will be authorized to set up and operate on their own on 
joint venture with law practitioners in Mauritius, and  

the cardinal principle of international reciprocity will be respected and, if not, 
why not. 

Mr  Yerrigadoo:  Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the  question, 
consultations are not envisaged as of yet inasmuch as the setting up of a new regime would 
not concern the Judiciary or the Council for Vocational and Legal Education. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, however, the Law Practitioners Act (LPA) will 
have to be amended so that a new regime may operate outside the Act.   The forthcoming 
global legal services advisory licence will enable flagship international law firms which are 
mostly solicitors firms to set up in Mauritius to provide legal advisory services on business 
transactions. The new licence will be administered and delivered by the Financial Services 
Commission. The new regime is going to complement the Law Practitioners Act in providing 
a more conducive environment for these flagships to be domiciled in Mauritius without being 
held  down  by  specific  corporate  structures  or  on  the  activities  with  respect  to  what  is 
permissible under the Law Practitioners Act. 

With regard to part (c) of the question, Madam Speaker, any such foreign law firm 
may be authorised to operate on its own but subject to strict regulatory supervision, including 
under the Law Practitioners Act. 

With regard to part (d) of the question, the issue of reciprocity does not arise. I am 
informed that Mauritius  has not  yet  given any  commitment in relation to  Liberalization of 
Trade in Legal Services also known as (TiSA). 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Gobin, any question? You don’t have. Yes, hon. Uteem! 

91 

 
Mr  Uteem:  Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  There  already  exists  a  regime  right  now 
under the Law Practitioners Act for foreign law firms which want to practice foreign law or 
Mauritian  law  as  well.  So,  may  I  know  from  the  hon.  Attorney  General  now  that  there  is 
going to be a special licence issued by the Financial Services Commission, are we going to 
have two systems, one by the FSC and one under the Law Practitioners Act? 

Mr Yerrigadoo: Madam Speaker, I thank the hon. Member for the question. What is 
being  envisaged  under  the  new  licence  is  a  different  kind  of  business  altogether.  It  is  not 
going to impact on the traditional law firms which we have in Mauritius which are already 
catered  for  under  the  LPA  whereby  they  can  set  up  by  joint  venture  with  local  Mauritian 
partners  or  what  else.  We  are  envisaging  more  in  terms  of  LLP’s  structuring  in  order  to 
structure the transactions of their clients, same is readily available in London, in South Africa 
near to us. We see in it more as an opportunity to beef up our offer, the financial services 
sector. But, as and when we are  going to come with proposals for the law, of course, this 
House will be kept informed, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

Mr Mohamed: Since the hon. Attorney General has just answered that Mauritius has 
not in any way committed itself as regards the services issue at the level of the World Trade 
Organisation I gather, and in spite of that we are already showing that we are opening our 
jurisdiction to foreign law firms even further through the proposals of Government through 
the hon. Attorney General, could he, therefore, not consider the question for looking at the 
services chapter at the level of the WTO once again as far as legal services are concerned, 
even a carve-out is all possible at the level of the WTO and therefore reciprocity is of utmost 
importance because otherwise we would have our feet stamped upon and we will have to just 
bear it and not do anything about it? 

Mr  Yerrigadoo:  Again,  I  thank  the  hon.  Member.  My  learned  friend  the  former 
Minister of Foreign Affairs and myself have already stressed the importance of reciprocity. 
My learned friend will be aware of the fight of India, for instance, in that sphere. But, what 
we are looking at is more a type of global business, but one thing the hon. Member can rest 
assured, when we would be drafting legislation we would have particular attention to enable 
young  Mauritian  practitioners  to  have  the  exposure  required  because  what  we  envisage  is 
technology transfer but also capacity building. We would see to it in consultation with these 
foreign law firms when they do come in that they can capacity build with our people so that 

 

92 

even if they are not working on the local jurisdiction per se, they could give exposure so that 
Mauritian  professionals  can  beef  up  services  and  perhaps  be  posted  not  only  in  those 
Mauritius offices but in Geneva, Paris,  London,  in the US. My learned friend will also be 
aware that in America, for instance, these days there is a great debate about this whole legal 
services  aspect.  So,  it  is  more  in  terms  of  the  jurisdiction  benefiting  from  it  and  getting 
Mauritius in another category so that we can beef up global business altogether in a spirit of 
getting Mauritius as an international financial centre of repute, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo, last question! 

Mr Ganoo:  The hon. Attorney General has told us now that the law will be amended 
so that there will be two different regimes. Can the hon. Attorney General inform the House 
whether the law will be specifically amended to dissuade or prevent these foreign firms to 
operate in areas of law which our local firms are operating?  What is the guarantee that this 
will be done? 

Mr Yerrigadoo:  The LPA will have to be amended because, at any rate, when you 
are engaged in advisory services on the local soil of Mauritius, you are giving legal services, 
so to speak per se, in the technical sense of the term.  Of course, the licence given to each and 
every of these firms will be very limited in the specific fill-in structuring transactions, but it 
will be coming to this House.  It is an interesting debate, but we are looking at it more on a 
global business perceptive. 

Madam Speaker: I will allow one last question from hon. Teeluckdharry! 

Mr  Teeluckdharry:    Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  Can  the  hon.  Attorney  General 
inform the House whether there is any principle of reciprocity between the countries of origin 
of  those  firms,  that  is,  can  our  local  firms  or  Chambers  open  their  Chambers  in  those 
countries? 

Mr  Yerrigadoo:    That  is  a  big  debate.    That  is  what  hon.  Mohamed  just  said. 
Reciprocity is a big debate at the level of WTO, but what we can do is when we are getting 
law firms to come in their licence, to try to rope in as maximum, Mauritian professionals, so 
that they get the required exposure to bring Mauritius on the next level.  That is the ambit of 
it. 

Madam  Speaker:    The  Table  has  been  advised  that  P.Q.  Nos.  B/323,  B/324  and 

B/325 have been withdrawn.  Time is over! 

 

93 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10(2) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that all the business on today’s 

Order Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun) rose 

and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS 

FORT GEORGE - GAS TURBINE UNITS 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public  Utilities  (Mr  I. 
Collendavelloo):  Madam  Speaker,  thank  you  for  allowing  me  to  make  a  statement  on  the 
status of the prequalification document in respect of the two proposed Gas Turbine Units of 
35-40 MW at Fort George which I am laying on the Table of the Assembly. 

In May 2015, the World Bank recommended the procurement of gas turbines to run 

initially on diesel and I quote – 

“in  the  amount  the  currently  applied  planning  methodology  indicates  is 
needed (2 × 36 megawatts [MW])”   

It is in line with these recommendations that CEB is now considering installing two heavy 
duty industrial gas turbines, configured in open cycle mode, each rated between 35-40 MW. 

The House will note that the prequalification document just tabled does not state that 

“one of the mandatory conditions in the tender for prequalification” is that, I quote -  

‘The bidder should have experience in similar tropical island...” 

In a reply to a query from one bidder, the CEB responded, inter alia, that, I quote – 

“The  applicant  shall  demonstrate  experience  of  at  least  one  gas  turbine 
installation  having  unit  size  of  30  MW  or  more  in  a  typical  -  and  not 
tropical island states.”  

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Minister Bhadain! 

 

 

94 

INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL OF COMMERCIAL ARBITRATION CONGRESS 

2016 

The Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms 
(Mr S. Bhadain): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to make a statement on the 
ICCA Congress 2016 and Good Governance. 

Madam  Speaker,  in  a  fortnight,  Mauritius  will  host  the  23rd  Congress  of  the 
International Council of Commercial Arbitration (ICCA), more specifically from the 08 to 11 
May.   

ICCA  is  the  most  prominent  international  arbitration  organisation  in  the  world.  It 
federates  international  arbitration  institutions  and  practitioners,  without  itself  administering 
arbitral proceedings. 

The  ICCA  Congress  is  a  high-level  event  which  takes  place  every  two  years,  and 
brings together all the major public, private and multilateral actors in the field of international 
arbitration.  Given  its  importance,  it  is  commonly  referred  to  as  the  “Olympic  Games  of 
international arbitration”. 

Madam Speaker, in its 50 years of history, this is the first time that the Congress is 
being  held  in  Africa.  It  is  a  matter  of  pride  that  Mauritius  has  been  retained  to  host  this 
international event which will, for the first time in our history, bring to our shores arbitrators, 
lawyers, scholars and researchers of world repute, including Law Lords, Ministers, Attorney 
Generals and Chief Justices. So far, some 800 international delegates from 71 countries have 
confirmed their participation. 

Madam Speaker, besides the distinguished participants, I have already mentioned, the 
House  would  be  delighted  to  note  that  we  have  been  able  to  secure  the  presence  of  His 
Excellency the Secretary General of the United Nations, Mr  Ban Ki Moon at this Congress. 
Mr Ban Ki Moon will deliver his keynote address on Monday 09 May 2016 at the Swami 
Vivekananda International Convention Centre at Pailles. 

Madam  Speaker,  my  Ministry  and  the  Host  Committee  responsible  for  the 
organisation of this Congress are not sparing any effort to make it not only a historical event, 
but  also  an  instrument  to  uphold  the  image  and  position  of  Mauritius  on  the  international 
scene. 

95 

 
Madam  Speaker,  the  Nobel  Peace  Laureate,  Dr.  Mohammad El  Baradei,  former 
Director  General  of  the  International  Atomic  Energy  Agency  has  also  confirmed  his 
attendance. Dr. Mohammad El Baradei will deliver his keynote address on Sunday 08 May at 
the opening of the Congress at l’Aventure du Sucre.  

Madam Speaker, the presence of those two eminent dignitaries at the ICCA Congress 
is not only an evidence of the importance of the event, but also a significant milestone in our 
constant effort to promote the image of our country. Madam Speaker, this is the first visit of a 
UN Secretary General to our country and a Nobel Peace Laureate, together. 

Madam Speaker, the theme of the Congress - ‘International Arbitration and the Rule 
of Law: Contribution and Conformity’ - is particularly apt to allow our part of the world to 
start having its voice heard and acted upon.  

The theme of the ICCA 2016 Congress is very pertinent and relevant to the concerns 

of Mauritian society.  

Madam  Speaker,  the  23rd  ICCA  Congress  is  a  unique  opportunity  to  foster  more 
exchanges between Governments, and between Governments and private sector actors in the 
field of international arbitration.  

It is also, of course, an opportunity to showcase our international arbitration project. 
As  this  House  will  be  aware,  my  newly  created  Ministry  took  over  supervision  and 
implementation of this project in order to make the most of the obvious synergies with our 
financial  services  industry.  Mauritius  is  today  perceived  as  the  foremost  and  most  reliable 
seat  for  international  arbitration  in  Africa,  as  the  first  cases  start  to  come  through  our 
international  arbitration  centre,  the  LCIA-MIAC,  and  to  the  Mauritius  office  of  the 
Permanent Court of Arbitration. 

Madam Speaker, I further wish to inform the House that LCIA-MIAC has last year 
won  the  prestigious  Global  Arbitration  Review  award  for  up-and-coming  regional  arbitral 
institution. This success is also the result of the contribution made by our Judiciary.  

Madam  Speaker,  furthermore,  having  led  the  path  in  the  field  of  investment 
arbitration,  and  having  hosted  the  signature  ceremony  of  the  UNCITRAL,  Mauritius 
Convention on Transparency in treaty-based investor-State arbitration in March 2015, we are 
stepping up our diplomatic efforts with our African neighbours to take over the chairmanship 
of UNCITRAL at its next session. Government is also finalising the plans for a state-of-the-
art arbitration hearing centre, which will be up and running by the end of this year. 

96 

 
 Madam  Speaker,  the  ICCA  Congress  will  not  only  be  a  platform  to  promote 
arbitration as an alternative to dispute resolution, but also to launch Mauritius as a hub for 
international  arbitration.  It  must  be  recalled  that  this  international  event becomes  a  logical 
sequence to the launching of Mauritius by the Financial Services Promotion Agency and my 
Ministry as an International Financial Centre earlier last month in the presence of the Lord 
Mayor of the City of London. Hon. Members will appreciate the nexus between arbitration 
and financial services and the need for expeditious dispute resolution which is the hallmark of 
arbitration. 

Madam Speaker, arbitration as opposed to decisions of the court is no doubt an area 
which would elicit interest of proponents of an expeditious delivery of legal services. This 
Congress would thus be a solid platform to further promote arbitration as an instrument for 
the resolution of litigations.   

The House will also note that in the field of international arbitration, we were the first 
State  Party  to  ratify  the  United  Nations  Convention  on  Transparency  in  Treaty-based 
Investor-State Arbitration a few months back on 05 June 2015. 

This Convention which is now known as the ‘Mauritius Convention on Transparency’ 
demonstrates  our  determination  to  introduce  openness  and  accountability  in  the  field  of 
Investor-State  arbitration  and  our  commitment  to  uphold  democratic  participation,  good 
governance and the rule of law.  

Madam Speaker, I would also like to take this opportunity to share with the House the 
outcome  of  my  recent  meeting,  with  the  Deputy  Secretary-General  of  the  Commonwealth 
Secretariat.  Indeed,  the  Commonwealth  Secretariat  has  been  highly  impressed  by  the 
initiatives  put  in  place  in  Mauritius  to  strengthen  good  governance.  In  a  recent 
correspondence, the Deputy Secretary-General, Dr. Mrs Josephine Ojiambo has informed us 
as follows – 

“We  have  been  impressed  by  the  initiatives  that  your  country  has  put  in  place  to 
strengthen  good  governance,  which  we  discussed  when  you  visited  Marlborough 
House  last  month.  As  you  will  recall,  at  that  meeting,  I  indicated  our  interest  in 
exploring  opportunities  for  other  Commonwealth  Member  States  to  learn  from  the 
successes, valuable lessons and initiatives taken by Mauritius”. 

Madam  Speaker, 

the  recognition  of 

to  our 
commitment and approach to promoting and enhancing good governance is yet another key 

the  Commonwealth  Secretariat 

 

97 

milestone for us. This recognition reinforces the position of Mauritius as the leader in Good 
Governance initiatives in Africa and also among the Small Island Developing States (SIDS) 
countries.  The  House  will  recall  that  at  the  last  conference  of  the  State  Parties  to  the  UN 
Convention  Against  Corruption  in  St  Petersburg,  a  resolution  was  voted  on  05  November 
2015 to make Mauritius a dedicated platform for anti-corruption reforms for SIDS countries.  

Madam  Speaker,  all  our  efforts  are  meant  to  showcase  Mauritius  in  terms  of  good 
governance  practices  and  consolidate  our  position  as  a  transparent  international  arbitration 
hub.  

Thank you for your attention. 

 

PUBLIC BILLS 

First Reading 

On motion made and seconded the following Bills were read a first time - 

(a) 

(b) 

The National Women’s Council Bill (No. V of 2016) 

The National Wage Consultative Council Bill (No. VI of 2016) 

Second Reading 

THE FIREARMS (AMENDMENT) BILL  

(No. IV of 2016) 

Order for Second Reading read. 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  with  your  permission,  I  move  that  the 

Firearms (Amendment) Bill (No. IV of 2016) be read a second time. 

The  main  objects  of  the  Bill  are  to  domesticate  the  Arms  Trade  Treaty  to  which 
Mauritius  has  acceded  to  in  July  2015,  and  to  strengthen  the  provisions  of  the  existing 
legislation  on  firearms  so  as  to  enable  the  Police  Force  to  have  a  better  control  on  the 
movement of firearms in the country and those in transit.  The objectives of the Arms Trade 
Treaty  are  to  prevent  and  eradicate  the  illicit  trade  of  conventional  arms  and  their 
unauthorised use, including the commissioning of terrorist acts and acts of piracy, through the 
control of the export, import, transit, trans-shipment and brokering of these arms. 

While existing national and regional controls are important, they are not enough to 
stop  the  irresponsible  transfers  of  arms  and  ammunition  between  countries.  Inadequate 

 

98 

controls of arms transfers in many countries have led to widespread availability and misuse of 
weapons.  

The Arms Trade Treaty is expected to transform the way global arms trade operates.  
It will set new standards and enshrine, in international law, strict controls on the arms trade 
which has been poorly regulated for a very long time. It will no longer be acceptable for arms 
to be transferred to regimes that will use them to harm innocent people and violate human 
rights. 

Under the Treaty, before any arms transfer takes place, the supplier Government must 
assess associated risks of the deal against strict criteria, including whether the arms might be 
used for human rights violations, war crimes or the commissioning of other unlawful acts. If 
there is a substantial risk of this happening, the deal will not be authorized by the seller. 

The  implementation  of  the  Treaty  by  Member  States  will  definitely  create  a  new 
international norm that will shape the way all States view arms transfer. All countries, even 
those that have not signed the Treaty, will be measured against this norm, and to a certain 
extent will be held accountable for any misuse of the arms. 

Madam Speaker, in the local context, the domestication of the Treaty through this Bill 
will enhance the national control system on the export, import and transit activities related to 
conventional arms.  

The country’s legal framework to combat terrorism and piracy will be strengthened 
making  our  extended  territorial  water  and  EEZ  safer  areas  at  a  time  when  Mauritius  is 
developing its ocean economy and is aspiring to become a petroleum hub in the Indian Ocean 
region. 

The  Bill  is  also  an  opportunity  to  further  consolidate  certain  provisions  of  the 
Firearms Act 2006 so as to enhance the control and inspection of firearms held by private 
parties and in transit in the country, whilst at the same time taking into account the need to 
keep  procedures  as  simple  as  possible  so  as  to  maintain  the  country  as  an  attractive 
destination for ease of doing business.  

In  this  context  several  amendments  are  being  proposed  to  the  existing  Act,  among 

others - 

(a) 

to empower a Police Officer, not below the rank of Assistant Superintendent 
of Police, to carry out checks at the places of firearm licence holders to allow 
the Police to ensure that firearm licensees are complying with the conditions 
attached to their licence, and 

 
(b) 

99 

to  review  the  rate  of  storage  fees  for  firearms  in  transit  downwards,  from 
Rs200  to  Rs100  per  day  during  the  prescribed  period  and  from  Rs400  to 
Rs200 per day in the eventuality the prescribed delay, as provided for in the 
Second Schedule of the  Act, for keeping any  firearm in transit is  exceeded.  
This  measure  follows  the  various  representations  received  from  relevant 
stakeholders, but does not compromise security issues.   

Madam  Speaker,  let  me  now  highlight  some  of  the  amendments  that  are  being 

proposed to the Firearms Act - 

(i) 

(ii) 

Section 3 of the Act currently provides that no person shall deal in prohibited 
arms.  It  is  proposed  to  amend  it  so  as  to  exempt  officers  of  the  disciplined 
forces from this prohibition to enable them to use a wider range of firearms for 
training purposes, with the authorisation of the Commissioner of Police. 
It is proposed to amend section 8 of the Act so as to make provision for the 
storage of firearms and ammunitions in such a manner as may be prescribed 
by  regulations,  and  to  empower  the  Police  to  inspect,  at  the  time  of  an 
application  for  a  firearm  licence  or  employee  permit,  the  places  where  the 
firearms  and  ammunitions  will  be  stored.  Presently,  the  safekeeping  of 
firearms is not prescribed.  

(iii)  Under section 12 of the Act, the control and inspections of the firearms and 
ammunitions in the possession of licence holders are done only once, at the 
time the licences are being issued.  The Police considers the lack of periodic 
control of the firearms as a shortcoming in the law which should be amended. 
It is therefore proposed to introduce, under this section, a new subsection (2A) 
so  that,  over  and  above  the  yearly  renewal  process  of  the  licence,  a  Police 
Officer,  not  below  the  rank  of  an  Assistant  Superintendent  of  Police,  may 
enter and inspect the place where firearms and ammunitions are stored by a 
firearm licensee. 
Sections 20 and 21 of the Act will be amended so as to make it an offence for 
import and export licence holders who do not keep a record of every firearm 
and  ammunitions  under  that  licence.  These  sections  will  also  empower  the 
Commissioner of Police not to issue an import or export permit in respect of 
any firearm or ammunition if he has reasonable doubts that they will be used 
for unlawful purposes. 

(iv) 

 
(v) 

(vi) 

100 

Section 21A of the Act will also be amended to enable the Commissioner of 
Police to request for any information or document from any person on board 
of  a  ship  or  aircraft,  within  the  territorial  waters  of  Mauritius,  if  he  has 
reasonable grounds to believe that the ship or aircraft is carrying any firearm 
or  ammunition  in  violation  of  the  obligations  of  Mauritius  under  the 
international law. 
Section 22 of the Act will be amended so as to increase the safekeeping of any 
firearm  or  ammunition  in  transit  at  the  Police  Armoury  from  90  days,  as 
provided for in the Second Schedule, to 2 years, for practical reasons, as from 
Police experience, the 90 days storage period has been found to be inadequate 
in many cases. However, if the firearm or ammunition remains unclaimed for 
a period of one year after the expiry of the two years, same could be disposed 
of by the Commissioner of Police. 

(vii)  One of the main obligations of a State Party under Article 12 of the Treaty is 
to keep national records of the conventional weapons which it has exported, 
transferred to its territory as the final destination, or authorised to transit, for a 
minimum of 10 years. Section 23 of the Act is, therefore, being amended to 
create a database within the Central Firearms Register of the Police Force so 
as  to  have  updated  information  on  firearms  and  ammunitions  in  transit  in 
Mauritius, at any point in time. 

(viii)  Additionally, under new section 23A, every person who is required to keep a 
record pursuant to the Act will, from now on, have to do so for a minimum of 
10 years. 

Madam Speaker, as mentioned earlier, the rates to be paid for firearms in transit will 

be revised downward following representations made by licence holders. 

The Second Schedule in the Act is accordingly being amended not only to increase 
the prescribed storage period of firearms in transit, from 90 days to two  years, but also to 
decrease the fees payable per day for each firearm, from Rs200 to Rs100 and from Rs400 to 
Rs200 per day for a period of one year after the expiry of two years. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  conclude  by  saying  that  the  Treaty,  among  others,  was 
lying in the drawers for a long time, and I personally instructed that Mauritius accedes to it as 
a matter of priority and this was done by my Government in July 2015. 

With these words, I commend the Bill to the House. 

 

 I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

101 

 The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun) rose 

and seconded. 

(4.34 p.m.) 

(Interruptions) 

Mr R. Uteem (First Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis Central): Madam 
Speaker, the facts, according to a report published last year by Amnesty International, 875 
million small arms and light weapons are estimated to be in circulation worldwide.  Between 
700,000 and 900,000 small arms are produced annually; twelve billion bullets are produced 
every year. It is estimated that the value of arms trade is $100 billion annually. 

 Now, the killer facts. Globally, it is estimated that armed violence kills around half a 
million people every year.  In the Democratic Republic of Congo alone, it is estimated that 
more than five million people have died since 1998 as an indirect result of armed conflict, 
over 80% of all casualties are civilians, 90% of these are caused by small arms. 

Madam  Speaker,  today,  weapons  of  mass  destruction  are  not  the  nuclear  weapons, 
they are not the atomic bomb.  They are the Kalashnikovs, they are the bazookas, they are the 
portable missiles, lethal weapons that are easy to transport, lethal weapons that are easy to 
smuggle, lethal weapons that are easy to fall in the wrong hands, and lethal weapons so easy 
to  use  that,  today,  they  are  manned  by  children;  children  getting  younger  and  younger, 
Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker, it is the civilian population that ends up paying the price of conflicts, 
not  only  in  terms  of  casualties,  but  also  in  respect  of  long-term  impact  resulting  from  the 
collapse of government services. Armed conflicts, overburdened healthcare systems disrupt 
education for millions of children, and armed conflicts come with a massive economic cost. 

According to Nobel Prize Winner Joseph Stiglitz, the estimates of the economic cost 
for the US alone on its War on Terror would be $1 trillion. Billions of dollars are spent by the 
United  Nations,  the  African  Union  and  others  in  peacekeeping  missions.  According  to 
Oxfam, it is estimated that armed violence costs Africa $18 billion every year. Conflicts in 
countries like Burundi have cost the government an annual economic loss of 37% of their 
GDP.  Money  that  is  spent  on  arms  could  and  should  have  been  spent  on  education, 
healthcare, social security, on developmental projects. 

 

102 

Madam Speaker, corruption is a major problem in arms trade. The unregulated trade 
in arms conducted by corrupt individuals or companies leads to the diversion of weapons into 
the illicit market to dangerous end users. Corruption in the defence industry is estimated to 
cost  $20  billion  per  year.  The  United  States  Department  of  Commerce  estimates  that 
corruption in arms trade accounts for approximately 50% of all corrupt transactions globally, 
despite the fact that the value of arms traded annually does not exceed 1% of global trade. 

Madam Speaker, armed  conflicts also result in displacement of entire communities. 
According  to  the  United  Nations  High  Commissioner  for  Refugees  in  2014,  there  were 
almost 60 million refugees and internally displaced people.  Most of them are from Syria, 
Colombia, Democratic Republic of Congo and Somalia.  This mass movement of people has 
a  huge  monetary  cost.    The  annual  cost  of  this  displacement,  according  to  the  Internal 
Displacement Monitoring Centre, has now reached over $100 billion.  Today, dealing with 
refugees  fleeing  armed  conflicts  has  become  one  of  the  most  politically  sensitive  issues 
facing developed nations in Europe. 

Madam Speaker, I have the privilege of being part of the Committee on Cooperation, 
International  Relations  and  Conflict  Resolution  of  the  Pan-African  Parliament.    At  every 
session, we discuss various conflicts that are taking place in Africa.  We try to find solutions 
to  prevent  and  resolve  armed  conflicts  among  Member  States.    Unfortunately,  Madam 
Speaker,  the  African  Continent  is  the  single  continent  with  the  highest  number  of  armed 
conflicts;  Somalia  with  the  Al-Shabaab,  Sudan  with  Darfur,  South  Sudan  with  ethnic 
conflicts, Nigeria with Boko Haram, Central African Republic, Guinea-Bissau, Democratic 
Republic  of  Congo,  Libya,  Mali.    It  would  seem  that  each  time  we  try  to  reach  some 
compromise, some settlement, a new armed conflict erupts elsewhere in Africa. 

Hon. Armance, hon. Ms Sewocksingh, hon. Mrs Selvon and hon. Quirin will recall 
that, during my last intervention at the Plenary Session of the Pan-African Parliament, I stated 
that, in order to resolve armed conflicts on the Continent, we needed to attack the root of the 
problem, and the root of the problem is financing of conflicts and arm trafficking. Without 
money, there is no war; without arm, there is no war. 

On the finance side, Mauritius has always endeavoured not to be used as a jurisdiction 
for  financing  of  arms  trafficking.  I  am  not  saying  that  Mauritius  has  not  been  used  for 
financing arms conflict. You will always find people who are naive enough or greedy enough 
to allow themselves to be engulfed into this arms trafficking business. But we have always 

 

103 

been  cooperative,  always  been  transparent  and  we  have  the  necessary  legal  framework 
already.  We  have  signed  and  ratified  international  convention  and  we  regularly  accede  to 
exchange  of  information  whenever  there  is  allegation  of  Mauritius  being  used  in  arms 
trafficking. 

So much, Madam Speaker, for the financing of arms trafficking; what about the arms 
trafficking  itself?  One  would  have  imagined,  it  should  have  been  easy  to  control  arms 
trafficking because it is not difficult to identify the arms’ used. Once you identify the arms, it 
is not difficult to identify the manufacturer and once you have identified the manufacturer, 
you  can easily  go and  resolve the  arms trafficking.  But unfortunately, this is not the case, 
Madam Speaker.  As I pointed out earlier, arms’ trade today is 100 billion dollars business. 
So, there are lot of lobbies at stake.  

One should not also forget, Madam Speaker, that almost 80% of the world’s weapons 
are  manufactured  by  six  countries,  namely  China,  France,  Germany,  Russia,  UK  and  the 
USA. And five of these six producers sit on as permanent members of the United Nations 
Security Council.  So, it was not an easy task,  Madam Speaker, to agree on a multilateral 
treaty that would regulate international trade in conventional weapons.  

Madam Speaker, the initiative of Arms Trade Treaty can be traced back to a group of 
Nobel  Peace  Prize  laureates  as  far  back  as  the  1990s.  The  movement  was  spearheaded  by 
Costa Rican former President and Nobel Prize winner, Óscar Arias.  In 2006, United Nations 
passed a resolution, seeking members’ views on the feasibility of adopting a comprehensive, 
legally binding instrument establishing common international standard for the import, export 
and  transfer  of  conventional  weapon.  Just  to  illustrate  how  difficult  it  was  to  get  that 
resolution, the United States refused to sign that resolution in 2006. After more than a decade 
of negotiations and lobbying, the Arms Trade Treaty was finally adopted on 02 April 2013 at 
the United Nations General Assembly. The resolution was passed in a sweeping victory.  155 
nations voted in favour; 22 abstained and only 3 countries opposed the treaty, namely Iran, 
Syria and North Korea. The treaty came into force on 24 December 2014, on the date of the 
fifth  year  ratification.  Mauritius,  as  rightly  pointed  out  by  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister, 
became acceded to the treaty on 23 July 2015.  

The  Arms  Trade  Treaty  basically,  Madam  Speaker,  prevents  State  parties  from 
transferring any conventional arms if it has knowledge that the arms would be used in the 

 

104 

commission of genocide, crimes against humanity, attacks against civilians and state parties 
are required to regulate the import and export of conventional arms as well as arms brokers.  

The Bill, before the House, Madam Speaker, is precisely to implement the provisions of 
the Arms Treaty through an amendment to the Firearms Act. I have listened carefully to the 
Rt. hon. Prime Minister, and I totally congratulate him for the laudable initiative that he took 
when  he  took  office  to  ratify  this  treaty,  but  I  don’t  know  who  has  been  advising  the 
Government  on  this  project  because,  in  my  humble  opinion,  Madam  Speaker,  the  proper 
procedure would not be to amend the Firearms Act but to come forward with a legislation 
which would be specific to the Arms Treaty. And I will explain why. 

The  Firearms  Act,  Madam  Speaker,  today  covers  only  firearms.  It  is  primarily 
concerned with the licensing of firearms for domestic purposes, be it for use of firearms, be it 
for security purposes or for gaming, for hunting like my good friend hon. Yerrigadoo knows. 
We have a local law for this. The Arms Treaty goes beyond that. For example, if I take a 
simple definition in the Arms Treaty, it does not deal only with firearms, it also covers battle 
tanks, armoured combat vehicles, large calibre artillery system, combat aircrafts – my good 
friend,  hon.  Dayal,  will  appreciate  -  attack  helicopters,  warships,  missiles  and  missile 
launchers  and not just small arms, not just firearms. So, for me, today,  to amend only the 
firearms is not to give full effect to the treaty because we are tackling only one of the many 
different types of weapons that has been ratified under the treaty. We are not dealing, today, 
with  helicopters,  aircrafts,  tankers,  etc.  And  where  I  find  it  difficult  to  understand  is  that 
anyone  who  is  familiar  with  this  treaty,  anyone  who  has  done  any  research  would  have 
known  that  there  is  a  model  law  that  has  been  prepared  by  an  ONG  called  Small  Arms 
Survey, a Swiss based group, which works with the New Zealand Government in developing 
a model law, and I quote – 

“(…)  to  assist  in  identifying  and  translating  Arms  Trade  Treaty  commitments  into 

national legislation.” 

It is a very comprehensive text and, more importantly, it has commentaries under each 
object, each clause which would have helped in interpreting the law if ever there is a dispute. 
And why is it important that we follow the model law? It is precisely to avoid any regulatory 
arbitrage, to prevent warlords from choosing Mauritius for regulatory arbitrage because they 
can find a loophole in Mauritius if we did not ratify and reflect fully the texts. So, today, we 

 

105 

are amending the firearms only, but I hope that consideration will be given, subsequently, to 
come with a full-fledged law which would cover the whole of the treaty, Madam Speaker. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  would  end  by  quoting  His  Holiness  Pope  Francis.    Pope  Francis 
when he addressed the US Congress in September last year stated the following, and I quote 
– 

"Being  at  the  service  of  dialogue  and  peace  also  means  being  truly  determined  to 
minimise and, in the long term, to end the many armed conflicts throughout the world. 
Here, we have to ask ourselves: Why are deadly weapons being sold to those who plan 
to  inflict  untold  suffering  on  individuals  and  society?  Sadly,  the  answer,  as  we  all 
know, is simply for money: money that is drenched in blood, often innocent blood. In 
the face of this shameful and culpable silence, it is our duty to confront the problem and 
to stop the arms trade." 

Today, Madam Speaker, we are answering the call of his Holiness and we are bringing 

our little contribution to an armed conflict. 

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker:  I suspend the sitting for half an hour. 

At 4.50 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 5.24 p.m. with the Deputy Speaker in the Chair. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Rutnah! 

Mr S. Rutnah (Third Member for Piton and Rivière du Rempart): Thank you, Mr 
Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.  Firstly,  may  I  start  by  congratulating  the  hon.  Prime  Minister  for 
bringing this interesting Bill into this House today. 

It  is  a  very  important  day  in  the  history  of  Mauritius  insofar  as  the  regulations  of 
firearms are concerned and not only ordinary firearms - when I say ordinary, I mean to say 
light firearms - but also firearms which are used in order to oppress people in conflict zone. 

The implementation of the provisions of the Arms Trade Treaty was long overdue in 
Mauritius and elsewhere within the African Continent. Mauritius became a member State by 
virtue of accession on 23 July of last  year and,  in doing so, we have, today, sent a strong 
signal  to  the  international  community  that  Mauritius  cares  about  what  is  happening 
elsewhere. 

106 

 
The Arms Trade Treaty means that every State  that has signed up, must now obey 
strict rules on international arm transfers. This will at last help to stem the flow of weapons 
that fuel bloody conflicts, atrocities and state pressing around the world. 

The Treaty’s rules are simple. If a country knows that the arms about to be sold will 
be  used  for  genocide,  for  crime  against  humanity  or  war  crimes,  then  they  must  stop  the 
transfer. 

Every  day  thousands  of  people  are  killed,  injured  or  forced  to  flee  their  homes 
because of violence and armed conflicts. The majority of casualties - as my very able friend, 
hon. Reza Uteem said – in armed conflicts are civilians. Weapons such as missiles destroy 
hospitals, homes, market and transport system, pushing survivors into poverty. People’s lives 
are destroyed. For example, in the Democratic Republic of Congo, it is estimated that more 
than 5 million people die indirectly because of armed conflicts since 1998. For every person 
who is killed in armed conflicts and armed violence, many more are injured, tortured, abused 
or kidnapped at gunpoint. 

Now,  against  this  background  at  an  international  level,  let  us  look  at  what  is  the 
position of our island. I will refer to an article from the Inter Press Services on: “Investigation 
Exposes Arms Trafficking Network in Mauritius”. It is an article written by Carlota Cortes 
and it starts as follows – 

“An  investigation  by  the  Conflict  Awareness  Project  has  exposed  an  active  arms 
trading  network  of  associates  of  former  trafficker  Viktor  Bout  that  involves 
companies  from  the  United  States,  South  Africa  and  the  United  Kingdom,  among 
other countries. 

All are cross-linked in a complex system with its centre in the island of Mauritius. 

The  traffickers'  ultimate  goal  was  to  access  countries  such  as  Iran,  Sudan,  the 
Democratic Republic of Congo, Somalia and possibly Syria, researchers say.” 

And, the former United Nations Arms Investigator Kathi Lynn Austin was able to track down 
the  illicit  activities  of  this  network  led  by  two  main  actors  who  once  were  Bout's  top 
lieutenants: Sergey Denisenko and Andrei Kosolapov. Many actors involved in this network 
had a connection with Viktor Bout and are back in the game of shipping arms to war zones. 

This  time  around  the  illicit  activities  took  place  in  Mauritius,  an  island  situated  on 
Africa’s south east coast. It is a strategic spot due to its location as a gateway between Africa, 

 

107 

Asia  and  the  Middle  East  and  thanks  to  tax  incentives,  drop-box  addresses  and  offshore 
banking. The Denisenko-Kosolapov network tried to obtain an Air Operation Certificate from 
the  Mauritius  Government,  which  is  required  for  planes  to  take  off.  For  that  purpose  they 
sought  a  partnership  with  a  local  aviation  company  with  a  pre-existing  certificate  so  they 
could quickly start working. So, this is the reputation of Mauritius and this morning we were 
hearing  from  the  Opposition  side  a  little  bit  of  comments  about  human  rights  during  the 
Prime Minister’s Question Time in relation to Bramer banking question!  

What is being done today is to bring a law into our domestic law from international 
law and to make it human right compliant in order to save human rights and the cause of the 
basis of humanity. And, in doing so what the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has proposed in this 
Bill today by virtue of amending sections 21 and 22 of the 1996 Act is that there will be and 
there is going to be strict control against importers and exporters who believe or who think 
that they are going to use our island as a platform to trade arms for the purpose of committing 
genocide, crimes against humanity and crimes against people who cannot defend themselves 
in countries like Syria, Sudan, Iran, Democratic Republic of Congo and elsewhere. 

Trade details are often shrouded in secrecy, but the value of the international trade in 
conventional weapons is estimated to be around USD100 billion. Only States can control the 
trade by granting or refusing licences and only States can prohibit certain inhumane types of 
arms and impose arms embargoes and suspension and this is what is happening by virtue of 
this  amendment  today.  What  is  going  to  happen  is  that  the  Commissioner  of  Police  will 
decide  and  before  making  the  decision  whether  to  grant  a  licence,  he  is  going  to  be 
empowered to carry out necessary investigation and competency test before giving licences. 
And, we should not forget that certain countries should assume their responsibility insofar as 
arms trade is concerned.  

Certain Governments, unfortunately, have not lived up to their obligation and  I am 
sad  to  say  so.  I  am  sad  to  say  that  countries  like  China,  for  example,  have  supplied 
ammunition and small arms to Sudan where they are used by security forces of Malaysia in 
Darfur region as well as to South Sudan and the Democratic Republic of Congo. France has 
supplied arms to Libya under al-Gaddafi, Egypt, Israel and Chad, and Syria between 2005 
and  2009.  Ten  percent  of  all  Russian  arms  exports  are  believed  to  go  to  Syria,  making  it 
Syria’s largest arms supplier. It has also supplied helicopter gunships to Sudan and is said to 
be a major exporter of military equipment to Egypt. The United Kingdom has supplied arms 
to countries with high risk behaviour when it comes to human rights abuses such as in Sri 

 

108 

Lanka. The United States of America has supplied arms to more than 170 countries. It has 
restricted arms transfers to Myanmar, China, Sri Lanka and Zimbabwe but has not taken the 
same precaution against Iraq, Israel, Sri Lanka, Bahrain, Egypt and Yemen. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it was important for our small island nation to set the record 
and  to  send  the  signal,  and  the  right  signal  to  the  international  community  that  Mauritius 
cannot be used as that platform for arms trade. I was earlier on listening very intently to my 
friend, hon. Uteem, who was proposing that there should be a new regime, a new law in its 
entirety to deal with other kinds of armoury, but, perhaps, at this stage, it is not necessary 
because we already have provisions in our law.  

In  the  Prevention  of  Terrorism  Act  2002,  there  are  strict  restrictions  and  severe 
penalties for persons furnishing terrorists, terrorist organisations and other individual, groups, 
undertakings and entities associated with such goods.  

• 

• 

• 

• 

Regulation 9 provides that no person shall, directly or indirectly, export, sell, 
supply  or  ship  any  arms,  weapons,  ammunitions,  military  vehicles  and 
equipment,  paramilitary  equipment,  spare  parts  and  related  material  to  any 
listed terrorist.  
Regulation 10 provides  that no owner or master of  a Mauritius ship and no 
operator of an aircraft registered in Mauritius shall, directly or indirectly, carry 
or  cause  or  permit  to  be  carried  any  arms,  weapons,  ammunitions,  military 
vehicles  and  equipment,  paramilitary  equipment,  spare  parts  and  related 
materials for any listed terrorist.  
Regulation 11 provides that no person shall directly or indirectly provide any 
listed terrorist with technical advice, assistance or training related to military 
activities. 
Regulation 12 says that it is an offence to contravene these Regulations. 

So, there we are and what the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has done today in this House is very 
important to bring back respect to our country from what we were when the Press article was 
published  in  relation  to  Investigation  Exposes  Arms  Trafficking  Network  in  Mauritius, 
clearly  accusing  our  nation,  our  island,  our  people  of  being  involved  or  being  facilitating 
arms trade in the world. 

Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  in  relation  to  the  amendments  that  have  been  proposed, 
section 22 which deals with the number of days – 90 days – was indeed inadequate for the 

 

109 

purpose of carrying out the necessary task that was required and the two-year period is very 
welcome for the purpose of this Act.   

In general, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, this is a legislation that will have the unanimity of 
this  House  today.  Again,  I  thank  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  for  having  brought  this 
legislation to combat the trafficking of arm domestically and on an international level. 

Thank you. 

(5.42 p.m.) 

Mr R. Dayal (First Member for Flacq & Bon Accueil): Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I 
would  like,  at  the  very  outset,  to  commend  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Sir  Anerood 
Jugnauth,  Minister  of  Defence  and  Home  Affairs  for  seeing  right  the  very  concept  of  the 
Arms  Trade  Treaty  and  I  have  a  copy  with  me.    I  am  referring  to  article  14  where 
enforcement is mentioned.  I would like to read that – 

“Each  state  party  shall  take  appropriate  measures  to  enforce  national  laws  and 
regulations that implement the provision of this treaty.” 

That  sums  it  all.    Therefore,  there  was  no  need  for  a  separate  law  as  such  because  the 
Firearms Act, through our embassies, makes sure that there is the end-user certificate for any 
arms and ammunitions and any military hard and software that come to Mauritius, go through 
a  process  of  accountability  until  it  reaches  Mauritius  into  the  hands  of  the  competent 
authorities.  So, therefore, that addresses the remark made by hon. Uteem. 

I would like now to refer to the Firearms (Amendment) Bill (No. IV of 2016) because 
it is a clear indication of the political will of this Government to amend the Firearms Act with 
a view to implement provision of the Arms Trade Treaty to which Mauritius is a signatory.  
The proposed amendments amply demonstrate the commitment of the present Government to 
prevent and curb down illicit trade of arms.  These amendments also espouse the object and 
purpose of the Arms Trade Treaty, that is, - 

(i) 

(ii) 

to  establish  the  highest  common  international  standards  for  regulating  or 
improving the regulation of international trade in conventional arms that can 
destabilise  our  democracy  and  cripple  the  rule  of  law,  and  prevent  and 
eradicate the illicit trade in conventional arms; 
prevent the diversion more than ever in the fast changing security environment 
with illicit movement of arms and ammunitions in the region. 

 

110 

It is important to highlight that the purpose of the said treaty is to contribute to international 
and regional peace, security and stability, reduce human suffering and promote cooperation, 
transparency  and  responsible  actions  by  States  parties  in  the  international  trade  in 
conventional arms; the more so, in the volatile environment of the African and Indian Ocean 
region, and in the wake of evolving terrorism and cross-border crimes. It is but fitting to note 
that  international  trade  of  arms  comprise  of  export,  import,  transit,  transhipment  and 
brokering.  

The  proposed  amendments,  and  more  precisely  sections  20,  21  and  21(a),  aim  at 
addressing  issues  with  regard  to  import,  export,  permit  and  transit  of  firearms  and 
ammunitions.    The  abovementioned  sections  of  the  Firearms  Act  gives  power  to  the 
Commissioner of Police not to issue an import or export permit as well as authority for transit 
of firearms and ammunition in the event there is any violation of obligation of Mauritius and 
the  measures  adopted  by  the  United  Nations  Security  Council  contravene  the  other 
international  obligations  of  Mauritius  or  he  has  reasonable  grounds  to  believe  that  the 
Firearms  and  Ammunition  may  be  used  in  the  commission  of  genocide,  crime  against 
humanity or war crimes are intended to undermine peace and security as is evident in Africa.  
This, against the very spirit of the Geneva Convention of 1949, which we adhered to and we 
equally signed its Additional Protocols.   

As  an  independent  country  anchored  in  peace  and  stability  where  democratic 
principles and values are firmly anchored, we are duty bound to draw lessons from the past 
with a view to better shape the future.  We have the famous case of Silver Gate which led to 
the illegal entry of firearms.  The ‘Piou Piou’ case at Médine where three innocent persons 
sadly lost their lives and equally the same number in Gorah Issac case, Escadron de la mort, 
gang violence among the drug mafia leading to firing of live rounds at Line Barracks, Port 
Louis.    The  discovery  of  considerate  amount  of  ammunitions,  some  2,700  live  rounds  in 
raffia  bags  at  Pierrefonds,  Bambous,  some  three  years  back  and  which,  in  some  way, 
coincided with an earlier report of Ms Kathleen Austin, concerning arms trafficking transiting 
through  Mauritius.    There  are  a  series  of  other  cases  involving  firearms  which  led  to 
mounting  of  operation  such  as  ‘Operation  Sunrise’  and  an  amnesty  under  Sir  Anerood 
Jugnauth - and I was Commissioner of Police then - for unregistered arms and ammunitions.  
I must say here that we managed to get about 17 such arms and ammunitions which were not 
registered.    From  a  regional  security  perspective,  we  have  all  seen  the  Westgate  attack  in 
Kenya, terrorist threats by extremists groups like Al-Shabaab and Boko Haram, whereupon 

 

111 

trafficking  is  very  often  linked  with  drug  trafficking  and  also  interconnected  with  terrorist 
financing.  

More so, as we are presently in a Commission of Inquiry on Drugs and it is more than 
ever  pertinent  to  take  action  in  all  fronts,  we  are  equally  not  immune  to  threats  posed  by 
Somalian pirates because Mauritius has far flung territories in the Indian Ocean.  We all have 
a moral and legal obligation to shape a better future where peace and security prevails in its 
fullest extent and the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is paving the way.   

We no longer want situations to arise when an MLA or any other citizen will need to 
make someone hide in a foreign country following a case of murder.  I am here referring to 
the late Mr Toorab Bissessur, who had to seek refuge in Madagascar.  There is a pressing 
need to also consider providing necessary protection to witnesses such as Ms Kathleen Austin 
to  come  to  Mauritius  and  give  necessary  evidence  with  a  view  to  detect  cases  of  arms 
trafficking linked to organised crime and money laundering.  

Crime has no frontier and criminals are more than ever active in cross-border crimes, 
taking  advantage  of  inherent  weak  links  in  local  and  international  legislations,  dictating 
proper  law  enforcement.  We  have  done  that  with  the  amendment  of  the  Explosive  Act  in 
1991 when I was the Commanding Officer, and the Rt. hon. Prime Minister was the Prime 
Minister of this country. Bound to impose strict control of arms trade and we are not getting 
bomb  blast  like  in  other  countries  since  then.    Trade,  whilst  mitigating  risk  of  weapon 
trafficking, Police is the right arm of democracy and a citadel of peace and stability to enable 
the sustainable development that we all crave for at national level.   

The  proposed  amendment  provides  the  Commissioner  of  Police  with  the  necessary 
legal  framework  in  connection  with  the  issue  and  renewal  of  firearm  licence  but,  more 
importantly,  the  issue  of  import  and  export  permit  as  well  as  authority  for  the  transit  of 
firearms  and  ammunition.    This  is  where  we  have  a  thorny  issue.  The  power  of  the 
Commissioner of Police proposed under section 21A (3) at page 8 is applicable – 

“(...) within the territorial sea of Mauritius, or an aircraft in Mauritius is carrying any 
firearm and ammunition (...)”. 

This  is  a  clear  evidence  of  the  political  will  of  this  Government  to  maintain  strict 
control  over  any  possible  carrying  of  any  firearm  and  ammunition  within  our  territorial 
waters,  which  are  in  violation  of  section  21A  (3)  (a),  (b),  (c).    Effective  and  efficient 
enforcement of this provision will necessitate the close collaboration between the Mauritius 

 

112 

Police  Force,  the  Civil  Aviation,  the  Port  Authority,  the  National  Coast  Guard  as  well  as 
exchange of information between friendly countries. 

Section (2) (a) makes provision for the Commissioner of Police to issue guidelines.  
Here, I am making a humble proposition for the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence 
and Home Affairs, Minister of Finance and Economic Development, Minister of Rodrigues 
and  National  Development  Unit,  as  a  matter  of  policy,  to  kindly  consider  and  request  the 
Commissioner of Police to include in the guidelines the necessity for a sanitized bay for ships 
transiting and carrying firearms on-board in our harbours. 

Such measure will allow for better control by police and minimise any possible risk of 
unlawful removal of firearms. There is also a need to review the procedures for destruction of 
firearms, so that there is greater transparency and accountability.  Just like drugs, it should be 
done in public, in the presence of stakeholders in national security to show transparent good 
governance.    And  the  reason  is  very  simple.    It’s  because  we  have  seen  many  pieces  of 
firearms in certain areas of Mauritius, more precisely in the area of Beau Bassin. 

To conclude, I seize the opportunity to thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for taking 
the bold and courageous initiative to sign the Arms Trade Treaty and coming forward, in a 
timely manner, with this amendment, which paves the way for a safe and secure Mauritius 
whilst at the same time contributing to regional and international peace and stability. 

Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I am done. Thank you for your attention. 

(5.53 p.m.) 

Mr D.  Ramful (Third Member for Mahebourg &  Plaine Magnien): Mr Deputy 
Speaker,  Sir,  I  am  going  to  be  very  brief.    Arms’  trafficking  is  a  very  serious  issue.    It 
involves our national security; it involves the security of the region. I have to say right from 
the outset that it is a positive step in the right direction that this Government has taken the 
initiative to accede to the Arms Trade Treaty. It is also a positive step today that Government 
is coming with this Bill before the House. 

However, I have to say one thing.  When I look - and I will take it from where hon. 

Uteem left - at the objective of the Bill, the Explanatory Memorandum reads as follows – 

“The main object of this Bill is to amend the Firearms Act so as to implement the 
provisions of the Arms Trade Treaty to which Mauritius is a signatory.” 

 

113 

This, unfortunately, does not reflect the truth, because when we look at what we have signed, 
when  we  look  at  the  provisions  of  the  Treaty,  the  provisions  are  much  wider  that  what  is 
being provided in the Bill.  Let me take Article 1 of the Treaty. Article 1 provides for the 
object and purpose, and this is where, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, hon. Dayal and hon. Rutnah, 
unfortunately, got it wrong. 

This  is  what  we  have  signed,  this  is  what  we  have  agreed  to  implement  in  our 
domestic  law.  We  have  agreed  to  “establish  the  highest  possible  common  international 
standards for regulating or improving the regulation of the international trade in conventional 
arms.” We have agreed to “prevent and eradicate the illicit trade in conventional arms and 
prevent their diversion.” This is what we have agreed. This is the undertaking we have given 
at international level to implement in our domestic law.  When we look at Article 2, where 
the definition of conventional arms is given, it includes several categories, and hon. Uteem 
has  made  reference  to  the  various  categories.  They  include  battle  tanks,  armoured  combat 
vehicles, large-calibre artillery systems, combat aircraft, attack helicopters, warship, missiles 
and missile launchers, and small arms and light weapons. 

Unfortunately, the definition of firearms, as it stands in our law, would only include 
small arms, not conventional weapons. Not only that!  We have also undertaken to include in 
our domestic legislation ammunitions that are defined in the Treaty as to include missiles and 
other  ammunitions  that  are  released,  that  are  discharged  from  those  conventional  arms.  
Unfortunately, the Act as it stands, the Firearms Act, does not provide for conventional arms 
and the wider definition of ammunitions and munitions. 

As rightly stated by hon. Uteem, we have two options.  Either we come before this 
House  with  a  new  Bill  that  would  cover  all  these  conventional  arms,  and  not  only 
conventional arms, but parts and components as well. People being involved with the export 
and import of parts and components of those conventional arms should also be included in 
the definition. 

The law as it stands, if we apply the provisions of what is being proposed today, a 
vessel  transiting  through  our  territorial  waters,  someone  being  involved  in  the  export  or 
import  of  conventional  arms  or  components,  someone  being  involved  in  ammunitions  like 
missiles, for example, would not be covered by the law, unfortunately.  So, this is the point 
that I wanted to make as regards the objective and the scope of the Bill. 

114 

 
I  have  two  suggestions  to  make.    It  relates  to  clause  11,  which  proposes  to  amend 
section 23.  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, under Section 23 provision is made for the setting up of 
a  central  firearm  register  so  that  we  have  a  national  list  that  would  include  records  of  all 
firearms  that  are  being  used  in  our  country  and  clause  11  (6)  to  include  in  that  register  a 
database for the Vessels in Transit Transporting Firearms and Ammunitions. May I suggest to 
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to consider also the inclusion in that database for private security 
service  providers,  those  employing  bouncers,  etc.  They  also  are  entitled  under  the  law  to 
apply for firearms certificates and they are, very often, given that licence. They are also in 
possession  of  firearms,  I  believe,  and  it  is  good  that  we  should  also  have  a  record  of  the 
firearms that are in their possession.  

There is a second proposition that I wanted to make which is in relation to the penalty. 
Section 46 deals with the sanction and penalties and, in the event there is a breach of the Act, 
the  court  is  only  empowered  to  impose  a  fine  or  imprisonment.  Now,  I  believe  that  we 
should,  if  we  are  serious  with  this  matter,  also  empower  our  courts  to  cancel  or  suspend 
import or export licences in appropriate circumstances, and I will request the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister to take these two suggestions into consideration.  

Therefore,  to  conclude,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  the  amendments  that  are  being 
proposed  today,  although,  as  I  have  said,  they  are  welcome,  they  are  positive  steps  but, 
unfortunately, they do not fulfil the international obligations that we have taken to regulate 
the trade of conventional arms. I suggest that Government should come before this House as 
soon as possible with an appropriate Bill. 

Thank you. 

(6.03 p.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Technology,  Communication  and  Innovation 

(Mr  E. 
Sinatambou): Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, at the outset, like previous orators before me, I would 
like to commend the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for coming forward with this legislation because 
it actually brings Mauritius into line with its international law obligations.  

The Arms Trade Treaty was actually the result of the UN Conference on the subject 

matter which had its final meeting between 18 and 20 March 2013.  

Now,  I  will  share,  indeed,  the  views  of  the  previous  orator  when  he  says  that 
Mauritius and the Government have taken a step in the right direction. But I will certainly 

 

115 

disagree when he then says that there are shortcomings, and my reasons for saying so is by 
referring to the treaty itself.  

Indeed, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the previous orator has referred us to Article 2 of the 
Convention speaking about the definition of conventional arms. True it is that conventional 
arms are defined in such a way as to include battle tanks, armoured combat vehicles, large 
calibre artillery systems, combat aircrafts, attack helicopters and so on, but it should surely be 
clear  to  everyone  in  this  House  that  this  is  not  the  type  of  arms  which  actually  enter 
Mauritius. I mean, would we need to bring a legislation to control the export or import of 
combat aircraft or of attack helicopters? With all due respect, I must disagree, and I believe 
that  common  sense  should  actually  hold  the  day,  and  that  it  is  the  case  that  the  Firearms 
(Amendment) Bill, which is before this House, and which is amending the Firearms Act of 
2006, is well formulated and tackles the problem in the right way.  

Incidentally, I would like to take this opportunity, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, to go back 
to the dates I was just referring to. Indeed, the final United Nations Conference on the Arms 
Trade  Treaty,  I  said  earlier,  took  place  between  18  and  20  March.  The  Treaty  itself  was 
approved for adoption by the UN General Assembly on 28 March and under Article 21 of 
that Treaty it was open for signature by all States from 03 June 2013 until its entry into force, 
and those who are wise today, to come and give lessons, were in power yesterday but had no 
time to actually do what was needed to safeguard the interest of this country to fight against 
the international scourge which is arms trade and arms trafficking; and it had to take the Rt. 
hon. Prime Minister, here, to ensure that Mauritius accedes to that Treaty in July 2015.  

So, from my perspective, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the other side of the House should 
actually be congratulating Government for, in fact, doing that which they failed to do from 
2013 until their demise at the general elections.  

May I also take this opportunity, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, to refer to what one of the 
previous orators, the Third Member for Piton and Rivière du Rempart had said and, with all 
due  respect,  that  refers  to  the  names,  I  think,  the  infamous  names  today  of  Mr  Andrei 
Kosolapov  and  Mr  Sergei  Denisenko.  Why  am  I  referring  to  these?  Because,  sometimes, 
those who claim to be whiter than white, those who claim to be so candid, those who keep 
attacking this side of the House have so much to hide themselves.  

I  will  now  refer  to  what  I  saw  in  a  Parliamentary  Question  on  the  issue  of  arms 
trade/arms trafficking dated 15 November 2012 and, at that time, the now hon. Leader of the 

 

116 

Opposition,  who  was  then  also  the  Leader  of  the  Opposition,  as  he  has  been  for  so  many 
years, decided to query the then Prime Minister about cases of arms trafficking by foreign 
nationals.  

That happened in 2012; the Arms Trade Treaty is signed in March 2013 and they have 
been negotiating the alliances for the elections of 2014 and we then learned that, not only are 
those people - those individuals I just mentioned - involved in arms trafficking, but we also 
learned that they actually are involved in some very serious money laundering transactions. 
We learned from that Private Notice Question that a number of banks have actually failed to 
adhere to the Guidance Notes on Anti-Money Laundering and Combating the Financing of 
Terrorism.  And all this happened during 2013! It started in November 2012, the Treaty is 
passed in March 2013, the infamous coalition is in April 2014. And throughout all this time, 
we  have  heard  no  more  about  the  failure  of  three  banks  to  actually  fulfil  their  legal 
prerequisites,  their  legal  obligations  regarding  fraudulent  use  of  money,  regarding  arms 
trafficking.  So,  it  is  my  respectful  submission  before  this  House  that  we  should  be  very 
careful. Far too often, as we say, “they look at the straw in our eyes but they don’t see the 
poutre which is in theirs”.   

The log, thank you, Sir.  

(Interruptions) 

I think there is one thing also, which I would like to mention, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. 
This morning while we were having the Private Notice Question, I was - I won’t say amused;  
I could have been amused, if I was actually ironical or cynical - rather bemused because I 
heard  the  hon.  First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  and  Port  Louis  East  speaking  about 
scandals in Senegal and Djibouti about lack of transparency and corruption. And yet, when 
we look at this Private Notice Question regarding Andrei Kosolapov and Sergey Denisenko, 
relatives  of  Members  of  this  House  who  give  us  lesson  every  session  of  Parliament,  were 
actually involved. So much for transparency… 

Mr Mohamed:  On a point of order.  The hon. Minister, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, said: 
“relatives of a Member of this House were involved”.  Now, there need not be any effort on 
his part to mention who is this hon. Member but when he says that “relatives are involved”, 
those are people who are not here.  No tribunal has ever established that any relative of any 
Member is involved and as far as this report that he is referring to, is concerned, it is sub 
judice  because  there  are  three  matters  pending  before  the  Supreme  Court  that  have  been 

 

117 

entered against Mrs Kathi Lynn Austin. So, if the hon. Minister wants to pursue on that, I 
would invite you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, to tell him to hold back because this whole matter 
is sub judice, just as the same matter, the same words used by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister this 
morning and the hon. Minister of Youth and Sports when he said: “matters were sub judice”. 
Please! 

The  Deputy  Speaker:  Well,  hon.  Member,  your  point  of  order  comprises  three 
questions.    In  my  opinion,  the  hon.  Minister  is allowed  to  refer,  even  if  he  uses  the  word 
‘relative’ to state his opinion.  It is related to the debate today.  However, it is… 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Mohamed, let me finish my line of thought! So, I don’t think there is any problem with 
him saying ‘relative’ .  However, it is out of order to give names of people outside of this 
Assembly  who  cannot  defend  themselves  and  to  abuse  this  power  that  we  have  here,  the 
freedom of speech.  

Secondly, with regard to the matter which is sub judice, I thank you for bringing this to 

my attention and you are indeed correct it shouldn’t be debated upon. 

Mr Sinatambou:  Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. You will please observe, Mr 

Deputy Speaker, Sir, that I mentioned no person… 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed:  On a point of order again!   You just ruled, he is still arguing with you.   

The  Deputy  Speaker:  Hon.  Mohamed,  he  is  not  arguing,  he  has  just  started  his 

(Interruptions) 

sentence.  Let him finish his point!   

(Interruptions) 

I haven’t even listened to what he has said, hon. Mohamed! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Mohamed, I have not heard what he has said.  Don’t jump on the gun! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Sinatambou:  I am, in fact, continuing my speech with all due respect, Mr Deputy 

Speaker, Sir. 

 

118 

(Interruptions) 

If  I  may  be  allowed  to  continue  my  speech,  I  hope  that  people  now  understand  how  I  or 
anyone  else  on  this  side  of  the  House  feels  when  we  are  unjustly  attacked  right,  left  and 
centre, not only in this House, but outside this House in the Press. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Minister, please!  

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Mohamed, we had enough shouting this morning.  Hon. Minister, please come back to 
the Bill.  

(Interruptions) 

You have made your point.  I have let you make your point.  Now, please come back to the 
Bill! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Sinatambou:  Well, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, if I may be allowed to continue with 
my speech before this House. You will see that whenever I am mentioning about the Arms 
Trade Treaty, about the amendments being brought before this house, I am making it a point 
not to give names of any Member, of any relatives, knowing that whoever is concerned, will 
recognise themselves as opposed to… 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed:  He keeps on making those backhanded attacks without even having the 
courage to, basically, say what he wants to say.  Is he going to continue being hypocritical in 
his manner? 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mohamed! 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Mohamed, I don’t see why I should stop him from stating his opinion, to be quite frank! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed:  Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, he cannot cast imputations on the reputation 

and honour of people in this august Assembly. He cannot do it! 

 (Interruptions) 

 

And when he says… 

119 

(Interruptions) 

When he says: “I have not mentioned names” … 

(Interruptions) 

…that does not in any way absolve him of the responsibility. 

(Interruptions) 

He said: “An hon. Member of Parliament”! 

(Interruptions) 

Come on! 

The Deputy Speaker:  Sorry, I haven’t heard the last part. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mohamed:  He cannot simply absolve himself of the responsibility by saying ‘I am 
not mentioning names’.  If he says a Member of this Assembly, he is, therefore, attacking any 
Member of this Assembly, and that is itself condamnable. He cannot do that.   

The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Sinatambou, will you please continue without having to 

polémiser… 

(Interruptions) 

…with this any longer and move on to the next point?  If you would do this House a favour! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr  Sinatambou:    Thank  you,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir.    I  think  the  point  has  been 

made. Maybe I should also say, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, there are two sayings.  

(Interruptions) 

One says: ‘qui s’excuse s’accuse’.  The other says: ‘qui se sent morveux se mouche.’ 

(Interruptions) 

Here, why I am saying this, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, is because at no time am I inventing 
anything.  I made it a point to go and verify the Private Notice Question of the then and now 
hon. Leader of the Opposition dated 15 November 2012, and at page 8 of that Hansardised 
version,  which,  as  far  as  I  know,  according  to  the  Standing  Orders  of  this  House,  is  the 

 

120 

official version.  I do read about lawyers Y. M. and Z. M. having been involved with those 
two Russian nationals against whom - I read now at page 1- 

“(…) there are cases of arms trafficking.” 

However,  I  must  stress,  because  I  think  I  have  struck  a  sore  point  here.    Time  after  time, 
myself  against  myself,  and  my  family,  my  wife  and  my  children,  allegations  have  been 
made… 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Minister, this is not relevant to the Bill! 

Mr Sinatambou:  No, but, at least, some people can now see how it pinches when 
you  are  unjustly  accused.    Here,  there  is  nothing  that  I  invented.    It  is  all  there  and 
incidentally, while all this was happening, the Arms Trade Treaty was actually adopted at the 
United  Nations.    That  was  in  2013.  Yet,  at  no  time  did  the  then  -  how  do  I  call  them  - 
infamous coalition which was busy koze-kozé, find time to actually do the needful regarding 
this piece of legislation. 

Closing was the better thing to do, they felt.   

(Interruptions) 

Let me now, however, Mr Deputy Speaker, say that I think and believe that we ought 
to be proud that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has given instructions for the Attorney General to 
come up with the Bill and for Government to come before this House to get it passed. If we, 
actually, look at Articles of the Treaty, we will find that the main obligations of the State 
parties are to establish and maintain an effective national control system. Here, the scope of 
the  Treaty  is  all  encompassing  to  the  extent  that  it  involves  export,  import,  transit, 
transhipment and brokery and this not only for all those categories of arms which fall within 
the definition of conventional arms, but also for munitions and ammunitions. 

It  must  also  be  borne  in  mind,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  and  I  am  informed 
accordingly, and which is why I am so critical of the conduct of the now Opposition about 
this issue of the Arms Trade Treaty is because several international and regional institutions 
such  as  the  European  Commission,  the  International  Committee  of  the  Red  Cross  and  the 
African  Union  have,  on  many  occasions,  reiterated  their  call  to  all  countries,  including 
Mauritius, to adopt the Treaty as a means of preventing unauthorised non-State actors to have 
access to those conventional weapons for their use in illicit activities such as terrorism and 
piracy. Despite those calls, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, it had to take the Rt. hon. Prime Minister 

 

121 

to make sure that Mauritius accedes to this Treaty in July 2015 and for us to, now, have those 
amendments brought and passed before this House today. 

I would like to conclude, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, and this time, with all due respect, 
to the hon. First Member for Port  Louis Maritime and Port Louis East, I will refer to him 
specifically because this morning, this time, I was neither amused nor bemused, this time I 
felt… 

(Interruptions) 

No, no. I felt insulted as a citizen of this country when he said that he has got no confidence 
in the Police. That was in the course of Parliamentary Question B/277. I believe and you can 
see  why  I  made  my  statement  about  unjust  attacks  on  people,  on  this  side  of  the  House 
because,  on  that  side  of  the  House,  is  where  they  take  the  latitude  of  the  immunity  in  the 
House to make accusations of that type with impunity. What type of country would we have 
if those, who had actually held office as Members of Government, who were Ministers, now 
come  and  say  openly  and  publicly:  “I  have  no  confidence  in  the  Police”,  when  we  are 
speaking of a serious matter. Look at this Bill, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir! We are speaking of a 
Bill to ensure that there is no arm trafficking in this country, that people with whom some 
here  have  been  associated,  cannot  get  involved  into  such  activities.  We  know  that  the 
custodian  of  all  the  measures,  which  are  going  to  be  taken  under  this  Bill  which  seeks  to 
amend the Fire Arms Act of 2006, is the Commissioner of Police. I think it is just simply 
shameful. 

With  these  words,  Mr  Deputy  Speaker,  Sir,  I  will  just  say  that  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime 
Minister must be commended. Rt. hon. Prime Minister, thank you for being here and thank 
you for coming up with this Bill. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Members, Madam Speaker will now resume the seat as 

Chair. 

At this stage, Madam Speaker took the Chair. 

Madam Speaker: Rt. hon. Prime Minister! 

(6.28 p.m.) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I thank all the Members who have taken part 
in  the  debate  on  this  Bill.  I  also  thank  them  because,  despite  some  reserves  from  two 
Members  on  the  other  side  that  we  should  have  come  with  a  new  legislation  instead  of 

 

122 

amending the law as it is today, they all are, at least,  for this Bill so that there is unanimity in 
this House and I am very thankful for that. 

Now,  insofar  as  the  fear  that  there  is  a  possibility  of  fighting  aircrafts  coming  in 
Mauritius  and  transiting,  well,  warships  coming  to  Mauritius,  tanks  coming  to  Mauritius! 
Well, who will ever think of that happening here? 

(Interruptions) 

No, but that we are going to inspect and see. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem, I am sorry! You had the opportunity to intervene on 
this Bill. Now, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister listened to you when you intervened. I think it 
would only be fair that you listen to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister without interrupting him. 

The Prime Minister: If warships are going across the ocean, you think we can go, 

inspect them and arrest people there? Well, let us be practical! 

Some Members, from this other side, have already answered that we have other laws, 
for example, Anti-Terrorism Act, Explosives Act. All these together, we are going to act and 
apply all these laws. Therefore, I don’t see any reason why we should have come with a new 
law when we can do it by amending the present law. This is our opinion! This is my opinion! 

Madam  Speaker,  I  must  say  that  Government  will  be  ruthless  in  combatting  arms 
trafficking and trade. The amendments we will be voting today will consolidate the security 
of our citizens and visitors. As  I said, at the beginning, it will allow Mauritius to meet its 
international obligations as regards the Agreement on the Firearms Treaty. 

As suggested by hon. Ramful,  I have to add that Central Firearms  Index also have 
data on all firearms, including those in the possession of private security service providers. 
Provisions have been made that any breach of the Firearms Act will lead to the cancellation 
of the licence. So, there should be no fear entertained as regards that. 

Madam Speaker, I am convinced that the accession of Mauritius in the Arms Trade 
Treaty and the amendments to the Firearms Act will have a positive impact on the country. It 
will  not  only  help  us  to  increase  our  visibility  as  a  safe  haven  for  doing  business  and  for 
tourism,  but  it  will  also  give  the  Police  an  important  tool  to  have  a  better  control  on  the 
movement of arms within the country and those which are in transit.  

123 

 
I don’t think I should take more time of this House to enter into some of the details 
that were put forward by the other side. I think what we are doing right now is sufficient and, 
if need be in the future, if we have to come with other amendments, we will certainly do so to 
meet the exigencies of the time. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  shall  at  Committee  Stage,  be  moving  for  minor  amendments  as 

 
circulated. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

 Question put and agreed to. 

Bill read a second time and committed. 

 

COMMITTEE STAGE 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

THE FIREARMS (AMENDMENT) BILL 

(NO. IV OF 2016) 

Clauses 1 to 7 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 8 (Section 21 of principal Act amended) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stands part of the Bill.” 

The Prime Minister: Madam Chairperson, I move for the following amendment in 

clause 8 - 

“(a) in subclause (b), in the proposed new subsection (2)(b), by inserting, after 

the word “working”, the word “days”; 

(b)  in subclause (d), in the proposed new subsection (6), by deleting the word 

“import” and replacing it by the word “export”” 

Amendment agreed to. 
Clause 8, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 
Clauses 9 to 17 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 
The title and enacting clause were agreed to. 

The Bill, as amended, was agreed to. 

On  the  Assembly  resuming  with  Madam  Speaker  in  the  Chair,  Madam  Speaker 

reported accordingly. 

 

124 

Third Reading 

On motion made and seconded, the Firearms (Amendment) Bill (No. IV of 2016) was 

read a third time and passed. 

(6.37 p.m.) 

ADJOURNMENT 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  that  this  Assembly  do  now 

adjourn to Tuesday 03 May 2016 at 11.30 a.m. 

The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands (Mr S. Soodhun) rose 

and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned.  

MATTERS RAISED 

EAU BONNE, BAMBOUS – LAND ACQUISITION 

Mr E. Jhuboo (Third Member for Savanne & Black River): Thank you, Madam 
Speaker. I would like to raise an issue addressed to the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of 
Housing  and  Lands  with  regard  to  land  acquisition  at  Eau  Bonne  in  Bambous  for  the 
rehabilitation of La Ferme Dam and it concerns mainly four families, the Dookhy family, the 
Buruth family, the Rayapen family and the Fortune family. I would like to refer particularly 
to the Fortune family.  

Government  wishes  to  acquire  a  portion  of  800  toises,  a  quarter  of  an  arpent,  on 
which there are various buildings of around 4,000 square feet. The Government Valuer has 
proposed the figure of Rs3 m. and if we look at the market price of the region of Bambous, 
the  land  itself  is  worth  Rs2  m.  and  if  Mr  Fortune  wishes  to  reconstruct  his  building,  a 
building of 4,000 square feet, it will cost at least Rs3 m. So, we are talking of a figure of Rs5 
m. instead of Rs3 m. that is being proposed to Mr Fortune and the others. So, could the hon. 
Vice-Prime Minister see to it that these persons, namely the four families mentioned get, at 
least, a fair compensation from Government? 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun): 
Madam Speaker, what has been mentioned by the hon. Member is exact, but we have already 

 

125 

referred the case to the Board of Assessment.  We are awaiting the result and then we are 
going to communicate.  

QUATRE BORNES - FARQUHAR AVENUE - ACCESS 

Dr.  R.  Sorefan  (Fourth  Member  for  La  Caverne  &  Phoenix):  My  concern  is 
addressed to the hon. Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport. Actually, in old 
Quatre Bornes, we have a few roads that have been made one-way while they were two-way 
traffic  roads.  This  particularly  concerns  Farquhar Avenue  where  we  have  the  office  of  the 
Vice-President of Mauritius. It used to be a two-way traffic and the Vice-President used to 
get access to the Victoria Road and to the centre of Quatre Bornes very easily. Now, because 
of the one-way traffic, the VIPSU officer with the Vice President has to turn right and go 
inside Quatre Bornes to get access which is a long way to the main road. Normally, we see 
the President and the Vice-President  accompanied by VIPSU officers  clearing the way  for 
them to go faster, but with this one-way, I see that the one-way system is making the Vice- 
President take a long way to get access to the main road. 

Could the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands refer this matter 
to the Ministry of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport so that the matter can be cleared 
for the Vice-President to have faster access to the main road? 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun): 
Madam Speaker, I am certainly going to pass the message to the substantive Minister and I 
am  sure  that  he  is  going  to  liaise  with  the  RDA  and  the  Municipality  to  come  out  with  a 
reasonable solution. 

TROU D'EAU DOUCE - COMMUNITY CENTRE 

Mr  K.  Tarolah  (Third  Member  for  Montagne  Blanche  &  GRSE):  Madam 
Speaker, I wish to draw the attention of the House by addressing the hon. Minister of Health 
and Quality of Life about the fact that the villagers of Trou d'Eau Douce are right now being 
deprived  of  their  community  centre  which  is  being  used  as  an  area  health  centre  by  the 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life February since 2014. 

The  actual  health  centre  has  been  left  in  a  state  of  disrepair.  It  is  not  safe  for  the 
villagers and definitely not beautiful at all for a tourist village like Trou d’Eau Douce where 
we have hotels, bungalows and a reference like Ile aux Cerfs.  

126 

 
We all know that this region is visited by many tourists and local people every day.  
Pulling  down  the  actual  Health  Centre  and  combining  it  with  another  neighbouring  plot 
belonging to the State will enable the construction of a new building, which can be used as an 
Area Health Centre.  It will also be an opportunity to create more parking for the benefit of 
needy  patients.    It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  previous  Government  hired  a  building  for  a 
dispensary  during  a  period  of  five  years  while  it  would  have  been  more  appropriate 
constructing  a new building for that purpose.   The hon. Minister of Health and Quality of 
Life, Mr Anil Kumarsingh Gayan, is aware of this situation, and was previously addressed. 

At this stage, I humbly request the hon. Minister to take urgent actions regarding the 
erection of a new building in the village of Trou d’Eau Douce to house an Area Health Centre 
for the welfare of the inhabitants. 

Thank you. 

The Minister of Health and Quality of Life (Mr A. Gayan): Madam Speaker, the 
hon. Member is right about the state of the Trou d’Eau Douce building.  In fact, that building 
has to be pulled down.  It ought to have been pulled down but, unfortunately, the space that 
we need is not sufficient to put a Community Health Centre.  There is a plot of land which is 
adjacent to that old building but, from my information, it is vested in the Ministry of Energy, 
which  has  given  it  to  the  Mauritius  Post.    I  am  in  consultation  with  my  colleagues  to  see 
whether  that  land  can  be  released  for  us  to  be  able  to  put  up  the  structure.    But  it  is  an 
ongoing project, and we will give priority to it. 

DR. JEETOO HOSPITAL - INCINERATOR 

Mr R. Uteem (First Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis Central): Madam 
Speaker, there is an issue which I would like to raise and which concerns the hon. Minister of 
Health and Quality of Life. 

It is, unfortunately, an issue which I have raised several times before by way of PQs 
and at Adjournment time.  It concerns the incinerator at Dr. Jeetoo Hospital.  The last time 
this issue was addressed was during the Committee of Supply, last year, on 16 April 2015.  
The hon. Minister stated that what he had in mind was to have a separate incinerator for the 
whole medical wastes, and that there have been visits to Reunion Island and they were going 
to do a feasibility study. 

127 

 
So,  I would humbly ask the hon. Minister to look into the matter, because we still 
have black smokes, and this is creating a lot of inconvenience for users and inhabitants in the 
region of Dr. Jeetoo Hospital. 

The Minister of Health and Quality of Life (Mr A. Gayan): Madam Speaker, in 
fact, we have just been informed that there is a plot of land now available. We will be having 
possibly a BOT for the incinerator which will be used not only by all regional hospitals, but 
also by all clinics, to make it worthwhile for the investors to come.  So, now, at least, we are 
moving forward. 

LES SALINES - SIR ROBERT EDWARD HART GARDEN 

Mr  V.  Baloomoody  (Third  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West):  Madam 
Speaker, if I may address my request to the hon. Minister of Local Government and ask him 
if  he  could  use  his  good  offices  with  regard  to  the  Sir  Robert  Edward  Hart  garden  at  Les 
Salines, commonly known as Jardin La Saline. 

In fact, there are three main issues – 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

the garden is not properly maintained.  For security reasons, especially, 
there are certain corners of the garden where there are high grasses and 
high trees; 

the light at the bowling ground where they play pétanque -  there were 
lights before, but then it was removed -  has not been installed yet, and 

the road leading to the garden is in an impracticable situation.  People 
have to leave their cars at Reserve Street to go to the garden and this is 
causing  considerable  prejudice,  especially  to  old  people  and  parents 
with young children. 

So, I would  ask the hon. Minister if he could intervene vis-à-vis the Municipality of Port 
Louis.  Thank you. 

The Minister of Local Government (Dr. A. Husnoo): Madam Speaker, with regard 
to  the  road,  in  fact,  I  have  already  discussed  with  my  colleague,  the  hon.  Vice-Prime 
Minister,  who  is  looking  after  the  NDU  projects,  to  sort  out  the  issue  about  the  roads.    I 
appreciate.  I know it is in a very pitiful state.  We have already discussed about the road.  So, 
we are going to try to take care of that.  I already discussed with him. 

 
As  far  as  the  garden  and  the  lighting  are  concerned,  I  am  going  to  ask  the 

128 

Municipality of Port Louis to look into that. 

FLIC-EN-FLAC - PUBLIC BEACH – TUCK SHOPS 

Mr  A.  Ganoo  (First  Member  for  Savanne  &  Black  River):  Madam  Speaker,  I 
would  like  to  raise  an  issue  regarding  the  Ministry  of  Environment,  Sustainable 
Development, and Disaster and Beach Management. 

At  Flic-en-Flac,  during  the  course  of  the  past  years,  food  sellers  have  erected 
structures on the public beach.  They have constructed their tuck shops, their tabagies in a 
very disorderly manner et qui n’est pas joli à voir.  These people have been operating for 
long, long years, without a licence or permit, and this has been creating a lot of problems.  
They  have  even  constructed.    There  is  a  problem  of  hygiene.    In  fact,  my  colleague,  hon. 
Jhuboo, and I met the forces vives of Flic-en-Flac some days ago, and we are today the porte-
parole of the forces vives of Flic-en-Flac. 

I  am  just  asking  the  hon.  Minister  to  look  into  this  issue  because  it  is  an 
environmental issue primarily; the conditions in which the food is being sold.  These people 
are earning their living.  We realised that it is difficult to make them vacate these premises, 
but the proposal of the forces vives is to ask the hon. Minister whether a food court cannot be 
constructed in a specific area somewhere, along the public beach, dans un coin quelque part, 
so that if members of the public want to avail themselves of these facilities, they can go to 
these  food  shops,  which  should  be  placed  somewhere  else  from  where  these  operators  are 
operating today. 

So, I would like to ask the hon. Minister if he could look into the matter and propose a 
win-win situation for these operators, for the public who come to the public beach and also 
for the inhabitants of Flic-en-Flac. 

The  Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms,  Minister  of 
Environment, Sustainable Development, and Disaster and Beach Management (Mr A. 
Wong Yen Cheong): Madame la présidente, je remercie l’honorable Ganoo de venir avec ces 
demandes  très  pertinentes.    Effectivement,  comme  vous  le  savez,  le  gouvernement  a  la 
volonté de mettre de l’ordre en ce qu’il s’agit des marchands ambulants, en ce qu’il s’agit de 
nos  plages.  Les  espaces  publics  aujourd’hui  sont  accaparés  par  certaines  personnes.  Ces 
même  personnes  qui  n’ont  même  pas  de  permis  vont  saisir  la  justice  pour  avoir  des 

 

129 

injonctions, et ils savent très bien que le temps que cela va traîner, ils pourront rester autant 
qu’ils veulent. 

Je remercie de voir qu’il y a une volonté ici, avec les membres de l’opposition, de 
venir travailler dans le  même sens, afin d’assainir la situation dans le  pays, parce  qu’il ne 
s’agit  pas,  comme  certaines  personnes,  de  faire  de  la  démagogie  politicaille  pour  les 
prochaines  élections.  C’est  une  question  de  bien-être  du  pays.  Il  est  temps  de  mettre  de 
l’ordre  dans  le  pays,  et  je  remercie  l’honorable  Ganoo.  Nous  avons  les  mêmes  idées.  Ces 
personnes doivent gagner leur vie, nous sommes certains. Il ne faut pas enlever ce qu’ils ont. 
Mais il faut proposer des choses avec des réglementations très strictes, afin que tout le monde 
puisse jouir de l’espace public. 

Je vous remercie. 

LAW AND ORDER - CID NORTH, PORT LOUIS 

Mr  A.  Ameer  Meea  (Second  Member  for  Port  Louis  North  &  Montague 
Longue):  Madam  Speaker,  the  issue  I  am  raising  is  in  relation  to  the  CID  North  of  Port 
Louis.  So, it relates to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister.  What happens is that the CID North 
faces  a  lot  of  challenges  in  this  area  of  Port  Louis,  in  terms  of  theft,  larceny,  and  several 
issues in terms of law and order. Since very long, it has been undermanned and recently there 
have been Police Officers being posted on a temporary basis. 

So, my request to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is to see to it with the Commissioner of 
Police that these officers be placed on a permanent basis, so that the CID North can carry on 
with their job. 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I will certainly do so.  I will pass the message 
to the Commissioner of Police, but I think we must recruit more Police Officers. With the 
number that we have, we can’t meet all the exigencies of the moment. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

MILITARY ROAD – SQUATTERS - RELOCATION 

Mr S. Mohamed (First Member for Port Louis Maritime and Port Louis East): 
Madam Speaker, I wanted to raise an important issue which was going to be addressed this 
time to the Vice-Prime Minister and Minister of Housing and Lands, hon. Soodhun. It is with 
regard to a matter, which he will recall, Madam Speaker,  I  raised following a question by 

 

130 

another Member on the fate of thirteen inhabitants of a State land at Military Road, Plaine 
Verte.  

The Vice-Prime Minister will recall, at one point in time last year, when I had asked 
him whether he would see to it that those thirteen poor families obtain a plot of State land 
somewhere  in  the  vicinity  where  they  were  living  and  some  place  that  had  already  been 
identified  by  the  Ministry  of  Housing  and  Lands.  He  had,  Madam  Speaker,  agreed,  and  I 
thank him for that. He had said that he would help them to obtain the very same plot that was 
identified.  Following  that,  the  hon.  Minister,  as  he  would  confirm  I  am  sure,  visited  the 
squatters  and  he  went  for  a  site  visit  and,  in the  presence  of  all  those  thirteen  inhabitants, 
mainly women of a certain age. He went to see the plot of land that had been identified and 
he promised that they would try to ensure that they obtain that very same plot of land because 
most of them were already paying rent for that plot of land that was identified.  All of them 
were also in possession of a document whereby they had received a letter from the Ministry 
where they had been offered that plot of land for Rs2,000, which is a very good decision.  

Unfortunately,  ever  since  then,  they  have  been  moved  to  another  area  altogether 
which is Pointe aux Sables. The hon. Minister is aware that he has received letters explaining 
their plight. They are very old people with children, pensioners, handicaps who are receiving 
help financially from people of the locality and certain sociétés and Madrassas of the locality. 
So, moving those very old people who know no other area than this one to an area like Pointe 
aux Sables, whilst I thank the hon. Vice-Prime Minister for having made the effort,  I  also 
invite him, Madam Speaker, to recognise the difficulty that they will face being so far away, 
where  all  those  people  in  the  locality  helping  them  financially  would  have  difficulties 
continuing to help.  The Mosque of the vicinity  that was helping them financially would not 
be able to continue the same help. 

 So,  in  those  special  circumstances,  I  pray  that  following  the  correspondencee 
received  on  23  April,  if  he  could  please  consider  rehousing  those  inhabitants,  where  he 
himself had promised, apart following his site visit, because they were very relieved after the 
hon. Vice-Prime Minister went to that site and made their hearts feel great. So, if he could 
please look into that in the name of a very difficult situation that they are facing.  

Thank you. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun): 
Madam Speaker, in fact, it is true to say that there are certain families for whom my Ministry 

 

131 

identified  a  plot  of  land  near  Canal  Anglais,  as  the  hon.  Member  is  certainly  aware. 
Unfortunately, according to the Ministry of Environment, we cannot allocate this land due to 
certain hazards,  of flood and so on and also because of the ring road. 

But I agree; we are looking at Vallée des Prêtes where we are trying to see where we 
can buy land and then can transfer them. I am doing my best to see how we can help. For the 
time being, as we have already mentioned, we have to evacuate all the squatters from Port 
Louis.  We have temporarily sent them at Pointe aux Sables.  In fact, I am doing my best to 
see where we can have some place. As you are aware, those at Vallée Pitot  also had to be 
moved, but we have been able to give them in situ.  I am doing my best to see how we can 
help. 

Thank you. 

At 6.57 p.m. the Assembly was, on its rising, adjourned to Tuesday 03 May 2016 at 

11.30 a.m.  

WRITTEN ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 

RODRIGUES – DEBRIS FOUND – INQUIRY 

(No.  B/279)  Ms  M.  Sewocksingh  (Third  Member  for  Curepipe  &  Midlands) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to the debris found in the vicinity of Rodrigues Island, he will state if it is 
now confirmed that same belongs to the Malaysian Airlines MH 370. 

Reply:  I am informed by the Commissioner of Police that on 30 March 2016, debris 
suspected to emanate from the missing Malaysian Airline aircraft MH 370 were picked up by 
a French national at Var Brulée in Rodrigues.  The debris were transferred to the National 
Coast Guard Headquarters in Mauritius for safekeeping. 

On  04  April  2016,  Police  informed  both  the  Australian  Transport  Safety  Bureau 
which is responsible for search in the southern part of the Indian Ocean, and the Malaysian 
Investigation  Team  for  MH  370  of  the  debris  found.    Subsequently,  on  07  April,  two 
Malaysian experts came to Mauritius to examine the debris. 

I  am  further  informed  that  on  08  and  11  April  2016,  whilst  the  Malaysian  experts 
were in Mauritius, other debris which had been found at Trou D’Argent and Anse Ally in 

 

132 

Rodrigues, were handed over to Police by two individuals.  These debris were despatched to 
Mauritius. 

All  the  debris  were  examined  by  the  experts.    Two  sets  thereof  were  secured  and 

taken along for further examination in Malaysia by the experts who left on 11 April 2016. 

I  am  informed  that  there  has  been  no  further  communication  from  the  Malaysian 

authorities on the matter as at date. 

AIRPORT & PORT – DRUG SEIZURE 

(No. B/280) Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of 
Finance and Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
whether, in regard to drug trafficking, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the 
Commissioner of Police, information as to the types of drugs seized at the airport and the 
port, respectively, since January 2016 to date, indicating the total commercial value thereof. 

Reply:  I am informed by the Commissioner of Police that the types of drugs seized at 
the airport and port between January 2016 to April 2016 together with the total commercial 
value are as follows – 

(i) 

(ii) 

two  cases  of  importation  of  Heroin  and  Cannabis  have  been  reported  at  the 
airport for an estimated total commercial value of Rs1.97 m, and 

10 cases of importation of Heroin, Cannabis, Hashish and Synthetic Drugs at 
the port for an estimated total commercial value of Rs51.29 m. 

HAUTE RIVE VILLAGE – MORCELLEMENT – BIDS 

(No.  B/281)  Mr  B.  Jahangeer  (Third  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of 
Finance and Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
whether, in regard to an invitation for bids for the development of a proposed morcellement at 
Haute Rive Village, in Rivière du Rempart, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from 
the  Employees  Real  Estate  Investment  Trust,  information  as  to  why  one  of  the  mandatory 
conditions to bid is fixed at one project of similar nature of a minimum of Rs100 m. 

Reply:  I  am  informed  that  the  Employees  Real  Estate  Investment  Trust  does  not 

belong to Government and, therefore, I cannot provide the information requested. 

 

133 

PORT LOUIS WEST & GRANDE RIVIÈRE NORTH WEST – NDU 

PROJECTS 

(No. B/282) Mr P. Armance (First Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in 
regard to Constituency No. 1, Port Louis West and Grande Rivière North West, he will state 
the – 

(a) 

(b) 

projects  implemented  by  the  National  Development  Unit  thereat  since 
December 2014 in respect of which works – 
(i) 
(ii) 
preventive measures taken to avert the recurrence of floods thereat. 

have been completed, and 
are in progress, and 

Reply:  I am tabling the list of projects which the National Development Unit (NDU) 

has embarked upon in Constituency No.1 as well as a status report thereon. 

As regards, part (b) of the question, the NDU in consultation with the Parliamentary 
Private Secretary for the region and other stakeholders is endeavouring to construct drains in 
various localities where same are warranted. The preventive measures will hopefully alleviate 
the plight of the inhabitants. 

CITE JUNCTION, PAILLES – AMPHITHEATRE – CONSTRUCTION 

(No. B/283) Mr P. Armance (First Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in 
regard  to  the  construction  of  an  amphitheatre  at  Cité  Junction,  Pailles,  by  the  National 
Development Unit, he will state where matters. 

Reply:    I  am  informed  by  the  National  Development  Unit  that  the  amphitheatre  at 
Cité  Junction,  Pailles,  has  been  constructed  by  the  ENL  Foundation,  on  a  strip  of  land 
previously  vested  in  the  NDU,  which  was  later  transferred  to  the  Ministry  of  Local 
Government. 

I  am given to understand that the project is completed and the handing over to the 
Municipal Council of Port Louis is being arranged by the Ministry of Local Government with 
the ENL Foundation. 

 

134 

JIN FEI ECONOMIC ZONE PROJECT – PLANTERS – COMPENSATION 

(No.  B/284)  Mr  K.  Teeluckdharry  (Second  Member  for  Pamplemousses  & 
Triolet) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of 
Finance and Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
whether, in regard to the Jin Fei Economic Zone Project in Riche Terre, he will state where 
matters  stand  as  to  the  implementation  thereof,  indicating  if  the  106  planters  have  been 
allocated land for the relocation of the plantations thereof or have received any compensation 
from the State therefor. 

Reply:  The House is aware that the Government has, in January 2015, recovered 500 
arpents  of  State  Land  previously  leased  to  the  Mauritius  Jin  Fei  Economic  Trade  and 
Cooperation Zone Co. Ltd. in September 2009. 

As at to date, 325 arpents are under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Housing and 
Lands and Government has leased 75 arpents to Mauritius Jin Fei and is committed also to 
lease 100 arpents to a subsidiary of Mauritius Jin Fei. 

In  December  2015,  Mauritius  Jin  Fei  submitted  a  Master  Plan.  The  company  was 
issued  a  Letter  of  Comfort  on  05  January  2016  by  the  Board  of  Investment.  On  the  175 
arpents, Mauritius Jin Fei has proposed developments in two phases – 

Phase 1 will consist of an integrated commercial district, a wedding theme square, a 
business  hotel,  educational  and  training  facilities,  and  a  business  club  with  an  estimated 
investment of some MUR 5 billion. 

Phase  2  will  comprise  a  manufacturing  and  an  enterprise  headquarter  zone,  an 
international  convention  and  exhibition  centre,  office  spaces  and  residential  units  with  an 
estimated investment of some MUR 10 billion. 

I am informed that construction works are scheduled to start in the third quarter of 

2016. 

With regard to the ex-Jin Fei planters, I am informed that the 106 sugar cane planters 
have received compensation of Rs210,000 per arpent, aggregating to Rs54 m. paid by the 
then  Government  in  February  2008.  They  have  also  each  received  10  perches  of  land  for 
residential purpose at Khoyratty in September 2014. I am informed that there is apparently no 
problem relating to these 106 planters. 

 
Regarding the 121 vegetables planters they are also being provided with 10 perches of 

135 

land for residential purposes at Khoyratty and Mon Gout respectively. 

CYBERCITY (SECOND) – SETTING UP 

(No.  B/285)  Mr  K.  Teeluckdharry  (Second  Member  for  Pamplemousses  & 
Triolet) asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of 
Finance and Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
whether, in regard to the project of the setting up of a second Cybercity, which was to be 
financed by the Government of India, he will state where matters stand. 

Reply:  Government  is  presently  implementing  a  Technopole  Project  in  Rivière  du 
Rempart and one in Rose Belle.  It is also envisaged to construct two other Technopoles, one 
in  the  East  and  the  other  in  the  West.  In  these  circumstances,  the  setting-up  of  a  second 
Cybercity will be considered at a later stage. 

 

CANNABIS & OPIUM-BASED MEDICATION  

(No. B/286) Mrs D. Selvon (Second Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) asked 
the  Rt.  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in 
regard to cannabis, he will state if he – 

(a)  proposes to engage dialogue with citizens, religious groups like the Rastafari, the 
Ayurvedic and traditional medicine practitioners and medical practitioners for the 
liberalization  thereof  in  line  with  what  obtains  in  many  countries,  including  in 
Canada and in Uruguay and  
is  aware  that  cannabis-based  and  opium-based  medicines  are  imported  into 
Mauritius  and  that  a  cannabis-based  medical  product  was  recently  imported  by 
the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life for Ayurvedic treatment. 

(b) 

Reply  (Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life):    With  regard  to  part  (a)  of  the 

question, I am not proposing to hold any consultation in respect of Cannabis. 

With  regard  to  part  (b)  of  the  question,  no  Cannabis-based  medication  has  been 
imported in Mauritius.  However, for allopathic purposes, medication such as Pethidine and 
Morphine, with an opium-based component, are imported and are used as painkillers in post-
operative and cancer treatment. 

 

136 

With regard to Ayurvedic treatment, no medication with Cannabis component is being 
imported  as  from  2014.  Prior  to  that,  deactivated  Cannabis  herbs  were  used  with  other 
ingredients in the ratio of 1:20 for the compounding of three Ayurvedic drugs. 

 

OFFENSIVE WEAPONS – SALE 

(No. B/287) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to the offences committed by making use of offensive weapons, he will 
state if he will consider introducing legislation to make the selling of any type of offensive 
weapons to any person under the age of 18 an offence with a view to curb the incidence of 
minors involved therein. 

Reply: Section 233A and 233B of the Criminal Code regulate the sale of offensive 
weapons.  While section 233A prohibits the sale of offensive instrument to any person in the 
open,  that  is,  on  a  street,  in  a  fair  or  any  open  space,  section  233B  of  the  Criminal  Code 
prohibits the sale of offensive instrument to any person under the age of 12. 

There are other provisions of the Criminal Code which provide for offences in respect 
of  the  possession  or  use  of  offensive  weapons  in  other  circumstances,  for  example,  while 
taking part in an unlawful gathering and riots, cases of larceny and looting. 

Moreover, section 9 of the Public Gathering Act provides for offences of possession 
of an offensive weapon without lawful authority at a public gathering and section 13D of the 
Police Act also prohibits the possession of an offensive weapon during curfews. 

The Commissioner of Police has informed that from January 2014 to 22 April 2016, 
21 cases of use of offensive weapons by persons under the age of 18 have been reported.  I 
will request him to examine the advisability and justification of introducing any appropriate 
piece of legislation. 

MORCELLEMENT GUIBIES, PAILLES – ROAD RESURFACING 

(No. B/288) Mr J. C. Barbier (Fourth Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to the road linking Anse Courtois Street to Morcellement Guibies, Pailles, 

 

137 

he  will  state  if  the  National  Development  Unit  will  give  priority  consideration  for  the 
resurfacing thereof in view of the very bad state thereof. 

Reply:  I am informed by the National Development Unit that resurfacing of the road 
linking Anse Courtois Street to Morcellement Guibies, Pailles, cannot presently be effected 
on a priority basis given that major sewerage works are scheduled in that locality. 

Consideration  will  be  given  to  the  resurfacing  of  the  road  as  soon  as  it  becomes 

possible. 

STERLING HOUSE – OFFICE SPACE – RENT 

(No. B/289) Mr J. C. Barbier (Fourth Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Minister  for  Rodrigues  and  National  Development  Unit 
whether, in regard to the National Development Unit, he will state – 

(a) 

(b) 

the amount of rent payable for office space therefor, in Sterling House, in Port 
Louis, over the past five years, indicating the cost per square foot, and 
if the transfer of the offices thereof is being envisaged and, if so, indicate – 
(i) 

the  cost  per  square  foot  of  the  new  office  space  and  if  the  service 
charges are included therein; 
if tender procedures were carried out therefor and, if so, indicate the 
names of the bidders and the respective bid value thereof, and 
the  estimated  cost  of  the  transfer,  including  the  cost  of  new 
installations therefor. 

(ii) 

(iii) 

Reply:  I am informed by the National Development Unit (NDU) that it has rented 
office accommodation at Sterling House, Port Louis, since December 1996 to accommodate 
its staff as well as the Parliamentary Private Secretaries (PPSs). Presently, the NDU is housed 
on 5 storeys of Sterling House and same covers a floor area of 24,088 square feet. 

The total rent payable for same is Rs746,094 monthly, inclusive of service charge and 
VAT. The rate being paid per square foot in respect of the different levels differs given that 
the NDU did not rent all office spaces at the same time. However, the average cost per square 
foot is Rs31, inclusive of service charge and VAT. 

As regards part (b) of the question, I am informed that the transfer of the offices of the 

NDU to new premises is indeed being envisaged. The reasons for same are – 

138 

various complaints received from the PPSs regarding the state of their offices; 

health and safety issues; 

the need for the NDU to have all its services under one single roof as currently 
its  Procurement  and  Supply  Section  is  based  at  the  Emmanuel  Anquetil 
Building; 

the need for additional office space to cater for staff, and 

the provision of additional parking space. 

 
(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

I  am  informed  that  tender  procedures  for  the  procurement  of  office  space  were 
launched on 22 May 2015 through Open Advertised Bidding (OAB) method and it was a two 
stage bidding process, namely, technical evaluation and financial evaluation. At the closure 
of the submission of bids, seven bids were received. The names of the bidders are – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

Excelsior United Development Companies Ltd (EUDCOS); 

Societé P. Jhugroo Frères; 

Pierre Mont Co Ltd; 

Henessy Court Ltd; 

(e)  Mascareignes Sterling Co Ltd; 

(f) 

(g) 

Orland Ltd, and 

IKS Cargo Ltd. 

However,  out  of  these  seven  bids,  two  were  rejected  by  the  Departmental  Bid 
Committee (DBC) as they did not meet the pre-requisite requirements as spelt out in the bid 
document, that is, they were not within the radius or localities specified in the bid document 
or they did not comply with the submission of mandatory documents. 

The Bid Evaluation Committee (BEC) constituted, thereafter, for the evaluation of the 
five  remaining  bids  found  that  only  the  proposal  submitted  by  Orland  Ltd was technically 
substantially responsive and consequently, recommended same for financial evaluation. The 
offer of Orland Ltd was Rs76.76 per square foot, inclusive of service charge and VAT. 

The views of the Director, Valuation & Real Estate Consultancy Services, Valuation 
Department was sought on that bid and subsequently, negotiation was held and the acceptable 

 

139 

rate of Rs58.65 per square foot, inclusive of service charge and of VAT was reached. This 
new rate was recommended by the Valuation Department. 

As  regards  part  (iii)  of  the  question,  I  am  informed  that  the  Lessor  of  the  new 
premises  is  providing  fit  outs,  air  conditioning,  floor  finishes,  mechanical  &  electrical 
services  and  integrated  communication.  As  such,  expenses  to  be  incurred  by  the  NDU  for 
shifting to the new premises will be restricted to – 

(i) 

(ii) 

transfer of the PABX system, telephone lines, Wi-Fi facilities, and 

purchase and fixing of new blinds. 

The  exact  cost  thereof  is  not  known  as  relevant  quotations  are  being  sought.  The 

estimated costs of same is not likely to exceed Rs1 m. and funds are available. 

NHDC – HOUSING UNITS - CONSTRUCTION 

(No. B/322) Mr K. Teeluckdharry (Second Member for Pamplemousses & Triolet) 
asked  the  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  whether,  in  regard  to  the 
social housing programmes, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the National 
Housing Development Company and other entities, information as to the number of social 
housing units that – 

(a)  have been constructed and delivered since 2015 to date,  
(b)  will  be  constructed  and  delivered  in  Constituency  No.  5,  Pamplemousses  and 

Triolet in 2017, 2018 and 2019 respectively. 

Reply: I am informed by the National Housing Development Co. Ltd (NHDC) that 21 
social housing units have been constructed in 2015 at d’Epinay in Constituency Number 5, 
Pamplemousses  and  Triolet.  The  housing  units  have  been  allocated  to  the  eligible 
beneficiaries in July 2015.  

Moreover,  I  am  informed  that  61  housing  units  are  under  construction  at  Pointe  aux 

Piments and will be ready for allocation by June 2016.  

I also wish to inform the House that my Ministry has allocated, in February 2016, 41 
serviced lots at Solitude to eligible applicants. These serviced lots were ready for allocation 
since  2013  but  have  remained  in  an  abandoned  state  since  then.  The  NHDC  has  had  to 
disburse some Rs600,000 in 2016 to clean the site prior to allocation. 

As regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed that a total of 57 social housing 
units are presently under construction in Constituency Number 5;  44 in Calebasses and 13 in 
Baie du Tombeau. The 57 housing units will be delivered in March 2017.   

 

140 

As  for  social  housing  units  to  be  constructed  and  delivered  in  2018  and  2019,  my 
Ministry  has  identified  two  other  sites  of  the  respective  extents  of  6A26P  and  3A86P  at 
Calebasses for the construction of some 152 housing units of duplex-type and of an area of 
about 50 square metres each.   

My Ministry is also proposing, in collaboration with the Ministry of Social Integration 
and  Economic  Empowerment,  to  carry  out  a  rehousing  programme  for  some  150  families 
living in deplorable conditions at Longère Blanc and Longère Tole in Baie du Tombeau. The 
exercise would start in financial year 2016/2017 and is expected to be completed in 2019 in 
view of the complexity of the works due to the fact that the families are residing on the site. 

PUBLIC OFFICERS - CAR PURCHASE – DUTY EXEMPTION 

(No. B/323) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked the Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms, Minister of Environment, 
Sustainable  Development,  and  Disaster  and  Beach  Management  whether,  in  regard  to 
recommendation  5  at  paragraph  18.2.20  (II)  contained  in  Volume  1  of  the  Pay  Research 
Bureau Report 2016, he will state if he will consider the possibility of extending the grant of 
70 per cent duty exemption on a car of engine capacity of up to 1400 cc to all public officers 
who reckon at least 25 years’ service and who have never benefitted from same irrespective 
of their salary and grade. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

MAHEBOURG – STREET LIGHTING SYSTEM 

(No. B/324) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  whether,  in  regard  to 
Mahebourg,  he  will  state  if  he  is  aware  of  the  lack  of  several  street  lanterns  in  the  street 
lighting  system  found  on  the  main  road  thereof  and,  if  so,  will  he,  for  the  benefit  of  the 
House, obtain from the Road Development Authority, information as to if consideration will 
be given for a review of the said lighting system and installation of additional street lanterns 
thereat and, if so, when and, if not, why not? 

(Withdrawn) 

 
AIRPORTS OF MAURITIUS LIMITED - RECRUITMENT & TENDERING 

PROCEDURES 

(No. B/325) Mr P. Jhugroo (Second Member for Mahebourg & Plaine Magnien) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and  Institutional  Reforms 

 

141 

whether,  in  regard  to  the  various  alleged  malpractices  which  occurred  at  the  Airports  of 
Mauritius Limited in relation to the recruitment and tendering procedures in relation to which 
Mr S. P., former Chief Executive Officer of AML, is allegedly involved, he will state if his 
Ministry has carried out inquiries thereinto and, if so, indicate the outcome thereof and, if not, 
why not. 

(Withdrawn) 

 

CITÉ ST AUBIN - SUGAR CAMPS - PHASING OUT 

(No. B/326) Mr M. Gobin (First Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked the Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security whether, in regard to the phasing out 
of the sugar camp at Cité St. Aubin, he will state where matters stand. 

Reply:  In  regard  to  the  phasing  out  of  the  sugar  camp  at  Cité  St.  Aubin,  I  am 
informed that the remaining 40 camp dwellers will be relocated at sites which are adjacent to 
the existing VRS employees’ sites, as follows - 

 

•  St. Aubin   
•  Rivière des Anguilles 
•  Lady Barkly, Souillac 

 
 
 

13 beneficiaries 
10 beneficiaries 
17 beneficiaries 

For  the  St.  Aubin  site,  all  infrastructural  works  have  been  completed  since  2015.  
According  to  the  phasing  out  of  sugar  camps  scheme,  the  beneficiaries  have  to  effect  a 
nominal  payment.    The  13  beneficiaries  have  been  requested  to  effect  payment  for  the 
nominal  price  of  Rs3,500  per  perche  for  the  land,  Rs5,025  representing  Notary  Fees  and 
Rs500  representing  payment  to  the  Ministry  of  Housing  and  Lands  for  the  Parcel 
Identification Number.  Out of the 13 beneficiaries, five have already paid for the land. 

For  the  site  at  Rivière  des  Anguilles,  the  ten  beneficiaries  have  been  requested  to 
effect the relevant payment to enable the company to proceed with the preparation of the title 
deeds. 

The site at Lady Barkly in Souillac concerns 17 beneficiaries. The title deeds will be 

prepared once the Morcellement Permit is issued by the Morcellement Board. 

The Ministry and the MCIA are closely following up on the matter.  The phasing out 

of sugar camps is expected to be completed by September this year. 

 
 
 

 

142 

CEB - ST LOUIS POWER STATION - ENVIRONMENT AND SOCIAL 

MANAGEMENT PLAN 

(No.  B/327)  Mrs  D.  Selvon  (Second  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, following 
the publication of the Environmental and Social Management Plan Summary in 2014, he will 
state  the  concerns  and  advice  provided  by  the  African  Development  Bank’s  Energy, 
Environment  and  Climate  Change  Department  in  relation  to  the  social  and  environmental 
risks posed by  the St  Louis Power Station Redevelopment, in Port  Louis, indicating if his 
Ministry will ensure the implementation by the Central Electricity Board –  

(a)  of  the  environmental  protection  measures  recommended  therein,  indicating  if 

some of them will not be implemented and, if not why not, and  

(b) and local residents of a joint committee to foster permanent dialogue in relation 

thereto. 

Reply: I am informed by the Central Electricity Board that - 
(i) 

the  Energy,  Environment  and  Climate  Change  Department  of  the  African 
Development Bank has not  expressed any concerns on environmental issues 
relating to the redevelopment of the St Louis Power Station; 
the  Environment  and  Social  Management  Plan  was  prepared  by  CEB’s 
consultant as a mandatory requisite of the loan application to AFDB, and  

(ii) 

(iii)  the  Bank  has  already  approved  the  loan  after  examining  all  the  mandatory 

requirements related to the loan application.  

I wish to further inform the House that the project obtained an EIA on 1 August 2013 
and  that  the  Environment  and  Social  Management  Plan  forms  part  of  the  works  contract 
between CEB and the contractor. The contract was also vetted by the AFDB. 

CEB  will  as  a  responsible  organisation  ensure  that  the  Environment  and  Social 

Management Plan and the conditions of the EIA Licence are fully complied with. 

With regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed by that the CEB officials have 
been  holding  consultation  meetings  with  the  local  residents,  including  the  President  of 
Mouvement  Civique  of  Camp  Chapelon  and  has  informed  them  that  they  may  visit  the 
construction site, if they make a request to CEB.  

 
 
 

 

143 

FISHERMEN – CARDS – ISSUE & STAMPING 

(No.  B/328)  Mrs  D.  Selvon  (Second  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Ocean  Economy,  Marine  Resources,  Fisheries,  Shipping  and  Outer 
Islands whether, in regard to the fishermen of Port Louis, he will state - 

(a) the number of fishermen’s permits issued, region-wise, since December 2014 to 
date, indicating the number of requests therefor which have been turned down, 
indicating in each case, the reasons therefor, and  

(b)  if  he  is  aware  of  their  complaints  to  the  effect  that  officers  of  his  Ministry  are 
often not in post to stamp their cards when they return from fishing expeditions 
and, if so, if remedial measures will be taken in relation thereto. 

Reply: Regarding part (a) of the question, I am informed that no fishermen permits, 
commonly  known  as  fisherman  cards,  have  been  issued  to  fishermen  in  Port  Louis  since 
December 2014. There are 41 applications from Bain des Dames, Grand River North West 
and Roche Bois as at date and no request has been turned down. 

Regarding part (b) of the question, I am aware of the problems faced by fishermen 
concerning  the  stamping  of  their  cards  at  Fisheries  Posts.  In  order  to  eliminate  undue 
hardships on fishermen who would call at the Fisheries Posts to stamp their cards, a decision 
has been taken by my Ministry last to allow fishermen cards to be stamped and signed after 
sunset at Pointe aux Sables. 

The  problem  of  stamping  of  cards  was  further  compounded  by  shortage  of  staff  in 

Fisheries Posts. Staff shortages in Fisheries Posts have been a persistent problem.  

However, with a view to alleviating the problem, my Ministry has, in 2015, recruited 15 
Fisheries  Protection  Service  officers  to  serve  in  Fisheries  Posts.  Some  26  additional  such 
officers would be recruited this year. 

 

UNIVERSITIES - DIPLOMAS/DEGREES - DELIVERY 

(No.  B/329)  Mrs  D.  Selvon  (Second  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West) 
asked the Minister of  Health and Quality of  Life  whether, in regard to the recent cases of 
universities which had been set up in Mauritius and which had not been allowed to deliver 
diplomas/degrees to their students, he will state in each case, the present status thereof and 
whether  a  solution  has  been  reached  regarding  delivery  of  the  said  qualifications  to  the 
students thereof. 

Reply  (Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 
Scientific Research):  I am informed by the Tertiary Education Commission that there are no 

 

144 

recent cases as such of universities set up in Mauritius and which have not been allowed to 
deliver diplomas/degrees. 

I  presume  the  hon.  Member  may  be  referring  to  the  D.Y.  Patil  Medical  College, 
running  postgraduate  courses  in  medicine  and  whose  students  were  not  registered  by  the 
Medical  Council  of  Mauritius.    The  Medical  Council  had  then  drawn  the  attention  of  the 
authorities  on  certain  shortcomings  with  regard  to  the  courses  run  by  D.Y.  Patil  Medical 
College.    These  students  could  not  get  registered  by  the  Medical  Council  and  they  were 
therefore unable to practice as Specialists.   

When we took office after the elections, an inter-ministerial committee comprising 
my ministry, the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life and the Attorney General’s Office 
was set up to look into the matter and to come forward with a solution.  A decision was taken 
to invite the Imperial College, London to carry out an assessment in respect of the Doctors 
who could not get registered as Specialists by the Medical Council. 

The team from Imperial College and local Clinicians from the Ministry of Health 
recorded  certain  shortcomings  in  the  clinical  competencies.    A  top-up  medical  programme 
was  proposed  and  designed  by  the  Imperial  College,  London.    The  programme  includes 
clinical  training  and  supervision  to  be  run  by  the  University  of  Technology,  Mauritius 
(UTM).    As  for  the  clinical  supervision,  it  will  be  carried  out  by  the  Specialists  of  the 
Ministry of Health. 

We have thus managed to come forward with a solution to this issue. 
I am advised that the registration of students for the top-up programme is scheduled 
for Wednesday 27 April 2016 at the UTM and the course is due to start on Friday 29 April 
2016 for students wishing to enrol for the course. 

Upon successful completion of the programme, the process leading to the registration 
of the students as Specialists would have to be completed as per requirements of the Ministry 
of Health and Quality of Life and the Medical Council. 

 

INFANT MORTALITY  

(No.  B/330)  Dr.  Z.  Joomaye  (Second  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac)  asked  the  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  whether,  in  regard  to  infant 
mortality, he will state the latest figures available therefor, indicating the remedial measures 
being taken by his Ministry to curb the incidence thereof.  

 

145 

Reply: In my reply to P.Q. No. B/464, of September 2015, I informed the House that 
the forecast for Infant Mortality Rate for 2015 was 12.6 for the Island of Mauritius and 14.3 
for Rodrigues.   

I wish to inform the House that figures for the year 2015 for the Island of Mauritius 

are 13.7 and 11.7 for Rodrigues.   

These  figures  confirm  that  there  is  a  declining  trend  and  that  the  strategies 

implemented by my Ministry to curb the incidence are effective.  

Since November 2015,  a Neonatal  ICU is operational at J. Nehru Hospital. Further 
remedial  measures  proposed  and  being  implemented  by  my  Ministry  to  curb  down  Infant 
Mortality Rate are set out as below - 

• 

• 
• 
• 

• 

• 

Opening of a National Neonatal ICU at Victoria Hospital in January 2017 to cater 
for all complicated cases of the whole island. The bed capacity at the National 
Neonatal ICU will be increased from 6 to 16. 
Upgrading of the Neonatal ICU of SSRN to increase the bed capacity from 5 to 7. 
Opening of a Neonatal ICU at Dr A. G. Jeetoo Hospital and Flacq Hospital. 
Training of Medical Health Officers and nurses in Neonatal  ICU care which is 
due to start in May 2016. 
A  multi-disciplinary  team  approach  has  been  adopted.  A  Respiratory  Therapist 
will be attached to each of the neonatal units of all the regional hospitals and will 
provide assistance under the Supervision of the Head of Neonatal Services. 
A Paediatric Intensive Care Unit will be opened shortly at J. Nehru Hospital to 
cater for critically ill children of age above one month and also to provide a more 
specialised service. 

The  other  remedial  measures  being  taken  to  reduce  Infant  Mortality  Rate  are  the 
vaccination of babies  and  young  children  with Rotavirus and Pneumococcal vaccines. The 
Rotavirus vaccine was  introduced in our hospitals since March 2015 to the tune of Rs 10.5 
million annually. The Pneumococcal vaccine was introduced in the hospitals in March 2016 
at a cost of Rs33 m. annually. 

As  regards  Rodrigues  Island,  a  team  from  my  Ministry  comprising  a  Consultant 
Gyneacologist and Obstetrics and a Consultant-in-charge Paediatrics carried out an audit in 
November  2015  on  infant  and  under  five  mortality  on  the  island.  They  made  several 
recommendations  in  order  to  reduce  Infant  Mortality  Rate.  These  recommendations  have 

 

146 

been referred to Departmental Head, Health and Sports, Rodrigues Regional Assembly for 
necessary actions. 

 

HOSPITALS - BED OCCUPANCY 

(No.  B/331)  Dr.  Z.  Joomaye  (Second  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  & 
Souillac) asked the  Minister of Health and Quality of Life whether, in regard to the Dr A.G. 
Jeetoo Hospital, the Queen Victoria Hospital and the Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam National 
Hospital,  he  will  state  the  average  monthly  bed  occupancy  in  the  respective  medical  and 
surgical departments thereof.  

Reply: I am tabling the average monthly bed occupancy in the respective medical and 
surgical departments for the Dr A. G. Jeetoo Hospital, the Queen Victoria Hospital and the 
Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam National Hospital.  

 

PRB REPORT 2016 - ERRORS, OMISSIONS AND ANOMALIES 

COMMITTEE 

(No. B/332) Mr M. Gobin (First Member for Rivière des Anguilles & Souillac) 
asked the Minister of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms, Minister of Environment, 
Sustainable Development, and Disaster and Beach Management whether, in regard to the Pay 
Research Bureau Report 2016, he will state if –  

(a) Government will set up an Errors, Omissions and Anomalies Committee and, if so, 

indicate when and the terms of reference thereof and, if not, why not, and  

(b)  if  the  Option  Forms  have  been  issued  to  the  employees  governed  by  the  said 
Report and, if so, indicate when or Government proposes to await the publication 
of the EOAC Report, if any, prior to requiring the filling and submission thereof. 

(Withdrawn) 

NATIONAL MINIMUM WAGE - IMPLEMENTATION 

(No. B/334) Mr V. Baloomoody (Third Member for GRNW & Port Louis West) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and  Training  whether,  in 
regard to the proposed introduction of an across the board National Minimum Wage, he will 
state where matters stand, including if a timeframe for the implementation thereof has been 
set. 

Reply:  Cabinet  approval  has  been  obtained  for  the  introduction  into  the  National 

Assembly of the National Wage Consultative Council (2016) Bill. 

147 

 
The proposed Council will, within a period of 12 months, make recommendations to 
Government regarding a national minimum wage to be introduced for both the private and 
public sectors. 

CAMP DE MASQUE - COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTRE 

(No.  B/337)  Mr  K.  Tarolah  (Third  Member  for  Montagne  Blanche  &  GRSE) 
asked  the  Minister  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life  whether,  in  regard  to  the  proposed 
construction of a Community Health Centre at Camp de Masque, he will state if a new site 
has been earmarked therefor and, if so, indicate the location thereof and, if not, indicate the 
actions taken, if any, to remedy the chaotic situation prevailing thereat. 

(Withdrawn) 

