No. 29 of 2016 

 

 

 

1 

 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

(UNREVISED) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

 

FRIDAY 19 AUGUST 2016 

 

 

 

 

2 

 

CONTENTS 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

PAPERS LAID 

QUESTION (Oral) 

MOTION 

STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS 

BILLS (Public) 

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

 

3 

THE CABINET 

 

(Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

 
Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 
KCMG, QC  
Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 
GCSK  
Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Hon.  Ivan  Leslie  Collendavelloo,  GCSK, 
SC 
Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK 

 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 
Communications 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 
Utilities 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 
International Trade 
 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha, GCSK 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan, SC 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 
Sinatambou 
Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 
Perraud 
Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain, GCSK 

of 
Minister 
Empowerment 
Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation  

Integration 

and  Economic 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 
Family Welfare 
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 
Institutional Reforms  

 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

 
Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 
Cheong, MSK 

Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 

4 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 
Institutions 
Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands 
 
Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms, 
Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 
Disaster and Beach Management 
Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and 
Training 

 

 

 

 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Gopall, Mr Navin  

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 29 of 2016 

 

Sitting of 19 August 2016 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 3.00 p.m. 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 

 

 

 

7 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

47TH CPA AFRICA REGION CONFERENCE – MAURITIUS HOSTING 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Members,  I  am  pleased  to  announce  that  the  Mauritius 
National  Assembly  will  be  hosting  the    47th  Commonwealth  Parliamentary  Association 
Africa  Region  Conference  from  22  to  27  August  2016  at  the  Intercontinental  Hotel,  in 
Balaclava  under  the  theme  “Africa  and  the  Sustainable  Development  Goals:    The  Role  of 
Parliaments”.  

Some 350 delegates from the other 17 National Branches and 18 Sub-Branches are 

participating thereto. 

As I am currently the President of the CPA Africa Region, I have nominated the hon. 
Deputy Speaker to lead the Mauritian delegation which will comprise of the following hon. 
Members -  

Hon. Baloomoody,  
Hon. Mrs Jadoo-Jaunbocus, and 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii)  Hon. Rutnah. 
In  addition,  the  following  hon.  Members  have  been  nominated  to  attend  the 

Conference as Observers – 

1.  Hon. Jhugroo,  
2.  Hon. Hurreeram,  
3.  Hon. Jahangeer,  
4.  Hon.  Dr. Joomaye,  
5.  Hon.  Osman Mahomed,  
6.  Hon. Mrs Monty  
7.  Hon.  Mrs Sewocksingh,  
8.  Hon. Dr. Sorefan,  

Moreover,  I  have  also  invited  the  Chairperson  and  two  Members  of  the  Rodrigues 

Regional Assembly to attend the said Conference as Observers.  

Hon. Members, you are all kindly invited to attend the Opening Ceremony of the CPA 
Regional Conference which will be held on Wednesday 24 August next at 11.00 hours at the 
Intercontinental Hotel, in Balaclava.  

 
I am pleased to announce that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has kindly agreed to deliver 

8 

the Opening Address.  

Alongside this Conference, the Mauritius National Assembly will also be hosting the 
7th  Commonwealth  Women  Parliamentarian  Africa  Region  Conference  on  24  August  next 
and which is being convened by hon. Mrs Boygah in her capacity as Member of the CWP 
Africa Region Steering Committee.  

Thank you. 

PAPERS LAID 

The Prime Minister:  Madam Speaker, the Papers have been laid on the Table - 

 

A.    Prime Minister’s Office ‒ 

 (a)   Status Report on the National Development Unit Projects for Financial Year  

2015 – 2016 as at 31 July 2016. 

 (b)   List of Projects of the National Development Unit for Financial Year 2016 – 

2017 as at 31 July 2016. 

 (c)   The  National  Flag  (Standard  Size  and  Dimension,  Colour  Codes  and 

Materials) Regulations 2016.  (Government Notice No. 174 of 2016). 

 

B.    Ministry of Finance and Economic Development ‒ 

 The  Sugar  Insurance  Fund  (Amendment  of  Schedule)  Regulations  2016. 
(Government Notice No. 176 of 2016)  

 

C.    Attorney General’s Office ‒ 

 The  Institutions  Agréées  (Amendment)  Regulations  2016.  (Government  Notice 
No. 175 of 2016) 

 

D.    Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection ‒ 

 (a)   The Rodrigues Consumer Protection (Control of Price of Taxable and Non-
Taxable  Goods)  (Amendment  No.  22)  Regulations  2016.  (Government 
Notice No. 177 of 2016) 

 

9 

 (b)   The  Consumer  Protection  (Control  of  Sale  of  Imported  Live  Animals  for 
Home  Slaughter)  (Amendment)  Regulations  2016.  (Government  Notice  
No. 178 of 2016) 

 

ORAL ANSWER TO QUESTION 

FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE – OUTBREAK 

The  Leader  of  the  Opposition  (Mr  P.  Bérenger)  (by  Private  Notice)  asked  the 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security whether, in regard to the recent outbreak of the 
Foot  and  Mouth  Disease,  he  will  state  the  population  of  cattle,  sheep,  goats  and  pigs  in 
Rodrigues and in mainland Mauritius respectively, as at June 2016, indicating –  

(a) the number thereof culled as at to date;  

(b)  if  the  breeders  thereof  in  Rodrigues  and  in mainland  Mauritius  will  receive  the 

same compensation;  

(c) if the ban on imports thereof from Rodrigues will be effective for three years and 

the breeders thereof will receive assistance in relation thereto, and  

(d) if the responsibilities have now been established on the manner in which the ban 
issued on 29 July 2016 was handled and the imports thereof from Rodrigues were 
disembarked on 01 August, 2016. 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, I would, first of all, wish to inform the House that 
the Division of Veterinary Services of my Ministry normally exercises a very strict control to 
ensure that live animals and meat imported in Mauritius originate from countries where there 
are no contagious diseases.   

In  fact,  before  issuing  import  permits  for  live  animals  and  meat,  an  Import  Permit 
Committee  thoroughly  examines  all  applications  and  pays  special  attention  to  conditions 
prevailing in the exporting countries, particularly in regard to prevalence of diseases.  

In view of this surveillance, Mauritius has been, except for the outbreak of African 
Swine Fever in 2007, spared from serious infectious animal diseases over a long period of 
time.  It has been brought to my notice, today itself, that there was an outbreak of the Foot 
and Mouth Disease in Mauritius in l916, 100 years ago. 

10 

 
We were, therefore, taken aback by the occurrence of the Foot and Mouth Disease in 
Rodrigues and eventually in Mauritius. The Fact-Finding Committee which the Government 
has agreed to set up will surely shed light on the possible causes of the entry of this disease in 
Rodrigues.  My  Ministry  is  presently  finalising  the  terms  of  reference  for  the  Fact-Finding 
Committee which will also be called upon to situate responsibility regarding the importation 
of the consignment of the infected cattle from Rodrigues on 01 August 2016. 

Madam Speaker, my Ministry has been very quick to react to ensure that the disease 
does  not  spread  over  the  whole  island,  which  would  have  been  a  major  tragedy  for  our 
livestock sector.  

The consignment of infected animals which reached Mauritius in cattle containers on 
01 August 2016 was immediately transferred to the Richelieu Quarantine Station where the 
animals were kept under observation. 

 Farm harbouring animals imported in a previous consignment from Rodrigues on 15 

July 2016 were regularly monitored to detect any signs of the disease.  

As soon as symptoms of the disease were detected and analysis of blood samples at 
the Animal Health Laboratory in Réduit has established the presence of the disease, decision 
was taken to cull all the animals at Richelieu Quarantine Station and in some farms at Vallée 
des Prêtres and Cité La Cure. 

This week, culling has been done in infected farms at Highlands and Notre Dame. An 

infected animal at Camp La Boue, Terre Rouge was culled yesterday. 

In all, some 681 animals have been culled so far in Mauritius.  

Blood samples as well as sera and epithelial tissue samples have been sent for analysis 
in laboratories in South Africa and France which are reference laboratories approved by the 
Office  International  des  Epizooties,  an  international  organisation  responsible  for  animal 
welfare.  According  to  the  latest  reports,  both  laboratories  have  now  confirmed  that  the 
serotype of the virus is of type <0>. 

Results of analysis of samples taken from Rodrigues on Monday last will be received 
from  Botswana  Vaccine  Institute  by  this  evening.  The  vaccination  campaign  will  start  on 
Monday  after  receipt  of  the  20,000  available  doses  of  vaccines  during  the  weekend  and 
10,000 of these vaccines will be sent to Rodrigues. 

11 

 
My Ministry has made a request for assistance to the FAO to help us cope with the 
current situation. The FAO has agreed to provide necessary assistance. A formal application 
under the Technical Cooperation Programme is being prepared, as per established procedures 
and will be submitted to the FAO shortly.  

The Indian Ocean Commission has also agreed to extend assistance to us to deal with 
this  problem.  I  had  a  meeting  today  with  the  Health  and  Surveillance  Unit  of  the  IOC 
whereby technical assistance had been obtained for a team of foreign veterinary officers to 
help us in the implementation of the vaccination campaign. 

Madam Speaker, it is also relevant for me to mention that I had a meeting with the 
President  and  representatives  of  the  Jummah  Mosque  yesterday  in  the  context  of  the 
forthcoming  Eid-Ul-Adha  festival.  A  number  of  issues  have  been  discussed  and  decisions 
taken to ensure that the festival takes place in the best conditions. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) (i) of the question, I am informed that as at 

June 2016, the overall population of cattle, sheep/goats and pigs is as follows - 

 (i) In Rodrigues - 

Cattle: 11,000,  

Sheep and goats: 29,000  

Pigs: 10,000  

(ii) In Mauritius - 

Cattle: 6,447  

Sheep/goats: 28,804 

Pigs: 21,235  

Regarding part (a) (ii) of the question, I am informed that 2,216 animals have been 
culled in Rodrigues as at to date. As regards Mauritius, 681 animals have been culled as at 
yesterday. 

With regard to part (b) (ii) of the question, the quantum of compensation payable for 

Mauritius takes into consideration several parameters, namely – 

12 

the market value of the local animals;  

 
(i) 

(ii) 

freight charges incurred for import;  

(iii) 

the cost of feed incurred by breeders, and  

(iv) 

age, sex and species of the animals. 

I  am  tabling  the  different  rates  worked  out  to  compensate  breeders  and  importers  in 
Mauritius. 

With  regard  to  Rodrigues,  I  understand  from  the  Rodriguan  Authorities  that  the 
Rodrigues  Regional  Assembly  has,  at  its  meeting  held  today,  decided  to  align  the 
compensation payable to Rodriguan breeders with those approved for Mauritius. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  proposed  ban  of  3  years  to  be  imposed  on  all  imports  from 
Rodrigues  is  in  line  with  norms  prescribed  by  the  World  Organisation  for  Animal  Health 
(OIE) and is a mandatory requirement for a country to regain its disease freedom status. 

The vaccination programme to be undertaken shortly in Mauritius and in Rodrigues 
will  have  to  be  effected  over  a  total  period  of  30  months  approximately,  and  in  4  phases 
including: a primary dose, followed by a booster dose after 21 days, a second booster dose 
after 4 months and lastly 3 additional doses at 6 months’ intervals.  During the vaccination 
programme, the disease status both in Mauritius and in Rodrigues will be closely monitored 
and if found to be under control and free from the disease, a decision may be taken to lift the 
ban imposed on Rodrigues earlier than the 3 years’ period. 

As  regards  compensation  payable  to  breeders  in  the  wake  of  the  disease,  I  wish  to 
point out that the Rodrigues Regional Assembly is an autonomous body which has its own 
Commission  of  Agriculture  and  its  own  Veterinary  Services.    As  such,  although  we  do 
provide  assistance  to  Rodrigues  as  and  when  required,  we  do  not  per  se  have  a  ‘droit  de 
regard’ on the internal policies of Rodrigues. 

However,  Madam  Speaker,  Cabinet,  has,  at  its  meeting  today,  decided  to  set  up  a 
Ministerial  Committee  under  the  chairmanship  of  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development,  for  the  relaunching  of  the  livestock  sector  in  Mauritius  and  Rodrigues.  The 
Committee will comprise the following Ministers - 

(i)   Minister of Youth and Sports; 

 
(ii) 

 Minister of Local Government; 

13 

(iii)   Minister of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment; 

(iv)   Minister of Agro-industry and Food Security; 

(v)  Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives, and 

(vi)   Minister of Environment. 

As regards the last part of the question, it is relevant to mention that the shipment of 
the  animals  was  authorised  by  the  Veterinary  Officer  of  Rodrigues.  The  cattle-containers 
were  off-loaded  in  the  Port  once  health  clearance  was  obtained.  The  clearance  of  the 
Veterinary  Services  in  Mauritius  was  required  for  the  importers  to  take  delivery  of  the 
animals in the Port area. This clearance was not given as it was suspected that the animals 
might  have  been  affected  by  the  disease,  hence,  the  instructions  issued  by  the  DVS  to 
Rodrigues  on  29  July  not  to  embark  the  animals  on  the  MV  Anna.  As  a  precautionary 
measure, all the animals had to be transported to Richelieu Quarantine Station to be placed 
under observation.   I cannot, at this stage, say  whether  I  am satisfied or not regarding the 
manner in which the importation was made. The Fact-Finding Committee will, as I indicated 
earlier, shed light on this matter. 

Mr Bérenger: The hon. Minister provided us with figures that I will look at carefully.  
I  have  heard  again  a  reference  to  the  number  of  animals  culled  to  date  in  Rodrigues  and 
Mauritius and not a breakdown.  Is this because we do not have at this stage the breakdown in 
terms of the different animals concerned? 

Mr Seeruttun: In fact, the breakdown is as follows – 

• 
• 

for Rodrigues - 699 cattle, 1,272 sheep and goats and 245 pigs, and  
for Mauritius - 257 cattle, 275 sheep and goats and 149 pigs. 

Mr Bérenger: Has the Ministry worked out an estimate at this stage of how many 

different animals will have to be culled before the problem is under control? 

Mr Seeruttun: In fact, as and when animals are showing signs of this disease - we are 
going through a selective mode of culling - we are culling the animals. We hope now, with 
the coming of the vaccines, that we are going to start the campaign as from Monday.  Then, 
we  will  be  able  to  save  all  those  who  have  been  in  contact  with  those  animals  that  were 

 

14 

infected.  So, hopefully, this will reduce the number of animals that have to be culled once 
the vaccines are being injected. 

Mr  Bérenger:  In  reply  to  my  PNQ  on  09  August  2016,  Madam  Speaker,  the  hon. 
Minister said that he too was shocked when reading in the Press of the conditions in which 
the animals in Rodrigues were culled.  Do we know more? Is it confirmed that these terrible 
things happen and has this stopped, that is, culling by cutting throats? 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam  Speaker,  rightly said, from what we read on the paper, the 
way things were being apparently  carried out in Rodrigues looked to be inhumane.   I was 
there  in  Rodrigues  last  Saturday.  I  had  meetings  with  all  those  concerned.  I  did  put  the 
question  to  those  concerned  and  the  reply  that  I  got  was:  “That’s  the  way  the  cattle  are 
slaughtered in Rodrigues.” That is what they do every Saturday when they go for the sale of 
meat. At the time when that disease was detected and with the limited resources that they had, 
they had recourse to that way of doing the culling. That is why we provided them with  two 
additional Veterinarians from Mauritius. And since, they have also obtained all the injections 
to endormir the cattle. The day  I was there, they confirmed to me that this is no more the 
practice. They are doing the same that we do here, that is, endormir les animaux before they 
are culled. 

Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, if you will allow me to congratulate the Rodrigues 
Regional Assembly which has decided, if I heard the hon. Minister correctly, today to align 
the compensation because I am sure the hon. Minister will agree with me that this was a very 
unhealthy situation; creating a lot of frustration in Rodrigues.  I congratulate the Rodrigues 
Regional  Assembly.  Of  course,  we  respect  the  autonomy  of  the  Rodrigues,  the  Regional 
Assembly and so on, but I am reading the Cabinet communiqué of 12 August, I quote 

“Cabinet has agreed to the payment of a compensation to breeders (…)”.   

Does that include an additional effort because we respect the autonomy of Rodrigues, but this 
is an exceptional matter; or do we expect the Rodrigues Regional Assembly to use only its 
normal funds to align the compensation; or does this Cabinet decision in mainland Mauritius 
include a sum to help the Rodrigues Regional Assembly align the compensation? 

Mr Seeruttun:  With regard to the compensation that has been announced, for the 
time being, it is being paid out of the fund from their own budget. But as I have mentioned in 
my  reply  earlier  on  we  have  set  up  a  Ministerial  Committee  to  look  at  all  the  issues  with 

 

15 

regard  to  that  problem  and    it  has  been  chaired  by  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development.   We will probably also look at other issues in terms of assistance that can be 
provided to the Rodriguans as well. 

Mr Bérenger: I think I heard the hon. Minister say that every effort will be carried 
out to reduce that period of three years, which was announced in reply to my PNQ: ‘we have 
for  scientific  reasons  to  have  a  period  of  three  years’.  Now,  I  understand  that  it  could  be 
reduced. Can I have a precision on what the Ministry, or the specialist concerned, is going to 
base itself, if ever, to come to a decision to reduce that period of three years? 

Mr Seeruttun:  In fact, during that period that we are going to vaccinate the animals, 
we will have to carry out tests periodically to see whether they still give signs of the presence 
of that disease in the bodies of those animals so if the results show that there is no sign of that 
particular disease then we can declare the island being free from the FMD. 

Mr Bérenger:   Different from compensation is  - during that period of three  years, 
less  than  three  years  or  whatever  period  -  assistance  to  the  breeders  in  Rodrigues  because 
there will be a ban for a given period on import of animals from Rodrigues. We respect fully 
the autonomy of the Rodrigues Regional Assembly, but is there any proposal from their end 
because again this is a national issue, to set up any scheme for assistance to those breeders? 

Mr Seeruttun:  Madam Speaker, that is where this Committee will look into all those 

issues and come up with some recommendations. 

Mr Bérenger:  In the last part of my question, Madam Speaker, I think I heard the 
hon. Minister say that the authorities in Rodrigues directed not to embark those animals that 
landed on 01 of August.  I am quoting from memory. Now, what disturbed me is that the hon. 
Minister did place on the Table of the Assembly the exchanges of correspondence.  Has it 
been pointed out to the officers, hon. Minister, that they only recommended? They did not 
direct!  The hon. Minister mentioned ‘directions’.  I am disturbed by the fact that they were 
not directed not to embark.  They said: “it is recommended”, and that took place from our end 
at 10 in the morning.  I must say the Rodrigues Officer was very quick.  At 12.43 p.m. he 
replied  and,  rightly  so,  being  a  civil  servant,  he  said:  “I  am  seeking  approval  from  higher 
quarters.”  Does not the hon. Minister think that there has been a lapse there? There has been 
no follow up within hours that could have stopped that embarkation. Does the hon. Minister 
have the date and time on which finally those animals were embarked? 

16 

 
Mr Seeruttun: The date and the time, I don’t have it with me now, but I can find it 
out.  The thing that I have gathered from the Chief Veterinary of the Ministry is that the mail 
clearly stated out that we are banning any importation of animals from Rodrigues and they 
should not embark any animal from thereon. 

Mr Bérenger:  There has been opinion by professionals, one retired official from the 
Veterinary Services, saying that those animals should have been kept on board and should not 
have been disembarked. Do your officers advise you in the same manner or are you satisfied 
that what took place had to take place, that is, sending them to Richelieu? 

Mr  Seeruttun:    At  the  time  that  the  consignment  arrived  in  Mauritius  on  01  of 
August,  tests  that  were  carried  out  to  confirm  or  not  the  existence  of  the  disease  showed 
negative results. Secondly, what I am told is that the animals arrived in containers because it 
is not a cattle carrier. Apart from animals, there are also other stuff that are embarked on that 
ship. If we had to send back the ship, we should have waited for the disembarkment of all the 
other items which were on board of that ship. It would have taken probably up to 9 days. As 
the animals had already stayed for 48 hours in the containers, it would have been inhumane to 
let  them  in  that  container  for  so  long.  So,  that  is  why  the  decision  was  taken  that  the 
containers  were  lifted  and  sent  to  the  Quarantine  Station  at  Richelieu.  They  were  not 
disembarked,  put  on  vehicles  and  transferred  to  the  Quarantine  Station.    They  were 
transferred as they were on the ship, that is, in the containers themselves.  So, there was no 
contact at the Port area up until they got to the Quarantine Station. 

Mr Bérenger:  I am puzzled, Madam Speaker - before  I leave the floor to others - by 
this  reference  to  containers.    Is  it  the  normal  practice  for  animals  to  be  exported  from 
Rodrigues to Mauritius in containers?  I must say I have never heard of that. 

Mr Seeruttun:  It is in containers, but with some openings. 

(Interruptions) 

I am told it is as per IATA requirements. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Uteem! 

Mr  Uteem:  The  hon.  Minister  mentioned  in  his  reply  that  he  had  meetings  with 
representatives of Jummah Mosque in view of the incoming Eid-Ul-Adha festival. So, may I 
just  seek  two  clarifications?  First,  will  all  the  cattle  have  to  be  slaughtered  in  the 

 

17 

slaughterhouse and to the extent that they can be slaughtered  at home,  will the Veterinary 
Services  issue  a  certificate  to  all  purchasers  to  certify  that  this  is  clean  and  it  can  be 
slaughtered at home? 

Mr  Seeruttun:  Madam  Speaker,  we  did  have  a  long  discussion  yesterday  with 
representatives of the Jummah Mosque and one of the proposals that we made was that in the 
region of Vallée des Prêtres and Cité La Cure, given that the area is mostly affected by this 
disease,  those  people  who  are  going  to  practice  the  Qurbani,  we  are  recommending  that, 
instead  of  doing  the  slaughtering  at  their  own  place,  they  do  it  at  the  Mauritius  Meat 
Authority.  The MMA is trying to come up with some kind of proposals to finalise with the 
representatives of Jummah Mosque shortly to see how we can go about because they won’t 
be able to cater for the whole island. In other areas where there is no problem, slaughtering 
will be done as usual, but under strict surveillance. We have proposed that all those breeders 
who are going to sell their animals for that particular event, they have to, first, be registered 
with the Veterinary Services of my Ministry, have a certificate of health of the animals to 
make sure that all animals that are going to be used for that particular event are free from the 
disease. 

Mr Mahomed: My question pertains to the 21,000 doses of vaccination that is going 
to reach our shore this weekend. Now that it is confirmed that it is of type ‘O’, but we also 
read that the viruses contain several strains. Now, the vaccination that is going to reach the 
country this weekend, is it of a spectrum that is wide enough to cater for all those possible 
strains because the first time the vaccination was not appropriate. 

Mr Seeruttun:  In fact, Madam Speaker, we have confirmation that the strain is the 
type ‘O’ strain and we have also been able to identity from which region. The origin is from 
the Middle East and South Asia. That’s the test that we just obtained this afternoon from the 
France laboratory. The vaccines that we have ordered is going to address the ‘O’ strain. So, 
that’s why we have ordered that particular vaccine. The one that we ordered last week was… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! Order! 

Mr Seeruttun: The one that we ordered previously was supposed to address the SAT 
1, SAT 2 based on the result that we got from the Lab in South Africa. These are being dealt 
with to have them sent back. 

18 

 
Dr. Sorefan: The best way to prevent the propagation of such a disease is how we 
dispose of those culled animals. May we know from the hon. Minister how those animals are 
being disposed of and whether incinerators have been sought from friendly countries, because 
to my scientific knowledge, the best way is to incinerate all the animals, to get on a free basis 
incinerators to get rid of the animals? 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, there are different ways of disposing of the carcasses 
of those animals and one is what we are doing, that is, bury the carcasses. The other could 
have  been  to  burn  the  carcasses.  But  we  are  in  an  island  where  the  farms  are  found  in 
residential areas and we have been told that it would not be environmentally correct to go for 
that way of disposing of the carcasses, it is not the right way because we are surrounded by 
residential  premises.  Looking  at  whether  we  have  contacted  friendly  countries  to  resort  to 
incinerator  facilities, well, this would have taken,  you would imagine, some time. Time is 
against us! 

Mr  Baloomoody:  The  hon.  Minister  just  mentioned  that  we  are  on  a  campaign  of 
vaccination, and the earliest we finished that campaign, the better.  We have a shortage of 
veterinarians in the services, this is why we are calling assistance from outside. Can I ask the 
hon.  Minister  whether  he  is  prepared  to  call  for  the  Mauritian  Veterinarians  in  the  private 
practice to come and assist so that we get on quickly with the vaccination? 

Mr  Seeruttun:  Madam  Speaker,  I  did  mention  last  time  that  we  have  also  already 
contacted  the  private  vets.  I  have  talked  myself  personally  to  the  Chairperson  of  the  Vet 
Council  and  I  know  my  Ministry  has  already  established  contact  with  them  and  they  are 
willing to give a helping hand. I have also mentioned that the COI is willing to provide us 
with  Vets  from  Madagascar.    They  are  willing  to  come  as  soon  as  possible.    This  also  is 
another venue we are looking at and whether to explore that venue as well to get additional 
resources to help us in that campaign. 

Mr Ganoo: Madam Speaker, mention is made in the last Cabinet decision which was 
published  last  week  that  assistance  has  been  sought  from  the  FAO.  Can  I  ask  the  hon. 
Minister  what  is  the  nature  of  the  assistance  which  has  been  sought  and  whether  it  is 
forthcoming? 

Mr  Seeruttun:  In  terms  of  assistance,  we  have  asked  for  technical  and  financial. 
Already, we have obtained a reply and I mentioned earlier on that a Technical Cooporation 
Programme  is  being  worked  out  and  we  will  send  to  the  FAO  to  get  that  assistance. 

 

19 

Concerning the IRC, they are also willing to provide in terms of vaccines freely to us in that 
programme to combat that disease. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, last question, hon. Leader of the Opposition. 

Mr Bérenger: I heard the hon. Minister say that the Terms of Reference of the Fact-
Finding Committee to be chaired by a sitting Magistrate are being worked out. Can I know 
from  the  hon.  Minister  whether  the  green  light  of  the  Chief  Justice,  of  the  required 
authorities, whether the Magistrate will be appointed as soon as the Terms of Reference are 
ready or whether we are going to wait for the current crisis to cool down before the Fact-
Finding Committee is appointed, which I don’t think would be a good thing? 

Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, we will do it at the earliest. 

Madam Speaker: Time is over! 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10(2) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move that all the business on today’s Order 

Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to 

 (3.35 p.m.) 

STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS 

APOLLO BRAMWELL HOSPITAL – EMPLOYEES - CONTRACT 

The Minister of Finance and Economic Development (Mr P. Jugnauth): Madam 
Speaker, with your permission, I will make a statement on issues raised at adjournment by 
hon. Reza Uteem on 11 August 2016. 

The issues raised were as follows - 

(i) 

(ii) 

Omega Ark had undertaken to take all the employees of the Apollo Hospital 
on board on the same terms and conditions. This has created confusion in the 
minds of staff of other three companies involved; 
Not all employees have received contracts of employment;  

 
(iii) 

(iv) 

20 

Even  those  who  have  received  contracts  of  employment,  the  terms  and 
conditions are not the same as existing terms. Furthermore, some of the terms 
are contrary to Employment Rights Act, and 
Termination of employment of a staff at the Apollo Bramwell Nursing School 
by the Special Administrator. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  am  informed  that  since  the  start  of  its  operations  in 2009,  the 
staff of the following three companies have never been the employees of Apollo Bramwell 
Hospital. However, the Apollo Bramwell Hospital had recourse to the services of the three 
companies.  Following  the  collapse  of  the  ex-BAI  Group,  these  companies  are  now  being 
managed  on  a  day-to-day  basis  by  the  appointed  Special  Administrator,  Mr  Yacoob 
Ramtoola. However, the Apollo Bramwell Hospital had recourse to the services of the three 
companies.  Following  the  collapse  of  the  ex-  BAI  Group,  these  companies  are  now  being 
managed  on  a  day-to-day  basis  by  the  appointed  Special  Administrator,  Mr.  Yacoob 
Ramtoola.  

The three companies are as follows –  

(i) 

Bramwell Catering Co Ltd - which prepares  food for patients, expatriate staff 
of the Hospital and other companies within the BAI Group; 

(ii)  Metropolis  Bramser  Laboratory  Services  (Mtius)  Ltd  -  which  offers 

Laboratory Services, and 

(iii)  Apollo Bramwell Nursing School Co Ltd - which provides training of nurses 

for the Hospital.  

The  Special  Administrator  has  the  responsibility  to  ultimately  find  potential  buyers 

for these three companies.  

Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  the  sale  of  the  business  of  the  Apollo  Bramwell 

Hospital, it was agreed, in the Asset Purchase Agreement, that - 

(i) 

only employees of the Apollo Bramwell Hospital will be employed by Omega 
Ark, and  

(ii) 

Omega Ark will continue to avail itself of the services of the three companies. 

21 

 
The employees of these three companies were fully aware that they were not party to 
the  eventual  takeover  of  the  Apollo  Bramwell  Hospital  by  Omega  Ark  and  therefore  the 
question  of  confusion  prevailing  in  the  minds  of  the  employees  of  these  three  companies 
should not arise.  

In  fact,  the  disposal  of  Apollo  Bramwell  Hospital  by  NIC  Healthcare  Ltd  and  the 
responsibility  of  the  Special  Administrator  with  regard  to  the  above  three  companies  are 
distinct matters. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to re-employment of the staff of the Apollo Bramwell 
Hospital, I am informed that, as at date, all 686 employees have been offered a contract of 
employment by Omega Ark.  

Madam  Speaker,  following  representations  made  by  the  Union,  today  I  met  the 

representatives of the Confédération des Travailleurs du Secteur Privé (CTSP) in my office. 

Their principal grievances are in respect of certain clauses that are contained in the 
new contract of employment which have been offered to the employees.  The Union is of the 
view that these clauses are against the employment laws of Mauritius. 

I have given the Union the assurance that officers of my Ministry and those of the 
Ministry  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and  Training  will  work  in  close 
collaboration to review the clauses mentioned by them. 

Madam  Speaker,  with  regard  to  the  said  employee  of  the  Nursing  School  whose 
contract  was  terminated  by  the  Special  Administrator,  I  am  informed  that  the  matter  was 
discussed  with  the  Special  Administrator  and  the  latter  has  agreed  to  find  an  acceptable 
solution. 

Thank you. 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Minister  of  Labour,  Industrial  Relations,  Employment  and 

Training! 

MAURITIUS SHIPPING CORPORATION LTD – PART TIME WORKERS 

The Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training (Mr S. 
Callichurn): Madam Speaker, with your permission, I would like to make a statement on the 

 

22 

issue of reduction of 16 part time workers at the Mauritius Shipping Corporation Ltd (MSCL) 
raised by hon. Osman Mahomed at adjournment time on Friday 12 August 2016. 

My Ministry received a letter dated 04 August 2016 wherein the Corporation notified 
its intention to lay off 16 terminal workers employed on a part time pensionable basis since 
2008. 

Management of MSCL has given the following reasons to explain the laying off of 

 
these workers - 

(a)  With the sale of MSCL passenger cum cargo vessel M/V Mauritius Pride in 
September  2014,  the  level  of  activity  of  the  said  company  at  the  passenger 
terminal  has  been  considerably  reduced  and  coupled  with  the  fact  that 
passengers prefer to travel by air rather than by sea, it is now handling 2,400 
passengers annually as compared to 42,000 passengers in 2013.  

(b) 

(c) 

There will be a new passenger terminal at the cruise jetty in the near future to 
cater  for  all  passengers  disembarking  in  Mauritius  i.e.  cruise  vessels  and 
MSCL vessel’s passengers in line with the Mauritius Ports Authority’s (MPA) 
Master Plan. 

The MPA has recently  decided to take over the operations of the passenger 
terminal from MSCL with effect from end of April 2016 and is reluctant to 
recruit these terminal workers. 

 
I am informed that the date of termination of employment of these workers has not yet 
been determined by the management as a matter of fact and it is still under consideration on 
humanitarian ground. 

I have also been informed that the hours of work and wages of the redundant workers 

 
are as follows – 

 

Category 

Hours of Work 

Monthly Wages 

 

 
Terminal Attendant 

23 

9.00 to 14.00 hours – 5 hours 

Rs 11,500 

( 5 days a week) 

 

Security 
Keeper 

Guard/Gate 

7.00 to 16.00 hours  - 9 hours 
in a month 

Rs 15,500 

(1 day per month) 

 

Security Guard 

7.00 to 16.00 hours 

Rs 13,300 

(1 day per month) 

 

Terminal Attendant/ 

4 hours per day 

Rs 14,600 

Luggage Porter 

(2 days per month) 

 

 

Therefore, at the request of the Union, my Ministry has held two meetings with the 
management  of  MSCL  on  13  May  and  06  June  2016.  Parties  have  agreed  to  discuss  the 
matter at their own level and stated that in case the dispute is not resolved, they would revert 
back to my Ministry. 

 
As the matter has not yet been resolved, Management of MSCL has now requested 
the intervention of my  Ministry to explore other avenues  for a settlement.  A meeting has 
been fixed on 23 August 2016 with the parties concerned to that effect. 

Thank you. 

 

PUBLIC BILLS 

Third Reading 

 

24 

THE APPROPRIATION (2016-2017) BILL 2016 (No. XVII of 2016) 

On motion made and seconded, the Appropriation (2016-2017) Bill 2016 (No. XVII of 

2016) was read the third time and passed. 

Second Reading 

THE PROTECTION OF ELDERLY PERSONS (AMENDMENT) BILL 

(NO. XV OF 2016) 

Madam Speaker: Before the debates will start on this Bill since I find that there is a 
long list of orators,  I wish to draw the attention of hon. Members that we are debating an 
Amendment Bill and debate is restricted to the  amendment. Therefore, in accordance with 
Standing Order 42 regarding the relevancy in debates, I will request hon. Members to restrict 
their interventions on the Amendment which is before the House today. 

Order for Second Reading read. 

The  Minister  of  Social  Security,  National  Solidarity  and  Reform  Institutions 
(Mrs  F.  Jeewa-Daureeawoo):  Madam  Speaker,  with  your  permission,  I  move  that  The 
Protection of Elderly Persons (Amendment) Bill (No. XV of 2016) be read a second time.  

The  amendment  that  is  being  proposed  today  has  a  laudable  purpose.  I  am  indeed 
pleased to bring forward this Amendment to the Protection of Elderly Persons Act 2005 with 
a view to enhancing the level of protection and security to the elderly persons. 

Our task does not end with the successful passing of an Act of Parliament, Madam 
Speaker.  The  Protection  of  Elderly  Persons  Act  2005  was  proclaimed  with  effect  on  01 
September  2006.  The  aim  was  to  set  up  a  legal  and  administrative  framework  to  provide 
greater protection and assistance to the elderly persons.  

However,  over  time,  we  have  realised  the  dreadful  reality  of  the  increasingly 
despicable conditions prevailing in the life of our elderly persons. A number of cases of abuse 
against elderly persons have been reported to my Ministry as at date. We all know how many 
cases may have been nipped in the bud and remain unreported for various known reasons. 

It is indeed heart breaking to note that most of the abuses are committed by family 
members, acquaintances, neighbours and so on. The causes of elderly abuse are very often 
linked  with  the  stress  associated  in  providing  care  and  assistance  to  frail  and  highly 

 

25 

dependent  elderly  people.  Abusers  have  a  total  misconception  that  violence  is  a  means  to 
obtain a desired benefit or to solve a problem. 

Although  my  Ministry  has  worked  on  a  series  of  measures  to  enhance  the  level  of 
protection  of  and  security  to  the  elderly,  it  was  high  time  that  the  Protection  of  Elderly 
Persons Act 2005 be amended to reflect the seriousness of this highly crucial and sensitive 
matter. Our task is to ultimately ensure that the various policies we want to achieve behind 
the implementation of the Act are truly attained. We need to ensure that the elderly persons of 
our  society,  the  founding  pillars  of  the  country’s  foundation  live  in  decent  and  safe 
conditions. They undeniably deserve that much. 

Madam Speaker, we receive complaints through hotlines 172 and 199 via the Elderly 
Watch  through  Regional  Social  Security  Offices  via  Senior  Citizens  Associations,  through 
Police  complaints,  through  the  Family  Support  Bureau,  the  Citizens  Advice  Bureau  and 
through  complaint  letters.  Complaints  are  also  made  by  family  members,  neighbours  and 
other acquaintances. To deal with these complaints, we adopt the intervention procedures as 
required  by  the  circumstances  of  each  individual  complaint.  Our  intervention  procedures 
include mediation, counselling and family conferencing. 

In order to successfully achieve the end result, it is obvious that the officers from the 
Elderly  Persons’  Protection  Unit  need  to  get  in  touch  with  the  victims  and  also  with  the 
alleged perpetrator. There are, however, cases where the alleged perpetrators show deliberate 
unwillingness to cooperate. They can neither be contacted during visits nor do they respond 
to  convocation.  This  results  in  undue  delays  and  obstruction  in  taking  remedial  actions. 
Therefore, it can rightly be said that the difficulties faced by the officers to contact alleged 
perpetrators  have  placed  a  clog  in  the  wheel  of  timely  protection  provided  to  the  elderly 
persons who are the victims of abuse.  The main impediment lies in the paucity of the powers 
of the officers to officially call the alleged perpetrator to attend to their office for intervention 
procedures. This is where the first amendment being proposed today is relevant.  

By amending section 7 of the Protection of Elderly Persons Act 2005, the Protection 
of Elderly Persons (Amendment) Bill 2016 provides that the officers of the Elderly Persons’ 
Protection Unit will now be empowered to cause the alleged perpetrator to be summoned to 
appear in person before the Higher Social Security Officer, in order to provide information 
with  regard  to  any  complaint  made  or  on  behalf  of  any  elderly  persons  against  him.  The 
summons,  as  proposed  in  the  Schedule  to  the  Bill,  will  be  issued  as  a  last  resort  in  cases 

 

26 

where  the  alleged  perpetrator  refuses  to  attend  after  having  been  officially  convened  in 
writing to meet the officer concerned of the Ministry. 

The  amendment  to  section  7  of  the  Protection  of  Elderly  Persons  Act  2005  is 
intrinsically linked to the proposed amendment to section 11 of the said Act. A well-known 
philosopher has one said that the law without sanction is a mere request.  I am, therefore, also 
proposing  to  attach  a  sanction  for  those  who  fail  to  comply  with  the  requirements  of  the 
summons. 

Therefore, section 11 of the Protection of Elderly Persons Act 2005 will be amended 
to add a new subsection providing for the offence of failing to comply with a summons issued 
by the Ministry on an alleged perpetrator of abuse on an elderly person. I must say that this 
amendment will pave the way towards more effective enforcement of the law protecting the 
elderly citizens of our country. It will serve as a deterrent factor preventing further abuse.  In 
addition, the amendment will not only promote a more timely resolution of disputes involving 
elderly persons, but may also lead to a possible elimination of elderly abuse. 

The next amendment, Madam Speaker, I am proposing today, is the increase of the 
membership of the Managing Committee of every Elderly Watch from a maximum of seven 
to a new maximum of 10 persons. 

Before elaborating further on this particular amendment, I wish to highlight that the 
Elderly  Watch  is,  indeed,  an  important  institution  assisting  in  the  organisation  of  public 
awareness and sensitisation campaigns on the rights of the elderly and elder abuse prevention. 
It also reports cases of abuse in its respective region, and more importantly, endowed with its 
knowledge of the elders, it assists the officers in the intervention procedures. 

As at now, 20 Elderly Watch have been set up in five different regions in Mauritius 
and four have been set up in Rodrigues. Each unit is administered by a Managing Committee 
of not more than seven persons. 

Increasing the number of members of the Managing Committee from seven to 10 will 
undoubtedly  enable  the  strengthening  of  the  proactive  approach  for  a  wider  participation, 
guaranteeing  more  effective  protection  of  the  elderly  persons.  It  will  also  reinforce  the 
reactive approach in reporting and counselling on reported cases. Effective organisation and 
management of the Elderly Watch will bear even more positive impacts on the protection of 
our elderly people. 

27 

 
I need to draw the attention of the House that, in Rodrigues, equal attention is being 
paid to the need for effective actions to curb down the extent of elderly abuse. Therefore, the 
amendments  being  proposed  will  not  only  benefit  the  Mauritian  population,  but  will  also 
assist  in  the  protection  of  the  elderly  population  in  Rodrigues  too.  Rodrigues  will  have  to 
adjust  its  human  resource  structure  to  cater  for  the  implementation  of  these  amendments, 
especially the one regarding the serving of summons by a designated officer who will stand 
as an Officer-in-Charge. 

The proposed amendments are also in line with the Government Programme 2015-

2019 which stipulates among others, I quote – 

“Caring for the most vulnerable ones and empowering for individual and collective 
advancement are topmost priorities in making Mauritius a better place to live. A key 
consideration of the Government during its mandate will be to reduce the gap between 
the  rich  and  the  poor,  promote  social  justice,  economic  empowerment  and  national 
unity, and protect the elderly and vulnerable ones.” 

As  a  responsible  Government,  we  need  to  provide  our  elderly  population  with  a 
required  security  and  protection.  We  are  deploying  all  possible  resources  to  enhance  the 
quality  of  life  of  this  vulnerable  segment  of  our  population.    Through  our  relentless  and 
concerted efforts, we will certainly succeed in curtailing the growing upsurge in the number 
of elderly  abuse cases.  We are undoubtedly inching towards the creation of a much better 
society. 

With  these  words,  Madam  Speaker,  I  commend  the  Protection  of  Elderly  Persons 

(Amendment) Bill (No. XV of 2016) to the House. 

Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun rose and seconded. 

Madam Speaker: Dr. Joomaye! 

 
 
 
(3.56 p.m.) 

28 

 
Dr.  Z.  Joomaye  (Second  Member  for  Rivière  des  Anguilles  &  Souillac):  Thank 
you, Madam Speaker. I stand here today to debate specifically on the proposed amendments 
to the Protection of Elderly Persons Act of 2005. 

These  amendments  propose  to  reinforce  the  protection  of  our  elderly.  First  and 
foremost, I must say that we, on this side of the House, totally adhere to the idea, and we 
completely agree that these amendments be voted. 

Anyone with some common sense cannot be against protecting our elderly persons. 
Mauritius, Madam Speaker, does not have any natural resources. All that we have achieved 
until now, we owe it to the hard work of our elders. 

This generation of seniors that we have nowadays are those who changed the face of 
our country from a developing country to a leading economy in Africa. They are those who 
believed  in  tertiary  education  for  their  children.  We  must  pay  tribute  to  their  discipline  in 
daily life. 

Their culture of   putting work first before leisure, and their way of upholding their values 
that has made Mauritius today a harmonious, stable, prosperous and tolerant society. From an 
almost exclusive agricultural economy to a diversified, multi-sectorial based economy, each 
and every of our elders are the minds and hands that have achieved the economic miracle.  
Where we were and where we are, we need to learn from them, and especially be grateful to 
them and now it is our payback time.  That is what we are talking about.   

We  have  an  ageing  population.    In  2015,  life  expectancy  for  both  sexes  was  on 
 
average 74.5 years.  It is a challenge for any country to properly address this issue.  We need 
to ensure that the rights of our seniors be safeguarded.  These are – 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

Rights to dignity, freedom from abuse, neglect and exploitation; 
Right to freedom from discrimination, right to adequate health care,  
Right to maintenance; 
Right to material assistance; 
Right to property;  
Right to participation in society, and 
Right to work, if they are so willing. 

29 

 
 
Madam Speaker, the Protection of Elderly Persons Act 2005 has laid the foundation 
of  a  good  framework  to  protect  the  seniors  from  potential  threats  of  daily  life.    To  fully 
achieve this objective, we need everybody on board.  It is a question of national solidarity.   

 
We  fully  agree  that  Section  7  of  the  Principal  Act  be  amended  for  the  Officer-in-
Charge of the Unit to issue summons.  We agree as well that the Managing Committee of the 
Elderly Watch be brought to a total of ten persons.   

A new subsection is being added to section 11 which deals with Offences.  It is now 
 
an offence where a person to whom a summons to appear or give information has been served 
not to react accordingly.  This will definitely help and goes along with the spirit of this Act 
that is being amended today.  However, Madam Speaker, the Protection of Elderly Act 2005 
is not perfect and ultimate.  Amending these sections is good, but not enough.  This Act has 
its  weaknesses.    We  need  to  think  ahead;  we  need  to  learn  from  what  is  being  done 
elsewhere.   

 
Recently,  Madam  Speaker,  there  has  been  a  judgement  in  France  in  the  Liliane 
Bettencourt  case,  a  French  billionaire,  first  fortune  of  France  and  owner  of  L’Oreal 
Cosmetics. In her late 70’s and suffering from Alzheimer’s disease, she has been under the 
influence and control of a network of advisers, personal assistants who abuse her confidence 
and, upon their advice, wilfully, donated and spent huge sums of money on them.  French 
Court of Justice in 2015, in that case, sentenced several persons to imprisonment and fine for 
abuse of weakness, abus de faiblesse.  This specific offence is not in our law and this should 
have been remedied.   

 
Nowadays, the biggest threat to an elderly is financial abuse.  In developed countries, 
Madam Speaker, people over 50 years control as much as 70% of national wealth.  They have 
become the target of fraudsters.  It is a crime to deprive older adults of their resources and 
ultimately their independence.  The role of the elderly watch should be extended to that effect 
as well.  Anyone who sees signs of theft, fraud, misuse of an elderly assets or credit, or use of 
undue influence to control same, should be able to alert the system.   

 
Banks  and  financial  institutions  should  be  taken  on  board  and  be  given  specific 
assignments as regard to monitoring the finances of the elders. Any change of financial patter 
should  be  treated  as  a  warning  sign.    These  changes  of  unusual  activity  in  elders’  banks 
accounts,  including  large  and  frequent  withdrawals  or  removal  from  ATM,  all  transfer  of 

 

30 

money which cannot be explained by a senior customer.  All these should be treated with a 
different perspective in view of protecting our elders’ wealth.  Any of these should lead to a 
suspicious transaction report to be addressed to a dedicated office which would need to be 
created.  The legal provisions of this office should have been included in this Act.  This is 
where we are failing all of us.  As I said earlier, Madam Speaker, protection of the elderly is a 
question of national solidarity.  It is the duty of the State, the family and also the third party, 
caretakers. 

 
It  is  the  role  of  the  Ministry  to  run  awareness  programmes  on  how  elders  can  be 
abused and how anyone can become a whistle-blower, who might change the life of a senior 
who is being abused.   

 

I will end on this note and I thank you, Madam Speaker, for your attention. 

 (4.04 p.m.) 

The Minister of Gender Equality, Child Development and Family Welfare (Mrs 
 
A. Perraud): Madam Speaker, the protection of the elderly ranks high on the Agenda of this 
Government  and  to  that  effect  a  key  consideration  during  our  mandate  as  spelt  out  in  the 
Government  Programme  2015-2019  is  to  reduce  the  gap  between  the  rich  and  the  poor, 
promote  social  justice,  economic  empowerment  and  national  unity,  and  protect  the  elderly 
and vulnerable ones. Government has also pledged to provide special support care to elderly 
persons with disabilities and those living alone as part of its strategy to provide a ‘service de 
proximité’ to them.  

 
Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  congratulate  my  colleague,  the  hon.  Minister  of  Social 
Security,  National  Solidarity  and  Reform  Institutions,  hon.  Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo,  for 
introducing  the  Protection  of  Elderly  (Amendment)  Act  2016  to  amend  the  Protection  of 
Elderly Persons Act to better contribute to the protection of the elderly in Mauritius, in line 
with our mandate.  

Madam Speaker, it is common knowledge that worldwide, and including Mauritius, 

 
elderly persons may be subjected to the following forms of abuse -  

(i) 

financial abuse;  

(ii) 

psychological abuse;  

31 

 
(iii) 

neglect; 

(iv) 

verbal; 

(v) 

emotional abuse, and  

(vi) 

sexual/physical abuse.  

 

The protection from the Elderly Act was passed in 2005 and promulgated in 2006. We now 
stand in this House, eleven years after the introduction of this Act to amend it to provide for 
the following – 

(i) 

To give powers to the Officer-in-Charge of the Elderly Protection Unit in the 
exercise  of  his  duties  to  summon  any  person  against  whom  a  complaint  of 
abusing  an  elderly  person  has  been  made,  to  provide  oral  or  written 
information in that regard. Failure to comply with the summons will entail a 
fine  of  not  less  than  Rs5,000  and  not  exceeding  Rs10,000  and  to 
imprisonment  for  a  term  not  exceeding  six  months.  A  schedule  has  been 
provided for in the Act in that regard, and  

(ii) 

Furthermore, provision is made for ten persons for the Managing Committee, 
which previously comprised of seven persons.  

 

 

Madam  Speaker,  this  Bill  brings  to  light  the  stark  reality  of  some  of  our 
elderly. I would wish to bring to your attention a few statistics. For the year 2015, out of 71 
interim Protection Orders issued, 9 were issued to males aged 60 and above. Out of 1,215 
interim  Protection  Orders  issued  in  the  same  year,  46  were  issued  to  women  aged  60  and 
above. Out of 43 Protection issued in the same period, 11 were males aged 60 and over, and 
34 were issued to females aged 60 and above, out of a total 826 in the same category.  

For  the  year  2016,  figures  have  been  made  available  from  the  Family  Welfare  and 
Protection Unit of the Ministry. Allow me to circulate the statistics, Madam Speaker. These 
statistics,  at  my  Ministry,  appear  to  be  only  the  tip  of  the  iceberg,  with  regard  to  the 
unreported cases of domestic violence perpetrated against the elderly, often by their family 
members, sadly. The Family Welfare and Protection Unit of my Ministry offers the following 
services to men, women, children, including the elderly – 

(1)  First Hand Counselling. 

32 

 
Family  Counselling  Officers  and  Family  Welfare  and  Protection  Officers  provide 
victims of domestic violence with information such as – 

•  what are their rights;   
• 
•  services offered by the Family Service Bureaux. 

the law pertaining to domestic violence, and  

(2) 

Psychological Counselling.  

Victims and perpetrators undergo psychotherapy sessions in strict confidentiality with 
Psychologists. 

 (3) 

Legal Advice. 

  

A Legal Resource person provides victims and perpetrators of gender-based violence, 
including domestic violence with information on matters pertaining to legal issues.  

(4)  Assistance to victims of domestic violence for application of Court Orders 
under the PDVA.  

Family  Welfare  and  Protection  Officers  assist  victims  of  domestic  violence  to  the 
nearest District Court for application of Protection/Occupation/Tenancy Orders under 
the Protection from Domestic Violence Act (PDVA).  
Madam  Speaker,  strengthening  inter-generational  relations  is  essential  at  this  point. 
National and Regional programmes are conducted across the island by the Family Welfare 
and  Protection  Unit  of  my  Ministry,  with  a  view  to  bridge  the  gap  among  the  three 
generations  and  concurrently  sensitise  them  on  the  importance  of  the  inter-generation 
relationship programme. The objectives are to – 

(i) 

build a strong relationship between children, parents and grandparents through 
communication and sharing;  

(ii) 

enhance a sense of family belonging and security;  

(iii) 

promote  high  value  for  family  and  traditions  thereby  creating  a  source  of 
wisdom and stability;  

Madam Speaker, I wish to underline the service to the elderly, ensured by the Police 
Family Protection Unit (PFPU), whose responsibilities, amongst other things, consist of the 
following – 

 

• 
• 
• 

33 

receive such problems and listen to the victims; 
investigate into the matter; 
arrange  for  investigations  and  coordinate  investigations  in  cases  of  gender-
based domestic violence, elderly abuse and family conflicts.  

The policy strategies are made up of prevention, protection and prosecution. 

Madam  Speaker,  allow  me  to  refer  to  an  Independent  Expert,  Mrs  Rosa  Kornfeld-

Matte, on the enjoyment of all human rights by older persons… 

Madam Speaker:  Can I just intervene, hon. Minister!  Don’t open the debate please!  
We  are  not  talking  generally  of  protection  of  elderly  persons,  but,  as  I  said,  right  at  the 
beginning,  we  have  got  an  amendment.    Can  you  make  your  arguments  in  relation  to  the 
amendment which is being brought to this legislation? 

Mrs Perraud: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I will restrict myself to the amendment. 

So, Mrs Rosa, she made, inter alia, the following recommendations in respect of the 
protection  of  elderly  persons  regarding  safeguards  and  also  monitoring  mechanisms, 
inspections.  So, these recommendations could be taken on board while developing strategies 
to enhance the level of protection of our elderly.   

The  Elderly  Persons  Act  2005  and  its  amendment  are  crucial  steps  to  providing 
adequate  protection  to  older  persons  against  ill-treatment,  be  it  physical,  verbal,  emotional 
harassment or financial prejudice.   

I wish my colleague, the hon. Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 

Institutions all the success with this new piece of legislation. 

 
Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

 (4.12 p.m.) 

Mrs R. Jadoo-Jaunbocus (Second Member for  Port  Louis South & Port Louis 
Central): Madam Speaker, as I was wondering what to say to this piece of amendment to the 
legislation,  I  came  across  this  -  through  the  papers  -  small  anecdote.  It  is  not  very  long, 
bearing in mind the lapse of time that we have to intervene.  Sitting alone in an old armchair 
in  a  one-bedroom  flat  of  the  ground  floor  of  a  large  multi-occupancy  building  with 

 

34 

deteriorating  eyesight,  limited  mobility  indoors  in  a  partly  torn  pyjamas,  exuding  a  strong 
smell  of  urine,  recovering  from  a  second  suicide  attempt,  was  an  old  man  there,  suffering 
from severe depression.  He asked: ‘Who has invented old age with all its worries?’ 

This is how often old age is seen from the elder person’s point of view and this is 
what this piece of law is, at all costs, trying to steer it away from such feeling and avoid its 
consequences.  

Abuse  of  elder  persons  by  family  members  dates  back  to  ancient  times,  Madam 
Speaker.  Until there have been initiatives to address child abuse and domestic violence in the 
last  quarter  of  the  20th  century,  this  issue  of  elder  abuse  was  a  private  matter  and  it  was 
hidden from the public view. 

However,  with  time,  elder  abuse  because  viewed  as  a  social  welfare  issue  and, 
subsequently,  it  became  a  problem  of  ageing.    Like  other  forms  of  violence,  it  became 
identified  as  a  form  of  family  violence.    From  then  on,  it  became  a  public  health  and  a 
criminal justice concerned. 

As elders become physically frail with associated problems such as physical mobility, 
dementia, they suffer from Alzheimer, hearing impairment, sight impairment, they become 
very trying for the people who care for them and they also open themselves up to potential 
abuse. There are several pieces of legislation, for instance, the Elderly Act 2005 which deals 
with that.  There is the Protection from Domestic Violence Act which has been amended in 
the course of time in order to address that in the form of Protection Order as the hon. Minister 
Perraud,  Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and  Family  Welfare,  has  just 
explained.    But  this  piece  of  law,  what  it  does  this  amendment  is  very  crucial.    It  might 
appear as three minor, shall I say, proposed amendments, but, in fact, it has a huge impact.  
What it does, it recognises that often the old persons will not want to go to Court to seek 
redress. This amendment hits the problem on the head and comes away to tackle the problem.   
We may have the Protection from Domestic Violence Act, we may have the Act of 
going to the Police Station consigning a declaration, but we must look, as hon. Mrs Jeewa-
Daureeawoo, the Minister has seen it.  What she has seen is the old person would not want to 
leave her house, go to the Police Station, consign a declaration, go to Court.  The Criminal 
Justice System takes time, the Protection from Domestic Violence Act, they have to go and 
swear an affidavit, but once they go to Court, there are several court appearances.  Finally the 
elder person who is dependent on the very person who may have been the perpetrator of the 

 

35 

violence, of the abuse, of the neglect, of the violent act, will say: ‘No, I do not want to go 
ahead.’    Because  we  are  dealing  with  an  age  group  of  persons  who  actually  are  very 
protective of the family  structure; they will suffer, they will submit, but still they will not 
denounce.   

And that’s what the hon. Minister, in amending section 7 of the Act 2005, has done.  
She has nipped the problem in the bud, she has identified the problem and she has come to 
this House and said: ‘Let us give the officers powers!’  And powers to do what!?  We may 
think what is the power, just to summon a person to her office as and when required as he 
may  be  directed  and  provide  such  information  as  may  be  necessary.    But  this  is  a  very 
powerful  and  very  meaningful  amendment.    What  it  does,  it  takes  the  officer  into  the 
household in a manner to speak and convey that person to come and face the law, face the 
authority.   

The  mere  fact  that  there  is  this  authority  to  summon  someone  who  might  be  a 
perpetrator  of  abuse  to  the  office  of  her  Ministry,  gives  the  loud  message  that  you  cannot 
carry on  with abuse behaviour any more.  You will have to come and explain, just because 
one has to come and explain we know how this can act as a deterrent. The hon. Minister has 
acknowledged that and has given her officers the power wherever there are cases of abuse.  
As it is the case with the labour law, the Labour officer can, in cases of breach of Labour Act, 
convene  the  employer  and  the  employee  for  mediation.  Likewise  the  officer  from  her 
Ministry can convene that person to answer for the act and, knowing that one has to come and 
explain, knowing that one has to give information that, in itself, will be a major deterrent and 
will reduce elder violence. 

Then  again,  if  that  person  ignores  those  powers,  as  the  hon.  Minister  has  said,  the 
piece  of  legislation  will  not  stand  on  its  own.  It  will  have  the  power  and  the  sanction  of 
inflicting a fine not less than Rs5000 and not exceeding Rs10,000. The mere fact that there 
will be this hanging like the sword of Damocles above the head of that potential perpetrator 
or the person who can hold information will act as a catalyst for that person to run to the 
office and give the explanation. This is very important. 

In  fact,  why  do  we  need  to  address  the  issue  of  the  abuse  amongst  the  elderly 
urgently, it is because we have an ageing population as we know and, with time, this ageing 
population will even increase. As said by the United Nations independent expert, just referred 
to by hon. Minister Perraud, what she has found is that, in Mauritius, we have a population, 
that was in 2015, of about 1.2 million out of which 13 per cent are 60 years old and above 

 

36 

and the figure is projected to reach from 13 per cent to 30 per cent in 2050! This is a huge 
climb and, in terms of ageing society, she says that Mauritius is facing challenges that are 
very similar to those of developed countries. Yet, she says, that we need to bear in mind we 
are  a  developing  country.  Mauritius  is  leading  by  example,  she  goes  on  to  say.  She  was 
impressed to learn that the Government is spending about 50 per cent, through the Ministry 
concerned,  of  its  budget  on  social  services  including  free  health  and  education  which  also 
benefit all the persons. She said that, put in a context of a developing country, Mauritius is 
doing quite well. 

As regards the amendment of increasing the Elderly Watch Committee, this again is 
very commendable in as much as it was, as the law provided, seven people maximum. Now it 
has gone on to ten which increases, first of all, the powers of the Committee, the number of 
members  of  the  Committee  and  will  lead  to  more  productive  work.  It  will  act  as  a  better 
pressure  and working Committee because one of the ways to assist and to deal with elder 
abuse, as has been done in Japan and in other countries of the world, in the United States, is 
having such kind of elderly watch or calling centres or drop-in-centres in order to give an 
opportunity  to  the  elderly  to  give  evidence  about  abuse  either  anonymously  or  through 
disclosure. 

Therefore, once more I shall say, it might be a three-line or four-line amendment but 
it has a huge impact on the care of elderly and I really must congratulate the hon. Minister 
because it is this attention, this very thorough examination of details and how can we actually 
reduce cases of abuse without being too intrusive. This is a way of doing it through attention 
to details and I, therefore, once again congratulate the Minister on this. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for half an hour! 

At 4.25 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

On resuming at 5.13 with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Tarolah! 

37 

 
Mr  K.  Tarolah  (Third  Member  for  Montagne  Blanche  &  Grand  River  South 
East):  Madam  Speaker,  today  we  are  considering  some  amendments  in  our  legislation  to 
protect  the  elderly  from  neglect  and  abuse.  I  wish  to  congratulate  the  hon.  Mrs  Jeewa-
Daureeawoo,  for  such  a  laudable  initiative  because  very  often  in  the  news  or  in  our 
surroundings, we hear about different forms of abuses our elderly are victims of. 

Madam Speaker, nowadays our elderly has become unpaid labour. Their contributions 
in some cases are not valuable and not recognised by their children, surroundings and at times 
societies in general. However, what matters is how effective they are in still performing the 
majority  of  the  house  chores,  laundry,  cooking  and  on  top  of  that  taking  care  of  the 
grandchildren at a time where they should be enjoying their old-age period. 

Madam Speaker, I would say, it is time to put a stop. Believe it or not, many of them 
are  neglected  and  abused.  We  often  notice  that  though  being  verbally  abused,  many  are 
physically abused and surprisingly they are financially abused. When we speak of financially 
abused,  I  am  talking  of  foregoing  their  signatures,  misusing  their  personal  cheques,  credit 
cards or accounts and stealing cash, income cheques or household goods. Some of them do 
not even have the luxury to enjoy their old-age pension, they are deprived of the liberty to 
manage their own money and when they get their pension, they do not know how to spend it. 

Madam Speaker, it is time that persons who neglect and abuse emotionally, physically 
and financially any older person know that we are amending the laws. I hope that our elderly 
will seize the law and make their complaints to the necessary institutions and to the Senior 
Citizen Council. In Mauritius of 2016, we should be capable of ensuring the safety and well-
being of our older persons. We need to be more sensitive to their needs. Madam Speaker, by 
amending our laws, we are showing that we are capable of dealing effectively with the plight 
of older persons. 

The establishment of a more efficient framework will definitely empower and protect 
our  elderly.  They  deserve  having  their  rights,  well-being,  safety  and  security  maintained. 
With such amendments of laws, gouvernement Lepep is ensuring once again that the dignity 
and rights of our elderly is respected and protected. Remember, as soon as the Government 
came into power, we have increased the pension of our senior citizens.  

(Interruptions) 

38 

 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Tarolah, what does that have to do with the Bill?   I have said 
right at the beginning and I am repeating it over and over again, don’t enlarge the debates on 
this Bill.  Come to the point with the amendment which is being brought to the Bill. 

Mr Tarolah: Thank  you, Madam Speaker.  We must not forget the social, cultural 
and economic contributions of our elders. At their age, instead of being abused, we should 
ensure  that  they  have  access  to  information  by  education  and  training.  It  is  said,  Madam 
Speaker, that the mind is the fastest thing in the world while the heaviest one remains. 

Madam  Speaker,  it  is  necessary  to  effect  changes  to  existing  laws  relating  to  older 
persons because we want  to empower them to live meaningfully and  constructively in our 
society. Protecting our elderly from abuse has to be one of the major concerns of each and 
every one of us. We must not sit and do nothing when we notice that old persons are being 
abused in their homes, in relative homes and even in the hands of those responsible for their 
care. Every suspecting case where an elderly person is at risk from a neglectful caregiver or 
being  preyed  upon  financially,  it  must  be  spoken  up.  Generally  our  elders  become  more 
physically frail and they are less able to stand up, to bullying or fight back if attacked. We 
have  come  through  some  cases  of  rape  of  our  elderly  in  the  recent  years.  Many  seniors 
around the world are being abused, harmed in some substantial way often by people who are 
directly responsible for their care. If many cases have gone unreported, we are now enforcing 
the laws to give a clear-cut indication to the abusers that we are having an eye on them and 
the price to pay will be heavy. 

Madam  Speaker,  when  we  are  talking  about  the  abuse  on  the  elderly  we  must  not 
forget the healthcare fraud and abusers. They are often victims of unethical doctors, nurses, 
hospital  personnel  and  other  professional  care  providers.  They  are  often  charged  for 
healthcare which has not really been provided. Madam Speaker, it is difficult to be an elderly 
when age brings with it infirmities and dependence. We will end up being old ones one day. 
We definitely do not want to be lashed out by our children, relatives or caregivers. I invite 
every Mauritian to denounce any form of abuse over our elderly. We must keep our eyes and 
ears open. Each elder abuse report is a snapshot of what is going on. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to end my speech with the quote of Tia Walter who nicely 

said, I quote - 

“To Care for those who once cared for us is one of the highest honours.” 

 

39 

And that is what we are exactly doing here. Thank you for your attention. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Boissézon! 

 

 

(5.16 p.m) 

Mr  E.  Boissézon  (Third  member  for  La  Caverne  &  Phoenix):  Madame  la 
présidente, je vous remercie de me permettre d’intervenir lors des débats relatifs au projet de 
loi The Protection of Elderly Persons (Amendment) Bill (No. XV of 2016). Je serai très bref. 

En 2005, the Protection of Elderly Persons Act 2005 et le Residential Care Homes 
Act 2003 sont deux lois qui furent promulguées en marge de la déclaration politique et le plan 
international de Madrid sur le vieillissement adopté en 2002. Cette déclaration démontrait la 
volonté  des  Etats  à  réaffirmer  leur  volonté  de  promouvoir  le  bien-être  et  la  sécurité  des 
personnes âgées. Depuis que la loi fut promulguée, l’environnement familial a changé d’où la 
nécessité  de  revisiter  la  loi,  l’espérance  de  vie  a  augmenté.  Le  mode  de  vie  des  jeunes  a 
changé. Dans le passé, le vieillissement de la population constitue un problème surtout pour 
les pays développés. Aujourd’hui, il prend de l’ampleur dans le monde  entier. À Maurice, 
l’espérance de vie a évolué de façon significative avec un pourcentage de personnes âgées de 
plus de 60 ans de 8.3 % en 1990,13.7 % en 2015 et une projection de 23.6 % et 28.2 % en 
2035 et 2050. 

Les  jeunes  qui  se  mariaient  auparavant  vivaient  avec  leurs  parents  qui  créaient  des 
extended  families,  aujourd’hui  ils  préfèrent  vivre  seuls  et  les  deux  personnes  travaillent. 
Ainsi, les aînés sont livrés à eux-mêmes, soit seuls dans leurs maisons  ou dans des maisons 
de  retraite.    Ils  éprouvent  un  sentiment  d’impuissance  et  de  vulnérabilité.  Ainsi,  ils 
deviennent les proies des personnes mal intentionnées. Les exemples ne manquent pas.  En 
2014, un jeune de 34 ans a agressé sa grand-mère. En septembre 2015, un neveu a agressé sa 
tante et en 2016, Maurice est réveillé sous le choc: une personne âgée de 80 ans a été victime 
de jeunes lors d’un cambriolage. 

Ceux  qui  habitent  avec  leurs  parents  sont  souvent  maltraités,  devenant  même  un 
fardeau pour ceux-ci.  Ceux qui habitent dans des maisons de retraite se plaignent du mauvais 
traitement… 

 
Madam Speaker:  Hon. Boissézon, can I just interrupt you for one minute and draw 

40 

your attention to Standing Order 42 (1) , which stipulates – 

“42. (1) Debate upon any motion, Bill or amendment shall be relevant to such motion, 
Bill or amendment (…)” 

I have given leeway to hon. Members to introduce the subject matter, but you should bear in 
mind that the amendments which are being brought relate mainly to the question of issuing a 
summon and the second amendment is with regard to increasing the number as regards the 
elderly watch.  So, if you could, while intervening, bring in light those two main issues in the 
amendments which are being brought. 

Mr Boissézon:  Oui, Madame la présidente. Je vois que –  

“The object of this Bill is to amend the Protection of Elderly Persons Act to enhance 
the level of protection of, and security to, the elderly.” 

Et là je dresse un tableau de la situation actuelle et je viendrai sur les points. Ayant 
fait un survol succinct de l’état des situations de sécurité et du bien-être de nos aînés, nous 
voyons l’importance d’un contrôle plus strict, et vu la complexité du sujet, nous avons besoin 
d’une  surveillance  rapprochée  et  d’une  proximité  d’où  l’importance  des  comités  ‘Elderly 
Watch’. Nous nous apprêtons à amender la loi pour augmenter le nombre du management 
committee de sept à dix et je félicite la ministre de la sécurité sociale concernant les fonctions 
du Elderly Watch.   

Quelles  sont  ces  fonctions  du  Elderly  Watch?    Il  est  reproché  à  ces  comités  qu’ils 
s’occupent beaucoup plus du bien-être que de la sécurité, que les régions sous leur tutelle sont 
trop vastes pour un suivi rapproché; le manque de communication et le manque de formation.  

En regardant la loi principale, à la section 8 (2) qui va être amendé –  

“provide support to families that need assistance and protection for elderly persons;” 

A Maurice le nombre d’abus rapporté est stable. Mais nous devons nous préparer à prévenir 
toute augmentation vu que le nombre de personnes âgées augmentent. Les familles doivent 
être prises en charge, former et se préparer avant même que les parents âgés atteignent l’état 
nécessitant une surveillance de pointe. 

41 

 
L’observatoire de vieillesse du ministère de la sécurité sociale propose le besoin de 
former  des  respite  carers  pour  aider  les  personnes  qui  s’occupent  des  parents  âgés.  Le 
nombre de personnes qui s’occupent d’un aîné augmentent.  Certaines personnes sont sur le 
qui-vive pendant toute la journée pour ne pas dire 24 sur 7. Au bout d’un certain temps, ces 
personnes sont fatiguées, exténuées, accablées et deviennent dépressives d’où le besoin d’un 
respite  care,  c’est-à-dire,  d’une  assistance  temporaire  pour  la  surveillance  des  personnes 
âgées pendant que les parents se reposent et se détendent. 

J’ai  fait  mention  du  nombre  de  dames  ayant  subi  un  abus,  qui  aujourd’hui  est  le 
double de celui des hommes. Il faut un gender approach. La surveillance des dames ne doit 
pas seulement être axée sur leur santé et bien-être mais aussi sur leur sécurité. 

Madame la présidente – la section 8(2)- 

“(c) endeavour to prevent acts of abuse on elderly persons;  

  (d) report cases of repeated abuse of an elderly person to an officer of the  

        Unit.” 

Ces  deux  sections  sont  inter-liées.    Les  membres  des  comités  de  Elderly  Watch  doivent 
s’assurer qu’il y ait plus de proximité entre eux et des personnes âgées pour savoir qui sont 
ceux qui sont abusés et négligés dont les traces sont visibles, bleus, souffrance subite, linges 
délabrés, ecchymoses. Créer un très grand sentiment de confiance, un espace d’intimité qui 
amènerait les personnes victimes à se confier en toute liberté. Et surtout cela permettrait de 
détecter  les  cas  suspects.  Pour  cette  dimension de  leurs  tâches,  ils  doivent  être  formés.  Ils 
doivent être formés pour détecter les changements d’attitude des vieux. Quand une personne 
âgée  cesse  de  parler  et  répond  en  monosyllabes  ou  encore  quand  elle  ne  regarde  plus  son 
interlocuteur dans les yeux, c’est le symptôme d’un tiraillement psychologique et d’un souci 
difficile à s’en débarrasser. 

Madame la présidente, ayant élaboré sur les points précédents, je suis pour le besoin 
d’augmenter le nombre de membres des comités de gestion de Elderly Watch d’une part, de 
leur  formation  et  surtout  au  niveau  national,  une  vaste  campagne  de  sensibilisation  pour 
expliquer le besoin de protéger les personnes âgées et l’augmentation de Elderly Watch.  

42 

 
Je terminerai en remerciant nos aînés qui ont eu la sagesse de travailler et de prendre 
les  décisions  qu’il  fallait  pour  nous  offrir  ce  bel  état  où  nous  vivons.  Montrons  notre 
reconnaissance et soyons un exemple pour la génération montante.  

Merci, Madame la présidente. 

 

 (5.25 p.m) 

Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’Baie & Poudre d’Or):  Thank you, 
Madam Speaker, for this opportunity to comment on this Bill.  Madam Speaker, I think the 
amendments  that  are  in  front  of  this  House  today  -  there  are  three  amendments  to  the 
Protection  of  Elderly  Persons  Act  of  2005  as  proclaimed  in  2006  –  reiterate,  firstly,  the 
increase in the number of persons, members of the managing committee from seven to ten. 
The two other amendments which relate to further powers to the elderly persons protection 
Unit’ officers for the issue of summons, and finally, the third amendment relates to the issue 
of an additional provision and the offences which were not there before. 

Madam Speaker, let us have a look at the original Act and I am going to intervene 
today  on  two  issues.  One  is  on  the  structure.  One  among  the  important  structures  where 
changes  are being brought is the Elderly Watch  and secondly,  I will also intervene on the 
issue of institutional settings, like residential homes where there is no adequate provision in 
the law for their protection… 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Rughoobur,  I  interrupt  here  again,  just  to  tell  you  that  the 

question of structure of institutional homes won’t fall in the ambit of this Bill. 

Mr  Rughoobur:  Madam  Speaker,  when  I  will  come  to  the  second  part  of  my 
intervention,  it  will  be  related  to  the  changes  that  are  being  brought  in  the  Act  and  the 
definition of ‘person’. 

Let me take the first issue of structures.  Madam Speaker, there are three important 
institutions in the original Act: the Monitoring Committee for the Elderly; the Elderly Watch, 
and the Elderly Protection Unit.  The Monitoring Committee has got important functions.  Let 
me quote from the Act the two important functions of the Monitoring Committee, which is – 

 
“(a) 

43 

to supervise the operations of the Unit - that is, the elderly persons protection 
aid  -  and  of  every  Elderly  Watch  and  give  its  officers  such  directions  of  a 
general character as it may deem necessary; 

(b) 

provide adequate resources and facilities for the proper operation of the Unit 
and of every Elderly Watch.” 

Madam Speaker, I must say here that I have been closely involved in social activities; 
I have been a member of the District Council in the North; I am now an elected member of 
Grand’Baie  &  Poudre  d’Or  constituency.    I  have  never  heard  about  this  Elderly  Watch 
structure.  Today, we are debating the impact of the changes we are about to bring; increasing 
the members from seven to ten, and the extent to which it is going to contribute in protecting 
our  elderly.    It  is  a  very  positive  move,  and  I  fully  support  the  initiative  of  the  Ministry.  
When I have a look at the functions of this Elderly Watch, it’s much more interesting.  Let us 
have a look at what the Act says about the Elderly Watch functions – 

“(a) 

promote  the  welfare  of  the  elderly  persons  in  the  region  for  which  it  is 
responsible; 

(b) 

(c) 
(d) 

provide support to families that need assistance and protection for elderly 
persons; 
endeavour to prevent acts of abuse on elderly persons, 
report cases of repeated abuse of an elderly person to an officer of the Unit.” 

Madam Speaker, we have Senior Citizens Associations around Mauritius.  The point 
that I want to make with this amendment, although I welcome this amendment of increasing 
the number of members, I believe it is not adequate, it is not sufficient.  The questions that we 
have to ask ourselves are about the Committee itself, where the appointment of members is in 
the hands of the Minister and representatives of the Senior Citizens Council.  The question 
that I have to ask first is how many members are appointed by the Minister and how many 
members are appointed by representatives of the Senior Citizens Council.  This is not clear in 
the Act. There are other interrogations that I have with this Elderly Watch. I must say that, 
when I look at the function, I see that the structure is a very good one.  It has to be here, it has 
to  work  in  close  collaboration  with  local  authorities,  with  CAB  Office,  with  the  senior 
citizens  in  the  various  regions.    This  particular  structure  is  appointed  by  the  Monitoring 
Committee, and I quote – 

44 

 
“There shall be in every region designated by the Monitoring Committee an Elderly 
Watch.” 

I would like to ask Members of the House how many  among us have ever heard - 
because  this  has  been  proclaimed  in  2006,  almost  nine  to  ten  years  –  about  this  Elderly 
Watch.    On  est  régulièrement  solicité  for  sponsors  by  senior  citizens,  but  in  my  political 
career and also as a social worker, this is the first time that I come across this structure.  But it 
is a very good initiative by the Ministry that they are trying to give it the necessary resources, 
the  necessary  drive,  so  as  to  ensure  that  we  promote  the  protection  of  the  elderly.    But, 
quelques questions, Madam Speaker, that I have, among which – 

(i) 

Apart from increasing the number of members, I would like to know in which 
regions they are situated today, because I don’t see them in my constituency.  
They should be there, but I think they have to be, as I said earlier, reorganised. 

(ii)  What are the logistics and resources available to them, to allow them to 

operate effectively and at optimum? 

(iii)  How do they collaborate with the senior citizens associations in the region 

they are located? 

(iv)  How are their members appointed?   
(v)  What are the means through which the Monitoring Committee keeps track of 

the work and performance on site? 

Only this morning, Madam Speaker, I was in a committee in the District Council of 
Rivière du Rempart, where we were discussing about crimes, and there has been an excellent 
decision  by  the  Commissioner  of  Police  to  introduce  what  we  call  ‘hand-hold  policing’.  
Apart from the amendments that are being brought, one of the suggestions that I will have for 
the Minister is to include a representative of the Police Department as well in the Committee.  
We are increasing it by three members.  I think we will have room to include a representative 
from the Police Department.  So, I’ll request the hon. Minister to kindly consider the proposal 
that I will be having. 

Madam Speaker, the second issue that I wanted to address is institutional setting, but I 
will come to offences.  We are amending the Act and we are talking of summons, we are 
talking of powers to officers of the Elderly Persons Protection Unit.  What I was trying to 
explain,  Madam  Speaker,  earlier,  is  that  I  believe  that,  with  the  amendments  that  we  are 
bringing, we have to look at the objective.  The objective is to protect the elderly.  But, in 

 

45 

these amendments, when we talk of offences, we talk of ‘offences by a person.’  I am not 
well versed in law, but I believe that there is a major shortcoming, because there is no proper 
definition of what we mean by ‘a person’ in the Act.  This brings about the big question of 
when we talk of a person committing an offence.  Is it an individual?  Is it a domestic person 
or can we refer to a person as an institution? 

I must, here, Madam Speaker, in this debate, shed light on a major problem that we 
lately  got  in  our  constituency,  namely  in  Petit  Raffray,  with  elderly  persons;  the  Gandhi 
Ashram of Petit Raffray, which was set up more than 50 years back.  And only last year, after 
the change in the management committee of the Ashram… 

Madam Speaker: No!  Hon. Rughoobur, again, I draw your attention to the fact that 
whatever arguments you are bringing does not fall within the ambit of the amendments to this 
Act.  I just draw your attention to the main points, which are being debated today and the 
amendments to the different sections of the Act.  So, I will kindly request you to bring back 
the debate to the essence of this Bill. 

 
Mr  Rughoobur:    Thank  you,  Madam  Speaker.  Madam  Speaker,  what  I  wanted  to 
explain  is  that  we  are  giving  powers  to  the  Elderly  Protection  Unit,  but  they  don’t  have 
powers to enter an institution like, for example, a Home for an Elderly; this is what I wanted 
to explain. These amendments are being brought, but we have to go into the spirit of the law; 
we have to go into the reasons for which these amendments are being brought.  Now, my 
point is that, with these amendments, there is a need to define clearly what we mean by a 
‘person’ and, Madam Speaker, it is in this spirit that I wanted to explain the plight of those 
people, those elderly at the Gandhi Ashram, who, unfortunately - if this is not in line with the 
Standing Order, then, I refrain from elaborating further on this.   

 
Therefore, Madam Speaker, before concluding, there are two important issues which I 
would  like  to  raise.    Firstly,  this  issue  of  Elderly  Watch,  which  I  consider  to  be  a  very 
important structure, and the proposals that I have raised, I would request the hon. Minister to 
take them on board, and, secondly, to ponder on the issue of definition of  ‘person’ in the Act.
 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

 
Mr  D.  Ramful  (Third  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien):  Madam 
Speaker, I promise to be very brief in my intervention.  Let me say, right from the outset, that 
as regards the amendments in relation to the increase in the number of persons that sit on the 

 

46 

Managing  Committee  of  the  Elderly  Watch,  I  have  no  problem.  In  fact,  the  greater  the 
number the merrier and it renders the Elderly Watch Unit more effective. 

 
However, I have some qualms with regard to the two amendments to sections 7 and 
11 with regard to the issue of the summons, as well as criminalising the act of not attending 
the summons.  So, my argument will be centred on these two amendments.   

 
I do agree, and I have no doubt, that the hon. Minister has very good intentions in 
coming up with those amendments.  We are all concerned about the protection of our elderly.  
However, I have to say that as far as these two amendments are concerned, in my opinion, 
these amendments are insufficient and inadequate and I will explain why.   

 
If  I  may  be  allowed,  I  would  like  to  go  to  some  statistics  very  briefly.  Firstly,  the 
percentage of the population that are aged 60 and over. In 1972, the percentage was about 
5.6%.  That is according to the latest report of 2015 that just came out.  It was conducted by 
the Central Statistics Office.  In 2015/16, we have about 14.8%, nearly 15% of our population 
who are 60 and above.  And we are expecting that in 2050, it will go up to 28.2%.  So, we all 
agree that we have an ageing population and it is good that we bring about changes towards 
legislation so as to protect those elderlies.   

 
The second statistics that I am going to refer to is about the percentage of persons of 
60 and above who have been subjected to some form of abuse.  And this is according to a 
latest  report  by  the  Ministry  of  Social  Security  itself.    According  to  that  report,  it  would 
appear that in 2013 – the latest figure that I managed to get – there were about 544 cases.  
Out of those 544 cases, you would be surprised to note that the number of cases that were 
brought to Court for prosecution is only one.  That was in 2016.  So, out of all these cases 
that were reported, only one case was brought before our Court of Law under this particular 
legislation.  So, I think it is justified when we look at the Statistics for us, today, to come up 
with appropriate amendments.   

 
Let  me  go  directly  to  the  amendments  with  regard  to  section  7.    It  concerns  the 
investigatory power of, the Elderly Persons Protection Unit.  There is a problem.  Apparently, 
these officers cannot use their powers effectively because as the law stands, they can only 
request  someone  to  come  to  the  Unit  for  investigation.    And  these  persons  are  not  forced 
under the law to attend.  So, the hon. Minister has come up with an excellent idea to issue a 
summons  upon  those  persons  that  are  required  for  investigation,  making  it  mandatory  for 

 

47 

them to attend.  The problem is, if the person comes and seeks advice from me as a lawyer, 
I’ll tell him: “Listen, you have a right to keep silent.  You attend, you abide by the summons. 
If you don’t abide with the summons, you don’t attend, you will be committing an offence, 
because, now, it is proposed to criminalise that act if you don’t attend.”  But I’ll also tell him: 
“But, under the Constitution, you have a right to remain silent.  You go, you sit down and you 
don’t speak. And you come back.”  So, Madam Speaker, how are we rendering the powers of 
that officer  effective?  And  I said it on the last occasion when we were debating, Madam 
Speaker, the law on the Independent Police Commission.  I said it; I referred to the powers 
under the ICAC.  We have to be careful; this power of summoning should not be used against 
suspected accused persons.  They are used to gather information.  They are used to call in 
witnesses, to get information from them.  You call in the family members, get information 
from them, then you use that information, you give it to the Police for the Police to conduct 
the inquiry, then the person is prosecuted if there is a charge against him.  This is how the 
power should be used and this is how ICAC uses that power.  I will refer to that particular 
section again.  I referred to it on the last occasion.  It is a very powerful tool, which I believe 
the hon. Minister should ponder upon.  It refers to section 50, Powers of the Commission – I 
am  referring  to  the  ICAC  –  to  examine  persons.  So,  where  the  Commission  decides  to 
proceed  with  further  investigations,  he  can  order  a  person  to  attend,  asks  him  to  produce 
books, documents, to give information, etc.  And that person may refuse, because he has got a 
right to remain silent. But then, there is a further provision which allows the Commission, 
upon  consultation  with  the  DPP’s  Office  to  grant  immunity  to  that  person,  telling  him: 
“Listen, whatever information you are going to give, we are not going to use that in a Court 
of  Law  against  you.    We  are  going  to  use  this  as  information  to  be  able  to  conduct  our 
investigation.”    These  are  the  powers  which  should  have  been  included  in  that  piece  of 
legislation in order to empower those officers in the Protection Unit for them to be able to 
conduct their investigation.   

 
Very briefly, I will refer to the offences.  I will just ask the hon. Minister to ponder 
upon some of those offences.  The offences are restricted to some acts of ill-treatment as well 
as mental and emotional harassment.  We should ponder upon one importance act.  It is about 
discrimination.   

Everyday we see the elders being discriminated on the ground of age, access to work. 
Very frequently, we will see in vacancies, if you are above 40, even in the civil service if you 
are above 40, you are not allowed to apply for a particular type of work. But this is against 

 

48 

the law. This is discriminatory. Why don’t we criminalise an act of discrimination against our 
elders? These are the situations that I invite the hon. Minister to ponder upon. For example, 
an elderly person going to the bank, asking for a loan, he is denied such a loan because he is 
above 60. An elderly person asking for a health insurance, he will not get it because he is 
above 60. So, these are types of discriminations that I think should be criminalised.  

There is also exploitation. Very frequently, we see families exploiting our elders just 
to get financial gains from them. So, these are the two situations which I will invite the hon. 
Minister to ponder upon. 

I have made my point, Madam Speaker, just in a nutshell, it is a good intention from 
the hon. Minister to come up with the amendment, but then in my humble opinion they are 
not adequate. 

Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah! 

(5.49 p.m.) 

Mr  S.  Rutnah  (Third  Member  for  Piton  &  Rivière  du  Rempart):    Thank  you, 
Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, the hon. Member who originally brought the main Act in 
this House in 2005, is the then hon. S. Lauthan, who was a good man and, if I may say, he is 
still a good man! I had the opportunity of meeting him a few times and exchanging with him 
certain  views.  The  Act  that  he  presented  in  this  House  then  reflects  exactly  on  the  man’s 
character. He cared for the elderly. He cared for people. 

When  I listened to my learned  friend, hon. Ramful about the criticisms that he has 
raised, I have made a few points that this Act is insufficient and inadequate. Let me remind 
him,  he  is  today  standing  as  a  Member  of  the  Labour  Party.  Let  me  remind  him  and 
everybody in this House that in 2005, when the then Minister was presenting the Bill in the 
House, the then Leader of the Opposition - we know who - was not even sitting there. 

His leader! He was not even there.  

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 
Madam Speaker: No comments! 

49 

 

Mr  Rutnah:  Not  only  in  relation  to  this  Bill. Whenever  the  then  Government  was 
presenting any Bill relating to the welfare of our population, for example, the welfare of the 
elderly  or  the  welfare  of  labourer,  he  was  not  here.  For  example,  the  then  Leader  of  the 
Opposition  was  not  there  when  the  then  Government  was  presenting  the  Financial 
Intelligence and Anti-Money Laundering Bill. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah, come back to the Bill, please! Others have to talk. 

Mr Rutnah: I am coming. 

Madam Speaker: No, I have given  you some leeway to introduce  your comments, 

but then, please, come to the essence of the Bill as hon. Ramful has done! 

Mr Rutnah: I am grateful for your guidance, Madam Speaker. 

Today, what the hon. Minister is presenting to this House is to help those who are in 
need of our help. Since 2005, a lot has happened in this country and law has to evolve. We 
have  a  duty  towards  our  elderly.  We  have  a  duty  towards  our  mothers  and  our  fathers.  It 
reminds me of the quotation in the King James Bible – 

“Honour thy father  and  thy mother that thy days may be lengthened upon the land 
which the LORD thy God gives thee.” 

We have that duty and I am grateful to the hon. Minister today for having presented this Bill 
in which we deal with some very serious issues in our society. As background, let me remind 
everybody in this House, and I thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister now, he was Prime Minister 
then  in  2001.    On  31  May  2001,  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  launched  the  ‘Ageing  in 
Dignity’.  It  was  as  a  result  of  the  action  plan  that  was  put  in  place  as  a  result  of  the 
involvement  of  many  Ministries    and  senior  citizens  organisations  and  other  communities 
involved  and you had the vision in 2001 that our elderly needs protection. The ‘Ageing in 
Dignity’ which the Prime Minister then launched, was internationally acclaimed, even by the 
international community that we were then well advanced of the Madrid International Plan 
for Action on Ageing. 

50 

 
Today, what is happening in this House is we are amending sections 7, 8 and 11 of the 
main Act. Section 7 is empowering officers to issue summons rather than requiring a person 
to come to their office or to an authority where that person can give an explanation as to an 
allegation  that  is  levelled  against  someone.  Now,  what  is  the  difference  in  the  word 
‘requirement’ and the terms that are going to be included now, that is, a ‘summons’. When 
we require someone to come, which means that it is not mandatory and this is where I differ 
from what my very able and learned friend, hon. Ramful, said that when you require someone 
to come, it is not mandatory, which means that if there is an allegation, he says: ‘I do not 
want to come’. It is worse than exercising his right of silence. I don’t want to come. Go and 
see what you want to do! But when you empower an officer to issue a summons and when 
you don’t respect that summons, a warrant of arrest can be issued against you. So, this is the 
difference. 

Now, if he goes there and tries to exercise his right to silence, there is law about this 
and as lawyers we should know. I know for a fact that we do not have the equivalent of the 
Criminal Justice & Public Order Act 1994 as in England and Wales where sections 33 to 36 
give the right to defendant to exercise the right of silence. However, if those who exercise 
their right of silence, then a Judge or a Magistrate can draw adverse inference. In our country, 
we have not reached that level yet. However, if there is an allegation made, those who are 
prosecuting that allegation can bring all evidence to Court or to any authority where there is 
going to be a litigation and prove the case against the defendant if he has exercised his right 
of  silence  and  if  he  could  not  reasonably  then  give  an  explanation.  Then,  the  evidence 
brought will be able to prove the case against the defendant. So, there is no need for explicit 
mention of right to silence or the person’s right to self-discrimination under the Constitution 
of  Mauritius  is  baffled.  This  is  not  the  case.  We  are  not  in  the  realm  really  of  actually 
threading into the rights of any defendant to exercise the right of silence. 

I  also listened to hon. Ramful.  He said that the issue of summons can be used by 
officers  without  making  enough  inquiries.  But  no,  that  cannot  be  the  case!  As  the  hon. 
Minister pointed out during her discourse the issue of a summons is only going to be the last 
resort. Today we should make it clear, the intention of Parliament is not to bring amendments 
in order to indiscriminately go and issue summons against people against whom allegations 
have been made, but it is only going to be a last resort action when all enquiries have been 
completed, and it is obvious that there is a prima facie case or there is  a case that  can be 

 

51 

established against someone; it is only then that the summons could be issued. That is the 
question of last resort. 

Coming  to  section  8  where  the  hon.  Minister  proposes  to  increase  the  number  of 
people sitting on the Committee from 7 to 10 is, obviously, a very good initiative. Why is this 
so?  It is because it is like quorum.  Generally, elderly people tend to get sick sometimes or 
they  have  to  go  on  excursions  or  they  have  commitments  and  they  can’t  attend  the 
Committee. If there is not going to be enough people, enough opinion aired about an action 
that is proposed; that is not going to be really democratic. In the circumstances, where from 
seven to ten, if two or three people cannot attend, then they will be able to continue with a 
committee and decide in a democratic manner.  

I  have  to  deal  with  one  thing.  My  friend,  hon.  Dr.  Joomaye  states  that  he  totally 
adheres to the amendment which goes along with a spirit of what is intended today in the 
House.  He  has  expressed  some  concern  about  financial  abuse,  but  the  issue  relating  to 
financial abuse has already been dealt with in the main Act. If I can refer hon. Members to 
Section 11 of the main Act, it has already made provision for pecuniary loss. So, therefore, 
there  should  not  be  any  difficulty  about  the  financial  abuse  that  hon.  Dr.  Joomaye  has 
expressed concern about.  

Obviously,  section  11  which  is  being  amendment  by  adding  the  new  section  is  to 
ensure that those, who do not comply with the provision of the summons, are dealt with in a 
manner that reflect the breach that they have committed otherwise what is the point of having 
a provision in the law to issue a summons and the person simply does not turn up on the day 
of  the  summons.  So,  it  is  important  to  bring  sanctions  again  those  who  refuse  to  attend 
whenever they are required to come and explain about an unauthorised act. 

Madam Speaker, I must say that, in this House, during the tenure of this Government 
so  far,  we  have  brought  serious  legislations.  For  example,  we  have  brought  the  Domestic 
Violence  Act.  In  the  Domestic  Violence  Act,  there  is  provision  also  that  whomsoever 
commits an act of a domestic violence under the same roof, that person can be subjected to 
the  penalty  that  is  provided  in  the  Domestic  Violence  Act  and  in  this  Act  also,  the 
amendment  is  consonant  with  what  we  have  done  in  previous  legislation.  This  shows  the 
consistency of Government in bringing legislation to modernise our legislation so that our 
people are protected especially our old, elderly, vulnerable people. 

 
On this note, Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving me the opportunity to address 

52 

this House today. 

 
(6.03 p.m.) 

53 

Mr  J.  F.  François  (First  Member  for  Rodrigues):    Madam  Speaker,  it  is  with  a 
deep  sense  of  respect  and  responsibility  towards  our  elderly  that  I  will  contribute  to  the 
debate  and  support  this  Bill  which  has,  as  objective:  “to  amend  the  Protection  of  Elderly 
Persons Act to enhance the level of protection of, and security to, the elderly.” 

Our elders have the constitutional right to be treated with dignity and respect, to make 
their own decisions and choices, to live in a safe environment and to have access to legal 
protection. This needs to be addressed and well addressed in the face of our fast changing 
societal environment, and I believe this is part of what the hon. Minister is bringing about 
through the proposed amendment today. I congratulate her for that. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  proposed  amendment  to  section  7(4)  is  by  deleting  the  word 
‘require’ and replacing it by the words “issue a summons, in the form set out in the Schedule, 
to”, gives powers for a Higher Social Security Officer to summon a person. This amendment 
brings a new mechanism of rapidity, efficiency and professionalism to tackle cases of abuse 
on our elderly. I believe, Madam Speaker, Government’s commitment to tackle abuse on our 
elderly people today reflects the UN 18th principle for older persons adopted in 1991. 

Our Republic’s vision is for a healthy, lively and active ageing population. Madam 
Speaker,  you  will  agree  with  me  that,  as  our  population  ages,  and  our  Republic  is 
modernising, the rates of abuse on older people are expected to increase. Allow me to refer to 
available  statistics  where  in  Rodrigues,  there  are  4,552  elders  for  2016  as  a  date,  out  of  a 
population  of  around  41,000  individuals,  that  is,  11%  of  our  population  are  elders.  From 
reported cases of elderly abuse in Rodrigues, I have been informed that the statistics show, in 
2010 - 52 cases; 2011 -38 cases; 2012 - 69; 2013 - 22; 2014 - 11; 2015 -5 and 2016 -13 as at 
date.  Despite these small numbers, for us one case is too many. It is worth to be noted that 
elderly abuse is complex, multidimensional and understanding the extent of abuse on older 
people  is  sometimes  difficult  to  identify  being  given  the  complexity  of  our  society  today, 
Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker, while the law protects our elders, you will be surprised that some 
people think they can get richer by exploiting our elders. And this is where our public officers 
should be able to stop that and with this power to summons, they would be able to stop these 
people. During my regular site visits, Madam Speaker, many elders do complain about the 

 

54 

ordeal to financial abuse from their relatives and carers. However, one particular case that has 
struck me was the poor living condition of a retired pensionable public worker with his wife.  

Despite his retirement pension and their Rs5,200 monthly pensions which amount to 
around Rs15,000 monthly as household income, their living conditions are pitiful. Through 
an enquiry, Madam Speaker, if you will allow me in that line just to substantiate what I am 
saying, I was informed that these poor people are victims of casseurs, unlicensed borrowers.  
I  use  this  leeway  to  raise  this  point.  Why?    Because  this  poor  family,  they  are  refunding 
casseurs so many instalments over the years. Madam Speaker, this amendment should and 
would allow public officers to summon relatives, but not the casseurs.  This is where I seize 
the opportunity to humbly request for a full-fledged enquiry to be carried out so as to put a 
full stop to these illegal abusers and societal ills. 

Madam Speaker, basically, we all know neglect pertains to failures by those carers or 
responsible persons to provide the necessity of life to older persons. Despite they are cashing 
their  carer’s  allowance  of  Rs3,000  monthly  -  there  are  visible  indicators  out  there,  I 
remember  going  to  someone’s  house  and  I  won’t  say  whether  it  is  in  Rodrigues  or  in 
Mauritius - food have been place within reach next to the  bedside of the old person with no 
carers, no one around and no supervision.  My question is, Madam Speaker, how many of 
these cases of neglect are being truly reported today? This is where I believe the new powers 
given  to  the  public  officers  to  summon  these  people  are  quite  crucial.  And  worst,  Madam 
Speaker, there is this case of infliction of mental stress on our elders. It is common where 
those elders are being treated as children, engaging in emotional blackmailing and preventing 
contact with the outside world.   

We know, the cases of abuse today, Madam Speaker, where some of our elders suffer 
with  the  problem  of  dementia  syndromes.  They  are  usually  treated  as  prisoners  -  I  use  a 
strong word - within their rooms. And again, this is where this amendment gives powers to 
the public officers and higher social security officers. It will be crucial to have more powers 
to deal with these cases and not to allow our elders to live in such situations or conditions of 
being slaves to carers or relatives or whoever is looking after them. In that context, Madam 
Speaker,  allow  me  to  seize  this  opportunity  to  make  the  following  recommendations.  In 
support  of  the  proposed  amendment,  I  believe  there  is  need  to  put  in  place  an  education 
strategy for our society and caring values for our elders. Educating and raising community 
awareness  to  the  problem  is  essential  to  fostering  an  intolerance  of  elder  abuse.  Further 

 

55 

amendments, Madam Speaker, need also to be made to allow- and this is important- almost 
everyone to report to an institution if they have reasonable cause to believe an old person is 
being abused  or neglected by a carer or by himself or herself. 

The persons who can report, I think, should take into consideration those persons who 
have  direct  contact  to  these  elders.  For  example,  I  will  just  name  some:  doctors,  medical 
practitioners, counsellors, police officers, bank tellers, bank managers. Why is that, Madam 
Speaker?  It is because, basically, today anyone should be able to report any case of abuse to 
the social security officers and they did not have to wait to be summoned by a social security 
officer to explain any case of abuse. I think this is very important. This is because anyone can 
simply use their eyes and their ears to observe unusual signs that could mean abuse such as 
burns, bruises, being beaten and I won’t name the entire list.  

Madame  la  présidente,  je  vais  être  bref.    Avant  de  conclure,  permettez-moi  de 
mentionner  quelques  mots  sur  Rodrigues  vue  que  ce  projet  de  loi  s’appliquera  aussi  à 
Rodrigues.  Je constate que dans la société Rodriguaise, une de nos valeurs fondamentales est 
d’aimer nos grands-parents.  Content nou grand dimounes.   

Nous  adoptons  l’approche  que  chaque  citoyen  ne  doit  pas  voir  une  personne  âgée 
comme  un  problème  mais  comme  une  richesse  de  nos  valeurs  humaines.    Pour  nous,  à 
Rodrigues,  les  personnes  âgées  dépendantes  ont  droit  au  respect  absolu  de  leur  liberté 
d’adulte et de leur dignité d’être humain comme a si bien mentionné l’honorable Rutnah who 
talked about dignity of elders. 

Madame la présidente, une société qui ne peut s’occuper dignement de ses aînés est 
une société décadente. Il est bon de souligner qu’à Rodrigues si jamais, une personne âgée est 
maltraitée c’est considérée comme une honte pour la famille Rodriguaise. Les amendements 
apportés par l’honorable Madame Jeewa- Daureeawoo vont dans la direction que Rodrigues 
s’engage pour nos aînés car nos aînés sont toujours considérés comme le ciment de la base 
familiale et sociétale de Rodrigues. C’est là une des raisons pourquoi la plupart des personnes 
âgées  sont  prises  en  charge  par  un  carer  qui  est  souvent  un  membre  de  la  famille  et  sont 
redevables envers les officiers de la Sécurité Sociale. 

 Madame  la  présidente,  au-delà  des  carers,  l’Assemblée  Régionale  de  Rodrigues  a 
recruté  quatre  professionnels  carers  qui  ont  suivi  des  formations  en  collaboration  avec  le 
ministère de la Sécurité Sociale au Mauritius Institute of Health.  Ils ont la responsabilité de 

 

56 

circuler  tout  autour  de  l’ile  Rodrigues  pour  aider  les  carers  malgré  leur  bonne  volonté  de 
mieux  encadrer  les  personnes  âgées.  C’est  dans  cette  même  ligne  que  la  Commission  qui 
s’occupe  des  personnes  âgées  à  Rodrigues  d’une  manière  innovante  et  en  même  temps  de 
sauvegarder nos valeurs traditionnelles est en train de construire un Respite Centre à L’Union 
à Rodrigues comme une espace spéciale pour nos aînés et il est impératif que la Commission 
de la Sécurité Sociale à Rodrigues augmente leur ressource humaine. Et le but de ce centre, 
Madame la présidente, pour terminer, c’est d’offrir une espace moderne afin de permettre aux 
carers/parents de respirer un peu pendant que les personnes âgées dépendantes sont prises en 
charge, dans un premier temps pendant 15 jours au maximum, par l’État dans ce centre. 

Madame la présidente, pour terminer sur ce point, ce centre agira comme centre de 

formation pour toutes les personnes qui bénéficieront de carer’s allowance à l’avenir. 

Madam Speaker, I also seize this opportunity to humbly request the hon. Minister to 
consider amending the Act with regard to the existing provisions for Rodrigues, mainly in 
sections  4,  5,  6  and  7  to  consolidate  the  Protection  of  Elderly  Persons  Act  2005  and  its 
effectiveness in the context of Rodrigues.  

Madam Speaker, to conclude I only hope that the proposed amendments will allow 
officers to deal rapidly and efficiently to tackle cases of abuse on our elderly and that our 
Community be more vigilant and value our elders to free our society from any form of elderly 
abuse while the officers have more powers to deal with cases of abuse.  

 Long live our elders, Madam Speaker.  May God bless them and protect them all.  I 

thank you for your attention.  

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Toussaint!  

 (6.16 p.m.) 

Mr  J.  C  Toussaint  (Second  Member  for  Curepipe  &  Midlands):  Thank  you, 
Madam Speaker.  Je vais être très bref parce que arrivé en dernier, presque tout a été dit et je 
ne vais pas perdre le temps de mes honorables amis.  

D’abord, permettez-moi de féliciter l’honorable Madame Jeewa-Daureeawoo qui fait 
un excellent travail et qui a à cœur les personnes âgées, qui a à cœur ceux qui sont dans le 
plus besoin dans la société.  

57 

 
Après  une  bonne  dizaine  d’années  il  était  très  important  d’apporter  ces  quelques 
amendements parce que bien sûr tout change, les choses évoluent et il faut  avancer avec le 
temps. Ces amendements viennent pour apporter plus de protection, plus d’efficacité et plus 
de résultats. Nos personnes âgées en ont besoin et plusieurs parmi nous l’avons dit que c’est 
grâce  à  eux  que  nous  sommes  là  aujourd’hui  et  ils  ont  contribué  à  ce  que  notre  pays  est 
devenu aujourd’hui et ils méritent toute la protection nécessaire. 

Ce projet de loi d’amender certaines sections est un signal fort pour ceux qui dans la 
société  ne  voient  pas  leur  grands  dimounes  comme  des  êtres  humains  et  qui  ne  font  pas 
honneur à ces gens. Alors ce projet de loi va leur dire: attention! La loi est là et elle vous 
surveille de près et si vous allez contre, il faudra payer le prix. 

Je  profite  aussi  de  ce  moment  pour  faire  un  appel  aux  plus  jeunes,  il  n’est  pas 
nécessaire de mettre des lois et des lois mais il faut que les humains, les jeunes, la nouvelle 
génération puissent comprendre que nos aînés sont des êtres humains et que c’est grâce à eux 
que nous sommes là et que demain zot tour pou arriver! C’est très important. Alors j’espère 
que la jeunesse d’aujourd’hui entende tout ce qui a été dit ici, entende cet appel et qu’ils ne 
voudraient pas que, plus tard, ils soient maltraités à leur tour. 

Je profite de l’occasion aussi pour féliciter les nombreuses associations de troisième 
âge qui  font un travail extraordinaire et tout  cela, bien sûr,  en parallèle avec ce que la loi 
prévoit. Il y a aussi donc des associations qui s’occupent de leurs aînés. Chez nous il y en a 
beaucoup  et  on  est  souvent  avec  eux.  Il  y  a  aussi  la  force  policière  qui  fait  un  travail 
exceptionnel  surtout  dans  notre  circonscription,  ils  vont  vers  les  personnes  âgées  qui  sont 
seules  à  la  maison.  Ils  prennent  contact,  ils  leur  parlent  et  ils  leur  apportent  le  soutien 
nécessaire. 

Comme je l’ai dit je vais être très bref. N’oublions pas que pour  Tino Rossi  la vie 
commence à 60  ans!  Et  j’encouragerai  mes  honorables  amis  d’aller  voir  le  texte  de  Tino 
Rossi, cela en vaut la peine. Comme je l’ai dit je vais être très bref et je souhaite de tout cœur 
que ces amendements apportent plus de protection à nos dadas, nos chachis, nos khalas, aux 
popos et à nos grand mounes en général de la République de Maurice. 

Merci beaucoup, Madame la présidente. 

 

 

 (6.21 p.m.) 

58 

Ms  M.  Sewocksingh  (Third  Member  for  Curepipe  &  Midlands):  At  the  very 
outset,  allow  me,  Madam  Speaker,  to  thank  the  hon.  Minister,  Mrs  Jeewa-Daureeawoo,  to 
bring this Bill to the House and I would also like to congratulate her for the outstanding job 
that she is doing. Madam Speaker, I will be very brief today as I promised the hon. Chief 
Whip that I will take only two minutes of the House. 

(Interruptions) 

Today,  we  are  talking  about  the  elderly  people.  It  is  a  very  serious,  sensitive  and 
valuable matter. No matter the ethnicity, culture, gender, creed or religion, Madam Speaker, 
mature adulthood has a very important role in our society. They are the pillars of our society. 
They have left their footprints in what we do and what the nation is today.  They have worked 
hard  in  their  lives  to  raise  their  families.  They  are  a  source  of  wisdom  and  they  are  the 
examples of today’s generation. But, unfortunately, Madam Speaker, time has made some of 
them  frail  and  vulnerable  sometimes  less  able  to  cope  with  the  day  to  day  life  and  they 
become les proies de la société. Sometimes they are being abused by their own environment 
and by their close ones. 

Some  common  abuses,  Madam  Speaker,  which  my  other  colleagues  have  already 
mentioned, I am not going to go into details, are the physical, emotional neglect, financial, 
sexual abuse, health care and so on. But, Madam Speaker, abuses are abuses and their impact 
can be very severe on our elderly people.  

My  very  good  friend  and  colleague  hon.  François  gave  figures  on  the  number  of 
abuses, but there are some cases that are not reported for some reasons or the other and the 
elderly people suffer in silence. Not later than a few days ago, Madam Speaker, I will just 
briefly take a case which I came across on the social media… 

Madam Speaker: But, is the case of the hon. Member related to the amendment? 

Ms Sewocksingh: Yes. 

Madam Speaker: Relate it to the amendment, please! 

Ms Sewocksingh: Where a mother has been beaten by her son because of money that 
she kept for her medical treatment. Madam Speaker, today we are bringing amendments to 

 

59 

the  Protection  of  the  Elderly  Act.  This  proves  the  commitment  and  seriousness  of  this 
Government. This Government does not let down its citizens and this Government has not 
missed any opportunity to ease the life of the elderly people. 

Madam Speaker, this piece of amendment can be just in a few lines, but it means a lot. 
It means a lot as it will bring a major change in the lives of the elderly people. As we can see, 
officers will have more authority to protect our senior citizens. Hon. Rutnah has clearly given 
the definition – I am not going to say it again, he has already given a very clear definition on 
the issue of the importance of a summons.  

Another effort that this Ministry is bringing by this amendment, Madam Speaker, is 
the increase in the members of the Managing Committee of the Elderly Watch. Again, this 
shows the commitment of this Ministry and that they want to make sure that this Committee 
will function very efficiently.  

Another pertinent amendment, Madam Speaker, is that now if a person commits an 
act of abuse on an elderly person, this Bill proposes a conviction to be liable to a fine not 
exceeding Rs50,000 and an imprisonment not exceeding two years. 

Madam Speaker, just to conclude, these are all the measures that are being taken and 
these measures will definitely bring our citizens free from danger and violence. Each of us 
has the responsibility towards our senior citizens. It is our duty to protect them.  

Before I end, I would like to pay tribute to all these elderly people who have strived a 
lot to make our nation, our country, the pride of the Indian Ocean, today we call it the Key 
and the Star of the Indian Ocean. Today I have the opportunity to thank them. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  think  my  two  minutes  have  already  lapsed,  with  due  respect,  I 

support this Bill and I commend it. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Minister! 

(6.27 p.m.) 

Mrs F. Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Madam Speaker, you will have to bear with me as my 
summing up will be a bit lengthy with regard to the number of interveners. We have today 
been favoured with exchange of views and opinions on a matter which concerns the elderly 
people  of  our  society.  The  main  objective  of  the  Bill  is  to  further  strengthen  the  existing 

 

60 

legislation  framework  in  an  attempt  to  better  protect  our  elderly  people  so  that  they  can 
evolve  in  a  just  and  safe  society.    I  value  the  input  of  each  and  every  Member  who  has 
intervened on this particular Bill and made constructive criticisms. Madam Speaker,  I will 
refrain from commenting on views expressed by Members who have navigated outside the 
ambit of the Bill. 

Coming to the intervention of hon. Dr. Joomaye, I must say that the intervention is a 
very constructive one. He has made some good points, but maybe I will need to clarify some 
of  the  points  which  he  mentioned.  Abuse  has  been  defined  under  section  2  of  the  Act  as 
meaning an act of abuse referred to in section 11. Now, when we have a look at section 11, 
which deals with offences, you can see that section 11(1) (c) states – 

“intentionally causes pecuniary loss or material prejudice to an elderly person.” 

It is good noting also that section 11 (1) (b) is wide-ranging and covers many cas de figure. 

Coming  to  the  issue  of  awareness  campaign,  sensitisation  programmes  on  elderly 
protection are carried out on a regular basis by the Elderly Persons Production Unit of the 
Ministry, the Social Welfare Division, and the Senior Citizens Council, as part of their core 
activities. 

Coming to the intervention of hon. Rughoobur, I think we need to distinguish between 
the Monitoring Committee and the Elderly Watch. We are here, in the amendment, referring 
to the Elderly Watch, which operates more like a squad by actually going out to look into 
reported cases of elderly abuse, gather relevant information and provide counselling services 
and guidance to permit that cases are resolved in an amicable manner and through mutual 
understanding. It is only in cases where there is reason to believe that the abuse is criminal 
that the matter is referred to the appropriate institution. 

With regard to the second point that the hon. Member has made, under the Residential 
Care  Home  Act,  officers  of  the  Ministry,  more  precisely  from  the  Welfare  and  Elderly 
Persons Unit of the Ministry, are authorised to access any charitable institution for reasons of 
inspection and even to look into suspected cases of abuse. This instrument is used whenever 
there  is  need  to  do  so.  Therefore,  we  cannot  say  that  institutions  are  not  covered  when  it 
comes to protection and security of our elderly people. 

61 

 
Coming to the intervention of hon. Ramful, the whole purpose of the summons is to 
call  upon  any  person  to  appear  before  the  Higher  Social  Security  Officer,  to  provide  such 
written or oral information, as may be necessary, in relation to a complaint made against that 
person with respect to an elderly person. In an event any person who turns up, following the 
issue of summons, does not provide the necessary information as required, well, the matter 
will be referred to the appropriate authorities for an enquiry to be conducted if need be. The 
summons  is  meant  primarily  to  draw  and  collect  information  and  not  for  the  purpose  of 
levelling  any  accusation  against  the  persons  summoned.  This  should  be  clear.  We  favour 
amicable arrangement to confrontation, thus mediation and counselling are resorted to only 
where there is reason to believe that the abuse is of a serious nature.  It is only then that the 
case will be referred to the appropriate authorities. 

With regard to the intervention of our friend, hon. François, the point raised about the 
need for education and sensitisation campaign is well noted. I wish to inform the House that 
it is already  being done and will be accentuated, as spelt out in the  National Strategy and 
Action Plan on Ageing 2016-2020. 

With  regard  to  the  second  point  made,  the  Solicitor  General  has  already  been 
requested  to  amend  those  particular  sections  of  the  Act  to  reflect  the  specificities  of 
Rodrigues  through  the  revisions  of  the  law.  The  Rodrigues  Regional  Assembly  has  been 
officially informed of this. 

Let me end by saying that this is a very important Bill because here we are dealing 
with the protection, security of our elderly people. Let me assure the House that my Ministry 
will look into the constructive points made by all hon. Members of the House, be it on the 
Government or Opposition side. I will not hesitate to come forward with any amendments, if 
need be, for the better protection and security of our elderly people. 

Thank you. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Bill read a second time and committed. 

COMMITTEE STAGE 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

 
The Protection of Elderly Persons (Amendment) Bill (No. XV of 2016) was considered 

62 

and agreed to. 

On  the  Assembly  resuming  with  Madam  Speaker  in  the  Chair,  Madam  Speaker 

reported accordingly. 

Third Reading 

On motion made and seconded, the Protection of Elderly Persons (Amendment) Bill 

(No. XV of 2016) was read the third time and passed. 

(6.36 p.m.) 

Second Reading 

THE PUBLIC OFFICERS’ PROTECTION (AMENDMENT) BILL 

(No. XVI of 2016) 

Order for Second Reading read. 

The  Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms,  Minister  of 
Environment, Sustainable Development, and Disaster and Beach Management (Mr A. 
Wong  Yen  Cheong):  Madam  Speaker,  with  your  permission,  I  move  that  the  Public 
Officers’ Protection (Amendment) Bill (No. XVI of 2016) be read a second time. 

As  the  House  is  aware,  the  Public  Officers’  Protection  Act,  which  was  enacted  in 
December 1957, makes provision for the protection of public officers working in Ministries, 
Departments and offices of local authorities in the discharge of their duties. 

In fact, section 3 of the Act provides that any person who, by force or violence, resists 
or  opposes,  molests,  hinders  or  obstructs  a  public  officer  in  the  performance  of  his  duty 
commits an offence and, on convention, is liable to a fine not exceeding Rs10,000 and to an 
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months. Hon. Members will agree with me that 
this Act, which has been amended on five occasions, needs to be further amended to be in 
line with our firm commitment to protect public officers while on duty, so that they operate in 
a secure and safer workplace. 

  
Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that lately we have been experiencing an 
increased number of cases of assault and violence against Public Officers, more particularly 

 

63 

those dealing with members of the public, while in the execution of their duties in accordance 
with prevailing rules and regulations. 
I am informed that there are many cases of assault/molestation against public officers 
 
in  the  Police  Department,  for  example,  between  2013  to  2015,  a  total  of  473  cases  were 
reported; while for period January to June 2016 only, there had been 95 cases.  There are also 
cases  reported  by  the  Ministry  of  Health  and  Quality  of  Life,  the  Ministry  of  Gender 
Equality,  Child  Development  and  Family  Welfare,  the  Ministry  of  Education  and  Human 
Resources,  Tertiary Education  & Scientific Research, the Ministry of Public  Infrastructure 
and Land Transport and Fire Services, amongst others. 
Madam  Speaker,  with  a  view  to  providing  a  strong  deterrent  to  persons  who  are 
 
minded to assault Public Officers, I am proposing to bring amendments to section 3 of the 
Public Officers’ Protection Act 1957, so as to make the penalties harsher. 
 
In fact, the need for this Bill was highlighted by the Ministry of Health and Quality of 
Life, which drew the attention of my Ministry of several cases of assault against doctors and 
nurses in hospital premises, and the need for urgent action to address this issue.  This was 
backed  by  the  representations  from  medical  and  nurses  associations,  who  pointed  out  that 
existing  provisions  were  not  adequate  enough  as  a  deterrent.  In  this  perspective,  I  am 
proposing that the quantum of fine to be imposed on any person causing hindrance to the 
smooth running of government business be increased from Rs10,000 to Rs100,000, and the 
term of imprisonment from 3 months to 2 years. 
 
Madam  Speaker,  let  me  point  out  that  the  proposed  Public  Officers’  Protection 
(Amendment) Bill will also entail consequential amendment to Section 159 of The Criminal 
Code  Act  1838,  which  sanctions  any  assault/violence  directed  against  a  Member  of  the 
Cabinet or of the National Assembly or a Magistrate or Judge, in the exercise of his functions 
or  on  account  of  such  functions,  or  against  a  ministerial  officer,  an  agent  of  the  civil  or 
military authorities or any person entrusted with a public duty or where committed in relation 
thereto. Accordingly, the quantum of fine imposable under Section 159 of the Code is being 
increased from Rs25,000 to Rs100,000. 
 
Madam  Speaker,  with  the  proposed  amendments,  the  Public  Officers’  Protection 
(Amendment) Bill will empower our Courts to administer higher penalties/sanctions with a 
view to eliminating the number of cases of assault against Public Officers on duty. 
Madam  Speaker,  I  am  fully  conscious  that  increasing  the  penalty  alone  will  not 
 
suffice to eliminate all cases of assaults against public officers.  I strongly believe that the 
focus should also be on preventive measures.  In this respect my Ministry (through the Civil 

 

64 

Service College, Mauritius) has already embarked on a series of training programmes geared 
towards “Customer Service Excellence”.  Three hundred (300) officers from across the Civil 
Service  have  already  been  trained.    Moreover  the  Civil  Service  College,  Mauritius  has 
already mounted a new training course on “Handling of difficult Customers” which will be 
launched  shortly.    As  such  our  officers  will  be  trained  to  be  prepared  psychologically  to 
handle difficult situations. 
 
I wish to highlight that the Employment Rights Act 2008 as subsequently amended, 
caters for employees of both the public and private sectors, and also provides that any person 
who  assaults  either  verbally,  sexually  or  physically  any  person  in  the  exercise  of  his 
functions, risks paying a fine of Rs75,000 and a maximum imprisonment sentence of 2 years.  
I have already taken up the matter with my colleague, the hon. Minister of Labour, Industrial 
Relations,  Employment  and  Training,  who  will  bring  the  consequential  amendment  to  the 
Employment Rights Act as regards the quantum of the fine so as to bring it at par with the 
proposed amendment to the Public Officers’ Protection Bill. 
 
Madam Speaker, hon. Members will agree with me that Police Officers, Medical and 
Health Officers, Nursing Officers, Educators, and Officers of the Child Development Unit, 
among others, will not be able to perform their duties effectively in a threatening workplace. 
 
The amendments proposed confirm that we have the interest of our public officers at 
heart and we wish to empower them to offer a quality service to the members of the public. I 
strongly feel that they should operate in a working environment where they feel they are safe 
and secure. 
On the other hand, this Amendment does not preclude the legal proceedings against 
 
public officers for abuse of power provided such proceedings are instituted within two years 
from date of occurrence.  
Madam  Speaker,  Government  is  committed  to  provide  protection  to  its  public 
 
officers,  who  are  its  agents,  in  the  implementation  of  public  policy  and  Government 
decisions,  maintenance  and  enforcement  of  law  and  order,  and  provision  of  enhanced 
services to our citizens. 
 
Madam Speaker, to conclude, I stress that Public officers whose primary duty is to 
serve the public, should be able to work in a safe environment and their workplace should not 
be a place where they are under threat of assault by members of the public. 
 
(Amendment) Bill 2016 to the House. 
 

Madam Speaker, with these words, I now commend the Public Officers’ Protection 

Thank you. 

65 

 
Mr Callychurn rose and seconded. 
 
 
Mr  V.  Baloomoody  (Third  Member  for  GRNW  &  Port  Louis  West):    Madam 
Speaker, I have listened carefully to the hon. Minister and we all agree that workers, be it in 
the Civil Service, in the public sector and in the private sector should not only have a safe 
environment for work but they should feel safe in their work as well. 

Madam  Speaker,  what  we  are  doing  today  is  increasing  the  penalty  with  regard  to 

 
assaulting Public Officers.  This is only one step we are taking to improve the service.  

 
 Like I said, we are for a proper and safe environment for Public Officers to work, but 
the question is: why are we coming with this Bill today? Why have we found it necessary to 
increase the penalty, and why there is an increase with regard to molesting Public Officers?  
Have we done a study to find out why?  Have we done a study to find out the cause?  You 
mentioned the hospital, you mentioned the police, those especially working with the members 
of the public?  Have we done a study to find out why before coming to increase the penalty?  
And I am one who believes that just by increasing the penalty does not reduce the crime rate! 
We are not against that, but we are saying, why are we coming here, today, without doing a 
ground work, when we know what is happening everywhere; when we  know what are the 
services that the public are having from the public sector.   

 
Madam Speaker, have we conducted a survey in the hospitals to find out why doctors 
and nurses are being assaulted, not all, but some?  The majority of the civil servants do their 
work properly. But what about when it comes to service, public relation with the members of 
the public! When you listen to the radio every day – I am sure all of us listen to the radio – 
the number of complaints you hear from members of the public, from the service they receive 
from Public officers. I was wondering, while preparing my speech, why do we need a special 
law to protect especially the public officers.  So, I say, let me go to Hansard to see when we 
introduced that Bill what were the reasons in 1957.  You will be surprised, Madam Speaker, 
that there has never been a debate in the House with regard to that Bill.  

There was a Public Officer Ordinance in 1957, and then on 20 December 1957, the 

 
Procureur général moves, and says -  

 

“Sir,  I  beg  to  move  that  the  Bill  ‘to  make  provision  for  the  protection  of  certain 
persons acting in the execution of statutory and other public duties’ be read a second 
time.   

 

66 

 
Sir, this is purely  editing. There is no change in the law for purely technical, legal 
reasons the provisions which were contained in the interpretation ordinance have been 
abstracted therefrom and reproduced in this Bill.” 

There was no debate. We just took what the Colonial Officers gave us and make it an Act 
before knowing whether it will fit the purpose of our country. Up till today, you rightly said, 
there have been amendments when we have never had a full debate of why we need that Bill. 
Like  I  said,  we  know  what  is  happening.  We  all,  as  Members  of  Parliament,  must  have 
received so many complaints, be it with regard to the people attending hospital, the way they 
are treated by the nurses, by the doctors, not even telling patients why your father has been 
admitted. They are going to have an operation of somebody they don’t even given the details 
and  inform  them  what will  be  the  consequence  and  they  don’t  tell  you  after  the  operation 
what has happened. People die in hospitals; they are informed hours and hours later. So, these 
are issues that we should address with regard to public officers. 

Like  I said, there is no doubt the majority do their best, but the Police –  I had the 
opportunity  to  say  this  when  we  debated  the  Police  Complaints  Commission.  In  these  six 
months’ training they are having, are they trained how to deal with members of the public? 
I’ll just give you one example which happened to me and it is good that you know it. We are 
given a car as Chairperson of the PAC. The first time I drove that car, I was going from Port 
Louis to Curepipe, it was a Saturday evening. There was a checkpoint. So, the Police Officer 
stopped the car. I stopped the car.  He came with his torch, he looked at the windscreen, but 
the official car doesn’t have l’assurance, déclaration. He asked me: “Eta, cot tone gagne sa 
loto  la!”  “Cot  tone  gagne  sa  loto  la!  Cot  to  declarasion !  Cot  to  l’assirance !”  I  was 
surprised, the first time I was having that car. I said probably I was wrong. Fortunately, his 
superior came, who was a sergeant. He came and said:  “Alle labas toi! Alle labas toi! He 
apologised to me and said: “Sorry! He is young.” Fortunately, I am a good man. 

It’s true! The way they speak to people! 

(Interruptions) 

Another  example  I’ll  give  you  which  happened  in  a  Police  Station.  I  was  giving  a 
statement with a client inside there. There was ‘le comptoir’- as the hon. Minister, my good 
friend, used to call it – and the lady was outside in waiting. There was another lady.  Now, 
when you give the declaration, they type it on the computer, it goes online. That lady was 
typing the declaration of that complainant. And from a distance nearly 6 to 7 feet, she asked: 

 

67 

“Eh, madame, ki lage ou ena! Qui lage ou ena! Et ou la, madame, pe cose are ou la, qui lage 
ou ena ! » Shouting in that Police Station asking a woman about her age. I intervened, I told 
the officer: “Would you have been happy if I asked you loudly what is your age? You are a 
woman like the other woman!” So, this is the problem 

You have mentioned how many statistics, how many cases. But, we have to have to 
make a study, like many countries have done, be it in South Africa, in Dublin recently, in UK 
they are bringing a study to see how public servants have to deal with members of the public. 
We must recognise that the public’s right is to access to information concerning themselves 
and their close relatives. You have to give information. Now, today, many public officials are 
reluctant to give information because – and I don’t blame them in certain cases – there is no 
code of conduct. They don’t know what information to release and what information not to 
release. They are afraid that tomorrow if they release information, they might be called at the 
Headquarters of the Central CID. So, we need a good proper code of conduct. 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, from everybody. You have a very good example. It is not easy; we just have to go on the 
Internet and search.   Look what other countries  have done!  In Dublin, they just have one, 
South Africa; they have a very excellent one. I refer to the Civil Service Code of Standards 
and  Behaviour  of  Dublin.  They  go  to  each  Ministry  and  each  sector,  what  a  nurse  should 
disclose to the patient, what a doctor should say to the patient, how you should handle them, 
how you should give information. 

Today, if you want to go to one of the Civil Service Office to ask information, you 
 
have to go four or five times. Just to transfer from one car owner to another car owner, you 
have to go to four offices and they all give your different description what documents you 
have to give, you give to NTA, they tell you to bring that, pou alle tire gage, you have to 
bring another one, they tell you it’s not your car, now bring the Identity Card of your wife, 
it’s on the name of your wife, you don’t tell you the first time. So, you have to go four to five 
times. In most offices, I see when you go there, you are giving them a burden. Pe alle fatigue 
zot! They don’t see you as a customer. They say: “Look at the queue here! Guette sa le queue 
la!  Ouf!”  When  you  are  queuing  and  waiting  in  the  queue.  So,  we  have  to  change  that 
mentality. 

(Interruptions) 

68 

 
You mentioned it, but, unfortunately, there is nothing done, even the school of Civil 
Service, two days’ course, two weeks’ course, is not enough. There must be legal statutory 
duty. This code of conduct, in Ireland, you have not only the code of conduct, you have a 
special  Act  which  they  call  -  and  it  has  legal  implication  –  they  have  an  Act  called  “The 
Standard in Public Office Act”. Under this Act, there is a code of conduct and this code of 
conduct, a breach of it, can lead to disciplinary action. We should not be only one sided. 

So, what I am proposing – and this is very good - the Mission of that Code of Conduct 

– 

“The  mission  of  the  Civil  Service  is  the  achievement  of  an  excellent  service  for 
Government and the other institutions of State as well as for the public as citizens and 
users  of  public  service,  based  on  principles  of  integrity,  impartiality,  effectiveness, 
equity and accountability.” 

This is the Civil Service that we need. 

When it comes to dealing with the public, look what it says – 

“Observe appropriate behaviour at work by: 

•  dealing with the public sympathetically, fairly and promptly, and 
• 

treating their colleagues with respect.” 

This is what we expect! 

We keep giving them protection, I don’t know why. Now, we have increased the fine. 
The hon. Minister mentioned: ‘Yes, they can be made available provided we sue them within 
two  years.”  C’est  aberrant!  If  a  Civil  Servant  commits  an  offence,  commits  a  case  of 
negligence which has cost life – I know cases where this has cost life, baby has died, mother 
has died – because of the long procedure with regard to the Judicial Enquiry, two years have 
lapsed, you cannot prosecute.  

The State Law Officer will take the point and rightly so! Rightly so, two years have 
gone,  you  cannot  prosecute.  So,  they  are  protected,  they  commit  an  offence,  by  their 
negligence people have died, we have had death, because the enquiry, the institution takes 
their time, we cannot prosecute them. Why this protection to them? Why these two years? If I 
commit a crime today, it is for life, any time, we have cases even after 19 years, we have 
prosecuted people. Why the public officer has to be protected that much? 

69 

 
So, we have to review that, if you want to have a standard, a good public officer, we 
have to – like I have said for the Police as well, the Standing Orders of the Police have to be 
enforced and they have to be punished in case of breaching the Standing Orders, not just do it 
like  that.  So  many  cases  have  been  dismissed  in  Court  because  the  Police  Officers  have 
abused their power, having confession under brutality, it was not a fair enquiry, this is breach 
of  the  Standing  Orders;  no  action  has  been  taken  following  judgment.  I  have  never  seen 
action taken in cases.  I and my friend, hon. Collendavelloo, we have appeared in so many 
cases, set aside confession, no enquiry against these Police Officers.  

In  fact,  some  have  been  promoted.  We  don’t  want  violence.  Those  who  commit 
violence have to be punished especially if it is against some person who has left his home to 
come and earn his living, be it in the private or public sector. We are protecting the public 
sector, okay. I don’t know why because there has been no debate. Up to today we will never 
know we have just borrowed the legislation from our colonial masters. It is our statute book, 
it has to be here. Why do public officers have this special category and, on the other hand, 
they don’t have any law or regulation which enforce them to do their work properly?  

So, I think this is a proper occasion and I am very sad that we are not coming to a 
second amendment to remove that barrier of 2 years or if they want to remove, increase it to 
5, 6  or 10 years because a judicial enquiry or a Police enquiry takes more than two years 
now. You should come forward and increase it. It was six months before. In 1992, I think, we 
increased it to 2 years, but, now with so many cases and so many activities, people are more 
aware  of  their  rights,  there  are  more  cases  reported  -  I  am  not  saying  more  cases  of 
negligence - the Court and the Police take more time to do the enquiry, so we should review 
those 2 years bar to prosecute. 

Madam Speaker, what am I proposing now? Okay the fine has gone up. Like I said, 
by just increasing the fine, it does not necessarily reduce the number of offences. We have 
seen that in so many cases, drug being one of them. We have a very severe law for drugs, but 
drug is increasing. For larceny with violence, we have increased the fine but every day it is 
increasing. Women and men are being attacked; their chains are being taken away because 
when  people  commit  that  act  sur  le  tas,  they  don’t  realise  the  consequences.  We  have

 

70 

 to  see  what  provoked  them  to  do  it.  I  propose  that  a  proper  study  be  done  and  a  proper 
training be given to our civil servants. Moreover, we should have a code of conduct which is 
enforceable so that they can be made aware of what are their rights and their limits. 

To conclude, Madam Speaker, we agree that the civil servants must be and feel safe at 
his  or  her  place  of  work,  but  I  will  go  even  further,  not  only  the  civil  servants  also  those 
working  in  the  private  sector.  However,  we  must  work  towards  a  Civil  Service  where  the 
civil servant will always be polite, helpful and reasonably accessible in his or her dealings 
with members of the public at all times, treating members of the public as customers who are 
entitled to receive a high standard of service. This is what we expect from civil servants and 
this is the civil service that the hon. Minister should aim for not just come and increase the 
fine because there has been an increase in violence. We have to see what is the cause, why do 
we have it, and it happens most specifically in hospitals and in the Police. So, I end up, I am 
done, Madam Speaker. 

(7.01 p.m.) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah! 

Mr S. Rutnah (Third Member for Piton & Rivière du Rempart): Madam Speaker, 
I heard very intently my learned friend, hon. Baloomoody, and the points that he has made, 
and true it is to say that the present legislation is an inheritance of the colonial days. During 
the  colonial  days,  the  fine  was  Rs500  and  thereafter  the  fine  was  increased  in  1991  to 
Rs10,000.  The  prison  sentence  was  also  increased  from  six months  to  a higher  number  of 
months. What this legislation is proposing is to increase the fine to Rs100,000 and to increase 
the terms of imprisonment by not exceeding two years. 

Hon. Baloomoody quite rightly asked why coming with the Bill today, why increase 
in  molesting  public  officers.  Let  me  remind  everybody  in  the  House.  We  said,  during  our 
campaign, that we are going to be tough on crime, tough on the causes of crime and tough on 
criminals. This is a strong signal that this Government is sending to those who think that they 
are going to walk into a hospital or a Police Station or any place where any civil servant is 
offering his services to act like thugs… 

(Interruptions) 

 

71 

Yes, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is always tough on crime. He is prompting me and I usually 
value whatever comments he makes. True it is that it should have been a fine with a term of 
imprisonment. Again, we are now sending the signal to those who think that they are going to 
go to public officers and they are going to assault, molest or abuse these officers. 

Let me say something, we, as Members of Parliament, have to be like a role model. 
We are here to set example to the society, to the youths, to those who are outside the House. 
We  know  we  had  a  former  Prime  Minister  who  was  openly  insulting  and  abusing  all  his 
Parliamentarians, all his Ministers. On certain occasions, even in the House, Members of the 
Opposition, while walking out of the House… 

Madam Speaker: Please, refrain from making these comments! Come to the point. 

Mr  Rutnah:  No,  I  am  giving  examples  -  they  were  inviting  other  MPs  to  come 
outside.  This  is  the  kind  of  behaviour  that  should  not  be  condoned.  True  it  is  to  say  that 
certain civil servants in hospitals, even Police officers, do not have the requisite standard of 
manners that is ordinarily expected of a normal human being, normal human behaviour. But 
what do we do? If someone behaves in an inhumane manner, if someone behaves in a manner 
which  is  below  the  standard  ordinarily  expected  of  a  person  who  is  working  for  the 
Government, are we going to retaliate by using violence? Two wrongs does not make a right. 
There  are  authorities  to  complain.  There  are  places  where  we  can  go  to  complain,  but  we 
cannot allow people to use violence otherwise this is a society is going to run into chaos. 

So, we have to regulate the conduct of people. We have to. If we don’t, then we are 
going to fail in our duty to protect our people and the society. I agree with the proposition 
that hon. Baloomoody made in relation to section 4 of the Act, but today we are not debating 
any  amendment  on  section  4.  I  anticipate,  in  the  very  near  future,  consideration  could  be 
given to carry out a proper exercise study into the limitation period of two years and I am not 
going to say anything on the limitation period. 

Madam Speaker, today it is our duty to ensure that this society evolves, that there is a 
change  in  behaviour,  a  change  in  mentality.  To  change  the  behaviour  and  mentality,  quite 
rightly, as hon. Minister Wong Yen Cheong said, an increase in penalty will not be sufficient.  

That is why he has introduced the Customer Service Excellence courses. There is, for 
the first time under this Government, the college of Civil Service that is going to train those 
who will be recruited in the Civil Service and from now on the improvement is assured. But 

 

72 

what  we  require  from  people,  what  we  require  from  society,  what  we  require  from  our 
children who are growing in society is that there should be a minimum standard of respect. 
This is the signal that this House is sending today. The minimum standard of respect should 
always prevail.  

On this note thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Sesungkur! 

(7.08 p.m.) 

Mr  D.  Sesungkur  (First  Member  for  Montagne  Blanche  &  GRSE):  Madam 
Speaker,  I  will  be  very  brief.  It  is  a  privilege  to  intervene  on  one  of  the  oldest  piece  of 
legislation of our motherland. I have listened carefully to the hon. Minister who has presented 
the amendment. I have also listened carefully to hon. Baloomoody who, in all fairness, has 
made very good points.  

We are not here to promote violence, assault against public officers, but at the same 
time we need to think carefully. We need to reflect on the problem which the hon. Minister 
has  elaborated,  the  growing  violence,  assault  against  public  officers.  We  want  to  have  a 
public administration system which functions. We want to have public servants who feel safe 
and comfortable to serve the public, but that same time, we need to ask ourselves, why the 
public oftentimes react like this. This is the question. The hon. Minister has said that he wants 
to toughen the law and he admits that by toughening the law, this will not solve the problem. 
He has said that he has taken a number of measures to improve the efficiency of the civil 
servants  by  giving  them  training.  He  has  mentioned  a  number  of  cases  of  assault  against 
public servants, Police officers, doctors and paramedical staff, but the question we should ask 
ourselves: We are training 300 civil servants, I suppose, on a yearly basis, but we have more 
than 80,000 civil servants.  At this rate, I think we will have a big problem of improving the 
whole service.  We should know what kind of training we are giving to these civil servants. Is 
it high level training like management and all these things or are we aiming at simple things 
like  giving  them  soft  skills  like  we  said  communication  skills,  skills  to  manage  difficult 
situations?  

These are the things that we need to give them. Things like how to tackle awkward 
situations.  These  are  things  that  I  think  we  should  also  take  into  consideration  so  that  we 
bring down this situation of violence against civil servants. The question also is: how far can 

 

73 

we go to protect public officers? We have mentioned cases of doctors and paramedical staff 
who are assaulted, but at the same time, we should compare their situation with those who are 
in  the  private  sector.  How  do  they  manage  with  these  kinds  of  situation?  They  are  also 
exposed,  but  they  are  not  as  protected  as  the  public  officers.  So,  we  need  to  develop  new 
techniques. I have seen in certain private medical clinics, they take appropriate actions, they 
educate the people by putting signboards like, for example, “stress will not help you!” “You 
do not have to be violent!” So, these are kinds of situation of dissuasion for the public not to 
react in a violent way.  One of the things that we can do is to adopt these kinds of techniques 
so that we can reduce the problem of assault and violence. 

I have also listened carefully to hon. Baloomoody, probably there is one point he has 
not  made.  We  know  the  case  of  provocation  and  abusive  languages.  There  is  one  very 
common  situation  that  we  face.  The  hon.  Member  has  mentioned  that  there  is  a  Code  of 
Ethics for civil servants. The Code of Ethics talks about political impartiality and it goes on 
saying - 

“Whatever  be  their  own  political  beliefs,  Public  officers  owe  loyalty  to  the 
Government of the day. They should always serve the Government of the day. Public 
officers  should  observe  political  neutrality  in  their  day-to-day  function  and  avoid 
activities likely to impair these kinds of situation.” 

But  what  do  we  see?  Oftentimes  we  see  certain  civil  servants  openly  show  their  political 
affinity which can create situations where il y a des affrontements. So, these kinds of situation 
should not be allowed. If we can eliminate these kinds of situation by promoting good code 
of ethics, good conduct, by training them, by giving them soft skills, we can eliminate a lot of 
these  kinds  of  situation.  I  also  agree  that  we  need  to  have  an  appropriate  complaints 
mechanism  in  place.  We  should  not  just  blame  the  public.  We  should  have  appropriate 
complaints mechanism. The complaints should be addressed within a reasonable delay so that 
we  can  eliminate  those  kinds  of  vociferation,  those  kinds  of  uproar  that  we  hear  on  radio 
every  day.  It  is  because  the  public  is  dissatisfied  by  the  service  that  they  go  on  radio.  At 
times, public servants get confronted to people who are bad-tempered and who cannot control 
themselves, that is why this brings us to these kinds of situation. 

I  think  there  are  three  levels  of  action.  Of  course,  the  hon.  Minister  wants  us  to 
toughen the law, but at the same time, I think, since the colonial days we have not had a very 
deep reflection about what kind of public service we want to have and how we can ensure 

 

74 

that the public servants offer a good service to the public, what kind of training we want to 
give  them  so  that  we  can  improve  the  overall  image  of  our  service,  of  our  public 
administration and, of course, appropriate complaints mechanism? 

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mrs Jadoo-Jaunbocus! 

(7.17 p.m.) 

Mrs R. Jadoo-Jaunbocus (Second Member for  Port Louis South & Port Louis 
Central):  I thank, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to intervene very briefly, 
to add my views and my points to this piece of amendment to this Act, the Public Officers’ 
Protection (Amendment) Bill. 

In fact, violence against the Police, we all know, is very much there.  I came in the 
middle  of  the  argument  of  hon.  Baloomoody  who  talked  a  lot  as  an  experienced  law 
practitioner having the encounter with the Police or how sometimes indeed, their attitude can 
be towards the public. 

Indeed,  we  are  very  much  aware  of  that.  That  is  one  of  the  reasons  why  in  the 
electoral campaign in the manifesto and in the Government Programme, this Government has 
decided to tackle the issue of the way the Police have been trained; the way we deal with the 
Police and the way we are going to train our future Police officers.  

In fact, it is common, as it has been said that often police officers do not know how to 
deal with the public and how to address the public due to lack of training. That may result in 
a reaction because,  as researchers in the States, in the United Kingdom, when you go through 
research,  research  tells  you  sometimes  violence  against  Police  is  not  only  because  of  the 
consequence of the act of the officer, but also the way the officer deals with the public, and 
the way he reacts to the situation. That is very important. But at the same time what do we 
have  to  consider?  We  have  to  bear  in  mind  the  consideration  and  the  training  that  this 
Government gives to a Police officer.  

Before talking about anything else, it is apt that I refer to the Budget Speech of hon. 
Pravind  Jugnauth,  ‘A  New  Era  of  Development’  at  paragraph  202,  under  the  heading  of 
‘Mauritius Police Force’.  What does he say? What action is this Government going to take 
concerning the Police? 

 

75 

Coming to the Police Force, the hon. Minister has allocated a sum of Rs8.7 billion in regard 
to this Department and what does he say at paragraph 201 –  

“Provision  has  been  made  for  recruiting  900  additional  Police  Constables  and  30 
additional cadet officers” 

In addition to all the officers that have so far been recruited since this Government 
came into Office, we are having now 900 in this year and 30 additional Cadets. That means 
939.  This  shows  the  commitment  to  strengthen,  empower  the  Police  Force.  When  this 
Government  is  talking  about  reducing  violence,  reducing  the  risk  of  danger,  talking  about 
public safety; it gives its commitment and it says: “additional police officers on top of what 
have been recruited last year and beginning of this year.” 

Now, at paragraph 202 which is most relevant and will answer the concerns of hon. 

Baloomoody and also those expressed by hon. Rutnah, it is – 

“A new training strategy will also be elaborated and provision has been made for a 
modern Police Academy at the Réduit-Ebène area.” 

This is very relevant. When we say that: “Yes, our police officers do not know how to deal 
with the public’’, I did not raise this issue just because for the mere essence and mere point of 
debating, and saying this is a problem, but because we have found a solution. The Rt. hon. 
Prime Minister had talked about it all throughout the electoral campaign. He had talked a lot 
about reforms he wanted to bring and one of the things that ‘l’Alliance Lepep’ has put very 
much forward and given faith and courage to police officers was that we are coming with the 
Police Academy. Why? The reason is because indeed we have a lot of faith and expectations 
from  our  Police  officers,  but  also  we  cannot  tell  them:  “Go  on  the  battlefield  and  fight  a 
battle”, without giving them the necessary training, the necessary equipment, the necessary 
tool. All this has been catered for and now once we do that and once we are doing that, hon. 
Minister Alain Wong Yen Cheong comes and say: “We have to protect our Police also. In 
addition of giving them training, we have to protect them, to ensure that people do not deal 
with  our  Police  officers  in  a  most  disrespectful  manner.”  We  talked  about  the  way  Police 
officers  talked  to  the  individuals,  but  have  we  seen  how  Mauritians  addressed  the  Police 
officers?  Especially, I have to say, I have to join hon. Rutnah on this.   

I have seen it myself so many times when Police officer stops an individual, what he 
says is just like that – I am sorry for you seeing this kind of gesture in Parliament, but it is 

 

76 

that - “mo pou bouge twa là, mo pou coze ek to patron là, mo pou coze ar intel là”. This is 
how  sometimes  public  deal  with  our  Police  officers.    Utter  lack  of  respect!  They  go  and 
threaten and they also go and commit all kinds of acts thinking: “He is a Police officer, he is a 
Police servant.  I will just talk to his boss and I will just use my political power, political 
contacts  -  as  is  commonly  used  in  Mauritius  -  and  just  get  him  transferred”.  Why?  It  is 
because the Police officer is enforcing what he  is supposed to do: the law. He is ensuring 
safety in the community. He is ensuring that law and order is respected.  It is because that he 
is  being  threatened,  “taler  mo  fer  to  papa  coz  ar  twa  là”.  This  is  not  said  in  a  respectful 
manner.  This is often said in a very disrespectful and provocative manner. What does the 
Police officer do?  He has to stay calm and he has to deal with insult.  

Often  in  riots,  in  public  gatherings,  they  are  insulted,  rude  words  are  being  used 
towards them, swear words are often used towards them and they have to keep their calm.  
This is not fair. I have always, as a law practitioner, said that we need to give respect to our 
Police officers and what we give is what we get. I am being shown that the time guillotine is 
coming on me, so I will speed up! What we give is what we get! That is why we have to say 
to  them  in  the  law.  I  congratulate  the  hon.  Wong  Yen  Cheong  for  saying  that  in  the 
legislation: “Yes, Police officers, we are taking you seriously”. What we are doing is that, we 
are saying: “should someone come and assault you, should someone use violence and molest 
you - it is an old fashioned term, a very Victorian word, the word ‘molestation’ - but it says 
when  someone  come  and  uses  force  against  the  Police  officers,  instead  of  just  a  trivial 
Rs10,000 maximum fine, you shall now be liable to a minimum of Rs10,000, not a maximum 
which is a serious sum of money and it will go up to Rs100,000.”  So, that gives the message 
loud  and  clear.    The  term  of  imprisonment  of  three  months  is  being  replaced  by  terms  of 
imprisonment of two years.  So, this is very much in line.   

I just need to propose one minor amendment to the legislation and then I will be done.  
That is why I wanted to participate to the debates today.  When we talk about amendment to 
the main Act Section 3  (a)  and (b), (b)  relates, in fact, to the main offence of violence  as 
molestation with violence as opposed to when there is absence of violence.  This is what I 
wanted to urge the hon. Minister to consider section 3 of the main Act, subsection 2.  What 
we are saying to the public is this and we cannot do that.  We are saying to the public – most 
humbly I suggest – “If you use violence, we inflict a penalty of Rs100,000 and we send you 
away in prison for 2 years maximum”.  But we say: “You can come and insult the Police and 
the fine remains the same Rs3,000”.  Most humbly, I say: “let us have the two subsections 

 

77 

correlate  to  one  another.”    Therefore,  when  we  look  at  the  penalty  at  subsection  (2),  then 
what  we  have  to  do  is  make  it  commensurate  with  the  offence  or  violence  so  that  we  are 
saying: “You cannot touch our Police officers, not just violently, but also verbally.” That is 
what I wanted to say.   

So, I thank you and I know I have exceeded my time. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Benydin! 

 (7.27 p.m.) 

Mr T. Benydin (First Member for La Caverne & Phoenix):  Thank you, Madam 
Speaker. I have the disadvantage of having been for quite a number of years, a civil servant, a 
public officer and I also headed an important Federation of civil servants for quite a number 
of  years.  But  I  have  always  defended  the  civil  servants,  the  public  officers.  And  in  my 
capacity before, as an international trade unionist, I have travelled in many countries, but yet 
when you compare you will still see that our civil service, our public service in Mauritius, 
there are a lot of improvements. 

No Government, no society can function without an efficient Public Service. I think 
that it is very easy to criticise. The aim of this legislation is to protect the civil servants. But 
we are not here to make – as we say – un procès des fonctionnaires because in the Police 
Force or in other sectors,  you have  a few people maybe who do not do their jobs  as they 
should do, but we cannot generalise.  But I know, I think the Rt. hon.  Prime Minister and 
even  hon.  Members  on  the  Opposition  side  know  that  there  are  many  competent  civil 
servants.  

No reforms can be overhauled.  You cannot bring reforms without an efficient public 
service.    I,  myself,  participated,  as  member  of  the  Jury,  in  the  Public  Service  Excellence 
Award.  It has always been chaired by somebody in the private sector.  I remember, before 
starting the first meeting, the Chair who comes from the private sector said, “Oh!  It is still 
the same thing, for example, at the Registrar General, where there is chaos?”  But I told him, 
“When you are going to visit, then you will have a different mind about the public service.”  
In fact, when he came back, he said, “Mr Benydin, you were right.  There are things that have 
changed in the civil service.” 

78 

 
 
It’s not that the amendments that will be brought will change everything, but, as has 
been said by my colleagues, it will give the right signal that you cannot molest public officers 
in the performance of their duties.  We have to respect.  Even the Police Force.  We have to 
respect!  Respect the man or the woman!  Respect the uniform of the Police officer!  You 
must respect him, and then he will respect you.  Maybe, for some who are not doing their 
duty correctly the Police Academy, as has been said, will be here. 

With regard to the Civil Service College, we cannot train all the 80,000 civil servants 
at  a  time;  otherwise,  the  civil  service  will  not  function.    So,  there  are  stages,  programmes 
which we have to  follow to prepare the civil servants to perform.   I  can spell out  clearly: 
whom are we recruiting today in the public service?  Most of the young are over qualified; 
they are already trained; they have been to universities!  So, I think what they get in the civil 
service is a plus.  The Civil Service College will train them as public officers.  I think they 
have  the  advantage  of  having  been  to  universities.    These  are  certain  issues  that  are  very 
pertinent.  I wanted to contribute, so that we can have a better civil service, because it has 
been my hobbyhorse.  Even the PSC should be reformed, reviewed.  Why cannot the PSC 
have  also  an  advisory  unit,  a  sort  of  complaints  unit?    Anybody  can  complain,  and  then, 
together, with the Office of the Ombudsperson, we can try to see how we can change things. 

We have many things to say, but we will never accept, for example, that teachers are 
being  molested.    In  the  education  sector,  we  have  noticed  increasing  violence.    There  is 
violence against Police officers, in the health sector and other sectors where citizens are in 
direct contact with public officers.  I think that the public should not lose sight of the fact that 
their  welfare  depends  to  a  great  extent  on  public  officers,  on  whose  shoulders  rest  the 
implementation of Government policies and public welfare programmes. 

I am trying to cut short of my speech, Madam Speaker.  But the problem is that when 
I was in the trade union movement and attended conferences, my colleagues used to say - I 
think  it  applies  also  to  the  politician  -,  “You  know  at  what  time  you  are  going  to  start 
speaking, but you don’t know at what time you are going to end.” This is the problem. 

As  PPS,  we  have  spoken  about  amendments,  about  reforms,  and  I  think  that  we 
should give a new look to the CABs, for example.  People can also go and complain if they 
see things wrong.  Don’t just go and complain to the radios, to the press.  People can go and 
also complain to the CABs, and then we can see how to improve and amend things. 

79 

 
Madam Speaker, a society is judged by the behaviour of its fellow citizens.  Values 
and norms are, however, transmitted through the socialisation process.  Even the education 
sector is one means to inculcate moral values, so that we can respect everybody.  We build a 
society based on values and respect for the civil service. 

On this note, I would like to end my intervention by congratulating the hon. Minister 

and wish all the public service well. Thank you. 

 (7.33 p.m.) 

Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Madam Speaker, allow me at the very outset to convey my 
 
heartfelt thanks to my colleagues who have supported me in this endeavour, and to all those 
on both sides of the House who have intervened on the Bill. 

I have listened carefully to all those who have intervened, and I am pleased to note 
 
that  there  is  consensus  in  this  House  on  the  need  to  protect  our  public  officers  in  the 
discharge of their duties. 

Madam Speaker,  I have noted  all comments  and views  expressed by  different hon. 
Members, and I reiterate that the amendments proposed will definitely act as a deterrent and 
will help to eliminate cases of assault against public officers. 

The House will agree with me that un cas d’agression est un cas de trop.  We cannot 
condone  any  case  of  assault  against  our  public  officers.    As  regards  the  points  raised  by 
different  Members,  especially  by  hon.  Baloomoody,  I  wish  to  reassure  him  that  all  efforts 
will be made by my Ministry to address the issue raised by him, and I wish to point out that 
my  Ministry  has  already  embarked  upon  several  initiatives  such  as  Mystery  Shopping  to 
gather information on site, Customer Satisfaction Survey, Code of Ethics for public officers, 
Customer Charters.  Moreover, through the Civil Service College, my Ministry is conducting 
competency-based  training  with  focus  on  customer  care,  managing  difficult  situations, 
handling grievances of customers. 

Madam Speaker, our philosophy is clear and unambiguous.  We want to protect our 
public officers on duty and at the same time ensure that they are fully equipped to cope with 
difficult situations at the workplace.  In this respect, I undertake to ensure that the preventive 
measures  taken  by  my  Ministry  are  sustained  with  a  view  to  preparing  our  public  officers 
psychologically to handle difficult situations. 

 
Je peux assurer, Madame la présidente, qu’il y aura un suivi continu et assidu par mon 

80 

ministère. 

As an endnote, I wish to make a humble appeal to all hon. Members of this House.  
Let us seize this goal and opportunity to consolidate the legislation, with in mind the prime 
objective of protection of public officers. I believe that we are here, in this House, and we are 
here to set example, as rightly said by hon. Balomoody.  We should start by us, who have 
been elected by the public.  I hope that, in this House, we will have plenty of discipline, we 
will never hear phrases like ‘tombe dehors’, and provocation on both sides of the House – I 
mean all of us. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Bill read a second time and committed. 

COMMITTEE STAGE 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

THE PUBLIC OFFICERS’ PROTECTION (AMENDMENT) BILL  

(No. XVI of 2016) 

 The Public Officers’ Protection (Amendment) Bill (No. XVI of 2016) was considered 

and agreed to. 

On  the  Assembly  resuming  with  Madam  Speaker  in  the  Chair,  Madam  Speaker 

reported accordingly. 

Third Reading 

On motion made and seconded, the Public Officers’ Protection (Amendment) Bill (No. 

XVI of 2016) was read the third time and passed. 

ADJOURNMENT 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  that  this  Assembly  do  now 

adjourn to Wednesday 31 August 2016 at 11.30 a.m. 

Mr Sinatambou rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

 
Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned. Hon. Bhagwan! 

81 

(7.39 p.m.) 

MATTERS RAISED 

LE MORNE – KITE SURFING COMPETITION 

Mr  R.  Bhagwan  (First  Member  for  Beau  Bassin  &  Petite  Rivière):  Thank  you, 
Madam  Speaker.  I  have  something  urgent  to  raise  concerning  three  Ministers,  that  of 
Tourism, Environment and Arts and Culture.  

Madame je voudrais partager la colère d’un grand nombre de mauriciens qui aiment 
leur pays et surtout nos lagons. Je suis sûr que le ministre de l’Environnement est au courant 
qu’il y a une compétition internationale de kite surf qui est prévue du 05 au 15 septembre 
2016 au Morne qui va être organisée par des étrangers, mais nous avons été informés qu’un 
des partenaires est le ministère du Tourisme et la MTPA. 

 Madame la présidente, nous comprenons que notre pays a besoin du tourisme pour 
grandir économiquement mais pas au détriment de nos lagons. Peut-être que ceux qui sont ici 
se  souviennent  qu’en  2013  il  y  avait  une  compétition  semblable  et  on  avait  construit  un 
échafaudage de 8 mètres de haut dans le lagon du Morne, alors que c’est une zone protégée 
de  l’UNESCO,  étant  donné  que  le  lagon  du  Morne  tombe  dans  le  buffer  zone  du  World 
Heritage Sites.  

Il y a eu beaucoup de protestations, des articles de presse, des manifestations et  il y a 
même eu une injonction et les autorités d’alors avaient pris la décision de ne pas aller  de 
l’avant.  

Madame la présidente, on a été informé que cette fois-ci, il y a la possibilité qu’il y ait 
une décision qu’ils vont construire un échafaudage de 8 mètres dans le lagon. On nous a fait 
comprendre que les gens ont protesté et – je ne sais pas si l’honorable Wong Yen Cheong ou 
le  ministre  de  l’Environnement  sont  au  courant  –  j’ai  été  informé  qu’on  va  installer  un 
échafaudage  cette  fois-ci,  pas  sur  le  front  de  mer  mais  sur  les  pirogues.    Madame  la 
présidente,  installer  un  échafaudage  de  8  mètres  sur  des  pirogues  est  pratiquement 
impossible. On se demande comment ils comptent le faire et, au cas qu’ils n’arrivent pas à le 
faire, qu’elle sera leur plan B.  

82 

 
Mon appel au gouvernement est de surveiller à ce qu’il n’y ait pas une répétition de ce 
qui s’est passé en 2013 car déjà il y a eu perte de vie quelques jours de cela au niveau de cette 
activité  de  kite  surfing  dans  le  sud  et  que  pour  la  protection  de  nos  lagons  et  pour  la 
préservation de l’environnement - je me fais le porte-parole des habitants de l’endroit et de 
ceux qui aiment l’environnement - de surveiller à ce qu’il n’y ait pas la construction de cet 
échafaudage dans le lagon du Morne. Merci.  

 The  Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms,  Minister  of 
Environment, Sustainable Development, and Disaster and Beach Management (Mr A. 
Wong Yen Cheong): Madame la présidente, j’ai bien écouté les doléances. Nous allons faire 
un suivi et, autant que je sache, je crois que ce sont des gens qui sont des experts, néanmoins 
nous allons bien suivre la situation. Merci. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rughoobur ! 

(7.42 p.m.) 

MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND QUALITY OF LIFE – KIDNEY TRANSPLANT - 

POLICY  

Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or): I have a 
request for the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life. I got representations once again from 
people of my constituency relating to the issue of transplant of kidney organs following renal 
failure. There is an absence of communication at the level of the Ministry on what is the new 
policy on this issue, and whether the treatment will be done locally or whether patients will 
be sent abroad. Since February this year, the treatment is not being done in hospitals for the 
transplant of kidney organs.  

So, my request is, if the substantive Minister could be conveyed with this issue and if 
the  Ministry  could  communicate  and  enlighten  the  country  as  to  what  is  its  policy  on  this 
issue of transplant. Thank you. 

The Minister of Local Government (Dr. A. Husnoo): Yes, Madam Speaker, I am 
going to pass on the message to the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life. Actually, we have 
discussed  this  problem  before.  There  are  different  aspects  of  it,  the  cadaveric  transfer,  the 
familial or those who may buy it as well. So, it is very complicated and we are going to look 
into it. But, I will pass on the message of the hon. Member to the Minister. 

 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Ramful! 

83 

(7.44 p.m.) 

PLAINE MAGNIEN - FOOTBALL GROUND 

Mr  D.  Ramful  (Third  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien):  I  have  an 
issue concerning the Ministry of Local Government. It concerns the Plaine Magnien football 
ground.  

The football ground was closed for a few years and there were renovation works. It 
was upgraded and, apparently, it has now been handed over from the NDU to the relevant 
local authority which is the Grand Port/Savanne District Council.  

Unfortunately, there are numerous complaints concerning the condition of the football 
pitch itself. If you go there after a rainy day, you would think that you are at a swimming 
pool! The goal post itself has not been properly aligned and the lightings are not working. So, 
may I request the hon. Minister to kindly look into the matter? 

The Minister of Local Government (Dr. A. Husnoo): Madam Speaker, I will look 

into it and I will talk to the Chief Executive in the south. Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Osman Mahomed! 

 (7.45 p.m.) 

VALLÉE PITOT - EIDGAH REGION – PUBLIC TRANSPORT 

Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South and Port Louis Central): 
Madam Speaker, I have an issue that concerns the hon. Minister of Public Infrastructure and 
Land Transport, but he is not here today. It is about the transportation by bus in part of my 
constituency,  especially  at  Vallée  Pitot  in  the  Eidgah  region  which  is  no  longer  served  by 
public transportation.  

I  have  been  told  by  my  constituents  that  for  several  years  there  was  a  bus  service 
numbered 115 that used to travel people from Cité Vallijee through Tranquebar and Vallée 
Pitot at the Eidgah region and then to Plaine Verte. I am further told that this service has been 
stopped for about 15 months now.  

84 

 
Well, there are many reasons for this. I believe mainly economical but, this is causing 
hardship  to  school  children,  the  sick,  the  disabled  and  also  the  elderly.  It  is  a  pleasant 
coincidence that today we have discussed about the protection of the elderly in the House. 

My  plea  this  evening  is  for  the  hon.  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land 
Transport to kindly consider the possibility of reinstating back that line 115 or to have some 
other  lines  extended  so  as  to  serve  the  Eidgah  region  in  Vallée  Pitot  on  social  and 
humanitarian ground. I thank him for his collaboration.  

Thank you.  

The  Minister  of  Technology,  Communication  and  Innovation 

(Mr  E. 
Sinatambou):  Madam  Speaker,  I  have  taken  good  note  of  the  problem  raised  by  the  hon. 
Member and I will transmit it to the Minister concerned.  

At 7.50 p.m. the Assembly was, on its rising adjourned to Wednesday 31 August 2016 

at 11.30 a.m. 

 

