 

 

 

No. 31 of 2016 

1 

 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

(UNREVISED) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

 

THURSDAY 01 SEPTEMBER 2016 

 

 

 

 

2 

 

CONTENTS 

 

QUESTION (Oral) 

MOTION 

BILLS (Public) 

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

 

3 

THE CABINET 

 

(Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

 
Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 
KCMG, QC  
Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 
GCSK  
Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

Hon.  Ivan  Leslie  Collendavelloo,  GCSK, 
SC 
Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK 

 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

 

Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 
Communications 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 
Utilities 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 
International Trade 
 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha, GCSK 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan, SC 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 
Sinatambou 
Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 
Perraud 
Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain, GCSK 

of 
Minister 
Empowerment 
Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation  

Integration 

and  Economic 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 
Family Welfare 
Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 
Institutional Reforms  

 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

 
Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 
Cheong, MSK 

Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 

4 

Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 
Institutions 
Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands 

 
Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms, 
Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 
Disaster and Beach Management 
Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and 
Training 

 

 

 

 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Gopall, Mr Navin  

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 31 of 2016 

 

Sitting of 01 September 2016 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 2.00 p.m. 

 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 

7 

ORAL ANSWER TO QUESTION 

STATE OF MAURITIUS - DAMAGES/COMPENSATIONS – CLAIMS LODGED 

AGAINST 

The  Leader  of  the  Opposition  (Mr  P.  Bérenger)  (by  Private  Notice)  asked  the 
Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  whether,  in  regard  to  the  claims  for 
damages/compensations  lodged  against  the  State  of  Mauritius  which  are  presently 
outstanding, he will state where matters stand, including those from – 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

Hogan Lovells International, on behalf of investors from the United Kingdom 
in relation to the implementation of projects in 2014 at Le Morne and at Pointe 
Jérome respectively;  

Betamax Limited;  

CT Power (Mauritius), and  

the former British American Insurance, indicating, in each case –  

(i) 

(ii) 

the quantum of the damages/compensations claimed;  

 the legal/arbitral institutions dealing therewith, indicating the dates on 
which same have been/will be considered and who has represented/will 
represent the State of Mauritius thereat, and  

(iii) 

if  provisions  have  been  made  for  the  payment  of  the  claims  for 
damages/compensations, if any. 

The Attorney General (Mr R. Yerrigadoo):  Madam Speaker, with your permission 
I shall be replying to this question as it relates to litigation involving claims against, inter-
alia, the State of Mauritius… 

Madam Speaker:  Order! 

Order! 

(Interruptions) 

 (Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Order, please!  Can I ask all hon. Members not to use unbecoming words. Although they may 
be considered as not being unparliamentary, but they are unbecoming words, please! 

 
Mr  Jugnauth:    Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Leader  of  the  Opposition  is  saying: 

8 

“kapon” 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Jugnauth:  He does not know how to address… 

(Interruptions) 

The Leader of the Opposition does not know how to…. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Order! Allow me to listen! 

Allow me to listen to the Minister! 

Order! 

Order, please! 

Order! 

Order, please! 

Please, order! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

You  know  in  all  this  noise,  I  can’t  listen  to  what  one  side  is  saying  and  the  other  side  is 
saying! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bérenger:  Is that a point of order? 

Madam Speaker:  I haven’t even heard what the Minister was saying! 

(Interruptions) 

 

9 

There was so much noise! Please, say what you have to say! 

Mr Jugnauth:  The hon. Leader of the Opposition, on a sitting position, is making 

comments by saying ‘kapon’!  

Kapon!  He does not know how to address a PNQ. 

(Interruptions) 

To which Ministry this is concerned! 

Ale apran!  

Ale apran do… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker:  Allow me… 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Members, allow me to say one thing before I give my ruling!  You know the House is 
not  a  forum  where  personal  attacks  can  be  indulged  in.    The  House  is  not  a  forum  where 
personal  attacks  can  be  indulged  in.    Now,  the  word  ‘kapon’  is  pointed  towards  the  hon. 
Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  and  I  consider  it  to  be  unparliamentary.  
Can I ask the hon. Leader of the Opposition to withdraw this word! 

Please withdraw! 

It is a point of order! 

This is my ruling.   

You are saying: “Shame on me?” 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

10 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Leader of the Opposition, my ruling is that you have to withdraw! 

Mr Bérenger:  Yes, I will withdraw with great pleasure since you are in the House! 

Madam Speaker:  To withdraw the word! 

(Interruptions) 

At this stage, the MMM Members in the Opposition left the Chamber. 

MOTION 

SUSPENSION OF S.O. 10(2) 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I move that all the business on today’s Order 

Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2) of Standing Order 10. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to 

PUBLIC BILLS 

Second Reading 

THE ROAD TRAFFIC (AMENDMENT) BILL 

(No. XVIII of 2016) 

Order for Second Reading read. 

 (2.08 p.m.) 

The  Minister  of  Public  Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport  (Mr  N.  Bodha): 
Madam Speaker, I beg to move for the Road Traffic (Amendment) Bill (No. XVIII of 2016) 
to be read for the second time. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  Bill  before  the  House  today  is  first  and  foremost  to  bring 
transparency  and  objectivity  in  the  examination  of  motor  vehicles  and  put  an  end  to  a 
situation of chaos and crisis which has prevailed for decades at the two vehicle examination 
centres operated by the National Transport Authority (NTA). 

Madam Speaker, at the outset, I will say that we are doing our best to salvage a given 
situation  as  contracts  for  private  examination  centers  have  already  been  signed  by  the 
previous Government and we had to re-engineer the whole system in the public interest.  

11 

 
Madam Speaker, as at June 2016, a total of 496,000 vehicles were registered with the 
NTA and the vehicle fleet is increasing by an average of 4.5%  yearly.   All these vehicles 
have  to  undergo  periodic  fitness  tests  as  per  the  requirement  of  the  Road  Traffic  Act  and 
policies  applicable  to  various  classes  of  motor  vehicles.  Private  cars  and  motor  cycles  are 
required to be examined after 7 years of their first registration, while vehicles used for public 
transport  and  for  transport  of  goods  are  examined  more  frequently  as  from  their  first 
registration. 

Requiring vehicles to be subjected to road worthiness tests is an important function 
which  urges  vehicle  owners  to  make  regular  servicing  and  effect  such  repairs  as  may  be 
required to maintain their vehicles in good running conditions.  As well, these test ensure that 
these vehicles have not been fiddled with and modified in such a way that their operation on 
public roads constitute a change to the driver of the vehicle or to other road users. Thirdly, 
these tests ensure that vehicles in operation are those which are originally registered with the 
NTA and there has been no attempt by the owners to forge vehicle identity by tampering the 
chassis numbers. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  fitness  tests  of  vehicles  as  carried  out  at  the  two  main 
examination  centres  are  presently  done  visually,  subjectively  and  in  a  most  unreliable 
manner.    In  2015,  almost  175,000  vehicles  were  examined  and  the  failure  rate  was  only 
0.4%.  This means that almost all vehicles calling for examination were able to secure their 
fitness certificates. The issue of Fitness Certificate is no more than an eye wash, serving no 
meaningful purpose, except a  “rubber-stamp”  compliance which  result in the poor state of 
some of the vehicles operating on our roads and the smoke emitted by the vehicles. 

Madam  Speaker,  allegations  of  malpractices  occurring  at  the  vehicle  examination 
centres  have  been  rife.    Vehicles  were  issued  the  required  Certificate  of  Fitness  (COF) 
although not being in a good state of repair against payment of bribes was so common that 
members of the public considered it to be the norm.  It was even possible for a vehicle to 
secure a Certificate of Fitness on the basis of paper documents only although the vehicle was 
not  produced  at  all  at  the  examination  centre.    In  certain  cases,  I  understand  that  the 
Certificate of Fitness was delivered at the vehicle owners residence without any need for him 
to move to the examination centre and some acted as agents with a fast-track service coming 
to the centre in different vehicles regularly. 

12 

 
Due to these malpractices, Madam Speaker, the NTA has consistently appeared high 
on the list of Government institutions perceived as being the most corrupt in the Corruption 
Perception Index Report of Transparency International. 

Madam Speaker, the situation depicted above lasted for years.  The NTA management 
has sought the assistance of ICAC to curb that malpractice and recommendations made by the 
latter  institution  have  been  implemented.    Workshops  have  been  organised  with  the 
collaboration of ICAC to sensitise the officers at the vehicle examination centres on the risks 
and penalties relating to corruption offences.  A few officers have even been subject to ICAC 
enquiry for corruption instances and have either been prosecuted and dismissed or they have 
been interdicted from office.  All these measures have been to no avail.  Operations at the 
examination centres had gone too far and too long in the wrong way for any hope of redress 
to be envisaged. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  recent  scandal  of  forged  horsepowers  was  the  latest  of 
malpractices uncovered.  Vehicle owners were able to underrate the engine capacity of their 
vehicles with the connivance of officers from fitness centres for avoiding payment of correct 
rate  of  road  tax  due  for  the  high  engine  ratings  of  their  vehicles.    This  malpractice  also 
enables vehicle owners to pay less registration duty on vehicles purchased by them as this 
duty, as well as, was charged on the basis of engine capacity. 

Madam  Speaker,  a  large  scale  operation  was  carried  out  by  the  NTA  management 
with  the  assistance  of  21  Police  Officers  posted  on  secondment  at  the  two  vehicle 
examination centres.  In addition, the assistance of the Mechanical Engineers of my Ministry 
was also sought.  In fact, as at 15 June, 2016, 5,163 vehicles have been examined with the 
assistance of the Police, 5,045 vehicles which were modified were thoroughly examined, out 
of  these  5,163  and  the  examination  reports  of  all  these  vehicles  have  been  referred  to  the 
CCID of the Police Department to consider whether there is any ground for prosecution to be 
initiated against the vehicle owners. 

In this process, four officers of the NTA were arrested then interdicted as there were 
prima  facie  cases  against  them  for  their  involvement  in  cases  of  forged  documents  or 
Certificate of Fitness issued on the premise of forged documents.  This operation disclosed an 
important  channel  for  defrauding  Government  revenue.    Remedial  actions  were  taken  for 
such fraud and forgery to be stopped. 

13 

 
Madam Speaker, the subject of Vehicle Fitness Testing and Certification requires a 
clearly  defined  long-term  strategy  and  a  practicable  approach  to  make  a  substantive  and 
effective start. International experts suggest a soft, graduated but structured and progressive 
approach, an environment that operates a predominant population of older design and old age 
cars. The approach recognises the reality that if the highest standards were introduced and 
enforced, it would result in the majority of vehicles being rendered unfit and off-road. Such 
an  outcome  would  obviously  be  unpracticable  and  consequently  unsuccessful  in  terms  of 
achieving any medium to long-term results. 

Madam Speaker, the Road Traffic (Amendment) Bill aims at introducing changes in 
the legislation to enable examination of vehicles to be effected by private entities by means of 
automated  and  transparent  systems  in  line  with  approved  examination  standards.    The 
privatised  centres  are  equipped  with  state-of-the-art  examination  equipment  which  display 
examination  results  clearly  and  objectively  in  which  vehicle  owners  will  have  trust  and 
confidence.  Vehicle examination results will no longer depend on human whims and fancies 
but  on  a  scientific  approach  using  internationally  comparable  guidelines  and  prescribed 
efficiency standards.  With the privatisation of vehicle examination, the  NTA will have to 
fully assume its role as a regulator only. 

Madam Speaker, the privatisation of vehicle examination was, in fact, considered as 
far back as 1999 when the then Government decided to outsource the examination of vehicles 
to private operators.  In fact, Part VIII of the Road Traffic Act was even amended.  However, 
the amendments were not proclaimed for reason unknown. 

The  proposal  was  again  brought  on  Government  agenda  in  2006  without  much 
conviction  and  will.    However,  in  2011,  the  proposal  was  given  firm  consideration  and 
expressions  of  interest  were  invited  for  the  setting  up  and  operation  of  private  vehicle 
examination centres.  17 expressions were received. A request for proposal was issued for the 
short listed entities.  Following an evaluation exercise, the following companies were selected 
to run the two existing centres and for the setting up of a third centre namely – 

• 
• 
• 

SGS (Mauritius) Ltd for the examination centre at Forest Side; 
Auto Check Ltd for the examination centre at Plaine Lauzun; 
Eastern Stone Crusher for the setting up a new centre at Laventure. 

14 

 
Madam Speaker, as per the Terms of Reference of this project, the private operators 
had  to  provide  the  following  equipment  at  their  respective  centres:    Brake  testers,  smoke 
metres, slip testers, light testers and sound level meters. 

Under carriage and over carriage checks to assess the outward conditions of the body 

of the vehicle will continue to be effected visually. 

All  checks  performed  by  means  of  specialised  equipment  will  have  an  electronic 
printout of the examination result and will be part of the examination report of each vehicle 
concerned.    So,  each  owner  of  the  vehicle  will  have  his  electronic  printout  of  the  state  of 
fitness  of  his  vehicle.  For  monitoring  the  whole  examination  process  and  ensuring  vehicle 
presence as well as compliance with guidelines issued, every centre has to be equipped with a 
CCTV  system  which  records  the  movement  of  vehicles  from  their  entrance  to  the 
examination lane to their exit.  The recordings are available for the NTA for viewing in case 
of need. 

Madam  Speaker,  when  the  new  Government  came  in,  we  had  to  review  the  whole 
system because the contracts had already been signed, as I said. The House may note that the 
contract for privatisation of the Vehicle Examination Centre was a well drafted one and was 
awarded on 29 April 2013.  Thereafter, when we came a Mise en Demeure was served on 
Government for loss of profit owing to the non-implementation of the project.  As such, a 
situation had arisen where we had either to – 

(i) 

(ii) 

Go for partnership with each promoter; or 

Go for partnership with all the promoters; or 

(iii)  Have a wholly State-owned company; or 

(iv)  Keep the status quo. 

The State  Law Office was consulted and had  advised that, in the event that the promoters 
were  not  agreeable  to  entering  into  any  joint  venture,  Government  would  then  have  to 
compensate  them  for  investment  costs,  as  well  as  for  loss  of  profit  over  the  period  of 
concession  which  was  25  years.  After  discussions  with  the  then  Minister  of  Finance  and 
Economic Development and the Attorney General, we agreed that in these circumstances, the 
best option would be to allow the three private operators to operate the stations independently 
with the National Transport Authority maintaining its regulatory function in respect of quality 

 

15 

service delivery, prescription of appropriate fees and ensuring that examination of vehicles is 
carried out in a fair and transparent manner and according to legal norms. 

Madam Speaker, the existing provisions of the Road Traffic Act does not allow for 
the private operators to operate the vehicle examination centres, to examine vehicles and to 
issue a Certificate of Fitness.  Hence, the need for amending the Act both for enabling the 
privatisation process to be implemented and also to provide for regulations to be made on 
issues relevant to vehicles examination. 

Madam Speaker, the main provisions of the amendments proposed are as follows – 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Examination  of  motor  vehicles  and  trailers  in  Mauritius  will  be  effected  by 
authorised examiners i.e. the private operators while the NTA will continue to 
be responsible for such examination in Rodrigues and Agaléga. 
The  NTA  shall  issue  licences  to  authorised  examiners  with  operating 
conditions attached thereto.  The NTA is empowered to suspend or revoke the 
licence in the event of non-compliance with either the conditions attached or 
other relevant provisions of the Act. 
Certificate of fitness shall be issued to all classes of motor vehicles and those 
certificates shall be displayed on the windscreen of these vehicles. Presently, 
motorcycles  and  private  cars  due  for  examination  are  issued  with  test 
certificates without any legal obligation for such certificates to be displayed. 
An  appeal  process  has  been  introduced  to  enable  vehicle  owners  who  feel 
aggrieved  by 
to  make 
representations to the Commissioner. 
The  law  provides  for  regulations  to  be  made  for  the  establishment  and 
maintenance  of  examination  stations,  for  the  equipment  to  be  used,  for  the 
levying of fees, for the manner in which examination shall be carried out, for 
the  regular  inspection  of  the  examination  centre,  for  the  fee  to  be  paid  for 
examination for each type or class of motor vehicle, for the form and content 
of certificate of fitness and for the custody of records by authorised examiners. 

the  results  of  examination  of 

their  vehicle 

Madam Speaker, with the privatisation of vehicle examination, the NTA will have to 
assume its role as a regular exercising control over the operation of the privatised centres, on 
policies governing vehicle examination and on complaints or appeals relating thereto. 

16 

 
The  House  may  wish  to  be  informed  that,  as  yet,  the  NTA  has  been  operating  as 
regulator  and  operator  with  regard  to  vehicle  examination.    This  illegal  and  incongruous 
situation was highlighted in a report of the then Management Audit Bureau some years back, 
but nothing was done to solve the situation.  The Bill will take care of this incongruity as 
well. 

As a regulator, the NTA will have some key functions – 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

(v) 

(vi) 

to license the private operators and ensure that the conditions of the licences 
are scrupulously complied with; 

to  license  the  vehicle  testers  employed  by  the  private  operators  after 
ascertaining that they are qualified and have clear police records; 

to verify that each centre is properly equipped and that the equipment is duly 
calibrated and in good working order; 

to be physically present at the centres for ensuring that vehicle examination is 
being carried out as per the approved guidelines; 

to provide technical  guidance on vehicle licensing, construction and design to 
the private operators and vehicle owners; 

to verify vehicle examination reports for the purpose of ascertaining that all 
these centres are operating consistently and there is no laxity at any place for 
increasing customership; 

(vii) 

to  carry  out  an  audit  on  the  performance  of  vehicle  testers  to  identify  any 
leniency or possible malpractice, and  

(viii) 

to deal with appeals where the re-examination of vehicles will be required. 

Madam Speaker, two officers of the NTA will be posted on a permanent basis at each 
centre  and  the  Police  officers  as  well  will  be  present.  Madam  Speaker,  today  at  the  three 
centres we have only nine pits for examination. With the new three centres we are moving on 
to 21 pits which will be operational. As such, the time taken for examination of the vehicles, 
it  is  expected  to  be  between  15  to  20  minutes  for  an  examination  which  today  takes  only 
visually five minutes. 

Moreover, an average of 1400 vehicles inclusive of new vehicles would be examined 
in the three centres on a daily basis.  The fitness tests would also be carried out on half days 

 

17 

on Saturdays, while the opening hours would be extended on weekdays from 09.00hours to 
16.00 hours to 08.00 hours to 17.00 hours.  With the implementation of these measures, there 
would be a drastic decrease in the queuing time, in fact, actually there is no queue, and in the 
long  run,  there  would  be  a  ‘walk  through’  system  wherein,  there  would  be  practically  no 
waiting time.  

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No cross talking! 

Mr Bodha: In the meantime, Madam Speaker, since 16 August we have managed a 
transition  period.  The  assistance  of  the  Police  was  sought  to  have  qualified  officers  to 
supplement the technical staff at the examination centres.  The services of the Police officers 
were made available by the Commissioner of Police to solve the crisis of vehicle examination 
after some of the examiners were suspended. I wish here to thank the Commissioner of Police 
for his help in those difficult times.  With these officers undertaking vehicle examination, the 
situation returned to normality.   

Madam Speaker, the House may be aware that the private vehicle examination centres 
started  an  operation  on  a  transition  basis  on  16  August  2016  under  the  guidance  and 
supervision of the National Transport Authority.  Presently, test certificates and certificate of 
fitness  are  still  being  issued  by  the  National  Transport  Authority  after  the  vehicles  have 
passed both the visual and the automated tests. Officers of the NTA are doing the visual tests 
and vehicle identification checks while vehicle testers are performing the automated tests.   

Because of the coming into operation of a new system of verification, i.e. both visual 
and automated, there was a slight confusion and delay on the first day, when we started on 16 
August.  However, adjustments have been made and I have the report today that everything is 
going smoothly and there is no queue. 

Madam  Speaker,  there  has  been  a  lot  of  speculation  and  disinformation  which  has 
been  vented  in  the  public  which  caused  vehicle  owners  to  show  an  apprehension  to  the 
coming into force of the private vehicle examination centres.  These were basically on two 
main  issues  namely,  the  examination  fees  to  be  charged  by  the  private  operators  and  the 
number  of  items  which  would  be  checked.    There  was  a  general  belief  that  the  new 
examination system was being introduced with the aim to put an end to the operation of old 
vehicles.   I wish to assure the House and the public at large that this is utterly false. This 
cannot be our focus behind the privatization of vehicle examination. 

18 

 
As  regards  the  fees  chargeable  for  vehicle  examination,  I  would  like  to  inform  the 
House that an undertaking had already been taken by the previous Government for those fees 
to be increased by 50% with the present fees being the base price.  This issue was in fact the 
root point in the discussions which my Ministry had with the operators and which delayed the 
conclusion of an agreement for the operation of the privatized centres.  I wish to assure the 
House  that  an  agreement  was  signed  anew  with  the  operators  in  the  best  interest  of 
Government and that of the public.  As announced in the Budget Speech 2016/17, vehicle 
owners  will  continue  to  avail  of  vehicle  examination  services,  though  improved,  at  no 
additional  cost  and  the  projected  increase  has  been  frozen  until  the  finalisation  of  the 
restructuring process. I would like here to thank the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development for his diligence and understanding. 

Madam  Speaker,  as  for  the  number  of  items  that  would  be  checked,  basically  five 
points are concerned i.e. braking, suspension / steering, light intensity, smoke emission test 
and sound level test besides under carriage and over carriage visual checks.  Vehicle owners 
only have to ascertain that their vehicles are properly repaired to pass those tests.   

Madam  Speaker,  in  this  process  of  privatisation,  the  fate  of  the  National  Transport 
Authority staff posted at the two examination centres has been duly taken into consideration.  
There  will  be  no  redundancy.    Information  sharing  meetings  have  been  held  with  the 
technical  staff  mainly.    Officers  from  the  general  service  will  be  redeployed  within  the 
National Transport Authority and they will help to see to it that administratively what has to 
be done is being done. 

Madam Speaker, road safety and saving life is our top priority. Modernisation of the 
vehicle examination centres and certification for road worthiness is an essential component of 
road  safety  and  reduction  in  accidents.    It  cannot  therefore  be  neglected.    Investments  to 
improve  the  infrastructure  of  our  roads  and  to  introduce  international  standards  of  traffic-
signage, better road and warning systems, policing and speed control systems, is one side of 
the  equation.  Improved  roads  also  means  a  capability  created  for  vehicles  to  attain  higher 
speeds. If roadworthiness and fitness of vehicles is neglected, the “active elements” of road 
safety would just combine to create an environment of new dangers on the roads. Without 
due attention to vehicle fitness the equation remains incomplete, Madam Speaker. 

So, the privatisation will pass from a visual testing to an automated one which has 
caused  problems  in  many  countries,  Madam  Speaker.  There  are  different  approaches.  You 

 

19 

have the approach in Japan where it is only a “Checklist and Automated” system. You come 
in, you have your certificate, either you pass or you fail and you have your certificate or not. 
However,  when  you  introduce  such  a  system  which  starts  from  the  visual  one  to  the 
automated one in Europe it is suggested to have a progressive “raising of the bar” so that with 
the automated test you have also the subjective judgement of the inspector. This is what we 
are doing, Madam Speaker, because of the fact that we have about 70,000 vehicles which are 
more than 10 years old. 

This is what we are doing, Madam Speaker, because of the fact that we have about 
70,000 vehicles which are more than 10 years old.  I would like here to state it clearly in the 
House that age is not a determining factor for a fitness certificate.  Age has nothing to do with 
the fitness certificate.  If the vehicle is roadworthy, it will have its fitness certificate. 

Madam Speaker, the sophisticated service to be offered through the privatisation of 
the vehicle examination centres will give an assurance of road safety to the owners of the 
vehicles,  all those who  drive them, but to other road users as  well.   It  will also provide a 
guarantee to the other road users, as I said.  In fact, the fitness test is an essential condition for 
road safety and is not a hassle, but it is a must. The manner in which the test is being carried 
out is a guarantee today that the test is done in better conditions, as there are no longer only 
visual but an automated system through a certificate of non-conformity listing, that is, each 
owner, when he leaves the examination centre, will have a carnet de santé of his vehicle, that 
is, what is wrong and what is doing well. Thus, each person will know the exact state of his 
vehicle and will have to assume his responsibility. 

Before I end, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank all those who have helped us in 
managing the crisis that arose around the fitness centres, the press and  also the State  Law 
Office, because they have been very diligent. We have been working for many hours.  We 
had very difficult discussions with the new operators because they wanted to start as soon as 
possible with all that have been decided in the past. We felt that was not the case because it 
has to be done in the public interest. We had to reassure the people who had the old vehicles. 
We had to reassure psychologically those who felt that passing the new test would be a totally 
detrimental to their vehicles.  I think that, today, we have been able to come with the law and 
a system, which is already working.  The transition period will be over as soon as the law will 
be passed. I checked today, and the rate of failure is about 10% to 15% in each centre. There 
is no queue, and everything is being done in a very modern manner. I think that we had to do 

 

20 

this, and we have to do it incrementally, so that in the end it is in the interest of all those who 
are road users and who are owners of a vehicle. 

  I hope I would be able to rely on the support of each and every one in keeping our 

roads safer.  With these words, Madam Speaker, I commend the Bill to the House. 

Mr Jugnauth rose and seconded. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mahomed! 

(2.33 p.m.) 

Mr O. Mahomed (Third Member for Port Louis South & Port Louis Central): 
Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not think I have anything adverse to say in particular about 
the  amendment  being  brought  before  this  House  today  because  the  previous  Government, 
itself,  prior  to  the  general  election  of  December  2014,  had  already  issued  all  necessary 
approvals for the privatisation of fitness centres, following proper procedures which included 
procurement exercise - the hon. Minister just mentioned it -, expressions of interest, that led 
to the selection of three companies, which he mentioned as well, namely Auto Check Ltd, 
Eastern Stone Crusher, and SGS (Mauritius) Ltd, to take over testing of vehicles in Mauritius. 
I am told that the previous Government initially wanted to proceed with the amendments that 
we  are  debating  today  by  way  of  regulations,  but  at  the  time  that  they  were  told  that  this 
would not be possible, we were already in the electoral campaign and it was just too late. 

That being said, I must further say that the present Bill does contain some additional 
elements. It must be said that we are debating on it less than a week after a bus that caught 
fire at St Jean church, a few days ago, on 25 August 2016, caused a lot of reaction on social 
media,  with  people  asking  a  lot  of  a  questions,  many  of  which  having  to  do  with 
roadworthiness of buses. There is a perception issue as well, because the owner of that bus 
happens to be a shareholder of one of the fitness centres. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, you are disturbing the hon. Member! 

Mr  Mahomed:  But  I  hope  that  the  hon.  Minister  will  clear  that  perception  issue, 
because it would not be normal for a bus owner to be a shareholder of a company and have 
his buses tested by his own company. 

Up  until  16  August  2016,  Madam  Speaker,  the  NTA  was  issuing  vehicle  fitness 
certificates based only on visual examination that followed a checklist. Now, from that day 

 

21 

onward, we have a new system that is run by private companies; the three ones that I have 
mentioned  above.  These  companies  are  to  go  about  totally  differently  in  terms  of  process. 
Gone will be the days when your appointment is fixed for a particular day and then you need 
to  be  in  a  long  queue.  I  understand  that  the  appointment  will  be  issued  for  a  particular 
timeslot.  We  all  know  how  people  were  calling  at  the  fitness  centres  at  4  o’clock  in  the 
morning sometimes, in order for them to be able to go to work in the same morning. So, it 
was a difficult time. 

Secondly, the element of subjectivity is reduced, I can say totally, because I have been 
to the fitness centre. I have visited it before preparing my speech. Given that, over and above 
the visual inspection, mechanical tests have now been introduced, which tests are referred to 
as  the  automated  test  system,  this  will  definitely  cut  down  on  the  rampant  corruption 
practices that prevailed all along in these centres. The hon. Minister has elaborated a lot about 
it. The fact that physical contact between the tester and the public will be reduced further 
helps. There used to be a time when vehicle owners used to choose their own lanes because 
they know so-and-so. So, they insist that they want to be in that lane. There used to be that 
kind of time in our country. So, gone will be these days. 

The mechanical test which is more fully detailed at section 113 (2) (a) (i) of the Bill 

mentions – 

“(…) noise and smoke emissions, brakes efficiency, lights, suspension and degree of 
opacity of windows and windscreens;” 

I  must  state  that,  among  all  these  tests,  the  suspension  tester,  which  is  also  known  as  the 
shock absorber test, is the most scary one, because some old vehicle owners are afraid that 
their vehicles will be damaged. In applying some basic engineering concepts, furthermore, I 
am just wondering as to why sideslip testing and accelerate plate detection are not stipulated 
in the amendment as being tests that need to be carried out. So, my question is: ‘Are they 
going to be mandatory or it will depend on the centre itself? So, I think this question merits 
that we look at it.  

This  question  brings  me  to  my  first  proposition  today;  that  there  is  a  need  for  a 
harmonisation insofar as tests to be performed are concerned. The more so we do not have a 
single authorised examiner, but three of them or potentially more given time because as per 
section 3(a) of the amendment, the Commissioner has the power to revoke the licence of the 
authorised examiner. I do believe that it allows the Commissioner to issue a licence to a new 

 

22 

examiner.  Or do we need to  go for tendering again?  May  I suggest the hon. Minister to 
clarify on this issue as well during his summing-up. 

Madam Speaker, coming back to where I left just now on harmonisation of tests, I for 
one believe that we need to have some formal guidelines for the three companies to follow; 
otherwise, one company may be doing lesser tests than the other and hence appear to be more 
competitive or more attractive. Not having these guidelines could tantamount to competitive 
advantages to some companies at a time when they are saying that they are facing a manque à 
gagner with the rates which have not been changed.  But I read in the papers that there is a 
subsidy that Government is providing, Rs80 per vehicle; whether this is true or not, I did not 
catch it from the hon. Minister’s speech, but I think this warrants some clarification as well. 

Madam Speaker, it is a fact that today people perceive the new system as being bad 
although  this  is  not  the  case.  We  know  it.  The  biggest  source  of  stress  in  life  is  changed.  
People are being moved out of their comfort zones. People were, so to speak, buying their 
fitness test. People were happy and so were the officers. The new system is a paradigm shift. 
It will take for people to understand that they are actually getting more value for money. The 
hon.  Minister  mentioned  about  a  carnet  de  santé.  They  are  paying  the  same  fees  and,  in 
return, they are getting a full health check for their vehicles. Now, we cannot play around 
with roadworthiness because it concerns drivers, passengers and road users, and if not looked 
after properly, it leads to loss of life and to social problems. 

Now, coming back to section 113 (2) (a) (i) of the Bill regarding testing for noise and 
smoke  emissions,  the  House  will  recall  that  I  had  asked  two  questions  to  the  previous 
Minister of Environment - I am glad he is here, hon. Dayal - and we were all amused to know 
when  he  was  saying  that  Police  officers  use  their  ears,  eyes  and  nose  to  detect  excessive 
emission because their respective metres were faulty. It seems that this problem will now be 
resolved at the time of fitness testing. But I must emphasise that we should not relax on this 
because if the vehicles are not properly serviced and if they are overloaded, once they leave 
the fitness centre, they will still emit on the road. So, we still need to have this equipment and 
not be re-comforted that they are being tested at the fitness centres. The new Minister is not 
here! 

It is a fact that cars propelled by fossil fuels are highly polluting. During my term in 
office  at  the  Head  of  Maurice  Ile  Durable,  I  have  been  involved  and  followed  with  much 
interest how Mauritius has progressively gone for cleaner diesel from 2500ppm to 500ppm 

 

23 

and  then  to  50  ppm  of  sulphur  content.  Mauritius  is  slowly  but  surely  moving  towards 
greener  technologies  in  the  transportation  sector.  While  hybrid  cars  are  already  available, 
electric cars have recently been introduced and section 3(b) (b) of the Bill talks about electric 
vehicles  for  the  purpose  of  its  mechanical  propulsion  draws  energy  from,  I  quote  –  “an 
electric energy”. I must emphasise that even though we do not see smoke out of an electric 
car - in fact we do not see smoke at all because there is no exhaust pipe - the electric car is 
polluting at the moment. In fact, it is more polluting than a conventional car. I rest my case 
on a study that my office undertook in the context of Maurice Ile Durable and this study was 
funded by the Agence Française de Développement.  The final report which was submitted 
on  18  September  2010  and  which  is  titled « Etude  d’évaluation  de  l’intérêt  des  véhicules 
fonctionnant à l’éthanol et des véhicules électriques dans le cas d’une politique des véhicules 
propres à Maurice », has the following conclusion at paragraph 3.7.  Madame la présidente, 
la conclusion se lit comme suit – 

« En tenant compte des  émissions de CO2 fossile réalisées sur le territoire de l’île 
Maurice,  le  mix  énergétique  actuel  qui  pourrait  être  utilisé  pour  la  recharge  des 
véhicules  électriques  se  traduirait  par  des  émissions  unitaires  aux  kilomètres 
parcourus,  plus  élevé  avec  un  véhicule  électrique  que  les  émissions  de  CO2  d’un 
véhicule thermique de même performance. »  

A comparison was made between the Nissan Leaf and the Nissan Tiida which runs on the 
same platform but one of which uses a normal engine and the other one an electric engine. 

I have a copy of the pertinent part of the report.  I am going to table it later for the 

attention of the hon. Minister. I’ll further quote from that report, Madam Speaker –  

«De plus, sur la base des investissements énergétiques prévus à l’île Maurice dans un 
futur  proche,  cette  situation  devrait  encore  durer  pendant  plusieurs  années.  En 
conséquence,  il  est  proposé  de  ne  pas  encourager  le  développement  des  véhicules 
électriques auprès des particuliers. »  

The bottom line is electric cars will be 100% clean the day people use their car batteries to 
store electricity produced from their photovoltaic panels.  

Madam Speaker, I will now move to section 115 of the Bill which talks about defects. 
Now,  I  said  above  that  there  is  a  paradigm  shift,  but  people  out  there  are  bewildered, 
especially  the  poor  people  who  cannot  afford  to  buy  new  cars  or  new  vehicles.  They  are 

 

24 

afraid that their vehicles will not obtain the certificate of fitness because of the simple reason 
of the age of the vehicles, although the hon. Minister has explained about it.  

The  amendment  at  section  115  does  not  take  into  account  the  fact  that  defects  and 
faults can be of different degree and different nature.  I rest my case with a few examples. 
There are defects that are major and certainly impact on security and safety. I have been in 
mind here faulty brakes, high emissions, used tyres, heavily dented bodies, so on and so forth. 
But there are defects that are relatively minor in nature, for example, fire extinguisher; even 
though  it  has  passed  its  expiry  date,  it  will  not  cause  a  road  accident.  So,  we  have  to 
distinguish between the two. I wonder whether the hon. Minister can consider this aspect of 
things that I have just evoked. 

Furthermore, buses and taxis for which the public pays, and I should say, heftily, in 
order to travel. Nowadays, a short trip in Port Louis what we refer to as local is Rs100. Not 
cheap!  But then when you go in these vehicles, sometimes you see damaged seats, torn parts 
all over the car and much to the discomfort of the taxi users. Why not ask the inspectors to 
pay particular attention to this?  After all, it is the money of the public that keeps the taxi 
going.  So, they deserve this attention, in my humble view, in the spirit of value of money. Le 
carnet de santé that we have just mentioned!  

In the last two cases, I believe that the vehicle owners must be sensitised. The vehicle 
examiner must be a good communicator and must be able to make it clear that the onus is on 
them for the repair, and that the next time they come over for testing that these issues that 
appear on the list of defects for which they would be given a copy, will need to be addressed. 
Now, this will go a long way in the betterment of our vehicle fleet in Mauritius.  

On a last note, Madam Speaker, once this Bill becomes law, it is understood that the 
testing centres will be fully autonomous and that all NTA officers will no longer be posted 
there safe for the two officers that the hon. Minister just mentioned and who will act as a 
watchdog together with Police officers on behalf of Government. Am I right? They will be 
so-called requested to play a role of regulator. 

(Interruptions) 

This aspect of things is primordial as we cannot possibly leave such an important sector in the 
hands of the private sector fully. Never mind the title, that can be decided, but the powers of 
that officer which needs to be a high probity, is not quite clearly spelt out in the Bill. So, I 

 

25 

think we ought to do that. Well, I am not a barrister, but this is my humble opinion and I 
think we need to spell out the powers of this officer. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: No comment! Please, don’t engage in any conversation with any 

Member! You address the Chair! 

Mr Mahomed: Okay.  

Madam Speaker: Yes. 

Mr Mahomed: So, I look at your side. 

Madam Speaker: Yes. 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Mahomed: It’s okay. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, they are interrupting him. 

Mr Mahomed: Well, I think I have said enough on the Bill and I thank you for your 

attention. 

Madam Speaker: Thank you. Hon. Dr. Sorefan! 

 (2.51 p.m.) 

Dr. R. Sorefan (Fourth Member for La Caverne & Phoenix): Thank you, Madam 
Speaker. Today, I see myself in the middle, on a project between the ex-Government and the 
new Government. 

The project was very opaque in 2014 and this Government is trying to legalise it. But 
I  am  surprised  that  the  hon.  Minister,  Madam  Speaker,  did  not  say  how  we  were  in  the 
Opposition at that time, how this project was opaque. The opacity of this project would have 
sufficed  to  justify  coming  with  this  legal  framework.  The  hon.  Minister,  Madam  Speaker, 
came  with  all  the  malpractices  at  the  NTA  to  justify  this  project.  Let  us  be  honest!  How 
opaque  was  it  in  the  past  that  we,  both  together  in  the  Opposition,  were  questioning  the 
Minister at that time. 

Madam  Speaker,  malpractices  have  been  for  some  time  and  I  don’t  know,  but,  in 
these last two years, these practices have gone three or four fold in the examination at the 
fitness centres. When the NTA tried to sack some of the officers and replace them by Police 

 

26 

Officers, it went 10 times the corruption. As the hon. Minister, there were malpractices. He is 
aware that finesses were given at home, but what did he do? Did he take any action? Were 
actions taken against these people? If the hon. Minister says there were malpractices and so 
many cases were taken to Court; I’ll say: “All right!” But knowing and without acting, I don’t 
accept things like this. 

Madam Speaker, we are today trying to legalise those three companies whose contract 
was signed, as said by the hon. Minister, in 2013; legalise after three years on a contract that 
was signed. I ask myself the question: do we do the legal framework and then appoint and 
sign a contract or do we sign the contract and then come and legalise this kind of operation? 
That’s a big question that I ask myself. The legal person knows very well how it should be, 
but, to my humble opinion, we do all the legal framework and then the company comes, bids 
and then we sign the contract. 

We see ourselves today, on the 18 of March - the Minister has mentioned it… 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, on 18 August, this year, the three companies started on a soft or whatever, without a 
legal  framework.  Is  that  illegal  for  them  to  do  automated  checks?  The  hon.  Minister  said, 
Madam Speaker, there were automated tests with visual tests so that they can get their fitness 
certificate  from  the  NTA,  but,  were  they  allowed  to  do  this  automated  check?  Even  up  to 
now, under which provision are they doing it one hour ago? Because this is not legal yet, it is 
not  proclaimed!  How  can  they  do  it?  I  ask  myself  the  question:  are  they  not  in  an  illegal 
situation up to that we proclaim this law, this amendment Bill? 

There is in the section where the definition  - 

““authorised examiner” means a person licensed by the Commissioner(…); ” 

 

D31/TAKE023/JG/4 

And – 

27 

“The  licence  of  an  authorised  examiner  may,  by  notice  in  writing,  be 
suspended or revoked by the Commissioner (…)” 

Among others – 

“where the authorised examiner is no more a fit and proper person to hold the 
licence” 

I get the impression that one person will get that as one entity. They are not talking about a 
company. If we are talking about a company, what are we talking about being fit or proper? 
There is no mention about a company. We are talking ‘authorised examiner’ as a person. I 
think the hon. Minister will have to look into it because from what we know all those three 
private  companies  –  I  call  them  companies  because  they  are  companies  the  one  at  Forest 
Side, the one in the North, the one … 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, Eastern one. I think they are all companies. So, I don’t see how a company will match 
with one person. 

Now that we have three private companies with a signed contract after two years/three 
years of agreement and even getting Rs200 from this Government as subsidy per car which 
comes to Rs500 m. to those three companies. I ask myself the question: are we not creating a 
cartel? We must be very careful. If these three companies get together, create a cartel under 
duress to this Government; go on strike to accede to their exigencies. We have only three. We 
must beware, we must be careful.  

What  I  suggest  is  that  we  democratise  this  system.  We  have  many  garagistes  who 
have got equipment to do this kind of test so that we say it’s open for anyone to apply for a 
licence,  of  course,  following  all  those  clauses  in  the  Bill  and  to  pay  for  a  trading  licence, 
which  I  don’t  see.  Probably,  I  am  wrong,  I  don’t  know  whether  it  is  included  in  another 
Schedule of the Local Government for them to pay a licence and how much. For such kind of 
business, the licence should be of a tantamount amount, probably, above Rs100,000 so that 
not a single garagiste can come and say: “I apply for a licence.” They must be careful when 
they apply for a trading licence. 

28 

 
Madam Speaker, democratisation will give opportunities and, at the same time, will 
tell the three companies to be careful. The Government also will be at ease. If  you revoke 
there are other people who are here, who can do the job. Concentrating all the examination on 
three  sides  create  havoc  although  the  hon.  Minister  came  and  assured  us  that  things  are 
running  smoothly.    All  the  examinations  on  three  sides  create  havoc  although  the  hon. 
Minister came and assured us that things are running smoothly. Before the automation - we 
all have cars, some send their drivers to have their cars checked - but I went to have my car 
checked  and  it  was  not  that  long  a  queue.  Now,  he  is  coming  and  telling  us  that  with  20 
minutes per car there won’t be long queues, remains to be proved and seen. Very soon I will 
have to take my car for a check and I will double-check, take some photographs and send to 
the hon. Minister. 

No, I have got some old cars also. 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please, don’t interrupt the hon. Member! 

Dr. Sorefan: Madam Speaker, there is one clause at page 5 subsection (c) of section 

113 and allow me to read it - 

“An authorised examiner who is aggrieved by the decision of the Commissioner under 
paragraph (a) may, within 10 days of being notified of the suspension or revocation, 
appeal, on payment of such non-refundable fee as may be prescribed, to the Minister.” 

May  appeal  to  the  Minister,  not  pay  to  the  Minister!  Do  I  take  it  that  when  we  make  an 
appeal, because it is not said in that section what the Minister will do, will the Minister, on 
appeal, confirm or reverse the decision of the Commission? When we make an appeal to the 
Minister, the Minister must say what to do. I would like to be clarified on this issue. 

Then it goes to section 114.  

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker,  the  question  has  been  raised  as  to  whether  private  buses  like  we 
heard  the  Commissioner  said  there  was  the  issue  of  some  UBS  buses  being  examined  by 
AutoCheck Ltd or whatever, it was in the newspaper. But, there is always this possibility, I 
am  sure  there  will  be,  of  how  the  private  buses  or  the  company  buses  are  going  to  be 

 

29 

examined and by whom and whether there won’t be any conflict of interest with the promoter 
of the project and the managers of those companies. That is one regarding the buses. 

Madam  Speaker,  regarding  new  vehicles  like  the  hon.  Minister  said  the  fitness 
certificate is not about the age of the vehicle. But, we all know that all brand new cars are fit. 
We sell them without a fitness certificate as opposed to those imported second-hand cars for 
which we have to get certificate before we can sell them. But, I get the impression that when 
we talk about brand new cars that have to go for fitness after 7 years, it has been voiced out 
that this may go to 5 years and I said it in this House that we may be promoting more cars to 
go  to  those  three  companies  for  them  to  make  more  money,  which  I  objected,  but,  the 
vehicles become damaged.  

One reason for this is that some drivers don’t know how to handle their cars or their 
vehicles. The second main reason is our road infrastructure. If we have smooth roads, well 
catered for, well looked after, the Government is spending a lot of money but, I don’t know if 
it is because of climatic change that our road infrastructure gets so damaged in such a little 
time or because we don’t have proper supervision from our technicians to look after those 
contractors who build our roads. Do they cut corners in doing the roads that they get damaged 
so easily and we, the road users, pay the consequence? 

From my own experience and probably many of the hon. Members will agree, if we 
think back, for many of our cars mechanical damage is always on the left side, not the engine 
but  the  frame  or  whatever  shock  absorber.  I  got  it  from  a  garagist.  I  said:  “why  do  you 
always  change  the  left-hand  side?”  And  he  said:  “because  of  our  road  infrastructure,  the 
middle of the road is alright but on the left side it is always damaged.” For our new cars one 
day not to come with exigencies of those companies telling us that we must have more cars 
coming and then we say okay, but 7 years goes to 5 years and this is not acceptable. We can’t 
go on promoting companies at the expense of Mauritians because of the system of our roads. 

Madam Speaker, in this Bill I see the Commissioner has been given a lot of power. 
Wherever you see it is ‘the approval of the Commissioner’ or ‘the Commissioner’. I will end 
on this. I started from the former Government to the new Government, the Commissioner was 
the head of the MLRT of the former Government and now he is the Commissioner of the 
NTA under the new Government. Great surprise! I went to the profile on social media. Hon. 
Minister, please see to it how qualified your Commissioner is to undertake this job! Just to 
give you an example, we are all persons… 

30 

 
Madam Speaker: Hon. Member, can I ask you not to go into details in this matter? If 
you have got additional information, you can pass it on to the hon. Minister because usually 
we don’t attack people who are not in the House to defend themselves. So, if you have any 
additional information on this officer, can you just pass it on to the hon. Minister, please? 

Dr.  Sorefan:  Okay,  Madam  Speaker,  I  won’t  table  it,  I  will  give  it  to  the  hon. 
Minister to have a look. Anyway, it is on the social media  - we have degrees,  myself BDS, 
University of London, but people here have things like Human Resources (UK), even got a 
degree in alternative medicines (India) without knowing from which country. We know it’s 
from which country, but the University is not mentioned. The Minister is well aware, he is 
laughing  on  this!  Because  we  want  people  to  be  rightly  qualified  to  executive  this  job.  A 
good Bill but without the proper man at the head of that institution will not make it work! 
Then the Government suffers. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  that  the  Government,  through  the  hon.  Minister  of  Public 
Infrastructure  and  Land  Transport,  takes  this  project  à  bon  port  without  any  favours  to 
anyone and to open this type of examination to other people.  Don’t keep it for free or big 
companies only.  There are garagistes like we all know. In England, we have the MOT done 
by garagistes where we don’t have long queues and they can do the job.  We have people to 
do  the  job.    I  keep  insisting.    We  are  Mauritians.    We  can  do  it.    We  do  not  need  only 
companies with big money to come and canvass to have a share from the Government at the 
expense of the Mauritian people. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bodha! 

(3.11 p.m.) 

Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my colleagues on one side of the 
House. In fact, there have been some very valid suggestions, some very pertinent questions 
and I think it is my duty to answer them because, in fact, they are questions where our hon. 
Members here and outside also must be asking. 

First of all, suffice it to say that today the examination was about 20 minutes and there 
were  no  queues.  We  started  at  8.00  a.m.  in  the  morning  and  the  appointment  was  on  a 
staggered basis. 

31 

 
As regards the illegality, Madam Speaker, there is no illegality because the tests are 
being carried out now by the NTA examiners and by the Police. The cashier also is from the 
NTA. The certificate is also delivered by the NTA officers. The private centres will operate 
only  when  the  law  will  have  been  passed  and  gazetted.  So,  I  wanted  to  assure  the  House 
about this. 

As  regards  the  additional  centres,  we  have  a  clause  in  the  agreement  whereby  the 

Government can allow the setting up of additional centres in the public interest, if need be. 

Madam Speaker, as regards the technical guidelines which hon. Mahomed raised, they 
will be very strict concerning all the tests, what are the major tests as mentioned and what are 
the minor tests. In fact, when you have this carnet de santé, each one will go with his own 
and will know exactly what is working and what is not working. The fitness certificate will 
be  given  only  if  the  major  tests  have  been  done  and  carried  out  in  positively.  I  already 
mentioned the transition.  

As  regards  the  roads,  we  know  that  there  have  been  some  works  which  have  been 
carried out in the utility sector and this has caused some problems. In fact, we had a meeting 
with  the  Vice-Prime  Minister.  We  have  just  allocated  a  budget  of  Rs600  m.  for  the 
resurfacing of roads and we are starting in the weeks to come. In fact, tomorrow we are going 
to have a list of all the roads to be resurfaced, Madam Speaker. 

As regards conflict of interest, this is very important. The shareholders of Auto Check 
Ltd. are owners of the Triolet Bus Service (TBS) and UBS. We have been very strict on it; 
their buses cannot be tested at Auto Check Ltd. They will have to be tested elsewhere. We 
have two other centres. Eastern Stone Crusher as well has some vehicles related to its other 
business  and  they  cannot  carry  the  tests.  This  has  been  made  very  clear  to  the  operators. 
There  were  some  major  and  minor  questions  that  I  have  answered.  I  also  answered  with 
regard to the conflict of interest. 

As regards the subsidy it is not Rs200. In fact, we have to include the VAT. So, the 
subsidy,  for  example,  for  Rs400  is  about  Rs80  as  the  hon.  Member  rightly  mentioned.  I 
would like also to say that the idea of MOT is being awarded by garage as it exists in the UK. 
It is a good idea, but it will take some time for us to be able to move from the visual system 
to an automated system and later to have people who will trust the garage to be able to deliver 
the MOT later. 

32 

 
Madam  Speaker,  I  think,  I  have  answered  the  main  questions.  The  most  important 
thing  is  for  us  to  be  able  to  have  a  system  which  is  trustworthy  and  which  is  working. 
Formerly, you had two fitness centres – 

• 

• 

in Plaine Lauzun, it was for Port Louis, lower Plaine Wilhems and the North, 
and 
in Forest Side, it was for the rest of the country. 

What we have allowed is, in fact, that the three fitness centres can operate and anybody can 
go and take an appointment at any centres. It will be staggered and will have his test done 
there. So, it is open. There is not going to be any geographic restriction. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, I would like to say that the most important thing in all this is 
that we had a very chaotic system and it was really very opaque. The contract itself we had to 
work it out. It took us a long time to be able to come to terms with the operators. Some even 
came with a mise en demeure, with their request for Rs600 m. of damages, that is, manque à 
gagner. I am convinced that we have come to a system today, which is doing well and which 
will do better, but it will all depend on the capacity of the NTA to be able to regulate, to see 
to  it  that  there  is  no  corruption,  there  is  no  favouritism  and  it  works  daily  because  we  do 
1,200 tests on a daily basis. So, the whole thing will depend on the way the NTA is going to 
be able to play its role as a regulator. We have gone to the PSC to have eight new examiners, 
new people who will be trained to do the job at the centres and we have also requested from 
the  Commissioner  of  Police  for  two  police  officers  on  a  regular  basis  to  be  present  at  the 
fitness centres so that there is no malpractice. 

With all these, I would like to thank the two hon. Members because they have gone to 
the centres. They have  witnessed it.  I think there were lots of apprehensions from moving 
from the system. You know what happened, Madam Speaker. The first day, you had about 
450 appointments, but 150 people did not turn up. So, we were surprised, but then we realised 
that these people, in fact, did come to the centre. In the past they were coming to the centre 
just  to  collect  the  fitness  certificate.  That  was  the  first  thing.  The  second  thing,  we  have 
realised now that you have agents that the same people come with different cars. So there was 
a system where people were saying ‘I am going to do your fitness certificate and then you 
just pay him’. So, now, we are going to be able to address these issues because at the end of 
the day roadworthiness is saving lives because we should have safe vehicles on the road. 

 
Well, I would like to thank my colleagues. I hope that now we can pass on to the next 

33 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Bill read a second time and committed. 

COMMITTEE STAGE 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

The Road Traffic (Amendment) Bill (No. XVIII of 2016) was considered and agreed 

stage.  

to. 

On  the  Assembly  resuming  with  Madam  Speaker  in  the  Chair,  Madam  Speaker 

reported accordingly. 

Third Reading 

On  motion  made  and  seconded,  the  Road  Traffic  (Amendment)  Bill  (No.  XVIII  of 

2016) was read the third time and passed.  

THE PRIVATE SECONDARY SCHOOLS AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL 

Second Reading 

(No. XIX of 2016) 

Order for Second Reading read. 

The  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 
Scientific  Research  (Mrs  L.  D.  Dookun-Luchoomun):  Madam  Speaker,  with  your 
permission,  I  move  that  the  Private  Secondary  Schools  Authority  (Amendment)  Bill  (No. 
XIX of 2016) be read a second time. 

The presentation of this Bill comes at a timely moment when major systemic reforms 

are being undertaken across the different sub-sectors of education. 

At  this  stage  of  the  educational  reform  process,  my  Ministry  is  also  reviewing  the 

prevailing legal, institutional and governance frameworks. 

In this connection, the hon. Minister of Finance has, yesterday, in the context of the 

Finance Bill, brought a number of amendments to the Education Act. 

 
Quite  understandably,  the  accompanying  legislations  of  several  support  institutions 

34 

equally stand to be reviewed.  The review of the PSSA Act falls within this process. 

Madam Speaker, this review of the Private Secondary Schools Authority (PSSA) Act 
was  announced  in  the  Government  Programme  2015-2019.  The  PSSA  was  established  in 
1976 to support free education. It has now become imperative, after 40 years of existence, to 
bring a number of changes to its Act so as to allow the institution to better respond to the 
current needs of the sector and the challenges lying ahead.  The Authority has fulfilled over 
the past years its mission of ensuring the provision of free education through the financing of 
private  grant  aided  secondary  schools.    It  is  equally  the  regulatory  body  for  a  sector  that 
covers 108 private secondary schools catering for some 71,000 students and employing some 
7,000 persons. 

In line with the educational reform agenda, the PSSA is now called upon to play a key 
role in the promotion of a quality-driven education in the private secondary education sector.  
The  review  of  the  legal  and  institutional  set-up  of  the  PSSA  will  act  as  a  major  spur, 
underpinning its transformative roles and evolving functions.  The institution will accordingly 
be provided with the relevant resources and means and these will enable it to fulfil its goals 
and objectives more effectively and efficiently. 

Madam Speaker, the objectives of bringing the amendments to the PSSA Act are to 
consolidate the provisions of the PSSA Act, review the functions and powers of the Authority 
and restore its pedagogical inspection and quality assurance functions. The Bill also provides 
for a consultative mechanism and a reviewed representation at the level of the Board as well 
as  a  change  in  appellation  of  the  organisation  into  that  of  “Private  Secondary  Education 
Authority”. 

Allow  me,  Madam  Speaker,  to  now  present  and  explain  the  rationale  behind  the 

amendments proposed in the Bill. 

To enable the Authority to fully assume its new role and to address new challenges 
facing the sector, provision is being made for amendments to sections 1 and 3 of the Act, to 
change  the  appellation  of  the  “Private  Secondary  Schools  Authority”  into  the  “Private 
Secondary Education Authority”. The PSSA will be called upon to play a developmental role 
in  the  advancement  of  the  sector,  providing  a  wide  range  of  dedicated  services  in  a  more 
wholesome  and  integrated  manner.  This,  in  keeping  with  the  review  of  the  strategic 

 

35 

orientation  of  the  Authority  and  the  shift  in  focus  towards  enhancement  of  the  quality  of 
education dispensed. 

Most  private  secondary  schools  have,  over  the  years,  invested  in  their  physical 
infrastructure, and this, primarily with financing from the State in the form of grants-in-aid.  
Similarly, improvement has been evidenced in students learning outcomes. However, more 
attention and effort need now be devoted towards achieving  excellence in education.  The 
PSSA  will  hence  be  equipped  to  deliver  on  a  panoply  of  services  for  which  it  will  be 
provided with the required means and resources. 

Let me enumerate some of these new services - 

(a) 

(b) 

the Provision of psychological support  services; 

the  Establishment  of  community  links  through  the  Educational  Social 
Workers, and 

(c) 

the Provision of guidance for career choices. 

Such services  are  already  provided by the Ministry  directly to State schools and to 
private schools, on request.  In this regard, it is important that the private secondary schools 
benefit  from  these  services  in  a  more  structured  and  effective  way,  bearing  in  mind  the 
specificity of the private sector. 

Madam Speaker, the functions of the Authority with regard to pedagogical inspection 
will  furthermore  be  restored.    Moreover,  the  regulatory  role  of  the  Authority  will  be 
strengthened  to  ensure  sector-wide  compliance  with  norms  and  standards  set  by  the 
Authority, in respect of infrastructure, the teaching and learning process, school performance 
and management, and other related matters. 

Hence,  it  is  considered  necessary,  right  at  the  outset,  to  change  the  appellation  to 

better reflect the new roles, functions and strategic orientation of the Authority. 

The Bill provides for an amendment to sections 4(d) and 4(e) of the Act. One of the 
objects of the PSSA is to ensure that the terms and conditions of employment of the staff of 
private secondary schools are “fair and reasonable”. 

In view of the differences in interpretation that may arise with the terms “fairness” 
and “reasonableness” and with the advent of new legislations and regulations now governing 
the  employment  of  staff,  it  has  been  considered  desirable  to  bring  necessary  amendments. 

 

36 

These will ensure that the employment conditions of staff in private secondary schools are in 
strict compliance with laws and regulations in force. 

The Bill, in a spirit of enhanced accountability and considering that a budget of Rs4.5 
billion  is  annually  appropriated  for  the  sector,  has  made  provision  for  an  amendment  to 
section 4(e) of the Act, whereby the Authority will have to effectively ensure that the grants 
disbursed to schools are being used for their intended purposes.  This, in conjunction with 
section 21B, where the Authority is provided with the means of achieving it. 

Madam  Speaker,  let  me  now  concentrate  on  the  new  functions  entrusted  to  the 

Authority. 

Section 5 of the PSSA Act currently caters for both the Functions and Powers of the 
Authority.  It has now been split into two, with section 5 dealing with the Functions of the 
Authority and section 5A providing for the Powers of the Authority. 

The Bill makes a new provision at section 5(d) to allow the Authority to formulate 
appropriate  policies,  make  rules  and  issue  guidelines  and  set  standards  in  relation  to  the 
quality  of  education  dispensed,  registration  of  schools,  utilisation  of  grants,  admission  and 
discipline matters. 

In  the  same  breath,  the  Bill  also  provides  for  a  new  paragraph  (f)  at  section  5  to 
include,  among  the  Functions  of  the  PSSA,  the  need  to  ensure  that  schools  are  managed 
according to relevant laws, rules, standards and guidelines. 

Madam  Speaker,  one  significant  amendment  to  the  Act  pertains  to  the  pedagogical 

inspection function of the PSSA through a new subsection (e) at section 5. 

As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  importance  of  pedagogical  inspection  and  quality 
assurance mechanisms in helping educational institutions to meet today's challenges hardly 
needs to be stressed – their contribution is fully recognized in every education system. 

I  wish  to  highlight  that,  in  May  2000,  following  an  amendment  brought  to  the 
Education Act, the PSSA’s power to undertake pedagogical inspections in private secondary 
schools  was  taken  over  by  the  Ministry  of  Education  in  an  attempt  to  set  up  a  National 
Inspectorate and investing it with powers of inspection for both State and private secondary 
schools. 

The National Inspectorate did not finally materialise. 

37 

 
For  its  part,  the  Quality  Assurance  and  Inspection  Division  of  the  Ministry,  which 
came up later and comprises public officers, has been focusing more on the State secondary 
sector than the private one. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to reiterate that the Quality Assurance and Inspection arms of 
both  the  Ministry  and  the  PSSA  will  operate  in  accordance  with  a  common  Quality 
Assurance framework.  This while keeping in view the specificity of the private schools. I 
wish to add, Madam Speaker, that the PSSA will be provided with the appropriate structure 
and resources to operate its Quality Assurance arm.  

The  fact  that  the  PSSA  knows  the  private  schools  better  and  thus  has  a  better 

appreciation of their specificities has been recognised and underscored by many.  

Madam Speaker, it is further envisaged in the long-term to have an autonomous and 

independent body to deal with quality assurance and inspection in education. 

Madam Speaker, the amendment adopted yesterday to the Education Act, under the 
Finance  Bill, is in consonance with Section 5(e) of this  Bill where the  PSSA will now be 
empowered to conduct Quality Assurance and Inspection in the private secondary education 
sector.   

Les  enseignants,  vous  conviendrez,  Madame  la  présidente,  ont  besoin  d’un 

encadrement soutenu afin de mener à bien leur rôle pédagogique. »  

By  restoring  its  pedagogical  inspection  functions  to  the  PSSA,  we  want to  foster  a 

culture that strives to constantly improve the quality of teaching and learning.  

It is worth noting that this is also in line with the recommendations of the Office of 
Public Sector Governance (OPSG), in its Report on the Restructuring of the PSSA conducted 
in 2014. 

The  proposed  amendment  will  shift  the  focus  of  the  PSSA’s  actions  from  the 
infrastructural inspection to what goes on in the classroom so as to make teaching-learning 
more effective.  We want to make our schools - all our schools - whether State or private, 
more accountable for improved learning outcomes among our students.  I am sure that the 
private secondary  education sector will definitely welcome this initiative and will own the 
entire process.  

Functions of the Authority (Section 5(g) – enquire into complaints) 

38 

 
The Bill will, through an amendment at Section 5(g), confer on the organisation the 
statutory authority to enquire into complaints regarding matters pertaining to the schools and 
take  actions  where  appropriate,  whether  on  its  own  or  in  consultation  with  other  relevant 
authorities. 

Functions of the Authority (Section 5(h) – psychological support) 

Last but not least, a new provision has been made at Section 5(h) for the functions of 
the  Authority  to  be  extended  to  cover  the  provision  of  counselling,  career  guidance  and 
psychological support to students in the private secondary schools. 

It is widely recognised that adolescents require closer and more specialised support, 
particularly with regard to their social and emotional development and well-being. The PSSA 
will  thus  be  staffed  by  Educational  Psychologists,  Educational  Social  Workers  and  Career 
Counsellors to provide a more wholesome set of services to the students.  

I  have  to  add  here  that  the  PRB,  in  its  2016  Report,  has  already  made 
recommendations for the creation of the posts of Educational Psychologist and Educational 
Social Worker at the PSSA. 

As far as Career Guidance is concerned, it has today become crucial for students to be 
properly  advised  on  their  choice  of  subjects  to  improve  their  prospects  for  future 
employability.  This function will be carried out in collaboration with the Career Guidance 
Services of my Ministry and the HRDC. 

New Section Powers of Authority (Section 5A) 

Madam Speaker, the introduction of a new subsection 1(a) under Section 5A aims at 

empowering the PSSA and to better regulate the sector.  

The changes taking place in the education sector have made it all the more vital now 
to strengthen the regulatory function of the Authority to ensure that the sector is efficiently 
regulated  and  that  norms  and  standards  are  established  and  respected.  This  will  be  in  the 
interest of both staff and students.  

And,  above  all,  this  will  be  in  keeping  with  the  principles  of  accountability,  good 
governance  and  transparency,  while  at  the  same  time  maintaining  the  highest  standards  of 
excellence.   

I  wish  to  highlight  that  the  existing  powers  of  the  Authority  under  section  5A 

subsections 1(b), (2) and (3) in the current Act, have remained unchanged. 

 

39 

Board and Consultative Committee (Section 6 and 6A) 

The  Bill  provides  for  an  amendment  to  be  brought  to  Section  6  as  regards  the 
composition  of  the  Board.  This  amendment  is  in  line  with  the  recommendations  made  by 
both  the  Office  of  Public  Sector  Governance  and  the  ICAC  in  their  respective  Reports 
submitted in 2014 and 2015. 

For recall, the PSSA is administered by a Board currently consisting of 12 members, 
including two representatives of Managers of secondary schools, two representatives of the 
staff  of  secondary  schools  and  one  representative  of  the  staff  of  the  PSSA.    Thus,  these 
representatives are on the apex body of the organisation and are involved in decision-making 
pertaining to schools, including their own, and the conditions of registration, including theirs!   

The ICAC, in its Corruption Prevention Review of 2015, has flagged this issue which 
may potentially give rise to situations of conflict of interest, especially in cases when they 
participate in decision-making affecting them directly at the level of the Board.  The ICAC 
Report  has  recommended  that  the  PSSA  Act  be  amended  accordingly  to  review  the 
composition of the Board.  

Quote from ICAC Report  

The Office of Public Sector Governance (OPSG), in its Report on the Restructuring of 
the PSSA conducted in 2014, had for its part recommended that the Board composition be 
reviewed so that the PSSA can more effectively exercise its regulatory function.  OPSG was 
of the view that consultation with stakeholders should be done at a different level.   

Quote from OPSG Report  

Madam  Speaker,  allow  me  to  just  mention  what  was  said  by  the  Office  of  Public 

Sector Governance, and I quote – 

“It is important that the Board composition of the PSSA should be reviewed to have a 
more coherent Board so that the PSSA can freely exercise its regulatory function as 
provided  by  the  Act.  Consultation  with  stakeholders  is  important  and  can 
conveniently be done at the management level and necessary feedback provided to the 
Board to take decisions as appropriate.” 

And if you’ll allow me, Madam Speaker, I will take up also what was recommended by the 
ICAC in its Corruption Prevention Review and it stated – 

40 

 
“School Managers should play an advisory role and to the Board of the PSSA. They 
should  be  called  upon  to  advise  the  Board  on  decisions  concerning  schools.  This 
would  enhance  the  governance  framework  as  it  will  ensure  that  those  involved  in 
decision-making  process  are  not  themselves  concerned  with  the  decisions  thus 
enabling the PSSA to better exercise its regulatory work. This would deter any risk of 
corrupt practices or the perception thereof.” 

So,  Madam  Speaker,  in  the  light  of  the  above  two  Reports  and  with  a  view  to 
enhancing governance framework, Section 6 of the PSSA Act regarding the composition of 
the Private Secondary Schools Authority’s Board is being amended.  Thus, representatives of 
Managers and Staff Unions will contribute at the level of Consultative Committees, instead of 
participating in decision-making at the level of the Board.   

As per the amendment to Section 6, the Board will also include two members having 
wide  experience  in  the  field  of  education.    We  shall  ensure  that  such  appointed  members 
while not being engaged or employed in the sector are effectively persons with the required 
profile, knowledge and exposure to the sector. 

It is further proposed to include a representative of the Ministry of Civil Service and 
Administrative Reforms on the Board, particularly to provide guidance in respect of matters 
pertaining  to  the  conditions  of  employment,  implementation  of  PRB  Reports  and  other 
relevant regulations for the members of teaching and non-teaching staff serving the private 
schools.  It has to be recalled that with a view to establishing parity of esteem between the 
private and State sectors, the salaries and conditions of service of staff have been gradually 
harmonised over the years with the publication of successive PRB reports.   

Madam Speaker, we need to be clear that the PSSA is an implementing agency. Its 
Board deals mainly with issues of an operational or administrative or financial nature. The 
policy making process is often a matter which rests with the Ministry. 

It is worth highlighting that many policy decisions concerning the private education 
sector  emanate  from  the  Ministry.  The  Board  deals  with  the  implementation  aspects  of 
projects and programmes which have either been subject to Government approval or in line 
with policies of the Ministry of Education. 

We  recognize  the  valuable  contribution  of  Managers,  the  Unions  and  other 
stakeholders for the development and advancement of the private secondary education sector.  
In this regard, we want to ensure that their inputs are taken on board.  We also intend to foster 

 

41 

an even greater involvement and participation of the stakeholders with an even wider cross 
section of stakeholders, and reinforce existing partnerships in the sector.  

Hence,  Madam  Speaker,  we  are  providing  for  a  proper  consultative  mechanism,    a 
platform for participation, an exchange of views, a sharing of good practices and all through 
the Consultative Committees to be set up under Section 6A of the Bill where existing and 
new  stakeholders  would  continue  to  contribute  to  discussions  on  matters  of  strategic 
importance. Consultative Committees can be set up to address specific subject matters and 
will comprise relevant stakeholders as appropriate. As you see Madam Speaker, we are not in 
any way jeopardizing our relationship with our partners. 

Madame la présidente, en aucun cas, nos actions compromettront ou mettront en péril 
ce partenariat privilégié que nous entretenons avec le secteur privé.  Bien au contraire, nous 
sommes en train de le préserver  et le consolider. Madame la présidente,  permettez-moi de 
souligner  à  la  Chambre  que  ce  partenariat  existe  et  existera  toujours.  L’importance  que  le 
ministère  de  l’Education  accorde  au  secteur  privé  représente  un  acte  de  foi  pour  le 
gouvernement, essentiel à l’avenir du secteur éducatif. Ce partenariat, Madame la présidente, 
ne  peut  se  résumer  qu’à  une  simple  question  de  représentativité  sur  un  conseil 
d’administration. 

Madame la présidente, nous sommes déjà en discussion avec nos stakeholders sur un 
nombre de sujets ayant trait à la mise en pratique du projet de la réforme du système éducatif 
et  ces  échanges  se  déroulent  dans  des  conditions  sereines  et  favorables.  Je  tiens  aussi  à 
rassurer la Chambre qu’il n’y a aucune controverse comme veulent le faire croire certains. 

Nous entretenons une excellente relation aussi avec nos partenaires du confessionnel 
comme  du  privé  et  nous  maintenons  une  ligne  de  communication  constante  avec  eux.  Ils 
auront  toujours  le  privilège  de  faire  entendre  leurs  voix,  dans  le  dialogue  que  nous  avons 
toujours  eu  d’ailleurs  tout  le  temps  et  maintenu  et  c’est  bien  ainsi  qu’on  entend  entamer 
l’avenir et garantir une éducation de qualité à nos enfants. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  Powers  of  the  Authority  -  in  line  with  Section  5A  subsection 
(1)(a), the Bill provides for new Sections 21A, 21B and 21C to empower the Authority to 
make rules and give directives and enforce same in the effective discharge of its functions. 
The  Authority  has,  over  the  years,  informed  the  Ministry  of  certain  legal  lacunae  that 
constrain it in the exercise of its regulatory functions and this calls for a strengthening of the 
regulatory framework of the Authority.  

42 

 
Thus, with the amendments now proposed, the Authority will have the power to make 
rules  and  give  directives,  in  given  specific  circumstances,  with  a  view  to  intervening  and 
addressing  situations  where,  for  example,  there  are  strained  industrial  relations  or  where 
grants are not being used for their intended purposes or where it has to protect the interest, 
welfare,  health  and  safety  of  staff  and  students  of  a  school.  Where  information  of  a 
mandatory nature is not being submitted, there are situations where the Authority will now be 
able to take action to ensure that there are no operational bottlenecks.  

The proposed amendments will further allow the PSSA, under Section 21C, to take 
appropriate  action  in  case  of  non-compliance.  This  power  is  to  be  exercised  with  due 
diligence  for  a  specific  purpose,  in  rare  cases,  especially  in  cases  where  the  legal 
requirements or conditions imposed are not being respected; bearing in mind that the majority 
of the operators comply with the rules and guidelines set by the Authority. 

Madam Speaker, the proposed amendments to the legal framework of the PSSA are 
long overdue and will instill a new dynamism in the sector. The amendments proposed are 
the result of an in-depth and exhaustive reflection on private sector provision of secondary 
education and are in line with our reform agenda. They will equally further strengthen the 
existing partnership with stakeholders to increase their participation in the development and 
promotion of this sector.  

Again,  with  the  conduct  of  quality  assurance  functions,  there  will  be  a  significant 
enhancement in the quality of education dispensed. As for the services being provided to the 
students by the PSSA, these will be further extended as the Authority comes to cater for a 
wide gamut of support services that are the legitimate due of learners. 

Madam  Speaker,  these  amendments  will  not  only  empower  the  Authority  to  more 
effectively regulate this very important sector of our educational system but will also usher in 
a new strategic vision for it as the Authority assumes a more pronounced developmental role. 
I  am  confident  that  all  these  initiatives  taken  together,  and  in  a  holistic  manner,  can  only 
result in a substantial improvement in performance levels.   

I  cannot  end  without  highlighting  the  contribution  of  the  private  providers  in  the 
educational landscape of Mauritius. The Government intends to promote and consolidate this 
existing  nexus  in  the  sector  and  bring  about  the  much-awaited  reforms  to  upscale  our 
secondary education to higher levels of growth and excellence.   

With these words, Madam Speaker, I commend the Bill to the House. 

43 

 
Thank you. 

Mr Gayan rose and seconded. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Rughoobur! 

 (3.47 p.m.) 

Mr S. Rughoobur (Second Member for Grand’ Baie & Poudre d’Or): Thank you, 
Madam  Speaker.  Let  me  congratulate  the  hon.  Minister  and  her  team  for  coming  forward 
with the amendments.  

Madam Speaker, actually there are, for me, four objectives that are associated with 
these amendments which relate to the promotion of quality education. The Bill aims at giving 
more powers to the PSSA. It encourages a better participation of stakeholders in this whole 
process of promoting  education in the private secondary  schools and, the fourth objective, 
which  I  believe  is  equally  important,  is  the  issue  of  accountability  because  we  should  not 
forget that there are public funds which are involved in this whole process of the management 
of these private secondary schools. 

Madam Speaker, I am going to be very brief in my intervention. The amendments to 

the three sections that I am going to comment upon are –  

• 
• 
• 

Section 4(d); 
Section 5 which talks about the functioning of the Authority, and 
Section 6. 

Madam Speaker, in my intervention what I would like to elaborate upon is how will 
these amendments to section 4(f), section 5 which relates to the functioning of the Authority, 
the new provisions under section 6 relating to the functions of the Board will contribute in 
ensuring that we meet these objectives for which these amendments are being proposed. 

Madam Speaker, we should not forget that year after year, there is a considerable of 
funds which are involved in the management of these private secondary schools. Last year I 
talked to the hon. Minister and she explained to me as to why the PSSA is not involved in the 
recruitment  process  of  the  teaching  and  non-teaching  staff  in  those  secondary  institutions. 
C’est  un  acquis  du  secteur  privé  que  le  gouvernement  ne  va  pas  toucher.    Cela  va  rester 
l’acquis du secteur privé. But we need to ensure that those funds that are being provided are 
better  utilised.  I  believe  that  this  section  4(d),  which  is  being  amended  and  relating  to 
conditions of employment of staff in the secondary schools where we are deleting the words 

 

44 

‘conditions of employment of staff are fair and reasonable’ and replacing it by ‘to ensure that 
conditions  of  employment  of  staff  comply  with  the  relevant  laws,  rules,  guidelines  and 
directives.’  Now,  this  is  an  opportunity  with  the  guidelines  for  the  PSSA.    Henceforth,  to 
ensure that there is better transparency in the recruitment process.  

Madam  Speaker,  we  have  received  complaints  on  several  occasions  on  the  way 
recruitments are being effected in certain private secondary schools. Today, there are almost 
no guidelines and the private secondary schools have the absolute liberty to recruit. But we 
should  not  forget  that  there  is  actually  one  condition  that  any  secondary  school  will  only 
recruit a teacher who has a teaching certificate issued by the PSSA. This is probably one of 
the rare conditions, but if we consider such a condition and if we are coming with such an 
amendment where we are now introducing guidelines by the PSSA for the management of 
schools,  probably  we  can  as  well  define  other  guidelines  that  would  probably  ensure  that 
there is better transparency in the recruitment process in the secondary schools.  

Now, apart from this section 4 which is being amended, Madam Speaker, I wanted to 
explain  further  on  this  specific  issue.  I  wanted  to  elaborate  on  section  5  -Functions  of 
Authority, which is actually a new section. In the new section 5 (d),  I am going to quote what 
is mentioned there - 

“formulate  appropriate  policies,  make  rules,  issue  guidelines  and  directives  and  set 

standards and conditions – 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

for promoting and enhancing quality education in secondary schools; 

for the registration of secondary and pre-vocational schools; 

for ensuring efficiency and transparency in the manner in which grants 
are used by secondary and pre-vocational schools; 

for the admission, transfer and discipline of students of secondary and 
pre-vocational schools; or 

(v) 

that are incidental or conducive to the attainment of its objects;” 

Madam  Speaker,  ‘formulate  appropriate  policies,  make  rules,  issue  guidelines’,  here,  I 
believe and I propose that while talking about issuing guidelines, these new functions that 
are being given to the Authority, I believe that we can add also as a sub paragraph in this 
section the employment of teaching and non-teaching staff. I mean issuing guidelines and 
directives for the employment of teaching and non-teaching staff. On ne va pas toucher à 

 

45 

l’acquis du secteur privé, Madam Speaker. When speaking about issuing guidelines, if we 
can also elaborate on a few conditions that would be attached to the employment of teaching 
and non-teaching staff in private secondary schools. Because I consider that the amount of 
money  that  is  being  spent  by  the  PSSA  on  this  specific  item,  there  is  a  need  for  better 
transparency  both  in  the  recruitment  of  teaching  and  non-teaching  staff.  So,  this  is  an 
opportunity, I believe, that we should not miss to issue a sort of guidelines, so that there is 
better transparency in the recruitment of teaching and non-teaching staff.  

Under this new section 5 - Functions of Authority, we have been talking about the 
role  of  parents,  Madam  Speaker.  While  talking  of  the  functions  of  the  Authority,  I  see 
nothing relating to the participation of the parents. How can the PSSA help in encouraging 
participation of parents in the administration of these private secondary schools? So, I am 
proposing that under these functions of the Authority, we have to think as to how we can 
also add initiatives that would be the responsibility of the PSSA, initiatives that we would 
have to take to encourage better participation of parents in the administration of these private 
secondary  schools.  We  know  how  important  the  role  of  the  Parent-Teacher  Association 
(PTA) is.  Whether it is a primary or secondary school, the role of the parents are extremely 
important.  So,  this  is  a  proposal  that  I  am  going  to  make  to  the  hon.  Minister  for  her  to 
consider, and if this can also be studied and see if we can take on board the proposal. 

Madam Speaker, the third section to which I was referring earlier was section 6 - The 
Board and the new section 6A where there is the setting up of a Consultative Committee. 
Madam  Speaker,  on  this  issue,  before  the  speech  of  the  hon.  Minister,  I  had  some 
reservations.  I can understand that there have been recommendations in this regard in the 
past  by  authorities,  by  the  ICAC  and  by  other  institutions,  I  believe,  who  have  made 
recommendations in this regard that we should have changes. But still, Madam Speaker, the 
role of the Consultative Committee, I believe, has to be well-defined because today as it is in 
the Act, it is not clear as to this Consultative Committee. There is a lack of information on 
this  very  function,  itself,  of  the  Consultative  Committee.  Second,  is  it  a  structure  which 
would be working in parallel or have powers equal to the Board because there is no mention 
of decisions taken by this Consultative Committee? Will it have to be ratified by the Board 
or is it final? The composition of the Council, itself, we have a lack of information on this. I 
am  sure  the  hon.  Minister  is  going  to  enlighten  the  House  on  this,  but  also  on  the 
composition of the Board. I see that there have been changes that are being proposed now 
that the hon. Minister has elaborated on the reasons.  

 

46 

But still I believe that the composition of the Board, as it is being proposed though I am sure 
that the Ministry, the officers have studied the positive impact that this is going to have in the 
education system especially the Private Secondary Schools in the future - that it is important 
that we understand well the actors who should be involved in the elaboration of the policy 
measures of the sector. We have the administrative arm of the PSSA which has its role, but 
we have also the board which has a policy role. And the question that I have is, if people with 
lack of experience in the field, or else let us proceed the other way; if people who have got 
years and years of experience do not form part of the board, will it be that easy for the PSSA 
to identify, to work on policies, to finalise strategies that will be in the interests of not only 
the Private Secondary Education Sector, but also the whole education sector in general? It is 
because in this case we are talking of removing representatives of managers, unions. I am just 
asking the question: whether in the absence of these actors, will we have people of experience 
who know the sector?  Will we be able to define a proper strategy that will be in the interests 
of the sector?  This is a question that I am asking!  

That  is  why  for  me,  I  believe,  that  representatives  of  managers  of  schools,  the 
representatives of the unions, even a representative of the Ministry of Social Security should 
have formed part of the board. This is my opinion. I may be wrong, but I believe that it is 
important that to define a strategy, to define an appropriate policy for the sector, we need to 
have people of experience, people who know what they are talking about and I would humbly 
suggest to the hon. Minister to look into this. Madam Speaker, these are the three important 
issues that I wanted to mention. I would like to thank all of you for your attention. Thank you 
very much. 

(4.03 p.m) 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Ganoo! 

Mr A. Ganoo (First Member for Savanne & Black River):  Madam Speaker, with 

the two main Opposition parties having shied away from commenting on this Bill… 

(Interruptions) 

I  find  myself  in  the  privileged  position  of  having  to  say  a  few  words  on  this  Bill  and  to 
disagree with the proposal of the Minister today. And I will explain why. 

Madam  Speaker,  it  is  a  Bill  which  is  being  presented  to  this  House,  containing  15 
sections and it is an Act which has been amended on a few occasions in the past - as far as I 
remember  on  two  or  three  occasions.    The  subject  matter  of  this  legislation,  as  the  hon. 

 

47 

Minister  pointed  out  rightly,  concerns  108  secondary  schools,  a  population  of  71,000 
students,  and  approximately  7,000  teaching  and  non-teaching  staff.  This  is  the  dimension 
which this legislation covers, Madam Speaker. 

Here, we agree that the law should have been reviewed, should have been updated, 
should have been modernised, and should have been revamped to adjust to the new realities. 
There is no problem about that, Madam Speaker. I agree that the Private Secondary School 
Authority Act, which was passed in June 1976 before elections which took place at the end of 
the  year,  should  have  been  reviewed.  There  is  no  problem  about  that.  But  unfortunately, 
Madam Speaker, the main point that we wish to make today is that; firstly, there has been no 
consultation  with  the  stakeholders.  This  is  what  I  have  been  told.  There  has  been  no 
consultation  with  the  two  unions.  There  was  no  consultation  with  the  UPSEE  and  the 
secondary  and  preparatory  school  teachers  and  other  staff  unions;  the  two  main  unions.  
There  was  no  consultation  with  the  Federation  of  Managers  or  with  the  other  authorities 
concerned with secondary education.  This is the first point I wish to make and which I wish 
to déplorer, Madam Speaker.  

We  know  when  we  are  talking  about  secondary  education,  we  are  talking  about 
unions which have been here working in this field for a long time. We are talking of Bureau 
de  l’Education  Catholique,  Federation  of  Managers.    We  are  talking  of  other  authorities, 
Madam  Speaker,  Islamic  Education  Authority,  Diocese  Adventist,  Diocese  Anglican;  all 
these  authorities  which  have  made  heavy  investment  in  secondary  education.  So,  this  is  a 
matter  of  regret.  Especially  as  the  hon.  Minister  herself  referred  to  the  Government 
Programme  where  on  the  chapter  of  education  it  was  mentioned  in  the  Government 
Programme in the address by His Excellency the President on 27 January 2015 on paragraph 
70 – 

“In order to build on the existing partnership with the private providers of secondary 
education and make it more effective, government will review the Private Secondary 
Schools Authority (PSSA) Act” 

To build on the existing partnership! So, the hon. Minister herself has said that there has been 
a long existing partnership over the time, over the decades, Madam Speaker and it is really a 
matter  of  regret  that  this  law  which  is  in  our  statute  books  since  1976,  which  is  being 
reviewed fundamentally today for the first time. I have look at the other amendments.  There 
was one during the MSM-MMM Government presented by hon. Obeegadoo. There was one 

 

48 

before  in  1983,  I  think.    But  this  Bill  today  comes  and  changes  fundamental  things, 
fundamental  matters  in  the  PSSA  Act  voted  and  adopted  in  this  House  in  1976,  and  we 
cannot, but regret that the stakeholders have not been consulted, Madam Speaker. 

I  will  say,  therefore,  that  the  decisions  have  been  taken  in  a  unilateral  manner,  are 
being imposed on the stakeholders, Madam Speaker. Coming from upward and inflicted and 
thrust upon those stakeholders especially as hon. Minister herself has paid lip service, if I 
may say so, on this existing relationship which has lasted over decades.  

Now,  Madam  Speaker,  there  are  good  things  in  this  legislation,  but  there  are  also 
things  which  are  not  acceptable.  I  will  not  go  through  all  the  clauses  of  the  bill,  but 
fundamentally the appellation of the Act, for example, has been changed. This is a correct 
initiative which is to be applauded. The Bill comes, Madam Speaker, as the hon. Minister 
said to invest the Authority with new functions, new powers.  

The Bill comes and sets up the guidelines, the rules by which the secondary schools, 
the Managers have to abide to. The Bill comes with the setting up of the new Board. The Bill 
comes to propose the Consultative Committee - and I will come on all these issues in a few 
minutes - and the Bill finally, Madam Speaker - which to my mind is another matter which is 
inacceptable also - comes to propose in its last part the imposition of administrative sanctions 
in case the rules are not abided by. 

But, let me come firstly, Madam Speaker, with the composition of the Board. I must 
say I was surprised, flabbergasted. I am not an expert in education, Madam Speaker, but I 
have talked to many knowledgeable people on this issue, who are in the sector, and I was 
surprised that it was this Minister, knowing democratic and open mindedness, who is coming 
now with such a Bill.  I am talking on the composition of the Board. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Minister  has  tried  to  justify  why  this  Board  is  being 
constituted differently now. She has given us the reasons, the justifications, reports from the 
ICAC,  reports  from  the  Public  Sector  Governance  Board  and  so  on  and  the  Minister,  as  I 
said, has, in fact, been referring to the partenariat, and to add insult to injury, I head the hon. 
Minister saying – 

« Ce partenariat, Madame la Présidente, ne peut se résumer à une simple question de 
représentativité sur un conseil d’administration. » 

 

49 

What is, in fact, happening as far as the Board is concerned? The hon. Minister has given us 
what were the recommendations of ICAC or the Public Sector Governance Board, conflict of 
interests and so on, and other reasons that were given. 

Madam Speaker, since the creation of the PSSA in 1976, the representatives of the 
employers, of the trade unions, of students have been sitting on this Board, and today, they 
are just being simply eliminated from this Board, at a time when we know good governance 
claims  for  more  dialogue,  where  there  should  be  more  wider  representation  in  different 
conseils d’administration. 

To me, this Bill before us now is turning the clock anti-clockwise, Madam Speaker. 

To me, this is un pas en arrière, un recul, unfortunately, une décision rétrograde pour moi. 

Why should have the trade union representatives been eliminated from this Board or 
the Federation of Managers, Madam Speaker? This particular aspect of the Bill, that is, the 
exclusion of the employers, of the union representatives from this conseil d’administration is 
une mainmise, une étatisation de l’éducation privée, Madam Speaker. As I said, it has been 
done in a unilateral manner. 

Now,  if  we  look  at  the  1976  Bill,  the  existing  legislation,  we  see  that  the  Board 
consisted of the Chairperson, appointed by the Prime Minister, the Permanent Secretary of 
the Ministry, the FS, the Director of the MIE, the Director of MGI, a public officer appointed 
by the Minister, two representatives of managers of secondary schools, two representatives of 
the  staff  of  secondary  schools,  one  representative  of  students  of  secondary  schools,  one 
representative of the staff of the Authority, Madam Speaker. Now, we are changing all this. 

According to what is being proposed in this Bill, as we can see, the Board will now 
consist  of  the  Chairperson,  the  FS,  the  PS  of  the  Ministry,  somebody  representing  the 
Ministry of Civil Service, the Director of MIE, the Director of the PSSA itself, and as the 
Minister  herself  highlighted,  two  persons  having  wide  experience.  So,  excluding  all  these 
civil servants of high-ranking status and the Director of the PSSA, only two persons having 
wide  experience  in  the  field  of  education  will  be  appointed  by  the  Minister.  This  is  a 
complete transformation of the Board as it was, Madam Speaker. 

These two persons, according to the Bill, should have been engaged or employed in 
the Private Secondary Education sector, and they will be appointed by the Minister. We don’t 
know.  The  Minister,  therefore,  will  have  the  liberty,  the  privilege,  the  prerogative  of 
appointing anybody, not necessarily somebody who is sympathetic to the cause of the unions 

 

50 

or to the cause of the employers, of the owners of these secondary schools, but provided they 
have a wide experience in education. 

Madam Speaker, but the worst thing in this Bill is that the Bill provides in another 
clause that the quorum will be five persons. If I can read to the House what is provided for in 
this Bill, so that the Board can finally take the necessary decisions. I read clause 11 (5) – 

“(5) At any meeting of the Board, 5 members shall constitute a quorum.” 

And furthermore, clause 11 (6) says - 

“(6) Everything authorised or required to be done by the Board shall be decided by a 
simple majority of the members present and voting.” 

Donc, theoretically, five members constitute the quorum and a simple majority means three 
members of the Board are enough to take decisions concerning any decision provided for in 
this Bill, Madam Speaker. So, for me, any important decision can theoretically be taken by 
three persons for such a sector which is of so much importance, Madam Speaker. 

I was reading the debates when this Bill was voted in 1976. Those were the days of 
the old Labour Government, Madam Speaker, and the Minister of Education at that time, Mr 
Chaperon, when questioned about the composition of the Board - this is why I said we are 
turning the clock backwards, anti-clockwise - said - I am just quoting him - 

“The hon. First Member for Belle Rose had some doubts about the composition of the 
Authority. Well, it is going to be a collective business, which should not separate the 
managers from the teachers, from the students, from the Government officials, from 
the  specialists  in  education.  It  should  be  one  whole  team  working  with  one  single 
spirit.” 

This  was  the  spirit  in  which  this  law  was  passed.  True  it  is  that  the  landscape  is 
different now, Madam Speaker. True it is – I repeat it again – we need new measures, the law 
has to be modernised but, in terms of partnership, Madam Speaker, I think this is the most 
objectionable  and  impeachable  part  of  the  Bill  when  the  Minister  has  come  relying  on 
whatever reports she has told us to come and change the composition of this Board.  

Now, what does this Bill do? To sugar-coat the bitter pill, in order to cover this recul, 
this pas en arrière, Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister in the Bill comes and proposes the 
Consultative  Committee.  The  Consultative  Committee  is  supposed  to  be  a  consultative 

 

51 

mechanism for greater involvement of stakeholders. So, the stakeholders will not be in the 
Board, they will be in this hazy nebulous body which is called the Consultative Committee.  

But, even when we look at the clause providing for this Consultative Committee and 
this  is  why  the  hon.  Member  who  spoke  just  before  me  asked  the  very  relevant  questions 
about what is the nature of this Consultative Committee, what are its powers. This is what the 
Bill says –  

“(1) The Board may set up, on such terms and conditions as it may determine, such 

Consultative Committee as may be necessary in the discharge of its function.  

(2)      A  Consultative  Committee  shall  consist  of  not  less  than  3  nor  more  than  7 

members, including the Chairperson, to be appointed by the Board (...).” 

And clause 6A (3) provides that – 

“A  Consultative  Committee  may  include  managers  of  private  secondary  schools  or 
representatives  of  unions  of  employees  of  private  secondary  schools  or  relevant 
stakeholders.” 

So,  even  this  Consultative  Committee,  Madam  Speaker,  according  to  the  law  may 
include managers of private secondary schools or representatives of the unions. Once again, 
the Board takes upon itself the entire liberty to decide who will form part of this Committee. 
The question one can ask and this is what the managers and the trade unions are asking is: 
will  this  Consultative  Committee  be  composed  solely  of  managers  or  trade  union 
representatives  or  both  of  them?  It  is  theoretically  possible  that  this  Committee  is  not 
composed of any trade union representative. In theory, it can be done. This clause also talks 
about  the  relevant  stakeholders.  It  may  include  managers,  may  include  representatives  or 
relevant stakeholders. Who are these relevant stakeholders whom the law refers to?  

This Consultative Committee, as I said, Madam Speaker, is to sugar-coat the pill that 
the Minister wants us to swallow. It is an eyewash because the final decision will come back 
to the Board and, the Board, as we know, is made up of totally d’une façon majoritaire of 
representatives and officials of the different Ministries and the Minister of Education, Madam 
Speaker. So, this is why therefore, as I said, the composition of the Board, the setting up of 
the new Consultative Committee, Madam Speaker, are matters which are unacceptable. 

Now, let us come to the question of the rules and the directives in the Bill. Madam 
Speaker, the Minister has already explained in her opening speech the new character of this 

 

52 

legislation in authorising the Authority in section 5(a) the Authority shall have such powers 
as may be necessary to make rules, issue guidelines and directives and so on. Furthermore, in 
clause 13 of the Bill, ‘Power to make rules’, we see that – 

“The  Authority  may,  with  the  approval  of  the  Minister,  make  such  rules  as  it  may 
determine in furtherance of its objects.” 

Any such rule – 

“(…) may provide for the imposition of an administrative sanction in relation to such 
matters as may be prescribed.” 

So,  we  don’t  know  what  will  be  the  administrative  sanction,  it  will  be  prescribed! 
And,  the  House  is  being  asked  to  vote  for  a  Bill  which  empowers  the  Authority  with  the 
approval  of  the  Minister  to  make  rules  which  provide  for  administrative  sanction  against 
these managers and the different other authorities and we don’t know what is the nature of 
this administrative section! The administrative sanction will be prescribed later on.  

Furthermore, in section 21B (4) –  

“The Authority may impose such administrative sanction as may be prescribed if a 
school fails to comply with a directive issued to it within such time as may have been 
determined.” 

Again, Madam Speaker, on two occasions, we are being asked to vote to allow the 
Authority to impose administrative sanction which will be prescribed. We are totally in the 
dark about the nature of such administrative sanction and the House is being asked to vote for 
this provision in the Bill! But, what is more difficult to understand, Madam Speaker, is that 
there is a section concerning offences in the Bill – 

“Any person who fails to comply with any requirement imposed under this Act, or 
any rule, guideline or directive under this Act, shall commit an offence and shall, on 
conviction, be liable to a fine not exceeding 50,000 rupees and to imprisonment for a 
term not exceeding 2 years.” 

Therefore, the clause about setting up the offence provides that anybody who fails to 
comply with any requirement imposed under this Act or comply with any rule is liable to be 
prosecuted and will commit an offence and liable to a fine not exceeding 50,000 rupees, as I 
just said, plus 2 years imprisonment. In addition to that, Madam Speaker, we are being asked 
to vote for an administrative sanction which is not elaborated and provided for in this Bill but 

 

53 

which will be prescribed later. When we know that in the law, the PSSA Act - I come back to 
this question of the composition of the Board - like in all other statutes, we know that the 
Minister has in relation to the exercise of the functions of the Board, she may give directions 
to the Board as she considers necessary in the public interest and the Board shall comply with 
those directions. I am coming back to this question of the composition of the Board because 
finally,  at the  end of the day, the Minister has the last say  and may  give directions to the 
Board and the Board has no choice but to comply with those directions given by the Minister. 

So, Madam Speaker, these are the reservations that we have on this Bill and there is 
another matter, Madam Speaker, to come back on this sanction, I agree that it exists in our 
laws, they are sometimes called administrative penalties, but they are clear and defined in the 
law in question. 

This is why I take strong objection to these administrative sanctions referred to in this 

Bill because they are not provided for in the Bill we are being asked to vote. 

Madam Speaker, another function of the authority will be now concerning le transfert 
des élèves.  I want to ask the hon. Minister because this is in the law now. Le transfert des 
élèves, is it not the authority of the  college, of the school? Is it not the  prerogative of the 
Manager? In so doing, by giving the authority the power for le transfert des élèves, is not the 
authority  taking  over  a  new  power  which,  in  fact,  belongs  to  the  management  of  the 
secondary school in question? 

Madam Speaker, another function of the authority will be now concerning le transfert 
des élèves.  I want to ask the hon. Minister because this is in the law now. Le transfert des 
élèves, is it not the authority of the  college, of the school?  Is it not the  prerogative of the 
Manager? In so doing, by giving the authority the power for le transfert des élèves, is not the 
authority  taking  over  a  new  power  which,  in  fact,  belongs  to  the  management  of  the 
secondary school in question? 

The last point I wish to make concerns the inspection and periodic quality audits in 
academic  areas.    The  hon.  Minister  talked  lengthily  about  that;  this  question  about 
undertaking inspection and periodic quality audits in academic areas. Madam Speaker, I am 
sure the hon. Minister knows about this. The unions have, in the recent past, met the Quality 
Assurance  Unit  of  her  Ministry.  I  think  this  took  place  in  May  of  last  year.  The  SPSTSU 
informed the Ministry about the difficulties they are having concerning the visits of officials 
of  the  Ministry  in  the  different  secondary  schools.    The  union  had  objected  and  had  even 

 

54 

given a  mot d’ordre to the members of the union to refuse access to their classes to these 
inspectors,  but  they  wanted  to  dialogue  furthermore  with  the  Ministry  concerning  the 
inspection of the inspectors, dispatched or sent by the different Ministries.   

Hence, Madam Speaker, there is necessity for the stakeholders, for the members of 
the  unions  on  this  Board  to  come  to  a  consensus  on  such  an  important  matter  about  this 
inspection  and  these  periodic  quality  audits.    There  is  nothing  wrong  in  inspection  being 
carried out, Madam Speaker. But all these should be done in a consensus; in the framework 
of a meaningful dialogue. This is why again it is a matter of regret. I have given one example 
why the Union’s representative; the Federation of Managers should not have been excluded 
from this important Board of this Authority? 

Madam Speaker, in other words, what we are denouncing today is the antidemocratic 
nature of these amendments and the unilateral way they have been taken by excluding the 
representatives of the employers and the trade unions. It is a pity that this has not been done. 
This is why we again underline and insist on the fact that the failure of the hon. Minister to 
agree  to  meet  these  stakeholders  has  resulted  in  a  Bill,  which  should  have,  in  fact,  been 
adopted unanimously in this House and should have been accepted by the stakeholders, but 
unfortunately this is not case. This is why we regret that this has not been done.  I have done.  
Thank you. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun! 

 (4.35 p.m.) 

Mrs  Dookun-Luchoomun:  Madam  Speaker,  let  me,  first  of  all,  thank  all  the 
Members  who  participated  and  contributed  to  this  debate  on  what  I  consider  to  be  a  very 
important Bill. 

Madam Speaker, let me take up some of the points raised by the hon. Members and 
I’ll try to bring some clarifications to their queries. I will start with hon. Rughoobur. Hon. 
Rughoobur was talking about the powers of the PSSA. I would like, from the very outset, to 
state  that  we  are  talking  about  powers  to  give  directives  and  guidelines,  but,  as  far  as 
recruitment is concerned, teachers are recruited according to the Regulations set by the PRB. 
All teachers recruited by private secondary schools have the qualifications as set out by the 
PRB and this is followed strictly by the managers of the schools and the PSSA as well. 

As far as the other point raised by the hon. Member and I think which was the same 
point raised by hon. Ganoo,  I will take it up. Regarding the  consultations, let me reassure 

 

55 

hon.  Ganoo  that  consultations  have  been  extensive  and  we  have  been  meeting  all 
stakeholders. To start with, as far as this Bill is concerned, there have been no less than 22 
meetings at the level of the PSSA with various stakeholders discussing the issue for a long 
time. Further, after the Bill went on the website of the National Assembly, I had a meeting 
with the Federation of Managers. Obviously, they mentioned their fears about not being on 
the Board, but I have explained to them that their non-representation on the Board is by no 
means a break in the dialogue that we constantly have with them.  

The Consultative Committee has been set for that particular purpose. I have already 
stated why for good governance and sake, we are not having them on the board of the PSSA, 
but the various Consultative Committees that are being set up would be to discuss issues that 
are of their interest. Now, Consultative Committees may be held together with managers and 
teachers,  but  we  may  have  Consultative  Committees  solely  with  managers  for  matters 
relevant to them and others with the representatives of the unions and the teachers as well. 
When  we  talk  about  other  stakeholders,  we  can  also  think  about  the  private  fee  paying 
colleges, they also may have to contribute. So, the Consultative Committees have got their 
own raison d’être. 

Hon.  Ganoo  has  been  talking  about  undemocratic  measures.  I  am  sorry!  There  are 
regulations already there and if I can mention the regulation. There is Regulation 13 of 1977 
which  refers  to  fines  to  be  imposed  on  managers  that  do  not  abide  by  regulations  or  by 
directives set. We are putting in the legislation to ensure that things move the way we want 
them to move, in the direction we want them to move. Now, I must here stress that most of 
the  managers  are  abiding  managers  and  their  schools  are  operating  pretty  well,  but  we  do 
have some brebis galeuses like we always have anywhere in any sector, Madam Speaker; and 
we need to come up with proper legislation to make sure that we manage these situations. 

When  hon.  Ganoo  went  back  to  the  1976  legislation  mentioning  who  are  the 
members, I am sure that he has noted that it is almost the same members that we are having 
on  the  Board.  The  only  distinction  is  that  we  are  now  asking  stakeholders  who  are  direct 
licensees. Madam Speaker, when we talk about regulatory bodies, we cannot have licensees 
sitting on the Regulatory Bodies Board. If we look at the recent legislation, we have a series 
of them. Let me just mention this. It is important for me to mention this. We have the ICT 
Authority,  the  Financial  Services  Commission,  the  Gambling  Regulatory  Authority,  the 
Tertiary  Education  Commission.  All  these,  Madam  Speaker,  cannot  have  operators  or 
licensees on their Board.  

56 

 
Let me mention that, in the case of the PSSA, not only is the PSSA a regulator, but 
the PSSA dishes out large amounts of money to these operators. So, we cannot have them 
sitting on the Board. I think that this is not at all undemocratic but, in fact, very transparent. 
This is what we intend to do. We want things to go on in a transparent way and following the 
principle of good governance, Madam Speaker. 

(Interruptions) 

Furthermore, I find here and I think, it was hon. Rughoobur who had mentioned that it 
is important to get parents on board while taking care of the students. But I had mentioned it 
in my speech, Madam Speaker that we are making provision in this Bill for the establishment 
of  community  links  through  the  social  workers  who  will  be  linking  the  schools  with  the 
homes of the students; trying to help out whenever situations become tough or tedious. So, 
we are taking the required measures. Madam Speaker, it is important for me to mention that 
we do believe in this partenariat that we have with the private sector and no matter what the 
Opposition says, no matter what is given on the papers; we do trust our partners and we do 
believe in this partenariat and we want to go on consolidating this partenariat. 

I would like also to add one point. Stating that we haven’t had consultations is not at 
all true. Only a few days back, I talked to the representatives of the Bureau de l’Education 
Catholique as well because it is true that once they noted - they were told earlier - that they 
are not on the board, they had fears - and I do think that it is legitimate – and thought what 
would  happen  if  we  want  to  discuss  matters.    I  have  been  stressing  all  the  time  that  the 
consultative committees are there, but over and above the dialogue with our partners does not 
restrict itself to the PSSA. Our partners can, at any time, knock at the door of the Ministry 
and my officers and myself, will be there to listen and to keep on discussing on issues that are 
close to our heart. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, this particular Bill is being presented to the House because we have 
at heart the interests of our children. And I believe that anyone who believes in the future of 
our children, who believes that we should give them the right encadrement, who believe that 
we  have  to  make  everything  sure  that  they  can  proceed  with  their  schooling  in  the  best 
possible ways, will have to agree to this Bill.  

I  thank  all  hon.  Members  for  their  contribution  and  attention.  Thank  you  Madam 

Speaker. 

57 

 
Question put and agreed to. 

Bill read a second time and committed.  

COMMITTEE STAGE 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

The  Private  Secondary  Schools  Authority  (Amendment)  Bill  (No.  XIX  of  2016)  was 

considered and agreed to.  

On  the  Assembly  resuming  with  Madam  Speaker  in  the  Chair,  Madam  Speaker 

reported accordingly. 

Third Reading 

On  motion  made  and  seconded, 

the  Private  Secondary  Schools  Authority 

(Amendment) Bill (No. XIX of 2016) was read the third time and passed. 

ADJOURNMENT 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  I  beg  to  move  that  this  Assembly  do  now 

adjourn to Tuesday 15 November 2016 at 11.30 a.m. 

 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned.     

MATTERS RAISED 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Ramful! 

(4.46 p.m.) 

PLAINE MAGNIEN – WATER SHORTAGE 

Mr  D.  Ramful  (Third  Member  for  Mahebourg  &  Plaine  Magnien):    Madam 
Speaker, I have an issue addressed to the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and 
Public Utilities who, unfortunately, is not here and I trust that one of the hon. Ministers will 
transfer the message to him. 

It  concerns  my  Constituency  in  particular  the  village  of  Plaine  Magnien  where  the 
inhabitants  are  facing  a  very  drastic  water  shortage  since  last  year.  I  remember  they  even 
came out on the street in protest to the problem that they were facing last year. It concerns 

 

58 

three areas mainly in Plaine Magnien.  I will give the names of the streets:  Cemetery Road, 
Plaine Magnien, Mamou Lane, Plaine Magnien, and Bois d’Oiseau Street, Plaine Magnien.   

So, I make a humble request to the hon. Vice-Prime Minister to kindly look into the 

matter. 

Thank you. 

The  Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Housing  and  Lands  (Mr  S.  Soodhun):  
Madam  Speaker,  definitely  I  am  going  to  refer  the  issue  raised  by  my  good  friend,  hon. 
Ramful to the hon. Vice-Prime Minister. 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Shakeel Mohamed! 

(4.47 p.m.) 

PRIMARY SCHOOLS (PRIVATE) - CPE EXAMS  

Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port  Louis  East):  
Thank  you  very  much,  Madam  Speaker.  This  is  an  issue  which  is  directed  to  the  hon. 
Minister of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific Research.  It 
has been brought to my attention only this morning by a group of parents of 19 students of a 
serious state of affairs that I thought it was, therefore, necessary that I raise this today.  

They are a group of parents who in September or October 2015 called upon the MES 
to ask if their children, then in Standard IV, would be able to sit for the CPE exams in 2016 
as private candidates as it was the last year for CPE.  The answer was that if the child is in a 
private  primary  school  and  I  underline  the  words  ‘private  primary  school’,  the  school 
direction should take the responsibility for assessing the potential of the child and let him or 
her sit for the CPE exams under the school’s name.  The MES then would have no objection 
as long as they could justify the ability of that child because here we are talking about private 
primary school and not Government school. The students finally followed the advice of the 
MES,  sat  for  the  Standard  V  exams  at  a  primary  school  and  I  will  take  the  liberty  of 
mentioning the name of the school ‘Le Nid Primary School’ in November 2015. And those 
who succeeded with good marks were promoted to Standard VI as from January 2016.   

The MES has been made aware of this as from 05 May 2016 that those students have 
been  promoted  to  Standard  VI  after  assessment  and  that  they  were  satisfied  with  their 
potential after having taken the exams and that is why they were promoted to Standard VI.   

59 

 
Not  once,  according  to  my  information,  did  the  MES  inform  the  school  that  those 
pupils would not be registered for the CPE exams. However, when the list of candidates was 
sent,  they  did  not  get  their  index  number.    A  number  of  letters,  Madam  Speaker,  were 
addressed  to  the  MES  and  the  Ministry  of  Education.  But  to  this  date,  almost  one  month 
before the exams, no answer has been given as yet. The pupils have already completed the 
CPE syllabus and are facing a traumatising situation. Five students in the same situation from 
the same school, from the same class have already been registered whereas the other 19 have 
not been registered who are in the same situation without any explanation. 

I have been informed that the hon. Minister is aware of this matter. I have also been 
informed that the hon. Minister is looking into the matter, but there is urgency.  I have also 
looked into the law that governs this whole matter. I would like to draw the attention, Madam 
Speaker, of the hon. Minister that the law which is referred to, here, which is the Education 
Act,  but  the  Ordinance  of  57,  does  not  in  any  way  preclude  the  hon.  Minister  from 
intervening  and  asking  the  relevant  authority  from  allowing  those  students  to  take  their 
exams. 

So, in the interest of those children, their parents and the sacrifice that they have put 
in  there,  silence  from  the  authorities  is  not  helping  the  situation  because  they  are  still 
traumatised and every single day that goes by, those students are seeing this trauma increased 
several folds. 

So, I humbly request that those children be allowed to take those exams because the 

law says they can. 

Thank you. 

The  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary  Education  and 
Scientific Research (Mrs L. D. Dookun-Luchoomun): Madam Speaker, you will recall that 
a question was addressed to me in this House. I had mentioned that there are cases where 
students, extremely brilliant students, who have shown that they have capacities beyond the 
normal  state,  are  sometimes  allowed  to  proceed  and  sit  for  the  exams  in  private  primary 
schools. However, we do not take it to be normal for a whole batch of some 19 students in a 
school to show such extreme capacities. 

However, we will look into the matter and see whether there is any reason why we 
should allow such a whole batch to proceed for the examination, because we feel that it is 
more traumatising for a child who is still younger to skip a class and to go for such a high 

 

60 

state competitive examination. This is perhaps more traumatising than waiting to know what 
is going to happen. However, Madam Speaker, I am going to look into the matter and see 
what can be done and if we can proceed with the whole batch or whether there should be 
some selection. 

At 4.52 p.m. the Assembly was, on its rising adjourned to Tuesday 15 November 2016 

at 11.30 a.m. 

 

