 

No. 09 of 2016 

1 

 

 

 

 

SIXTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

 

 

PARLIAMENTARY 

DEBATES 

(HANSARD) 

(UNREVISED) 

 

FIRST SESSION 

 

THURSDAY 26 MAY 2016 

 

 

 

 

2 

CONTENTS 

 
 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

MOTION 

BILL (Public) 

ADJOURNMENT 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

Members 

                                                                       Members 

 

THE CABINET 

 
     (Formed by the Rt. Hon. Sir Anerood Jugnauth, GCSK, KCMG, QC) 

 
Hon.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth,  GCSK, 
KCMG, QC  
Hon.  Charles  Gaëtan  Xavier-Luc  Duval, 
GCSK  
Hon. Showkutally Soodhun, GCSK 

 
Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Defence,  Home  Affairs,  
Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit 
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External 
Communications 
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands 

Hon.  Ivan  Leslie  Collendavelloo,  GCSK, 
SC 
Hon. Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, GCSK  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Regional  Integration  and 

Vice-Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Energy  and  Public 
Utilities 

Hon. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth 
Hon. Yogida Sawmynaden 

International Trade 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development 
Minister of Youth and Sports 

Hon. Nandcoomar Bodha, GCSK 
Hon. Mrs Leela Devi Dookun-Luchoomun  Minister  of  Education  and  Human  Resources,  Tertiary 

Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport 

Hon. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan, SC 
Dr. the Hon. Mohammad Anwar Husnoo  Minister of Local Government 
Hon. Prithvirajsing Roopun 

Social 

Education and Scientific Research 
Minister of Health and Quality of Life 

Hon. Marie Joseph Noël Etienne Ghislain 
Sinatambou 
Hon. Ravi Yerrigadoo 
Hon. Mahen Kumar Seeruttun  
Hon. Santaram Baboo    
Hon. Ashit Kumar Gungah  
Hon.  Mrs  Marie-Aurore  Marie-Joyce 
Perraud 

Minister 
of 
Empowerment 
Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation  

Integration 

and  Economic 

Attorney General 
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security 
Minister of Arts and Culture 
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection 
Minister  of  Gender  Equality,  Child  Development  and 
Family Welfare 

4 

Minister  of  Financial  Services,  Good  Governance  and 
Institutional Reforms  
Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives 
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform 
Institutions 
Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, 
Shipping and Outer Islands 

 
Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms, 
Minister  of  Environment,  Sustainable  Development  and 
Disaster and Beach Management 
Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and 
Training 

 

Hon. Sudarshan Bhadain, GCSK 

Hon. Soomilduth Bholah 
Hon. Mrs Fazila Jeewa-Daureeawoo 

Hon. Premdut Koonjoo 

 
Hon.  Marie  Roland  Alain  Wong  Yen 
Cheong, MSK 

Hon. Soodesh Satkam Callichurn 

 

 

 

 

 

5 

PRINCIPAL OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS 

 

Madam Speaker 

Deputy Speaker 

Hanoomanjee, Hon. Mrs Santi Bai, GCSK 

Duval, Hon. Adrien Charles 

Deputy Chairperson of Committees 

Hurreeram, Hon. Mahendranuth Sharma 

Clerk of the National Assembly 

Lotun, Mrs Bibi Safeena 

Deputy Clerk  

Clerk Assistant 

Hansard Editor 

Serjeant-at-Arms 

 

 

Ramchurn, Ms Urmeelah Devi 

Gopall, Mr Navin (Temporary Transfer to 
RRA) 

Jankee,  Mrs Chitra 

Pannoo, Mr Vinod 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

MAURITIUS 

 

Sixth National Assembly 

--------------- 

 

FIRST SESSION 

------------ 

Debate No. 09 of 2016 

 

Sitting of 26 May 2016 

 

        The Assembly met in the Assembly House, Port Louis at 11.30 a.m. 

 

 

  The National Anthem was played 

  (Madam Speaker in the Chair)  

 

 

 

 

 

7 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

MR KARIMULLA AKBAR KHAN – OFFICIAL VISIT 

Madam Speaker:  Hon. Members, I am pleased to announce the presence in 
our  midst  today  of  Mr  Karimulla  Akbar  Khan,  the  Secretary  General  of  the 
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association who is on an official visit to Mauritius.   

On  behalf  of  hon.  Members  and  in  my  own  personal  name,  I  extend  a  warm 

welcome to Mr Akbar Khan and wish him a pleasant stay in Mauritius. 

MOTION 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that all the business on 
today’s Order Paper be exempted from the provisions of paragraph (2)  of Standing 
Order 10. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Question put and agreed to. 

PUBLIC BILL 

Second Reading 

THE NATIONAL WAGE CONSULTATIVE COUNCIL BILL 

(No. VI of 2016) 

Order  read  for  resuming  adjourned  debate  on  the  Second  Reading  of  the 

National Wage Consultative Council Bill (No. VI of 2016). 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mrs Perraud! 

(11.34 a.m.) 

The Minister of Gender Equality, Child Development and Family Welfare 
(Mrs A. Perraud): Madam Speaker, let me, first of all, congratulate my colleague, 
hon. Callichurn, Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training 
for having brought this very important piece of  legislation.  This was a  promise of 
‘Alliance Lepep’ and today it is yet another promise delivered.  

It  is  an  undeniable  fact  that  there  have  been  many  promises  in  the  past  and 
various attempts to come up with a mechanism for fixing a minimum wage, but for 

 

8 

one reason or another, these attempts were not fruitful. Once again, our Government 
is making history.  

Madam Speaker, I do not intend to elaborate on the technicalities of the Bill.  I 
leave it in the able hands of my colleagues on both sides of the House who have the 
required expertise to discuss the matter.  Rather, I would like to address the House on 
the general context and the pertinence of this Bill in the whole economic landscape.  It 
is  a  well-known  fact  that  the  main  source  of  revenue  of  the  majority  of  Mauritian 
workers is their salaries. The level of their salary determines their standard of living.  
Experts  argue  that  a  country  must  handle  wages  properly  otherwise  it  cannot  have 
rapid and sustained economic development.  If there is wage mismanagement, this can 
end up in joblessness, unemployment and poverty and may also contribute to extreme 
unequal  distribution  of  income.    These  are  what  we  fear  the  most  as  a  caring 
Government.  We have always and will always put people first. 

Madam  Speaker,  looking  at  the  Bill  itself,  we  find  some  very  important 

characteristics or milestones which we may take for granted, namely – 

(i) 

(ii) 
 

It is a tripartite collective bargaining mechanism despite the fact that 
there  is  already  in  place  a  mechanism  for  tripartite  collective 
bargaining which meets once a year to determine wage compensation. 
The creation of a National Wage Consultative Council now creates a 
formal mechanism for tripartite bargaining. By providing an arena for 
all  three  parties,  that  is,  the  Government,  the  private  sector  and  the 
trade unions to voice their divergent interest and arrive at a consensual 
view, is, in itself, no mean achievement. Not only the National Wage 
Consultative  Council  will  engender  tripartism,  but  may  also  be  the 
forerunner to other forms of tripartism in the future. 
Tripartism is now being given a formal structure.   
As I pointed out, tripartite mechanism does exist in Mauritius, but it is 
in a more informal way.  With the new legislation, it is being given a 
solid  structure,  a  Secretariat  of  its  own  and  a  Director  General.  This 
will allow the National Wage Consultative Council to be an important 
actor  in  the  economic  landscape,  but,  at  the  same,  to  operate 
throughout the year. 

(iii)  Consensual and decision making.   

 
I quote from the Bill –  

9 

“The Board shall regulate its meetings and proceedings in such manner 
as it may determine.” 

 

I  presume  that  the  approach  to  be  adopted  will  be  a  consensual  one 
rather than a confrontational one. This, by itself, will contribute to a 
stable and peaceful industrial relations’ environment. 

(iv)  Annual auditing of the economy. 
 

I  note  that  one  of  the  main  objects  of  the  Bill  is  to  make 
recommendations in respect to the payment of additional remuneration 
to offset any increase in the cost of living every year with a view to 
improving the living conditions of workers.   

Madam  Speaker,  this  is  a  very  important  object  of  the  National  Wage 
Consultative  Council  which  should  not  go  unnoticed.    Since  we  already  have  a 
tripartite meeting each year, we may just say that this is only the formalisation of the 
above.    I  beg  to  differ,  Madam  Speaker.    For  me  this  object  will  provide  the 
opportunity to have a tripartite auditing of the economy on a yearly basis.  

All three parties would be involved in a detailed analysis of the economy and 
thereafter  make  recommendations  to  the  Minister  and  by  extension  to  the  central 
Government  on  the  salary  compensation  that  is  payable.  This  is  a  scientific, 
transparent and democratic process. It will have an immense value in the eyes of the 
population  and  the  workers  for  research  and  planning  purposes  as  well  and  will 
contribute  to  prevent  a  deterioration  of  industrial  relations.  I  hope  all  the  parties 
concerned, particularly the unions can capture the importance of this object. 

Having said so, Madam Speaker, I now turn to another important aspect which 
is of direct concern to  me as Minister of Gender Equality, Child Development and 
Family Welfare. I sincerely believe that the introduction of a national minimum wage 
in the private and public sectors will contribute to a large extent to improve family 
welfare and this is why I welcome and appreciate this measure. 

My  Ministry  is  engaged  in  a  vast  program  of  promoting  and  improving  the 
welfare  of  the  family.  However,  there  are  many  variables  which  are  outside  our 
control. One of them is the element of wages. Through the introduction of a minimum 
wage, one of those variables will be addressed in a rational and structured manner. 

10 

 
In  addition,  we  are  all  aware  that  Mauritius  is  facing  the  problem  of  aging 
population, coupled with the fact that there are fewer births. This is a serious problem 
and will have far-reaching implications in the future for the Mauritian economy, if not 
addressed urgently. 

I would like to refer to a recent study conducted in Canada and published in 
the  Canadian  Journal  of  Economics  in  February  2013,  where  it  was  found  that  an 
increase in the minimum wage has had significant impact on birth rates.  The study is 
based on adolescents, but its results could be transposed to young adults, and I quote – 

«  (…) une augmentation de 10% dans le niveau du salaire minimum est co-
reliée de manière significative à une croissance de 3 à 5% dans les grossesses 
adolescentes.  Ce  résultat  est  expliqué  par  des  calculs  additionnels  qui 
montrent  qu’une  augmentation  du  salaire  minimum  est  associée  de  manière 
significative à des gains plus élevés pour les jeunes hommes adolescents ; à un 
accroissement du taux de nuptialité, et un accroissement du taux de fécondité 
des couples adolescents mariés mais pas pour les adolescentes non-mariées. 
Enfin, des estimés fondés sur les Enquêtes sur la santé dans les collectivités 
canadiennes  de  2003  et  2005  montrent  que  les  adolescents  et  adolescentes 
mariés  sont  davantage  susceptibles  d’avoir  des  relations  sexuelles,  et  des 
relations  sexuelles  non-protégées,  que  les  adolescents  et  adolescentes  non-
mariés. »  

Interestingly,  when  we  look  at  the  minimum  wage  concept,  we  may  have  a 
very  restrictive perspective, but then, when viewed in the larger context, it has far-
reaching outcomes. 

Another element, which I want to address today, is the impact of the minimum 
wage on women. My Ministry is the national gender machinery and one of our main 
concerns is to promote gender equality. We are all aware that for labour economist, 
the law of one price still provides the central organising principle for the theoretical 
framework  to  understand  wage  determination.  The  principle  states  that  in  a 
competitive labour market, workers with similar skills and employed in similar jobs 
receive  the  same  wage.  It  is  this  principle  that  underpins  the  bulk  of  empirical 
research on wages, with a variety of wage gaps identified as evidence of the degree to 
which labour markets are distorted from competitive outcomes. 

11 

 
It is also a well-known fact that it is women in general who suffer from the 
wage gaps. I have been voicing out, trade unionists have been voicing out that there 
are many instances where, despite the equal pay for equal work principle, women still 
suffer  from  an  acute  discrimination  and  are  penalised.  I  sincerely  believe  that  the 
establishment  of  the  minimum  wage  principle  will  go  a  long  way  to  correct  this 
distortion  and  restore  gender  equality  in  the  workplace  in  respect  of  payment  of 
wages. A minimum wage, as we all know, is the lowest remuneration that employers 
may legally pay to workers. 

The International Labour Office in Geneva and Switzerland reports that some 
90% of countries around the world have legislation supporting a minimum wage. In 
January  2016,  22  out  of  the  28  EU  Member  States  had  a  national  minimum  wage. 
This implies that there is international agreement on the importance of this instrument 
of labour market intervention. 

Madam  Speaker,  this  is  the  time  to  shed  a  new  light  on  those  who  are 
exploited in their daily quest for a living. I would wish to bring to the attention of my 
colleagues,  Members  of  the  House,  that  in  our  constituencies  out  there,  so  many 
people  call  on  us  to  help  them  out  of  exploitation.  When  facing  the  necessity  of 
feeding a family, one has little choice than to accept the worst paid jobs. 

Il va sans dire, Madame la présidente, que la population vulnérable a beaucoup 
d’espoir  dans  le  gouvernement  Lepep.  Dès  notre  avenir  au  pouvoir,  en  décembre 
2014, nous avons démontré que nous sommes un gouvernement avec un cœur.  Les 
pensions  ont  été  augmentées  quelques  jours  seulement  après  la  victoire  du 
gouvernement  Lepep.  Ceux  qui  sont  au  bas  de  l’échelle  sociale  ont  une  attention 
particulière immédiate du gouvernement. Ce projet de loi est encore un exemple que 
le  gouvernement  a  un  grand  cœur  et  veut  donner  une  vie  décente  à  ceux  qui  sont 
exploités par leurs employeurs. 

Comme un gouvernement responsable, un gouvernement qui met l’homme au 
centre du développement, un gouvernement Lepep, nous faisons tout pour diminuer 
l’écart qui se creuse entre les riches et ceux qui se trouvent au bas de l’échelle sociale. 
Nous ne pouvons plus avoir dans notre société, d’un côté, des personnes qui ont un 
train de vie luxueux, qui achètent soit un vêtement ou lors d’un repas, dépensent la 
somme  que  touche  un  travailleur  au  bas  de  l’échelle.  Oui,  Madame  la  présidente, 

 

12 

malheureusement,  il  y  a  des  employeurs  qui  exploitent  et  qui  refusent  de  payer 
comme il le faut et de reconnaître la valeur de certains travailleurs. 

Aujourd’hui, en 2016, c’est inacceptable qu’une bonne à tout faire touche R 
3,000 pour tous les travaux ménagers : repassage, lavage, nettoyage et aussi faire la 
cuisine ;  qu’un  mécanicien  à  plein  temps  touche  Rs4,000,  un  serveur,  une  caissière 
qui font de longues heures mais qui ne touchent pas plus de R6,000 à R7,000. Ces 
gens  au  bas  de  l’échelle  sont  obligés  de  travailler  et  n’ont  pas  d’autre  choix  que 
d’accepter  les  salaires  dérisoires.  Et,  ce  projet  de  loi  va  nous  permettre  d’aider  ces 
personnes,  de  les  sortir  de  l’exploitation.  En  fait,  le  National  Wage  Consultative 
Council Bill va permettre à l’Etat de jouer son rôle pleinement. Le rôle de l’État est 
d’assurer que cette exploitation cesse. 

Une  mention  spéciale  pour  le  tourisme.  Le  salaire  minimum  va  être  très 
bénéfique à l’industrie touristique, plus particulièrement l’hôtellerie, afin de rehausser 
le niveau des salaires, car l’avenir de notre industrie touristique dépend beaucoup de 
la performance de ses employés, de leur satisfaction au travail, des conditions dans 
lesquelles ils évoluent. Il ne faut pas oublier que l’industrie touristique est un très gros 
pourvoyeur d’emplois. 42,000 emplois directs environ auxquels il faut ajouter encore 
les emplois indirects en sachant que chaque emploi direct crée deux emplois indirects 
supplémentaires.  Ce  qui  nous  fait  un  total  d’environ  120 000.  Même  si  les  salaires 
sont restés bas pour certains postes, il y a aussi une grande possibilité de mobilité pour 
ceux qui sont au bas de l’échelle. Nombreux en effet sont ces chefs de départements 
du  secteur  hôtelier  qui  ont  débuté  comme  simples  serveurs,  femmes  de  chambre, 
commis de cuisine. 

Le Premier ministre adjoint et ministre du tourisme, l’honorable Xavier-Luc 
Duval, l’a très bien compris et, dès son entrée en fonction, il a œuvré pour revaloriser 
le travailleur Mauricien. C’est ainsi que les Remuneration Orders qui tardaient à être 
appliqués  ont  finalement  été  implémentés  en  2015.  De  plus,  il  y  a  désormais  des 
restrictions sur l’emploi d’étrangers limités à certaines catégories spécifiques comme 
chefs,  e-marketing et quelques autres de façon  à permettre une meilleure ascension 
aux éléments locaux les plus valables. 

Pour toutes ces raisons énumérées plus tôt, Madame la présidente, ne serait-ce 
que pour éliminer l’exploitation de ceux qui sont au bas de l’échelle, nous devons tous 

 

13 

voter pour ce projet de loi. Mais, Madame la présidente, je ne pourrais me rasseoir et 
conclure mon discours sans présenter mes félicitations les plus sincères à l’honorable 
Pravind Jugnauth qui vient d’être nommé ministre des Finances et du développement 
économique. 

(Interruptions) 

Merci pour votre attention. 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition! 

(11.51 a.m.) 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger): Madam Speaker, I would 
wish to start by saying that I listened very carefully to three, from my point of view, 
very  good  speeches  that  were  made  last  Tuesday:  one  by  my  colleague,  hon.  Reza 
Uteem,  the  second  by  hon.  Alan  Ganoo  and  the  third  by  the  Minister  of  Business, 
Enterprise  and  Cooperatives,  hon.  Bholah.  I  hope  that  Government  has  listened 
carefully, that the Minister and the Rt. hon. Prime Minister have listened carefully to 
the numerous proposals that have been made. I shall be making amendment proposals 
myself later on and I agree with most of what was said not only by hon. Reza Uteem, 
there I agree totally, but what was said also by hon. Alan Ganoo. I do hope that the 
Minister and Government, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, have listened carefully and I 
hope there will be further amendments later on. As  I said,  I shall myself propose - 
suggest  rather  -  a  number  of  amendments.  But,  before  that,  I  shall  be  très  critique 
concerning  the  way  the  whole  issue  has  been  handled  by  the  Minister  and  by 
Government. 

The  first  point  is  that  I  consider  that  the  whole  thing  was  mishandled  right 
from the beginning. Why do I say that? The first version of the Bill, the first reading 
of the Bill was moved without proper consultations with the result that there was a 
tollé that all the trade unions reacted negatively and said bluntly that they would not 
sit on the Board of the National Wage Consultative Council. All of them! Well, it is a 
good thing that the Minister, Government took note and that a number of amendments 
have been brought to the Bill. This could and should have been avoided. If there had 
been  proper  consultations  before  the  First  Reading  of  the  Bill,  before  the  Bill  was 
circulated  in  its  final  form,  the  mode  would  have  been  different.  Better  late  than 

 

14 

never! But, I consider that the amendments that have been proposed are not sufficient 
and I will say why later on. 

Half  of  the  Bill  has  gone!  And  this  is  where  I  agree  fully  with  hon.  Alan 
Ganoo. The title itself is now a misnomer. The title of the Bill was and is the National 
Wage  Consultative  Council.  It  is  no  longer  a  National  Wage  Consultative  Council 
because half of the Bill has gone, that is, la compensation salariale annuelle and this 
is what most irritated the trade unions. Without debate the long tradition, the whole 
tradition  -  good  or  bad,  it  is  a  whole  debate  -  in  Mauritius  of  annual  tripartite 
discussions sur la compensation salariale was done away without explanation and so 
on. Well, at least, this has been removed. But the title should have been changed as 
well because la compensation salariale – we will see what happens to it further on – 
is not done away with, in the way it would have been done away with, in the first 
version of the Bill. So, that is a fundamental amendment through which half of the 
Bill has gone, but the title has mistakenly remained.  

The real point, Madam Speaker, has been said many times before me,  but  I 
have to repeat it. The main point is what was promised by the present Government 
before, during and after elections and what is before us now, what is being proposed 
now. What was promised, we all know, un minimum vital, I quote – 

« l’introduction  d’un  salaire  minimum  pour  les  travailleurs  au  bas  de 
l’échelle » 

Was one of the key; les 12 priorités des trois premiers mois au gouvernement. Widely 
canvassed, a firm promise. Dans les premiers trois mois un salaire minimum pour les 
travailleurs au bas de l’échelle would be implemented. One supposes that before the 
electoral alliance that developed into the present Government had done its homework, 
was  ready  with  concrete  proposals  because  it  said  within  the  three  first  months  of 
Government, we will set up a minimum wage for the lowest paid. Instead of that, as 
we know, we are now 15 – I will have to check with Minister Koonjoo – but we are 
now  15  months  later,  not  three  months  later.  And  now  what  is  being  proposed? 
Because  I  have  been  listening  to  the  last  orator,  it  is  as  if  we  are  setting  up  the 
minimum  vital.  We  are  not!  What  is  being  proposed  is  a  body  that  will  work  on  a 
minimum vital and that will make recommendations to the Minister! 

(Interruptions) 

 
Madam Speaker: Please. Please, hon. Deputy Prime Minister… 

15 

Mr Bérenger: We know that! 

Madam Speaker: No crosstalking! 

Mr Bérenger: Well… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Vice-Prime Minister, please don’t interrupt! 

Mr Bérenger: What has been spelt out is, I quote from their manifesto -  

« (…) un salaire minimum pour les travailleurs au bas de l’échelle » 

Exactly ! 

(Interruptions) 

Un  salaire  minimum,  yes,  of  course,  we  know  that!  But  that  is  not  what  we  are 
proposing here! Again, it is not. We are purely setting up a body that will work on 
salaire minimum, minimum vital, name it! We are setting up a body that, and I quote, 
maybe the Ministers have not read carefully. At paragraph 6 of the Bill it is said that 
the Council – 

“within  12  months  of  the  date  of  its  constitution,  recommend  a  national 
minimum wage (…)” 

Exactly! 

That ‘may’… 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

My point is - you are not following me!  

“that may” 

 The wording is important –  

“(…)  that  may  be  introduced  for  the  lowest  paid  workers  in  relation  to  the 

median wage.” 

 

Not ‘shall’, that ‘may’ be introduced.  

16 

And that underlines my  point that the Council only makes  recommendations to the 
Minister and recommendations that are guided by that kind of language. 

So, let us be clear, because I listened to all the speakers and most of them were 
talking as if we are introducing a minimum vital through wages.  My point is that we 
are not doing that.  We are merely setting up a body that will work on the minimum 
wage and which will make recommendations to the Minister.  Government may go 
along with what the Council will propose. This is a fundamental point. We should not 
give  the  impression  that  we  are  introducing  a  minimum  vital  through  a  minimum 
wage.  We are merely setting up a body that will work on that.  That is all we are 
doing.  This should be clear. 

As I said, after the setting up of the Council, the idea is, within a year, to make 
recommendations on a minimum wage.  They may make a recommendation.  After 
they  may  make  a  recommendation,  the  Minister  and  Government  may  reject  the 
recommendation.    So,  there  is  plenty  of  time  to  see  how  all  this  develops,  Madam 
Speaker. 

There is one thing which has disturbed me.  I must say that I have not seen the 
reaction from the unions.  That is the problem when you bring amendments. The first 
amendment was to do away with the compensation salariale annuelle.  The second 
amendment is a fundamental change in clause 5. In fact, clause 5 is replaced by a new 
clause 5.  Clause 5 is a fundamental clause, that is, Objects of the Council.  There has 
been a fundamental change, and I have not seen the reaction from the trade unions.  
Possibly, they have not had time to consider what has cropped through amendments 
and not in the original Bill. 

Of  course,  we  are  all  in  favour  of  the  lowest  paid  benefitting  from  higher 
sustainable increases.  We are all for that.  What concerns me is the body that is being 
proposed to make recommendation.  It is a huge body of 29 members.  It is huge.  So, 
we have to ask ourselves: is it meant to set up a debating council or something that 
will  work  with  representatives  appointed  by  the  trade  unions,  the  employers  or  by 
academia, as provided for? Is it supposed to be, therefore, a debating forum or is it 
supposed to be something that will work, that will perform, that will carry out studies 
and come with proposals? 

17 

 
When you have, as I said, 29 members of the Council, it will be very difficult 
for them to perform, to come with concrete proposals.  We will see.  When you have 
this kind body set up, let us take, for example, the representatives of Ministries. You 
have  representatives  from  the  Prime  Minister’s  Office,  representatives  from  the 
Ministry of Labour, representatives from the Ministries responsible for the subject of 
agriculture, business, industry, tourism.  If you have a body of 29 members, I suppose 
you have a list of Ministries that are going to be represented on this Council.  What 
about two vital sectors like the ICT, with very specific problems, like the Financial 
Services, which is in a very difficult situation?  They are not represented.  I am not 
saying that all the Ministries should be represented, but I am saying that when you set 
up a body of 29 members, you should be careful about who is excluded. 

I  put  myself  also  the  question.    The  wording  is  ‘7  members  representing 
organisations of employers (…)’.  But, if they do represent - if the word used is that - 
therefore,  they  will  come  and  stick  to  the  proposals  that  come  through  their 
organisations.    I  put  myself  the  question  whether  the  wording  should  not  be 
‘appointed  by,  chosen  by’  the  organisations  of  employers,  organisations  of 
employees, that is, trade unions in the second case.  But they do not really represent 
on this Council.  They should be chosen by the associations.  Never mind, I will not 
insist on that.  At least, we get the meaning; seven members representing employers 
and seven members representing trade unions. But where I think there is a little fine 
tuning to be done is the singular and plural.  If I can refer to the Board composition, it 
says – 

“7 members representing organisations of employers, to be appointed by the 
Minister after consultation with the most representative organisations…” 

‘organisations’ in the plural 

“of employers;” 

And so it should be.  I suppose it is a mistake, but it should be corrected.  Whereas in 
the case of trade unions, the original proposal, which has not really changed, is – 

“7 members representing trade union …” 

‘trade union’ is in the singular.  Why? 

18 

 
“of workers, to be appointed by the Minister after consultation with the most 
representative trade union of workers;” 

It does not even make sense!  Again, it should be in the plural.  It should be – 

“(…) after consultation with the most representative trade unions of workers;” 

It  means  something,  and  it  should  be  corrected.    In  the  new  version,  there  is  no 
progress.  In the case of employers, it is okay, it is in the plural, and it remains like 
that  after  amendments.  But  in  the  case  of  the  amendment  that  is  being  brought  to 
clause 10, it reads – 

“4 members of any worker’s (…)” 

Again, it is wrong.  But it is the same wrong expression that we found in the original 
proposal.  I suppose it is a mistake, but we better correct that mistake and put the ‘s’ 
in the right place in the case of the amendment that is being circulated, whereas the 
first version was totally misguided. 

This  is  why  I  listened  very  carefully  to  Minister  Bholah.  The  Small  and 
Medium Enterprises have specific problems and will be directly impacted upon by the 
fixing of minimum wages.  Therefore, I think it is not too late to send a signal to les 
petites et moyennes entreprises.  As we know, in the Budget of the then Minister of 
Finance,  likely  more  than  a  year  ago,  everything  was  promised  to  les  petites  et 
moyennes  entreprises.  Now,  the  Minister  responsible  for  Small  and  Medium 
Enterprises is himself not satisfied with the way MauBank is performing. 

Rightly  so!    But  we  know  what  was  promised  to  the  Petites  et  Moyennes 
Entreprises: Rs10 billion over five years. Rs2 billion first year and a bank dedicated - 
a  Small  and  Medium  Enterprise  Bank  -  which  would  be  a  real  One-Stop  Shop. 
Whereas  now  you  have  MyBiz,  you  go  there,  do  all  the  procedures  and  so  on  and 
when you have finished doing all the procedures, you get a letter from them, then you 
go  to  MauBank  and  knock  at  the  door  for  money.  It  is  not  even  a  One-Stop  Shop 
anymore. So, the Small and Medium Enterprises have, so far, been taken for a ride by 
the Government. Therefore, I believe, it is not too late when we get to the composition 
of the Board, 7 members representing organisations of employers. I think it should be 
spelt out that amongst them must be, at least, one representative of Small and Medium 
Enterprises. It would send a signal and it would ensure that those who are going to be 
impacted  upon  the  most,  as  far  as  the  employers  are  concerned.  Of  course,  it  gets 

 

19 

difficult  when  you  leave  Small  and  Medium  Enterprises  and  you  get  close  to  self-
employed people. The frontier is not always that clear.  

So, I think that is an amendment; it shouldn’t raise any problem, but it sends a 
signal and it ensures that Small and Medium Enterprises will be heard through. The 
employees’ organisations first and then the council will hear the special concern of 
the Petites et Moyennes Entreprises.  I agree with hon. Ganoo that the reactions of the 
trade unions when it is spelt out that clearly that the members representing the trade 
unions  are  appointed  by  the  Minister  after  consultation.  Well,  I  hope  the  hon. 
Minister,  when  he  holds  consultations,  does  not  have  the  same  interpretation  of 
consultations  that  the  Rt.  hon.  Prime  Minister  has  for  his  part,  but  I  agree  that, 
fundamentally,  it  should  be  before  the  Minister,  after  consultations,  disagrees  with 
who is recommended there.  

It  should  be  for  serious  reasons.  But  why  in  the  case  of  7  members 
representing organisation of employers, appointed by the Minister after consultation 
with the most representative organisations of employers? In the case of trade unions, 7 
members representing trade unions – I hope the ‘s’ will be imported in the Bill - of 
workers  to  be  appointed  by  the  Minister,  after  consultation  with  the  most 
representative  trade  unions  of  workers.  Why  in  the  case  –  because  we  are  talking 
consultations. Why in the case of the Chairperson, who, if anything is going to be key 
person? But why there is no mention of the Minister consulting both the employees 
and the employers and the trade unions, as is the case later on? I think the same spirit 
of consultation, of listening to what the trade unions on one side and the employers on 
the other have to say.  

The key point finally, and I will end on that, is, whether the trade unions will 
agree to sit on that council? Under la première version, la première mouture, all of 
them said: ‘we are not going to be present. We are not going to sit on that council.’ 
And, therefore, it was mort-né. If all the trade unions say ‘we won’t sit’, well, all that 
we have heard of tripartism and so on, c’est mort-né! Therefore, I hope that the hon. 
Minister will tell us what the trade unions have told him. If no one is prepared to sit 
on that council, as amended, c’est mort-né and when it is mort-né, forget about salaire 
minimum, minimum vital. Forget about it! So, I will be listening carefully and I think 
further amendments should be brought. I don’t know if at this late stage Government 
intends coming by itself with further amendments. I saw a mouvement, the Minister 

 

20 

coming  and  going  with  legal  advisors  and  so  on.  It  seems  there  will  be  further 
amendments.  Hon.  Ganoo,  hon.  Uteem    and  I,  we  have  made  quite  a  number  of 
precise suggestions and will venture to say that most of the amendments that we have 
proposed are not polémiques. Should not! Especially as the composition of the Board 
is a tough one because there would really need to be a last thorough discussion on the 
number of people sitting on that Board, on its purpose for it to deliver le minimum 
vital à travers un salaire minimum.  

So, I hope, as I have said, that Government has listened.  It is not too late. I 
think further amendments should be brought and this is why I would suggest, why not 
today, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is going to speak, why not postpone for two weeks 
the Committee Stage and for final consultations to take place between the Minister, 
the trade unions on the one end and the employees/employers on the other, but it is 
especially on the trade union side that there is need for further amendments so that the 
trade unions do agree, if they obtain satisfaction. They have obtained satisfaction on 
la  compensation  salariale,  there  is  no  reason  why  they  should  not  obtain  further 
amendments  that  would  make  them  change  their  stand  as  at  today  and  sit  on  that 
council.  

Therefore, my appeal is, let us say, we are having the last speeches, but before 
I would suggest that we allow for some two weeks before the hon. Minister sums up 
and we reach Committee Stage.  

Thank you. 

(12.18 p.m.) 

The  Prime  Minister:  Madam  Speaker,  allow  me  to  state  in  unequivocal 

terms, my personal support to the National Wage Consultative Council Bill.   

It is, indeed, a historical day for workers of our country.  Historical, as it is the 

culmination of the struggle of the working class to improve their lot.   

It is also a day of remembrance.  It is worth recalling those heroes who have 
unflinchingly given their blood, sweat and tears to the struggle and emancipation of 
the working class.   

The  road  was  long,  the  hurdles  were  numerous,  but  the  goals  were  clear.  
Today, Mauritius stands proudly in the League of Nations, as a free country imbued in 
the best democratic traditions, thanks to the heroes of the struggle. 

 
Madam Speaker, for the record, let me quote two relevant paragraphs of the 

21 

Government Programme 2015-2019.  

Paragraphs 10 and 17 read as follows – 

“10.  Government is committed to warding off unemployment, introducing a 
minimum  wage  policy  and  implementing  a  better  social  housing 
policy.” 

So, it is clear we are speaking of a minimum wage; we are not speaking of a 

minimum vital. There is a big difference between the two.  

“17.   A minimum wage bill will be introduced for the workers at the lower 

end of the ladder.” 

It must be very precise that it is meant for the lower end of the ladder. 
Thus,  the  Bill  before  the  House  is  yet  another  promise  that  Government  is 

keeping. 

Of course, Opposition is playing on words that this should have been done in 

three months’ time because it was promised, but I would say better late than never! 

Madam Speaker, the rationale underpinning this Bill is to provide a legislative 

framework for the National Wage Consultative Council.  

This  Council  will,  independently,  come  up  with  recommendations  on  the 

National Minimum Wage.  

Madam Speaker, a lot has been said about this Council. Why not accept the 
recommendation  and  put  into  practice?  But  then,  I  say  that,  ultimately,  it  is  the 
responsibility of Government to see to it that the minimum wage that is going to be 
put  in  practice  does  not  cause  harm  to  small  enterprises  and  businesses  because 
otherwise what will happen, if we are to tie our hands with the recommendation of the 
Council, the Council may be influenced by irresponsible persons as there are many in 
the  Trade  Union  Movement.  They  don’t  care  about  what  happens  to  the  economy, 
they don’t care about what happens, they think of their own prestige and they want to 
have their way. Well, we cannot accept that and we must make sure that the minimum 
wage, that we, as a Government, will ultimately come with, does not cause that sort of 
harm. Because, otherwise, what will happen? Many jobs will be lost, many of these 
small enterprises, businesses will be closed down and obviously the Opposition will 
enjoy.  

(Interruptions) 

 

22 

They will clap their hands! They will clap their hands! They will say: ‘look, instead of 
creating jobs, losing jobs, unemployment is increasing.’  

(Interruptions) 

Well,  they  are  already  doing  it.  They  are  using  that  sort  of  language  and  they  are 
murmuring ‘no’. Well, we know them too much! 

A National Minimum Wage will provide as much support as possible to the 
wages of the low paid without damaging their employment prospects by setting it too 
high.  

The National Minimum Wage sets a wage floor below which pay cannot fall, 
ensuring  protection  for  low-paid  workers.  The  National  Minimum  Wage  policy  is 
meant  to  ensure  employees  can  meet  their  basic  needs  and  create  the  necessary 
environment for industries to move up their value chain by increasing the productivity 
of their employees through the use of technology and other innovations. 

Government is fully alive to the fact that a National Minimum Wage should 
only  be  implemented  after  consultation  with  our  social  partners,  namely  the 
employees’ organisations and employers’ organisations, and this will be done by the 
Consultative Council. 

The National Wage Consultative Council will be entrusted  with the delicate 

task to come up with a ‘win-win’ solution for both employers and employees.  

For  those  who  challenge  the  introduction  of  the  concept  of  the  National 
Minimum  Wage  in  Mauritius,  I  hasten  to  say  that  Government  has  not  decided  to 
come up with such a policy decision lightly.  

A  finding  of  the  Global  Labour  University  (Working  Paper  No  11-March 
2011,  entitled  “Principles  of  Minimum  Wage  Policy-Economics,  Institutions  and 
Recommendations” by Herr and Kazandziska on the impact of minimum wages reads 
as follows, I quote - 

“One  very  positive  effect  of  minimum  wages  is  that  they  change  the  wage 
structure  in  such  a  way  that  a  more  equal  income  distribution  is  reached. 
Minimum wage policy thus contributes to poverty reduction. To illustrate this: 
12.5 per cent of the employees in Brazil receive the minimum wage and it has 
been found that the aggressive policy in Brazil during the past 8 years has had 
a strong effect on the compression of the wage structure.  

 

23 

In some cases we can observe that minimum wages have even had a positive 
employment effect. The argument is based on the fact that low-wage earners 
have a higher propensity to consume than richer households and thus higher 
minimum wages increase aggregate demand and output.  

Furthermore, taking into consideration that women have a large share in the 
low-wage  sector  increasing  minimum  wages  also  has  a  positive  gender 
equality effect.”    

I wish also to highlight that an academic study by the University of Witwatersrand, 
South Africa, on the impact of the National Minimum Wage in South Africa has come 
up,  inter  alia,  with  the  following  key  findings  pertaining  to  the  introduction  of  a 
National Minimum Wage in South Africa - 

“(a)  expert statistical modelling commissioned by Wits University’s National 
Minimum  Wage  Research  Initiative  reveals  that  a  national  minimum 
wage  in  South  Africa  would  considerably  reduce  poverty  and 
inequality while spurring economic growth, without significant adverse 
effects; 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

by  boosting  wages,  a  National  Minimum  Wage  increases  spending 
thereby inducing higher output in the economy. GDP growth increases 
by  an  additional  0.5%  per  year  for  higher  levels  of  a  National 
Minimum Wage.  A National Minimum Wage provides a considerable 
boost to incomes, consumption, and output. Total employment expands 
too; 

higher  wages  mean  a  higher  quality  of  employment  in  the  economy. 
This occurs in two ways: employment shifts within the economy and 
workers earn a fairer wage; 

a National Minimum Wage is an effective tool to decrease inequality 
and poverty, and 

a  National  Minimum  Wage  helps  to  establish  the  conditions  for 
sustained higher economic growth over the long run.  

It  should  be  used  in  conjunction  with  complementary  policies  to  increase 
productivity and industrial diversification. International experience indicates 

24 

 
the potential for complementary policies to leverage higher wages to more 
strongly  increase  productivity  and  expand  employment  and  industrial 
diversification.” 

Madam  Speaker,  let  me  emphasise  that  introducing  the  National  Minimum 
Wage  in  Mauritius  is  one  of  the  necessary  stepping  stones  which  will  enable 
Mauritius to become a high-income economy by 2030.  

In  order  for  Mauritius  to  become  a  high-income  nation  with  inclusiveness, 
wages at the bottom have to be lifted up. In addition, businesses have to transform by 
moving  up  the  value  chain  by  investing  in  higher  technology  to  increase  labour 
productivity as well as to reduce the nation’s dependence on unskilled foreign labour. 

This Government wants to ensure that growth which is achieved by the country 
is  inclusive  and  that  none  of  our  citizens  are  left  behind  whilst  our  country  is  on 
course to achieving meaningful progress. 

The minimum wage initiative is seen as one of the policy instruments to ensure 
inclusiveness by transforming the economy from a middle-income to a high-income 
by the year 2030. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to address the House on two specific provisions of 
the Bill which illustrate how my Government will leave no stone unturned to ensure 
that  the  recommendations  of  the  National  Wage  Consultative  Council  on  the 
Minimum Wage are implemented by both the public and private sectors. 

Clause 9(1) of the Bill will ensure that the Pay Research Bureau – 

“shall take such administrative measures as may be necessary to implement the 
national minimum wage and make any salary adjustment, where necessary, to 
address any problem of relativity distortion that may arise on the introduction of 
the minimum wage in the public sector.” 

Clause  25  (1)  of  the  Bill  repeals  and  replaces  Section  94  of  the  Employment 
Relations Act to empower the Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment 
and  Training  to  make  regulations  to  effect  payment  of  additional  remuneration  and 
national minimum wage.  

This  is  a  guarantee  for  employees  of  the  private  sector  when  the  national 

minimum wage is introduced. 

 

25 

Madam  Speaker,  the  introduction  of  a  national  minimum  wage  policy  will 
surely require employers to revisit their present business model and wage structure in 
their establishments.   

Government recognises that some employers may face challenges as they adjust 
to the national minimum wage.  However, the ultimate benefit to the country can by 
far outweigh short term difficulties.  

If  really  we  care  for  those  at  the  bottom  of  the  social  ladder,  we  need  to 
recognize  that  the  national  minimum  wage  policy  represents  a  step  in  the  right 
direction  for  Mauritius  as  we  join  the  ranks  of  some  150  nations  where  minimum 
wages policies are already in place. 

Madam Speaker, following certain criticisms that have been made against the 
Bill, I hasten to reassure that this Government is committed to tripartism and dialogue 
among social partners.  It is in this spirit that several amendments will be proposed to 
the Bill at Committee Stage.  

After  trade  unions  made  representations,  we  have  agreed  to  the  proposal  to 
delete the clause regarding young workers and to replace it by a clause for a lower 
rate for trainees. 

Madam  Speaker, 

trade  unionists  know 

that  I  have  always  welcomed 
constructive proposals. We are committed to freedom of speech and opinion which is 
a pillar of our Constitution.  In introducing a clause of confidentiality in the Bill, we 
wanted to create the best conditions for the Council to deliberate and decide without 
external pressure or influence.   

However,  we  equally  believe  that  unions  must  be  able  to  discuss  minimum 
wage issues without fear with their members. We have, accordingly, agreed to delete 
that clause on confidentiality. 

Madam Speaker, the yearly tripartite meeting to determine salary compensation 
for the rise in cost of living dates back to 1977.  This tradition, which is now nearly 40 
years  old,  is  so  rooted  in  our  labour  and  union  culture  that  replacing  it  appears  to 
create  some  discomfort  to  the  labour  movement.    We  are  conscious  of  that  and, 
accordingly,  we  have  agreed  to  bring  an  amendment  so  that  present  arrangements 
regarding yearly cost of living allowance are maintained. 

 

26 

Madam Speaker, my appeal to both employers and employees is to assume their 

responsibilities as all of us will be judged by future generations.   

We shall go down in history on those who dared, against all odds, to bring a 
degree of comfort to our fellow citizens who are to-day in poverty as they draw very, 
very low wages.   

I  shall  end  by  quoting  Amy  Lyman,  Co-Founder  and  Chair  of  the  Board  of 
Directors  of  ‘Great  Place  to  Work  Institute’,  a  global  research  and  management 
consultancy. I quote – 

"Paying  people  a  fair  wage  is  a  sign  of  respect  and  acknowledgement  of  the 
value of people's contributions to the business and society.  

When people are treated fairly and with respect, they will provide unparalleled 
levels  of  support  and  commitment  inside  the  business,  and  to  clients  and 
customers. Everyone is more successful when people are paid a fair minimum 
wage." 

With these words, Madam Speaker, I congratulate the hon. Minister of Labour, 
Industrial Relations, Employment and Training for the good work done and for the 
patience and comprehension he has demonstrated in listening to the unions and trying 
to have the best consensus possible on this Bill. 

Madam Speaker, I should like to comment – hon. Shakeel Mohamed is not here! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

The  Prime  Minister:  Well,  the  hon.  Member  has  been  saying  that  this 
minimum wage is not something new.  We  are  not inventing.   It had been in their 
agenda for long and that, in fact,  we  are not keeping our promise, as  I  said. Three 
months!  We  have  been  rather  late  after  one  year.    Well,  I  must  remind  the  hon. 
Member that he was Minister of  Labour.  If this was on the agenda, why did it not 
materialise? What prevented him to do so?   

(Interruptions) 

Well, ten years!  No, but he was not Minister for ten years! 

(Interruptions) 

 

27 

Madam Speaker:  Don’t interrupt the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, please! 

Don’t interrupt him, please! 

(Interruptions) 

The  Prime  Minister:    Of  course,  it  is  easy  to  criticise,  but  when  one  is  in 
power, one has a great responsibility not only towards one section of the population, 
but towards the people as a whole and towards the country. Therefore, we must know 
how  to  keep  the  necessary  equilibrium  so  that  we  do  not  allow  negative  effects  to 
affect our economy. 

The hon. Leader of the Opposition, prior to General Elections of 1982, used to 
promise  as  far  as  40%  salary  compensation,  but  as  Minister  of  Finance,  after  the 
elections, he granted only… 

(Interruptions) 

8% salary compensation.  Therefore, what I am trying to say is that when you are in a 
responsible position… 

Madam Speaker:  Order! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Order!  Order, please! 

Allow the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to proceed! 

Order! 

Order, I said! 

Hon. Uteem! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister: As I was saying, when you are in a responsible position, 
you  have  to  take  a  responsibility  not  only  towards  a  section  of  the  population,  but 
towards the population and the country as a whole. I am not blaming the Leader of the 

 

28 

Opposition. When he was Minister of Finance, he took his responsibility. And so it is! 
What we are doing today, we want to take our responsibility towards the country as a 
whole.  Of  course,  in  the  Opposition,  we  can  say  anything.  We  can  criticise 
everything. As far as I remember, from the last election up to this day, I have never 
heard  the  Leader  of  the  Opposition  saying  anything  that  has  been  done  by  this 
Government that is good for the country. He has always been criticising. Everything 
is wrong! Nothing is good! And, I am being called as a part-time Prime Minister. But 
as a part-time Prime Minister, what I am delivering? 

Madam Speaker: Order! 

Order, I said! 

Order! 

I am on my feet! 

Hon. Bhagwan! 

Hon. Bhagwan, I am on my feet! 

Hon. Bhagwan, I am on my feet! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Hon. Bhagwan, can I call you to order! 

I am calling you to order! 

I am calling you to order! 

(Interruptions) 

 (Interruptions) 

 

29 

(Interruptions) 

Okay! I know what I am doing. I have called hon. Bhagwan to order, and everyone! 

Can the House keep silent now! 

(Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister: Well, what I was pointing out is that… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan, would you continue? 

(Interruptions) 

Please, allow the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to continue and don’t interrupt him! 

And don’t interrupt him, please! 

(Interruptions) 

 (Interruptions) 

Hon. Bhagwan, I have called you to order several times! 

(Interruptions) 

Would you allow the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to continue? 

He is silent now! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister: Quiet! Quiet, please! 

(Interruptions) 

Well, what I was trying to convey… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, are you making remarks on the Chair? 

I think I heard! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

 

30 

Hon. Leader of the Opposition, are you talking to me? 

I am being fair! 

I am! You cannot challenge this! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

This also is another remark to the Chair! 

(Interruptions) 

You said I have to wear hearing aids. Did you say that? I am not prepared to accept 
that! 

You said! 

Did you address that to me? 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Yes, but I heard you saying that I have to wear hearing aids. 

Did you say that? 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

If you say no, you say no, otherwise, you have to withdraw it! 

Otherwise, you have to withdraw it! 

(Interruptions) 

You don’t know what you said! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

Did you say you don’t know what you said? 

 

31 

(Interruptions) 

I close this now, but then, I will be very careful to what is being said in this House. 

The Prime Minister: Please, keep quiet! 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Please proceed, hon. Prime Minister! 

(Interruptions) 

The Prime Minister: What I was trying to convey… 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: Silence, I said! 

The Prime Minister: …is that when you are in the Opposition, it is easy to 
promise anything, but when you take responsibility - what I was trying to show is that 
when he was Minister of Finance, he acted very responsibly because he granted only 
8% compensation when the rate of inflation was 13.5%. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam  Speaker:  Hon.  Rutnah!  Now,  you  are  interrupting  the  Prime 

Minister. 

The Prime Minister: I would also like to point out that when the hon. Leader 
of the Opposition was Minister of Finance - well, in fact, I have just been reminded 
because I have forgotten about this - he did not even chair the Tripartite Meeting. For 
him, that was not important. Today, he is trying, to say the least, to fool us all. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker,  we have listened to  all the  criticisms that have been  made 
against this Bill. Well, we appreciate their contribution, but then, I must say that we, 
as a responsible Government, are not going to bow down to things that may cause a 
lot  of  harm  to  this  country.  We  know  what  we  are  doing,  we  know  where  we  are 
going and the population will judge us finally. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

 

Madam Speaker: I suspend the sitting for one and a half hours. 

At 1.00 p.m. the sitting was suspended. 

 
On resuming at 2.30 p.m. with Madam Speaker in the Chair. 

32 

Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhadain! 

Mr  Bhadain:  Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  raise  a  point  of  order  under  the 
Standing Orders, as hon. Bhagwan before lunch, whilst pointing his finger at me, has 
stated the unparliamentary words ‘sucker’ and ‘mo pou touye twa’. So, I consider this 
as being an extremely serious threat and I wish for him to withdraw these words. 

Madam Speaker: Did you utter these words, hon. Bhagwan? 

Mr Bhagwan: As far as the second part is concerned, Madam Speaker, if he 

means that I used the words ‘mo pou touye twa’, I meant ‘touye li politiquement’.  

And secondly, as far as the first part is concerned, Madam Speaker, I call a 

spade a spade. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker: But no! Hon. Bhagwan, if you did utter these words, please, 

kindly withdraw. 

Order, please! Order! Order! 

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

If you did utter these words, I asked you whether you uttered. If I understood well, 
you  have  said  that  the  second  part  may  be  true.  If  it  is  true  then  kindly  withdraw! 
There is nothing dishonourable in withdrawing! 

(Interruptions) 

Mr Bhagwan: I did not mean to hurt him. So, if he is hurt, I can remove it.  

Madam Speaker: You withdraw? 

(Interruptions) 

Do you remove it or withdraw it? You withdraw!  

Okay!  

(Interruptions) 

(Interruptions) 

33 

 

Yes, hon. Minister Callichurn! 

(2.30 p.m.) 

Mr Callichurn: Madam Speaker, at the outset, allow me to congratulate my 
leader,  the  Leader  of  MSM,  hon.  Pravind  Kumar  Jugnauth  on  his  appointment  as 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development. 

(Interruptions) 

Madam Speaker, I wish to convey my heartfelt thanks to the Rt. hon. Prime 
Minister and the Leader of my Party, hon. Pravind Jugnauth, Minister of Finance and 
Economic  Development,  for  the  trust  they  have  put  in  me  and  for  the  unflinching 
support they have extended to me throughout the preparation of this Bill. I also wish 
to extend my thanks to all my colleagues who have been supportive all the way and to 
all those on both sides of the House who have intervened in the debates. 

Madam  Speaker,  let  me  reiterate  that  the  Bill  aims  at  further  consolidating 
workers’ rights by paving the way for a decent wage and will, in no way, curtail any 
of their acquired rights. The introduction of the national minimum wage will, without 
any  doubt,  protect  the  workers  and  improve  their  living  conditions.  This  will 
constitute a quantum leap forward for thousands of workers in this country. 

Madam Speaker, I have listened carefully to all orators and I have noted with 
pleasure that there is a broad consensus for the introduction of the national minimum 
wage  and  on  the  mechanism  that  is  being  put  in  place.  The  Members  of  the 
Opposition have, however, raised some concerns on which I would like to comment. 

Madam Speaker, contrary to what has been alleged by some Members on the 
other side of the House, I wish to reassure the House that all stakeholders have been 
consulted  during  the  whole  process  leading  to  the  presentation  of  the  Bill  to  the 
National  Assembly.  In  fact,  consultations  were  held  with  all  the  confederations  of 
trade unions in three distinct phases. 

Firstly, four meetings were held before the presentation of the Bill to explain 
the  rationale  and  the  parameters  of  the  National  Wage  Consultative  Council  and  I 
have personally chaired one of those meetings. However, it was noted with concern 
during the meetings that the trade unions took position against the establishment of a 
Council and they insisted that the responsibility should rest solely on Government to 

 

34 

determine the national minimum wage. I also met the confederations separately after 
the First Reading of the Bill to discuss their concerns and their proposals. Finally, I 
met the representatives of all nine confederations to inform them of the amendments 
which I propose to bring to the Bill and I have also considered other proposals in a 
true spirit of social dialogue. 

At  this  stage,  Madam  Speaker,  I  wish  to  extend  my  gratitude  to  the 
representatives of the trade unions who assisted to shape this legislation through their 
valuable contribution which led to the amendments which I proposed at the Second 
Reading.  It is, therefore, not correct to say that there were no consultations and no 
discussions as contended by the Opposition. 

Furthermore, Madam Speaker, in the setting up of the Council, I stood guided 
by  the  recommendations  of  the  ILO  Consultant,  Mr  Eyraud,  and  initiated  a  large 
debate with the stakeholders in order to reach a consensus. It was, indeed, difficult to 
reach a complete consensus on the mechanism to be put in place for the determination 
of the national minimum wage. 

Madam  Speaker,  contradictory  debates  form  part  of  the  democratic  process. 
The more so, when it comes to labour issues wherein the stakeholders do not always 
have  the  same  opinion.  I  am,  however,  pleased  to  note  that  at  the  end  of  the 
consultative process and, after the Second Reading, the position of the trade unions 
has evolved and they are now supporting the Bill. And, I note with pleasure that they 
will participate in the deliberation of the Council. I have received letters from various 
confederations stating their intention to sit in the Council. This is also the stand of the 
employers. This is overwhelming proof that, as a Government, we have been able to 
win the hearts and minds of all stakeholders in the consultative process, contrary to 
what the Opposition is contending. 

Madam  Speaker,  guarding  the  independence  of  the  Council  -  it  has  neither 
been the intention of this Government to tie the hands of the Council nor to use the 
Council as a scapegoat not to guarantee the payment of a national minimum wage as 
mentioned  by  the  Opposition.  This  is  completely  fallacious.  In  fact,  Government 
means  business  and  has  the  will  and  is  committed  to  come  up  with  the  national 
minimum wage. Due care has been taken in the Bill to protect the Council from any 
political influence and interference in its functioning. 

35 

 
Madam  Speaker,  the  Bill  already  provides  that  the  Chairman  shall  not  be 
actively involved in politics. Today I am going a step further, I am giving assurance to 
this  House  that  the  appointment  of  the  Chairperson  will  be  made  through  public 
advertisement. 

(Interruptions) 

Furthermore,  Madam  Speaker,  the  representatives  of  the  Government, 
business  and  workers’  organisation  will  be  on  the  same  level  playing  field  in  their 
representativeness. The hon. Leader of the Opposition mentioned the fact that there 
will  be  more  representatives  of  the  Government  on  the  Board  and,  as  such,  it  will 
have  the  upper  hand  in  the  decision-making  process.  I  fail  to  understand  how 
Government can be over represented when the Bill provides clearly that Government 
will be represented by the same number of members as employers and trade unions, 
that is, seven on each side. 

Furthermore, the right to vote and to constitute a quorum will be restricted to 
these constituents only. The ex officio and co-opted members as provided in the Bill 
will provide advisory and technical support only.  

Furthermore, Madam Speaker, the procedure adopted to appoint trade union 
representatives  on  the  Board  does  not,  in  any  manner,  put  into  question  the 
independence  of  the  Council.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  I  intend  to  appoint  the 
representatives  of  the  workers’  organisation  as  it  has  always  been  the  case  that  is, 
after due consultation with the most representative workers’ organisation.  

To  that  effect,  workers’  organisations  have  been  redefined  to  mean  a 
registered trade union, federation or  confederation having no double representation.  
This proposal, Madam Speaker, has been made by the trade unions themselves, so as 
to ensure the proper representation is made.  Let me reassure the House that I shall 
proceed  with  the  appointment  from  the  list  submitted  by  the  confederations 
themselves. 

Madam  Speaker,  the  hon.  Members  on  the  other  side  of  the  House  were 
insisting  that  the  Council  be  given  the  power  to  determine  the  national  minimum 
wage.  This approach is contrary to our institutional and consultative tradition since 
1939.    We  are  maintaining  this  institutional  approach,  which  provides  scope  for 
extensive  consultations  among  social  partners  in  the  determination  of  the  national 

 

36 

minimum wage.  Besides, we are going a step further.  In case the Minister decides 
not to implement the recommendation of the Council, he will be required to explain 
his decision in this august Assembly, and his decision will be questioned obviously by 
the Opposition. 

Coming to the predetermined parameters, as mentioned by hon. Uteem, we are 
not reinventing the wheel.  Most countries which have introduced a national minimum 
wage have adopted the median wage methodology and have set generally the same 
criteria  when  deciding  on  the  level  of  the  national  minimum  wage  to  be  fixed. 
Government  has,  therefore,  considered  it  appropriate  to  set  the  parameters  for  the 
functioning of the Council and for the determination of the national minimum wage in 
the Bill, and that is with a view to facilitate discussions among the stakeholders in an 
orderly manner, with clear objectives. 

Madam  Speaker,  there  is  still  some  confusion  on  part  of  the  Opposition 
concerning  the  rationale  of  the  national  minimum  wage.  Let  me  reiterate  that  the 
primary objective of Government in introducing a national minimum wage is about 
alleviating  poverty.  In  that  respect,  the  median  wage  is  the  more  appropriate 
instrument since it is this methodology which is commonly used at international level 
to measure the poverty line.  It is, however, our ultimate objective to ensure a living 
wage to the workers of our country.  This process, Madam Speaker, takes time.  UK, 
which is a developed country, first started by introducing a national minimum wage 
based on a proportion of the median wage in 1999.  It is only this year that they have 
shifted by adopting a living wage. 

Madam  Speaker,  as  regards  the  issue  of  young  persons,  the  issue  of 
discrimination in respect of a lower wage on the ground of age does not arise because 
the Employment Rights Act provides for a difference in treatment on the ground of 
age to achieve a legitimate aim, which is, in this case, to facilitate the integration of 
young persons in employment. 

Moreover,  Madam  Speaker,  the  Equal  Opportunity  Act  also  provides  under 

section 5 (a), and I quote – 

“An  employer  may  discriminate  on  ground  of  age  where  the  offer  of 
employment is limited to persons of a particular age.” 

37 

 
Furthermore,  both  the  Employment  Rights  Act  and  the  Occupational  Safety 
and  Health  Act  prohibit  the  employment  of  young  persons  on  work,  which,  by  its 
nature or the circumstances in which it is carried out, is likely to jeopardise the health, 
safety,  physical,  mental,  moral  or  social  development  of  the  young  persons.  The 
Employment  Rights  Act  also  provides  that  an  employer  shall  not  employ  a  young 
person in an industrial undertaking between 10 p.m. and 5 a.m. 

It  is  also  to  be  noted  that  the  Sugar  Industry  Agriculture  Workers 
Remuneration Order Regulation and the Tea Industry Workers Remuneration Order 
Regulation already provide for the payment of a lower rate to a young person subject 
to limitations on assignment of work.  It is also the practice at international level to 
provide  for  a  lower  rate  for  young  persons,  according  to  a  general  ILO  survey.  In 
2014, on minimum wage system, in countries like Netherlands, Chile, Luxembourg, 
Malta, young persons are paid a lower rate compared to workers who have attained 
the age of majority. 

Now, I turn to the funding of the Council, Madam Speaker.  As regards to the 
funding of the Council, I wish to reassure Members of the House that it will be funded 
by Government, and there should not be any doubt to that.  However, provision has 
been  made  to  empower  the  Council  to  seek  financial  assistance  from  international 
organisations  such  as  the  ILO.    Therefore,  the  issue  of  the  Council  being  funded, 
controlled or influenced by the private sector does not arise at all. 

Madam  Speaker,  I  would  like  to  dispel  another  misunderstanding  from  the 
Opposition side concerning the NRB and the Remuneration Order Regulations. As I 
have already stated in my speech, the NRB will, in the first instance, continue to co-
exist with the Council.  However,  I am in favour of an integrated wage  system, as 
recommended by ILO consultant, Mr Eyraud, and in this perceptive I intend to reform 
the NRB in the context of the review of the labour legislation, whereby its functions 
would  be  revisited.    This  does  not  mean  that  the  Remuneration  Order  Regulations 
would be eliminated.  The Remuneration Order Regulations would continue to exist 
under  new  auspices.    For  example,  all  the  core  conditions  of  employment  in  any 
economic  sector  would  be  harmonised  and  consolidated  in  the  Employment  Rights 
Act. The Remuneration Regulations will thus provide only for minimum wages and 
conditions specific to the sector of employment. 

38 

 
Madam Speaker, I have received representations from Business Mauritius to 
consider reviewing the national minimum wage every year and to remove the clause 
regarding the introduction of a master conversion table, to address the issue of wage 
relativity distortion in the private sector.  Although the proposal to review the national 
minimum wage every year may be interesting, it would be difficult to put in place, for 
practical  reason,  at  this  stage.    Since  it  is  the  first  time  that  the  national  minimum 
wage will be set up, the Council would need time to gather experience, to master the 
intricacies underlying the operation and process of the whole system. 

It is, therefore, more reasonable that the council be given the required time to 
carry  out  any  study  deemed  appropriate  on  the  labour  market  and    the  economic 
situation with a view to be able to make its recommendation in an informed manner. 
The  increase,  subsequent  to  the  review  after  every  five  years,  may  be  mitigated  if 
wages  are  reviewed  every  year  voluntarily  by  employers  or  through  collective 
bargaining.  The  National  Minimum  Wage  is  also  applicable  to  the  public  sector 
organisation.  In  view  of  the  fact  that  the  PRB  review  wages  and  conditions  of 
employment every five years, it could not be practical to review a National Minimum 
Wage  every  year.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  objective  of  reviewing  the  National 
Minimum  Wage  every  five  years  is  to  coordinate  and  synchronise  the  review  of 
wages by the Council, the NRB and the PRB at the same interval.  

However, I remain open to reconsider the proposal of Business Mauritius at a 
later stage in the light of the evolution of the work of the Council. Increasing wages of 
workers can also be done at the discretion of the employers.  I, therefore, invite the 
employers to do so on a yearly basis and this can help them to address their concern 
and mitigate the impact of the review every five years.  

Madam Speaker, it is obvious that the introduction of the National Minimum 
Wage will cause a wage relative distortion for some grades in both the private and 
public  sector.  For  example,  a  worker  reckoning  lesser  length  of  service  may  be 
drawing the same or higher wages than a worker in the same grade with longer length 
of service.  Experience has shown us that we cannot rely  exclusively on the market 
forces to adjust wages. This situation may give rise to an increasing number of labour 
disputes  to  the  Commission  which  may  be  damaging  to  our  traditional  harmonious 
industrial  relations.  Conversely,  the  Master  Conversion  Table  will  not  only  protect 

 

39 

workers against any wage distortion in respect of their position, but will also create 
conditions for orderly working relationship. 

Madam Speaker,  I hope that I have been able to address all concerns of the 
Opposition and dispel at the same time any doubt on our good faith. I am confident 
that if we value our labour, then paying them a decent wage is the least we can do for 
them. This Government is committed to make dignity at work a reality. This is what 
this Bill is all about, Madam Speaker. It is about putting in place a mechanism for the 
determination of a National Minimum Wage that would neither threaten jobs nor the 
economy. I am convinced that the setting up of a National Wage Consultative Council 
is  one  of  the  most  important  policy  initiatives  since  independence.  It  is,  Madam 
Speaker,  a  stepping  stone  towards  achieving  our  cherished  code  of  introducing  the 
National  Minimum  Wage.  This  Government  is  yet  again  keeping  another  of  its 
promises made to the nation in 2014. 

Before concluding, Madam Speaker, I would like to heartily thank officers of 
my Ministry for their hard work and dedication they gave in the preparation of this 
Bill, without forgetting the officers of the State Law Office who have been working 
indeed with heart on this project and, this morning itself, they have been made to rush 
but, fortunately, everything has been cleared now. I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I 
wish the Council good luck in their work they are going to do.  Thank you. 

Question put and agreed to. 

Bill read a second time and committed. 

COMMITTEE STAGE 

(Madam Speaker in the Chair) 

THE NATIONAL WAGE CONSULTATIVE COUNCIL BILL 

(NO. VI of 2016) 

Clause 1 (Short title) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

Mr Ganoo: Madam Chairperson, I would like to intervene on Clause 1. The 
hon. Minister said in his summing-up just now that he hopes all the concerns of the 
Opposition have been addressed, but there is one point which was raised and which he 

 

40 

did not answer or give any explanation, it is about the Title of the Bill itself. The Bill 
in  Clause  1  is  entitled the  ‘National  Wage  Consultative  Council  Act  2016’  and  we 
made the point that, since the question of additional remuneration has been removed 
from this Bill, as per the amendments proposed by the hon. Minister, therefore, this 
Bill is dealing with the minimum wage, whether it has escaped the attention of the 
hon. Minister, his Ministry or his officers, that this Bill should have been entitled, in 
fact, the ‘National Minimum Wage Consultative Council Bill’.  

In view of the fact that the two Conventions - which were cited by the hon. 
Minister himself and by the Opposition - of 1928 and 1970, No. 26 of 1928 is called 
‘The Minimum Wage Fixing Machinery Convention’ and the other one, No. 131 of 
1970 is called the ‘Minimum Wage Fixing Convention’, the words ‘Minimum Wage’ 
are  in  both  Conventions.  So,  I  will  very  humbly  appeal  to  the  hon.  Minister  to 
consider the advisability of adding the words ‘National Minimum Wage Consultative 
Council’ to the Title of the Bill. 

Mr Callichurn: Madam Chairperson, I think it is clear that the objective of 
the council is to make recommendation on the National Minimum Wage. So, I don’t 
see any reason why I should bring amendment to the Title of the Bill. 

On question put, amendment defeated. 

Clause 1 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 2 (Interpretation) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

Mr Callichurn: Madam Chairperson, I move for the following amendments. 

“In clause 2 – 

(i) 

(ii) 

by deleting the definition of “trade union”, “young person” and 
“young worker”;  

by inserting, in the appropriate alphabetical order, the following 
new definitions – 

 “worker’s  organisation”  means  a  registered  trade  union, 
federation  or  confederation,  of  workers,  having  no  double 
representation”; 

 

41 

 “young person” means a person who is over the age of 16 but 
under the age of 18.” 

Amendments agreed to. 
Clause 2, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 
Clauses 3 to 4 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 5 (Objects of Council) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

Mr Callichurn: Madam Chairperson, I move for the following amendments.  

“In clause 5 –  

 (i)  by  deleting  paragraph  (a)  and  replacing  it  by  the  following 

paragraph – 

 (a) 

be  responsible  for  the  evaluation  of  the  effect  of  the 
introduction  of  a  national  minimum  wage,  particularly 
on  pay  structures  and  pay  differentials,  wealth  and 
income distribution, wage ratio, employment, inflation, 
competitiveness, the cost of doing business, low paying 
sectors,  small  firms,  employment  of  foreign  workers 
and  groups  of  workers,  including  women,  gender 
discrimination,  young  persons  and  persons  with 
disabilities; 

(ii) 

in paragraph (b) – 

(A) 

by  deleting  subparagraph  (i)  and  replacing  it  by  the 
following subparagraph – 

(i) 

subject  to  subparagraphs 
(iii)  and  (iv),  for 
the 
introduction  of  a  national 
minimum wage calculated 
on an hourly rate for part-
time  workers 
a 
monthly rate for full-time 
workers  equivalent  to  a 

and 

 

42 

of 

proportion 
the 
domestic median wage of 
the preceding year for the 
lowest paid workers;  

(B) 

by inserting, after subparagraph (i), the following new 
subparagraph,  the  existing  subparagraphs  (ii)  to  (vi) 
being renumbered as (iii) to (vii) – 

(ii) 

for  the  computation  of  a 
national  minimum  wage 
calculated  on  an  hourly 
rate for part-time workers 
and  a  monthly  rate  for 
full-time  workers  without 
altering 
actual 
working hours regime and 
the mode of calculation of 
wages  or  salary  of  any 
worker; 

the 

(C) 

by  deleting  the  newly  renumbered  subparagraph  (iv) 
and replacing it by the following subparagraph – 

 (iv) 

wage 

skills 

having 

on a lower rate of national 
for 
minimum 
workers  on 
accredited 
training, apprenticeship or 
no 
probation 
corresponding 
job 
and 
experience, 
competencies, 
relevant 
accredited  vocational  or 
technical 
qualification, 
relevant  and  recognised 
certificate, 
proficiency 

 

43 

diploma,  degree  or  other 
professional qualifications 
in the field in which he is 
employed  or  where  the 
no 
job 
qualification, 
or 
experience; 

requires 

skill 

(iii) 

by  deleting  paragraph  (c),  the  words  “;  and’  at  the  end  of 
paragraph (b)(vii) being deleted and replaced by a full stop;” 

Amendments agreed to. 
Clause 5, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 
Clause 6 (Functions of Council) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

Mr Callichurn: Madam Chairperson,  I move for the following amendment. 
“In clause 6 – 

 

(i) 

(ii) 

in subclause (1), by deleting paragraph (h), paragraphs (i) and 
(j) being relettered as paragraphs (h) and (i); 

(2), 

by 

subclause 

the  word 
in 
“recommendation”,  the  words  “on  the  national  minimum 
wage”;” 

inserting, 

after 

Mr  Ganoo:  Madam  Chairperson,  the  hon.  Minister  again  in  his  speech 
explained  to  the  House  that  he  has  been  approached  by  Business  Mauritius  for  the 
advisability  of  reviewing  the  National  Minimum  Wage  every  year  and  he  gave  the 
explanations as regard to that request that has been made to him. Now, in the law, as 
the hon. Minister rightly pointed out himself, the National Minimum Wage will be 
reviewed every five years. Can I ask him whether he shouldn’t consider the possibility 
of reducing that period of five years, because five years is a long period?  

Once the Council will be constituted, it has one year, 12 months, as we know 
to  recommend  the  National  Minimum  Wage  and  after  that  one  year,  the  National 
Minimum Wage will be reviewed after five years. So, since in the case of the PRB, 
the review is now done every three years, could not the hon. … 

 

44 

(Interruptions) 

Okay.  Can  the  hon.  Minister,  therefore,  consider  the  possibility  of  reducing  that 
period of five years to three years? 

Madam Chairperson: Hon. Minister! 

Mr  Callichurn:  Well,  to  correct  the  hon.  Member,  the  review  of  the  Pay 
Research Bureau is done every five years and not three as he stated. Any suggestion 
ultimately can be considered, but it is at an early stage. So, we will have to give the 
Council time to work and then, we will see after. 

Amendments agreed to. 

Clause 6, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 7 ordered to stand part of the Bill.  

Clause  8  (Determination  of  national  minimum  wage  and  additional 

remuneration) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

Mr Callichurn: Madam Chairperson, I move for the following amendment in 

clause 8 - 

“In the heading, by deleting the words “and additional remuneration”;” 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 8, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 9 ordered to stand part of the Bill.  

Clause 10 (The Board) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

Mr Callichurn: I move for the following amendments in clause 10 - 

“(i) 

In subclause (1), by deleting paragraph (m) and replacing it by 
the following paragraph - 

(m) 

4 members of any worker’s organisation 
representing  workers  employed  in  the 
private  sector  and  3  members  of  any 

 

45 

organisation 

worker’s 
representing 
workers employed in the public sector, to 
be  appointed  by 
the  Minister  after 
consultation with the most representative 
worker’s organisation; 

(ii) 

by adding the following new subclause - 

(4) 
politics.” 

The Chairperson shall not be actively engaged in 

Mr Ganoo: Madam Chairperson, can I make another intervention with regard 
to clause 10, it is 10 (m), I mean the section which is being proposed to be amended 
by the hon. Minister and on which the Opposition has made a lot of comments. We 
have heard the hon. Minister giving further explanations in his summing up as to who 
will appoint the representatives of the workers’ organisation in this Council.  

In spite of what the hon. Minister has indicated to the House, I should insist 
that  this  is  the  first  piece  of  legislation  in  the  labour  relation  field  where 
representatives of workers’ organisations are being appointed by the Minister, true be 
it after consultation with the most representative workers’ organisation.  

In the spirit of the ILO Conventions, even Mr Eyraud in his Report which we 
are  all  citing  since  the  beginning  of  the  debates  in  this  House,  when  Mr  Eyraud 
proposed the Council, at the end of his Report, Mr Eyraud suggested that it should be 
-  in  his  proposal  he  said  -  four  Trade  Union  representatives  chosen  by  the  Trade 
Unions.  I  have  the  Report  with  me  and  I  am  sure  the  hon.  Minister  also  has.  Mr 
Eyraud,  himself,  suggested  that  the  Trade  Union  representatives  be  chosen  by  the 
Trade Unions.  

So, this is why I appeal, again, to the hon. Minister to consider the amendment 
that  the  seven  members  should  be  representatives  of  the  seven  most  representative 
trade union confederations or workers’ organisation and designated independently by 
those workers’ organisations.  

The hon. Minister has told us that all the confederations have written to him 

and told him that they are going to… 

(Interruptions) 

 

46 

Not all. So, you are being more precise now, not all. So, why should we have to open 
the  door  to  exclude  a  few  of  the  confederations?  So,  in  order  to  get  everybody  on 
board, I think that the hon. Minister should seriously have reflected on the possibility 
of  allowing  the  Trade  Unions,  the  workers’  organisations  or  the  confederations, 
themselves,  to  choose  their  representatives  as  has  been  suggested  by  Mr  Eyraud, 
himself, whose Report has been abundantly cited by everybody during the debates in 
this House. 

Mr  Callichurn:  Let  me  reassure  the  House  that  I  shall  proceed  with  the 
appointment  of  the  workers’  organisation  from  the  list  that  they  will  submit 
themselves. 

Amendments agreed to. 

Clause 10, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 11 (Meetings of Board) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

Mr Callichurn: I move for the following amendments in clause 11 - 

“In subclause (4), by adding the following new paragraphs - 

(c) 

The Board may remove from office any member 
who  is  absent,  without  leave  of  the  Board,  from  3  consecutive 
meetings of the Board. 

(d)  Where  a  vacancy  occurs  in  the  membership  of 
the  Board,  the  vacancy  shall  be  filled  by  a  person  appointed  by  the 
Minister, who shall hold office for the remainder of the term of office 
of that member.” 

Amendments agreed to. 

Clause 11, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clauses 12 to 17 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 18 (Confidentiality) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill.” 

Mr Callichurn: I move for the following amendments in clause 18 - 

 

47 

“By deleting clause 18, clauses 19 to 22 being renumbered as clauses 18 to 
21;” 

Amendments agreed to. 
Clauses 19 to 22 renumbered 18 to 21 accordingly. 
Clauses 18 to 21 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 
Clause 22 (Offences) 

Motion made and question proposed: “that the clause stand part of the Bill” 

Mr  Callichurn:    I  move  for  the  following  amendment  in  the  newly 

renumbered clause 22 – 

“In  subclause  (3),  by  deleting  the  words  “or  additional  remuneration” 

wherever they appear.” 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 22, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

Clauses 23 to 25 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 

The title and enacting clause were agreed to. 

The Bill, as amended, was agreed to.  

On the Assembly resuming with Madam Speaker in the Chair, Madam Speaker 

reported accordingly. 

Third Reading 

On  motion  made  and  seconded,  the  National  Wage  Consultative  Council  Bill 

(No. VI of 2016) was read a third time and passed. 

ADJOURNMENT 

The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that this Assembly do 

now adjourn to Tuesday 31 May 2016 at 11.30 a.m. 

The Deputy Prime Minister rose and seconded. 

Madam Speaker: The House stands adjourned.  

 

 

 

(3.10 p.m.) 

48 

MATTER RAISED 

HANDICAPPED YOUTH – LAYING OFF 

Mr  S.  Mohamed  (First  Member  for  Port  Louis  Maritime  &  Port  Louis 
East): I would be brief since I know everyone is in a rush to get to what they have to 
do.   

My point is addressed to the hon. Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism 

and External Communications. 

He will recall, Madam Speaker, that I had raised a point here concerning a 
young  man  from  my  Constituency  who  is  deaf  and  whom  the  hon.  Deputy  Prime 
Minister had promised he would look into the matter because he was a handicapped 
person who had lost his job and had not been re-instated in spite of the promises made 
by the hon. Deputy Prime Minister. 

I am sure the hon. Deputy Prime Minister has made arrangements for this to be 
done and I am sure that his intentions are good, but unfortunately, the results have not 
followed.  So, I will be very grateful if this could be looked into again.  That is the last 
call.  I have been called by the parents. The mother, this morning, in tears, asking me 
to address again for the hon. Deputy Prime Minister and Government to keep their 
promise  and  to  try  to  see  to  it,  not  only  in  words,  but  in  action  that  when  an 
handicapped losses his job for no reason whatsoever, that, at least, redress be brought 
immediately. Many months have passed by, if I am not mistaken, more than a year 
now. All us, four hon. Members for Constituency No. 3 are well aware of this issue, 
but it is important that I raise that matter as soon as possible and I am sure it will be 
the last time.   

Thank you 

(3.11 p.m.) 

The  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  External 
Communication  (Mr  X.  L.  Duval):    Madam  Speaker,  I  think  I  had  met  the 
gentleman concerned and I had undertaken to raise the issue with my colleague from 
the Ministry of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions.  I have 

 

49 

done  that  and  I  know  the  hon.  Minister  looked  at  the  case.    I  don’t  know  what 
happened since then, but I know that the hon. Minister has considered the matter.   

Thank you.  

At  3.13  p.m.,  the  Assembly  was,  on  its  rising,  adjourned  to  Tuesday  31  May 

 
2016 at 11.30 a.m. 

