BAIN DES DAMES - TANK FARM & COMBINED CYCLE POWER PLANT PROJECT
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Vice-
Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to the new Tank
Farm and Combined Cycle Power Plant Project to be implemented at Bain des Dames, he
will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Central Electricity Board, information as to
if it has –
(a) requested that all the EIA and Ramsar Committee/Wetlands requirements and
considerations be waived, indicating if the recent National Report of the
Ramsar Committee on the said project will be rendered public, and
(b) effected advance payments therefor before the completion of all the required
formalities in relation thereto.
aaaaa
The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities (Mr I.
Collendavelloo): Madam Speaker, I intend to reply with regard to the Tank Farm because
for the Combined Cycle Gas Turbine or the Combined Cycle Power Plant, CEB is still in the
process of appointing a consultant for the execution of the project.
In order to obtain new storage capacity to ensure at least two months’ storage capacity
including additional requirements for the new St Louis Power Station, the Central Electricity
Board decided to construct a tank farm on a plot of land of 14A87 at Les Grandes Salines.
On 24 May 2013, the Central Electricity Board applied for the EIA Licence which
was granted on 30 September 2013. Among the conditions contained in the EIA licence,
condition 9 stipulated that, I quote -
“The necessary setbacks shall be observed from the water drain and marshy
areas found in the vicinity of the site”.
No mention was made of the existence of wetlands on the site itself.
I am tabling a copy of the EIA licence.
On 04 July 2014, the Central Electricity Board invited bids for the construction of
three storage tanks of capacity 6,500 m 3 each. The Central Procurement Board approved the
award of the contract on 09 February 2015. After the issue of the notification to all bidders,
9
there was a challenge filed at the Independent Review Panel, which was set aside by the
Panel.
The Central Electricity Board awarded the contract on 29 May 2015 to Arun
Fabricators for the value of Rs540 m. exclusive of VAT.
The contractor mobilised on site on 28 August 2015. On 08 September 2015, the
contractor consulted the Forestry Department for the cutting of trees. Doubts were then
expressed on the possible presence of wetlands. On 12 September 2015, the Central
Electricity Board referred the matter to the National Ramsar Committee.
I am informed that a sub Committee of the National Ramsar Committee carried out a
site visit on 02 October 2015. The National Ramsar Committee had a first meeting on 12
October 2015. It had a second meeting on 26 October 2015 and, by a letter dated 30 October
2015, it has issued clearance to the Central Electricity Board. I am tabling a copy of the
letter.
I am informed that there is no “National Report” of the National Ramsar Committee.
The House may wish to know that the National Ramsar Committee comprises
seventeen members including the -
(i)  Ministry of Agro Industry and Food Security;
(ii)  The National Parks and Conservation Service;
(iii)  Ministry of Environment, Sustainable Development, Disaster and Beach
Management;
(iv)  Ministry of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, Shipping and Outer
Islands;
(v)  Ministry of Housing and Lands;
(vi)  Ministry of Local Government;
(vii)  Ministry of Tourism and External Communications;
(viii) Ministry of Arts and Culture;
(ix)  Ministry of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and
Scientific Research;
(x)  Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection;
(xi)  Forestry Services;
(xii)  University of Mauritius;
(xiii) Mauritius Institute of Education;
10
(xiv) Central Water Authority;
(xv)  Wastewater Management Authority, and
(xvi)  Two NGOs:  Mauritian Wildlife Foundation Environmental
Protection & Conservation Organization (EPCO)
As regards part (b) of the question, I am informed by the Central Electricity Board
that after the submission by the Contractor of the Performance Security, the Contractors all
risk Insurance Policy and an advance payment guarantee of Rs54m., Central Electricity
Board proceeded with the advance payment of 10% to the Contractor on 25 August 2015.
The contract is for a Design and Build project which implies that the Contractor has to
apply for permits and other clearances from relevant Authorities required under the EIA
licence conditions.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister has chosen to reply to the part of
my question which deals with the new tank farm and to ignore completely the project, the
proposed Combined Cycle Power Plant Project. Will he confirm that, in a letter dated 08
October 2015, the General Manager of CEB wrote to the Senior Chief Executive of the
Ministry of Energy and Public Utilities requesting, in fact, that all EIA and Ramsar
considerations be waived both for the new tank farm project and the proposed Combined
Cycle Project, if I can quote the last, but one paragraph of that letter before I table it as usual.
“On account of the sound reasons stated above, we hereby solicit your prompt
intervention so as to seek a waiver from the relevant authorities to depart from
the setback requirement in the EIA and to allow the CEB to utilise the full
extent of the site (including the marshy area thereof), to enable the timely
implementation of the project, that is construction of the three fuel oil tanks
and erection of CCGT power plant.”
I table a copy of the letter and can I ask the hon. Minister, therefore, why does he deal
with the three fuel oil tanks only and try to keep from public attention the request for a total
waiver for both projects?
Mr Collendavelloo: No. That is not so. I think this is an unwarranted reaction. I did
say, at the outset, that I was not going into the CCGT because we were still in initial stages.
Now, this request was made by the Senior Chief Executive to Mr Bikoo and Mrs Nababsing
attention and that was written by CEB to SCE. The Ministry did not go forward with this.
11
Mr Bérenger: So, I take it therefore that no decision has been taken to waive
completely all EIA considerations and the Ramsar consideration for both projects.
Mr Collendavelloo: If the term waiver means that the legal provisions are not going
to apply to this project, then there has been no waiver. However, we see from the document
which I have tabled that the Ramsar Committee has now given its approval to the project with
regard to the tank farm.
Mr Bérenger: Arms twisting and we will get to that letter – it is a shame! If I can
look at the EIA granted years back dated 30 September 2013, is the hon. Minister therefore
aware that it was for a tank farm only? There is no EIA clearance or even request as far as the
new plant is concerned and one of the two key conditions is that necessary setbacks meaning
30 metres as per the existing legislation from water drain and marshy areas is one condition.
Is the hon. Minister honestly telling us that there is no marshy land on the site itself when we
have EIA saying that there is and the CEB requesting that the EIA conditions we waived on
that point?
Mr Collendavelloo: Perhaps the House will read carefully condition 9 which I
underlined, which states that the water drain and marshy areas are found in the vicinity of the
site. We are talking only of tank farm. We have received an EIA - the CEB I mean - only for
the tank farm. No EIA has been asked yet for the Combined Cycle Power Plant for a simple
reason because the consultant has not even started the work. When the consultant will come -
and the hon. Leader of the Opposition knows this - with his project and with the siting of the
plant, then we will see whether the EIA will be granted or not.
Mr Bérenger: As far as the tank farms are concerned, is the hon. Minister aware that
a second condition in the EIA certificate authorisation, the 17 th condition, is that the tanks
shall be located at the northern extremity of the site furthest away from the residential area
and that now when he chose a contractor, the CEB has also agreed that the contractor - that
he has been paid Rs54 m. - Arun Fabricators carry out the soil investigation now for new
location at its cost and submit their findings and so on? So, now we are talking about moving
both the tank farms and the forthcoming plan away from the agreed site in the EIA. Is the
hon. Minister aware of that?
Mr Collendavelloo: Yes.
12
Mr Bérenger: Well, is the hon. Minister aware that in the letter which I tabled, the
CEB says that if the EIA conditions – can I quote instead if you will allow me, Madam
Speaker -
“In case the CEB makes the necessary setback allowance of the 30 metres, as
per Planning Policy Guidance issued by the Ministry of Housing and Land,
the extent of land left for development will be negligible for the Project
contemplated.”
Both “(… the proposed layout of the tank farm and the CCGT plant and - what they add as -
the visual extent of the marshy area).”
Is the hon. Vice-Prime Minister aware that the CEB says that if, as it requests, all the EIA and
Ramsar considerations are not waived, it simply cannot implement that project there?
Mr Collendavelloo: This is the view of the CEB. It is not shared by the Ministry.
(Interruptions)
This is the view of the CEB, which is not shared by the Ministry. Just like the hon. Member
does not share that view!
Mr Bérenger: It is shameful what you are doing! It is really shameful in that case.
Is the hon. Vice-Prime Minister aware that when the contract was awarded to the contractors,
it was said that they should look for a new location at the other end, that is, near the houses,
the habitations? These contractors have been chosen, paid an advance payment of Rs54 m.,
contrary to the EIA. We are talking about the Tank Farm. I have not yet reached the new
plant.
Mr Collendavelloo: Well, there are many questions in that supplementary. Let me
start with the first one, that is, the relocation of the Tank Farm. There is nothing surprising
that, in the course of works, the exact location could be changed. It is in order to comply
with the setback which is required under the EIA licence. The CEB has made the request and
it is going to be worked under the close monitoring of my Ministry as well as the Ministry of
Environment and the Ministry of Agro-Industry, that is, the Ramsar Committee.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, as far as the lease is concerned, is it not a fact that the
lease granted in - if I have the date of the lease - September 2015, the lease just granted to the
CEB is for the Tank Farm only? The lease recently granted in September 2015.
Mr Collendavelloo: The lease was granted in 2013, but signed in 2015.
13
(Interruptions)
But signed in 2015. Everybody who has been involved in Cabinet knows that, with regard to
the lease, there is a letter of intent, a reservation before it is finally drafted and signed.
Nobody who has been in Cabinet and worked, of course, could fail to know this!
(Interruptions)
Yes, I am arrogant before…
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Please! Hon. Shakeel Mohamed, please! No foul language against
any other Member, please!
(Interruptions)
No, please!
(Interruptions)
I have said no provocative language! Please!
Mr Bérenger: In the same letter, which I have tabled, the CEB pretends that - never
before - recently when authority was sought to cut trees, then, for the first time, it was
mentioned that there are marshy lands, that there is a marshy land problem, which is
completely false, and the hon. Vice-Prime Minister has himself quoted the EIA certificate,
going back to 2013, which mentioned precisely ‘marshy lands’. Is the Vice-Prime Minister
aware that the CEB had the cheek to put that on record?
Mr Collendavelloo: I don’t know about the cheek! What I know is that the EIA
licence mentioned wetlands in the vicinity of the site and not on the site. This is what is
mentioned on the EIA licence and I will stick to this.
Mr Bérenger: Well, the documents are now public and we are playing on words. I
ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister again. Is he saying that, on the site that has been leased,
there is no marshy land? There is a lease which has been approved, which has been drafted.
Is the hon. Vice-Prime Minister saying that there is no marshy land on the land leased?
Mr Collendavelloo: There is a map which has been annexed to the letter, to the
clearance of the Ramsar Committee. The map speaks for itself. As from that map, CEB will
have to do the needful so as to comply with the conditions of the EIA or the Ramsar
Committee. The Ramsar Committee has given its clearance; EIA has given its clearance.
14
Now, everything has been done, all the permits have been granted for the Tank Farm. If CEB
goes ahead with the Combined Cycle Power Plant, then, of course, new licences will have to
be applied for.
Mr Bérenger: If I precisely can move on to this Ramsar so-called clearance, it is an
awful shame. The hon. Vice-Prime Minister has tabled a copy of the letter and he calls that
letter a clearance from the Ramsar National Committee. Will the hon. Vice-Prime Minister
confirm that there are no less than seven conditions attached to the so-called clearance? And
can I quote –
“In the light of the above, the National Ramsar Committee has exceptionally
approved the grant of the Ramsar clearance for the project subject to the
following conditions (…)”.
Seven conditions! Will the hon. Vice-Prime Minister agree that, in fact, there is no Ramsar
clearance? Those conditions include - the hydrogeology characteristics of the site need to be
confirmed by an expert in the relevant field now; the necessary geotechnical investigation
should be carried out on the site, and construction of all infrastructure works will need to be
supervised by an experienced consultancy firm and so on. Will the hon. Vice-Prime Minister
agree with me that this is no clearance? There has been arm-twisting. This is no clearance.
The list of conditions shows that it is not clearance.
Mr Collendavelloo: Anyone can say whatever comes to his mind, but I am reading
what I read. The National Ramsar Committee has exceptionally…
(Interruptions)
It may be shame! I can also use ‘shame’!
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Please!
Mr Collendavelloo: Poor him!
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Please! No, comments from a sitting position, I said!
Mr Collendavelloo: The letter states clearly that the Committee has exceptionally
albeit, but it has approved the grant of Ramsar clearance. There are conditions attached to all
clearances as there are to EIA licences, to building permits, to all sorts of permits and
15
licences. It has put its conditions and, of course, it is for CEB to ensure compliance or else
the clearance will be removed. Surely, anybody of some narrow experience can know this!
(Interruptions)
Mr Bérenger: Shame on the hon. Vice-Prime Minister! Madam Speaker, we have a
National Ramsar Committee chaired by the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Agro-
Industry…
(Interruptions)
with a very extensive…
Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed, please!
Mr Bérenger: …membership. Can I know the date on which that Ramsar Committee
sat, whether it sat under the chairmanship of the Permanent Secretary, whether the full
Committee sat under the chairmanship of the Permanent Secretary, and can I know which
members were present at that Committee that supposedly approved that so-called clearance,
which is not a clearance at all?
Mr Collendavelloo: What I know is that the sub-committee of the National Ramsar
Committee…
(Interruptions)
Yes, a sub-committee of the National Ramsar Committee - because the Committee is allowed
to appoint a sub-committee - carried out a site visit on 02 October 2015. Then, the National
Ramsar Committee - not the sub-committee, but the Committee - had a first meeting on 12
October 2015. It had a second meeting on 26 October 2015. What I know is that it was
chaired by the Deputy Permanent Secretary. I do not know who else formed part of the
Committee, but if a question is asked…
(Interruptions)
Well, can I be allowed to speak without unruly interruptions? Or else, I’ll just sit down!
Madam Speaker: Please! You have asked the question, hon. Leader of the
Opposition. Allow the Vice-Prime Minister to reply! Please!
Mr Collendavelloo: Sorry, I do not reply by permission of the Leader of the
Opposition. He is not here to allow me to answer questions!
16
Mr Collendavelloo: I have…
Madam Speaker: Hon. Vice-Prime Minister, please, sit down! Please, sit down! I
have given my ruling on this; I have said that we should have order in the House. The
Opposition has the right to ask questions, you have the right to reply to the questions. Please,
proceed in order!
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, if I can move on to the award which has been granted
to the contractor! Is it not a fact that the contract was awarded in August 2015 for the Tank
Farm without, as I said, a new location having been found, without the tests that are supposed
to be carried out for the Tank Farm for Rs540 m. and a down payment of Rs54 m. has already
been paid, whereas, as I quoted earlier on, soil investigations are supposed to be carried out,
they are asked to find another location and the CEB says that they are unable to hand over the
site which is likely to make them liable to legal proceedings?
Mr Collendavelloo: Well, this contract is a designed and built contract; this is why a
down payment is made before certain procedural steps are made. This is part of the
contractual documents, and then it starts its work. There is nothing much we can do about it.
Mr Bérenger: If I can move to a part of the letter which I have tabled - the hon. Vice-
Prime Minister is in the habit of saying that I exaggerate, I dramatize things, etc. Can I quote
the following passage and tell him whether he is aware of that part of the letter? Can I quote,
Madam Speaker?
“The non-implementation of the project or any further delay in its implementation
may have (…)”
We are talking about both. We are talking about the Tank Farm and the new combined plant.
I repeat, Madam Speaker, with your permission -
“The non-compliance thereof or any further delay in its implementation may have
serious consequences on the electricity supply in the country as from 2018.”
And they add –
“The storage capacity of heavy fuel oil will not be sufficient to operate the new
generating sets which have been installed - already - at Fort Victoria Power Station
and those that would be installed at St. Louis Power Station by 2017.”
Is the hon. Vice-Prime Minister aware that, now, the CEB itself is talking that kind of
language, that the situation is urgent, not just for the new power plant to come, but they are
17
saying that there is no room now to store additional fuel required if that fuel tank project does
not go ahead, right now?
Mr Collendavelloo: Well, it is clear that this project is an integral and important part
of the development plan of the CEB. This is why we see that the Ramsar Committee starts by
saying the project is of national importance.
(Interruptions)
Pardon! Qu’est-ce que c’est?
(Interruptions)
No, that is one.
Madam Speaker: Please! Please, proceed!
Mr Collendavelloo: That is why the Ramsar Committee…
(Interruptions)
Of course, the Ramsar Committee!
Madam Speaker: Please, proceed!
(Interruptions)
Mr Collendavelloo: Not Rughoobur!
Madam Speaker: Hon. Vice-Prime Minister, we are left with only two minutes!
(Interruptions)
Mr Collendavelloo: I am sorry!
Madam Speaker: Please, proceed with your reply!
Mr Collendavelloo: The Ramsar Committee itself acknowledges that the project is of
national importance to ensure security of electricity supply in Mauritius. This is
acknowledged by one and all. The letter of the CEB is addressed to the Ministry of Energy to
set out all the parameters. That was not sent to the Ramsar Committee or to the EIA. The
Ministry had to be made aware of the strategic importance of that portion of land.
Madam Speaker: Last question, hon. Leader of the Opposition!
Mr Bérenger: Being given that the CEB itself is saying that, if we do not go full
steam ahead with both projects, we are in trouble, not only concerning the new power plant to
18
come, but concerning the new machines which will not be supplied adequately by fuel; the
hon. Vice-Prime Minister has not replied to most of the points raised today, either he has
chosen or he cannot, can I request - because we are dealing with a national issue - that he
should come and reply to all the points which I have raised, including that there is no marshy
land on the land leased as per the Lease Agreement?
Mr Collendavelloo: Well, let us not mix issues. With regard to the strategic
importance of that plot of land and even of the Tank Farm, the Combined Power Plant, from
the beginning I have said that it is part of the national strategy. And I agreed, and it is clear
from the World Bank Report, from my statements in Parliament, that it will be a severe
setback if we are unable to go ahead with this project.
Now, with regard to wetlands and marshy lands, I feel I have answered correctly, but I
will review all the questions of the hon. Leader of the Opposition when I read the transcript
and shall come back with a statement should I feel that I have been under the standard
required by the hon. Leader of the Opposition.
Madam Speaker: Time is over! Hon. Members, the Table has been advised that
Parliamentary Question No. B/754, in regard to loans guaranteed by Government in favour of
Air Mauritius Ltd., will be replied by the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic
Development. The Table has further been advised that Parliamentary Question No. B/753 has
been withdrawn. Hon. Dr. Sorefan!