INDIA-MAURITIUS DOUBLE TAXATION AVOIDANCE CONVENTION
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Rt.
hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and National
Development Unit whether, in regard to the India-Mauritius Double Taxation Avoidance
Convention, he will state if -
(a)  Cabinet was made aware on 03 July 2015 of the -
(i)  details of the Draft Protocol presented on 16 June 2015 by the hon.
Minister of Finance and Economic Development of Mauritius to the
hon. Minister of Finance of India, and
(ii)  Minutes of the Joint Working Group Meeting signed on 01 July 2015
by the Financial Secretary of Mauritius, and
(b)  the hon. Prime Minister of India has agreed that there will be no revision of
the main provisions of the said Convention, in particular, of Article 4
regarding Capital Gains.
aaaaa
The Minister of Finance and Economic Development (Mr S. Lutchmeenaraidoo):
Madam Speaker, I will reply to this PNQ put to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister.
The Mauritius-India Double Taxation Avoidance Convention (DTAC) was signed in
April 1983 and it came into force in June 1985.
So far, the DTAC has served the interests of both Mauritius and India where it has
played an important role in foreign investment in India, Private Equity and Portfolio
investment. These investments have been crucial to India to overhaul infrastructure and boost
growth. It has helped to build a diversified economy in Mauritius that is more resilient to
external forces and to attain middle income status. Increased reliance on the financial services
sector has been an engine of growth whilst creating employment opportunities for young
professionals.
11 
However, the DTAC has been continuously subjected to attacks from various quarters
in India with claims that its provisions were being misused, thus resulting in huge tax losses
for India.
In order to address concerns expressed by the Indian side on possible misuse of the
DTAC, a Joint Working Group (JWG) comprising senior officials from the concerned
authorities of India and Mauritius was established in August 2006.
The Terms of Reference (TOR) of the JWG was set as follows -
(i)  To put in place adequate safeguards to prevent possible misuse of the
India-Mauritius DTAC without prejudice to the economic interests of
either country, and
(ii)  to strengthen the mechanism for the “Exchange of Information” under
the India-Mauritius DTAC.
The Joint Working Group has held ten meetings between October 2006 and May 2014
without any positive outcome.
The discussions were inconclusive due largely to strongly conflicting views on the
mandate of the Joint Working Group amongst other things.
Following the visit of the Prime Minister of India in March 2015, I led a ministerial
delegation from 15 to 19 June to discuss various bilateral issues, including the DTAC
between our two countries.
I then met with the hon. Arun Jaitley, Minister of Finance, hon. Mrs Sushma Swaraj,
Minister of Foreign Affairs, and Mr Mishra, Personal Assistant to the Prime Minister of
India. In our meeting, we reiterated the need to maintain the DTAC between our two
countries and emphasised its importance for the survival of the Global Business Sector. We
shared the qualms of India in preserving the integrity of the DTAC and conveyed our
commitment in enforcing good governance in all sectors of our economy. We clarified our
Government’s vision in developing substance in our financial services sector by moving from
the traditional back office and treaty centric focus to more jurisdictional substance.
During the visit, the Mauritian delegation submitted a draft Protocol amending the
DTAC for consideration by the Indian authorities.
Subsequently, the Indian Authorities agreed on the 11 th Meeting of the Joint Working
Group to be held in India on 29 and 30 June 2015 to resume discussions.
12 
Accordingly, Cabinet was informed on 26 June 2015 that a delegation would proceed
to India to discuss the DTAC.
As regards part (a) (i) of the question, there was no need for Cabinet to be informed
on the details prior to the holding of discussions at the level of the Joint Working Group.
Concerning part (a) (ii) of the question, Cabinet was informed on 03 July 2015 that
the Joint Working Group had discussions to resolve pending issues and that agreed Minutes
of the discussions had been signed and a draft Protocol initialled by both parties.
Madam Speaker, with regard to part (b) of the question, I wish to inform the House
that, during the last visit of the Prime Minister to India in the context of the India Africa
Forum Summit, held in New Delhi on 29 October 2015, the issue of the Double Taxation
Avoidance Convention was raised during a bilateral meeting with the Indian Prime Minister.
During the discussions, our Prime Minister recalled the statement made by his Excellency
Mr Modi during his visit to Mauritius in the context of our National Day Celebrations. Mr
Modi, and I quote, stated -
“We understand the importance of the offshore banking sector for your economy. We
are conscious of its dependence on India. We will work together for our shared
objective to avoid the abuse of our Double Taxation Avoidance Convention. I thank
you for your support. But, I also assure you that we will do nothing to harm this
vibrant sector of one of our closest strategic partners”.
Madam Speaker, during the same bilateral meeting, amongst other issues, our Prime
Minister reiterated his appeal to the Indian Prime Minister to safeguard the interest of
Mauritius and to see to it that nothing is done to put at stake the benefits derived by Mauritius
under Article 13 of the Double Taxation Avoidance Convention with regard to Capital Gains
Tax. Our Prime Minister also assured India that Mauritius will put in all necessary efforts and
walk the extra mile to ensure that our reputation as a clean, proven and trusted jurisdiction is
upheld at all costs.
In view of the bond of kinship between our two countries and the mutual respect that
exists between the two Prime Ministers, Shri Narendra Modi reassured that India strongly
values its relationship with Mauritius and that his Government will not do anything to harm
the economic interest of Mauritius.
13 
Madam Speaker, there are, however, new developments concerning this sector at
international level, which we cannot ignore in Mauritius.
(i)  On 08 October 2015, the OECD announced that the G20 Finance Ministers,
including the Minister of Finance of India, have endorsed the final package of
measures proposed by the OECD/G20 Base Erosion Profit Shifting (BEPS)
project, including the development of a multilateral instrument for the
harmonisation of tax treaties and the elimination of double non-taxation.
(ii)  Moreover, the General Anti Avoidance Rule (GAAR) under the amended
India Income Tax Act will come into force in April 2017 and will address the
issue of double non-taxation as well as treaty shopping.
(iii)  India has already started its own financial services centre, that is, the Gujrat
International Financial Centre. All FDI to Mauritius is expected to be
channelled to India through the GIFC.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, my question was addressed to the Rt. hon. Prime
Minister of Mauritius who has just met the Prime Minister of India and subsequently made
statements on Tuesday the 3 rd of this month, and it was widely reported in the press in India. I
am, therefore, not putting questions to the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic
Development.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Members, with regard to questions addressed to the Rt. hon.
Prime Minister, the Table has been advised that P.Q. Nos. B/816 and B/822 have been
withdrawn. Hon. Ameer Meea!