CEB – ELECTRICITY SUPPLY
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the hon.
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to electricity,
he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain information as to -
(a)  regarding the emergency measures recommended by the World Bank to ensure
the security of supply thereof, where matters stand as to the –
(i)  appeals of CT Power and of Burmeister & Wain Scandinavian Contractor
AS and the purchase of engines of 60 MW for the St. Louis Power Station;
(ii)  optimisation of maintenance;
(iii) emergency voltage reduction;
(iv) 37-year old Pielstick engines, and
(v)  purchase of two 36 MW gas turbines, and
(b)  if the price thereof will be lowered, following the windfall gains made by the
Central Electricity Board due to the fall in the price of coal and of oil.
aaaaa
The Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities (Mr I.
Collendavelloo): Madam Speaker, in answer to part (a), the World Bank in its report at page
7 says –
“The results of simulations of the energy supply to peak demand in the island
of Mauritius carried out by the World Bank team revealed significant capacity
gaps for the period 2015-2017. In the short term - so goes on the World Bank
- time constraints would very likely prevent any additions to the generation
installed capacity in the island of Mauritius that are not already planned and
under development. Therefore, the measures recommended by the World
Bank team to eliminate the capacity gap in this horizon refer to enhancing the
operation of the existing system, fast tracking generation projects already in
the pipeline and extending the operation either of existing generation assets
10
that are scheduled for decommissioning or of IPPS whose contract is
scheduled for termination.”
At page 53 of the report, the World Bank discusses in detail its recommendations for the
short-term. Nothing in what they say can authorise any well-intentioned reader to find,
emergency drama or panic, when there is none.
It is, therefore, a theatrical exaggeration to suggest that we have to take measures in
the nature of an emergency.
On a correct reading of the report in conjunction with facts provided to me, I am of
the firm opinion that, in assessing the capacity gap, the World Bank, in fact, underestimated
the capacity available for supply, especially during the critical months of November and
December.
I shall take one instance which is at page 121 of the report. The World Bank assumes
that CEL will continue to run on coal and bagasse but omits from consideration the fact that
CEL has been running only on coal and this as from 2014. The World Bank figure is that
CEL will churn out only 12 MW. In fact, CEL will continue with coal and will churn out 22
MW of power.
At page 41, I can only read what is written there: Little information is available on the
Medine new bagasse-fired thermal plant in the documentation made available to the World
Bank team.
In the energy balance in 11, the projects output is considered from 2015 onwards. For
this reason, the World Bank team assumes that the Medine new plant is expected to be
operational at the beginning of 2015.
We see, therefore, that, far from being dramatic, the language of the World Bank is
guarded and cautionary. For example, on Medine New, the World Bank provides the figure
of 4 MW when the real figure is 11 MW.
As for the Pielstick engines, they will continue to run until 2017 and not 2016.
All this indicates that, on real figures, we are not in any situation of drama and/or
emergency.
What we see, therefore, is that not only has there been an underestimation of available
capacity, there has also been a misapprehension of the maintenance plan of CEB. CEB will
11
be able, with the assistance of the IPPs, to sail through 2016 and through 2017 without great
difficulty.
I come now to part (a)(i) of the question on CT Power and BWSC. The two cases are
not appeals strictly speaking; they are applications for Judicial Review. CT Power has applied
for judicial review. The matter will be mentioned on 24 September 2015.
BWSC has also applied for Judicial Review. They applied for an injunction. The case
will be mentioned on 28 September 2015.
In my statement in the National Assembly on 01 September 2015, I informed the
House that, on 03 July 2015, the CEB has invited fresh tenders with revised specifications for
60 MW capacity, as approved by the African Development Bank and recommended by the
World Bank. The closing date is 01 October 2015. It is expected that the contract will be
awarded by the end of this year for commissioning of the engines within 18 months. The
engines should be operational by June/July 2017.
Optimisation of Maintenance, that is with regard to part (a)(ii) of the question, the
CEB is in consultation with the Independent Power Producers and it has already finalised
scheduled maintenance of all generating units island wide with a view to optimise on capacity
available and minimise outage on maintenance, that is, machines being immobilised because
of maintenance. In terms of figures, the reserve margin - which is a capacity within which we
can play if we are in trouble - ranges from 42 MW to a very comfortable 146 MW during the
whole year taking into account what is called a spinning reserve of 10%. The reserve margin
should, therefore, cater for any major breakdown of the biggest unit in operation. All these
calculations have taken into account seasonal variation in demand and seasonal variation in
supply.
As regards part (a)(iii), emergency voltage reduction, that is a recommendation of the
World Bank. CEB has, in the light of these recommendations, conducted tests. They have
given positive results, confirming the forecast of the World Bank, that is, that it is feasible to
undergo emergency voltage reduction. What it means is that voltage would be reduced by a
certain percentage. Already, in our law under the Electric CT Regulations, CEB or any
producer is allowed to reduce voltage by up to 6% - to reduce or to increase by up to 6%.
This would mean, according to CEB’s estimates, that there would be a capacity reduction of
5 to 8 MW, but I hasten to add that this has not been tested on the terrain, these are estimates.
12
CEB also states that such reduction will have no effect on domestic and industrial
appliances.
CEB does not envisage resorting to this measure except in very, very extreme
circumstances.
As regards part (a)(iv), the Pielstick engines were commissioned in 1978 and 1979
respectively. The initial rating was 12MW for each engine; they have been derated to 5 MW
only and they are operating safely on this 5 MW output. It is expected that operating these
engines for two more years should not be a problem. Upon the commissioning of these new
60 MW units at St Louis in 2017, those units will be phased out.
As regards part (a) (v), the purchase of the two 36 MW Gas Turbines, in my statement
of 01 September 2015, Madam Speaker, I mentioned how the World Bank had recommended
that gas turbines of 2 x 36 MW should be procured. Such technology should provide lower
costs of production of electricity in the medium-term through significant improvement of
overall efficiency, which is twofold than the open cycle gas turbines presently in operation at
Nicolay. The environmental aspects associated with diesel engines operating on heavy fuel
oil will also be considerably improved.
The CEB is in the process of appointing a Consultant for the installation of the gas
turbines and a first unit is expected to be in operation in January 2018. The CEB has launched
an expression of interest for consultancy services on 25 August 2015. The closing date is 07
October 2015. The scope of the consultancy is to carry out a summary feasibility study to
validate the project and to propose technical implementation solutions, carry out
environmental impact assessment and risk assessment and the basic design engineering of the
power plant.
The CEB expects to appoint the Consultant by mid-October 2015, the report to be
submitted by June 2016. In parallel, the Consultant will carry out a pre-qualification of EPC
contractors by May 2016 and prepare the tender documents for design, supply and
commissioning of the plant. Tenders are expected to be floated in August 2016 and the
contract award is expected by January 2017 which means that the first turbine could be in
operation in January 2018 and a second one in January 2019 and completed with the steam
turbine and full CCGT plant in January 2020.
13
The Combined Cycle Gas Turbine plant will operate with an efficiency of around
60% as compared to 45% of diesel plant and 30% for coal/bagasse plant.
In parallel, a committee comprising my Ministry, Ministry of Finance and Economic
Development, Ministry of Environment, Sustainable Development and Disaster and Beach
Management, the Mauritius Ports Authority and the State Trading Corporation is working on
the aspects regarding the implementation, transport and storage of LNG. This will be the
subject of debates in connection with the MARENA Bill. The possibility of bilateral
cooperation with countries such as Mozambique and others regarding long-term Government
to Government agreement is also being considered.
As regards part (b) the question, I am not aware of the extent of these alleged
“windfall gains” as I do not hold the latest accounts of the CEB.
(Interruptions)
However, it is clear that with the drop in commodity prices – I do not read certain
newspapers - coupled with the fact that CEB steadfastly refused to be trapped by those who
were pressing for the adoption of hedging mechanisms, CEB can easily forecast a year of
profits. However, no reduction in tariffs is envisaged.
Compared to other institutions in the country, the Central Electricity Board took the
right decision not to resort to hedging at the time that the prices of HFO and coal were
increasing on the world market. May I add that I take no credit for this because these were
decisions which were taken before my time! This has enabled the Central Electricity Board to
benefit from the current drop in oil and coal prices. Such drops may be only temporary as the
situation may quickly evolve on the commodities market particularly if oil producing
countries reduce their production. Experience shows that oil prices are very volatile subject
to geopolitical situations and demand and supply conditions.
Furthermore, as the House is aware, the Central Electricity Board has heavy
investment programmes over the next five years to increase its production capacity through
the installation of engines at St Louis Power Station and at Les Grandes Salines. In addition,
the CEB is upgrading its grid because of the under-investment in that sector in the past.
There is a pressing need to upgrade the physical integrity of the Transmission and
Distribution network to cope with more adverse climatic conditions as well as to
accommodate more renewable energy to meet the target of 35% by 2025. The current figures
14
of Central Electricity Board show that it will need investments in the order of Rs22 billion in
the next five years.
Such investments would increase the debt servicing requirements of the Board and the
current positive financial position can only allow the Board to minimise any impact on future
electricity tariffs.
Furthermore, the Central Electricity Board tariff is not indexed to inflation and
foreign currencies for the payment of its loans. These factors may obviously erode the
current surplus.
In addition, according to Central Electricity Board’s forecast the price of coal is
expected to increase by 3% to 4% annually over the next four years, while the price of oil is
forecast to annually increase in the range of 6.7% to 7.5% based on the latest World Bank’s
Commodity Price Forecast Update. A new salary structure and related conditions of service
of Central Electricity Board employees is due as from July 2017. This will further add to the
operational costs of the Central Electricity Board.
In light of the above, I repeat that the Central Electricity Board is not envisaging any
reduction in tariff and I support fully the stand of the CEB.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, as the hon. Vice-Prime Minister has been very slow
in delivery, I will, therefore, expect that we have some more time for supplementary
questions. Any clear-minded reading of the report picks out emergency measures throughout,
the term ‘emergency measures’ appears time and again. It is clear that for the World Bank
we are in an emergency situation. Can I quote, for example, page 57, paragraph 5 where the
World Bank report says –
“In fact, even if all the recommendations are implemented, the quantitative
simulations indicate that there would still be a relevant capacity gap in 2016 and the
first semester of 2017.”
So, it is clear that it is emergency measures that are put forward. Now, it is clear also that the
hon. Vice-Prime Minister, advised by the CEB, is saying that the World Bank is wrong, has
underestimated this and that. Now, can I ask whether a representation has been made to the
World Bank by Mauritius, if yes, can we have a copy of that representation, and, if yes, what
has been the reaction of the World Bank?
15
Mr Collendavelloo: Let me take one thing first. Nothing in page 57 warrants creating
a panic! Nothing in page 57 warrants that we declare an emergency! On the contrary, of
course, we can always extract parts of a report.
The whole of that report shows that we are not in an emergency. Secondly, with
regard to what the World Bank figures have given, they, themselves said like I read at page
41 that they have made assumptions - which is perfectly normal for an expert to do on - when
they deal with Medine New the new bagasse fired thermal plant, it is clear that the experts
were basing themselves on the information which they had, but the real information is
otherwise, this is all I am saying. We have taken the report, I don’t think there is any need for
representations; I will take the decision when the decision has to be taken, but for now I’ve
read that 10 times over, I am satisfied that we are not in a panic situation, but we are border
line as I have said. We need to take our precautions, although it does not arise directly from
the question, but it comes to my mind, we are embarked on an Energy Efficiency STARTER
Programme which started with the Energy Efficiency Act, right now, I have asked PNKE to
start the programme with CWA. Already, just on CWA, we will be able to save 15% of
energy bills.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, we will have to agree to disagree. My reading of the
report is totally different and it is clear that the Minister himself disagrees when he says that
the World Bank has underestimated this and that and so on. But I’ll move on, since we have
to agree to disagree. As far as the purchase of those vital 60 megawatts engines at St Louis
are concerned, the hon. Minister has informed us that two cases: one from City Power and the
other one from BWSC are before the Supreme Court, will be mentioned in both cases in
September. Now, we know that time is of the essence, that we are very tight, it will take - I
don’t think 18 months like the CEB is saying – I think two years for the order to be placed,
the engines to be constructed, shipped to Mauritius, commissioned and installed,
commissioned and so on. But even on 18 months, will the hon. Minister agree with me, this is
very tight? Is he sure that those cases will be over by the end of the year or is he envisaging
to go ahead and place the order for purchase even if there are cases before the Supreme
Court?
Mr Collendavelloo: I will see when the orders are open. I must say that I agree with
the hon. Leader of the Opposition that this is one of the way forward. It is true that we cannot
be held to ransom by a Supreme Court case, but at the same time, we need to respect the
16
Judiciary. We have to balance these two matters. The Public Procurement Act allows me to
use certain powers, up to now I have been very careful not to make use of it, although I have
been very tempted to do this. The BWSC (Burmeister & Wain Scandinavian Contractor) - I
am sorry I can’t pronounce the real name - in fact, is very keen with the second tender. It has
made about 50 demands of clarifications. So, in the same time, they are saying to cancel the
tender the first month and at the same breath they are saying they want to be interested in the
second tender. I don’t want to pass comment because the case is in Court.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, if I can move to the other points which I have raised
because we see the risk, we are going to be sur la corde raide and I hope la corde ne cède pas
between now and the first six months of 2017. Now, if I can ask the next question -
optimisation of maintenance. We’ve been in this Assembly for the last year, then every year,
every time I put a question, hon. Beebeejaun then Minister responsible would say: “we are
improving, we are fine- tuning and so on”. What is left to be fine-tuned? Can I have an
estimate of what the fine-tuning by CEB at this late hour is going to bring us of more marge
de manoeuvre?
Mr Collendavelloo: It is not annual fine-tuning. I have looked at the maintenance
plan although I don’t understand much about it, but I mean it is not too difficult either. There
is a plan where you have lots of colours telling you month by month which machine is going
to go on maintenance and then I have read that for November and December there are 40.7
megawatts of power which will be available for maintenance because there will be no
maintenance at that time. This is what they tell me, their plan seems attractive and they tell
me with this maintenance plan they can cater for breakdowns etcetera. L’avenir nous le dira.
Mr Bérenger: I have looked at the figures which the hon. Minister has just provided
us for that is described as an emergency measure, this so-called ‘Emergency Voltage
Reduction’. Now, I’ve listened to the Minister and the figures that he has provided us, that we
are going to be able to bring down peak demand by 5 to 8 megawatt which is legally
admissible. Will the hon. Minister agree with me that this should be the very last resort, that
this is going to disturb the whole set up?
Mr Collendavelloo: I do. I mean by that, I agree.
Mr Bérenger: If I can move on the Pielstick engines. Really, I find that the Minister
takes it très à la légère. These are 37 year-old engines that can explode at any time - I am not
17
being alarmist - there have been accidents in the recent past. It is polluting the environment
there, you have protest and the World Bank points out that we will no longer have spare parts
for these 37 year-old engines and therefore is the hon. Minister telling me that he can live, he
is happy, with that really emergency situation? It is described by the World Bank that if
nothing else can be done, then these 37 year-old engines will be used with all the risks that it
entails.
Mr Collendavelloo: I have not started living in a dream world. The reality is there.
For 35 years, there have been these two Pielstick engines, it is not my habit to dig in the past,
but no one has been very worried about it until now. I am getting worried.
(Interruptions)
Yes, of course! I am not saying anything against you! I am talking of...
(Interruptions)
You want me to dig in the past, that is your problem!
(Interruptions)
In the past I would be – this is why I say I don’t want to dig in the past, but we raised
the alarm when we were together, we know this. But there was some complacency on the
other side. I don’t know why this - I saw that mini minor on the paper Le Mauricien with
Lady Jugnauth saying that was the first car she drove. This is the attachment we have with
old engines. We’ve got to understand what we are talking about. When we talk of the
Pielstick engines running, we are talking only about three hours daily during peak hours. We
are not talking of Pielstick engines running all the time. We are not that dependent on them,
but at night, for instance, it is 200 megawatts. We don’t need them, but when it comes to 492
on peak demand then, of course, you put in the additional power. I hope that clarifies the
matter.
Mr Bérenger: If I can move on because the hon. Minister is taking a lot of time
instead of replying to questions. On the issue of the two new turbines, gas turbine, to be
operated for a few years on light diesel oil and then to move on LNG, if we do import LNG.
Figures have been quoted by the Head of the CEB that it will cost us Rs5.50 ou Rs5.70,
without telling us if that is long-term with LNG or only with light diesel oil. Can we have
precision on that?
18
Mr Collendavelloo: Well, I hope I will start replying to your questions since you
seem to be unhappy with my attitude.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Vice-Prime Minister, please! Address the Chair!
Mr Collendavelloo: The combined cycle gas turbines will run on diesel oil. I have the
figures; they have just been given to me. In combined cycle, the cost of production will be
less than Rs6 per kilowatt hour.
(Interruptions)
That’s on combined.
(Interruptions)
Yes, with the light diesel oil. Wait a minute, don’t be impatient.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Allow the hon. Vice-Prime Minister to reply, please!
Mr Collendavelloo: Madam Speaker, will give you time.
(Interruptions)
Yes, I know it is combined cycle gas. Your question is: what will happen when LNG steps
in?
Mr Bérenger: No, my question is: with light diesel oil, what will it cost?
Mr Collendavelloo: Rs6 ! Light diesel oil…
Mr Bérenger: This is with combined cycle!
Mr Collendavelloo: No, no!
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Please, allow the hon. Vice-Prime Minister to reply. Do you have
the reply, hon. Vice-Prime Minister?
Mr Collendavelloo: Combined cycle will run on diesel. Combined cycle will not run
with gas, will not run with kerosene.
19
Mr Bérenger: Can I remind the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, therefore, that we have set
up, we are going to have a feasibility study if it is possible to have the combined cycle. Now,
we are setting up a feasibility study to look whether it will be feasible to import LNG. Isn’t
that putting la charrette loin devant les bœufs? We are going for LNG, we are going for the
combined cycle and, at the same time, going with feasibility studies!
Mr Collendavelloo: We are not at LNG. We are not at LNG yet. We need to know, to
do all the feasibility studies before we can reach there. For the moment, we have already
launched ourselves on the combined cycle which will run on diesel, and you may be of a
different opinion, but, for the moment, I am taking the decision on advice which I received,
and on the advice that I have received, not only from CEB, and on that it is erroneous to
assume that my advice is from CEB. I have independent Advisers and sometimes they
coincide and sometimes they do not coincide, and from what they tell me, the combined cycle
will start working with diesel oil and then we will see what happens with LNG; because, it
can be hoped.
Mr Bérenger: I still have not been provided with the figure. With light diesel oil,
without the combined cycle, what will it cost us?
Mr Collendavelloo: We don’t know. Because we need to do the feasibility study
before I adventure myself in figures.
Mr Bérenger: This morning, Madam Speaker, the Head of the CEB made a
statement. I wanted to ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister whether he confirms that, that we are
bound by international conventions not to import - what was stated this morning, a
convention internationale signée par le gouvernement - more than the 750,000 tonnes that we
import as at present. Now, I want to know, has Mauritius signed, ratified any international
convention that says that?
Mr Collendavelloo: I am not aware of that statement, but the true position is that in
the forthcoming COP21 there will be attempts to impose upon us, but there is no convention
which limits the imports of coal for the moment.
(Interruptions)
Mr Bérenger: A good thing, because it seems that the CEB has forgotten – I don’t
know if the hon. Vice-Prime Minister is still standing – that CEB had given its green light to
20
CT Power, and that would have meant 500,000 additional coal to be imported, and now the
Head of the CEB makes such statement à la place du ministre, je dois dire. But, I am
satisfied that the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, at least, is not aware of any convention that we
have signed.
Mr Collendavelloo: No, I am not saying I am not aware. There is none. There is no
such convention. Unless otherwise advised.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Osman Mahomed!
Mr Bérenger: A last part of my question and then …
Madam Speaker: Okay!
Mr Bérenger: On the cost. I am surprised that the hon. Vice-Prime Minister is saying
that he is not aware; he has not had the final accounts of the CEB and so on. I am sure he is
aware of the Central Electricity Board official report for the first five months of the year, and
if I can quote -
“The CEB budgeted a profit of Rs264 m. for the first five months, ending 31 May, but
the actual profit for the first five months are now to be Rs1,594,000,000.”
This represents a favourable variance of Rs1,330,000,000, the windfall gains of the five
months.
Now, if you project that over the 12 months, and is the hon. Vice-Prime Minister
aware that only last week the latest order placed for purchase of coal was at 50 Dollars? The
former purchase was 60 Dollars. Last week, the order for purchase has been put at 50 Dollars.
Therefore, the windfall gains have already been made and the accounts are in front of the - or
it should be - hon. Vice-Prime Minister, and it is easy to calculate that the windfall gains
would be more than Rs3 billion for the whole year.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order, please!
Mr Collendavelloo: This is only one of the reasons why I am a happy man.
(Interruptions)
21
But, on the report, I do not have it. I have asked the Chairman of the Board.
(Interruptions)
I will! The first thing I do when I buy ‘Weekend’ is to read the hon. Leader of the Opposition
for his press conference.
Madam Speaker: Please, come back to the question!
Mr Collendavelloo: Let me say, I am explaining how I came to know of the existence
of this management account. I have asked the Chairman, it has not yet come up to the Board,
and when it comes, I will look at it and then I will see. The Chairman is the person, because
he chairs the Finance Committee, he should be the one to be available. So, I am…
(Interruptions)
I am not going into this. I follow sound principles of good governance.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Osman Mahomed!
Mr Mahomed: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In reply to my Parliamentary Question
No. B/457 of two weeks ago, the hon. Vice-Prime Minister replied that the highest price at
which we ever purchased coal was 141 Dollars, and now we hear it is 50 Dollars, latest
consignment. And we hear also this morning that the forecast increase in price of coal by the
CEB is 4% to 5%. That will take at least 20 to 25 years for the price of coal to become its
original highest. Does that not provide enough leeway to the CEB and to the Government to
be more compassionate to the people who are at the lower rungs of the ladder and to our
manufacturing sector which is having difficult times competing with countries like China and
Bangladesh and so on and so forth?
Mr Collendavelloo: Well, that’s a good one - at last! - because I was expecting that
for a long time. Why, because hon. Ganoo was the first one to suggest this in one of his press
conferences! Yes! What can be done is for the lower rungs of the ladder to benefit from a
restructuring of the tariffs so that they don’t pay that much and they benefit from the gains to
be obtained. The suggestion from hon. Mahomed is extremely valid and it follows from what
hon. Ganoo has suggested. Let us look at the lower rungs, see whether the other consumers
22
can pay for those who are downtrodden. Now, for manufacturing sectors, I don’t think we
can do this.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah!
Mr Rutnah: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In relation to part (b) of the PNQ, can I ask
whether the hon. Vice-Prime Minister is aware that during the course of the press conference
of the hon. Leader of the Opposition on Saturday, the hon. Leader of the Opposition was
quite enthusiastically referring to the final accounts and actually distributed the final accounts
during the press conference…
(Interruptions)
The management account! I am sorry, if I got it wrong. The management account and that if
in the light of the answer given by the hon. Vice-Prime Minister that he is not aware of the
content of the report, whether there has been a breach of confidentiality and whether…
(Interruptions)
…and whether the hon. Vice-Prime Minister will initiate….
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Allow the hon. Member to finish! Allow the hon. Member to
finish!
(Interruptions)
Order, please! Order, Please!
(Interruptions)
Order!
(Interruptions)
Order, I said! I have given already additional time for this PNQ. I don’t want us to lose the
time of the House, please!
(Interruptions)
23
Mr Rutnah: Perhaps the hon. Members on the Opposition side can extend the courtesy
of listening!
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Don’t make remarks! Please, ask your question!
Mr Rutnah: Will the Vice-Prime Minister order an inquiry - and I anticipate….
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah, don’t anticipate anything! Ask your question, the
hon. Vice-Prime Minister will reply!
(Interruptions)
Mr Rutnah: The question is whether there has been a leakage and whether there will
be inquiry and whether during the course of the inquiry the hon. Leader of the Opposition
will assist as to how he received the copy of the report.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah! Hon. Rutnah, please!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Rutnah, please behave!
(Interruptions)
Yes, allow the hon. Vice-Prime Minister to reply!
(Interruptions)
And then the last question will be for the hon. Leader of the Opposition!
(Interruptions)
Mr Collendavelloo: If hon. Baloomoody will let me….
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Member, don’t use this kind of words in the Parliament!
24
(Interruptions)
You have finished!
Mr Collendavelloo: I have not even seen the document which was distributed to the
press, for one. I am not even aware of the origin and provenance of that obscure document.
(Interruptions)
This document has not even reached the Finance Committee of the Board.
(Interruptions)
Now, whether…
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah, please! I have asked you to behave!
(Interruptions)
Mr Uteem: On a point of order…
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: On a point of order, yes!
(Interruptions)
Mr Uteem: The hon. Member has just made a very serious allegation that the hon.
Leader of the Opposition has been involved in a serious crime of bribery. He said that he
paid bribery ….
(Interruptions)
May I ask him to come and withdraw immediately….
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah, did you say this?
(Interruptions)
Did you say this? If you did, please say ‘yes’ and withdraw!
25
Mr Rutnah: I never from a standing position made any allegation.
(Interruptions)
And I have not said it and I refuse to withdraw.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: No. Hon. Rutnah! Hon. Rutnah, please!
(Interruptions)
Please, sit down!
(Interruptions)
Order, please! Order!
(Interruptions)
Order, please! Can I have some order, otherwise I will suspend the session?
(Interruptions)
Order, please!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Minister, please, sit down! The floor is for the hon. Vice-Prime Minister.
Mr Collendavelloo: Thank you, Madam Speaker.
(Interruptions)
Let me - don’t spoil my day!
(Interruptions)
For unparliamentary language, the Standing Orders say: it is only when the Speaker has heard
the word.
(Interruptions)
Read your Standing Orders! Go and read your Standing Orders, then come back!
26
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Minister …
(Interruptions)
Mr Collendavelloo: If you haven’t heard…
Madam Speaker: Please, sit down! I will listen, if there is need, to the recording,
whether in the recording there are such words which have been used. I have asked the hon.
Member to say whether he has used these words and I haven’t as yet received his reply.
Mr Collendavelloo: May I reply to the question, Madam Speaker. I am not aware of
the origin, provenance of that document. I cannot, therefore, even say if there has been a
leakage. The leakage is a leakage of an authentic document. For all I know, it could have
been written by anyone in the world. Now, come and satisfy me that this is the original
document and I will answer readily!
Madam Speaker: Last question is for the hon. Leader of the Opposition.
Mr Bérenger: Before I ask the question, can I table a copy of the report dated 30
July….
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Please! Hon. Bhagwan, please, allow the hon. Leader of the
Opposition to ask his last question! We are ahead of time!
Mr Bérenger: And the title is ‘Management Accounts for the period January-May
2015 and Revised Forecast for the year 2015’. I table a copy. You give me back my copy,
please!
My last question is - I hope the CEB is right. We all hope, but can I remind the hon.
Vice-Prime Minister, il prend de lourdes responsabilités. We have had precedence. The CEB
has been badly wrong in the past. In 1976-1977, we had rolling blackouts. We had to
purchase a very expensive gas turbine in emergency situations that we all remember.
Therefore, is the hon. Vice-Prime Minister giving the guarantee to the country that there will
not be a repeat of these periods?
27
Mr Collendavelloo: The country will not wake up with any blackout if I am in charge
and I am going to be in charge. If I can see the report, please! I would like to see that. I have
never seen that report. I don’t know where it comes from. Of course, it will be unsigned.
You can’t expect it to bear a signature.
(Interruptions)
So, until such time …
(Interruptions)
…when I obtain the correct copy, then I will…
Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed, you have got a question! No, not from a
sitting position, please!
Mr Collendavelloo: So, when I obtain what I have said…
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Please, sit down!
(Interruptions)
Mr Collendavelloo: …then I will be able to comment. For the moment, this has no
value for me.
Madam Speaker: Time is over! Hon. Members, the Table has been advised that
P.Q. No. B/523 has been withdrawn. P.Q. No. B/521 in regard to the proposed setting-up of
a Land Tribunal and addressed to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister will now be replied by the hon.
Attorney-General. P.Q. Nos. B/527 and B/528 have also been withdrawn. Hon. Dr. Sorefan!