MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND QUALITY OF LIFE – MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS – RECRUITMENT
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Rt.
hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and
National Development Unit whether, in regard to the recent recruitment of 60 medical
practitioners as Medical and Health Officers at the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life and
to the national stir caused by the exercise, he will –
(a)  state if –
(i)  his Office is in presence of complaints in relation thereto, and
(ii)  consideration will be given for the recruitment exercise to be cancelled
and for a fresh one to be carried out by the Public Service Commission,
and
(b)  for the benefit of the House, obtain from the –
(i)  Equal Opportunities Commission, information as to if it is in presence
of complaints in relation thereto, and
8
(ii)  Public Service Commission, information as to –
(A)  if it is in presence of complaints in relation thereto, and
(B)  the reasons why it had delegated its recruitment powers to the
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life for this exercise.
aaaaa
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, in regard to part (a) (i) of the question, I have
indeed received complaints addressed to me from candidates who have not been selected
following the selection exercise in question.
I have also taken note of complaints which have been addressed to the Equal
Opportunities Commission and the Independent Commission against Corruption and copied
to the Prime Minister’s Office.
Madam Speaker, in regard to part (a) (ii) of the question, I am informed by the
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life that as at August 2015, there were 119 permanent
vacancies and 60 temporary vacancies for the post of Medical and Health Officers/Senior
Medical and Health Officers in that Ministry. Temporary vacancies arose as a result of
doctors proceeding on leave without pay for further studies. The permanent vacancies were
reported to the Public Service Commission on 05 March 2015. The vacancies were
advertised by the Commission on 07 April 2015 with closing date 27 April 2015. I am
informed that interviews will be conducted by the Public Service Commission during the
period November 2015 to January 2016.
Madam Speaker, with regard to the recruitment of Medical and Health Officers/Senior
Medical and Health Officers on a month-to-month basis, the Public Service Commission has
delegated its powers since October 1997 to the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life, under
section 89(2) of the Constitution, and regulation 29 of the PSC Regulations, to employ
Medical and Health Officers/Senior Medical and Health Officers on a purely temporary and
month-to-month basis so as to palliate shortages of staff in critical areas and pending
recruitment exercises being completed by the PSC.
Several conditions are attached to such delegation of powers, namely that the
employment is made against vacancies and that candidates should have the required
qualifications as laid down in the Scheme of Service. They should also not have retired in the
interest of the Public Service or on medical grounds.
9
I am informed that the interview exercise was carried out based on the conditions as
set out by the PSC under delegated powers, which include the following –
(i)  Medical practitioners may be employed only if vacancies exist in the grade of
Medical and Health Officer/Senior Medical and Health Officer;
(ii)  The candidates should possess the qualifications laid down in the approved
Scheme of Service;
(iii)  The employment is purely temporary, on a month-to-month basis, subject to
termination at any time. Remuneration is at the initial salary of the post, and
(iv)  Should vacancies be advertised, the doctors must apply if they wish to be
considered for regular employment and will have to compete along with other
applicants.
Madam Speaker, I am informed that there are precedents in that a first selection
exercise was carried out as far back as 1998 under such delegation. Thereafter, several such
selection exercises have been made as follows –
Year  Selected Candidates
2004  :  7
2005  :  63
2006  :  30
2007  :  133
2008  :  12
2009  :  173
2010  :  84
2011  :  69
With regard to the present selection exercise, the post of Medical and Health
Officers/Senior Medical and Health Officers on a month-to-month basis was advertised on 24
June 2015 and closing date was 08 July 2015. 445 applications were received. Interviews
10
were carried out at the level of the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life under delegated
powers from 11 to 21 August 2015.
Sixty candidates were offered employment as Medical and Health Officer/Senior
Medical and Health Officer on a month-to-month basis. They assumed duty on Monday 12
October 2015.
Madam Speaker, the House will agree that in any selection exercise, it is difficult to
satisfy all candidates, the more so when there is a large number of eligible candidates.
I also wish to inform the House that it has become a common practice for the PSC to
delegate its powers for speedy filling of vacancies across the public service under specified
conditions.
Madam Speaker, in regard to part (b) (i), I am informed by the Equal Opportunities
Commission that three complaints were received thereat last week. These complaints have
already been registered on the database of the Commission as per its complaints handling
system and will be considered at the level of the Commission as from next week.
Madam Speaker, regarding part (b) (ii) of the question, I wish to highlight that the
Public Service Commission is a Constitutional body established under section 88 of the
Constitution with the power to appoint persons to hold or act in offices in the public service.
The exercise of the powers of the PSC cannot be called into question by any Minister and I
cannot exercise any control regarding appointment exercises carried out by the Public Service
Commission.
Regarding part (b) (ii) (A) of the question, I do not propose to reply to any further
question in relation to the operation of the Public Service Commission save for the factual
matters raised in this question.
Madam Speaker, I am therefore informing the House that the Public Service
Commission has not received any complaint in relation to the recruitment exercise.
Regarding part (b) (ii) (B), the Public Service Commission has delegated its powers,
as it is empowered to do so, under section 89(2) of the Constitution. I cannot seek to question
the Public Service Commission regarding the reasons for which it decided to delegate its
powers.
11
Madam Speaker, as the House is aware, health services are very critical and it is
imperative that we have the adequate manpower at different levels to provide medical
services round the clock.
Moreover, as the Public Service Commission is currently looking into the matter, it
would not be appropriate for me to substitute myself for the Commission.
Mr Bérenger: Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he is fully aware that,
on the basis of information widely available these days, it is widely felt that meritocracy has
not prevailed in that exercise and that there has been ingérence politique throughout?
The Prime Minister: Well, I am not aware of this thing, whether it is a fact as
rumours go round, but we know people are never satisfied even when the Commission does
its work. So, we expect people to grumble - those who are not recruited.
Mr Bérenger: The PSC has delegated its powers in that case as in others. Can I know
from the Prime Minister, being given this hue and cry that has arisen, whether he has tried to
find out - the Board that has exercised those delegated powers - what criteria have been used?
Because it is clear that it is neither experience nor qualification that has prevailed. Just to take
one example, half of those recruited have been registered with the Medical Council over the
past year whereas a lot of others had years and years of work experience and have not been
recruited. So, can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he has tried to find out what
criteria have been used by the Board that has exercised those delegated powers of the PSC?
The Prime Minister: Well, I have been told that the same criteria which would have
been used by the PSC have been used.
Mr Bérenger: Has the Rt. hon. Prime Minister tried to find out whether the Board
that had exercised those delegated powers was constituted as it should have with top officers
from the Ministry concerned and not much more junior officers, as I am given to understand
took place in that case?
The Prime Minister: The panel consisted of the –
Chairperson Dr. Mrs M. B. M. Timol, Director, Health Services who was
acting as Director-General, Health Services from 03 August to
28 August 2015
12
Member  Mr S. K. Sobee, Assistant Permanent Secretary, who was
acting as Deputy Permanent Secretary from 19 June to 23
August 2015
Member Mr Z. Bhugelloo, Manager Human Resources
Mr Bérenger: Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister if he has taken the trouble to
check whether this composition is in order? I am given to understand that in the past it was
the most senior officer of the Ministry that chaired with other Medical Officers, whereas in
this case it is not a top Senior Medical Officer and two civil servants. Has he tried to find out
whether this is normal?
The Prime Minister: Well, at first sight, when I look at the names, it seems they are
qualified people capable of doing the job for which they were assigned.
Mr Bérenger: I asked the Rt. hon. Prime Minister the reasons why the powers were
delegated and he told me that this is a current practice going back a long time. In this
particular case, it has been widely reported in the Press - I would wish to clear the point - that
supposedly the PSC delegated its powers because there is a case before the Supreme Court.
Another Medical Officer in the former recruitment exercise has challenged in Court and,
therefore, because of that, the PSC has delegated its powers. Is that a fact?
The Prime Minister: Well, I don’t know whether it is a fact. But I cannot see why,
because there is a case in Court, the PSC is paralysed and cannot keep on proceeding with its
duties. I don’t see why it should be like that!
Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Dr. Joomaye!
Dr. Joomaye: Can I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether, among the
candidates whose services have not been retained, there were some who had postgraduate
degrees, that is, they were already qualified specialists and they were applying for the post of
Medical Health Officer?
The Prime Minister: I do not know; I cannot answer this question.
Mr Bhagwan: Can I know from the Prime Minister whether he has been made aware
and whether he could enquire as well if whether interviews were carried out in a rush manner
– in a cuit vider manner, as we say - even at night, calling candidates to come at the last
minute, and that caused a lot of frustration and even doubts in the mind of the public?
The Prime Minister: I am not aware of this and I have not inquired into it.
13
Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem!
Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is the hon. Prime Minister aware if this
panel which carried out the interview took into consideration any reserved list that had been
prepared by the PSC following interview exercise for recruitment of doctors in the past?
The Prime Minister: I cannot answer this; I do not know.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed!
Mr Mohamed: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since the hon. Prime Minister is now
aware - after having a first sight, now that he has a second sight - that there is a lot of people
who were on a waiting list prepared by the PSC and those people have not been taken into
account for the recruitment exercise, now that he is aware that people have made complaints
at the Equal Opportunities Commission, now that he is aware that the Board that was set up is
not in the normal process as far as the composition is concerned…
(Interruptions)
… now that he is aware that there are clearly some zones d’ombre - serious - following
certain Press reports of this morning, does he not consider that it would be in the interest of
justice that he puts a halt to this whole exercise of recruitment and that there is an enquiry
that is carried out in order to render justice to all those people who have been waiting for
years as opposed to people who for a few months only have come in, in the interest of justice
now that he is aware?
The Prime Minister: The PSC is continuing with its exercise of recruitment.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Not from a sitting position, please! Allow the hon. Prime Minister
to reply then the hon. Member will have time to ask questions!
The Prime Minister: Well, if these people are qualified, they are on a waiting list, I
am sure they will get their chance to be recruited by the PSC!
Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo!
Mr Ganoo: Madam Speaker, some time back the hon. Prime Minister, in this very
House, said that he had no objection that the list of these new recruits as public officers
should be published officially by the PSC or by the Ministry concerned. Does the hon. Prime
14
Minister have any objection that, in this case also, the names of those who have been
recruited be published officially?
The Prime Minister: Well, insofar as I am concerned personally, I have no objection
that once people who are selected will be recruited that the names will be made public. What
is wrong with it?
Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Jhugroo!
Mr Jhugroo: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Can the hon. Prime Minister confirm
whether the same exercise had been carried out in the past years and this year it had been
chaired by someone very professional, Dr. Mrs Timol, who is a consultant, I think, in
Psychiatry and also has the same exercise not been carried out in 2012, 2013 and 2014?
The Prime Minister: Well, I have already answered this in my answer. For years,
this has been going on and it has become a practice for PSC to delegate its powers and make
such appointment, of course, on a temporary basis.
Mr Bérenger: I have just heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister say - and it is a good
thing - that he has no objection as far as he is concerned - and he is the Prime Minister, we
are all aware - for the complete list of those 60 who have been recruited to be made public. I
am sure he doesn’t have any objection for the date on which they were registered with the
Medical Council to be also attached to that piece of information.
The Prime Minister: Well, as far as I am concerned, I have no objection that the
names be published because all the names are already well known in the public. It was
published, I hear, in the papers.
Mr Bérenger: My last question. As you are aware, I asked whether consideration
will be given for the recruitment exercise to be cancelled and for a fresh one to be carried out
by the Public Service Commission. It is the prerogative of the Prime Minister to cancel that
exercise and have a fresh exercise? Is he prepared to exercise his prerogative in that case?
The Prime Minister: I do not see any need to do that.