CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL (NO. XXIX OF 2015) & GOOD GOVERNANCE AND INTEGRITY REPORTING BILL (NO. XXX OF 2015) – AMENDMENT 11
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Rt.
hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and
National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Constitution (Amendment) Bill (No.
XXIX of 2015) and the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill (No. XXX of 2015),
he will state if –
(a)  Government still proposes to amend the Constitution to introduce therein the
concept of confiscation without a definition thereof and, if so, indicate
whether amendments to the Constitution (Amendment) Bill (No. XXIX of
2015) will be proposed;
(b)  he will circulate the amendments to the Good Governance and Integrity
Reporting Bill (No. XXX of 2015) as being proposed by Government, and
(c)  Government still intends to introduce a new Declaration of Assets Bill.
aaaaa
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, with a view to promoting a culture of integrity
and good governance in the country, a number of measures have been outlined in the
Government Programme 2015-2019. We are today proceeding with the amendment of the
Asset Recovery Act and will shortly introduce the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting
Bill as well as the Declaration of Assets Bill as part of a wider spectrum of institutional
reforms. It will be recalled that good governance is a prerequisite in achieving meaningful
change and we have in that regard, pledged for a more just, transparent and accountable
society based on the precepts of good governance and at the same time zero tolerance against
fraud, corruption and other malpractices.
Since the setting up of a Ministry with specific mandate for the subject of good
governance, reviews have been conducted on major contracts awarded by the previous
Government as well as on decisions involving State-owned companies and parastatal bodies,
resulting in the termination of such contracts and consequential savings for the country. Such
reviews are ongoing and will continue to be conducted in the public interest. Besides
numerous requests for reviews, the Ministry of Financial Services, Good Governance and
Institutional Reforms is also heavily solicited by the public, public sector entities and other
organisations to enquire into a host of issues of public interest.
Madam Speaker, the House will appreciate that most of the malpractices and acts of
corruption which have been uncovered during the last decade could have been avoided had
there been a proper framework for the reporting of such acts. Also, we should take into
12
consideration that for reporting of such acts there should be a conducive environment
whereby the person making the report has the comfort of being adequately protected by the
State against retaliation whilst at the same time preventing people from abusing the system by
making frivolous and vexatious allegations.
With a view to addressing the deficiencies in the current legislative framework and at
the same time stimulating performance in public and private sector organisations through
effective reporting and other processes, it is proposed to introduce the Good Governance and
Integrity Reporting Bill, the objects of which will be to -
(i)  encourage and foster a culture of integrity and good governance in the
Republic of Mauritius;
(ii)  stimulate integrity reporting in the public and private sectors;
(iii)  encourage positive reports of acts of good governance;
(iv)  disclose and deter malpractices and recover unexplained wealth, and
(v)  protect and reward persons making genuine disclosures and reports of
malpractices.
Madam Speaker, with a view to achieving a wide consensus, the Minister of Financial
Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms opened up public debates and
encouraged a participative approach on the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill.
This process is ongoing. A number of valid proposals have been made and at the same time
clarifications have been provided on the clauses of the Bill mostly those dealing with the
issue of unexplained wealth orders and the confiscation of property.
Madam Speaker, the House will recall that in October 1986 the Constitution was
amended to provide for the taking of property “by way of penalty for breach of the law or
forfeiture in consequence of a breach of the law or in consequence of the inability of a drug
trafficker or a person who has enriched himself by fraudulent and/or corrupt means to show
that he has acquired the property by lawful means”.
In my address to the House I stated as follows -
“We are, therefore, amending the Constitution in order to have full authority to
confiscate the wealth of drug-traffickers. There is no doubt that we will seek to
confiscate only their ill-gotten wealth. Whatever they have rightfully earned will be
theirs to enjoy. But whatever they will be unable to show as having been acquired by
lawful means will be confiscated.
In order that there may be no doubt about the legality of what we have already
embarked upon, we have to amend the Constitution. In the absence of an amendment,
13
doubts will continue to linger about whether it is reasonable or justifiable to
confiscate wealth in a democratic society.
I, for my part, do not believe for a moment that democracy will in any manner stand
diminished by this amendment. Democracy cannot extend to freedom to drug others
to death, and to stand by and laugh heartily in the warmth of ill-gotten gains while
others die in pain and agony.
The amendment simply lays down the authority for the confiscatory action which we
are proposing and which is very much favoured by all right-minded persons.”
Madam Speaker, the underlying objective of the amendment to the Constitution is to
provide for non-conviction based recovery of assets. In 2012, the Asset Recovery Act was
proclaimed and the Explanatory Memorandum to the Asset Recovery Bill provided that the
aim of the Bill was to provide “for conviction based and non-conviction based recovery of
assets”.
The Asset Recovery Act already introduced in Mauritian law the concept of a non-
conviction based recovery of assets. The proposed amendments constitute an important
addition in the arsenal of the State to track down and recover ill-gotten gains.
In order to better understand the rational for providing for confiscation in the manner
we are providing in the Constitution it would be useful to quote from the report of Booz-
Allen-Hamilton under the Comparative Evaluation of Unexplained Wealth Order Heading,
and I quote -
“The importance of confiscating proceeds of crime has long been recognised as an
effective tool in disrupting the activities of organised crime. The underlying reason is
that profit or financial gain is the main motive for criminals to engage in criminal
activities. This profit is used to fund lavish lifestyles, as well as invest in future
criminal activities. Indeed, in removing the profit motive is considered to act both as a
preventive and a deterrent to criminals by diminishing their capacity to invest in future
criminal activities. The strategy of hitting criminals where it hurts most, “their
pockets”, is regarded as an effective strategy by law enforcement agencies for
organised crime. While organised crime has shown resilience and a high level of
adaptability to other law enforcement strategies, removal or reduction of assets is
considered to have an impact on their operations. Thus, confiscation of criminal
proceeds is embraced by many countries through conviction and non-conviction based
confiscation mechanisms.”
14
Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, Government maintains its
proposal to amend the Constitution to avoid any lingering doubt about the constitutionality of
the Unexplained Wealth Order. We are introducing the Constitution (Amendment) Bill (No.
XXIX of 2015) which was introduced in the National Assembly on 27 October 2015.
Madam Speaker, the Constitution is a living document and the provisions have to be
given a purposive interpretation. Following the consultation exercise which has taken place
during the last three weeks, Government has been attentive to the views and proposals of
stakeholders and Government is considering the proposals. It is only after a thorough
analysis thereof that any decision for the amendment of the Bill would be taken.
Madam Speaker, in regard to part (b) of the question, pursuant to the consultation
exercise, the proposals and suggestions made by stakeholders are being considered. A
number of proposed amendments have been publicly announced and should further
amendments be considered to be necessary, these will be looked into.
Madam Speaker, in regard to part (c) of the question, as the House is aware,
paragraph 248 of the Government Programme 2015-2019 provides that –
“Government will eradicate fraud, corruption, malpractices and irregularities in all
aspects of public life and restore our national values. To this end, a new Declaration
of Assets Act for MPs and high ranking public officers will be enacted”.
My Office has already started working on the implementation of the above measure.
In this context, a Committee, under the chairmanship of the Secretary to Cabinet and Head of
the Civil Service and comprising, the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Financial Services,
Good Governance and Institutional Reforms, the Solicitor-General, the Director-General of
the ICAC, the Secretary for Home Affairs, and the Senior Chief Executive, Ministry of Civil
Service and Administrative Reforms, examined numerous issues in connection with the
subject matter, inter alia –
(i)  whether the definition of “assets” in the new law should be widened;
(ii)  who else should be required to declare his assets, apart from Members of the
National Assembly, the Members of the Rodrigues Regional Assembly and
Councillors of Municipal City, Municipal Town and District Councils;
(iii)  who should be the depository of the Declarations;
15
(iv)  whether the information contained in declarations of assets should be open to
the public, and
(v)  whether the present penalties for breach of the Act should be toughened.
In the course of its deliberations, the Committee also considered the draft Declaration
of Assets Bill proposed in April 2012 by the former Parliamentary Committee on the ICAC
and has also drawn from international experience in assets declaration, as published in reports
from the OECD and the World Bank.
Madam Speaker, Government was apprised of the findings of the Committee on 16
October last and has decided to set up a Ministerial Committee to look into the proposals and
to make recommendations, as appropriate. The Committee comprises -
(i)  the hon. Vice-Prime Minister and Minister of Energy and Public Utilities;
(ii)  the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development;
(iii)  the hon. Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport;
(iv)  the hon. Minister of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and
Scientific Research;
(v)  the hon. Minister of Health and Quality of Life;
(vi)  the hon. Attorney-General, and
(vii)  the hon. Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional
Reforms.
Madam Speaker, once the Ministerial Committee finalises its recommendations,
instructions will be conveyed to the Attorney-General’s Office for the drafting of the
Declaration of Assets Bill.
Madam Speaker, I wish to give the assurance to this House and the population at large
that the proposed amendment to the Constitution aims specifically at tracking massive
unexplained wealth accumulated by people through illicit dealings and on the back of honest
and hardworking people.
I strongly condemn the attitude of the Leader of the Opposition who instead of
keeping to his numerous speeches where he, in fact, made plea in favour of firm legislation to
deal with unexplained wealth, is today trying to play politics on such a vital issue.
16
I tell the Leader of the Opposition to be honest towards himself and to try to
understand the relevance of the proposed amendments instead of indulging in demagogy to
create confusion in the minds of the population.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Please, no comments!
(Interruptions)
Order, please!
The Prime Minister: I say, once more, that only dishonest and ill-intended persons
have to fear the proposed legislation.
Madam Speaker, we are sweeping clean this country and are setting new foundations
to fight corruption, illicit dealings and dishonest practices.
(Interruptions)
My Government and myself will not, in any way whatsoever, fail in our duty towards the
nation to build a country based on transparency, good governance and integrity.
We fail to understand why people who have been shouting all the time that corruption
is rife and nothing is being done, dare to challenge us when we are taking the bull by its
horns. I wonder what they are afraid of!
Thank you, Madam Speaker.
(Interruptions)
Mr Bérenger: I shall, of course, ignore the last part with the élucubrations and the
allegations that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has deemed fit to come out with. I was going to
say that what I heard on the first part of my question, that is, the amendment to the
Constitution of Mauritius, the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, presented by the hon. Prime
Minister, Government remains open to amendments to the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, if
I heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister correctly and this is the right attitude. Therefore, can I
suggest to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, he has himself referred to amendments in the past to
section 8 of the Constitution - Protection from Deprivation of Property. Indeed, there have
been exceptions, but will he agree with me that when there have been exceptions, for
example , in subsection (4) of the Constitution, Protection from Deprivation of Property,
section 8, subsection (4), in every case, the Constitution has been made to read –
17
“Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be
inconsistent with or in contravention of subsection (1) - that is, Protection from
Deprivation of Property (…) - except so far as that provision or, as the case may be,
the thing done under its authority is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a
democratic society.”
Therefore, can I put the question to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister: will he agree with me that
there is absolutely no reason not to include that at the end of the Constitution (Amendment)
Bill being circulated by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister? Therefore, will that be considered? It
already is in other sections that it should be added to the section being proposed to the
Constitution (Amendment) Bill.
The Prime Minister: It is being already in the law. I don’t see any need for it to be in
the Constitution.
Mr Bérenger: I also heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister say some amendments have
already been made public. We have not received any written copy. Again, if I heard him
correctly, he said that further amendments, this time to the Good Governance and Integrity
Reporting Bill, will be considered. Can I make the request that the amendments already
proposed and any amendment to come should be circulated in writing so that we can study
the details of the language used in those amendments?
The Prime Minister: We will consider this.
Mr Bérenger: Therefore, pending receiving a written copy of these amendments, I
leave it there. On the last part of my question, I am a bit disturbed - that is, a new Declaration
of Assets Act, I heard the Prime Minister say it is forthcoming but, omitting to repeat what
was in Government’s programme, that is, may I be allowed to remind the House, Madam
Speaker, that it is said “combattre la fraude” sous la section les douze priorités des trois
premiers mois au gouvernement. I quote –
« Combattre la fraude et la corruption : la ‘Declaration of Assets Act’ sera amendée
pour inclure les propriétés acquises sous des prête-noms et la publication de toutes
les informations dans la Gazette du gouvernement. »
I am quite disturbed that I have not heard the hon. Prime Minister confirm that yes, in the
new Declaration of Assets Act, the declaration of assets will be made public through the
Government Gazette, as was provided for in the Electoral Programme.
18
The Prime Minister: It seems as we have already started debating the Bill, all these
matters will be raised when the debates will take place.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed!
Mr Mohamed: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has
stated very publicly of his wish to clean the country and come up with a policy of
transparency, could he consider the possibility of doing two things: one, of ensuring that the
proposal that has been made to clean up the country also covers the period as far back as
Independence time because he has the majority…
(Interruptions)
May I continue…
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Now, please, order!
(Interruptions)
Mr Mohamed: Now I understand who is scared! Now I see who is scared! My
question is very simple, two things, very simple things…
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, please don’t interrupt!
Mr Mohamed: I do not know why, Madam Speaker, they seem to be agitated each
time when I say that…
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: No, ask your question!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Shakeel Mohamed, please proceed and ask your question!
Mr Mohamed: I am trying to, precisely, and I thank you for your help. So, the
question is, if I may be allowed, there are two things: to show that there is no political agenda
- which I am not saying there is - but, to assure us and the country at large that there is no
19
political agenda, consider amending the law in such a way or make proposals in such a way
as to cover as far back as 1968 and, as in other jurisdictions - every other jurisdiction where
this issue is really taken at heart within this day and age - that it is an independent body such
as a body which has constitutional protection and independence that is created in order to
wield this investigative and power to seize and confiscate.
Madam Speaker: Okay!
Mr Mohamed: Two issues, simple!
The Prime Minister: This is rubbish!
(Interruptions)
This is what I call demagogy!
Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem!
Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The hon. Prime Minister in justifying this
Act talks about gains acquired through unlawful means; he talks about proceeds of crime. In
order to reassure the public that wealth that has been acquired through lawful means but
which cannot be, for any reason, or do not have to be explained because of passage of time
the evidence has gone missing or whatever, would the hon. Prime Minister consider in the
amendments to replace the concept of ‘unexplained wealth’ with the concept of ‘illicit
enrichment’ so that there is an element of unlawful gain in the element of the confiscation?
The Prime Minister: Well, the whole idea behind this law is to track unlawful gains,
illicit money. All the time people have been insinuating, talking about Sun Trust. Well, like
any other party, MSM got contributions and this can be checked. All the money as
contributions, the MSM had an account in the Mauritius Commercial Bank Ltd.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order!
The Prime Minister: All the money was deposited there and all transactions on
behalf of MSM, the building Sun Trust, all transactions were paid by means of cheques. This
can be…
(Interruptions)
20
Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah!
Mr Rutnah: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Given the nature of Constitution itself is
dynamic, the last amendment of section 8 of the Constitution was made in 1986 whereas from
1968 when the Constitution was written there were no amendments until 1986…
Madam Speaker: What is your question?
(Interruptions)
Mr Rutnah: Can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister confirm that henceforth, since 1968 and
1986 respectively onwards, crime has sophisticated to such a level and corruption to such a
level that it is now imperative…
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah, can I just interrupt you and ask you…
(Interruptions)
Please, order! I am on my feet!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Rutnah, please come straight to your question because we are short of time! Please!
Mr Rutnah: It is now, Madam Speaker, imperative to bring amendment to section 8
of the Constitution to combat corruption in this country and bring morality into society.
(Interruptions)
The Prime Minister: I fully agree, Madam Speaker, and this is exactly what we are
doing!
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition!
Mr Bérenger: I did not hear the Rt. hon. Prime Minister contradict me when I said
that I had heard him say that Government remains open to any reasonable required
amendment to the Constitution (Amendment) Bill and when I said that I heard him say that
there might very well be further amendments apart from the three that have already been
21
mentioned in the Press, but not circulated. Can I, therefore, insist so that the whole country,
but the Opposition can do its work on this very serious issue which raises constitutional
matters that, as soon as amendments are ready, they be circulated in writing and not at
Committee Stage as it is usually the case? When we reach Committee Stage then
amendments are circulated, that these amendments as agreed by Government be circulated as
soon as agreed upon.
The Prime Minister: We will follow the normal procedure which is always followed
in such cases.
Madam Speaker: Was that your last question, hon. Leader of the Opposition?
(Interruptions)
Hon. Leader of the Opposition, I am just asking whether that was your last question!
Mr Bérenger: Yes, I understand that we are following normal procedures.
Madam Speaker: Okay!
(Interruptions)
Okay! So, hon. Members the Table has been advised that Parliamentary Question No. B/944
in regard to the Bassin Football Ground presently under construction and addressed to the
hon. Minister of Youth and Sports will be replied by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, time
permitting. Hon. Ameer Meea!