STC - DIESEL & GASOLINE - PRICE
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the
Minister of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection whether, in regard to the State
Trading Corporation, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to
-
(a)  in regard to diesel and gasoline -
(i) the amount of money contributed into the Build Mauritius Fund in
2014 and estimated to be contributed thereinto for 2015, and
(ii)  if the local price thereof will be lowered by 10 rupees per litre being
given that world oil prices have collapsed by 60% since June 2014 and
resulted in price reductions worldwide, and
(b)  its surplus for the year 2014 and for the period January-June 2015
respectively, indicating its accumulated reserves.
aaaaa
Mr Gungah: Madam Speaker, with your permission, I shall reply to the PNQ and PQ
B/491 together as they relate to the same subject matter.
Madam Speaker, as regards part (a)(i) of the PNQ, I am informed by the State Trading
Corporation that the total amount of money contributed into the Build Mauritius Fund in
2014 was Rs339,550,030. The estimated contribution into the Build Mauritius Fund for
January to December 2015 is Rs1,363,615,334.
As regards part (b) of PQ B/491, I am informed that the total amount of money
collected for the Build Mauritius Fund for the period January 2014 to August 2015 was
Rs1,121,165, 364.
9
As regards part (a)(ii) of the PNQ, since June 2014 to date, the Platts price of mogas
has decreased from 1,021.32 US$ per metric tonne to 519.22 US$, that is, a decrease of
502.10 US$, representing 49.16%.
Regarding gas oil, the Platts price has decreased from 118.76 US$ per barrel to 59.05
US$, that is, a decrease of 59.71 US$, representing 50.28%.
From August 2014 to December 2014, there have been three decreases in the retail
price of mogas and gas oil amounting to a total of Rs6.30 and Rs6.15 per litre respectively.
In January 2015, the item “Contribution to the Build Mauritius Fund” in the price
structure of both mogas and gas oil was increased from Re1 to Rs4 per litre in order to cater
for the financing of works related to the water distribution network so as to provide a more
regular water supply to the population. The item “Contribution to Rodrigues transportation
and storage” was also increased from 5 cents to 16 cents per litre so as to subsidise the
increasing cost of freight and other related costs to maintain the price of petroleum products,
LPG, cement, ‘ration’ rice and flour at par with those prevailing in Mauritius.
Had the contribution to the Build Mauritius Fund remained at Re1 per litre on both
mogas and gas oil, and the contribution to Rodrigues Transportation and Storage not been
increased by 11 cents, there would have been a decrease of Rs3.40 and Rs3.45 per litre for
mogas and gas oil respectively. Accordingly, the total decreases in the prices of mogas and
gas oil would have amounted to Rs9.70 and Rs9.60 respectively.
Madam Speaker, as regards part (a) (ii) of PQ B/491, the different components of the
price of mogas and gas oil comprise, inter alia -
• Platts Reference price;
• Insurance;
• Freight;
• Excise duty;
• Maurice Ile Durable levy;
• Contribution to Road Development Authority;
• Contribution to Rodrigues transportation and storage;
• Contribution to the Build Mauritius Fund;
• Contribution to subsidy on LPG, Flour and Rice;
• STC’s operational expenses;
10
• Oil Companies’ operational expenses and wholesale margin;
• Retail margin (Filling station’s margin) and
• Value Added Tax.
I am tabling a copy of the price structure listing down the quantum of its different
components per litre, as they stood at 05 September 2015.
Madam Speaker, I would have wished that the price of mogas and gas oil to have
decreased further for the benefit of one and all. However, the Consumer Protection (Control
of Price of Petroleum Products) Regulations 2011 regulate the functioning of the Petroleum
Pricing Committee and has set up thresholds to be observed for any revision in the prices, be
it for increase or decrease purposes.
In January 2014, only the thresholds of the petroleum pricing mechanism were
reviewed to calculate increase or decrease in prices. They were changed from a range of 5%
to 15% for an increase to 4% to 10% - the range - and for a decrease from the range of 7%
to10% to the range of 4% to10%.
Moreover, the Reference price is calculated based on a twelve-month average Platts
price comprising of six months actual and six months future prices.
I have, therefore, set up a Technical Committee to review the current petroleum
pricing mechanism. The Committee comprises representatives of my Ministry, the Ministry
of Finance and Economic Development and the State Trading Corporation, and has already
started its workings.
I have requested the Technical Committee to review that element of threshold as well
as others of the Petroleum Pricing Mechanism. I am confident that the new mechanism that
will be worked out by the Technical Committee will allow the decrease in prices of
petroleum products to be passed on to consumers while at the same time be able to contain
rise in prices when this situation crops up, the more so that the price of petroleum products is
volatile and fluctuates daily.
Madam Speaker, as a responsible Government, we should not only look at the current
situation but we should also plan for the future and not be taken by surprise.
I want to achieve a win-win situation, that is, decrease in prices is passed on
reasonably to the consumer while not putting at stake or jeopardising the finance of the STC.
The supply and pricing of petroleum products is one of national interest. To open “a
11
parenthèse”, this is the very basis which prompted the new Government to take amongst its
first decisions, the doing away of the services of Betamax Ltd. for the transport of our
petroleum products.
Madam Speaker, regarding part (b) of the PNQ, I am informed by the STC that its
surplus for the year 2014 was Rs442 m., and the surplus for the period January to June 2015
is Rs428 m. The accumulated reserves of the STC as at 30 June 2015 stood at Rs2.05 billion.
An amount of Rs1.45 billion has been earmarked by the STC for remittance as dividends to
the Consolidated Fund in financial year 2015-2016 for Government to implement projects in
its Public Sector Investment Programme.
I wish to inform the House that with the decrease in world prices of LPG, the amount of
subsidy required has decreased for the period January to June 2015 compared to the year
2014. Consequently, the amount required to maintain prices of LPG on the local market has
decreased. Hence, the increase in accumulated reserves for the STC for the six months’
period.
Mr Bérenger: If I heard the hon. Minister rightly, I think the figure into the Build
Mauritius Fund is Rs1,350,000,000, but, here, in the House on 10 February 2015, he, himself,
said that it would be Rs1,800,000,000. Now, we are told that it will be Rs1,350,000,000,
which is a lot of money. Can I be made to understand why this change?
Mr Gungah: The change is due to the fact that when the retailers, that is, the filling
stations sell their products, it is not a fixed figure that is being sold in terms of litres and it
varies daily.
Mr Bérenger: As far as accumulated reserves are concerned, we have been told that
the STC has accumulated reserves of more than Rs2 billion. Now, I take it that the profit that
the STC is making is - apart from Rs1,350,000,000 that will be taken out of consumers’
pockets - millions of profit on trade in diesel and essence generally. Can we know whether
any sum from the STC - because we have been told that there is an earmarked sum that will
be transferred to the Consolidated Fund - has today been transferred since the beginning of
the year to the Consolidated Fund or to any other funds Government-controlled?
Mr Gungah: According to information I have, Madam Speaker, there is no profit on
sale of mogas and gas oil. Concerning the amount that is to be transferred, it has not yet been
transferred. It is going to be transferred, that is, the amount of some Rs1.5 billion.
12
Mr Bérenger: Are we being told that with the drop in the price of oil products, the
STC is not making any profit on diesel and essence? Is that the correct answer?
Mr Gungah: It should not be labelled as ‘profit’ because the amount is used to fund
projects and other developments.
Mr Bérenger: Then, Madam Speaker, by whatever name is called surplus, profit or
what have you …
(Interruptions)
…has millions been transferred to other funds, either the Consolidated Fund or other funds
apart, of course, from the Build Mauritius Fund?
Mr Gungah: In fact, the sum that has been accumulated, it is the surplus for several
years, Madam Speaker, which has amounted to Rs2.05 billion. It is not the surplus of the last
eight months; it is a surplus that has been accumulated since several years.
Mr Bérenger: I want to get that clear. So, what is being taken out of the pocket of
consumers is not only more than Rs1 billion contributed to the Build Mauritius Fund, but also
millions that are being called profits or surplus or what have you that are being transferred to
the Consolidated Fund.
Mr Gungah: The STC sells petroleum products and this generates fund for the
Government, revenues for the Government, and these revenues are at the service of the
Government to implement projects and we have a list of priorities…
(Interruptions)
…like among others the Water Supply Project.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, reference has been made to Betamax and only last
week the hon. Minister told us that STC has saved Rs2 billion, R 2 milliards, over the period
of the agreement that has been ended. Can I know the impact - since the beginning of the
year, since January, when Betamax has been done away with - on the price, that is - the hon.
Minister has worked out that over the period of the agreement; Rs2 billion have been saved
since February - has it been worked out how much per litre the STC is paying less for freight?
Mr Gungah: The STC is definitely paying less on freight and the Rs2 billion which I
mentioned is for the period of 15 years, Madam Speaker.
13
Mr Bérenger: I said that the period of the agreement - different papers, les petits
papiers. I put my question again: Has it been worked out how much that saving – if we call
it that – by STC translates in terms of rupees per litre and should not at least the price of
diesel and essence been brought down by that amount? At least!
Mr Gungah: I said, Madam Speaker, in fact, there is the Consumer Protection
(Control of Prices of Petroleum Products) that regulates the functioning of the Petroleum
Pricing Committee and now that I have set up a technical committee to review the structure,
as I just mentioned, the range for the calculation of the petroleum products and also, the
twelve months average Platts reference price, we are going to take into consideration all these
factors.
(Interruptions)
It is only eight months, Madam Speaker, that we are in Government and we have started
making savings and these savings will be definitely répercutés on the population in general in
different ways.
(Interruptions)
Mr Bérenger: I referred to June because June 2014 was the peak. Is the hon. Minister
aware that the price has gone down since that peak from USD115 to less than USD50? It has
just gone below USD45. Since the last increase – because he gave figures about the increases
under the former Government – in December, is the hon. Minister aware that prices have
gone down by 30%? And, therefore, Madam Speaker, that justified why the then coalition,
hon. Xavier Duval promised Rs10 of decrease per litre. It was made an electoral promise.
With figures like that, why has not the price of diesel and l’essence gone down by Rs10 as
promised?
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed, please!
(Interruptions)
Mr Gungah: Madam Speaker, I clearly explained that we are bound by the Petroleum
Pricing Committee, the mechanism that is in place right now. That is the reason why we
could not bring any reduction in the price of petroleum products, be it diesel or essence and
now that the new committee is working to review the price structure, the formula will be
different and I am sure with the new formula, that is going to come out very soon, the price
14
fluctuation, be it increase or decrease, will be clearly répercuté on the population and
everything will be done in the interest of the population.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, please!
Mr Bérenger: I am sure I can ask the hon. Minister. He must be aware that that
formula…
(Interruptions)
Shame! I am sure the hon. Minister is aware that that formula worked out by the previous
Government was designed so that when there are increases, it does not reflect in any decrease
because it has no effet rétroactif. It worked out on a given period of time, one after the other,
but not looking onto the past, that is, it is accumulated money out of the pockets of the
consumers. So, can I ask the hon. Minister, now that he has discovered l’Amérique – it is not
Godsend that formula; it was worked out by the previous Government to deprive consumers
of their due.
(Interruptions)
Can I know whether…
(Interruptions)
Of course, everybody knows that! Except you apparently until now…
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order, please!
Mr Bérenger: … you set up a committee! Everybody knows that!
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order! Hon. Jhugroo, please!
Mr Bérenger: Can I know whether the formula will be backdated? Because all this
money has been coming out of the pockets of the consumers.
Mr Gungah: Madam Speaker, the existing formula…
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah, please!
15
Mr Gungah: The existing formula, up to now, has saved consumers a lot of money
because there was a period which lasted for almost 23 months where prices were increasing
in the world market. Here, we managed to stabilise it without any increase and there was
another period for 17 months in which we were in the same situation.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order, please!
Mr Gungah: This new formula on which we are working…
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Would you allow the hon. Minister to reply, please!
(Interruptions)
Some order!
Mr Gungah: This new formula on which we are working will take into consideration
what the Petroleum Pricing Committee has been doing, that is, keep the price stable as far as
we can, but, at the same time, when there is a decrease like we are having right now on the
world market, it is repercuted on the consumers.
Mr Bérenger: Can we have a time frame within which….
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: No cross-talking, please!
Mr Bérenger: Can we have a time frame within which that new formula will be
worked out? Is he aware that formula or no formula, all around us, since 01 September -
India, Reunion Island next door, last Monday Seychelles - prices of diesel and l’essence have
been going down regularly except here because of a formula that is discovered now to be
inadequate? Therefore, can I know within which time frame that formula is going to be
worked out and whether it will have effet rétroactif?
Mr  Gungah:  The  time  frame  will  be  approximately  one  month,
Madam Speaker, but it won’t be rétroactif. My reply is to the other part of the question that
the hon. Leader of the Opposition asked, that is, comparison with other countries, I think, we
should take note that Mauritius is one of the few countries where the prices of gasoline and
gasoil are low compared to many other countries. I can give examples, Madam Speaker. For
example, the price of gasoline in Mauritius is 1.23 USD per litre compared to Seychelles
16
where it is 1.25 USD, Zambia: 1.25 USD, Comoros: 1.42 USD, France: 1.50 USD, Malawi:
1.48 USD, United Kingdom: 1.72 USD.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order, please!
Mr Gungah: The list is long; I can go on, Madam Speaker. It is the same for the price
of gas oil which, in Mauritius, is 0.95 USD per litre compared to Seychelles which is 1.09
USD, compared to France where it is 1.22 USD. And in France, we all know, they have got a
stockage capacity, they have got a refinery. Here, in Mauritius, we have neither stockage
capacity nor refinery. We have to import the product. That’s why we are working to make
Mauritius a petroleum hub in order to have capacity of storage so that even if there is price
fluctuation, the price at which we have bought the product, will be sold to the consumers.
Mr Bérenger: The hon. Minister has quoted a number of countries. Can he tell me
how many times prices have gone down in those countries since January of this year? Can he
give us this information?
Mr Gungah: Madam Speaker, even if there have been several decreases or I don’t
know how many decreases, the price is still higher than in Mauritius.
Mr Mahomed: I do know if the hon. Minister has tabled a paper regarding the
structure. My question is as follows: under Maurice Ile Durable, may I know from the hon.
Minister what has been the amount that has been collected in 2014 and forecasted to be
collected in 2015 and whether the sum that is being collected is being consolidated or
channelled to sustainable development projects as originally designed?
Mr Gungah: Madam Speaker, the amount that has been collected in the MID Levy
for the year 2014 is Rs123 m. and for the year 2015, it is the same amount, that is, Rs123 m.
As far as how this amount has been spent, unfortunately, Madam Speaker, the MID Levy
does not fall under the purview of my Ministry and it will be presumptuous for me to give
more details on that.
Mr Uteem: The hon. Minister is saying that now he is going to review the structure,
but, as far back as 10 February 2015, in this very House, when I asked him to do the same
thing, this is what he replied –
17
“I propose to consult my colleague, the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic
Development on the possibility of reviewing the price structure for Mogas and
Gas Oil.”
That was as far back as February. So, may I know from the hon. Minister why, after 7
months, he still has not done any structures?
Mr Gungah: Madam Speaker, I had several consultations with the Vice-Prime
Minister and Minister of Finance and Economic Development, but we should not forget that
the price of petroleum products is very volatile. We have been studying the case since that
period and we have achieved results as they are now and that is why a decision has been
taken. It is true, I do not deny the fact that prices have been decreasing, but, because of the
mechanism that is in place right now, we are not being able to pass it on to the consumers.
But now, that the Committee has been set up, and it is a Committee that is working very
seriously on that, it is going to come with recommendations, that will be discussed in the
Government and I am sure that any change, be it increase or reduction – and I prefer it is
reduction always – will be passed on to the consumers.
Mr Mohamed: The hon. Leader of the Opposition has asked a very important
question, I would like to recap from there. The hon. Minister says there has been a lot of
savings made following the Betamax cancellation of their contract. The question is not what
is the price of freight, because this is one element of the equation - the price of freight. The
question is: what is the reduction or the saving made per litre? This is a question that the hon.
Minister has been avoiding; not the freight, but per litre.
Mr Gungah: Madam Speaker, let me, first of all, say one thing. At least, in this
Government, STC is making profits whereas in the previous Government, we all know the
losses that were accumulated with hedging and others.
(Interruptions)
To reply… 
Madam Speaker: Order, please!
(Interruptions)
Order! Hon. Jhugroo, please!
Mr Gungah: To reply to the hon. Member…
18
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, please!
Mr Gungah: To reply to the hon. Member who is talking about freight that we are
paying less, I wish to inform the House that the freight on Mogas, for example, represents
1.5% of the retail price and for Gas Oil, it is 2% of the retail price. Now…
Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, you have asked the question; allow the hon.
Minister to reply, please!
(Interruptions)
Allow him to reply!
Mr Gungah: Now, Madam Speaker, I just said that since we took Government, the
STC is making profit, we don’t deny about that.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, please!
Mr Gungah: STC is making profit and we are in the process of distributing this
profit…
(Interruptions)
But the Committee that is going to be set up will take all these factors into consideration to
get the price per litre.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, I am drawing your attention once more. If you
have a question to ask, you will stand up; I will give you the opportunity, you will stand up
and ask the question.
(Interruptions)
No, not now!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Mohamed, last time! Last time I am drawing your attention to it.
(Interruptions)
Yes, hon. Bhagwan!
19
Mr Bhagwan: Madam Speaker, can the hon. Minister confirm to the consumers, the
country and the nation that duty, levies and taxes on the importation price represent 177%
that the consumers are being asked to pay and no other country in the world has such a heavy
rate of taxes? Can the hon. Minister, at least, honestly inform the House that this Government
has been fleecing the consumers?
(Interruptions)
Honestly!
(Interruptions)
Ine coquin consommateurs!
Mr Gungah: This percentage of tax had already been existing for years and years. I
repeat and repeat and repeat again!
(Interruptions)
The Committee that has been set up is going to look into all these elements!
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order, please!
(Interruptions)
Would you allow the Minister to reply or you don’t want him to reply?
Mr Gungah: Maybe the hon. Member wants to eat some pizza!
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Bhagwan!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Bhagwan, I am on my feet!
(Interruptions)
Can I have some order in the House!
(Interruptions)
20
I am on my feet, please!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Bhagwan! Please, Minister!
(Interruptions)
You can’t imply me in any debate or any discussion, you are a seasoned politician and you
know that!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Jhugroo!
Mr Gungah: Madam Speaker, this tax has been existing for years and I said it, with
the new mechanism that is going to come very soon all these will be taken into consideration,
if need be. But, we have to be responsible. We are a responsible Government. We have to
take decisions in the interest of the public and I am sure, once the Committee has given its
recommendations and once the Government has taken the decision that should be taken,
everything will be done in the interest of the population.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo!
Mr Ganoo: In view of the CIF price of one litre of mogas which is about Rs16.20 and
the amount finally sold to the consumers which is about Rs46.00, representing about 175%,
in view of the specific price structure prevailing in the country, can I ask the hon. Minister
whether isn’t it time for representatives of the Consumer Organisation to form part of the
Price Mechanism Committee or the Technical Committee which is going to be set up to
review the structure and the mechanism?
Mr Gungah: Madam Speaker, right now, the Committee comprises of members from
my Ministry, from the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development and the State Trading
Corporation. I will welcome anybody who has got brilliant ideas, be it from the civil society
or from the Opposition, to send me their recommendations and, if need be, I am ready to meet
them to discuss about this and, if their proposals are correct, we will take them on board.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition!
(Interruptions)
21
No! Time will be over! The last question is for the hon. Leader of the Opposition!
(Interruptions)
Please, sit down!
(Interruptions)
Sit down! I have given the floor to the hon. Leader of the Opposition for his last question!
(Interruptions)
Time permitting! No! I decide! You don’t decide for me!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Leader of the Opposition!
(Interruptions)
Mr Bérenger: Well, of course, we know that the Minister has chosen to reply to the
Private Notice Question and the Parliamentary Question at the same time and there is no limit
as far as the Parliamentary Question time is concerned. Therefore, can I appeal to the Chair to
allow a last supplementary question?
Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, I have given additional time so that
the Parliamentary Question also may be replied at the same time. So, I have already given
additional time and time permitting, I give the opportunity to everybody to ask questions and
I have given everybody in turn. The floor is yours, hon. Leader of the Opposition for the last
question!
(Interruptions)
Mr Bérenger: My last question will, therefore, unfortunately have to be, being given
the crash in prices, not volatility, from US$115 to today US$45, being given secondly, the
billions of profits made by the STC, and thirdly, being given the promise of a Rs10 decrease
during the electoral campaign - rightly promised - being given all this, will the Minister agree
with me that bringing down the price of diesel by a meager Rs2 and keeping the price of
l’essence as it is, is nothing but a provocation and that, therefore, consumers can be expected
to benefit from that new formula as soon as possible?
Mr Gungah: Madam Speaker, when the hon. Leader of the Opposition is talking
about crash in prices, I don’t know whether he is referring to crude oil or to the Brent or the
22
Platts price. Because, from the crude there is a procedure for refinery and transport and the
price that is quoted by Platts is not the same as crude.
As far as the second part of the question of the hon. Leader of the Opposition is
concerned, I said that the Committee is working and is going to come out with
recommendations and I welcome all hon. Members of the National Assembly. If they want
to share their ideas they can meet me personally. I say it loud and clear, Madam Speaker,
with the new formula that is going to be worked out, any reduction that is going to occur on
the world market will be passed on to the consumers because right now, with the system that
is prevailing, unfortunately, we can’t do that. With the system that exists at present, two
factors mainly affect consumers. But there are also advantages of the present system because
as I said, for almost 23 months while there was an increase on the world market, the price
was stable in Mauritius and even for a period of 17 months - I don’t remember the date
exactly, it was, I think, in 2013. But with the new system, I can assure the House, the hon.
Members and the population in general that any reduction will be passed on to the consumers.
Madam Speaker: Time is over! Hon. Members, the Table has been advised that
Parliamentary Question No. B/482, in regard to the setting up of a Land and Monitoring
Research Unit, addressed to the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, will now be replied by the hon.
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External Communications. Parliamentary
Question No. B/478 has been withdrawn. Yes, hon. Bhagwan!