AGALÉGA – MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Rt.
hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and
National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Agreement for the development of
Agaléga which was recently signed between the Republic of Mauritius and the Republic of
India, he will -
(a) give details thereof, indicating if it includes -
(i)  any form of a Lease Agreement and;
(ii) the setting up of a Coastal Surveillance Radar Station on Agaléga and
entails Mauritius joining India’s Regional Radar Network or (joining) the
trilateral India-Sri Lanka-Maldives Regional Security Cooperation set-up,
and
(b) lay copy thereof.
aaaaa
The Minister of Ocean Economy, Marine Resources, Fisheries, Shipping and
Outer Islands (Mr P. Koonjoo): Madam Speaker, with your permission I shall reply to the
PNQ addressed to the hon. Prime Minister.
As the House is aware, Agaléga has for too long been neglected in matter of socio-
economic development, particularly regarding infrastructural development.
The existing jetty which is only 60m long was constructed in 1985. The jetty is in a
very bad condition and it is most imperative that a proper quay be constructed. It is to be
noted that repairs were effected to the jetty in 1992, 2003 and 2013 after the passage of
cyclone Dumile.
This is the only facility available for loading and unloading of cargo and embarking
and disembarking of passengers. M/V ‘Mauritius Trochetia’ lays in anchor at some 400m
away from the jetty at the St. James anchorage, located at the reef-free area, where the depth
is only 60m. However, during certain past voyages, M/V ‘Mauritius Pride’ and M/V
‘Mauritius Trochetia’ could not anchor and had to be kept on the drive for both disembarking
and embarking of goods and passengers in the high seas due to bad weather conditions.
Another major shortcoming in Agaléga relates to the airstrip which badly needs
upgrading. Presently, only small aircrafts like the Dornier can land in Agaléga.
9
Madam Speaker, it is comforting to note that in line with the longstanding Indo-
Mauritius relations, the Republic of India has graciously signed a Memorandum of
Understanding with Mauritius during the recent visit of H.E. Shri Narendra Modi, Prime
Minister of the Republic of India. The MoU precisely addresses the infrastructural problems
faced by Agaleans. The components of the MoU are -
(a)  construction of a jetty for berthing of ships;
(b)  rehabilitation and repaving of the runway over a maximum length of 4,000
feet, an apron for two aircrafts of size (ATR 42 type) and a taxiway;
(c)  installation of a power generation facility of approximately 300 KW;
(d)  setting up of a water desalination plant of capacity of approximately 60 tonnes
a day;
(e)  construction of a National Coast Guard Post, including basic repair facilities,
and
(f)  any other facility related to the project.
Under the MoU, the Government of India shall finance the projects to the tune of
USD 18 m. in the form of financial grant and will also provide suitable personnel with
necessary expertise and experience to assist in the implementation of the projects.
Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) (i) of the question, I would like to point out
that the MoU between the Government of the Republic of Mauritius and the Government of
the Republic of India does not include any Lease Agreement in whatsoever form.
With regard to part (a) (ii) of the question, the reply is in the negative.
Madam Speaker, with regard to part (b) of the question, in line with Government
policy of transparency and good governance, I am laying a copy of the MoU on the Table of
the National Assembly.
Mr Bérenger: Before I put some questions, of course, my PNQ was addressed to the
hon. Prime Minister, but, at least, the situation is clear as far as any lease agreement is
concerned. There has been a lot of talk, at least, that is clear. But is there any reason why the
Minister has avoided replying to part (a) (ii), that is, whether the agreement between India
and Mauritius includes the setting up of a Coastal Surveillance Radar Station on Agaléga and
entails Mauritius joining India’s Regional Radar Network or the trilateral India-Sri Lanka-
Maldives Regional Security Cooperation set-up?
Mr Koonjoo: Madam Speaker, with regard to the separate agreement, Article 3 of the
MoU provides the possibility of drawing up and entering into other supplementary
arrangements as may be required for the fulfilment of the pursuance of obligations of both
10
parties. In this respect, India did suggest a separate agreement; first, use of facilities being
developed and to prevent use of facilities by party with interest initiated to the party. I must,
here, point out in no uncertain terms that any agreement to be considered would have
necessarily to satisfy the following conditions -
• it is of mutual benefits, and
• it will be in strict compliance with the principles of sovereignty and territorial
integrity.
Mr Bérenger: Well, if I heard the hon. Minister correctly, he said that the Indian side
- we have very good friends - has suggested a separate agreement. Is there a separate
agreement? Has there been any other agreement signed or circulated?
Mr Koonjoo: Madam Speaker, as far as I know, I don’t think I have seen any
agreement of that sort in the MoU.
Mr Bérenger: I don’t want to think about things like that! My question was addressed
to the hon. Prime Minister. Has, at least, the hon. Minister - because he has chosen to reply;
the hon. Prime Minister has asked him to reply - seen with the hon. Prime Minister whether
there is this radar system dimension or even more because I’ll quote from what both Prime
Minister Modi and the Foreign Minister of India have stated recently which entails also
suggestions that we should join this security arrangement for that tripartite Sri Lanka-
Maldives-Seychelles already in existence?
Mr Koonjoo: Madam Speaker, I repeat again, the answer is no.
Mr Bérenger: The whole point - of course, Madam Speaker, I am sure the hon. Prime
Minister can understand that - is to clear the air completely. We have excellent relations with
India and there has been a lot of rumours, a lot of procès d’intention, a lot of talk of loss of
sovereignty and so on. So, the whole point was to give the opportunity to the hon. Prime
Minister to clear the air completely and say where we stand exactly. So, can I ask again the
hon. Prime Minister, is there going…
Madam Speaker: Not the hon. Prime Minister, you should ask the Minister who
replied the question.
Mr Bérenger: Unfortunately!
(Interruptions)
Or fortunately for the country!
11
Can I ask the hon. Minister, therefore, to be more precise? Has the Indian side
suggested a separate agreement that would bear on such matters: radar systems and security
matters?
Mr Koonjoo: There is no request for that, Madam Speaker, as far as I know.
Mr Bérenger: As far as he knows! Has he talked to the hon. Prime Minister before
taking the responsibility of replying to a PNQ that deals also with radar installations and
security issues?
Mr Koonjoo: Madam Speaker, so far as security issues are concerned, I believe the
Prime Minister’s Office…
Mr Bérenger: That’s why the question was addressed to him.
Mr Koonjoo: They are aware about that; I am not aware about that.
Mr Bérenger: I find that very sad. This was an opportunity to clear the air completely
and to strengthen still further our excellent relations with India and we are missing it, Madam
Speaker. I put the question clearly: Is there in the agreement or in the proposed agreement,
the setting-up of a radar system in Agaléga?
Madam Speaker: You have the reply, hon. Minister?
Mr Koonjoo: I said, Madam Speaker, that, as far as I know, I don’t know whether
there is a radar system.
(Interruptions)
I don’t know.
Mr Bérenger: I don’t think it is worth…
(Interruptions)
It’s an awful shame!
Mr Koonjoo: Madam Speaker, I said that there is no radar. I don’t know. If the hon.
Leader of the Opposition has got any information, would he tell the House?
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Leader of the Opposition, do you have any other
questions?
(Interruptions)
Hon. Leader of the Opposition, I understand that you don’t have any further
question.
(Interruptions)
Hon. Leader of the Opposition, I am addressing you. Hon. Leader of the Opposition,
I understand you don’t have any other supplementary questions?
12
(Interruptions)
I am sorry, can you please stand up and tell me whether you have any other
supplementary questions or you don’t have?
Mr Bérenger: I have already said that there is no use according to me to pursue the
matter further and that, therefore, I am not going to put any question, wasting the time of this
House with the Minister who does not know anything about the matter raised in my question.
Madam Speaker: Now I understand because from a sitting position, I can’t take your
statement. Thank you.