CEB - TANK FARM PROJECT, GAS TURBINES & TARIFFS
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Vice-
Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities whether, in regard to electricity, he
will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Central Electricity Board, information as to
–
(a)  if the St. Louis 60 MW contract has been awarded;
(b)  if it is going ahead with the –
(i) Tank Farm Project at Bain des Dames, indicating -
A. whether a new location and EIA are being sought therefor, and
B. where matters stand concerning the National Ramsar
Committee;
(ii) purchase of two Gas Turbines, indicating the –
A. estimated cost thereof;
B. price of electricity using diesel oil, and
C. impact on the environment of diesel oil as compared to coal, and
(c)  when the tariffs thereof will be lowered.
aaaaa
Mr Collendavelloo: Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, I
informed the House in my reply to the PNQ of 01 April 2015 that in February 2014 the
Central Electricity Board had initiated a procurement process for four diesel engines each of
15 MW capacity.
Five prequalified bidders had been invited to submit proposals. Only one was
received and the Central Procurement Board found that the bid was substantially non-
responsive and that it was not in a position to approve any award of the contract.
Based on that decision, the Central Electricity Board cancelled the procurement
process after consulting the African Development Bank which was the funding agency.
There was a challenge at the Independent Review Panel and subsequently in the
Supreme Court. On 13 November 2015, the bidder withdrew his case.
8
In July 2015, the Central Electricity Board, on the advice of the African Development
Bank, initiated a second procurement exercise with revised specifications for a total 60 MW
with 10% plus or minus. The new bid specifications were approved by the African
Development Bank.
At the closing date on 01 October 2015, five bids had been received at the Central
Procurement Board. On 11 November 2015, the Central Procurement Board informed the
Central Electricity Board that it had approved the award of the contract to Burmeister &
Wain Scandinavian Contractor A/S (BWSC) for the total evaluated contract price of
EUR85,185,404+Rs823,922,094, excluding VAT. The Central Procurement Board requested
the Central Electricity Board to proceed with the notification of the award in accordance with
the Public Procurement Act after having sought the concurrence of the Funding Agency, the
African Development Bank, and to revert to the Central Procurement Board after the
notification period or earlier.
On 12 November 2015, the Central Electricity Board informed the African
Development Bank of the Central Procurement Board’s decision and has sent the Evaluation
Report to the Bank.
The reply from the Bank is expected by mid-December 2015. It is expected that the
award of the contract will be made early next year and the project would be completed by
June/July 2017.
As regards part (b), following the clearance from the National Ramsar Committee, the
Central Electricity Board has repositioned the Tank Farm on the same site at Les Grandes
Salines.
The Contractor has been advised that he may proceed in the meantime with the design
part of the Tank construction. Physical works will start as soon as possible.
In November, the Central Electricity Board informed the Ministry of Environment of
the repositioning of the tanks on the same site.
The Central Electricity Board has also appointed Hydro Geological Experts to address
the requirement of the National Ramsar Committee and the experts are expected to carry out
their assignment in the course of this month.
As regards part (b) (ii) -
9
(i)  A consultant will be appointed in January 2016 to proceed with the
implementation of two 30 MW gas turbines as a first phase for the final
Combined Cycle Gas Turbine (CCGT) configuration.
(ii)  The estimated cost of the two gas turbines is Rs1.6 billion.
(iii)  The current price of electricity generation using diesel fuel at Central
Electricity Board Thermal Station ranges from Rs3.35/kWh to Rs3.98/kWh
(These are the figures for June 2015).
(iv)  The impact on environment is measured in tonnes CO 2 /MWh (tonnes per
Megawatt hour). With coal it ranges from 1.29 to 1.63 t/MWh. With diesel
oil in Central Electricity Board stations it is currently 0.58 tonnes/MWh.
I now come to part (c) of the question. I informed the House in my reply to the PNQ on 22
September 2015 that an overall tariff decrease is not envisaged.
I wish to reiterate that contrary to other organisations, the Central Electricity Board
took the judicious decision not to resort to hedging at the time that heavy fuel oil and coal
prices were increasing on the world market. This enabled the Central Electricity Board to
benefit from the current drop in the prices of these commodities. The CEB has to invest
heavily in new generation capacity in the coming years as advised by the World Bank and the
African Development Bank.
I also drew the attention of the House that the electricity tariff is not indexed to
inflation and foreign currencies for payment of loans. This may erode the surplus.
I had stated that I would look into a lower tariff for lower income groups. I am
pleased to announce that on 27 November 2015, Government has endorsed the decision of
the CEB to introduce a new Social Tariff 110A as from 01 January 2016.
When the Social Tariff 110A was introduced in 2012, there were 30,629 customers
whose electricity consumption did not exceed 75 kWh. By September 2015, this number had
reduced to 7,875.
I asked the Central Electricity Board to review the scheme and it has come up with a
new one which would benefit about 70,000 households.
With the new scheme, households with an average monthly consumption of up to
85kWh will benefit from a lower tariff, that is -
10
(i)  Rs2.18/kWh for the first 25 kWh instead of Rs3.16;
(ii)  Rs3.04/kWh for the next 25 kWh instead of Rs4.38, and
(iii)  Rs3.28/kWh instead of Rs4.74/kWh for the next 35 kWh.
The CEB is working in close consultation with the Ministry of Social Security,
National Solidarity and Reform Institutions and the National Empowerment Foundation for
the implementation of the scheme.
The households benefitting from the scheme will include -
(i)  households receiving social allowance from the Ministry of Social Security,
National Solidarity and Reform Institutions, Social Register of Mauritius for
Child allowance, irrespective of the criteria defined by CEB;
(ii)  households identified by the National Empowerment Foundation (NEF) as
registered by the Ministry of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform
Institutions, irrespective of the criteria set by CEB, and
(iii)  domestic consumers, of course, excluding those on the Social Register, who
satisfy the criteria set by CEB.
The CEB will work in consultation with the NEF and the Ministry of Social Security,
National Solidarity and Reform Institutions to disseminate the scheme to the potential
beneficiaries and provide assistance through its Customer Desk to households who have to
make an application.
Mr Bérenger: For today the hon. Vice-Prime Minister has confirmed that we are
going to BWSC, this Scandinavian firm, which had been the only firm to be qualified under
the previous tender. Will he confirm that, in fact, BWSC was the most expensive offer under
the latest tender and that, therefore, purchasing those machines from BWSC will cost Rs700
m. additional compared to what we would have paid if we had not wasted time?
Mr Collendavelloo: That is quite correct. The first bid was non-responsive. I can’t
say the figures offhand, but I am sure these figures must be more or less what they are. There
was the first bid. There was a price X and the second bid was X plus Y. But do not forget that
the first bid was non-responsive and that is why probably it was cheaper because they had not
put up a programme according to specification.
11
I have the figures now. The bid price of the Scandinavian was Rs3.6 billion at that
time comprising numerous major deviations. This is why the Procurement Board had not
considered to be responsive. The new price with compliance with specifications for 66
megawatt capacity is Rs4.3 billion. I am advised that the difference in costs is attributed to –
(i)  change of technical specifications by the CEB;
(ii)  correction of deviation leading to rejection of first tender;
(iii)  higher rating of units by 10%, and
(iv)  market conditions prevailing.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, the figures speak for themselves. On the question,
some time back, when we were discussing the Bain des Dames project, the CEB insisted that
Bain des Dames project site was the right site for both the tank farm and the combined cycle
plant to be set up in the future. When that met with the trouble that we know about, the Chief
Executive of the CEB said: ‘On n’a pas d’alternative’, whereas the hon. Vice-Prime Minister
said: ‘Si jamais il y a l’espace nécessaire pour la centrale, nous la construirons sur le même
terrain. Si on ne peut le faire, ce ne sera pas la fin du monde’. Deux longueurs d’ondes!
Can I know whether any alternative site is envisaged for both the tank farm and the combined
cycle plant?
Mr Collendavelloo: Well, I must confess that we were taken aback by this allegation
of wetland. I had myself gone to the site. I did not fall in any wetland and I could not see any
wetland. But we have worked and this is probably why there were answers which were not
quite in tune. I do not meet the General Manager of the CEB to work out replies beforehand.
We give them as we believe them to be true. The worst-case scenario, the first two gas
turbines will be constructed on a portion of land which is leased to the CEB, which is in
existence and which was destined for the coal transit associated with CT Power. The site is
close to the existing Fort George station and is well located from the environment standpoint.
Then, afterwards these turbines will be transferred to the new site for implementing
that project. The Central Electricity Board has already written to the MPA for the release of
six hectares plot of land which has not been allocated yet in replacement of Les Grandes
Salines, if this is warranted. This site is at ex-Dockers Flat, Baie du Tombeau.. But our
preferred spot is still Les Grand Salines, if it can be worked out and if everybody reaches a
consensus with CEB.
12
Mr Bérenger: The hon. Vice-Prime Minister himself, on the Ramsar issue, said, and I
quote from the Press –
“CEB has accepted all the Ramsar conditions.” set up by the so-called Ramsar
National Committee.
Is that the case?
Mr Collendavelloo: Perhaps I could explain in limine first of all. When we had this
problem of the wetland and the matter was referred to the Ramsar Committee, we had two
choices, either to stick to our guns and to state clearly that we do not believe that there were
wetlands on the site or to comply with the conditions of Ramsar Committee. I advised the
CEB that we were not going to waste time and energy fighting Ramsar Committee. On the
contrary, let us work together with them. We are not sure whether everybody is clear in their
minds that this is a site where there are wetlands, but this is precisely when we do not need to
quarrel. Ramsar Committee, being unclear itself, asked CEB to appoint an expert. I believe he
is called geological or something of the sort, hydrological, geological expert, condition 9, if
my memory does not fail me. He has been appointed and we expect his report very soon. As
soon as we get his report, we shall send it to the Ramsar Committee and then we shall see
whether, in fact, there is wetland or there is no wetland. Visually, there is no wetland, but we
are not experts on wetlands.
Mr Bérenger: I thought the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public
Utilities were, the way he talked to the Press!
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker, concerning the storage plant, I heard the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, I
think, say that they are going ahead, that CEB is going ahead, and he said on the same site.
My point is that, in the EIA, it is spelt out that this new tank farm must be at the other end of
the terrain, of the site, that is, farthest from the maisons, from the inhabitants. Is that the
case? Because otherwise we would need another EIA certificate.
Mr Collendavelloo: It is not going to be near the houses or far from the houses or
whatever. It is really a repositioning on the site. We need to look at the map, which I tabled at
the National Assembly, in order to see that it is not a great repositioning. But what is more
important is what happens with the Ministry of Environment and the Municipal Council of
Port Louis. Those are the most important aspects. Whatever I think or CEB thinks is
irrelevant. So, what we have done is that the Municipal Council of Port Louis will examine it
13
and, with regard to environment, we have informed the Ministry of Environment of the new
location. If I can put it broadly, in the beginning it was going to be to the north of the site,
now it is going to be to the south of the site.
Mr Bérenger: It is my concern because to me the most important thing is the
inhabitants of that part of Port Louis. Can I quote the EIA, the present EIA obtained. I quote
paragraph 17 –
“The tank shall be located at the northern extremity of the site, furthest away from the
residential area”.
So, if we are changing the site for the tank farms, we will need a new EIA.
Mr Collendavelloo: This is why we have informed the Ministry of Environment. We
have not sought clearance, we have not applied for a new EIA. We have informed the
Ministry of Environment to see whether the change in location is of a nature to affect the
environment to such an extent as to require us to apply for an EIA licence. We shall stand
advised. From the information that I have, although it would have moved nearer to the
habitations, the distance is not too significant.
Mr Bérenger: I think I heard the hon. Minister say that the CEB is going ahead with
the purchase of two gas turbines. The CEB is appointing or has appointed, I am not sure, two
consultants. One to look at the possibility of liquefied natural gas being used in the future,
whether it is feasible, and the second one to look whether the combined cycle plan is feasible
in Mauritius. My question is: are we going to issue the tender? Are we going to go for the
purchase of these two gas turbines even before these two consultants have reported back?
Mr Collendavelloo: Well, the short answer is no! We are not going to do anything of
the sort. Let me just dissociate the two: gas turbines, which will run on light diesel oil, and
LNG. Those two are fuels for these machines. The LNG process is still in its infancy. We
have a committee working with various Ministries. We have progressed, and we hope to be
able to put a position paper before the House very soon, probably when we resume in March,
so that the House be kept fully informed as to what is the progress being made. The most
important aspect of it is source of supply and mode of transportation, which are the two items
which can be very costly. At the end of the day, we might decide not to go for LNG at all! It
is a question of cost. So, our preliminary meetings are for this. But notwithstanding what
happens on LNG, we are going to place these two combined cycle gas turbines, which will
run - I have called it initially. Initially might be for quite some time! - initially on diesel oil,
14
which will be on light fuel oil, that is, at Rs32 the litre compared to Rs22 the litre for heavy
fuel oil. The advantage is that it is a new technique and that, as far as the experts tell me, the
switch over to LNG is quite feasible and easy.
Mr Bérenger: That is my worry. It’s that we are going to use this light diesel oil for
we don’t know, in fact, how long. Can I ask the hon. Vice-Prime Minister whether he is
standing by those figures which the CEB is providing, how much it will cost as compared to
other modes of production of electricity? The figures - I am prepared to take a bet - are very
much on the very low side. And we must compare like with like! CEB has provided figures
of what they produce with machines that have been written off, that have been and so on and
so on. So, is the hon. Vice-Prime Minister going to stand by those figures - Rs3 something?
Because my information is totally to the contrary, namely that producing through diesel oil is
going to cost much more than that through new machines, new gas turbines.
Mr Collendavelloo: Of course, as usual, I always pay attention to remarks coming
from the hon. Leader of the Opposition and of other hon. Members of this House. This
question has been raised before. I have consulted not only the CEB but also my own advisers
who have indeed told...
(Interruptions)
No! My own adviser, as the hon. Leader of the Opposition knows, is Mr Robertson - to have
an objective view of that. Quite he has also expressed certain doubts, but without finalising
these doubts. For the moment, CEB commits itself to telling me that the final cost of
generation expected from combined cycle gas turbines, CCGT operation on light diesel fuel,
will be Rs5.63. That is what I have. Of course, in these matters, prices are almost esoteric.
(Interruptions)
But that is how it is.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, if I can ask a question and then give the floor. We
know that coal pollutes, but we know that we have progressed a lot to decrease the pollution
that coal causes, and I read the Chief Executive of CEB - dismiss coal! We are going to use
diesel for God knows how long. Is the hon. Vice-Prime Minister aware that using diesel oil
is nearly as polluting as using coal under state-of-the-art technology? If I can quote the
Financial Times of 03 November 2015 –
15
“According to the International Energy Agency, diesel electricity production emits
only slightly less carbon than burning coal”.
Therefore, are we prepared to review the whole situation?
Mr Collendavelloo: I am sure the House will recall how the hon. Leader of the
Opposition scoffed me when I made my first statement in this House on electricity and I said
there are ways of having clean coal and we must work on it. I went back to my books and I
now know that clean coal - let us call it clean coal, it is never very clean - is possible, but it is
terribly expensive. So, what do we do? We spend a lot of money in cleaning coal, getting the
particles because, let us not forget, coal is not only CO 2 , it is also mercury and all sorts of
things - I don’t know their names - which have got to be trapped and treated and all that, and
that is expensive. Yes, clean coal is possible; but, are we in a position to pay the price or do
we pay something which is a bit more polluant but which will meet the exigencies of
everything?
Let me come to the point of coal. When I made my first statement, it was in what
context? It was in the context that we were not dismissing coal, but since the time I took
office and up to now, there are tremendous developments on the international front, including
what is happening at COP21 which we will have to await to see what will be the funding
which will be associated because there are subsidies which probably we will obtain from this
World Green Fund and we will have to determine the issue as from these new facts. We must
not also forget that associated with this is renewable energy. Right now, there will be
probably another 50 MW of solar photovoltaic which will come on the network. We are
almost for finalising a waste-to-energy project. We will continue with the Sotravic landfill
gas at Mare Chicose. The aeolian, which was told for ages in the ancient Government, now is
starting. I am going to visit the last installation very soon. Put together, it means we are not
putting all our eggs in our basket, but I repeat one thing, all that I am saying, I have not
invented; I am not a magician. I have read it from the Manraj Report and from the Strategic
Plan of 2009 which was more on electric, but the National Energy Commission Report, well,
we may grumble, but it has been accepted unanimously in Mauritius. So, I have been going
on the books which I have. They may be wrong, but I am not going to invent things myself. I
am not an inventor. I am just a lawyer who happens to be a Minister.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Osman Mahomed!
16
Mr Mahomed: Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to welcome the
lower tariff for the lower-income group. Pressure was from several quarters, including a
specific question of mine in the PNQ of the Leader of the Opposition. Thank you for that. My
question this morning pertains to the 60 MW St. Louis Power Plant. In his reply, the hon.
Vice-Prime Minister said it is going to be on line, on the grid in 2017, and my question
specifically pertains to power security. What is the current peak being faced by the CEB these
days in summer when people are using their air conditioners, fans and all, because in my
Constituency there has been very frequent power tripping off. And I would like to know from
the hon. Vice-Prime Minister whether these are being associated with load shedding from the
CEB because it is not able to cope with the peak that he is going to provide to us?
Mr Collendavelloo: No. There is no load shedding. I can assure the hon. Member of
that, there is no load shedding. The current peak, I am going to wait for confirmation but for
the meantime, let us say that it is 462 MW or 492 MW - I keep forgetting; I get it now. It is
460 MW. Yesterday, it was 435 MW. There is no load shedding; I am getting confirmation
now on the agenda. If there are some tripping off, well, CEB has just informed me that the
chauves-souris are now going haywire and they are disturbing all the electricity supply near
Réduit. So, let us blame the chauves-souris, again.
(Interruptions)
So, in Réduit, this is what CEB tells me, they have a problem with the shooting of those
chauves-souris.
Madam Speaker: Time is over, but there is one last question.
Mr Bérenger: My last question, of course, will relate to the new CEB tariff which has
been announced. We will have to study it carefully, but my last question, Madam Speaker, is
to the hon. Vice-Prime Minister. We know that prices of oil products and coal have crashed
on the world market. As a result, the prices of diesel and l’essence have been brought down
but not enough, far from enough as per the crash on the world market. Now, we know that
CEB works with both coal and oil products. So, can the hon. Vice-Prime Minister tell the
country why is not, as in the case of diesel and l’essence, a general decrease in the CEB
tariffs plus, as in the past, an extra effort for the people on the lowest rank economically?
Mr Collendavelloo: Well, diesel and essence (mogas), they have got their own
regulations for the fixing of prices. I am not going to make comparisons. Insofar as the CEB
is concerned, I do not have a policy of just hiking down the tariffs, and then what happens? I
17
have put, with the Accountants of CEB, a financial plan where we will try and reimburse the
debts that we have and invest in machines. I know I have the support of the hon. Prime
Minister on this because we need to use the money at bon escient. I don’t think that the ‘gro-
palto’ of Mauritius need a 10% decrease on their electricity tariffs. I don’t think that
commercial or industrial undertakings need a 10% decrease - which is the figure.
(Interruptions)
I am sorry, but that is my policy. I am the Minister. This is what I have decided and
the lowest classes have benefited from a 30% increase. I have said it publicly, hon. Ganoo
and hon. Mahomed had this strategy in mind, I do not share the view of the hon. Leader of
the Opposition. We must agree to disagree. With the plan which we have put up,
reimbursement, reinvestment, by 2018, this Rs2.5 billion profit which we are making, not
Rs5 million, not Rs4.7 billion but Rs2.5 billion which we are making now, will all be
finished. What do we do? We re-increase the tariffs, again? No. We can’t do that, and I am
not going to do this. The hon. Leader of the Opposition knows what sort of person I am and
he is also the same sort of person as I am.