TRIPARTITE COMMITTEE – WAGE COMPENSATION
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the
Minister Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the annual wage
compensation payable to employees for loss of purchasing power due to inflation, he will
state –
(a)  why tripartite meetings for discussion thereof have not been held to date,
indicating if same will be held urgently and, if so, when and if not, why not,
and
(b)  if same will be paid to the employees of both the private and the public
sectors, as from 01 January 2016.
aaaaa
Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, the Tripartite Committee usually meets
annually a few weeks before the Budget exercise is completed. This year is exceptional
because the budget covers a period of eighteen months ending June 2016. The next budget
exercise is expected to be completed by May next year. In years when the fiscal year begins
on 01 July, the Tripartite Committee Meeting was held in the month of May and the
Additional Remuneration Bill was introduced in the National Assembly after the
Appropriation Bill has been passed.
As regards part (a) of the question, Cabinet has decided that a Meeting of the
Tripartite Committee be convened for determination of the payment of salary compensation
on Thursday 03 December.
Madam Speaker, I wish to remind the House that the policy priority of Government
this year has been to improve the purchasing power of the most vulnerable families and deal
with the issue of absolute poverty. To this end, we have taken several measures.
First, we granted a salary compensation of Rs600 across the board, with effect from
01 January 2015 to all employees which was well over and above the inflation rate of
3.2 percent. This has cost Rs1.3 billion to the public sector and Rs3 billion to the
private sector for a total of Rs4.3 billion.
Second, Government has also increased, under the Marshall Plan announced by the
Prime Minister, the Basic Retirement Pension substantially, from Rs3,623 monthly to
9
Rs5000. This has cost the Budget an extra amount of Rs4.7 billion, bringing the
annual budget for Basic Pensions from Rs11.7 billion to Rs16.4 billion, that is, an
increase of 40 percent.
Third, we have lowered the price of mogas at the pump from Rs45.95 to Rs41.35 per
litre, that is, by 10 percent.
Fourth, we have lowered the price of diesel from Rs37.80 per litre to Rs32.75, that is,
by 13.4 percent.
Fifth, Government is subsidising basic commodities like cooking gas, flour and rice at
a cost of Rs810 m.
Sixth, Government has extended the Youth Employment Programme (YEP) to the
public sector, thus employing an additional 1,000 youths.
Seventh, as announced last week, Government is introducing a new social electricity
tariff for some 70,000 low-income households that will be effective as from January
next year.
Concerning the inflation rate for the year 2015, it is estimated to be around 1.3
percent. This would be the lowest inflation rate over the past 28 years. Government policies
and measures aimed at improving the purchasing power of the population have contributed
significantly to bringing down the inflation rate to such a low and stable level.
I must stress that if we want to join the league of advanced countries, it is imperative
that increases in the wage bill is matched by increases in labour productivity. This is crucial
to improving the competitiveness of the country, attracting more investment and creating
more jobs.
I wish to inform the House that a 1% increase in wage bill will cost the economy
around Rs1.3 billion, that is, 0.3% of GDP.
As regards part (b) of the question, the issue of salary compensation will be addressed
by the Tripartite Committee which will make recommendations to the Cabinet.
At this stage, it is premature to pre-empt the decision of Cabinet on this matter.
Mr Bérenger: Am I given to understand since the hon. Minister has made reference
to the fact that it is sans précédent, that it is on the eve of Christmas that the Tripartite
Meeting is being called? Is it not a fact that, in fact, it is being called because in a letter dated
10
26 November, ne voyant rien venir, all the trade unions wrote to the Minister of Finance to
request that this Tripartite Meeting should take place?
Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: The Tripartite was scheduled to take place this year. So,
there was this question of when. Well, Cabinet has decided that we are meeting tomorrow.
The Tripartite will be meeting tomorrow afternoon and any decision to be taken will be taken
by Cabinet.
Mr Bérenger: The hon. Minister wants to make us believe that a meeting was to take
place in December, we beg to doubt that very much, Madam Speaker. I heard the hon.
Minister say that the Tripartite Meeting will be held tomorrow, if I got him right, whereas
Cabinet announced, after Cabinet met last Friday, that it would meet on Friday and then a
second time on the 8 th and it was even announced that Parliament would consider the Bill to
implement whatever decision is taken, that Parliament would meet on 11 th to vote the
required Bill. Is that still on?
Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Well, what is still on is that we are meeting tomorrow; we
are listening to the various parties as usual. If we need to meet a second time, we will meet.
We can make formal proposals. I will go to Cabinet with the proposals and Cabinet will
decide on the quantum.
Mr Bérenger: I heard the hon. Minister insist that it is the lowest rate of inflation that
we have this year, for many years, but the tone adopted could be interpreted as meaning that
there will be no wage compensation as from 01 January, being given this rate of inflation.
Can I ask, therefore, the hon. Minister whether the principle that there will be a wage
compensation as from 01 January is on?
Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: The principle of a wage compensation is on, though we all
know that, in one PRB Report, it was agreed that for the public sector when inflation rate is
less than 5%, there would be no compensation. We also realise that when it comes to decision
making, we have to see and listen to everyone. So, the meeting with the unions tomorrow and
the employers will allow us to make a clearer picture of where we are going and where we
should go.
Mr Bérenger: Regarding part (b) of my question, the hon. Minister has just come
back to the country, I think, but I am sure he must have had time to feel the frustration, the
concern in the public sector, being given that information is circulating that if there is a wage
compensation in the private sector, there might not be one because of the PRB considerations.
11
Now, can I know whether the trade unions from the public sector will be present at the
Tripartite Meeting that has been called for tomorrow and, if not, whether this is not sending
the wrong signal to the public sector?
Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: The public sector trade unions are being invited for
tomorrow.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem!
Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The hon. Minister of Finance mentioned
that we have a Budget for 18 months which will end in June of next year, 2016. So, may I
know from the hon. Minister of Finance whether there would be a second exercise of
compensation carried out in July 2016?
Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: When we come to the bridge, we will decide.
Mr Bérenger: My last question: being given that the Minister has said the principle
that there will be a wage compensation to compensate for inflation is on, can I know at this
stage whether the Minister has any ordre de grandeur that would be suggested to the trade
unions tomorrow?
Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Well, I cannot pre-empt on the outcome of the Tripartite
Meeting. We are four Ministers present there, we have the private sector, we have the trade
unions and I want to listen to them - listen and come with proposals.