ROCHES NOIRES MEGA PROJECT
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the
Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the Roches Noires
Mega Project referred to in the 2015-16 Budget Speech, he will, for the benefit of the House,
obtain and give details thereof, indicating –
(a) if an Environment Impact Assessment Licence and an Integrated Resort Scheme
certificate have been delivered therefor;
(b) the name of the owner and promoter thereof, indicating if he has been delivered
with -
(i) an authorisation to purchase the land concerned therewith; and
(ii) registration as an investor, and
(c) if the Department of Civil Aviation and the Prime Minister’s Office have objected
thereto.
aaaaa
The Minister of Finance and Economic Development (Mr S. Lutchmeenaraidoo):
Madam Speaker, on 15 September 2005, the Board of Investment received an application
from Roches Noires Resorts and Residence Ltd for an IRS Certificate for an integrated
development, comprising of two hotels, a golf course, chalets, marina and golf villas, and a
business park on freehold land of an extent of 352 Hectares at Roches Noires.
The application was submitted on behalf of the Élan Group, a South African
enterprise which had developed several integrated property development projects in South
Africa.
The promoter proposed to acquire the plot of land from the local owners, Grand Lake
Ltd, represented by the Fon Sing Group.
After all Ministries concerned had examined the project, a Letter of Comfort was
issued on 06 December 2005 to the promoter, in line with the then established procedures at
the Board of Investment (BOI). The purpose of the Letter of Comfort was to enable the
promoters to commit funds to finalise the detailed Master Plan of the project and submit
technical details to enable BOI to issue an Investment Certificate under the Integrated Resort
Scheme.
9
On 09 October 2006, BOI was informed by Élan Group that Élan Group had
withdrawn from the proposed IRS project and that the new promoters were a consortium led
by Jean Marie Bain.
On 30 April 2007, BOI issued a Letter of Intent to Roches Noires Resorts and
Residence Ltd based on a new Master Plan which included a marina.
Concerning part (a) of the question, the Ministry of Environment issued, on 30 May
2007, an EIA License for the project. An IRS certificate was issued on 13 November 2007.
As regards part (b) of the question, the land of 352 Hectares was originally owned by
Grand Lake Ltd, whose main shareholder was the Fon Sing Group. Two other small
adjoining plots of 4.22 Hectares belonging to Société Yajna and 0.7 Hectare belonging to Mr
S. Ghurburrun, were subsequently purchased and integrated in the project. So, the total extent
of land for the project amounted to 358 Hectares.
The main promoters consist of a consortium led by Mr Jean Marie Bain with
Cassiopee (Ile Maurice) Ltée as main shareholder.
Concerning part (b) (i) of the question, on 30 October 2007, under the Non-Citizens
(Property Restriction) Act, the BOI issued an authorisation to the IRS Company allowing it to
acquire the 358 Hectares of land at Roches Noires.
As regards part (b) (ii) of the question, the BOI had issued to Roches Noires Resorts
and Residence Ltd, a Registration Certificate as investor on 30 October 2007.
Madam Speaker, the IRS Company informed the BOI on 11 February 2010 - three
years later - that it could not raise finance and service its loans due to financial difficulties
and asked permission to sell 90 Hectares, from the 358 Hectares acquired in 2007, to local
investors who want to carry out a residential morcellement. The Board of Investment rejected
the request.
On 03 May 2010, Barclays Bank, holder of various fixed/floating charges on the
assets of the IRS Company appointed Pricewaterhouse Coopers Ltd as Administrator of the
IRS Company.
10
Messrs Bonieux and Lutchumun were appointed in March and April 2011, as
‘Receivers and Managers’ of Roches Noires Resort and Residence Ltd.
On 05 April 2012, the Board of Investment revoked the IRS certificate it had issued to
the Company.
Following a bid exercise the receiver-manager received a pre-sale agreement of the
property with the YIHE Group from China on 04 September 2012.
The YIHE Group, established in 1992, has been involved in the development and
operation of large scale master planned communities, luxury residential projects, hotels and
property management and education industry in China. The company had invested in some
40 projects in seven major cities across China.
It has also property development projects in Sydney in Australia, and Boston and Los
Angeles in the USA.
The YIHE Group incorporated the Island Summer Palace Ltd in Mauritius and
submitted a business plan in respect of an IRS Certificate on 01 March 2013.
The project is planned to be implemented in three phases.
Phase 1 includes: A hotel and leisure zone, a commercial zone, a business zone, a
convention centre and a waterfront residential area.
Phase 2 includes: a golf course, golf villas and a club house.
Phase 3 includes: low-rise residential units, a retirement village and an education hub.
The project will require investments of some MUR 44 billion.
I must inform the House that a delegation of the YIHE Group led by its Chairman, Mr
He Jianliang arrived in Mauritius this morning to finalise discussions. We have proposed to
the YIHE to go for a Smart City Concept rather than an IRS because we want to avoid the
“Rich Ghetto” concept linked to IRS and RES.
Concerning the environment aspects, of the 358 Hectares involved in the project, the
wetlands and the barachois will be kept in their current state of natural habitat. Those account
for some 100 Hectares of land. There will be no construction on those land areas and all the
11
endemic trees and plants will be preserved and new endemic plants will be grown. I have
explained this issue of environment because there are objections and, rightly so, as to the
non-protection of the environment there. Therefore, we have seen to it that the whole ecology
and environment of this place be preserved totally.
As regards part (c) of the question, on 29 May 2013, les choses se gâtent the
Department of Civil Aviation informed the Board of Investment, that the proposed site falls
within the area for the second runway and as such construction should not be allowed in the
event of implementation of the northern airport project.
This was clearly a pretext found by the former Government to stop this huge project,
et les mauvaises langues prétendent que le campement de l’ancien Premier ministre qui est
juste en face et c’est la raison réelle qui avait motivé, donc, the interdiction to go ahead with
the project.
So, quite recently, this year, following – following a Cabinet Paper, we went to
Cabinet – Cabinet discussions, the Department has reviewed its decision as no second runway
is envisaged on this plot of land.
So, Madam Speaker, this project dates back to 2005 and met with a lot of obstacles on
its way. So, we are pleased to inform the House that we are on the point of finally kicking off
the project with the delegation presently in Mauritius
Mr Bérenger: This was presented as something new, one of the Smart Cities and so
on, and what we learn now is that it is an IRS project, known project, going back to 2007, but
marketed as a new Smart City and so on, in the Budget Speech. Can I ask the hon. Minister of
Finance and Economic Development, am I right in saying that an EIA certificate was granted
to the owners at that point in time in May 2007 and an IRS certificate in November 2007?
Am I right in saying that, in fact, the EIA certificate has lapsed and whether a new request
has been put in and now, we have learned today that the IRS certificate has been revoked?
So, can we know where matters stand as far as both are concerned, the EIA certificate and the
IRS certificate?
Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: As far as I know, both have lapsed. In fact, the question of
IRS, Madam Speaker, we are not playing on words. Experience with IRS, up to now, has
shown us that we have turned the country into areas, what I call real rich men’s ghetto -
ghetto for the rich - in the sense that those areas are fenced and reserved for a small class of
12
people. We feel, in Government, that this type of approach to development is the wrong one
because we are isolating from the country, large groups of people who are buying inside
those IRS, and this explains the decision why we have decided to review the whole IRS
concept and RIA concept also and come forward with new proposals which will make those
projects more integrated in the social environment whereby if there is an IRS or RIA or
anything, that people who are inside are not in boxes, first condition, and second, that the
whole population should be in a position to buy, reside and live in those areas also. I think it
is a beautiful concept, but we are coming out with it in one month - less than one month. The
BOI presently is working on a new version of IRS which will be more integrated in the
paysage, in the social environment and more integrated for a country that is multiracial and
willing to live with others freely. That’s the IRS and RES.
On the question of Smart Cities, this is a concept which is different. The concept is
much bigger, much larger and we are here dealing with the development on 800 acres of land
which is huge. So, we have not yet convinced the investors. I have met them this morning,
the hon. Prime Minister met them this afternoon, we have not yet convinced them that the
project should be converted into a Smart City, but they have agreed, in principle, to go for it.
In which case, I would be very happy because then we are going to have a major
development in Roches Noires which, accidentally, is my Constituency also and that of the
hon. Prime Minister.
So, as far as I know, the EIA licence has lapsed, I asked my officer at the back to
confirm and, as far as I know also, the IRS certificate also issued in 2007 has lapsed also.
Mr Bérenger: Yesterday, we learnt that discussions are still ongoing with Jin Fei to
get that thing going. In principle, agreement has been obtained and today, we hear that, in
principle, agreement has been obtained from the YIHE Group of companies. So, these two
projects, amongst others, were announced when nothing is finalised yet.
In this case, can the hon. Minister also confirm that - we are talking about a project
that goes back to 2005 and 2007; an IRS project, in fact, the whole thing went into
receivership, as he has said, as from 2011 and the Chinese promoter, the YIHE Group, has
come in for an IRS project? Now, he is being asked to change to a Smart City Project. Will
the hon. Minister confirm that, in fact, more than Rs1.5 billion are owned by the owners in
bankruptcy, to two banks in Mauritius and what is going to happen as far as this new YIHE
Group investor is concerned?
Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Yes. Well, I am sure the hon. Leader of the Opposition
would love to know that I received a letter this morning that following the reception and
13
dinner of last night, that the Jin Fei group has agreed to our request and the hon. Prime
Minister made it through. In fact, Jin Fei has agreed that the 75 acres of land that they will
keep will be under the lease agreement and will not be sold. This is very important. So, the
plot of land will not be sold. Second, the 425 acres of land will be returned to the Ministry of
Housing and Lands.
I just want the House to note that those 425 acres are fully equipped land with roads,
electricity, phone and I would value them at a minimum of Rs5 billion. So, I must say that we
have made an incredible - re-established justice where there was injustice for the small
planters - and second, we restituted back to the country, 425 acres of fully equipped land
worth at least Rs5 billion. So, this is good news for the country and I am happy that it went
through.
As for the second aspect of the question, if we can, naturally approve a new IRS for
the group but, as I say, then we run the risk of having 800 acres of closed development
reserved for the favoured few. I don’t want this. We don’t want this. We want a development
where the whole nation will participate and where people can also buy - Mauritians and non-
resident Mauritians also. So, it is in the interest, I think, of one nation country that we go for
development which is more integrated.
I appreciate that this might take some time. It will take some time, but I have already
this morning, the agreement, in principle, from the YIHE Group that they are agreeable to
change their IRS to a full-fledged small Smart City. This is what they agreed to this morning.
We are still under discussions and third, the hon. Leader of the Opposition put the question of
the bankruptcy. PricewaterhouseCoopers, therefore, is the company that has taken over the
lead. I need to say also that the one who went bankrupt, Mr Bain, has gone to Court three
times objecting to the fact that this plot of land be taken over by the Chinese group. We put a
condition this morning with the group that they will have to bear the full cost of any
indemnity that might come out of a Court judgement established by Mr Bain in the process.
So, we are now at a stage where Mr Bain might go to Court again, but where the promoter
has accepted to take the full responsibility of whatever the outcome. So, I am covered at this
level. We are covered also for the approval, in principle, of the Smart City to replace the IRS
Project, and I think that things will move quite fast. That’s my feeling today.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, discussions are still on to change the requests from
Government to change from an IRS project to a Smart City project and now we hear that
there are plenty of trouble in Court. Can I know from the hon. Minister - this is a thing that
14
goes back to 2005-2007 - when does he expect the project in one form or the other to start
and to be completed?
Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Madam Speaker, I am no magician. This project has been
delayed since the Labour Government came to power in 2005. They have taken nine years
and have done nothing, and I am being asked to give a date when the project will be
completed. It will be completed as soon as possible.
Mr Bérenger: Even start, the hon. Minister can’t say! Can I ask the hon. Minister not
to get me wrong! I am not pushing for an IRS project, I am just pointing out that in the
Budget Speech this was presented as a Smart City project, new project, whereas it goes back
to 2005-2007, bankrupt as an IRS project. I am not pushing for an IRS project or whatever.
Can I ask the hon. Minister whether he understands that I don’t hold a brief on behalf of those
people?
Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: I fully understand the soucis of the hon. Leader of the
Opposition. It is just that we are pushing through projects which have been sleeping in the
drawers of the former Prime Minister. This is what has been happening. We are not
inventing, reinventing nothing and we have promised no miracle. We are just saying that
those files have been kept in drawers in the PM’s office against the development of the
country. You know, this project was going through in 2013. There was nothing to stop it.
Then, suddenly the PMO said, “No, we have to stop the project because there is going to be –
what - an airport there”. We all know that there will be no airport in the North. Then they
said: “No, there will be a second airstrip that will be completed further down once the airport
is constructed”. Then, as I told the hon. Leader of the Opposition, the information leaking out
- les mauvaises langues peut-être - is that the only reason why the project was rejected was
because the campement of the former Prime Minister was just opposite. We stopped the
project, a development of 800 acres on the caprices d’un Premier ministre. This is what we
have been doing. The number of projects which have been stopped like this is incredible.
Yesterday, Jin Fei - people now take it for granted that we have worked through and retrieved
425 acres. That’s easy to say. Who did it? We did it! We worked it through. We negotiated.
We pinched them. There was arm-twisting also, and we did it because we had to decide.
Yesterday, we had two meetings because there are two major projects now: one is at Médine
which has been stopped because of secondary reasons - no real big reasons. First, is the
education hub and the hon. Minister of Education yesterday took the decision personally to
remove any obstruction at that level. Second, there was un rail, the old railway system that
went through the project and the project was stopped because of this. The Médine project
15
which is a multi-billion project was stopped because one silly officer thought that this road
track is le patrimoine national. Would you believe it? It is incredible what we have been
doing in this country for the past years. Yesterday, my colleague, the hon. Vice Prime
Minister and Minister of Housing and Lands, had to intervene personally to ensure that
Médine compensates the Government for this railway track, but does not stop development
because there is a railway track there. We have been proceeding like this since we have taken
over in December. People might think this is easy. We are implementing projects which have
been kept in drawers for long. There are also other new projects which are developing and we
are working on them, but I need to reassure the hon. Leader of the Opposition that we are
leaving no stone unturned to tell civil servants that they are not there to say no. Civil servants
are there because they have to find solutions to problems. I told them yesterday and the day
before also that I am not chairing a committee to listen to civil servants coming to the
committee saying: ‘we can’t do this because of that’. I said: “No. My question is this: you
are paid from public funds to find solutions, not to come to me and say there are problems”.
This is our approach presently. This is the approach which is paying because those same
officers now are returning back to their desk, are taking the same files and are okaying those
files. I don’t want to make any imputation or any insinuation, but a lot of money has been
stopping those projects in the past. Lot of bad money! Whether it concerns Jin Fei or whether
projects are blocked – I come and say: why have they blocked those projects? - waiting for
money before implementing or approving! I put the question because we are here trying to
practise transparency. We are here for that. Sorry, I have taken some more time, Madam
Speaker. I wish to apologise. I think that this need to be taken within the global approach that
we are having now, that we are just opening up old files and getting them new again.
Mr Bérenger: The hon. Minister has made a very serious allegation that, in fact, the
Civil Aviation, which, in those days, was under the Prime Minister’s Office, has objected
because the previous Government used that as a pretext to stop the project whereas we know,
right or wrong, that long-term the Civil Aviation has been arguing for years that we should
keep that site in case there is need in five, ten, 20, 25 years for a second airport. Now, the
hon. Minister is saying that this was a pretext. I repeat the Civil Aviation was under the Prime
Minister’s Office. Can I know who was the Director of Civil Aviation when supposedly he
came with that kind of pretext? Who is the Director of Civil Aviation now?
Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: That’s a good question to which I don’t have the answer. I
will just ask my officers.
(Interruptions)
16
No, I don’t have the answer. But for the airport, maybe the hon. Leader of the
Opposition would wish to know whether this development will stop a new airport project.
No! It is only a projected second airstrip further down the road, once the airport is
constructed, that goes on this plot of land. So, even by approving that probably the second
airstrip is being sacrificed, the plot reserved for the main airport has been kept.
Mr Bérenger: Can I know, therefore, if there is disagreement on that, there is a very
serious allegation that it was a pretext from the previous Government and that now the
Director of the Civil Aviation has revoked that decision taken by I don’t know whom. If
taken, can I put in a request that the correspondence between the Civil Aviation and whoever
– Board of Investment or what have you - be laid on the Table of the Assembly as to when
the objection was raised and when the objection has been lifted?
Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: That’s a question to which I can’t reply as Minister of
Finance, but if the hon. Leader of Opposition comes with a formal question, I am sure that the
hon. Minister concerned with the Civil Aviation will give the reply. Let me just add one
thing. I must say one thing that the same officers who have been resisting those former files
from those major projects are the same ones approving them today. I have to admit it,
whether it be the Ministry of Environment, the Ministry of Housing, the officers have not
changed. We have changed them. This is the difference. We have changed them into being
more proactive and taking decisions. Therefore, I would not impute motives on the former
Director of Civil Aviation. I don’t know who he is or who is the new one, but if the question
needs to be answered, I would ask.
(Interruptions)
Yes, but I don’t have the reply. The hon. Leader of the Opposition can ask a
substantive question.
(Interruptions)
It is secondary at the same time. I would say that, in all the Departments we are
working with, our civil servants have been traumatised under intense pressure and that we are
now using the same officers, speaking to the same officers and we are encouraging them to
change their views on life and they are changing. I am happy with it.
Mr Bérenger: That is certainly a pretext, telling me that I need to put a formal
question. When the question is put now, first, to give us a copy of the correspondence and
secondly, to tell us who was Director of Civil Aviation when the objection was put and who
is now that the objection has been raised supposedly?
17
My last question, Madam Speaker, will be - I do not think there are others – can we
have any kind of time frame; can we know when we will have an answer from the YIHE
Group from Guangzhou; do we have any indication when they will provide with an answer to
the request from Government that we drop the IRS Project and that they should come forward
with the so-called Smart City Project?
Mr Lutchmeenaraidoo: Well, it might take some time, but then, for a project of this
magnitude, we are speaking of Rs44 billion of investment, I would not mind waiting for two
or three weeks or even more. The issue is that, do we want Roches Noires to become an IRS
or do we want Roches Noires to become a Smart City? I am convinced that Roches Noires is
much better equipped to become, for the north of the island, a Smart City.
Madam Speaker: Time is over!