ELECTORAL REFORM
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Rt.
hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and
National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Ruling of the United Nations Human
Rights Committee in 2012 following the complaint by ‘Rézistans ek Alternativ’ regarding the
non-compliance by Mauritius with the International Covenant on Political and Civil Rights,
he will state –
(a)  where matters stand at the level of the Committee, as at to date, and
(b)  how Government proposes to follow up on the said Ruling, indicating if an
electoral reform Bill with ‘une dose de proportionnelle’ and to do away with the
obligation imposed on every candidate at general elections to declare the
community to which he or she claims to belong will be introduced and, if so,
when.
aaaaa
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, as the House is aware, prior to the last General
Elections, every candidate at any general election was required to declare his community,
pursuant to section 3(1) of the First Schedule to the Constitution.
In 2007, the political party “Rezistans Ek Alternativ” challenged the above
requirement before the United Nations Human Rights Committee (UNHRC).
The United Nations Human Rights Committee (UNHRC) concluded that the
requirement of mandatory classification of a candidate for a general election constituted a
violation of Article 25 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The
United Nations Human Rights Committee (UNHRC) also reminded that Mauritius was under
an obligation to provide the complainants with an effective and enforceable remedy and
avoid similar violations in the future.
This is precisely what Government is in the process of doing.
10
In December 2011, following a Judgment of the Judicial Committee of the Privy
Council, the political party “Rezistans Ek Alternativ” entered two constitutional plaints
which are still pending before the Supreme Court.
Consequently, in July 2014, Parliament passed the Constitution (Declaration of
Community) (Temporary Provisions) Bill which removed the mandatory requirement for a
candidate to declare his community.
However, the above Act applied only to the first general election held after the
commencement of the Act. For subsequent general elections, candidates will still have to
declare their community, if no change is brought to the law. For this reason, “Rezistans Ek
Alternativ” has maintained its constitutional plaints which have been fixed to 03 November
2015 for merits.
The House will appreciate that we can only report new developments to the Human
Rights Committee once the matter has been resolved at the level of the Supreme Court.
Madam Speaker, in regard to part (b) of the question, as the House is aware, with
respect to electoral reform, the Government Programme 2015–2019 provides as follows -
Paragraph 264 -
“Our electoral system will be reformed to introduce a dose of proportional
representation in the National Assembly and guarantee better women
representation.”
The Government Programme also provides that Government will eradicate fraud,
corruption, malpractices and irregularities in all aspects of public life and restore our national
values based on discipline, work ethics and good governance. To this end, a Financing of
Political Parties Act will be enacted.
Madam Speaker, since the year 2000, there have been several Reports and
Commissions that have looked into the electoral system of Mauritius, namely -
(i)  the Sachs Commission (2001);
(ii) the Report of the Select Committee on the “introduction of a measure of
Proportional Representation in our Electoral System (2002);
(iii) the Report of the Select Committee on the “Funding of Political parties”
(2002);
11
(iv) the Carcassonne Report (Dec 2011);
(v)  the Sithanen Report (January 2012);
(vi) Modernising the Electoral System (March 2014).
This Government has pledged to adopt a genuinely decentralised and participative
approach in decision making and a consultative approach in matters directly relating to the
Constitution of the country in all cases where the interest of the public at large is at stake.
On the other hand, in line with its reporting obligations under the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, Mauritius should have submitted its fifth National
Periodic Report to the Human Rights Committee in 2010. This was however not done. I am
proposing to submit the Report early next year.
Madam Speaker, upon the advice of the Solicitor General tendered on 16 October
2015, Government proposes to inform the Human Rights Committee that Government stands
committed to reform our electoral system so as to introduce a dose of proportional
representation in the National Assembly and guarantee better women’s representation.
Furthermore, the Electoral Supervisory Commission will be given wider powers to control
and sanction fraud, corruption and conflict of interests during election time and also to
monitor political funding and abuse of position of power. The issue of mandatory
declaration of community will be addressed in the wider context of the electoral reform
proposed by the Government.
Madam Speaker, the last General Elections in December 2014 has in effect acted as
referendum and thus people of Mauritius have made an unequivocal choice. I wish to draw
the attention of the House, that the proposals of the previous regime, were more in the
personal interests of two party leaders rather than in the national interest. The population
rather opted for the programme proposed by L’Alliance Lepep which was for the clean-up of
the country to create a conducive environment for sustainable development and economic
growth.
Madam Speaker, this Government has pledged to conduct business on the principles
of discipline, transparency and accountability. Good governance is the order of the day and
we will restore trust and confidence in all aspects of public and institutional life.
Madam Speaker, I would like to state that I am not prepared to accept a PR model
that will disturb the verdict of the Mauritian electorate and frustrate the will of our people.
In this respect, I propose to set up a Ministerial Committee to examine and make
12
recommendations on electoral reforms as proposed in our Government Programme 2015-
2019. Appropriate consultations will thereafter be held with all stakeholders.
Mr Bérenger: I understand that Government has decided to wait for the case that is
coming before the Supreme Court. Do I take it, therefore, that since the last general elections,
the Human Rights Committee in Geneva has not been informed of the pending case and of
the stand of Government and that it is now, from what I heard, that Government is going to
inform the UN Human Rights Committee what is the situation?
The Prime Minister: That is so, Madam Speaker.
Mr Bérenger: Can I, again, ask there has been no correspondence from their end,
from the side of UN Human Rights Committee on that case?
The Prime Minister: I am not aware of.
Mr Bérenger: Can I know whether there has been locally any representation as far as
Rezistans Ek Alternativ is concerned - representations to the Government?
The Prime Minister: Not that I am aware of, but we are waiting for the verdict of the
Supreme Court.
Mr Bérenger: The Rt. hon. Prime Minister has reminded us of what was provided for
une dose de proportionnelle, in both the present Government’s Electoral Programme and
later on the 2015-2019 Government Programme. Does that include bringing down the
threshold for parties to be qualified to 5%?
The Prime Minister: Well, I can’t answer to that. When we will be taking decision,
we will consider that.
Mr Bérenger: I am sure the Rt. hon. Prime Minister must be fully aware that, as far
as I can see, no one has ever proposed a proportional representation, une dose de
proportionnelle - rather to use the very words which were used in their programme - no one
has proposed a dose de proportionnelle that would overturn the result of the electorate. Does
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree that, in fact, no one has ever proposed that?
The Prime Minister: Well, I don’t think I’ll agree to that. We all know that the kind
of amendment that was being proposed by the MMM in the past would certainly have
disturbed the verdict of the electorate.
13
Mr Bérenger: I hope the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is not referring to the time when he
was in the MMM and proposed what we proposed then. Can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister give
me any reference, on what occasion, what proposal did the MMM make at any time down
history lane which would have disturbed the result of the elections, that is, the result at the
level of constituencies? Can I be reminded? Will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister be kind enough
to remind me on what occasion was that proposed, in what form?
The Prime Minister: In fact, the MMM has all the time in mind, the same type of
amendment based on what had been done in Rodrigues.
Mr Bérenger: Reference has been made to Rodrigues. I need not quote from what the
Rt. hon. Prime Minister said in the case of Rodrigues on 20 November 2001, where he said -
I’ll quote - when he was presenting the Bill for autonomie -
“Fear has been expressed that a party which obtains a clear-cut majority at the
local regional level – that is, constituencies – may find itself without a majority after
the allocation of seats on an island region basis – that is, à la proportionnelle. With
the system proposed, this is unlikely to happen. However, to allay such fear, provision
has been made in clause 11(10) for additional seats to be allocated to the winning
party so as to preserve its majority.”
And the hon. Prime Minister then continued -
“This is, of course, an exception. The proposed system may not be perfect - in fact
there is no perfect system anywhere in the world - but it is the best for Rodrigues.”
As described by the then Prime Minister and now Prime Minister. Will the hon. Prime
Minister agree with me that what went wrong in Rodrigues is not the electoral system
proposed, it is the fact that the then Chief Commissioner quarrelled with some of his people
who left him and he found himself in a minority. It has nothing to do with the electoral
system!
(Interruptions)
The Prime Minister: Well, the result of the electorate had naturally been disturbed.
The majority was diminished. I must tell the hon. Leader of the Opposition that he should
know that I have always stood by the principle that the verdict of the electorate should not be
disturbed. But since my Government at that time, all of them decided that we should go with
14
that law insofar as Rodrigues is concerned, I brought the Bill in the House and as Prime
Minister, was it not my duty to defend it? Could I have done otherwise?
Mr Bérenger: Yes, but would the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree with me that there is
no comparison possible between Rodrigues and Mauritius in terms of the number of elected
people, Members of the elected Assembly, the size of the electorate and there is no
requirement there to declare your community when you have elections for the Regional
autonomy Assembly? Will he agree with me that the comparison does not apply at all and
that therefore we should work out something for the whole of Mauritius, including
Rodrigues, for this National Assembly and not go on this wrong track which he is adopting as
if what has happened in Rodrigues - for the wrong reasons, in fact - can be duplicated here in
Mauritius?
The Prime Minister: Well, in fact, this is what we are doing. I have said it in my
answer.
Mr Bérenger: Can I be provided with any detail of the Ministerial Committee that is
going to be set up? Is it going to be set up even before the case in the Supreme Court takes
place? Are we going to inform the UN Human Rights Committee in Geneva that a Ministerial
Committee is going to be set up?
The Prime Minister: The case is coming very soon. I hope the judgment will not be
delayed. It will depend when the judgment is going to be delivered. If there is a long delay,
then we will have to act.
Mr Bérenger: Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he will agree with me
that there are two completely different things: electoral reform has been with us for a long
time and it had nothing and has nothing to do with individuals; la deuxième république, le
partage des pouvoirs is another matter, but now we are talking about electoral reform and this
has absolutely nothing to do…
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order, please!
Mr Bérenger: This has absolutely nothing to do with individuals. What is being
discussed has been discussed for the last 30 years and that, therefore, we should not mix
issues; mix the issue of electoral reform with the issue of the rééquilibrage des pouvoirs entre
15
le Président et le Premier ministre. Will he agree with me that we will not move forward if
we keep on mixing those two issues?
The Prime Minister: Well, we don’t agree with that.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed!
Mr Mohamed: I would like to ask the hon. Prime Minister the following: in the
decision of the Committee Experts delivered on 15 January 2015, following the
communication of Rézistans ek Alternativ, I read, at paragraph 15.5, a very important element
which is reference to the 1972 Census. Here, the Committee Experts - if I may be allowed to
quote - states that it has looked into it and it says –
“The Committee therefore finds, taking into account the State party’s failure to
provide an adequate justification in this regard (…)”
Here, it was in regard to the Census of 1972 that had not been updated -
“(…) and without expressing a view as to the appropriate form of the State party’s or
any other electoral system, that the continued maintenance of the requirement of
mandatory classification of a candidate for general elections without the
corresponding updated figures of the community affiliation of the population in
general would appear to be arbitrary (…)”
The fact that it has not been updated –
“(…) and therefore violates Article 25 (b) of the Covenant.”
Having noted what was said at paragraph 15.5 of the experts’ opinion delivered, as I
stated, on 15 January 2015, could the hon. Prime Minister tell us what exactly does his
Government propose to do in order to address this particular remark of the experts that says
that the stand of Mauritius not to update this Census of 1972 is itself a violation of Article 26
of the Convention because I am also aware, as everyone else, the hon. Prime Minister would
recall…
Madam Speaker: Ask your question, hon. Shakeel Mohamed!
Mr Mohamed: That’s the last part.
16
Madam Speaker: You should give the opportunity as others also want to have the
floor! Please, be accurate and short!
Mr Mohamed: That’s the last part. The hon. Prime Minister would recall that this is
also a view and whether he would consider re-actualising this Census as also agreed because
I have seen also his partner, the actual Deputy Prime Minister, stating in public that he would
be agreeable to that.
Madam Speaker: We have understood your question, hon. Shakeel Mohamed!
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, when we will come with the reform, there will
be no reason to deal with any census.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Lesjongard!
Mr Lesjongard: Madam Speaker, may I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he
is aware of the several representations made by the Rodrigues Regional Assembly or political
parties in Rodrigues with regard to the issue of proportional representation in the sense that it
does not represent les vœux de l’électorat à Rodrigues and that they have requested in the
past - and this has never been entertained - that this be amended?
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, it is a fact that representations have been
made on several occasions. Recently, I was in Rodrigues, request has been made officially, I
had been around, the feeling of the people in general is that they are fed up with the present
system and that there should be remedial action. There should be a new electoral system for
Rodrigues and I agree with them.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Leopold!
(Interruptions)
Mr Leopold: Indeed, this proportional system in Rodrigues causes instability because
out of six regions in Rodrigues we won four and we are ruling with only one majority in
Parliament. So, it causes instability. I would like to ask the hon. Prime Minister - because that
system of allocation of proportional seats for the Rodrigues Regional Assembly has caused
instability to the First-Past-The-Post system - whether he will consider amending the law
shortly.
The Prime Minister: I have just said it.
17
Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Uteem!
Mr Uteem: I heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister mention that there is going to be a
Ministerial Committee which will look into this whole electoral reform. May I know from the
Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether this Committee will have full powers or will it be bound by
the commitment already taken during the elections and set out in the manifeste électoral of
l’Alliance Lepep, namely, that –
« Une dose de proportionnelle sera introduite ; le seuil d’éligibilité pour les sièges
proportionnels sera 5% des votes nationaux recueillis ; une représentativité d’un tiers
des femmes sera assurée ; le système de Best Loser sera maintenu. »
Will this Ministerial Committee be bound by what has been in the manifeste électoral?
The Prime Minister: We will try to stick to our principles and our promises as far as
possible.
(Interruptions)
Mr Ganoo: May I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, in view of the urgency of the
matter and in view of the fact that the Bill, which is passed by the previous Government in
2014 was a sunset Bill, we have to find another formula for the next election, and also, in
view of the fact that the Privy Council said in its judgement in 2011, I quote -
“That if the issues cannot be resolved politically, they may be raised before the
Judicial Committee in the future.”
And another sentence was –
“It remains open to the applicant to advance a constitutional challenge in the future.”
So, this is the invitation of the Privy Council for the complainant to come before the
Privy Council to find a solution. The Privy Council ruled on the matter. Can I ask the Rt.
hon. Prime Minister to take up the previous question that has been put? Political reform is a
matter of compromise. Wouldn’t the Rt. hon. Prime Minister think that it will be better to set
up a Committee of the House so that all political parties as well as those outside the House -
because we are all for political reforms in this House - can be heard?
18
The Prime Minister: When there have been Select Committees in the past and my
personal feeling is that we will never come to a conclusion, we will never come to an
agreement. We have taken the responsibility. We want to take the whole responsibility to
discharge that burden which is on us and finally re-consult the population. I hope that the
population will agree with us.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition!
Mr Bérenger: A lot of detailed work has been done in the past; going back to the
days when the Rt. hon. Prime Minister was Prime Minister and all the way back to 1982 and
later on. A lot of work has been done, both at the Prime Minister’s Office level, but also at
the Solicitor General, the State Law Office and the Attorney General’s Office. A lot of work
was done at the Attorney General’s Office until the eve of the last elections. I am not saying
that the work was completed, but a lot of progress was made. Has the Rt. hon. Prime Minister
been able to get help from the Attorney General to trace the latest drafts that had been ready
at the level of the Attorney General’s, Solicitor General’s Office?
The Prime Minister: We will certainly consult all these. We will do that.
Mr Bérenger: Will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister circulate whatever the latest version
prepared at the Attorney General’s and Solicitor General’s Office is available?
The Prime Minister: I do not see any need for me to circulate.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, any questions?
Mr Bérenger: No.
Madam Speaker: That’s all. Questions! Hon. Bhagwan!