DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Minister
of Gender Equality, Child Development and Family Welfare whether, in regard to domestic
violence, she will –
(a)  state the total number of reported cases thereof both to the Police and to the
Family Support Bureaux, since 2010 to date, on a yearly basis, indicating the
number of prosecuted cases thereof and the outcome thereof;
(b)  state if a fresh study on the extent, nature and cost thereof will be carried out and,
if so, indicate when;
(c)  state how the implementation of the 2014 Domingue Report is progressing,
indicating the measures being taken in relation thereto at the level of the Police,
and
(d)  for the benefit of the House, obtain from the National Coalition against Domestic
Violence Committee, information as to the composition thereof, indicating if the
report thereof has been finalised.
aaaaa
Mrs Perraud: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the hon. Leader of the Opposition for
this question. It comes at an opportune time as we are commemorating the International Day for
the Elimination of Violence against Women tomorrow, 25 November 2015.
Allow me, at the very outset, to inform the House that domestic violence takes different
forms such as physical, sexual, psychological and also economic exploitation, occurring in the
family and in communities with devastating effects. It harms families and communities across
generations and reinforces other violence prevalent in society. Domestic violence is not confined
9
to a specific culture, region or country or to particular groups of people, but spans across all
segments and strata of society. Mauritius is no exception to this phenomenon.
Madam Speaker, in regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed by the Commissioner
of Police that the number of cases of domestic violence reported to the Police since 2010 to date
is as follows -
No of cases
reported
2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015
(Jan -
Oct)
Total  3078  3046  3285  2842  3062  2375
Convicted  362  331  286  341  301  228
Cases of Domestic Violence registered to Police Family Protection Unit for Mediation and
Counselling
Year  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015
(Jan - Oct)
Total  4332  4208  4811  4767  4701  3534
As regards the number of domestic violence cases reported at the 6 Family Support
Bureaux of my Ministry -
YEAR  TOTAL
2010  2215
2011  1817
2012  1974
2013  1786
10
2014  1680
2015 (Jan - Oct)  1259
I must, however, point out that there may be a duplication of figures being given that some
cases are both reported at the Police as well as at the Family Support Bureaux of my Ministry.
Regarding part (b) of the question, I would like to inform the House that a study on the
extent, nature and cost of domestic violence to the Mauritian economy for the period 2008 - 2009
was conducted by the Mauritius Research Council and was launched in 2010. The study also
attempted to place a monetary value on the burden that such type of violence has on the
economy. The total cost was estimated at Rs1.4 billion for the period 2008 - 2009. According to
the Report, the most common type of gender-based violence were: emotional, physical and
sexual.
Given the importance of such a study, my Ministry has already initiated action to
commission a new study on Intimate Partner Violence that will focus on the Prevalence, Causes,
Consequences and Cost of Intimate Partner Violence on the Mauritian Economy. The Terms of
Reference have already been worked out. The study will provide policy recommendations, with
specific indicators, that will enable the development of a Costed Action Plan and appropriate
strategies to deal with Intimate Partner Violence through prevention and appropriate intervention
mechanisms and measures. The study will be partly financed under the UNFPA assisted
programme. Call for Proposals will be sought by the end of this month and it is expected that the
consultancy contract, which would be for a duration of six months, would be awarded by mid-
January 2016 and completed by July 2016.
Insofar as part (c) of the question is concerned, I would like to inform the House that the
Domingue Report was launched on 17 August 2015 following which, a three-day consultative
workshop was held with all stakeholders. The objective of the workshop was to elaborate a
strategic plan for the effective implementation of the recommendations of the Report.
Madam Speaker, the recommendations of the Domingue Report concur that our laws in
respect of domestic violence, including Protection from Domestic Violence Act (PDVA) as well
as the Penal Code and other related Acts still have numerous lacunas and weaknesses and
changes are needed to make them more compliant.
11
My Ministry is in consultation with the Attorney General’s Office to bring about the
required amendments to the legislation. The proposed amendments include, amongst others –
(i)  the PDVA to provide for a more comprehensive definition of ‘domestic violence’ so
as to include psychological, sexual and economic violence that occur within the
family or between former or current spouses or partners, whether or not the
perpetrator shares or has shared the same residence with the victim;
(ii)  provision to be made in the Criminal Code for the following -
(a)  all forms of domestic violence to be criminalised, including the intentional
conduct of seriously impairing the psychological integrity of a spouse or
partner through coercion or threats;
(b)  for harsher penalty when offences committed, inter alia, against a person
with special need, a pregnant woman or a person who due to whatever
reason is incapable of resisting, a weapon was used, or the act was
committed in the presence of a minor or in repeated incident of domestic
violence, regardless of the level of injury;
(c)  for manslaughter committed by a spouse or partner of the victim be treated
as aggravating circumstances and the related sentences be inflicted;
(d)  rape, to include marital rape;
(e)  Section 242 of the Code, which provides that manslaughter committed by
any person on his spouse, as well as on his accomplice, at the very
moment he finds them in the act of adultery is excusable, be repealed;
(f)  provision to be made for deferred prosecution agreements, whereby the
Director of Public Prosecutions can enter into an agreement with an
alleged perpetrator not to prosecute for a domestic offence, subject to the
alleged perpetrator taking the commitment to attend a rehabilitation
programme and not to indulge in further acts of domestic violence; should
the perpetrator fail to meet the requirements laid down in the agreement,
prosecution would ensue;
12
(iii)  Provision to be made in the Court Act for video link when victims and witness do
not want to confront the perpetrator during Court proceedings. Specialised
Domestic Court should be set up to guarantee the rights of victims of domestic
violence.
As regards the Police, consultations were carried out and it has been agreed that provision
be made in the Police Act so that “Police may arrest without warrant upon reasonable ground of
suspicion, a person who committed an offence of Domestic Violence of an aggravated nature”.
The Police is also willing to extend its assistance to Court Ushers whenever required in cases of
domestic violence.
I am confident that, by the next session of the National Assembly, we would have
brought the necessary amendments to strengthen the legislative framework in respect of
combatting the scourge of domestic violence in our Republic.
Madam Speaker, concerning part (d) of the question, I am informed that following the
announcement in the Government Programme 2015-2019, the National Coalition Against
Domestic Violence Committee was set up under the aegis of the Prime Minister’s Office, with
representatives from the following Ministries/Departments/Organisations –
(i)  Prime Minister’s Office (Home Affairs Division);
(ii)  Ministry of Gender Equality, Child Development and Family Welfare;
(iii)  Ministry of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reforms Institutions;
(iv)  Police Department;
(v)  Ministry of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment;
(vi)  Ministry of Health and Quality of Life;
(vii)  Ministry of Housing and Lands;
(viii) Ministry of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training (Employment
and Training Division);
(ix)  Attorney General’s Office;
(x)  MACOSS;
13
(xi)  SOS Femmes, and
(xii)  the private sector.
The involvement of NGOs and the private sector were considered essential for the
adoption of a holistic approach to the problem of domestic violence. However, no representative
from the Private Sector turned up for the Committee meetings when convened.
Nine meetings of the Committee have been held over the period March to 23 November
2015.
Two subcommittees have been constituted to look at the following –
• streamlining of procedures for victims of domestic violence, and
• proposals for accommodation and employment.
A Wrap up meeting is scheduled for Tuesday 24 November 2015, that is, today, at 3.00
p.m. to finalise the report. Thereafter, approval of Cabinet will be sought early December 2015
for the implementation of the recommendations made in the report. It should be pointed out that
the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life is already implementing the guidelines and protocol in
order to fast-track cases where victims of domestic violence call at the hospital.
Madam Speaker, domestic violence is a “fléau sociale” which has far-reaching
consequences on society if not addressed properly. We must halt and reverse the trend and this is
what I have tasked myself with as a priority since my assumption of office. Many programmes
and projects are under way. Our approach is three-pronged, that is, intervention, prevention and
rehabilitation which is being provided through our six Family Support Bureaux. We have
reinforced our human resource capacity with additional Family Welfare and Protection Officers
and the recruitment of additional legal persons on sessional basis. It is a national issue and the
collaboration of all stakeholders is required.
Mr Bérenger: The figures provided by the hon. Minister for the number of cases
reported and sent to Court of domestic violence is quite disturbing. Can I ask the hon. Minister
whether she will agree with me that, in fact, what is reported, what goes to Court and so on, is
the tip of the iceberg, here, in Mauritius, as is elsewhere, if I can refer to a study in the European
Union in 2014 which established, I quote –
14
“About a third of all women in the European Union have experienced either physical or
sexual violence since the age of 15”
and which puts the number of women killed by domestic violence around 3,000 every year? Can
I ask whether any kind of guesstimate has been worked out, basing ourselves on the experience
elsewhere and what we know of Mauritius, what are the real figures?
Mrs Perraud: Madam Speaker, as I have stated in my reply, we have figures from the
Police and also figures of cases reported at our six Family Support Bureaux. I totally agree with
the hon. Leader of the Opposition that this problem is very serious. This is why, at the level of
my Ministry, we are taking it seriously and we are working on all the recommendations of the
Advisory Committee.
Mr Bérenger: The hon. Minister has just made reference to the six bureaux. Can I know
from the hon. Minister what is their geographical distribution over the island and whether she is
satisfied that the existence of six bureaux is sufficient or whether a request has been made for
other bureaux to be opened?
Mrs Perraud: I can say that, six Family Support Bureaux are found at Port Louis,
Goodlands, Flacq, Bambous, Phoenix and Rose Belle. So, we have six Family Support Bureaux
at the level of our Ministry and we have been talking with the Police so that we can also use the
seven bureaux that the Police have so that we can have more bureaux and a complete service
offered to the victims of domestic violence. Indeed, six is insufficient.
Mr Bérenger: Concerning the National Coalition against Domestic Violence Committee,
I thank the hon. Minister for providing us with information, but can I know who chaired this
Coalition Committee?
Mrs Perraud: The person who chaired the Committee is the PS at PMO.
Mr Bérenger: If I can move on to the Domingue Report, of course, the hon. Minister
will understand that I talked about the 2000 routine Domingue Report, because it was set up
then, but it reported, if I am not mistaken, at the end of 2014, but was made public after the
general elections. Will the hon. Minister agree with me that it is a strong report? I consider it a
very strong, very good report, except for the part dealing with the Police. Will the hon. Minister
agree with me that, in fact, the Police in Mauritius is part of the problem and not part of the
15
solution, when young girls/women report to Police Stations in cases of domestic violence, of
sexual violence, they are humiliated by most officers - you have good officers, but humiliated!
Sometimes they are raped a second time, verbally, I mean. Will she agree with me that on that
the report is weak and has she taken that up with the Prime Minister, especially the idea of
having female Police officers present in every Police station?
Mrs Perraud: Indeed, we got cases reported at the Ministry’s level that for some people
when they go to the Police station to find assistance, they are not well welcomed. So, I have
already talked about this problem to the Commissioner of Police himself. I have met him more
than three times to discuss this matter and we have regular meetings with the Police and officers
of my Ministry to talk about this problem.
Mr Bérenger: I didn’t get an answer whether we are progressing in terms of female
Police officers presence, who should be in every Police station as soon as we can reach that
stage. But can I ask - since the hon. Minister mentioned the Commissioner of Police – whether
we can also have sessions de formation for policemen because they are what they are; we are all
what we are with our prejudices, our mentalities and so on? Therefore, will she agree with me
that sessions de formation for the Police officers of the whole Force is urgently required and
should be ongoing?
Mrs Perraud: Yes, this is already on. We have capacity building for the Police officers.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo!
Mr Ganoo: May I ask a question to the hon. Minister - a matter which I have raised some
time back in this very House concerning the abusers and the perpetrators - whether we should not
inspire ourselves when amending the law from what takes place in other countries? When a
protection order is issued against the husband, he is formally ordered and compelled to follow
sensitisation courses so that he may understand where things are going wrong and these courses
can yield positive results with regard to the husband.
Mrs Perraud: I have already stated in my reply that we are working for rehabilitation of
perpetrators.
Mr Sesungkur: Madam Speaker, I think the plight of women, of couples should interest
all our Members here and I am happy that the Leader of the Opposition…
16
Madam Speaker: Don’t make a statement hon. Sesungkur, ask your question!
Mr Sesungkur: Yes, I am coming to it. Based on the figures quoted by the hon. Minister,
will she agree that despite so much money spent on various programmes, there seems to be no
meaningful and no productive result because I can see that since 2010 the number of cases did
not go down? Can the hon. Minister enlighten the House if the cases reported are in specific
regions so that we can assess whether it is linked with poverty or any social issues?
Mrs Perraud: Madame la présidente, j’ai déjà dit dans ma réponse qu’en ce qui concerne
la violence faite aux femmes, cela ne concerne pas de région, de race, de couleur ou de social
background. Donc, tout le monde est concerné. Mais j’aimerais aussi dire que mon ministère fait
de la prévention et de la lutte contre les violences faites aux femmes une priorité et que notre
objectif c’est qu’aucune violence déclarée ne doit rester sans réponse. Il nous faut sensibiliser la
société. Les violences faites aux femmes ne doivent plus être ni une fatalité ni un tabou.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem!
Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister mentioned that the Units are now
adequately staffed. May I know from the hon. Minister how many psychologists are attached to
her Ministry and whether there is any agreement with the Police that each time there is a
domestic violence case reported, the victim has access immediately or as soon as possible to a
psychologist?
Mrs Perraud: We have six psychologists attached to the Family Welfare Protection Unit
and 12 to the CDU.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan!
Mr Bhagwan: Can I know from the hon. Minister whether in view of the alarming
situation a comprehensive study is being carried out with regard to capacity as a whole within the
Ministry, taking into consideration the staff and what does the Ministry consider urgent to have
for the coming years?
Mrs Perraud: As I have already said in my reply, we are looking forward for a new
study.
Mr Bérenger: Can I have a last question ? J’ai écouté attentivement la ministre. Est-ce
qu’elle sera d’accord avec moi – je pense que oui – que tout reste à faire – beaucoup, mais moi je
17
dis tout reste à faire à Maurice - pour combattre la violence domestique ? Est-elle d’accord avec
moi qu’à l’occasion de la Journée Internationale demain contre la violence domestique qu’il faut
faire un appel spécial, à travers ce Parlement, surtout aux hommes et aux jeunes à l’occasion de
cette Journée Internationale contre la violence domestique et nous tous ensemble faire en sorte
que le combat contre la violence domestique prenne un nouveau départ à l’île Maurice ?
Mrs Perraud : Effectivement, je pense qu’il faut faire un plaidoyer pour que tout le
monde se sente concerné par rapport aux violences faites aux femmes. Et demain, comme j’ai
annoncé hier lors de ma conférence de presse, il y a toute une série d’activités organisées pour
justement commémorer cette journée et beaucoup a été fait depuis que nous sommes arrivés en
décembre de l’année dernière. Nous travaillons beaucoup avec le monde associatif, avec les
ONG pour combattre ce problème. Nous avons demandé et obtenu lors du dernier exercice
budgétaire – je tiens à remercier le ministre des Finances – des effectifs additionnels justement
parce que le problème est conséquent, donc il nous faut avoir du personnel pour pouvoir
soutenir et aider ces femmes qui sont victimes de violence. Donc, je fais un appel à tous mes
collègues qui sont là. Demain c’est la Journée Internationale contre la violence faite aux femmes,
que chacun soit un ambassadeur, que nous soyons de l’Opposition ou du gouvernement et des
associations et aussi les journalistes qui sont là, que nous soyons tous demain et tous les jours
des ambassadeurs pour protéger les femmes à Maurice et que nous soyons tous dans ce combat
pour que nous ayons une société vraiment beaucoup plus bénéfique pour les femmes et pour tous
les mauriciens.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: The Table has been advised that Parliamentary Question No. B/947
has been withdrawn. Hon. Dr. Sorefan!