CHAGOS ARCHIPELAGO & TROMELIN ISLAND – MAURITIUS SOVEREIGNTY
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Rt.
hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and
National Development Unit whether, in regard to the sovereignty of Mauritius over the
Chagos Archipelago and over the Tromelin Island, he will state –
(a) where matters stand before the United Nations Arbitration Tribunal on the
Chagos Archipelago Marine Protected Area;
(b) what initiatives Mauritius is taking on the Chagos Archipelago sovereignty
issue at this 2016 turning point, and
(c) if Mauritius has confirmed to France its decision not to go ahead with the 2010
“Accord-cadre sur la co-gestion de l’île Tromelin”, and if so, indicate
whether discussions over the sovereignty issues have started.
aaaaa
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, as the House is aware, it has always been the
unequivocal stand of Mauritius that the Chagos Archipelago, including Diego Garcia and
Tromelin form an integral part of its territory.
In line with its commitment to ensure that the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Mauritius are fully respected and safeguarded, Government will spare no efforts so that
Mauritius can effectively exercise its sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago and Tromelin.
Madam Speaker, let me also remind the House that in the Government Programme
2015/2019, we have expressed our concern at the lack of progress to resolve the long-
standing dispute over the Chagos Archipelago and we have pledged to speed up diplomatic
talks with the UK and the US Governments and actively seek the support of the international
community in this respect.
Madam Speaker, in regard to part (a) of the question, as the House is aware, Mauritius
initiated on 20 December 2010 proceedings against the UK under Article 287 of, and Annex
VII to, the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) to challenge the
legality of the ‘marine protected area’ which the UK has purported to establish around the
Chagos Archipelago. Mauritius considers, inter alia, that the UK, not being a “coastal State”
under UNCLOS and international law, had no authority to establish a marine protected area
around the Chagos Archipelago.
8
Since Mauritius and the UK did not agree on the means for the settlement of the
dispute, it has been submitted to arbitration in accordance with Annex VII to UNCLOS. In
this respect, an Arbitral Tribunal, consisting of five members, including three Judges of the
International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, has been set up.
The team of Counsel who have assisted Mauritius in this case includes prominent
lawyers such as Mr Philippe Sands QC, Professor of Law, University College, London and
Mr Paul Reichler of Foley Hoag, a law firm in Washington, DC. Professor James Crawford
who was Whewell Professor of International Law at the University of Cambridge was also
part of the team prior to his assumption of the post of Judge of the International Court of
Justice on 06 February 2015.
In accordance with the timetable which was initially set by the Arbitral Tribunal for
the filing of pleadings by Mauritius and the UK on the merits of the case, Mauritius filed its
Memorial on 01 August 2012.
The UK subsequently raised, on 31 October 2012, preliminary objections to the
jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal in respect of the dispute. The UK also requested that its
preliminary objections be dealt with as a preliminary matter and that in case that request is
not accepted by Mauritius, a separate hearing be held on the procedure to be followed in
dealing with its preliminary objections.
After consideration of the written submissions of the Parties and their oral
submissions at the hearing held on 11 January 2013 in Dubai, the Arbitral Tribunal adopted
on 15 January 2013 a Procedural Order, ordering that -
(a)  the UK’s request that its preliminary objections to the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal be dealt with in a separate jurisdictional phase as a preliminary
matter is rejected, and
(b)  the UK’s preliminary objections will be considered with the proceedings on
the merits.
At the request of the Arbitral Tribunal, Mauritius and the UK engaged in
consultations with a view to reaching agreement on a revised schedule for the filing of the
remaining pleadings on the merits of the case. Pursuant to the revised timetable, the UK’s
Counter-Memorial was filed on 15 July 2013, Mauritius’ Reply on 18 November 2013 and
the UK’s Rejoinder on 17 March 2014.
9
Thereafter, the Arbitral Tribunal held a hearing from 22 April to 09 May 2014 in
Istanbul, Turkey on both the merits and the preliminary objections raised by the UK. The
Award of the Tribunal is awaited. The Tribunal has, in a letter to the Parties dated 17
November 2014, indicated that it would not issue its Award before the end of 2014 and that it
would later provide the Parties with an update on the anticipated date of issue of the Award.
In reply to part (b) of the question, as I have mentioned earlier, Government is much
concerned at the lack of progress made so far to resolve the long-standing sovereignty dispute
over the Chagos Archipelago.
In view of the expiry in 2016 of the initial 50-year period of the UK-US agreement in
respect of the Chagos Archipelago, Government is currently considering the diplomatic and
other strategies to adopt with regard to an eventual agreement, bearing in mind that the US
considers that Diego Garcia continues to be of strategic importance.
In keeping with the bi-partisan approach we have always adopted on issues of
national importance, the hon. Leader of the Opposition will be consulted at the appropriate
time.
In regard to part (c) of the question, pending the settlement of the sovereignty dispute
between Mauritius and France over Tromelin, the two countries reached an agreement in
2010 on the co-management of Tromelin, without prejudice to the sovereignty of Mauritius
over the island.
I am informed that when the former Prime Minister met the French President on 03
October 2014 in Paris, he said that since there had been considerable delay in the adoption by
the French National Assembly of the Bill relating to the ratification by France of the co-
management agreement, the whole question of sovereignty should be revisited and that he
was no longer in favour of the ratification of the agreement.
He proposed that if France were to acknowledge the sovereignty rights of Mauritius
over Tromelin, Mauritius would be ready to conclude a new bilateral agreement with France
for the sharing, on a 50/50 basis, of the natural, mineral and other resources of Tromelin, and
their joint exploitation on the same basis. The French President indicated that the proposal
made by the former Prime Minister would be considered by the French Government. To
date, there has been no reaction from the French Government to that proposal.
10
Government intends to press for the early resolution of the dispute between Mauritius
and France over Tromelin, in the spirit of friendship and trust that has always characterised
the relationship between the two countries.
Madam Speaker, I would like to reaffirm, most emphatically, the commitment of my
Government to ensure that the territorial integrity and sovereignty, and rights as well as
security interests, of Mauritius are fully respected and safeguarded.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, on the first part of my question, that is, the UN
Arbitral Tribunal sitting in The Hague, I have not heard any indication of when we can
expect the Tribunal to come with the judgement, with the findings. Can I know from the Rt.
hon. Prime Minister - since he refers to Professor Philippe Sands, who leads the team of
lawyers on behalf of Mauritius; we know that he visited Mauritius recently - who represented
Mauritius in discussions with Professor Sands?
The Prime Minister: As I have said already, the Tribunal has not set any specific
date when its Award is going to be known. In a similar case, they have said that it will not be
in 2014. Insofar as the second part of the question is concerned, I have not met Mr Sands and
I do not know with whom he has discussed.
Mr Bérenger: I was a bit surprised, Madam Speaker, since Government says that it is
dissatisfied with the lack of initiatives by the former Government on the Chagos Archipelago
issue when the Cabinet communiqué relating to Cabinet decisions of 09 January 2015, stated
that “Cabinet looked forward to the Award of the Arbitral Tribunal” which seems to be
positive in tone in contrast to the general comment made. Can I know on what basis, that
kind of comment, that we look forward to the arbitration pronouncement, is based?
The Prime Minister: Well, how can we do better than that? We are waiting for the
Award. We look forward to get the Award. That is all we can do for the time being.
Mr Bérenger: Do we have any indication that indeed the Tribunal is going to
consider –
(i)  Sovereignty, and
(ii)  whether we have any indication that once it considers that it can take a stand
on sovereignty it will go our way?
The Prime Minister: I suppose both issues are interlinked. Therefore, that is my
opinion; they will have to consider both.
11
Mr Bérenger: Last question on that part of my question. Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime
Minister whether he has looked into it that it is confirmed that there can be no appeal against
the pronouncement of the Arbitral tribunal? That is, if it rules against Mauritius, there is no
appeal against that ruling.
The Prime Minister: Well, I cannot answer that. I have not looked into it.
Mr Bérenger: Fortunately that is the case. Madam Speaker, as the Rt. hon. Prime
Minister said, 2015 is the turning point because the agreement between London and
Washington in 1966 was for 50 years, and it was in the agreement that should either party,
UK or United States, want to change anything in the agreement or put an end to it, they
would have to make a move in 2015 or 2016, and if there is no move, it is renewed
automatically for 20 years. Surely the Rt. hon. Prime Minister will agree with me that if that
agreement is renewed for a further 20 years, it will make our case even more difficult. Can I
ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether this issue of discussions, supposedly, possibly taking
place this year or next year and the role of Mauritius, our stand on sovereignty, has been
discussed with either London or Washington or both?
The Prime Minister: I do not know what the previous Government has done,
whether they have had certain discussions. I am not aware of it. Our stand is very clear; we
have through diplomatic channel made it known that we will not agree to anything that is
going to be done between these two parties alone. We want to be concerned and we want to
be party to what takes place because we consider that the whole thing from the very
beginning had been illegal. United Kingdom had no right to extract from our territory, before
giving it its independence, any part of it. Whatever has been done is illegal and whatever is
being done in that context, so far we are concerned, is illegal.
Mr Bérenger: From what I am hearing, Madam Speaker, it seems that there has been
no contact between the new Prime Minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, and the Prime Minister of
the UK and the President of the United States since the last elections, in particular, London.
Can I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether we have tried to raise, at the highest
level, the issue with London, being given this crucial turning point of 2016? I am asking
whether London has refused to discuss the issue pending the Tribunal pronouncing itself on
the case in The Haye. Is that the stand taken or have we simply not asked for the matter to be
taken at the highest level with London?
12
The Prime Minister: I have had no chance of meeting either the Prime Minister of
UK or the President of the United States of America. Insofar as the second part of the
question is concerned, well, as I have said we have made it known what our stand through
diplomatic channel is. For the time being, we could not do anything more than that.
Mr Bérenger: Well, for the time being! However, can I know whether the new
Government is preparing action at any level, in case London and/or Washington do not wish
to discuss the issue again? Are we considering new initiatives at the United Nations
including the General Assembly or anywhere else, at the Commonwealth Summit, that are
coming this year?
The Prime Minister: Definitely, we are working on it. We are considering the stand
that we should take and we want the matter of sovereignty to be thrashed out once and for all.
At this juncture, it will not be wise for me to give any details of what we intend to do.
Mr Bérenger: Can I know whether the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has had the
opportunity since the last general elections of raising or discussing that issue with India, the
friendly country that has been very helpful on that issue and, if not, whether it is the intention
of Government to seek once more India’s support when the Prime Minister of India visits
Mauritius in a few days?
The Prime Minister: India has always been supporting us. I will certainly raise the
matter with him. I have, throughout my political career, whenever I have been meeting
Heads of Government of other countries, been raising this matter and have been asking for
their support at the international level.
Mr Bérenger: If I can move on to Tromelin, Madam Speaker, it is indeed in 2010, on
07 June that the agreement for co-gestion was agreed upon by the two sides, Mauritius and
France, and when the former Prime Minister was in Paris on 03 October 2014, being given
that the agreement for co-gestion was for five years initially and more than four years after, it
had still not been ratified by the French side, we are informed that the former Prime Minister
asked President Hollande, in a way, in English, that enough is enough, and that Mauritius no
longer wishes to go forward with the co-gestion agreement and we wish to discuss the
sovereignty issue over Tromelin. Has there been any reaction on that part of my question, that
is, discussions on the sovereignty issue, either in Paris or here with the French Ambassadeur
in Mauritius on the sovereignty issue?
13
The Prime Minister: Well, as I have said, the former Prime Minister made his
position clear. We were definitely taken for a ride and he has been waiting for the reaction of
the President of France, but there has been so far no reaction and, unfortunately, since we are
here now in Government, we have had no time to take up the matter with the President of
France.
Mr Bérenger: I heard very strong, I would not say undiplomatic, but strong words,
from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister that we were being taken for a ride by a friendly country,
France.
(Interruptions)
I take note! My point is the following: being given that France, like India, is a friendly
country, are we prepared in case we see no reaction from the French side, no move to discuss
sovereignty, will we consider asking this friendly country which France is, to agree to
arbitration before the International Court of Justice or any other Court for that matter but,
obviously, the International Court of Justice is there for that kind of issue. If both sides agree,
are we prepared to try and convince France to go for arbitration before the International Court
of Justice?
The Prime Minister: We have not yet discussed at Government level what stand we
are going to take. As soon as we are ready we will do the needful and we will approach the
President.
Mr Bérenger: If I can have a last question before others coming, if they wish,
Madam Speaker. For years, Madagascar and other friendly, brotherly countries next door to
us, had been claiming sovereignty over all of the so-called Iles Éparses, including Tromelin -
for years - and then it was in 1978 that I discussed the issue with then President Ratsiraka in
Antanarivo and Madagasar agreed to stop claiming sovereignty, that Mauritius only would
claim sovereignty over Tromelin and we would support their claim on the other Iles Éparses,
and since then, the next year, 1979, Madagascar moved a resolution in the United Nations
General Assembly, claiming sovereignty yet obtaining the support of the General Assembly
for its sovereignty over the Iles Éparses and excluded Tromelin as we had agreed, and since
then, on every occasion, Madagascar has kept that stand, but there is a new President in
Madagascar and, here, now, Sir Aneerood Jugnauth as Prime Minister. Can I know whether
we have taken the first opportunity or we will take the first opportunity to, in a friendly way,
obtain from our Malagasy brothers and sisters that this stand is reconfirmed?
14
The Prime Minister: We certainly congratulate the Leader of the Opposition for
having achieved that with Madagascar and we are very grateful to Madagascar for the stand
that it has taken. We will certainly do what the Leader of the Opposition is suggesting, we
will take it seriously.
Mr Ganoo: Madam Speaker, I heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister mentioning in his
answer when answering to part (b) of the question, that the hon. Leader of the Opposition will
be consulted in due time. This is very positive and we appreciate that. Can I ask the Rt. hon.
Prime Minister since this is an issue of national importance which concerns the whole nation
and all the political parties in this House, shouldn’t it be the case that, to transcend political
considerations, wider consultations, more meaningful consultations – une concertation plus
large - should take place between all political parties in this House and perhaps structure
these consultations in the form of an All-Party Parliamentary Group or Committee which
exists in the UK, for example, and this All-Party Committee, which should be across political
parties, to be chaired by somebody who has showed long interest on that issue like hon.
Minister Bodha or the hon. Leader of the Opposition.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order! Can the hon. Members please allow the Rt. hon. Prime
Minister to reply?
The Prime Minister: This question of Chagos Archipelago, Tromelin, is of national
interest and in the interest of what we want to achieve, we want to have as wide consultations
as possible but, at the same time, we have to be careful not to let things leak out that may
cause prejudice beforehand to what we intend to do. Therefore, we have to take some care
and precaution.
Mr Bérenger: One last question, with your permission, Madam Speaker. Being
given that time is of the essence, 2016 is a turning point, my information Madam Speaker -
and I don’t know if the hon. Prime Minister has the same information - is that discussions
between Washington and London on this agreement that will be renewed automatically for 20
years if there are no changes suggested by either side, have already started. Can I, therefore,
insist that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister should, as soon as possible, take up the issue with both
the Prime Minister of the UK, although elections are derrière la porte, and the President of
the United States because time is of the essence?
15
The Prime Minister: I have already taken this matter even in the past with the
President of the United States of America and the position of the United States has always
been that they have nothing to do with Mauritius. They have dealt with UK. There is a lease
agreement between United Kingdom and United States and, therefore, they always
recommended us to go and deal with UK; and even with UK, I have been raising this matter
on all occasions whenever I was Prime Minister, I was meeting the Prime Minister. The
Prime Minister of UK made it always very clear that the day it is no longer required for the
defence of the West, the Chagos Archipelago would be returned to Mauritius and full
sovereignty will come back to Mauritius. And we are made to understand always that the
threat to the West was the Soviet Union, the Cold War, but Cold War does not exist today.
Today, what we hear now? This information that they are already negotiating, I have it also, I
know. But can we stop them? Have we got the means to stop them? And you know, this is a
matter with the UK, a question of might, might is right. They feel they are in a very strong
position, they don’t care to heed what we say, but that won’t prevent us, of course, to
approach them to do our best and I hope they will come to reason.
Madam Speaker: No more questions? Time is over!