CHAGOS ARCHIPELAGO – MAURITIUS SOVEREIGNTY
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Rt.
hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and
National Development Unit whether, in regard to the sovereignty of Mauritius over the
Chagos Archipelago and the so-called “Chagos Marine Protected Area”, he will state if
Mauritius is in presence of an official copy of the Ruling delivered yesterday by the United
Nations Arbitral Tribunal and of the statement made on the said Ruling by the United
Kingdom Foreign and Commonwealth Office and, if so, indicate if -
(a) copy thereof will be circulated, and
(b) he proposes to carry out consultations with the Opposition before issuing any
statement on the Ruling or deciding on the way forward.
aaaaa
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I had already planned to make a statement this
afternoon to inform the House that the Award has been delivered in the case brought by
Mauritius against the United Kingdom in respect of the Chagos Archipelago. I thank the hon.
Leader of the Opposition for giving me an earlier opportunity to address this issue.
This Award is an important milestone in the relentless struggle, at the political,
diplomatic and other levels, of successive Governments over the years for the effective
exercise by Mauritius of its sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago. In this respect, I need
not remind the House of my own initiatives, both as Head of State and Head of Government,
to reaffirm the sovereignty of Mauritius over the Chagos Archipelago and to press for its
early and unconditional return to the effective control of Mauritius.
Madam Speaker, in reply to part (a) of the question, as the House is aware, in pursuance
of our ongoing struggle, Mauritius initiated on 20 December 2010 proceedings against the
United Kingdom under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) to
challenge the legality of the ‘Marine Protected Area’ (‘MPA’) which the United Kingdom
purported to declare around the Chagos Archipelago in April 2010.
Since Mauritius and the United Kingdom did not agree on the means for the
settlement of the dispute, it was submitted to arbitration in accordance with Annex VII to
UNCLOS.
9
After lengthy written pleadings by the Parties and a hearing from 22 April to 09 May
2014 in Istanbul, Turkey, the Arbitral Tribunal set up under Annex VII to UNCLOS gave its
Award on 18 March 2015. The Award is final and without appeal, and is binding on both
Parties. It has been made public this morning and may be consulted on the website of the
Permanent Court of Arbitration.
The Tribunal unanimously held that the ‘Marine Protected Area’ which the UK
purported to declare around the Chagos Archipelago in April 2010 violates international law.
This is a historic ruling for Mauritius. It is also the first time that the United Kingdom’s
conduct with regard to the Chagos Archipelago has been considered and condemned by any
international court or tribunal.
Madam Speaker, the Award is a resounding victory for Mauritius. In a closely-reasoned
decision of over 200 pages, the Tribunal held unanimously that, in declaring the ‘MPA’, the
United Kingdom violated international law. It ruled that the United Kingdom has breached its
obligations under Articles 2(3), 56(2), and 194(4) of UNCLOS.
In reaching these conclusions, the Tribunal made a number of important findings. It
considered in detail the undertakings given by the United Kingdom to the Mauritian
Ministers at the Lancaster House talks in September 1965. The UK had argued that those
undertakings were not binding and had no status in international law. The Tribunal firmly
rejected that argument, holding that those undertakings became a binding international
agreement upon the independence of Mauritius, and have bound the UK ever since.
It found that the UK’s commitments towards Mauritius in relation to fishing rights
and oil and mineral rights in the Chagos Archipelago are legally binding.
Moreover, the Tribunal also found that the United Kingdom’s undertaking to return
the Chagos Archipelago to Mauritius when no longer needed for defence purposes is legally
binding. This establishes beyond doubt that, in international law, Mauritius has real, firm and
binding rights over the Chagos Archipelago, and that the United Kingdom must respect those
rights.
The Tribunal went on to hold that the United Kingdom had not respected Mauritius’
binding legal rights over the Chagos Archipelago. It considered the events from February
2009 to April 2010, during which time the ‘MPA’ proposal came into being and was then
imposed on Mauritius. The Tribunal stated that it, I quote –
10
“finds it difficult to reconcile this course of events with the spirit of negotiation
and consultation or with the need to balance the interests at stake in the waters of
the Archipelago.”
It considered that the United Kingdom, I quote -
“has not been able to provide any convincing explanation for the urgency with
which it proclaimed the MPA on 01 April 2010.”
It held that, I quote -
“To the extent that the timing of the declaration of the MPA was in fact dictated
by the electoral timetable in the United Kingdom or an anticipated change of
Government, the Tribunal does not accept that such considerations can justify the
disregard of the United Kingdom’s obligations to Mauritius. The absence of any
justifiable rationale for the United Kingdom’s haste - which, the Tribunal notes,
stands in sharp contrast to the absence of implementing measures following the
MPA’s declaration - exacerbates the inadequacy of the prior consultation with
Mauritius.”
The Tribunal also observed that the failure of the United Kingdom to balance its own
rights and interests with those of Mauritius is to be contrasted with the approach adopted by
the United Kingdom with respect to the United States. It noted that the record demonstrates a
conscious balancing of rights and interests, suggestions of compromise and willingness to
offer assurances by the United Kingdom, and an understanding of the United States’ concerns
in connection with the proposed ‘MPA’. Those elements were noticeably absent in the
United Kingdom’s approach to Mauritius.
Accordingly, the Tribunal found that, in declaring the ‘MPA’, the United Kingdom
had acted unlawfully and in disregard of Mauritius’ rights.
Madam Speaker, Mauritius had also asked the Tribunal to rule that the United Kingdom
was not the “coastal State” for the purposes of UNCLOS, because the excision of the Chagos
Archipelago from Mauritius was contrary to international law. Three members of the
Tribunal found that they did not have jurisdiction to rule on that question; they expressed no
view as to which of the two States has sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago. However,
and very significantly, two members of the Tribunal, namely Judges Wolfrum and Kateka,
11
held that the Tribunal did have jurisdiction to decide this question, and concluded that the
United Kingdom does not have sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago. They found that -
(a)  internal United Kingdom documents suggested there was an ulterior motive
behind the ‘MPA’ and noted the disturbing similarities and common pattern
between the establishment of the so-called “BIOT” in 1965 and the
proclamation of the ‘MPA’ in 2010;
(b)  the excision of the Chagos Archipelago from Mauritius in 1965 shows a
complete disregard for the territorial integrity of Mauritius by the United
Kingdom;
(c) UK Prime Minister Harold Wilson’s threat to Premier Sir Seewoosagur
Ramgoolam in 1965 that he could return home without independence if he did
not consent to the excision of the Chagos Archipelago amounted to duress;
(d) in 1965, Mauritian Ministers were coerced into agreeing to the detachment of
the Chagos Archipelago, and that this detachment violated the international law
of self-determination, and
(e) the ‘MPA’ is legally invalid.
This is a highly significant moment. It is the first time ever that any international
judge has looked at the legal merits of this issue. Indeed, Judges Wolfrum and Kateka have
unequivocally affirmed the sovereignty of Mauritius over the Chagos Archipelago. They have
also gone on to find that the United Kingdom had acted in bad faith in declaring the ‘MPA’ in
2010.
Madam Speaker, it is significant that the Tribunal’s Award also determined that, I
quote -
“the United Kingdom’s undertaking to return the Chagos Archipelago to Mauritius
gives Mauritius an interest in significant decisions that bear upon the possible future
uses of the Archipelago.”
The result of the Tribunal’s decision is that, to use the very words of the Tribunal, I
quote -
“It is now open to the Parties to enter into the negotiations that the Tribunal would
have expected prior to the proclamation of the MPA, with a view to achieving a
12
mutually satisfactory arrangement for protecting the marine environment, to the
extent necessary under a “sovereignty umbrella”.”
I am tabling copies of the Award and of the Dissenting and Concurring Opinion by
Judges Kateka and Wolfrum.
Madam Speaker, as at the time of the drafting of this reply, we have not come across
any official statement made by the British side on the Award. I am, however, informed that
in an article published in ‘The Guardian’ of yesterday, comments were made by a
spokesperson of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office on the Award.
Madam Speaker, in reply to part (b) of the question, my Government will study the
Award with all the care it deserves, with the assistance of our local and external legal teams.
In the coming period, we will define the steps that will now need to be taken to give effect to
the sovereignty of Mauritius over the Chagos Archipelago, explicitly recognised by two of
the arbitrators and denied by none of the other three. We will also consider the steps that need
to be taken to give effect to all our rights over the Chagos Archipelago, including those
relating to fisheries, and oil and minerals which the Tribunal has unanimously affirmed.
As I had mentioned in my reply to the PNQ on 26 February 2015, in keeping with the
bipartisan approach we have always adopted on issues of national importance, the hon.
Leader of the Opposition would be consulted at the appropriate time.
I propose to chair a committee which will consider the best way forward. I am
formally inviting the hon. Leader of the Opposition, as well as a representative of each
political party represented in this House, to form part of this committee. The committee will
be assisted by our local and external legal teams, as and when required.
May I also add that this victory today is a victory for Mauritius as a whole, including
those of our fellow countrymen who are of Chagossian origin. It is a victory for the nation
and the people of Mauritius.
Madam Speaker, I take the opportunity, finally, to thank our team in Mauritius led by
our agent, Mr Dheerendra K. Dabee, Solicitor-General, and our external legal team led by
Professor Philippe Sands QC for their excellent work and their dedication.
Our friends in Africa, Asia, Latin America and the rest of the world have over the
years consistently supported us in our efforts to effectively exercise our sovereignty over the
13
Chagos Archipelago. In fact, during his recent visit to Mauritius, Prime Minister Modi
reaffirmed India’s support for Mauritius on this matter. We are thankful for this international
solidarity and have no doubt that all our friends will rejoice in this victory, which some might
compare to the victory of David over Goliath. We are confident that we can continue to rely
on their staunch support in the pursuit of our ongoing and just fight.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, I thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for providing us
with an official copy of both rulings; the unanimous and the minority ruling of the Tribunal.
But I am a bit surprised because, as the Rt. hon. Prime Minister just said, ‘The Guardian’ of
this morning quotes an official reaction from the Foreign and Commonwealth Office
yesterday afternoon, as soon as the ruling was out, and we are still not in presence of any
official communiqué, any official statement. Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether
our Mission in London has tried to obtain a copy of any official reaction yesterday afternoon
from the Foreign and Commonwealth Office on that? Because it is important for us to have
the official text and not just what ‘The Guardian’ has simply produced.
The Prime Minister: We are not in a hurry to make public comments, Madam
Speaker. Insofar as any expression on the part of the Commonwealth Office or UK External
Affairs is concerned, we have had no official copy so far.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, on the first issue, it is a fact that the Rt. hon. Prime
Minister has said that the Tribunal has ruled that the UK acted illegally in setting up the MPA
- Marine Protected Area. It has ordered, in fact, the UK – London - to renegotiate with
Mauritius the setting up of such a MPA. But, in the reaction from the Foreign and
Commonwealth Office, as reported by ‘The Guardian’ of this morning - until we have an
official document - London was cheeky enough to declare itself ‘pleased’ with certain aspects
of the ruling, and has tried to downplay terribly the impact of the ruling, indicating that they
are prepared only to discuss our fishing rights in the Chagos Archipelago. As I have said, we
want to have the official statement. But have we already protested on the basis of what they
are doing, trying to downplay completely the importance of that ruling, and limiting whatever
discussion there will be on fishing rights in the Chagos Archipelago, full stop?
The Prime Minister: Could we expect anything else from them, anything contrary
from the stand they have been taking all along, from the time they excised part of our
territory? They are the culprits, and we know - last time when I answered a question here I
14
said that their philosophy is, might is right, and this is on what they are relying. But I hope
finally justice will prevail and we will get our full sovereignty for the Chagos Archipelago.
Mr Bérenger: On the same issue, Madam Speaker. There are going to be general
elections in the UK on 07 May; in six weeks’ time. Will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree
with me that it is necessary to get in touch right now, after this ruling, with both the outgoing
Prime Minister and the outgoing Leader of the Opposition, to prepare the ground for
substantial discussions after 07 May, especially so, that the Chagos Archipelago in 1965 was
supposedly detached from Mauritius whilst the Labour Government was in power in London?
The Prime Minister: Insofar as their interests are concerned, Madam Speaker, I am
sorry to say there is no difference between Labour and Conservative.
Mr Bérenger: In fact, maybe the Labour Government was worst in London than the
Conservative Government. If I can move on to the fundamental issue of sovereignty, Madam
Speaker, I agree fully with the Rt. hon. Prime Minister that c’est un grand pas en avant
because two of the judges, UN judges, concluded that Mauritius has sovereignty, as the Rt.
hon. Prime Minister said, over the Chagos Archipelago, being given that, I quote –
“in 1965, Mauritian Ministers were coerced into agreeing to the detachment of the
Chagos Archipelago, and that this detachment violated the international law of self-
determination.”
Will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree with me that the other three concluded that
they did not have jurisdictions to pronounce themselves to take a stand on sovereignty, but it
is also very important that none of them said that UK has sovereignty over the Chagos
Archipelago?
The Prime Minister: Yes, I said so in my reply. This is a fact and we know that the
whole transaction that took place was under duress, and we also know that from the very
beginning the excision was illegal. I said so some time back when I answered a question over
here.
Mr Bérenger: I am sure that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister will agree with me. With
this ruling in our hands, the question is: from now on where do we go? And I am sure that the
Rt. hon. Prime Minister will agree with me that there are key strategic decisions to be taken
without losing time. With this ruling, two UN Judges pronouncing themselves for the first
15
time in favour of our sovereignty, what line of action are we going to take? Are we going to
try and bring London to agree to go to the International Court of Justice, or instead are we
going to take new diplomatic initiatives, possibly including the initiatives which we took in
2000/2005 on the issue?
The Prime Minister: I cannot answer this right now. I have said there is going to be a
Committee which will decide what line we are going to follow, but, definitely, we are going
to stand firm and we are going to fight against the United Kingdom to retrieve our territory.
(Interruptions)
Mr Bérenger: I welcome the Rt. hon. Prime Minister’s decision to chair a committee
- a political committee with the required experts - on the issue. Therefore, I welcome that, I
thank him for that. I welcome that totally. But will he agree with me that there is no time to
waste? The UK reacted immediately yesterday afternoon in a nasty way. There is, therefore,
no time to waste. Will he agree with me that this committee, which he is going to chair,
should get to work as soon as possible?
The Prime Minister: Certainly, we will do that. We are also in a hurry.
Mr Bérenger: My last question, Madam Speaker. I heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister
thank Professor Philippe Sands, the leader in our legal team, and the local people concerned
also, the Solicitor-General and others. Indeed, this is a historic ruling, an important milestone
- to pick up the words which the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has used. Therefore, can I suggest -
he has thanked Professor Philippe Sands and the others - that the House expresses its thanks
and conveys its thanks to Professor Philippe Sands and to his team for the fantastic work
done; that therefore the House should - not just the hon. Prime Minister - thank them and
address our thanks to them.
The Prime Minister: Well, the House is joining me to thank everyone who has
helped in this matter.
Madam Speaker: Time is over! Hon. Jhugroo, I am sorry, the last question usually
rests with the hon. Leader of the Opposition.