REPUBLIC OF MAURITIUS - PRESIDENT – LAWS & APPOINTMENTS
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Rt.
hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and
National Development Unit whether, in regard to the exercise by the President of his
functions and following the advice given by the Acting Solicitor General on 03 December
2015 to Government who endorsed and acted thereupon in the Assembly on the same day, he
will state if, either –
(a)  all the laws and appointments made to date by the President in contradiction
therewith will be reviewed and amended; or
(b)  amendments to the Constitution of the Republic of Mauritius will be
introduced in the Assembly to give to the President the power to appoint as
provided for in a number of Acts of Parliament.
aaaaa
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, for the purpose of replying to part (a) of the
Private Notice Question, it is apposite to refer to the advice tendered by the Attorney-
General’s Office, on 03 December 2015.
I quote paragraphs 2 and 4 of the advice -
“2.  You may wish to note that section 64(1) of the Constitution
contains an umbrella provision to the effect that ‘In the exercise of
its functions, the President shall act in accordance with the advice of
Cabinet or of a Minister acting under the general authority of the
Cabinet’.
4.  Accordingly, the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting
Bill being an ordinary law, its provision cannot override section
64(1) of the Constitution which is the supreme law of Mauritius.”
Madam Speaker, the advice tendered by the Attorney-General’s Office should be read
together with the other documents referred to therein, namely, previous advice tendered by
the Attorney General’s Office on the interpretation and implication of section 64 of the
Constitution, as well as the judgment in the case of Dayal v President of the Republic of
Mauritius (1998 MR 4).
11
Read together, the advice means –
(a)  Parliament can properly enact a law that empowers the President to appoint a
person to a statutory office after consultation with the Prime Minister, a
Minister or the Leader of the Opposition;
(b)  but, even though that law says, that the President of the Republic must merely
consult the Prime Minister, a Minister or the Leader of the Opposition, it does
not empower the President to make an appointment contrary to the wish or
advice of the Prime Minister or a Minister, as the case may be, because section
64(1) of the Constitution limits the cases where the President can act against
the advice of or without consultation with the Prime Minister or a Minister, to
cases where the Constitution itself says that the President shall act in his own
deliberate judgment or shall act on the advice of, or after consultation with, a
person or authority other than Cabinet, and
(c)  as regards the amendment initially proposed to the Good Governance and
Integrity Reporting Bill, namely, appointment by the President of the
Republic, after consultation with the Prime Minister and the Leader of the
Opposition, the effect of section 64(1) of the Constitution is that, in reality,
whatever may be the desire of the President or the Leader of the Opposition
regarding the identity of the person to be appointed, the President would be
bound to make an appointment as he is advised to do by the Prime Minister;
hence the advice of the Attorney-General’s Office to the effect that section
64(1) of the Constitution, in the event of conflicting intentions of the President
and the Prime Minister regarding the identity of the person to be appointed,
would have overridden the amendments initially proposed to the Good
Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill. Thus, it will always be the Prime
Minister’s intention or wish, or his advice to the President, which will prevail
as regards who should be appointed.
Madam Speaker, I also wish to refer the House to the case of Dayal v The President of
the Republic of Mauritius (1998 MR 4) where the former Chief Justice, Honourable A. G.
Pillay whose expertise in interpreting our Constitution is well-known, stated as follows, and I
quote -
12
“The position would be different, in our opinion, in the case of acts
ostensibly performed by the first respondent under the Constitution
or any other law but which are in reality performed by some other
person or authority i.e. acts performed by the first respondent in
accordance with the advice of some other person or authority where
he is bound to comply with the advice given - vide section 64(1) of
the Constitution”.
It is clear that the Court was highlighting the overriding effect of section 64(1) of the
Constitution.
Madam Speaker, for all the reasons stated above, Government decided not to proceed
with the amendment proposed by the hon. Leader of the Opposition to the Good Governance
and Integrity Reporting Bill and to proceed as it did.
In the circumstances, the question of reviewing or amending the laws does not arise.
Madam Speaker, in regard to part (b) of the question relating to amending the
Constitution of the Republic of Mauritius to give to the President the power to appoint as
provided for in a number of Acts of Parliament, this also does not arise in the light of what I
have stated earlier.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is giving an
interpretation of the interpretation that the Solicitor General had given. Will he not agree
with me though in spite of what he has just said that the advice given by the Ag. Solicitor
General was clear at paragraph 4 - which the Rt. hon. Prime Minister carefully refrains from
quoting - and it is said -
“Accordingly, the Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Bill being an ordinary
law, its provisions cannot overwrite section 64(1) of the Constitution, which is the
Supreme Court of Mauritius”.
The whole point, being given that, as hon. Collendavelloo had pointed out, in that ordinary
law, as it is called by the Ag. Sollicitor General, it was said that you cannot approve a law -
not an appointment - which is in contradiction with the Constitution.
Now, will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree with me - and the Supreme Court will
decide in due course - that there is a number of laws where what is provided for, as the Ag.
Sollicitor General has said, is in contradiction with the supreme law of Mauritius, that is, the
13
President is given the power to appoint responsible people after consultation with the Prime
Minister and the Leader of the Opposition, and this has been ruled by the Ag. Sollicitor
General as being in contradiction with the supreme law of Mauritius?
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I do not agree with the hon. Leader of the
Opposition.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, of course, he will not agree. But, in the meantime, is
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister aware that what is taking place is that until the Supreme Court
has a chance to give a ruling on that - because the advice of the Ag. Sollicitor General is clear
and now the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is contradicting that advice. Of course, it will go to the
Supreme Court! But is it a healthy situation? Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister where
those in office are there, according to the advice of the Ag. Sollicitor General, in
contravention, in violation of the Constitution, I will be asked to give my opinion in cases
which, according to the Ag. Sollicitor General, are in contravention, in violation of the
Constitution?
The Prime Minister: I am contravening nothing. Even in certain legislations, it is
provided that the President shall consult before appointment is made or at the end of the day
it is the prerogative of the Prime Minister to advise the President.
Mr Bérenger: What a situation we are in, Madam Speaker, where we received clear
advice from the Ag. Sollicitor General! Clear advice! If I can quote the No. 4 in Government,
he said that, for quite some time, he has had doubts about the constitutionality of all the Acts
of Parliament which give the power to the President of the Republic to appoint after
consultation with the hon. Prime Minister and the hon. Leader of the Opposition. If I can just
be given time to find where it is. Therefore, in spite of that, he is now contradicting both what
the Ag. Sollicitor General said and what his No. 4 said in Parliament. He is now
contradicting all this and he finds that a normal situation!
The Prime Minister: I must say that I do not agree with the hon. Leader of the
Opposition.
Mr Bérenger: I found the page where the Adviser to the Government on legal matters
made his speech –
“I have always had doubts about the constitutionality of simple Acts of Parliament”.
Not appointments!
14
“I have always had doubts about the constitutionality of simple Acts of Parliament
which stated that the President shall appoint (...)”.
So, we leave it to the Supreme Court and I hope the sooner. I wonder how the
President of the Republic feels these days, but I will wait for the first time that she consults
me and the Supreme Court will decide.
The Prime Minister: We will wait for a decision of the Court.
Madam Speaker: Does the hon. Leader of the Oppostion have other questions?
Mr Bérenger: No.
Madam Speaker: Please, hon. Ganoo, I am sorry! The last question usually rests
with the hon. Leader of the Opposition.
Mr Ganoo: This is a constitutional debate. This is a question pertaining to the
Constitution, and I am sure the hon. Leader of the Opposition can come back afterwards.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo, I have already given my ruling. I said that the last
question usually rests with the hon. Leader of the Opposition.