CAMP DIABLE - AMMA TOOKAY KOVIL - INCIDENTS
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Rt.
hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and
National Development Unit whether, in regard to the recent incidents which occurred at the
Tookay Temple and elsewhere, he will -
(a) for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police,
information as to -
(i) the number of arrest effected in connection therewith, as at to date,
indicating if the arrested suspects have criminal/legal antecedents;
(ii) the localities where the incidents occurred, including the ones which
occurred during the weeks preceding the Tookay incidents, and
(iii) if cases of incitation à la violence through the internet have been
established, and
(b) state if he has discussed same with the Commissioner of Police and if he is
satisfied with the work of the Police in relation thereto, as at to date.
aaaaa
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police
that on 05 September 2015, at 06.45 hours, one Mr P. C., President of Amma Tookay Kovil
situated at Camp Diable reported that during the previous night, unknown persons had
damaged several idols at Amma Tookay Temple.
Police initiated an enquiry immediately.
I am informed that Mr P. C. showed to the Police the footages of the Kovil CCTV
cameras, from which it was confirmed that the incident had taken place at 23.35 hours on the
previous night. Two suspects were identified in the footage. The two suspects had been
loitering on the main road near the temple, seen by Police Officers on patrol on the night of
the incident.
In regard to part (a) (i), (ii) and (iii) of the question, I am informed by the
Commissioner of Police that on the same day, two suspects, one Police Officer residing at
Vallée Pitot and one hawker residing at Rivière des Anguilles were arrested in relation to the
incident at Amma Tookay Temple. They were provisionally charged for “stirring up civil
war” in breach of section 62 of the Criminal Code Act. They appeared before the Bail and
Remand Court on 06 September 2015 and they have been remanded to Police cell. They
10
again appeared before the Savanne Court on 07 September 2015 and were remanded to Police
cell up to 11 September 2015.
One of them, namely, Mr A. B. has record of two previous convictions, namely
“stolen property” and “possession of counterfeited bank note”.
Madam Speaker, I am further informed that prior to that incident, no other incident of
the same nature either in Camp Diable region or elsewhere, has been reported.
From 05 to 07 September 2015, nine incidents causing damage to mosques, houses
and vehicles have been reported in the regions of Camp Diable, Rivière des Anguilles,
Batimarais, Rose Belle, Nouvelle France and Chemin Grenier. According to the Police,
seven persons have been arrested so far, in relation to those incidents. They appeared before
Court, and have been remanded to Police cell and they are still in Police custody.
Madam Speaker, I am further informed that on 07 September 2015, the Permanent
Secretary of the Ministry of Technology, Communication and Innovation reported to the
Police that racial comments had been posted on Facebook, which could lead to interracial
problems. An enquiry was instituted immediately by the CCID to trace out the identity of the
Facebook account holders and those who had commented on the post. Nine such posts have
been identified and one person has been arrested so far. He has been provisionally charged
for the offence of “stirring up civil war” and remanded to Police cell. He will appear before
the District Court today.
Madam Speaker, in regard to part (b) of the question, since the incidents have been
reported, the Commissioner of Police has been in constant touch with my Office and myself.
I have given strict directives to the Commissioner of Police to take all operational measures
and to be ruthless against all ill- intentioned people and troublemakers who are putting at risk
social harmony and public safety.
The Commissioner of Police has informed that the following measures have been
taken -
(i)  the whole Police Force, including the Special Mobile Force, Special Support
Unit, Police Helicopter Squadron, National Coast Guard, have been mobilised
for a demonstrative and permanent presence on ground;
(ii)  patrols have been deployed around the whole island to deter any other such
incident;
(iii)  road blocks and vehicle checkpoints have been set up at strategic places round
the clock;
11
(iv)  all other Units of the Police, including the Cyber Crime Unit, are on the alert,
and
(v)  a series of community policing activities and actions are being taken at various
levels.
Madam Speaker, I am fully satisfied with the work of the Commissioner of Police and
his team, and the situation is being monitored round the clock.
As I stated at a press conference yesterday, as Prime Minister I will not tolerate any
conspiracy against the State and the people of Mauritius.
I wish to remind the House and the population in general that our legal framework
already caters for such situations. For instance, sections 62 and 282 of the Criminal Code
provide for custodial sentences going up to 60 years. Regulations are also being made under
the Information and Communication Technologies Act to curtail harmful and illegal
communication services.
I shall personally ensure that we kill the demon today so that we do not face the devil
tomorrow.
Our country has a solid reputation of a tolerant society, but we must not underestimate
the fragility thereof. On the contrary, we must strive for it to be protected as well as further
consolidated. I, therefore, call upon the population to act responsibly.
We must also not forget that such incidents may have serious negative repercussions
to our country as a tourist and investment destination.
Madam Speaker, in the wake of the incident that occurred at Rivière des Anguilles,
Her Excellency the President of the Republic met the members of the “Conseil des
Religions”, a few Religious Heads and inhabitants of Camp Diable, Tyack and Rivière des
Anguilles, Britannia at the State House on Monday 07 September 2015 at 16.30 hours in the
presence of the Vice-Prime Minister, hon. Soodhun. Around 100 persons were present. The
Press was also invited to attend the meeting.
Her Excellency reminded those present at the meeting that ethnic groups in Mauritius
live in peace and harmony and have all contributed to the socio-economic development of the
Island. She urged those present not to give way to needless debates and retaliation to isolated
cases and to think about nation building.
She invited all Heads of Religious bodies to take the pledge to put a stop to violence
and to spread the message of love and brotherhood.
12
Madam Speaker, as the House is aware, we have inherited a rich tapestry of different
cultures knitted together which has given birth to a nation that is forward looking while being
deeply attached to the great cultures and religions of the world.
As a responsible Government, we are making every effort to rally all Mauritians
around a national project and garner all our will power and energy to shape a prosperous
nation where our unique cultural mix remains a source of pride, inspiration and strength
rather than a constraining factor in our development process.
I make an appeal to one and all to join us in the task of nation building and
maintaining social stability, peace and harmony.
Madam Speaker, let me again reassure the House and the population at large that I
shall see to it that all perpetrators of these despicable acts, whoever they might be, are
brought to justice.
I am convinced that these incidents have been politically masterminded with the
intention of destabilising my Government and thwart the ongoing clean up exercise, and the
development of the country.
This can be testified by the statement of Mr Rama Valayden at Vallée Pitot and Rose
Hill in the course of nocturnal public meetings where he exhorted the public to come to the
street, I quote him -
“ziska nou fer sa gouvernmant la aller”.
This same sort of provoking statements were made in 1999 prior to the sinister Kaya
episode.
(Interruptions)
But he has to be careful this time! I warn him!
Let me also be very clear. As long as I am Prime Minister, I shall not tolerate any
such reprehensible acts by anybody that imperil social peace and harmony and jeopardise the
safety and security of our nation.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, I think I heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister say that
in all eight persons have been arrested; seven around the violence committed and one in
relation to internet prevention offences. Is that the case, eight in all and will he table a list of
those arrested?
The Prime Minister: I will table the list.
Mr Bérenger: We have been told, Madam Speaker, that among those arrested, there
is a Police Officer. Can I know whether that Police Officer has been suspended, whether he
has precedence?
13
The Prime Minister: Well, he has no precedent; otherwise I would have said it in the
answer. Only one has precedent. Insofar as suspension is concerned, naturally the enquiry is
still on and action will be taken and I have asked the Commissioner of Police that we must
get rid of such people in the Force.
Mr Bérenger: Can I know as far as those arrested are concerned, is the Rt. hon.
Prime Minister aware of one gentleman – if I can call him that - from Bois Chéri - I won’t
give his name at this stage - who has been arrested, who is an employee of Mauritius
Telecom and he was supposedly involved in a case of stealing a vehicle from Mauritius
Telecom and coincidence, coincidence when the Police went to arrest him in that case, they
found the vehicle at his home and secured the vehicle, and this gentleman is reported by the
Police, itself, of damaging places of worship in the recent past?
The Prime Minister: Apparently, this has been tolerated by the previous
Government. Apparently, he was in the habit of taking that vehicle to his place, but we are
going to see to it that this is stopped and any severe action that can be taken, will be taken
against this fellow.
Mr Bérenger: Well, I am a bit surprised by the Prime Minister’s answer as far as
incidents weeks before the Tookay Temple. It seems that the Police has not provided the Rt.
hon. Prime Minister with information in relation thereof. Will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister
take the trouble to look at it, including, for example – I’ll quote one example - at Goodlands,
on 01 September, a temple was attacked and an idol destroyed, the head was left behind and
then two days ago, same thing again at Goodlands, but this time the head disappeared; they
smashed the statue and the head disappeared? This has happened in Goodlands and,
according to my information, in several other places.
The Prime Minister: Maybe the Police does not have this information. If the case
had been reported, the Commissioner would have certainly given me the information.
Mr Bérenger: If the Rt. hon. Prime Minister wants the dates when it was reported, I
have the dates, the Police Station and everything. At first, it was reported on 01 September to
the Police Station of Goodlands and then, on 07, a few days ago, again, there was a report to
the Police Station. You want another example! Grand’ Baie! At Grand’ Baie also, there was
an incident. In that case, reported on 07.
The Prime Minister: Well, I will certainly ask the Commissioner of Police to look
into these cases.
14
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he has
had the opportunity to congratulate and thank, specifically the leaders of the Tookay Temple,
the leaders of the mosques concerned and some socio-cultural organisations that have been
very helpful in trying to cool things down? Has the Rt. hon. Prime Minister found the time to
thank them, congratulate them and encourage them in the same direction?
The Prime Minister: Well, I have been thankful to everybody who has been
cooperating with the Police.
Mr Bérenger: Including me, I am sure!
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker, can I know whether the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has been advised by the
Police, by the State Law Office or by his Minister of Technology, Communication and
Innovation that the law, as it stands, specifically three Acts: the Criminal Code, the
Information and Communication Technology Act and the Computer Misuse and Cybercrime
Act of 2001, that these Acts need to be further amended, strengthened so that this problem of
inciting racial hatred or incitation à la violence or communalisme, including on radios be
better tackled?
The Prime Minister: Yes, we are aware of all this and it is being looked into.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister said that he is fully
satisfied; can I put it on record that my feedback also is that the Police needs to be
congratulated, but, at the same time, can I appeal that we improve on performance, for
example, that family that was aggressed in Rivière des Anguilles had to wait for hours before
a sentry, Police assistance was provided?
The Prime Minister: Well, maybe the Police Officers were taken up. They were so
busy that it took some time. But, generally, I must say, in many cases, this is how it happens.
Police always come quite late!
(Interruptions)
I will ask the Commissioner of Police to see to it and to see that there is acceleration
in the Force.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed!
Mr Bérenger: If I can have one last question and then I will give the floor. The Rt.
hon. Prime Minister has said, I am sure we’ll all agree, something very serious concerning an
organised plot behind the events that have taken place. Can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister
15
report further, Madam Speaker - one name has been mentioned, but the accusation is larger
than one person - can we have more enlightenment on that?
The Prime Minister: I can’t give any enlightenment on that, but I must say one
thing, that what I have been saying here is what is officially communicated to me by the
Police. But I get many information from inside, even what goes on in conversation among
agents, leaders, especially in the Labour Party these days. When I come and say that it is a
plot by politicians, I am serious, I know what I am talking about.
Mr Mohamed: As I said, I have two questions. The first one will be – I am quite
amused anyway by hearing the Rt. hon. Prime Minister talk about the Police coming in late.
But, to pick up from where the hon. Leader of the Opposition left off, there is an information
that I received that at the time in question, the Rivière des Anguilles Police Station was
greatly undermanned and that is why it explains the delay in having to attend certain reported
cases like Rivière des Anguilles. But, coming to my question, could the Rt. hon. Prime
Minister consider the possibility of having the relevant amendments brought to the Criminal
Code as well as procedures pertaining to criminal law that would enable the Police to enter
provisional information, at the same time keeping confidentiality as to the name of the
accused because, in this particular case, had the Police been able, legally and logistically
speaking, to keep confidentiality about the name as is possible in the United Kingdom, there
would not have been the name made public and perhaps this would not have allowed people
without any logic and without any love for their country to go into a haphazard retaliation
which was unacceptable? Could the Rt. hon. Prime Minister consider the possibility of
amending the law to give this tool to the Police to keep confidentially of such sensitive
issues?
Madam Speaker: You have made your point, hon. Mohamed.
The Prime Minister: Well, that the Police Station is undermanned, not sufficiently
provided with Police Officers, has this happened yesterday or since December? Was it not
there and were you not in Government? What have you been doing?
Mr Mohamed: I was not Prime Minister.
(Interruptions)
The Prime Minister: But, we…
Madam Speaker: Please do not reply from a sitting position!
16
(Interruptions)
The Prime Minister: We are working to remedy the situation. About the second
question also, we are looking into all this, Madam Speaker.
Mr Ganoo: Madam Speaker, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has rightly said that, in spite
of long years of nation building, the social fabric of our country is still fragile. Doesn’t the Rt.
hon. Prime Minister think he should arrange for the Heads of the different religions to come
on TV and together make an appeal to the whole population of the island so that the situation
might cool down?
The Prime Minister: The President of the Republic has done already a good job.
This has gone to the public. About information going to the public, when something takes
place in a region, in a village especially, can you keep that secret? Is that what the hon.
Member wanted to make us believe?
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo, Please! You have made your point. The Rt. hon.
Prime Minister has already replied. Hon. Uteem, please!
Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, during the Press Conference, the
Rt. hon. Prime Minister was quite forceful; not only making an appeal to the public, but also
threatening about measures he would be taking. One of the measures that he alluded to was
the state of emergency and he stated that he has the majority to give him this. So, may I ask
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to give a reassurance to the House and the population that we
have not reached this state of affairs which would call for a state of emergency and this
would only be used in a very dramatic situation?
The Prime Minister: I was very clear when I said: if we reach that situation and if we
reach that situation, I would not hesitate.
Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Mohamed!
Mr Mohamed: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have one last question: on this side of
the House, we do not want to politicise such a very, very dangerous situation and we are all
for what the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has said, not on all fronts but on part of it. Since the Rt.
hon. Prime Minister has made very serious allegations - not only here today, but also
yesterday according to my information - when talking about some political complot, may we
know whether the Rt. hon. Prime Minister intends to make use of the information that he has
17
and, by all means, give a declaration to the Police and communicate it to the Police for an
enquiry to be carried out, instead of just simply throwing out allegations, but an enquiry must
be made?
The Prime Minister: We are still having discussions on that.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition!
Mr Bérenger: My last question, if you would allow me, Madam Speaker! It is
addressed to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and follows up through what my colleague, hon.
Reza Uteem has just said. Will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree with me that the way
forward is through national appeals, national action, unified action by Government, the
Opposition, the trade unions, the Forces Vives, everybody, appealing for calm and so on, and,
if required, through the kind of national appeal which, we were in Opposition, both the Rt.
hon. Prime Minister and myself went on television, the then President, the Government and
so on, in the 1999 dramatic situation that we went through, to appeal to the population at
large. Does he not agree with me that this is the way forward and not threats about a possible
état d’urgence?
The Prime Minister: Well, I have appealed for the cooperation on the part of the
whole nation and that includes everybody.
Madam Speaker: Are you done, hon. Leader of the Opposition. That’s it. Time is
over! Hon. Members, the Table has been advised that Parliamentary Question B/419 in
regard to the allocation of the contract to Airway Coffee Ltd. addressed to the Rt. hon. Prime
Minister will now be replied by the hon. Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and
External Communications. Furthermore, Parliamentary Questions B/429, B/430 and B/432
have been withdrawn. Hon. Bhagwan, you may ask your question!