DR. NAVINCHANDRA RAMGOOLAM - FORMER PRIME MINISTER - PROVISIONAL CHARGES
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Rt.
Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and National
Development Unit whether, in regard to Dr. Navinchandra Ramgoolam, GCSK, FRCP,
former Prime Minister, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of
Police, information as to -
(a) the provisional charges lodged against him;
(b) if an objection to departure has been lodged against him, and
(c) if he has been interrogated in relation to the -
(i) Roches Noires bungalow case of July 2011;
(ii) death of Mr A.K.R. in Police custody at the Rivière du Rempart Police Station,
and
(iii) case regarding the audio recording at Rivière du Rempart in December 2014.
aaaaa
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, in regard to part (a) of the question, I am
informed by the Commissioner of Police that on Saturday 07 February 2015, the following
charges were lodged against Dr. Navinchandra Ramgoolam, former Prime Minister -
(i)  “Conspiracy”, and
(ii)  “Money Laundering”.
The enquiry is still in progress.
Madam Speaker, with regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed by the
Commissioner of Police that Police filed a “Prohibition Order” against Dr. Ramgoolam on 07
February 2015, together with the Provisional Charges, to which the Bail and Remand Court
acceded.
Madam Speaker, with regard to part (c) (i) of the question, I am informed by the
Commissioner of Police that Police sought to interview Dr. Navinchandra Ramgoolam on
Saturday 07 February 2015, at the Central CID, Line Barracks, in connection with the theft at
Roches Noires bungalow and after being cautioned, he declined to give his statement and
informed that he would do so at a later stage.
11
Madam Speaker, in regard to part (c) (ii), as far as the case of the death of Mr A. K. R.
in Police custody at Rivière du Rempart Police Station is concerned, in light of fresh
information obtained on the case, a new enquiry is in progress, and so far Dr. Ramgoolam has
not been interrogated.
Madam Speaker, regarding part (c) (iii) of the question, relating to the audio recording
at Rivière du Rempart in December 2014, I am informed that the enquiry into the case is in
progress and Dr. Ramgoolam would be interrogated in due course.
Mr Bérenger: The Rt. hon. Prime Minister has informed us that…
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am sorry, I think I missed one page.
Dr. Navinchandra Ramgoolam appeared before the Bail and Remand Court on the
same day and was granted bail subject to the condition that he furnishes a surety of
Rs200,000 and enters into a recognizance of Rs1 m. under each charge. He was released on
parole by the Court pending his attendance at Rivière du Rempart and Upper Plaines
Wilhems District Courts respectively on 09 February 2015 to do the needful in relation to
surety and recognizance.
On 09 February 2015, he appeared before the District Courts of Upper Plaines Wilhems
and Rivière du Rempart and furnished the required sureties.
I wish to point out that according to information obtained from the Commissioner of
Police, in the course of the enquiry, searches carried out at the residences of the former Prime
Minister at Desforges Street, Port Louis and Riverwalk, Floreal, have led to the securing of a
substantial sum of money.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, we heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister saying that there
are two provisional charges. In the case of the one relating to money laundering, if the Rt.
hon. Prime Minister has gone through the provisional charge before the Court concerned, has
it been brought to his attention that the provisional charge amongst other things reads thus, I
quote -
“(…) was found in possession of over Rs4 m. composed of Mauritian rupees and
foreign currencies and another huge amount of around Rs200 m., suspected to be
proceeds of corruption and bribe found in two safes seized by the Central CID which
have to be forced opened, as access therewith is not available”.
12
Has the Rt. hon. Prime Minister tried to find out how can, in a provisional charge, be said that
the two safes have not yet been opened, and yet there is a huge amount of Rs200 m. in those
two safes yet to be opened?
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, we must not forget that this is just a provisional
charge. The enquiry is still on. The counting is not over and it was supposed to continue
today but, unfortunately, the former Prime Minister has fallen ill. I think I am not in a
position to answer to many supplementary questions because being given that he has not yet
given his defence statement, being given that all the money has not yet been counted; I think
any new information that may go out may cause a lot of prejudice to the enquiry.
Mr Bérenger: The Rt. hon. Prime Minister will have understood my point. Is it serious
to put in a provisional charge that the safes have not yet been opened and yet the Police, the
CID knows that there is a huge amount of more than Rs200 m., concerning safes not yet
opened, according to themselves?
The Prime Minister: Well, I suppose the Police has acted under information received.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, therefore, the first mention was of Rs200 m. Then I
heard - because now you can’t say I didn’t say that – the Sergeant - not Sergeant-in-Chief –
now in charge of the Press Office saying that he had talked to Police Officer Jangi and he had
been told “li paret ki ena plis ki R 200 millions”. En direct! Then that figure was – by the
same Police Officer, now Press Officer – said to be between Rs450 m. to Rs500 m. That was
yesterday and today it has climbed up, according to the same Police Officer, to Rs800 m.
when, in fact, they have already started counting the money.
The Prime Minister: Well, I suppose it is all estimates, but I can’t answer for the
Press Officer.
Mr Bérenger: Is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister saying that? Is he satisfied with the way
Police is handling this case? If that is the trial by the Press, what is? Is the Rt. hon. Prime
Minister satisfied with the performance of that new Sergeant, freshly appointed Press
Officer? He thinks he is a pop star. I don’t know if the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has watched
him, making jokes! Since when does the Police whilst a prosecution is on, the enquiries are
on, behave in that manner through the Press and the MBC? Is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister
satisfied with the way the Police is conducting the whole thing and whether, in the end, they
are not going to mess up their own case?
13
The Prime Minister: Well, I am not concerned with comments. I am satisfied the
Police is handling the enquiry properly and it is only when the formal charge will be brought
that we will know what is the exact amount.
Mr Bérenger: The amount is one thing, but the way the Police is conducting, I am
surprised that a lawyer and Prime Minister is satisfied with the way the Police is behaving
concerning the Press and the MBC, but chacun a son opinion, Madam Speaker. I have seen
that, at a point in time, apart from the Police, ICAC surfaced. Is it at the request of
Government or the Police that ICAC has stepped in?
The Prime Minister: Well, from the information that I have, it was at the request of
Police.
Mr Bérenger: Well, I am not suggesting that Rt. hon. Prime Minister should interfere
in the details of the enquiry, but does he not agree with me that, at this stage, the Police
should carry out its enquiry and ICAC should not be brought in? There is going to be a big
polémique around ICAC; the one-man ICAC that we have, the way he was appointed; there is
going to be a debate about that and it is now a one-man only, ICAC, and lawyers are lawyers.
I can see on the horizon whatever happens they are going to challenge, the composition of
ICAC, the legality of ICAC if ICAC steps in. Will not the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree with
me – I will deal with ICAC later on – that ICAC should be kept out of even the money
laundering aspect of the case?
The Prime Minister: Well, if that is so, Counsels for the former Prime Minister
should have objected. In fact, the hon. Attorney General was there at the invitation of the
Police, there was objection and he went away.
Mr Bérenger: As far as the interdiction to leave the country is concerned, I think I
heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister saying that it is only on the 7 th when provisional charges
were put, that an interdiction to leave the country was lodged against the former Prime
Minister. Is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister aware that, in fact, when the Bail and Remand Court
granted bail to the former Prime Minister, it bluntly put it that she did not agree with that
argument that he might leave the country, because - I quote the ruling of the Magistrate –
“Had he wanted to escape justice, he had ample time to do so prior to his arrest.”
14
Does that explain why in a case like that, ample time was left to the suspect at this stage for
him to leave the country if he so chooses and it is only on the 7 th that an Interdiction to
Departure was placed?
The Prime Minister: Well, the Police thought it right at that time and this was the
normal procedure.
Mr Bérenger: Now that there is an interdiction - I am sure the hon. Prime Minister is
aware that the Court is to step in - if the accused has been informed that there is an
interdiction, then that interdiction, if he has been informed, lapses after 72 hours, unless the
Police goes to the Court and obtains an order this time - not from the Police, but from the
Court - to interdict him from leaving the country. Has this already been done? Is it being
done?
The Prime Minister: Well, I have no information about that.
Mr Bérenger: If I can move to the last part of my question. Concerning the Roches
Noires bungalow affair, I think I heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister say that the former Prime
Minister has not to date given a statement. He has said he will later on give a statement. Have
all the other aspects of that inquiry into the Roches Noires bungalow affair been completed?
The Prime Minister: Well, the inquiry has not yet been completed, because the
former Prime Minister has not given his statement so far. Once his statement is given, then
the Police will consider whether other statements have to be recorded.
Mr Bérenger: Concerning the other case, the death of Mr A.K.R. in Police custody at
Rivière du Rempart Police station in July 2011, I heard the hon. Prime Minister say that a
new inquiry has started and is in progress. It has been repeatedly reported in the press that
one suspect of this aggression – supposedly aggression, theft and so on - is in detention. Is
that the case? Is he formally under detention or is he being kept at the Special Mobile Force
for whatever purpose?
The Prime Minister: In which case is that?
Mr Bérenger: It is in the case of the death in Rivière du Rempart Police station of Mr
A.K.R. It has been repeatedly reported that there is a suspect being held by Police in relation
to that case. Is it so?
15
The Prime Minister: No. I have not read that. Nobody has told me that and I think
this is a very wrong impression that the hon. Leader of the Opposition has got. I am not aware
of anything of that sort.
Mr Bérenger: It is not an impression. That has appeared repeatedly in the press and
there has been no Police communiqué to advise the public that no one is in detention in
relation to that case. Therefore, it is not just my impression. It has been reported and not
denied by the Police. They talked a lot about other things but, in that case, I suppose they
could have clarified the situation. The new inquiry is still in progress, Madam Speaker. Has
any link been established, at this stage, between the Roches Noires bungalow affair and the
death of Mr A.K.R. in Rivière du Rempart Police Station?
The Prime Minister: I cannot answer to this question. The inquiry is still on.
Mr Bérenger: The last part of my question, Madam Speaker, regards the audio
recording – the bande sonore – at the Rivière du Rempart meeting in December 2010. Can I
ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister what explains the fact that there have been several arrests -
the most important thing apart from life, the most important thing in life is freedom - and
every day there were articles in the press, statements by the Police, so and so is going to be
called, so and so is going to be arrested, it went on and then suddenly it disappeared. It is off
the radar screen completely. Has the Rt. hon. Prime Minister – because as I said people have
been arrested? Why this inquiry is supposedly proceeding in that way?
The Prime Minister: Well, it is not the first time that somebody is arrested in a case.
The hon. Leader of the Opposition should know that. The Office of the DPP made an
application dated 19 December 2014 for a production order directing the following service
providers V-mail LLC Facebook Inc. and Google ILC to disclose the user ID who posted the
link on the web. The Judge’s Order was obtained on the same date and forwarded to the
Police. I must add also, in the meantime, the Police officers who were engaged in this case
were very busy with the other cases and that is why this inquiry has been a bit delayed.
Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, the hon. Prime Minister mentioned that one of the
charges against the former Prime Minister is one of money laundering. In view of the fact
that a huge amount of money is involved in foreign currency, is the hon. Prime Minister
aware whether the hon. Attorney General has made any request for any foreign State for
assistance under the Mutual Assistance in Criminal and Related Matters for this case?
16
The Prime Minister: No, I am not aware of any.
Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Mohamed.
Mr Mohamed: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Could I ask the Rt. hon. Prime
Minister, since before the 10 th of December of 2014, we have all in Mauritius heard the Rt.
hon. Prime Minister before then, gave information that, at some stage, he was aware of the
intricacies of the case of Roches Noires in relation to the death of the person referred to in
question (c) (iii), whether since he seemed to be aware and made statements to that effect,
when does he intend to give a statement to the Police to share that important information,
because we need justice to be done and if he does not intend to do so, maybe he could tell us
how he could communicate that information to the Police and when he would do it?
The Prime Minister: This information was being circulated, it reached me and it has
reached also the Police. So, I don’t have to inform the Police.
Mr Ganoo: May I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, in view of the substantial amount
of money which has been found on the premises of the former Prime Minister and in view of
the fact that all parties in this House are agreeable that a legal framework be set up to control
the finances of political parties, doesn’t the Prime Minister think that it is urgent to uphold
the dignity of the political class in this country after what has just happened to come up with
a legislation, either setting up a Select Committee or come up with a legislation once for all
for the financial control of political parties?
The Prime Minister: This is irrelevant to the PNQ.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, did you ask the floor? No! That’s alright. Hon.
Leader of the Opposition!
Mr Bérenger: Well, I’ll pick up from where hon. Ganoo left. My last question will
relate to now that the country is - I think we can all agree on that - en état de choc, being
given that in the Electoral Programme of the present Government, it was stated that there
would be a new Declaration of Assets Act that will be made public and it was stated also that
a law – new law – would come forward to control, to make transparent, les finances des
partis et des campagnes électorales. This has been picked up in the Government Programme,
but I note that it is no longer said in the Government Programme that these declarations of
assets will be made public. There has been a change between the programme éléctoral and
17
the programme gouvernemental – le discours-programme. Will the hon. Prime Minister see
to it, being given where we are, that the two things are done as soon as possible - a new
Declaration of Assets Act, foolproof, as he said in his electoral program, to be made public?
A new Declaration of Assets Act - this is what his programme spoke about - and also that will
enlighten what took place in 2000-2005; things will be activated so that a law to regulate, to
control, make transparent les financements des partis et des campagnes éléctorales, will be
before the House as soon as possible.
The Prime Minister: Well, this Government means to implement all its promises.
Madam Speaker: One last question, we have got three more minutes. The last
question is usually for the hon. Leader of the Opposition. Does he have any other questions?
Mr Bérenger: No.