PORT LOUIS HARBOUR – MASTER PLAN
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Ag.
Prime Minister whether, in regard to the Port Louis Harbour, he will, for the benefit of the
House, obtain from the -
(a) Mauritius Ports Authority, information as to where matters stand concerning the -
(i) implementation of a new Master Plan therefor;
(ii) extension of the berths at the Mauritius Container Terminal;
(iii) setting up of a new cruise ships quay thereat;
(iv) refurbishment of cranes thereat, and
(v) development of the Island Container Terminal, and
(b) Cargo Handling Corporation, information as to if Dubai Ports World has been
chosen as strategic partner therefor and, if so, indicate the conditions of the
partnership and whether it has been discussed with the trade unions and the local
private sector.
aaaaa
The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I would like first of all to point out that,
as the principal gateway of the country, Port Louis harbour plays a vital role in the national
economy by handling about 99% of the total volume of external trade and through which all
strategic imports such as food and petroleum products, raw materials for the textile industry
and major exports such as sugar and textile, transit.
Additionally, Port Louis by virtue of its location and the significant growth in traffic
between Asia, Europe, Africa and South America, is ideally located for container
10
transshipment activities and therefore represent an excellent opportunity for enhanced
economic development in Mauritius, particularly in the region of Port Louis.
Our strategic objective is to make of Port Louis harbour a well-equipped,
professionally managed and constantly upgraded Port so as to maintain high productivity and
enhanced service levels at competitive rates. To this end, we will pursue a policy of constant
improvement and opening to the outside world and encourage further investments so as to
respond to the needs of shipping lines and other Port stakeholders.
Madam Speaker, as regards part (a) of the question, I wish to inform the House that
under the Ports Act 1998, the Mauritius Ports Authority is required to prepare and
periodically update a Port Master Plan and also implement the recommendations of the
Master Plan. The last Port Master Plan study was undertaken by Messrs Halcrow in 2009.
Port Louis harbour has since then experienced a major change in the traffic pattern. As from
2009, the Port traffic registered an average growth of more than 10% annually. This was the
result of major developments in the different sectors of the country’s economic activities and
the increase in transshipment traffic.
Most of the projects recommended in the Port Master Plan have already been
implemented or are in the process of being executed.
In the Port sector, it is foreseen that Port Louis harbour has the potential to be
developed as a hub for containers transshipment and petroleum products and also as a
destination for home porting of cruise tourism as well as other Port related activities.
Following a tender exercise, the bid from Messrs Royal Haskoning of Netherlands
was retained. The contract sum is Euro 489,500 plus MUR 3,640,000. Royal Haskoning is
an international consultancy firm with extensive experience in the preparation of Port Master
Plans and development of Ports and harbours.
The scope of services for the Port Master Plan Study include inter alia -
(i)  preparation of traffic forecast including a transshipment study;
(ii)  assessment of the potential of Port Louis harbour as a hub for transshipment,
petroleum products and bunkering;
(iii)  preparation of a land use plan of Port Louis harbour and other sites such as
Terre rouge, Grande Rivière Nord Ouest and Albion;
11
(iv)  recommendation for future Port infrastructure requirement, and
(v)  a risk assessment.
The Consultants have mobilised a team of experts in Mauritius since 01 September
2015.
The Consultants have engaged consultations with Port stakeholders and will also
assess projects already submitted to the MPA for consideration.
The Preliminary Port Master Plan Report is expected to be submitted by December
2015 and the final report by June 2016.
The Port Master Plan will be the roadmap for Port land use development over the next
25 years up to the horizon 2040.
As regards part (a) (ii) of the question, the MPA is implementing the extension and
strengthening of the Mauritius Container Terminal (MCT) berth and associated dredging
works so as to accommodate large vessels of over 8,000 TEUs (TEU: 20 foot equivalent
units) and the increasing container traffic. The project is being implemented under three
separate packages and the status is as follows -
a) Bund construction
In order to contain the dredged materials, MPA has embarked on the construction
of bunds to enable land reclamation of about 35 ha at Fort William and 4 ha at
Fort George respectively. The contract for the construction of the bund wall
package was awarded to Messrs PAD & Co Ltd. for the total amount of
Rs365,284,000. Works on site started in August 2013 and have been completed.
b) Marine and Civil Works
The contract for the marine and civil works was awarded to JV Strabag
International Gibb/Archirodon in August 2014. The works comprise -
• Extension of the existing MCT berth by 240m
• Strengthening of the existing 560m long berth
• Expansion of the Container Stacking Yard by 7.5 ha
The project for an amount of Rs4.2 billion will be executed over a period of 27
months and is expected to be completed around March 2017.
c) Dredging Works Package
12
The work comprises the dredging of the Navigational Channel to 16.5 m below
chart datum and associated land reclamation of about 35 ha at Fort William and 4
ha at Fort George.
Proposals for prequalification were received at the CPB from four potential
contractors and following assessment, three contractors were shortlisted. The
shortlisted contractors submitted their bids at the Central Procurement Board. The
bid prices received exceeded the estimated cost by more than 80% and the bidders
exercise has been cancelled. New bidding exercise has now been launched with a
view of completing the works by end 2016.
Expression of interest from nine potential contractors have been received by the
Central Procurement Board and are presently being evaluated.
The whole project, i.e. the three packages detailed above, is expected to cost
around Rs5.7 billion. Following commissioning of the project, the capacity of the
terminal would increase from 530,000 TEUs to 750,000 TEUs and two large
vessels of about 9,000 TEUs capacity will be able to be accommodated at berth at
any one time without any restriction.
As regards part (a) (iii), the MPA commissioned the cruise jetty at Les Salines in
January 2010 with a view to further improve the reception facilities at Port Louis. MPA is
proceeding with the construction of a cruise terminal building.
MPA will proceed with the appointment of a consultancy firm by end of October
2015 and it is intended to complete the construction of the building by end 2017.
As regards part (a) (iv) of the question, I wish to inform the House that Cargo
Handling Corporation Ltd (CHCL) has five ship to Shore Cranes (Portiques).
Three of these are more than 15 years old and CHCL was having problems in the
maintenance of those cranes and same was affecting the overall productivity.
Following an assessment of the three Hanjung Ship to Shore Cranes, the CHCL Board
of Directors approved the repairs and refurbishment works for these on 25 January 2012.
13
Messrs MGM-OMG were appointed as Consultants following a restrictive bidding.
Following specifications prepared by MGM-OMG, bids were invited through
International Open Advertised Bidding under the aegis of the CPB and the Bid Evaluation
Committee recommended that the contract be awarded to Messrs Aliani Project SRL -
Tecnomontaggi Division at the cost of Rs160,887, 000.
On site works started on 15 August 2014 and was completed on September 2015.
As regards part (a) (v), of the question, the development of the Island Container
Terminal comprise of construction of breakwater, dredging of the navigational channel, land
reclamation, construction of Access Bridge, berths and container stacking yard.
However, given its exposed condition and its proximity to the Terre Rouge River
Estuary (a Ramsar site) and the Baie du Tombeau residential area, a detailed technical and
economic study is necessary.
MPA is proceeding with the techno-economic Feasibility Study. The African
Development Bank is funding the study through a grant. Expression of Interest for the
selection of potential consultancy firms has been launched. Proposals have been received
from 45 firms which are being evaluated by the MPA. Shortlisted consultants will
subsequently be invited to submit their proposal. It is planned to complete the study by mid
2017.
Madam Speaker, as regards part (b) of the question, I wish to apprise the House that
no strategic partner has so far been selected for the CHCL Ltd. The House may note that the
issue of appointing a strategic partner for CHCL has been on the table since 2001, with a
view to increasing productivity and efficiency of cargo handling facilities at Port Louis
harbour. The project was at that time put on hold to enable CHCL Ltd. to attain financial
stability. A second initiative was started in 2005 with the objective to develop Port Louis
Harbour into a major transshipment hub to enable the capture of substantial traffic in the
region. However, the exercise undertaken between 2007 to 2009 by the Consultant IFC to
select an appropriate bidder proved to be inconclusive. In fact, following a selection exercise
only one bid was received and assessed as non-responsive and therefore non-compliant.
14
A fresh attempt is now being made to explore avenues to give a new boost to the
activities of the CHCL Ltd. In this context, a collaboration with DP World of Dubai is being
examined.
This Project consists of, inter alia -
(i) development and operation of a Freeport, logistics park and other Port related
activities;
(ii) development and investment in new and state-of-the-art port infrastructure in
Mauritius and transformation of Port-Louis into a major logistics and maritime
hub;
(iii) expansion and operation of current and future cargo handling capacities in
Mauritius and Rodrigues based on market demand;
(iv) promotion and marketing of Mauritius as a platform for Port related and
maritime activities in the Indian Ocean Region, and
(v) provision of a wide variety of new maritime and Port related services.
We are of the view that there could be substantial benefits to be derived from such a
collaboration in consideration of the fact that DP World is one of the largest marine terminal
operators in the world, and has a portfolio of more than 65 marine terminals across six
continents, including new developments in India, Africa, France, UK, Australia and the
Middle East. DP World also owns the Jebel Ali Free Zone, one of the world’s largest free
zones which serves as a dynamic base for thousands of businesses from over 100 countries,
sustaining over 135,000 jobs and attracting more that 20% of the United Arab Emirates’
foreign direct investment. Over 80% of the shares of DP World are indirectly owned by the
Government of Dubai, with the remainder of the company’s shares listed on the Nasdaq
Dubai stock exchange.
The Container Terminals operated by DP World in Dubai handled a container
throughput of 15.2M containers in 2014 and Dubai was ranked 9 th worldwide in Container
Port ranking. Worldwide DP World is the 4 th largest Port Operator and handled some 70M
containers in 2014.
15
So far, the project has progressed as follows -
In early June 2015, the Sultan Ahmed Bin Sulayen, Chairman of DP World, together
with a team of technical experts, effected a visit to Mauritius and had meetings with the
Prime Minister, the Minister of Finance and Economic Development, the Minister of Housing
and Lands and myself to elaborate on the avenues of operations between the two parties.
Meetings were also held with Government Officials.
Subsequently, in September 2015 a technical team from DP World carried out a
prospection visit in Mauritius to discuss with stakeholders and to collect information.
Working sessions were held with MPA and CHCL Ltd. The delegation also visited the
Mauritius Container Terminal and the proposed logistics park.
From information received from the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development,
the delegations also had meetings during their visit with the following stakeholders -
(i)  Board of Investment;
(ii) Ministry of Fisheries;
(iii) Enterprise Mauritius;
(iv) Chamber of Commerce and Industry;
(v) Joint Economic Council;
(vi) MEXA;
(vii) State Development Company Ltd (SLDC).
A business plan is expected from DP World in November 2015.
Madam Speaker, at this juncture, the project is still at discussion stage.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, if I can start with the Master Plan, the new version
thereof is being prepared, from what we have heard. I understand that they called for
proposals, that the tender for carrying out the new Master Plan, the tender was issued on
March 2014. It is a long time back. The terms of reference must have been put out then. In
the meantime, especially the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development has been
talking about developing the whole of the harbour from Pointe aux Sables all the way to Baie
du Tombeau. Obviously, that cannot have been included in the terms of reference of the Port
Master Plan. So, can I know whether the terms of reference are being updated/completed in
16
view of this new vision of this whole area, from Pointe-aux-Sables to Baie du Tombeau, as
being the new Port Louis Harbour area?
The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, as I understand, the terms of reference for
the Master Plan are quite vast, including traffic forecast, use of land, potential for economic
development, etc. I am not aware that it needs to be changed. What I can say is that all the
projects that had been submitted to MPA have been given to the consultants, and they are
also having discussions directly with these promoters to see how viable these projects are and
how they can be incorporated in the Master Plan if they need to be incorporated in the plan.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, as far as the extension of the berths at the Mauritius
Container Terminal is concerned, I listened, of course, carefully to the hon. Ag. Prime
Minister, and the impression that he gave was that everything is going fine. There is no
problem at all. My information is not to that effect. My information is that the project has
met with very serious problems to the extent that works had to stop at a moment. Can we be
enlightened on that?
The Ag. Prime Minister: I am aware, Madam Speaker, that there is delay of some two
months in the completion of the project. I am not aware whether the works have stopped, but
I am aware that there is some delay.
Mr Bérenger: Delay is delay! My information is that there are big problems, that is, as
the works have progressed, the piling and so on has been done – something like Bagatelle
Dam saga – it has been found that very serious problems have been met with. The Ag. Prime
Minister said that he is not aware that works have stopped. My information is that the works
have stopped and that there are very serious problems. I would like to be reassured that we
are not heading for another Bagatelle Dam saga.
The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, the note I have from my colleague is that
works have not stopped and that, as I mentioned, there are some technical problems. Works
have not stopped. There is a two-month delay, but everything else is going to plan.
Mr Bérenger: My question, Madam Speaker, is whether works had stopped. I did not
ask whether works have stopped at present. My question was whether the situation is so
serious that, in fact, works had stopped.
17
The Ag. Prime Minister: I am not aware. I am informed, Madam Speaker, that works
had not stopped and have not stopped. I repeat, Madam Speaker; had not stopped.
Mr Bérenger: If I can move on, therefore, leaving the harbour as such to the Dubai
Ports World issue or rather the strategic partnership. I listened again to the hon. Ag. Prime
Minister and he said that no strategic partner has so far been chosen, but - if I heard him
correctly- that a fresh attempt at finding a strategic partner is being carried out and this now
involves Dubai Ports World, DP World as they are known. Can I know whether this aspect
of DP World being taken on board by the Cargo Handling Corporation has been discussed
with the recent delegation?
The Ag. Prime Minister: The recent delegation from DP World Ltd! Madam Speaker,
there have been a number of discussions, as I mentioned, with various Ministries. We don’t
yet have a final or even a preliminary written proposal from DP World. The last team that
was here was here to collect information and gather as much information as possible, to come
up with a proposed business plan to submit to Government in November. It is at that point in
time that DP World will have submitted something in writing as to exactly what it wants to
do. At the moment, I doubt whether they know themselves what they want to do because
they wanted to gather all the information and come up with a firm proposal.
Mr Bérenger: It would seem from what I have heard that the DP World delegation
talked to the private sector, especially the Mauritius Chamber of Commerce and Industry and
the Joint Economic Council. Can I know why they did not meet with the trade unions also?
The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I think we have to get it right, in sequence.
At the moment, we have an idea, but we don’t have a precise description of project proposal
from DP World. That project proposal has not been approved by Government yet. So, it
would be premature to go and talk to the unions. Let the proposal come, let it at least be
analysed and assessed by Government and, if it looks likely to go ahead, that will be the time
that all the stakeholders will be put on board. But I must say also that, at the preliminary
discussions, the whole question of taking on board the labour force was discussed at length
with the Sultan himself and the other members of the delegation and, obviously, it is clear
that this issue is of paramount importance to the go-ahead of the project.
18
Mr Bérenger: The Minister in charge of Port Louis Harbour is the Ag. Prime Minister.
Can I know whether Government as a whole has considered the security dimension of this
whole project? I am sure the hon. Ag. Prime Minister is aware that, some years back, when
DP World acquired P&O, as a result of that acquisition, they became owners of operations
across all around the United States, from Miami to New York and so on, and that raised hell –
if that is parliamentary – in the United States. And, in fact, the elected Members of Congress
refused that, voted against that - quoting security reasons, terrorism reasons, and so on. As a
result, DP World sold all its interests in the United States.
The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, the USA may have its reasons for having
acted that way, but I must say that DP World operates 65 terminals around the world,
including Australia, Canada, Belgium and France. So, it is not something that is being sort of
taken as an outcast. Secondly, Madam Speaker, we are talking about the Mauritius Container
Terminal here. It is only part of the Port. The rest of the Port or the other terminals,
including the general purpose terminals which will continue - at least, it seems at the moment
– to be Government owned, continue as previously. So, we are not talking about the whole
Port at the moment. We are talking part of the Port, which is the Mauritius Container
Terminal, which handles amongst other things transhipment for the rest of the region.
Mr Bérenger: The hon. Ag. Prime Minister was out of the country when the team from
DP World visited Mauritius a few days ago. They met the hon. Minister of Finance who
made statements to the local Press. In fact, ‘L’Express’ of last Friday quoted the Minister.
He must have liaised with his colleague. Is he aware that, in that Press article which quotes
the hon. Minister of Finance - more than a possibility - the probability of a strategic alliance
with DP World is discussed and the hon. Minister even allows himself quite threatening
words in the direction of trade unions? Has he had the opportunity of discussing that with his
colleague?
The Ag Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I have given the exact position as it stands.
Obviously, as far as the unions are concerned, I myself raised this issue with the Sultan
himself and he assured me that he has tremendous experience in taking on board unions and
labour force all around the world. He told me himself that he was 100% confident to be able
to come to a win-win situation with all the workers. Let us not forget, Madam Speaker, that,
after all, we are talking about a much bigger Port. We are talking about far greater
19
employment, directly import activities and also in the hinterland so far as the Freeport is
concerned. We are talking about hundreds of additional jobs in the Port that can only satisfy
people working there and living in the vicinity and indeed all over Mauritius. We will have
hundreds of jobs in the Port itself and thousands of jobs in the Freeport, if that develops as we
expect. That is in addition to the other developments that are happening. For instance, we’ve
discussed, I think, last week before, about the Chinese proposed project at Bain des Dames.
So, all this is coming and offering great opportunities for everyone in the region to obtain
well-remunerated and satisfying jobs.
Mr Bérenger: I will have a last one. We have been talking about…
Madam Speaker: Is that your last question, hon. Leader of the Opposition?
Mr Bérenger: Yes.
Madam Speaker: Because there are other Members who wish to intervene. Hon.
Shakeel Mohamed!
Mr Mohamed: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The hon. Ag. Prime Minister has said -
if I understand correctly - that there will be a report submitted with regard to the global plan
and the proposals that DP World would like to make to the Government of Mauritius and
there are no exact ideas to what exactly they would propose as yet. Now, in that context, he
has also said that there would be thousands of jobs that would be created. So, could he tell us
and how does he reconcile, therefore, not knowing exactly what the plan of DP World is, how
exactly does he not know what the proposal would be? What exactly would be the thousands
of jobs that would be created, in what category or for what type of workers, for men, for
women, what age group, what would be those thousands of jobs that would be created?
(Interruptions)
The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, we are talking about a project. I think
everybody understands. We are talking about a project that has not been submitted in writing,
but has been discussed. So, we are talking about what? We are talking about the
transshipment hub, we are talking about the freeport and we are talking about developing
cruise and other port related activities and, I must say, in order to look at it in a dispassionate
way, we are dealing here with the fourth largest port operator in the world. It is not everyday
20
that you attract this sort of gold chip company, if I may say so, to Mauritius. We have
mentioned that it operates in Australia, Belgium and all that - great countries. So, it is not
everyday. So, we have to have also some leeway, give it some time and invest our own time
in allowing DP World to come to finalise its project. At the same time, Madam Speaker, this
has been going on since 2001, various means of trying to find a strategic partner, because as a
huge potential with the development of Africa and with the thousands of ships that are
coming this way. So, that is the situation. Obviously, as it stands, we are going to create
200/300 jobs with the port extension as it stands. Now, when we are talking about the
freeport, if it comes online, and I have just mentioned in my reply, Madam Speaker, that in
Dubai, there are 135,000 people working there. I don’t know whether men, women – I hope
not children – working there.
(Interruptions)
There are 135,000 people! So, we are talking about 325 acres of land for this project. So, we
can just imagine that this is going to create thousands of jobs for Mauritians, hopefully, who
will want to go and work there. Same, for the cruise, same for everything.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea!
Mr Ameer Meea: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The hon. Ag. Prime Minister
informed the House that DP World has had various discussions with Ministries and the
private sector. My question is: with regard to this new project, who will hold the majority of
shareholding, will it be the Government or DP World?
The Ag. Prime Minister: Shareholding in what? So, this is the first thing. The project
itself is of various parts. The shareholding has not yet been finalised at all. So, we do not
know yet what are the financials, what is the investment. So, we wait for the business plan
and we wait for the proposal of DP World and then we are open to discussions with
Government.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody!
Mr Baloomoody: The hon. Ag. Prime Minister just mentioned that there have been
many consultations, but the unions are the ones who know the ins and outs of the Port. Why
is it that there has been no consultation with the unions? The more so that we know that the
21
project has been underlined and, as from this Friday, following the declaration made by the
hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development, there is much concern among the
unions about their future.
The Ag. Prime Minister: I take this opportunity to reassure the House and reassure
the workers at the Port that the whole idea of this project is to bring economic development
and prosperity to the Port. That is the whole idea. And the first people to benefit from that
will, obviously, be the workers. So that is the whole point of it. As far as the discussions are
concerned, there have been discussions to help them work out the business plan. Once that is
finalised, then it will come to the discussions with the unions. As you mentioned, any
statement that is made, tends to create some uncertainty here and there.
Let us reduce the uncertainty because, at the moment, we don’t have any final
proposal or even a preliminary proposal in writing from DP World. So, it is premature to
cause uncertainty or unrest in the Port based on that. Once we have this, it will be public.
This is what we are talking about; the proposal will be put to the unions and, as I have
mentioned, they have guaranteed that they have excellent experience in getting everybody on
board.
Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Leader of the Opposition, a last question!
Mr Bérenger: We have been discussing at length DP World and their eventual
involvement in the Port Louis harbour. As we know, Madam Speaker, in August, the hon.
Minister of Finance and Economic Development was in Singapore and from what we’ve
read, had discussions with the Minister concerned, Minister of Transport, but also the port of
Singapore authority. So, can I know which is which? What did we discuss with DP World,
what did we discuss with the port of Singapore authority? How eventually is the port of
Singapore authority to be involved in those developments?
The Ag. Prime Minister: Well, I have seen no reference in the papers, Madam
Speaker, of the Singapore Ports Authority, but I’ll reassure my colleague, I am not aware of
what was discussed.
Madam Speaker: Time is over! Hon. Members, the Table has been advised that
Parliamentary Question No. B/623 has been withdrawn. Hon. Dr. Sorefan!