BUILD MAURITIUS FUND - MONEY DISBURSED
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the
Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether in regard to the Build Mauritius
Fund, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain therefrom, information as to the amount of
money –
(a)  contributed thereto from the price of diesel and petrol by the State Trading
Corporation since January 2015 to date,
(b)  available therein as at to date, indicating the amount of money disbursed
therefrom –
(i)  to reduce the public debt, if any, and
(ii)  for the replacement of the defective water pipes of the network of the
Central Water Authority since January 2015, indicating the sums that
have actually been utilized therefor and the kilometres of pipes
replaced.
aaaaa
The Minister of Finance and Economic Development (Mr P. Jugnauth): Madam
Speaker, the setting up of the Build Mauritius Fund was announced in the 2014 Budget
Speech with the objective of financing infrastructure projects, including road, transport,
utilities, and development schemes. The Fund was created as a Special Fund under the
Finance and Audit Act to execute the various projects under the Build Mauritius Plan.
The Build Mauritius Plan was elaborated in the Budget Speech 2014 with focus on –
(i) Infrastructure for greater connectivity with the rest of the world;
(ii) More fluid traffic flows;
(iii) Efficient and safe public transport, and
(iv) Regular supply of water and electricity at competitive prices.
Furthermore, mention was made in the Budget Speech 2014, that the following
projects would form part of the Build Mauritius Plan which would be financed partly by the
Build Mauritius Fund -
(i) World Class Airport to promote the development of Aviation Hub;
(ii) Port Development;
(iii) Maritime Services Hub;
9
(iv) Petroleum Hub;
(v) Land Transport;
(vi) Bus Replacement Mechanism;
(vii) Mauritius Light Rail Transit (MLRT) Project;
(viii) Public Utilities, and
(ix) Water Sustainability.
The Build Mauritius Fund was set up by way of the Finance and Audit (Build
Mauritius Fund) Regulations 2013, and is under the purview of the Ministry of Finance and
Economic Development.
Initially the Fund was set up with financial resources to the tune of
Rs4.7  billion  transferred  from  the  Consolidated  Fund,  comprising
Rs4.3 billion as a loan and Rs0.4 billion as contribution from Government. An amount of
Rs300 m. out of the loan of Rs4.3 billion has so far been refunded to the Consolidated Fund.
Subsequently, in January 2014, the Consumer Protection (control of price of
petroleum products) Regulations was amended to provide for a contribution of Rs1 per litre
on both Mogas and Gas Oil to the Build Mauritius Fund (BMF) to finance the Bus
Replacement Scheme announced in the Budget Speech 2014 as part of the Build Mauritius
Plan.
The STC price structure for petroleum products was further amended on 16 January
2015 to increase the contribution to the Build Mauritius Fund from Rs1 to Rs4 per litre. The
additional Rs3 per litre is to be used essentially for investment to upgrade and modernise the
water supply and distribution network.
Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, the total amount contributed
by the State Trading Corporation from January 2015 to April 2016 totalled Rs2.09 billion.
Concerning part (b) of the question, the amount of money available in the Fund as at
31 May 2016 was Rs4.758 billion.
As regards part (b) (i) of the question, I am informed that no money from the Build
Mauritius Fund has been used to reduce the Public Debt.
10
Concerning investment to upgrade and modernise the water supply and distribution
network, an amount of Rs3.6 billion for the period 2015-2018 has been earmarked in the
Build Mauritius Fund for Central Water Authority (CWA) to undertake -
(i)  17 priority projects involving the replacement of about 200 kms of pipes, and
(ii)  construction of five service reservoirs to ensure water distribution at the
required pressure.
I am informed by the Central Water Authority that -
(i)  contracts for replacement of 8 kms of pipes have been awarded for two
projects, namely Alma Reservoir to Alma Hill and distribution main from
New Bosquet Reservoir to Coromandel for a contract value of Rs114 m.;
(ii)  contracts for replacement of 83.5 kms of pipes will be awarded by November
2016 for an estimated value of Rs763 m.;
(iii)  contracts for replacement of 133.3 kms are expected to be awarded by
December 2016 and the works will be completed by 2018, for an estimated
value of Rs1.275 billion, and
(iv)  contracts for five service reservoirs at Cluny, Riche en Eau, Balisson, Alma
and Riviere Dragon are expected to be awarded in early 2017 for an estimated
value of Rs125 m. and the works will be completed by 2018.
I am informed that an amount of Rs1.034 billion has been used from the Build
Mauritius Fund for the water sector in respect of the Bagatelle Dam Project.
It is to be pointed out that during the current financial year, CWA has replaced about
80 kms of defective water pipes at a cost of Rs650 m. which have been financed from its own
funds.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, from my question, of course, I wanted figures to
date; the latest figures that we have. But if I heard the hon. Minister rightly, he gave us
figures going back month and month. Can I ask him again, therefore, what has been the total
sum collected by the STC on essence and diesel and paid to the Fund since January 2015?
We had a figure of Rs2 billion, but I understand it is not for that period. It goes months back.
Mr Jugnauth: Well, I have given the figures that have been collected. For the
period of January to June 2015, we have collected Rs207 m. and from July 2015 to April
11
2016, we have collected Rs380 m. Now, that is the levy for the bus modernisation scheme.
The levy for the water sector, from January to June 2015, it is Rs362 m. and for the ten
months of July 2015 to April 2016, it is Rs1.141 billion. Now, I have the figures for April
2016.
Mr Bérenger: Can I have also the reserves at the Fund? How much is standing to the
credit as reserves of the Fund to date again because the former Minister of Finance had stated
in November 2015 that the Fund had reserves of Rs4 billion. So, can I know now where we
stand?
Mr Jugnauth: Well, again in my reply, I have stated that as at 31 May 2016, a sum of
Rs4.758 billion is available in the Fund.
Mr Bérenger: Well, we had new figures now. From what I understand - because it is
still not clear - the total sum collected by STC and paid into the Fund since the multiple by
four increase in the levy, is more than Rs2 billion. I am sure that the Ministry of Finance
must have worked out even today when the baril de pétrole stands at USD50 per baril. Can
we know the estimates from the Ministry of Finance for the year 2016 and how much is
expected to be paid as compared to the previous estimates? How much in 2016 is estimated
to be paid into the Fund for that levy in spite of the USD50 price on the petroleum products?
Mr Jugnauth: Well, Madam Speaker, the question is about the contribution since
January 2015 to date. Now, of course, we surely must have estimates of projection with
regard to 2016, but I am not in a position to give that amount. I can, of course, inform the
House about the figure that is likely to be contributed.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, I am bit surprised, but I will wait for the estimates to
be obtained and circulated. Why I am asking is that we have more that Rs4 billion of
reserves in that Fund. Therefore, will the Minister – although he does not have the estimates
of what will be collected this year, even when the baril de pétrole is at USD50, I believe it
would be billions again out of the pockets of consumers of diesel and essence - give the
guarantee in that kind of situation that there will be no increase in the price of diesel and
petrol, being given that we have all this money taken out of the pockets of consumers of
diesel and essence? If ever there is a need to rectify the situation and if the price of petrol
keeps on going up, consideration will be given to bring it down that Rs4 per litre of
petroleum products and not again passing whatever increase to the consumers?
12
Mr Jugnauth: Well, Madam Speaker, we will have to see how the situation unfolds
in the future. We are right now preparing the Budget, we are working on figures, estimates
for the future and in the light of what we assess as being the economic situation for the future,
we will take decisions accordingly.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, I heard the hon. Minister say that no money has come
from the Fund to repay our public debt, but he did point out that - I did not hear the figure
again - a lot of money has been paid from the Fund, in the period of time that we are talking
about, into the Consolidated Fund. Can we have the figure and can I know whether it has not
been un truc du metier, that is, instead of repaying the public debt, of course, it is put in the
Consolidated Fund and then Government uses, not in a regular way, that device to bring
down the public debt? Can we have the figure? How much has been transferred to the
Consolidated Fund over that period and by how much, combien a été puisé du Consolidated
Fund to bring down the public debt?
Mr Jugnauth: Madam Speaker, as far as I am informed, when the Fund was set up,
Rs4.3 billion were taken out of the Consolidated Fund for that Build Mauritius Fund as a loan
and Rs400 m. have been contributed by Government to that Fund. Therefore, it is quite
normal that when it is a loan it has to be refunded and, up to now, Rs300 m. have been
refunded by the Fund to Government and when it is refunded it goes to the Consolidated
Fund. So, I can assure the House that there has been no, what you call truc du métier or
technicality, because a loan is a loan.
Mr Bérenger: Can I move on to the next part? We have been given kilometres of
CWA pipes that have been replaced at the cost of CWA, but when the levy was multiplied by
4, the money that came out of the pockets of the consumers of diesel and l’essence was
supposed to fund 100 kilometres. Does the hon. Minister find it normal that to date – that was
in January 2015, more than a year later - not a cent of that money has been spent to replace
pipes, and we are told that a contract for 8 kilometres has been awarded? Can I have the date
on which that contract was awarded?
Mr Jugnauth: Well, the Fund had its objectives and one of them was to spend money
for the water sector and I have given the amount that has been spent with regard to the
Bagatelle Dam. I think Rs1.034 billion has already been spent, but then, of course, I have
mentioned the number of projects which I have been informed from the CWA with regard to
projects that are in the pipeline and future projects. So, the other question was for?
13
Mr Bérenger: The date on which the contract has been awarded.
Mr Jugnauth: Which contract?
Mr Bérenger: As far as I heard, only one contract has been awarded although the
increase took effect in January 2015, more than a year ago. The only result I heard is that one
contract for 8 kilometres of pipe has been awarded. May we know the date on which that
contract has been awarded?
Mr Jugnauth: The date of the contract awarded was in April 2016 and I am also told
that with regard to the contracts for works, it can only be awarded after the completion of
detailed design and that there are several water projects and so on.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan!
Dr. Sorefan: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On 15 September 2015, the hon. Minister
of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection said that there is reserves of Rs2.5 billion
and that the STC intends to transfer Rs1.45 billion in the Consolidated Fund for the financial
year 2015 and 2016. Will the hon. Minister confirm whether this is so? As per his answer it
seems that this is not so.
Mr Jugnauth: Well, this is a question with regard to whether funds have been
transferred from STC. I don’t have the information. The question can be put to the
substantive Minister and I am sure he will reply.
Mr Bhagwan: Madam Speaker, can I know from the hon. Minister what mechanism
has been set up at the level of the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development to monitor
the allocation of massive funds which are earmarked - this is public funds - with regard to the
timely implementation of the projects and also on matters of good governance and allocation
of contracts? Is there a Committee which has been set up at the level of the Ministry of
Finance to oversee all these issues?
Mr Jugnauth: Well, again, if it is with regard to the Build Mauritius Fund, I can
assure the hon. Member that there is a Committee which comprises of the Ministry of
Finance and Economic Development, the Ministry of Energy and Public Utilities, the
Ministry of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport, the Prime Minister’s Office, the
Accountant General’s Office and, of course, there is a Secretary to service that Committee.
And that Committee, of course, sees to it that whatever money is being requested to be spent
for different projects are being monitored properly.
14
Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhuboo!
Mr Jhuboo: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the light of the forthcoming Budget and
being given that the economy is slowing down and investment is declining, will the hon.
Minister consider passing on the future reductions to the public in general in order to boost up
consumption and the economy in general?
Mr Jugnauth: Well, I know that there has been a decrease in the price of Mogas and
Gasoil on two occasions. In fact, on 14 November 2015, the price came down from Rs45.95
to Rs41.35 for Mogas and for Gasoil from Rs37.80 to Rs32.75; and in February last, it came
down to Rs38.85 for Mogas and for Gasoil to Rs29.50.
Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister of Finance gave us two
important figures, that is, the balance as at 31 May 2016 which is Rs4.758 billion and also a
figure of Rs3.6 billion for projects that have been earmarked by the CWA for 2015 and 2018.
So, clearly, there is ample fund for these projects that have been earmarked for CWA for
three years. So, my point is: will the hon. Minister consider the fact - due to the figures that I
just gave - to bring back the levy to the figure that it used to be, that is, from Rs4 to R1?
Mr Jugnauth: Well, again, Madam Speaker, we have to look at the economic
situation, first of all, with regard to the infrastructure projects that this Government has. I
mean, there are so many projects that we want to finance and we need to get money from
some quarters. This is not new. I mean, in the past also there has been a levy which has been
earmarked for contribution with regard to specific projects. Now, we all know what are the
objectives of the Build Mauritius Fund and I am sure that all these projects are priority
projects for Government and need, in fact, a lot of financing and we have to see to it. Of
course, if the time comes when we feel that a decrease in such a levy can be applied, I am
sure Government will consider that.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo!
Mr Ganoo: Can the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development confirm
whether at the time that the new Government took over in January 2015, the balance
available in the Fund was about Rs4 billion, and if that is the case, why did Government take
the decision to increase the levy from R1 to Rs4?
Mr Jugnauth: Well, again, in fact, that has been explained by the former Minister of
Finance and Economic Development because we have as priority projects, the water sector.
There are so many replacement of pipes, building of reservoirs and so many other projects
15
with regard to the water sector. The Bagatelle Dam, itself, if I must say, is a reservoir sans
fond, and that is not the end of the matter, Madam Speaker, we will have to, in fact, inject
more money and God knows, how much more money we will have to inject in the future. So,
we have to be careful because Government cannot just take a decision for now, we have to
see what is likely to happen in the future and, therefore, even if true it is that the amount that
was in the Fund stood at Rs4.7 billion yet there are so many projects. In fact, that amount by
itself is not enough to finance all the projects that this Government is willing to come forward
with.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem!
Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The hon. Minister Finance and Economic
Development just confirmed that he is not going to remove that Rs4 tax on each litre of
petrol. The figures that he has given show already that there is going to be an excess of over
Rs1 billion… the water supply project. So, may I know from the hon. Minister Finance and
Economic Development whether this above Rs1 billion existing has been earmarked for any
specific project or will that be used also for public utilities, water supply projects?
Mr Jugnauth: Well, it is not correct to say that there is an excess. There is an excess,
of course, with regard to the amount that has been earmarked to be spent as at now, but more
money is going to be required for other projects that are in the pipeline. Therefore, I don’t see
why we should look at it from that angle and we should not forget also that Government has
given a loan to the Build Mauritius Fund of Rs4.3 billion and that loan has to be refunded.
Therefore, only Rs300 m. has been refunded so far. We have also to look at it that the
Consolidated Fund must be consolidated further.
Madam Speaker: Yes, last question hon. Leader of the Opposition!
Mr Bérenger: I will put the same question in another way. When the levy, which is,
in fact, a tax in a so-called no tax budget, but it was a massive tax, it was increased from Rs1
per litre to Rs4 per litre. The main reason put forward was not Bagatelle Dam or whatever,
was replacement of pipes and 24 sur 24 and sept sur sept in the near future. Now that we
know that not a single contract has been awarded; one is being awarded - we had the date
earlier on - one contract for 8 km under that item. We know how much money is there in the
reserve and so on and yet we heard the hon. Minister of Trade and Industry - on behalf of
Government - managing public opinion, preparing public opinion for another increase in the
price of diesel and l’essence.
16
Therefore, I agree with the hon. Minister that there has to be an overall examination of
the situation, but will he agree with me that this would be unacceptable after the figures that
we have, that now we have another increase in the price of diesel and l’essence, because there
has been a slight increase on the world market in the price of petroleum products?
Mr Jugnauth: Well, I will look at it differently, Madam Speaker. I will say what is
not acceptable is that we are being late for a number of projects. In fact, I have to be honest,
CWA for all this replacement of pipes and the investment that has been earmarked for
reservoirs and so on, I believe that we have to try to move forward as quickly as possible
because that is the priority for Government. In fact, my colleague, the Vice-Prime Minister,
Minister of the Energy and Public Utilities spoke to me and I am sure that he is seeing to it
that these projects are materialised as soon as possible.
Madam Speaker: Time is over! Hon. Members, the Table has been advised that PQ
No. B/535 in regard to the Director General of the University of Technology, Mauritius, will
now be replied by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, time permitting. PQ No. B/512 has been
withdrawn. Hon. Rughoobur!