AIR MAURITIUS LTD. – CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER – TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Ag.
Prime Minister whether, in regard to the sacking of Mr M.P., CSK, as Chief Executive Officer of
Air Mauritius Ltd., he will –
(a)  for the benefit of the House, obtain from Air Mauritius Ltd., information as to –
(i)  the Board Members thereof who were present and absent at the Board
meetings held on 28 October and on 10 November 2016 respectively,
indicating in the case of each of the said meetings, how much notice was
given;
(ii)  the capacity in which Mr S. S., former Secretary to Cabinet and Head of
the Civil Service, participated in the Board meeting thereof held on 28
October 2016, and
(iii)  if the sacking of Mr M. P. was discussed at the Board meeting held on 10
November 2016 or on any subsequent Board meeting thereof, and
(b)  state if the Board of both Air Mauritius Ltd. and of Air Mauritius Holdings Ltd.
are being replaced.
aaaaa
The Ag. Prime Minister (Mr X. L. Duval): Madam Speaker, with your permission I
shall reply to the Private Notice Question and to Parliamentary Question No. B/891 together.
In reply to previous Parliamentary Questions, the Prime Minister has already informed
the House that Air Mauritius Ltd is a listed public company quoted on the Stock Exchange of
Mauritius and is governed by the provisions of the Companies Act, the Securities Act and the
Listing Rules of the Stock Exchange. The Listing Rules provide for an appropriate forum for
disclosure of information relating to the Company’s affairs and matters relating to day-to-day
administration, especially those which may affect the share price. Further, I am informed that the
termination of employment of the former CEO may be the subject of litigation before the Courts.
17
Given the above, the House will appreciate that while I have chosen to reply to this PNQ,
I shall restrict myself to limited matters which may fall within the purview of Government.
Furthermore, Air Mauritius has its own Board of Directors and its Executive
Management who are responsible for the management and administration of the Company and
Government does not have responsibility for the administration and management of the
Company.
However, I have chosen to reply to this Private Notice Question inasmuch as information,
not always accurate, on this issue has been widely circulated in the Press and is already in the
public domain.
Madam Speaker, in regard to part (a) (i) of the Private Notice Question, I am informed
that the following Members were present at the Special Board Meeting held on 28 October 2016
–
(1)  Dr. Arjoon Suddhoo
(2)  Mr Sateeaved Seebaluck
(3)  Mrs Kan Oye Fong Weng-Poorun
(4)  Mrs Banoomatee Veerasamy
(5)  Mr Daniel Mackay
(6)  Mr Dharam Dev Manraj
(7)  Mr Ramprakash Maunthrooa
(8)  Mr Bissoon Mungroo
That is eight Directors.
The following Directors were absent with apologies –
(1)  Mr Megh Pillay
(2)  Mr Marie Hector Philippe Espitalier Noel
(3)  Mr Marc Hein
(4)  Mr Ashwani Lohani
(5)  Mr Jean Michel Louis Rivalland
(6)  Mr Patrick Roux
(7)  Mr Yoosuf Muhammad Salemohamed
18
No Director convened to the meeting of 28 October objected to the holding of the
meeting.
At the meeting held on 10 November, all the Board Directors were present with the
exception of Mr Ashwani Lohani. At the beginning of the meeting, the Board took note of the
resignation of Mr Sateeaved Seebaluck on 31 October and, in accordance with the Articles of
Association of the Company, filled the casual vacancy with the appointment of Mr Nayen
Koomar Ballah. Just before the meeting, Mr Megh Pillay tendered his resignation as Director by
way of a letter and the resignation was accepted by the Board.
In regard to the Special Board Meeting held on 28 October, I am informed that the
meeting was convened at 14.48 hours for the meeting scheduled at 16.00 hours on that same day.
As indicated in the News Release issued by the Company, the meeting was convened in
conformity with the legal requirements and the provisions of the Articles of Association of Air
Mauritius.
A convocation and an agenda were sent to all Directors entitled to attend the meeting,
including Mr Megh Pillay.
For the Board meeting held on 10 November the Members were convened on 03
November.
Madam Speaker, in regard to part (a) (ii) of the Private Notice Question, I am informed
that Mr Seebaluck was legally entitled to participate in the Board Meeting of 28 October 2016 as
he was still a Board Director of the Company on that date. His replacement by Mr Ballah as
Company Director had not yet been implemented in conformity with the Articles of Association
of the Company which required the formal resignation of Mr Seebaluck and the appointment of
Mr Ballah by the Board of Directors, by way of the filling of a casual vacancy. The House may
wish to note that Directors are appointed by Shareholders in General Meeting on a yearly basis.
Casual vacancies may, however, be filled by the Board of Directors appointing a Director to hold
office until the next annual meeting of Shareholders.
Madam Speaker, in regard to part (a) (iii) of the Private Notice Question, the House may
be aware that Air Mauritius Ltd issued a News Release on 14 November 2016. According to that
Release, the Board, held on 10 November 2016, decided to provide clarifications on the
19
termination of contract of Mr Megh Pillay as well as on the Board Meeting held on 28 October.
Moreover, the Director of Civil Aviation was informed of the decision and of the appointment of
Mr Indradev (Raja) Buton as Officer-in-Charge on 28 October, immediately after the meeting of
the Board. There was no objection from the Director of Civil Aviation. Mr Buton has acted as
Accountable Manager on various occasions in the past and was found suitable as per the
standards of the Department of Civil Aviation. I am, therefore, tabling a copy of the News
Release which addresses some of the issues in the PNQ.
Madam Speaker, in regard to part (b) of the Private Notice Question, it is for the Annual
Meeting of the Shareholders to determine the Board Membership of Air Mauritius Ltd. Insofar
as Air Mauritius Holdings Ltd is concerned, this is a matter for consideration by its Board and
shareholders as it is a private company.
Madam Speaker, with regard to Parliamentary Question No. B/891, I have been informed
by the Prime Minister that he was apprised of certain internal problems relating to Air Mauritius
Ltd and that the situation had deteriorated to a point where it was no longer possible to carry on
with the former Chief Executive Officer. He was of the view that, if that was the case, then the
Board of Directors should do what was right for the company, taking into account the interest of
the airline and its stakeholders.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition!
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, the Ag. Prime Minister insists that Air Mauritius is
independent from Government and so on, but he agrees that, in fact, the Government controls Air
Mauritius, being the majority shareholder with 62 per cent with SIC, and appointing, therefore,
the majority of the Board members. On top of that, will he agree with me that the proof to the
contrary of what he is arguing is that, when the Rt. hon. Prime Minister came back from overseas
on Tuesday 04 October of this year, on the day that he came back to his office, he ordered that
Mr Mike Seetaramadoo be suspended as Executive Vice-President to appear before a
Disciplinary Committee, and it was done on the spot? Will he agree with me that what all this
shows is that Government decides? It is a majority shareholder, it appoints the Directors, and in
the case of Mr Seetaramadoo, the proof is there.
The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, there is a big difference between being a
majority shareholder and running the Board of Directors as pseudo-Directors. This is a
20
completely different matter whereas, in fact, accusing the Government of running Air Mauritius
as pseudo Directors opens lots of doors which should not be opened, Madam Speaker. The
situation is that, obviously, as we are the majority shareholder, we are the main shareholder of
Air Mauritius, we are kept apprised of the situation at Air Mauritius. Same goes for the Minister
of Finance and Economic Development who was kept apprised. But the decisions that are taken
at the Board remain, by law, the decisions of the Directors who are there in their own right, in
their own capacity and, as we will all agree, have a fiduciary responsibility vis-à-vis the
shareholders and the stakeholders, Madam Speaker. Therefore, it is not correct to say that
Government, in any way, is running the Board of Directors of Air Mauritius, and whatever
information, I have no confirmation either to support or to deny whatever the hon. Leader of the
Opposition is saying about Mr Mike Seetaramadoo. I am not aware of that.
Mr Bérenger: Well, I am surprised. The Ag. Prime Minister will understand that I am
surprised because he said that he had discussed with the Rt. hon. Prime Minister about the
situation there and so on and he did not raise that point where the Rt. hon. Prime Minister,
according to what has been reported, ordered that this gentleman be suspended!
(Interruptions)
The Ag. Prime Minister: I have not said that I had discussed, Madam Speaker. The
quote that I have given for the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has been given to us verbatim from the
Rt. hon. Prime Minister who is on mission. But I have not discussed the matter of Air Mauritius
with him myself.
Mr Bérenger: If we can move to the Board, is the Ag. Prime Minister telling us that he
finds it normal that a Board of 15 members should meet within very short notice to get rid, to
sack its Chief Executive Officer, and takes that decision with only five members present? Does
he find that normal?
The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, factually, there were eight members present,
and I understand that everybody voted in the same direction, that is, to terminate the contract of
Mr Pillay. I agree with the hon. Leader of the Opposition that the notice was short. I agree with
him and there is no doubt about that. But, on asking for further information, I was told, Madam
Speaker, that there was a real risk that the whole matter escalated further, which would not be in
the interest of the company which, as we know, has a crucial role to play both in the economy
21
and has 14,000 shareholders. So, in the interest of the company, it was decided to take a very
quick decision and that was why - under normal circumstances, you would not call a Board of
Directors within few hours’ notice - the Board meeting was called. There were eight Directors
present, who all voted in the same direction and, of course, the subsequent Board meeting of 10
November goes in the same direction.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, the Ag. Prime Minister is trying to make us believe that
the Board meeting was called within very short notice because things would run out of control as
far as Air Mauritius in general; it would crash! Well, will he agree with me at least that, in fact,
the reason that it was called that urgently is that it had to be held minutes before the Disciplinary
Board that was meant to consider the case of Mr Mike Seetaramadoo within a few minutes later
and that, therefore, this was the real reason that this Board was called for within an unacceptable
short notice?
The Ag. Prime Minister: Honestly, I do not see that the Board took any decision
concerning - what I was told was on the agenda of the Board did not concern Mr Seetaramadoo.
So, I have asked the question in good faith and I am providing the answer in good faith to the
hon. Leader of the Opposition in the House that it was to stop matters escalating.
Mr Bérenger: Yes, but we all know that the truth is that the Disciplinary Committee was
waiting to meet. It did not have to be discussed because they met urgently to get rid of the Chief
Executive Officer.
The Ag. Prime Minister: I must also add, Madam Speaker, that the Disciplinary
Committee, I understand - although I did not want to go into this issue, but nevertheless -, is
going to be held this week, and the Chairman of the Disciplinary Committee is someone very,
very senior. It’s Mr André Robert, and I think we can let the Disciplinary Committee do its
work.
Mr Bérenger: I heard the Ag. Prime Minister say that there was an agenda circulated.
Can we have a copy of that agenda?
The Ag. Prime Minister: I don’t have it, but I will see whether it can be circulated.
Mr Bérenger: We have been told, Madam Speaker, that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has
said that he was made aware of certain problems, disagreements at Air Mauritius and that he,
22
therefore, left it to the Board. But, in fact - will the Ag. Prime Minister agree with me - what
Government is trying to say in the public is that there were a number of disagreements between
the former Chief Executive and the Board of Air Mauritius Ltd. Can I ask the Ag. Prime Minister
whether he can produce any evidence of disagreements between the Board - not between the
present Chairperson and the Chief Executive. This, we all know - and the former Chief
Executive? Can he produce evidence, minutes of the Board of Air Mauritius Ltd. of any serious
disagreement between the Board and the Chief Executive?
The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I think the hon. Leader of the Opposition
should not take me as the spokesperson of Air Mauritius Ltd. or of the Board, which I am not! I
am speaking, Madam Speaker, as the representative of the main shareholder. If there are
questions that are being raised, it is for the Board of Directors and its Chairman to respond to the
public. I have already said so and I repeat it, Madam Speaker, that communication is important
for the Board of Air Mauritius Ltd. to explain fully to its shareholders, to its stakeholders at large
and to the public what has happened. I take note of what the hon. Leader of the Opposition is
saying. But, again, Madam Speaker, it is not for me, but for the Board of Directors of a listed
company to respond, if need be.
Mr Bérenger: Yes, but can I remind him, Madam Speaker, that he responded in public!
He made a statement…
The Ag. Prime Minister: I didn’t!
Mr Bérenger: He made a statement through an email, I understand, to a given paper,
where he said –
« Ceux qui ont pris la décision de limoger le CEO doivent s'expliquer. »
Therefore, just hiding behind the Board when it suits the purposes of Government will
not do! Has he obtained information from the people concerned? Have they expliqué
themselves?
The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, certainly, but I will again say that I maintain
the same position that there needs to be full communication from Air Mauritius Ltd. on aspects
which are affecting its share price - the share price fell by 10 per cent; it has since recovered -
affecting the stakeholders and affecting the travelling public at large. I maintain that this is so. I
23
am happy that the Chairman gave an interview in Le Défi, I think, that yesterday a communiqué
was issued, and this has helped to elucidate some of the issues. This is a communication
exercise also for Air Mauritius Ltd., Madam Speaker. I maintain what I have said.
Mr Bérenger: Can I insist? Whatever the present Chairperson says is one thing. Can
we be provided with any evidence of disagreements between the Board of Air Mauritius Ltd. and
the former Chief Executive?
The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I did not want to be legalistic. I must come
back here to the legal provision because, after all, we are un État de droit. There are Listing
Rules of the Stock Exchange which are quite clear as to the proper forum for information to be
disseminated and that proper forum, especially for listing companies, is not in this House and it
is not by me, it is by the Management of the company. So, I can quote again the paragraph
relating to the Listing Rules, but that is quite clear, Madam Speaker.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, therefore, to me, it’s quite clear to the Ag. Prime
Minister, but to me it is even clearer that this is being made up, pretexts and excuses, for having
got rid of the previous Chief Executive. The Ag. Prime Minister had said: ‘Ceux qui ont pris la
décision de limoger le CEO doivent s’expliquer.’ We have had also an interview from the
nominee of the Ag. Prime Minister, Me Mark Hein, who let out the truth. Can I know, at least,
whether he has discussed the issue with Me Mark Hein, being given that somebody else
confirmed to him that this was being decided elsewhere?
The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, Me Mark Hein did not consult me,
especially I was not in Mauritius, before giving that interview. Now, I was a bit taken aback by
it, but still he did speak to me. What, in fact, is good that the hon. Leader of the Opposition
gives me a chance to explain. I told Me Mark Hein that I was saddened by this continuing strife
which is a historic thing between the Chairman, and the Board of Directors of Air Mauritius and
its Management. It is not new, this strife. It is been going on for some time. Every time we
appoint a Chairman and we have a CEO and they start having issues of governance. Who does
what? This is why, Madam Speaker, I think, I have discussed it also with some of my colleagues
here, that it is time that we set really in stone what are the responsibilities of the Chairman of the
Board of Directors of Air Mauritius and of the CEO because in each case there is confusion …
(Interruptions)
24
Madam Speaker: Order, please!
(Interruptions)
Order!
(Interruptions)
Can I ask hon. Members to remain silent while the Ag. Prime Minister is replying to the
question, please?
The Ag. Prime Minister: I also had the occasion to speak to my colleague, hon.
Bhadain, on this issue. I think it is time that we have it properly because, on some instances, you
have a CEO not listening to the Board – historically - and also some instances where the Board
may appear to be micromanaging the company. So, I honestly think that we have to have
something much more formal that is set out to avoid future conflicts.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, it is as if we are découvrir l’Amérique! This is issue has
been looked at and solved years ago and now we have a Minister for Good Governance who has
gone back on that. There is nothing new in separating the responsibilities but, to us, it is clear
that the present Chairperson is responsible for what developed at Air Mauritius and Mr Pillay is a
bouc émissaire, paying for what the present Chairperson has done at Air Mauritius.
The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Prime Minister, I can go back to the …
(Interruptions)
One day! Insha’Allah, one day, Madam Speaker, you will become Prime Minister! We
are after all passing the Motion for Gender Equality later on this afternoon.
Madam Speaker, the situation was explained to the Prime Minister. The Prime Minister is
away and I do not want to speak in his place. He was apprised of the situation and he gave
obviously carte blanche to the Board, as is the legal situation, to take whatever decision. I will
not enter into this debate.
Mr Ganoo: Madam Speaker, can I ask the hon. Ag. Prime Minister to answer the
question which I have put and to which he has attempted to answer. The question was: whether
the Prime Minister and Cabinet also were made aware of the intention of the Board to sack the
Chief Executive, not the differences that existed between the CEO and the Chairman of the
25
Board, but whether he was apprised of the intention to get rid of the Chief Executive. This was
my question.
The Ag. Prime Minister: I think it is quite clear from the statement I quoted from the
Prime Minister that he was apprised of certain internal problems relating to Air Mauritius and
that the situation had deteriorated to a point where it was no longer possible to carry on with the
former Chief Executive Officer. Therefore, he was going to be sacked and he was of the view
that if that was the case, the Board of Directors should do what was right for the company, taking
into account the interest of the airline and its shareholders. I think I have answered that part.
Mr Mohamed: I have listened with much attention to the hon. Ag. Prime Minister who
has said, time and time again, that there was a convocation and that there was an agenda. He
also said that the convocation was done in line with the Companies Act, the Eight Schedule,
which is section 158 of the Companies Act, which talks about agenda. We have here in this
House, at this very moment, the Chairman who is not an Executive Chairman and the Secretary
of Air Mauritius. My information, Madam Speaker, is that there was at no time an agenda that
was circulated. There was no agenda and that is what may …
Madam Speaker: Ask your question, hon. Mohamed!
Mr Mohamed: It’s coming!
Madam Speaker: Please, don’t be long in asking your question!
Mr Mohamed: There was no agenda and that is what makes the meeting illegal and
unlawful. Since those members are in the House, I am sure, Madam Speaker, that you will give
a few moments to the Ag. Prime Minister to tender his hand out, so that they could give him a
note. Give him the agenda! This agenda that, in fact, does not exist!
Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, I don’t think that you should give instructions to the
Chair. The Chair knows what it has to do. So, allow the Ag. Prime Minister to reply!
The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I was told that there was an agenda. I do not
have it now. But I would also remind the hon. Member as to what I have just said at the start of
my reply, that – I do not know if he is going to be the lawyer for Mr Pillay, there is no problem
with that – there is going to be in most probability a court case. So, I must be doubly attentive
not to say anything which will go one way or another to affect the interest of Air Mauritius.
26
Mr Uteem: The hon. Ag. Prime Minister mentioned that Air Mauritius was a listed
company governed by the Listing Rules. Yet, Air Mauritius did not issue any Press release to
explain why he was sacking the CEO and, as a result of that, the shares plunged. Now, I would
like to have a very specific answer to this specific question. Is the hon. Ag. Prime Minister
aware if the Financial Services Commission (FSC), as regulator, has taken any sanction against
Air Mauritius and does he find it appropriate that the Chairman of the Financial Services
Commission, Mr Dev Manraj, was one of the Directors who did this act in breach of the Listing
Rules?
The Ag. Prime Minister: I agree with the hon. Member that communication wise Air
Mauritius ought to have responded, on the same day probably, as to the sacking of the CEO. I
agree with that. As far as the FSC is concerned, I do not reply for the FSC. I do not know what
was taken. I am not aware that any action has been taken by either the Stock Exchange which
would be the first authority to take action or the FSC in that regard. I would not make any
statement on any conflict of interest.
Mr Rutnah: Since the issue of short notice has been raised in the House today, can I ask
whether the Ag. Prime Minister is aware that while the Board was convened, Mr M. P. was
firstly within the close proximity of the Board, and secondly, that he could have attended the
Board given that he was within the close proximity to resist the decision, and thirdly, that
members of the Board by virtue of the Article, …
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: It is up to the Chair to decide whether it’s three questions.
(Interruptions)
Mr Rutnah: …members of the Board …
Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, are you picking up a quarrel with the Chair?
Mr Mohamed: No! I am just telling …
Madam Speaker: Yes, but you should not pick up a quarrel with the Chair. It is for the
Chair to decide.
Mr Rutnah: Thirdly and finally, Madam Speaker…
27
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Not again!
(Interruptions)
No argument!
Mr Mohamed: On a point of order.
Madam Speaker: Please, sit down!
(Interruptions)
Please sit down, hon. Shakeel Mohamed! It is the right of any hon. Member to ask questions.
(Interruptions)
And it is for the Chair to decide when to stop that hon. Member.
(Interruptions)
Mr Mohamed: May I raise a point of order?
Madam Speaker: Please do!
Mr Mohamed: My point of order is: could you, therefore, rule that you are allowing him
to put three questions all in one?
Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed, it is not for you to tell me to rule. I give my
ruling when I feel I should and I don’t take orders from any Member of the House.
Mr Rutnah: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thirdly and finally, Madam Speaker,
whether the Ag. Prime Minister is aware that Members of the Board by virtue of the Articles of
Association of Air Mauritius could have voted over the phone to manifest whatever they wanted
to?
The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, as to the whereabouts of Mr Pillay, I cannot
reply to that. Secondly, as to the notice, we agree it was short. I have explained why it was
called at short notice. But also it is good to say that - I am told - it was legally in order for it to be
called at short notice. There were previous occasions when this has happened. As far as the
Articles of Association is concerned, I have not read the Articles of Association to say what sort
28
of requirement is needed, but it is usual for people to attend Board Meetings via digital
communication.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan!
Mr Bhagwan: Madam Speaker, can the Ag. Prime Minister inform the House whether he
has taken cognizance that there has been unanimity among the staff of Air Mauritius at all levels
concerning this problem and, in fact, what has happened really is that M. Pillay a été victime
d’un complot ourdi par le Senior Adviser, M. Maunthrooa, en complicité avec M. Suddhoo, le
Chairman, parce que M. Pillay était un obstacle à leur mauvaise pratique de gestion?
(Interruptions)
The Ag. Prime Minister: The hon. Member is just saying something without giving any
evidence, just a general statement that there is a complot. Complot for what? We don’t know. I
have no information of any complot, Madam Speaker. The information that I have given, the
information that the Chairman has given, I am going by that, Madam Speaker.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo!
Mr Ganoo: Can I ask the hon. Ag. Prime Minister whether, in view of the reactions of
the trade unions and the employees, in view of the comments of hon. Minister Bhadain, in view
of the reaction of the small shareholders, Government would reconsider the possibility of
reintegrating Mr Megh Pillay?
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order, please!
The Ag. Prime Minister: Firstly, Madam Speaker, I think it is too late now. Too much
water has gone under the bridge for anything to happen on that score. And anyway, Madam
Speaker, again, not because I am answering this question that I have suddenly become the
Chairman of the Board or I am replacing the Board of Air Mauritius.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition!
Mr Bérenger: I am quite shocked by the attitude of Members of Government when hon.
Ganoo made the proposal that Mr Pillay be reinstated. This laughter! It seems that they are not
29
aware of the situation in the country. Can I ask the hon. Ag. Prime Minister whether he will
agree with me that the country outside has been shocked by the way Mr Megh Pillay has been
sacked – shocked - and that therefore the least that we can do is to agree to what I proposed in
the last part of my question, that is, both Boards - starting with the present Chairperson - of Air
Mauritius Limited and Air Mauritius Holdings Ltd. should be replaced? This is the least that the
country outside is expecting. Will he agree with me?
The Ag. Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, as I mentioned, the procedure for replacing
the Board is that we have to call an Annual General Meeting or a special General Meeting of
shareholders. I will obviously pass his request on to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister. That is, of
course, what I should do. But, Madam Speaker, what is important is that Government has
supported the decision of the Board of Directors so that the company may continue on its journey
towards profitability, on its journey towards servicing the needs of the country via, for example,
the Air Corridor, via what it is doing in Africa. The paramount consideration for Government is
that the Company Air Mauritius, given its prime role in the economy, should continue avec toute
la sérénité nécessaire and that it should continue on its way. That is, Madam Speaker, the
position of Government. That is why we are supporting the Board of Directors in their decision.
Madam Speaker, I will also say that there is obviously some uneasiness in the population and
that is the responsibility of the Board of Directors to communicate properly on this issue.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Time is over! Hon. Members, the Table has been advised that PQ
No. B/882 in regard to the Metro Express Project will now be replied by the hon. Minister of
Public Infrastructure and Land Transport. PQ No. B/885 in regard to the Community Service
Order Act will now be replied by the hon. Attorney General. Hon. Osman Mahomed!