POVERTY ERADICATION & MARSHALL PLAN AGAINST POVERTY – SUMS EARMARKED
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the
Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to poverty eradication, he
will state the –
(a)  number of adults/households who/that will be entitled to the payment of a
monthly subsistence allowance under the new proposed scheme, indicating the
–
(i)  criteria that will determine the quantum thereof payable thereto, and
(ii)  sums provided in the Budget for the payment thereof over the period
01 December 2016 to end June 2017, and
(b)  programmes and actions in the Marshall Plan Against Poverty that will be
implemented in 2016/2017, indicating the sums provided in the Budget for the
implementation thereof.
aaaaa
The Minister of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment (Mr P.
Roopun): Madam Speaker, with your permission, I will reply to this Private Notice Question.
I wish to thank the hon. Leader of Opposition for giving me the opportunity to
elaborate and shed light on the proposals contained in the Budget Speech with regard to the
payment of a Subsistence Allowance and the implementation of the recommendations made
in the Marshall Plan against Poverty.
Eradication of absolute poverty has always been the priority of priorities of this
Government since our taking over in December 2014. The Government Programme clearly
states at paragraph (20) thereof the elaboration of a medium to long term Marshall Plan to
combat poverty and social exclusion.
This was further reaffirmed in the Budget Speech of last year and also in the
Economic Vision Statement of the Prime Minister.
The Marshall Plan is a reality today, since we have even made provision for the
implementation of the flagship recommendations contained in the Plan as from this year.
With regard to part (a), I wish to inform the House that, as at to date, the income
threshold for the absolute poor is Rs6,200 per household per month irrespective of the family
9
size for Mauritius and Rs5,000 for Rodrigues. Presently, there are 13,267 households in
Mauritius and 1,400 households in Rodrigues who are registered and found eligible in the
Social Register of Mauritius (SRM) for support under the National Empowerment
Foundation’s (NEF) programmes and the Child Allowance respectively.
The monthly household threshold of Rs6,200 which was determined in 2012, is no
longer adequate and has already served its purpose. In our bid to find a fairer and more
equitable threshold, we have reviewed it taking into consideration international prevailing
methodologies for the determination of an appropriate poverty threshold for Mauritius
including Rodrigues. As per international poverty line of USD 1.25 a day per person, it
would have been lesser than what we are providing. At that level, the proportion of
households as per Statistics Mauritius (SM), in absolute poverty, is less than 1,000.
However, we have calculated the new Poverty threshold taking into consideration all
incomes derived by the poor households which stands at Rs2,720 per adult per month. This is
40 % higher than the World Bank threshold of US Dollar 3.10 Purchasing Power Parity (PPP)
equivalent to Rs1,938 per person per month for developing countries. For obvious reasons,
children under the age of 16 have been considered half of that amount.
The proportion of poor households, based on the World Bank threshold, is 1.73%
equivalent to 6,400 families or 2.7% of the number of poor persons representing 34,200
persons based on total income of the household including Rodrigues.
I wish to inform the House, that the above mentioned figures are mere estimates and
the actual figures can only be determined after a full-fledged survey which my Ministry will
carry out in collaboration with other stakeholders as from next week. For Rodrigues, the
survey will start at the beginning of September 2016.
The whole survey is expected to be completed by end of October this year which will
be followed by home visits with a view to calculating the assessed income through a revised
Proxy Means Test.
We are confident that payment of this income support will be effective as from
December 2016.
I seize this opportunity to seek the collaboration of all Members to sensitize poor
people of their Constituencies who fall within the new poverty threshold to register
themselves at the Registration Centres that will be communicated in the Press.
With regard to part (a) (i), the House will note that the eligibility threshold per adult
per month is Rs2,720 while, depending on the family size, the maximum threshold for a
household will be Rs9,520 per month. For the benefit of Members, I am circulating a copy of
10
the new thresholds. Just as an example, I may state that for one adult and two children the
new threshold will come to Rs5,440, for two adults and two children, the new threshold will
be Rs8,160 and for two adults and three children it will come to Rs9,520. The sum to be
disbursed will be the difference between the threshold and the assessed income. For example,
for a household of two adults and two children, the new threshold being Rs8,160 per month.
If the assessed income of the household stands at Rs5,000 per month, the additional amount
eligible to be paid to this household will be the difference between the assessed income and
the new threshold, i.e. Rs3,160 per month.
As I stated earlier, the new threshold is fairer and more equitable as larger families
will now qualify for support as compared to the current uniform threshold of Rs6,200 .
Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that all support provided by NEF is
already subject to a social contract which is a mutual agreement between the beneficiary and
NEF. This monthly Subsistence Allowance is a new scheme to empower the vulnerable
households under the social contract which will run for two years and will be reviewed
accordingly.
With your permission, Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that we have
already secured the assistance of UNDP to review the existing social contract with a view to
making it more appropriate and effective. In addition, the UNDP Team will also assist in the
restructure of NEF and the setting up of an appropriate Management Information System
(MIS) for better monitoring and evaluation of individual households who will be
accompanied and handheld during this period of two years.
I am confident that with these new measures, we are adopting a holistic approach in
our fight against the scourge of absolute poverty. The households will no longer be left on
their own as they will always be supported by a Case Management Officer of the NEF.
Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) (ii) - payment of monthly Subsistence
Allowance, the amount as provided in the Budget is Rs200 m. for Financial Year 2016/2017
and Rs300 m. for Financial Year 2017/2018.
With regard to part (b), the Marshall Plan has made a series of actionable programs to
be implemented over the short, medium and long term by several Ministries including,
amongst others, Education, Housing, Labour, Environment, Social Security, Gender, Youth
and Sports, Health.
As the House is aware, several of these actions have already been initiated in the
Budget Speech for those eligible under SRM. Provision made in Financial Year 2016/2017 is
as follows -
11
1.  Rs 200 Million  Subsistence allowance based on the new poverty threshold
2.  Rs 60 Million  Educational support as follows -
- A one off School Completion Premium of -
• Rs15,000 for students successfully completing the Grade 9
level under the nine year schooling;
• Rs25,000 for students successfully completing School
Certificate or equivalent vocational qualifications;
• Rs35,000 for students successfully completing Higher
School Certificate or equivalent vocational qualifications -
This amount will be credited in a savings account opened in the
name of the child and can only be accessed when the latter reaches
18 years. This amount can be used by the child to pursue further
education or set up a small business.
3.  Rs3 Million Community based school to be implemented in five ZEP schools on
a pilot basis by the Ministry of Education;
4.  Rs4 Million  Crèche Voucher Scheme, i.e. an increase from Rs1,500 to Rs2,000
per child;
5.  Rs30 Million Cash grant for purchase of school materials as follows -
Rs1,500 for Pre-Primary and Primary students, and
Rs2,000 for Secondary including Pre-Voc and Tertiary students;
6.  Rs10 Million  to offer a second chance for students for exam resits at SC and HSC
levels under the Vote of the Ministry of Social Security;
7.  Rs15 Million  Funeral Grant will be increased from Rs4,950 to Rs10,000 under
the Vote of the Ministry of Social Security;
8.  Rs350,000  in respect of fire victims to enable them to secure accommodation
for a maximum period of six months, i.e. Rs5,000 per month under
the Vote of the Ministry of Social Security;
12
9.  Review of CSR by the setting up of a National CSR Foundation whereby, at least, 50%
of CSR funds collected will be channelled to the Foundation;
10. Rs10 Million for recruitment of 50 Case Management Officers and Psychologists at the
NEF, including Rodrigues, in the context of the reorganisation of the core activities of
the case workers;
11. Rs200 Million for the New Decent Shelters Programme. A Committee is currently
working on its implementation.
Madam Speaker, I am confident that the series of measures enunciated in the Budget
Speech, and which we are implementing, will undoubtedly bring about substantial
improvement in the living conditions of those in extreme poverty.
Mr Bérenger: I am quite surprised that it is the Minister of Social Integration who is
replying to the PNQ. I refer to paragraph 299 of the Budget Speech, where it is announced
that a new monthly subsistence allowance scheme will be set up, and it says ‘(…) a new
scheme under which every adult on the Social Register will be entitled to a monthly
subsistence allowance (…)’ and so on. My first question to the Government is: Will that
monthly subsistence allowance be paid, as is spelt out in the Budget Speech, to every adult or
to every household?
Mr Roopun: Madam Speaker, as I stated, it is going to be paid to households on the
basis of the number of persons within that family.
Mr Bérenger: In the Budget Speech, it is said ‘every adult’, and when you turn it into
household, it divides by two. So, can I ask again? Are we going to stick to what is said in
the Budget Speech; that every adult will be paid that allowance? Or will it be every
household?
Mr Roopun: Madam Speaker, the threshold is per adult and the payment will be per
household.
Mr Bérenger: In the Budget Speech, the Minister says to every adult. Now, we have
been told that there is now going to be a full-fledged survey and so on. I want to have a
figure. How many adults as from 01 December are going to benefit from that new allowance?
Can I remind the Minister that, in the Estimates, for his own Ministry, Ministry of Social
13
Integration and Economic Empowerment, there is no question of a survey. It is said there is
no question of a survey, and I quote –
“(…) amongst the main achievements for financial year 2016/2017, registration of
13,267 households with a monthly income of less than Rs6,200 under the Social
Register of Mauritius.”
So, my second question is: Are we now going to carry out a survey or as promised by the
Minister of Finance, all these adults, all the 13,217 people who are on the Social Register of
Mauritius will be paid as at 01 September this new allowance?
Mr Roopun: Madam Speaker, first of all, allow me to lay a copy of the table which I
mentioned earlier. I wish to clarify one thing. When I came at the Ministry, there was no
Social Register, although - the ancient Government - since a few years ago, it was clearly
stated that all beneficiaries of the NEF should be registered under the SRM. The SRM was
based under a threshold of Rs6,200 per family, and this dates back to 2012. It was this
exercise that I carried out last year. This has been completed. Under this exercise, the amount
of Rs13,000 and something was found out, and it was on this basis that we effected all our
interventions last year. But the House will realise that this new threshold is something which
has been announced in this very Budget, and the whole calculation has now changed. It is
per capita based on a totally different mechanism. The amount itself has increased. It is for
this purpose that a fresh exercise will necessarily have to be carried out if we want to
implement the new measure under this Budget.
Mr Bérenger: My point is simple, Madam Speaker. We have had a speech from the
hon. Minister of Finance who says that every adult on the Social Register of Mauritius will be
paid this new allowance. The Minister concerned has said that there is an existing Social
Register with 13,267 households, and the Speech said that adults are going to be paid. So,
my question was simple. I do not want to hear about the new survey. Carry out the number
of surveys! But there is, according to your own Ministry - the Attorney General is going to
advise the other one! Keep to your place!
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order, please!
(Interruptions)
14
Mr Bérenger: My simple question is …
(Interruptions)
Yes, it is a shame what is taking place!
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order, please!
(Interruptions)
Order!
(Interruptions)
I am on my feet! I have said order!
(Interruptions)
Order!
Mr Bérenger: We have 13,267 households on the Social Register which the hon.
Minister has set up. Are they going - every adult - to be paid this special allowance? Yes or
no?
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Can I call the House to order, please! Hon. Leader of the
Opposition, you will have to ask your question to the Minister, and it is up to the Minister to
reply. Whatever happens in between is no concern of the House.
(Interruptions)
To the Minister!
(Interruptions)
This is what I am telling the Minister. He has to reply to your question, but whatever happens
in the Chamber is no concern of anybody.
Mr Roopun: Madam Speaker, I wish to repeat again. I am sure that the hon. Leader
of the Opposition will appreciate that whatever is in the Budget is done at the level of the
15
Ministry. Of course, we are consulted, but we should realise that these are two different
exercises. The first exercise carried out is, in fact, per household, but here we want to help the
poorest among the poor. A new mechanism is being established where it is going to be per
capita instead of being per household, with a cap of Rs9,520.
Mr Bérenger: I do not think it is worth carrying on, Madam Speaker. We have seen
that it is pure bluff as far as the eradication of poverty is concerned. I am not carrying
onward.
(Interruptions)
It should be a shame on him!
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order!
(Interruptions)
Order!
(Interruptions)
No, this is not acceptable! Hon. Leader of the Opposition, whatever you said is not
acceptable!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Leader of the Opposition, please withdraw those words ‘bous to lagel’, which have
been said!
(Interruptions)
Please! Please!
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, you have ruled! Yes, I withdraw! You have ruled!
In the recent past, when the Prime Minister said ‘shut up!’ to somebody, you have ruled that
it is parliamentary. So, shut up!
(Interruptions)
16
Madam Speaker: No! Hon. Leader of the Opposition, I am just drawing your
attention to the fact that whatever the Prime Minister said, he had withdrawn.
(Interruptions)
Hon. Leader of the Opposition, have you finished…
(Interruptions)
…others have questions!
Hon. Osman Mahomed, you have a question!
Mr Mahomed: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My question pertains to the Marshall
Plan. Now, in the Budget Speech, more specifically at paragraph 289 on the Marshall Plan,
provision is being made for Rs50 m. for 1,000 housing units. My first question is: does that
pertain to the Marshall Plan, and if so, what is the size of houses that is being envisaged,
because in the past when the Marshall Plan was being initiated, the question was to provide
larger houses because the hon. Minister rightly mentioned larger families are being catered
for, and whether the roof, instead of being Corrugated Iron Sheet (CIS) at the moment, will
be in concrete? Because we are talking about Rs500,000 per housing unit?
Mr Roopun: The previous social housing was of an area of 31 m 2 . This is being
increased up to 50 m 2 , depending upon the size of the plot and it is going to be in concrete.
This is our intention: a concrete building up to 50m 2 .
Madam Speaker: Hon. Ramful!
Mr Ramful: May I refer the hon. Minister to the Household Budget Survey 2012
where the poverty line for two adults and two children, the average household income, was
calculated at Rs13,330. Now, with the new calculation that the hon. Minister has tabled, for
two adults and two children, the monthly income threshold has been reduced to Rs8,160 and
in 2012, there were 33,800 households which were within that threshold. Now, with this new
calculation, wouldn’t there be a number of those households which would be outside the
bracket?
Mr Roopun: Madam Speaker, today with this measure, we are concerned with
extreme poverty, absolute poverty and the other threshold relates to relative poverty. We
want, first of all, to deal with the poorest among the poorest, that is, those in extreme poverty
17
with this provision in our Budget. We are not, at this stage, concerned with those who are in
relative poverty. For those, we will have to seek other mechanisms.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Barbier!
Mr Barbier: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In his reply, the hon. Minister stated that
Rs3 m. will be allocated to the community-based schools and it concerns five schools, I
suppose, in the ZEP zone. May I know from the hon. Minister whether these schools have
already been identified, and if so, whether he will give us the list of schools which have been
identified?
Mr Roopun: The list has not yet been finalised. It is being worked out at the level of
the Ministry of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific Research.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo!
Mr Ganoo: Madam Speaker, I would like to ask the hon. Minister the following
question. Reference is, in fact, made to the Social Register in the Budget Speech by the hon.
Minister. Do we have a Social Register? Because there are questions which have been asked
in this very House under the previous Government, and we were told that this is a dynamic
register, and that people come in and get out and there is, in fact, nothing as a Social Register.
Isn’t this a confusing situation? Why does the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic
Development make mention in his speech about 6,400 families? He mentioned that there are
some 6,400 families still living below the absolute poverty threshold and in the Estimates,
reference is made to about 13,000 families in the same category as has just been mentioned
by the hon. Leader of the Opposition.
Mr Roopun: I wish, once again, to clarify this issue which, I think, is very pertinent.
The 13,000 was based on the threshold of Rs6,200 per family and it was on this basis that we
conducted the registration last year. And now, it is completely a new mechanism that is
going to be put into place, based on this threshold per adult equivalent of Rs2,720. It means
that within the first list of 13,000, we will have to revalidate and find out, because within that
register we did not take into consideration the number of persons per family, but it was based
essentially on the household. We are coming with a completely new system of calculation
which is fairer and which, we believe, is going to target most specifically those who are the
poorest among the poor.
18
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon Rutnah!
Mr Roopun: Excuse me, Madam Speaker! So far as the Social Register is
concerned, the one which has been prepared and which is mentioned in the Supplement under
my Ministry, we do have a Social Register right now which is with the Ministry of Social
Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions, and I may add also that in this Social
Register, we have been able not only to have a list of those families, but we know exactly per
village how many households are on this Register. We know in each and every Municipal
Council, in each Ward, which are those families. We have also worked with Statistics
Mauritius to know specifically, geographically where they are situated, and even within each
village, it has been divided amongst enumeration areas and we know exactly where they are.
Now, we wish to ascertain that there is no exclusion error. The exercise is going to be carried
out with the help of the community, and then with this database, for the first time, we will be
able to come with a proper and clear way of fighting poverty. But, in the meantime, we had a
new policy designed through this Budget. We will have to adjust and take into consideration
these new factors, and then, we are going to proceed with our strategy as planned earlier.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah!
Mr Rutnah: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Will the hon. Minister agree with me that
in order to eradicate absolute poverty, it is not only about the amount of money allocated to
poor families, but in line with paragraph 302 of the Budget Speech, at page 41, where this
Government proposes to introduce major programme to empower these families to break
away from poverty cycle and stand on their own feet, that is, other than monetary terms, this
Government undertakes to bring other sorts of programmes in order to empower these
families?
Mr Roopun: In fact, Madam Speaker, the payment of this income support is the first
step towards empowerment. We want, first of all, to ensure that those families have the strict
minimum for their daily needs, and from there, then comes the major challenge. The major
challenge is to take all those families out of assistance and try to empower them. This is
where the new role of the National Empowerment Foundation (NEF) is going to be very
important. This is why we are enlisting the support of further field workers who are going to
manage the families. They are going to hand-hold those families and try to take them out of
19
poverty, help them in different manners, try to train them, be at their side, support them and
ensure that they graduate out of poverty and they become independent and they fully
integrate in society, and can participate fully in economic and other social activities designed
for each and every Mauritian.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition!
Mr Bérenger: I don’t have any further question.
Madam Speaker: You don’t have any further question. I am sorry then, because the
privilege is for you. Time is over!