LIGHT RAIL TRANSIT PROJECT
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the
Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the Light Rail
Transit Project, he will state -
(a)  the amount of money spent in relation thereto as at to date;
(b)  if a new feasibility study will be carried out therefor, indicating the
involvement of the Singapore Cooperation Enterprise in relation thereto, if
any;
(c)  how the Road Decongestion Programme will be amended to accommodate
same taking into consideration the involvement of the Republic of South
Korea therein, if any, following the recent signature of the Framework
Cooperation Agreement therewith, and
(d)  if a new Road Decongestion/Light Rail Transit Master Plan will be proposed.
aaaaa
Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the hon. Leader of the Opposition
to ask this question as it relates to two of the most ambitious projects ever designed in
Mauritius.
Madam Speaker, as the House is aware, the country is faced with major transport
network difficulties which cause acute traffic congestion problems especially during peak
hours at the entrance and exit of Port Louis. The Road Decongestion Programme is one of
the most important road infrastructure projects ever embarked by any Government. It will
lay the foundation of a modern Mauritius and it will help to alleviate the road traffic
congestion problem, which is being aggravated with the increasing number of vehicles.
It will enhance mobility and fluidity especially among the main conurbations along
Curepipe – Port Louis corridor. This is as regards infrastructure and mobility.
As regard to Mass Transport System, the LRT has been one of the most ambitious
projects for the transportation of passengers from the Upper Plaine Wilhems to Port Louis
and it has been around here since 1989.
With regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed that the Mauritius Light Rail
Transit System Project was initiated under a Government to Government Agreement between
10
the Government of Mauritius and the Government of Singapore represented by the Singapore
Cooperation Enterprise (SCE).
A feasibility study was undertaken by the SCE in October 2013, prior to the Project.
The estimated capital cost of the Project is Rs24.8 billion in 2013.
I am informed that Rs539,226,992 have been spent as at date on the LRT Project as
follows -
SN 
1  Singapore Cooperation Enterprise (Consultancy
Services)
Rs411,692,528
2  KDA Geo Systems Co Ltd for land survey and
data processing services
Rs25,462,250
3  Water Research Co Ltd for geotechnical survey  Rs5,842,657
4  P & P Link for Communication port folio  Rs8,096,230
5  MRA (Tax Deduction at Sources TDS) & Value
Added Tax
Rs86,941,387
6  Grant Thornton for Household & Traffic Surveys  Rs1,150,000
7  Legal Fees  Rs41,940
Total  Rs539, 226,992
Madam Speaker, with regard to part (b) of the question, I wish to inform the House
that the Singapore Cooperation Enterprise team was engaged in 2012 to undertake the
Feasibility Study and Project Implementation Planning for the Mauritius Light Rapid Transit
system. Following the successful completion of that stage, the SCE team was assigned the
duty to undertake the role of Transaction Management and Transaction Advisor for the
project’s procurement.
11
Today, in view of the significant work already done and the sum paid to SCE, no
feasibility study is envisaged. Discussions are currently being held with SCE with the view to
engage them to produce an update of the studies already completed.
In fact, Madam Speaker, a delegation of SCE has arrived yesterday to start
preliminary discussions on the matter.
With regard to part (c) of the question, I wish to inform the House that the Road
Decongestion Programme will involve the following components -
(i)  A1-M1 Link Road and Bridge over GRNW linking Coromandel to Motorway
M1 at Soreze;
(ii)  Ring Road Phases 2 & 3 (including 2 Tunnels); Signal Mountain and Colline
Monneron;
(iii)  Quay D/Freeport Roundabout, and
(iv)  Jumbo/Phoenix/Dowlut Roundabout linking it to the Terre Rouge/Verdun
Road.
As announced in the last year’s Budget, my Ministry had initiated necessary steps for
the implementation of the Programme as from this year.
I wish, however, to inform the House that the Road Decongestion Programme on its
own would not have solved the problem of traffic congestion. This is the reason why since
the start we knew that we have to come ultimately with an alternative mode of transport
which would be complementary to the Road Decongestion Programme and that is the key
word.
While the Road Decongestion Programme will ease fluidity of movement of vehicles,
the LRT will ensure mobility of people and facilitate the access to jobs and other activities.
Madam Speaker, the Road Decongestion Programme is therefore complementary to
the possibility of having an LRT. It is visioned to have a road transport system with a three
tier structure. It is like ground plus two. What exists actually will form the base, that is, the
first level. The Road Decongestion Programme will be the second level and the LRT will
represent the third level. All the levels will be integrated to provide greater mobility and
fluidity in the transport system for the next 30 years.
12
Madam Speaker, as I indicated earlier, the Ministry had already initiated procedures
for the implementation of the Road Decongestion Programme as from this year as follows -
•  Ring Roads Phases 2 and 3;
•  Quay D/Freeport Roundabout;
•  A1 –M1 Link Road, and
•  Phoenix/Jumbo Roundabout.
Bids have already been invited for consultancy in respect of the following projects in
September 2015 -
(i)  The grade separated junction at Phoenix, and
(ii)  A1 – M1 Link Road.
However, following my visit in November last to South Korea, I was very impressed
by the Korean state-of-the-art technology and knowhow in the fields of roads, bridges and
tunnels construction, I invited them to make a technical and financial audit of our RDP. In
fact, a Korean team of consulting and engineering firms visited Mauritius in November 2015
and made an initial assessment. They came on a second visit in March 2016 to make a
complete technical and financial assessment of the Road Decongestion Programme which
had started with Rs34 billion, but which had been reduced to Rs15 billion.
They submitted their final report in April 2016 and necessary procedures were
initiated in accordance with the provisions of the Public Procurement Act to consider the
possibility of an implementation of the RDP under the G to G agreement. In fact, a
Memorandum of Understanding was signed between the RDA and the Korea Expressway
Corporation on 05 April 2016.
A due diligence exercise was carried out on the proposal of the Korean Team to
ensure that Government is obtaining value for money. The due diligence exercise has been
completed and submitted to the High-Powered Committee set up under the chairmanship of
the Secretary to Cabinet and Head of the Civil Service. The report of the High-Powered
Committee will be submitted shortly to Government for consideration and a decision.
Madam Speaker, it is not proposed to amend the Road Decongestion Programme to
accommodate the LRT. However, in view of the different alignments of the LRT and the
RDP, it is proposed to study how best we could integrate the transport system along the two
alignments.
13
Madam Speaker, regarding part (d) of the question, there exist a Master Plan for the
RDP and a Master Plan for the LRT. It is, therefore, not proposed to carry out a separate
Master Plan. It is more appropriate to see how to integrate the two from the Town and
Country Planning perspective to see to it that the project can be implemented efficiently and
that they are financially viable if Government decides to go on the LRT Project.
Madam Speaker, I wish to add that at all times the RDP has taken into account the
alignment of the LRT. As I mentioned in the House last week, all the 92 plots of land
acquired for that purpose have been maintained.
Mr Bérenger: There is a last part.
Mr Bodha: Yes, I answered part (d).
Madam Speaker: It has been answered.
Mr Bodha: There exist a Master Plan for the RDP and a Master Plan for the LRT. It
is, therefore, not proposed to carry out a separate Master Plan. It is more appropriate to see
how to integrate the two from the Town and Country Planning exercise to see to it that the
project be implemented efficiently and that they are financially viable if Government goes
with the LRT system.
Mr Bérenger: Does this figure of the funds already spent on the LRT project include
land acquisition and, if not, do we have the figure for land acquisition so far?
Mr Bodha: No. It does not include the acquisition of land. In fact, this is being done
at the level of the Ministry of Housing and Lands. From what I have heard, it is around Rs2
billion.
Mr Bérenger: If I can move to the second part, that is, the LRT itself, we have been
told that there will not be a new feasibility study carried out, but an update of the 2013
feasibility study. Do we have, at this stage, the latest estimate of what the LRT project will
now cost? It was estimated at Rs24.8 billion in 2013.
Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, this is going to be the starting point. In fact, we have not
started discussions at all so far.
Mr Bérenger: We were told last week that there had been a meeting held under the
chairmanship of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister. Anything new! Can I ask whether there has
been development since then and whether Minutes of that meeting are available?
14
Mr Bodha: It was a meeting, in fact, to address the issue of the roadmap if we were to
consider the LRT as a feasible option.
Mr Bérenger: At this stage, do we know whether, if we go ahead with the LRT, it
will be a PPP project and how it would be financed, and can we know the financial
involvement of India eventually therein?
Mr Bodha: No. We are not yet there, Madam Speaker.
Mr Bérenger: Well, I wonder whether we will ever get there. Did I hear the hon.
Minister say that the tracé itself will be re-examined, will be updated or re-examined by the
same Singapore people?
Mr Bodha: What I said is that we have an alignment which has been there. This
alignment has at all times been taken into consideration when we designed the RDP; all the
plots which have been acquired along the alignment have been preserved. So, the alignment
is there. It is intact.
Mr Bérenger: Can I know whether, at this stage, the Government has taken a decision
whether it is going to proceed the way that the previous Government did? According to
expert advice that I have received from the African Development Bank and other
development institutions, it was very dangerous the decision that was taken, that is, to allot
one tender, one contract, to one firm or group of firms to design and construct the LRT, and
then later on choose another firm to operate. The expert advice I got, this is the last thing to
do because if the operator has not been involved in the first two parts thereof, it is going to
raise all sorts of objections. There are going to be extra costs, amendments and so on. So,
has a decision been taken at this stage now that we are envisaging to get going with the LRT
again, to have the three stages, that is, design, construction and operation allotted to the same
consortium or group of companies?
Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, in fact, we are just starting again. What we are going to
do is, we have all the studies which have been carried out by the Singapore team. It is going
to be actualised and then we will sit down and see what are the implications as regard to the
roadmap. That was, in fact, the purpose of the meeting with the Prime Minister; it is to see
what is the roadmap as regard to the technical, later the financial. First of all, we have to see
the project from the reassessment and the re-evaluation as at 2016.
Mr Bérenger: Yes, but I am sure that the hon. Minister will agree with me that this is
what took place before. The Singaporeans did the feasibility study. They took charge of
15
everything and yet, according to me, the wrong decision was taken to proceed in two stages:
design and construction, and then later to get somebody else to operate. My question is: have
we decided not to follow that very dangerous route anew?
Mr Bodha: There is, in fact, no decision which has been taken, but I agree with the
hon. Leader of the Opposition on one matter. The most important thing in whatever we do in
infrastructure or major project is the technology. You should do it in such a manner that you
have the best technology at the best price. So, we are going to reassess what has been done by
the Singapore team and see what is the best way forward. The hon. Leader of the Opposition
mentioned the three stages. We will see whether from what has been already done, how to
move in such a manner that it is in the best interest of the country and it is in the best interest
of the country to be able to provide this project to the nation.
Mr Bérenger: Last week, only a week ago, I move on to the Road Decongestion
Programme, the hon. Minister said that he had absolutely no problem. He said he has
absolutely no problem: “Of course, we can table the Memorandum of Understanding.” Can I
know why it has not been…
Mr Bodha: I am sorry about that, Madam Speaker. We can table it. We will table it as
soon as we can today.
Mr Bérenger: And what about the report! He told us also last week that the report
from the Korean firm had already been received some time back and it was being examined.
Will it be made public?
Mr Bodha: First of all, Madam Speaker, it is a 300-page report. Second, there has
been a due diligence report which has been worked upon it. Thirdly, there has been a High-
Powered Committee which met and discussed the due diligence report. The whole document
is going now to Cabinet. Once Cabinet decides one way or the other, all the documents will
be laid on the Table of the National Assembly. I said that we are going to do this in all
transparency. It has to be done in the best interest of Mauritius. And I said that all the
problems we have had in the past like financial overruns, delay, quality of project, delivery
will have to be taken care of. Nous n’avons pas droit à l’erreur. Nous n’avons pas droit aux
erreurs que nous avons commises dans le passé, Madame la présidente.
Mr Bérenger: I am glad to hear that. Can I have a point of clarification? Because I
have listened to the hon. Minister carefully last week and I read the verbatim and at one
point, at page 62 of the verbatim, this is what the hon. Minister said –
16
“From what I understand (…)
I know that the hon. Minister understands many things.
(…) KEC, that is the Korean Company, is the regulator, the builder.”
Can I have a point clarification whether they are regulator, a builder or both and anything
else?
Mr Bodha: The Korea Expressway Corporation, in fact, is the regulator and the builder
and the manager of about 8,000 kms of motorway in South Korea. They also do the
procurement, the engineering and they manage the tunnels. In fact, there are two things I
have said, may I say three things, Madam Speaker? Firstly, Korean technology has built the
highest building in the world today, 126 towers, the Burj Al Khalifa in Dubai. They have
built a motorway of 34 kms four-ways on the sea in Korea and they have built, now, a tunnel
of 12 kms in the mountains, four lanes which I have been able to visit. So, the Korea
Expressway Corporation, in fact, is the regulator and also the manager of the main projects in
Korea.
Mr Bérenger: But not the builder! If I heard the hon. Minister correctly, he said on
several occasions: “They have also built this, built that”. I take it that they plan things; they
regulate, but are not builders. I take it they tender out the works for the building of those
projects.
Mr Bodha: What KEC does, in fact, is the engineering, the procurement and the
construction in relation to the main contractors in South Korea. The main contractors in
South Korea, we have: Daewoo Engineering, Samsung Engineering which has, in fact, built
the building of the Burj Al Khalifa. Let me now just give an idea. They built the Barakah
Nuclear Power Station in Abu Dhabi; 387 kms motorway in Algeria. They are building the
tunnels…
(Interruptions)
They do the EPC, that is, the Engineering Procurement and the Construction is done by the
other main contractors which are also Government companies.
Mr Bérenger: That is what I wanted to hear that they are not builders. They tender out
the works contrary to what the hon. Minister said last week. So, did I hear correctly that, as
far as the Road Decongestion Programme is concerned, at this stage, none of its components
have been left out including, I take it, for example, the tunnel coming into Port Louis?
17
Mr Bodha: The RDP is going to be implemeneted as it is with all the components. On
the contratry, in fact, the former proposition, which was by Maynard which was, in fact,
designed by the former Government, proposed a 1.2 km tunnel under the Signal Mountain
which would be a two-lane tunnel. What the Koreans have proposed is a four-lane tunnel
below the Signal Mountain and we would have co-exited around Dauguet. We thought about
a viaduct along the Mountagne Coupée near the Champ de Mars. What the Koreans have
proposed, in fact, is to dig a tunnel under Colline Monneron so that this will then go beyond
Cité Martial to link up with the great seperator coming from the North.
Mr Bérenger: On the last part of my question, maybe the hon. Minister didn’t get the
point which I was making. The hon. Minister has informed us that there was a Master Plan
for the LRT by whatever name called. There is a Master Plan for the Road Decongestion
Programme, again by whatever name called, and they are going to be merged in one way or
the other. My question is: don’t we need a Road Master Plan for the whole of the island?
Because what has been going on at the same time, before we were going for LRT, then we
went for decongestion and in the meantime, fiscal policy is encouraged, purchase of cars,
leasing and so on. Bus companies have been encouraged to borrow billions. So, there is no
overall Master Plan for road traffic in Mauritius. My question is: is that not required now
before we embark again on the LRT project to have une vue d’ensemble, a Master Plan for
road traffic planning and development in Mauritius?
Mr Bodha: That’s a good idea, but we would like to mention to the hon. Leader of
the Opposition that this is the programme of the Labour Party and the MMM about road
infrastructure. It was exactly what we are doing now. To come back to the …
(Interruptions)
Yes!
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: No interruption, please! No interruption!
Mr Bodha: But, as regard the major alignments, I have them here, Madam Speaker.
In fact, there are two connecting points. One is Phoenix where we have the three
roundabouts and the great separator and the last one is at the terminal in Port Louis. So, we
have the two alignments here. And then, what I said is that the alignment as regards the LRT
has never been tampered with. It has always remained there. The land which has been
acquired has always remained there. Again, it is a decision of Government. If Government
18
decides to go ahead with both projects, both projects can be done. I also said that I totally
agree with the hon. Leader of the Opposition. We will go to Cabinet, most probably this
week, and all that we are going to do with South Korea will be made public once Government
has taken a decision. I can say that it is the best solution we can have. The Koreans have also
proposed in their package – because it goes beyond the building of the roads or the bridges or
the tunnels - that they will work on a road Master Plan as well within the package that we are
going to sign with them, again if Government decides to do so.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Osman Mahomed!
Mr Mahomed: My question pertains to the LRT. Would the hon. Minister kindly
confirm to the House whether during the days of the previous Government, the way leading
to the LRT Project, there was a High-Powered Committee comprising of the then Secretary to
Cabinet and Head of Civil Service, the Solicitor-General, Supervising Officer of the MPI,
CEO of the then MLTA and, most importantly, a Probity Officer who is a senior member of
the Judiciary and that this Committee has verified all the transactions and have found out that
everything was in order and for the MLRT Project to be implemented as a priority
concurrently and not as a second storey or third storey of the building; he just gave analogy
that he is proceeding with?
Mr Bodha: Whether there was a High-Powered Committee which stated that it was
the best project, I think this is yet to be proven.
Dr. Sorefan: The hon. Minister has mentioned due diligence on the Korean
Company, the Korea Expressway Corporation. Will the hon. Minister confirm to this House
whether this company is not a private company - he seems to give us the impression that it is
a Government entity, but according to my information, it is a private company – and whether
this due diligence was done by RDA with the help of the Chairperson, Mr Wong So, who, I
understand, has a relationship with the Koreans?
Mr Bodha: I would like to say this loud and clear to the nation, as my friend, hon.
Bhagwan, usually says. The poor daughter-in-law of Mr Wong So has a snack in Grand’Baie.
What can this have with a project of this magnitude, Madam Speaker! And, I said once this
has gone to Cabinet and Cabinet has approved this, all the documents, the Mission Report,
the due diligence exercise and the High-Powered Committee Report will be laid on the Table
of the National Assembly.
19
Mr Rutnah: In relation to the breakdown of the figures that the hon. Minister was
giving earlier on, the hon. Minister quoted legal fees. Can he enlighten this House who were
appointed as legal advisers in relation to this project, how much fees have been paid so far
and when were those legal advisers appointed? If the hon. Minister does not have the
information now, perhaps it can be tabled later.
Mr Bodha: No, I don’t have the answer, but I think I can provide it later.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan!
(Interruptions)
No cross-talking, please!
Mr Bhagwan: The hon. Minister has said on many occasions, if ever Government
goes ahead with the LRT Project. Can the hon. Minister inform the House whether local
authorities are in the picture because, in the past, local authorities were not in the picture and
within the tracé, there are places where market has to be removed or other utilities? So, can
the hon. Minister inform the House whether in the costing of the whole project, funds will be
given to local authorities from the start to the end so that, at the same time, provisions can be
made to move utilities such as markets and other items?
Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, I have been made to understand that this LRT file was a
top secret file in the Prime Minister’s Office and all the RDA…
(Interruptions)
Yes. The RDA people never knew about the alignment. Everything was done at the level of
the Prime Minister’s Office. That’s why when hon. Mahomed said…
(Interruptions)
…said that there was a High-Powered Committee which analysed, I said this has yet to be
proven.
(Interruptions)
Well, I think it is very important. Everybody ….
(Interruptions)
20
…all the stakeholders - because this is going to be a major project - again I say if
Government comes with a decision to go about it, all the stakeholders have to be taken on
board because this will change the face of Mauritius totally. As regards the funding, I think
we will have to consider that matter as well.
Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister just mentioned the opacity in the past
and we are talking about a huge project. So, may I get the assurance from the hon. Minister
that in respect of all tender documents and all agreements that are going to be signed, whether
with the designers, the contractors and the operators, there would be no confidentiality clause
so that in this House we will be able to ask questions and get answers?
Mr Bodha: I do not want to be called by any names, Madam Speaker. This is a very
important project. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister has said that all the projects that we do should
be done in transparency, no cost overrun, no delay and there should be quality. I can give the
assurance to the House and I said if Government tomorrow decides on the G to G with South
Korea, the Mission Report, the Due Diligence Report and the High-Powered Committee
Report will be laid on the Table of the National Assembly.
Madam Speaker: Last question, hon. Leader of the Opposition!
Mr Bérenger: I think I heard that as far as the Road Decongestion Programme is
concerned, when the report of the Koreans will have been examined and so on, it will go to
Cabinet next week, from what I heard. Can we have an indication of a time frame, by what
time the updating of the feasibility study for the LRT should be ready and when can we
expect, therefore, that to be before Cabinet?
Mr Bodha: In fact, as regards the RDP, it is going to Cabinet this week if the Rt. hon.
Prime Minister, of course, agrees to it.
As regards the LRT, we are having the first discussions today and tomorrow. And, we
know the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, if decisions have to be taken, they would be taken as fast
as we can.
As regards the RDP, Rs2.5 billion have already been earmarked for this year and
works are supposed to start in December.
Madam Speaker: Time is over! Hon. Dr. Sorefan!