PROSECUTION COMMISSION BILL & CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL - INTRODUCTION
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Rt. hon.
Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and National
Development Unit whether he will state if a Ministerial Committee has been set up to discuss
proposed amendments to section 72 of the Constitution to provide for the creation of a
Prosecution Commission and, if so, indicate –
(a) the terms of reference and composition thereof;
(b) if consideration will be given for all the documents circulated in relation to the
said proposed amendments since 2000 to be rendered public, and
(c) if it is proposed to introduce a Constitution Amendment Bill with the objective of
amending section 72 of the Constitution to provide for the creation of the said
Prosecution Commission before the end of the year and, if so, indicate how it will
10
take into consideration the Judgment of the Lords of the Judicial Committee of
the Privy Council in the case of Jeewan Mohit v/s The Director of Public
Prosecutions of Mauritius in 2006.
aaaaa
The Prime Minister: Mr Deputy Speaker, proposals for the review of Section 72 of the
Constitution have been on the agenda since 2003. This was following the decision of the then
Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) in the case of State versus Cehl Fakimeeah, whereby the
DPP advised no further action.
Further, I wish to refer the House to a statement made by the Leader of the Opposition,
who was then Prime Minister, following the judgment of the Intermediate Court relating to the
case of rape where Mrs S. O. was the complainant. Let me quote what was reported in the Press
regarding the statement of the then Prime Minister, now Leader of the Opposition, I quote -
«Le Premier Ministre partage la colère et l’indignation de S. O. Il l’a dit hier lors de
sa conférence de presse. Il compte rencontrer S. O. bientôt pour lui exprimer sa
'solidarité’ et son ‘encouragement.’ Le PM pense ‘comme bien d’autres que le DPP
aurait dû envoyer le cas aux assises et non en Cour intermédiaire. Le Premier
Ministre estime également que le magistrat aurait pu imposer une sentence
‘consecutive’ (8 ans + 5 ans), au lieu de la sentence ‘concurrents’ dans ce cas de
‘gang rape’ et de sodomie. Selon le Premier Ministre, l’affaire S. O. vient une fois de
plus relancer le débat sur les pouvoirs absolus du DPP…»
Mr Deputy Speaker, the then Prime Minister, now Leader of the Opposition, was also
reported to have said, I quote -
“Il y unanimité au gouvernement et à la présidence pour revoir les pouvoirs du DPP,
Maurice étant le seul pays au monde où le DPP détient le pouvoir absolu.»
The hon. Leader of the Opposition, himself, has admitted that there was a need to review
the powers of the DPP. Accordingly, in 2003, he, himself, as the then Prime Minister instructed
the Attorney General’s Office to prepare draft Bills with a view to making provisions for the
accountability by the DPP in the discharge of his functions.
Thereafter, draft Bills, including Bills for amending the Constitution, were prepared by
the Attorney General’s Office for consideration by Government.
11
Subsequently, on 23 September 2004, the then Prime Minister chaired a meeting which
considered the setting up of a Prosecution Authority consisting of the DPP and two deputies to
form a collegiate authority. The current DPP, who was then acting Parliamentary Counsel, was
part of the meeting.
Further, in reply to Parliamentary Question B/217 at the sitting of 20 April 2004, the
Leader of the Opposition who was then Prime Minister informed the House that consideration is
still being given to amending the constitutional provisions relating to the powers of the Director
of Public Prosecutions in view of the fact that the DPP is the only institution that does not have
to answer to anybody, including the Supreme Court, for any of its decisions or actions or lack
thereof.
On 25 April 2006, the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council delivered judgment in the
case of Mohit v/s DPP where the Privy Council stated, inter alia, I quote -
“Under the Constitution of Mauritius, the DPP is a public officer. He has powers
conferred on him by the Constitution and enjoys no powers derived from the royal
prerogative. Like any other public officer he must exercise his powers in accordance
with the Constitution and other relevant laws, doing so independently of any other
person or authority. Again, like any other public officer, he must exercise his powers
lawfully, properly and rationally, and an exercise of power that does not meet those
criteria is open to challenge and review in the courts. The grounds of potential
challenge certainly include those listed in Matalulu, but need not necessarily be
limited to those listed. But the establishment in the Constitution of the office of DPP
and the assignment to him and him alone of the powers listed in section 72(3) of the
Constitution; the wide range of factors relating to available evidence, the public
interest and perhaps other matters which he may properly take into account; and, in
some cases, the difficulty or undesirability of explaining his decisions: these factors
necessarily mean that the threshold of a successful challenge is a high one. It is,
however, one thing to conclude that the courts must be very sparing in their grant of
relief to those seeking to challenge the DPP's decisions not to prosecute or to
discontinue a prosecution, and quite another to hold that such decisions are immune
12
from any review at all, as a line of English authority relating to the DPP and other
prosecuting authorities has shown.”
Mr Deputy Speaker, in regard to part (a) of the question, the composition of the
Ministerial Committee which has been tasked to fine-tune two draft Bills vetted by the Attorney
General’s Office is as follows -
(a)  the Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External Communications;
(b)  the Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities;
(c)  the Minister of Finance and Economic Development;
(d)  the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport;
(e)  the Minister of Health and Quality of Life;
(f)  the Minister of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment;
(g)  the Attorney General, and
(h)  the Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms.
Mr Deputy Speaker, as to part (b) of the question, the hon. Leader of the Opposition is
fully aware that the documents he is referring to are privileged documents and are not meant to
be made public.
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in regard to part (c) of the question, the grounds of potential
challenge of a decision of the DPP are at pages 12 and 13 of the case of Mohit v DPP and are as
follows -
“It may be accepted, however, that a purported exercise of power would be reviewable if
it were made -
1.  In excess of the DPP’s constitutional or statutory grants of power - such as
an attempt to institute proceedings in a court established by a disciplinary
law (see s 96(4)(a)).
2.  When, contrary to the provisions of the Constitution, the DPP could be
shown to have acted under the direction or control of another person or
13
authority and to have failed to exercise his or her own independent
discretion - if the DPP were to act upon a political instruction the decision
could be amenable to review.
3.  In bad faith, for example, dishonesty. An example would arise if a
prosecution were commenced or discontinued in consideration of the
payment of a bribe.
4.  In abuse of the process of the court in which it was instituted, although the
proper forum for review of that action would ordinarily be the court
involved.
5.  Where the DPP has fettered his or her discretion by a rigid policy – e.g.
one that precludes prosecution of a specific class of offences.
There may be other circumstances not precisely covered by the above in which judicial
review of a prosecutorial discretion would be available. But contentions that the power
has been exercised for improper purposes not amounting to bad faith, by reference to
irrelevant considerations or without regard to relevant considerations or otherwise
unreasonably, are unlikely to be vindicated because of the width of the considerations to
which the DPP may properly have regard in instituting or discontinuing proceedings. Nor
is it easy to conceive of situations in which such decisions would be reviewable for want
of natural justice.”
The Court went on to question whether a mistaken view of the law by the DPP could ever
found a successful challenge, save perhaps where it had prompted a decision not to prosecute.
Given the fact that in the case of Mohit, the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council
stated that the threshold for reviewing of the decision of the DPP is a very high one and further
given that it was stated that the DPP must, like any other public officer, exercise his powers
lawfully, properly and rationally, it is considered that for the DPP’s decision to be successfully
challenged, it must be irrational, perverse or otherwise erroneous in law or on facts.
I have to inform the House that the Bill dealing with the Prosecution Commission Bill
and the Constitution (Amendment) Bill will be considered by Cabinet this Friday. In the
circumstances it would not be proper to disclose the contents of the Bills before Cabinet’s
approval. I can nevertheless reassure the House that the two Bills will not take away the rights
14
conferred on persons to seek a review of any decision of the DPP as determined in the case of
Mohit. Instead, the Bills aim to provide even more accountability in regard to the decisions of
the DPP.
In regard to part (c) of the question, the Leader of the Opposition who has been former
Prime Minister fully understands the workings of the Government. The proposed Prosecution
Commission Bill and Constitution (Amendment) Bill have to be approved by Cabinet before
they are circulated in the National Assembly.
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, this is exactly what will happen. As soon as the Government
agrees to these Bills, they will be circulated and the contents thereof will be made public.
However, I can assure the House that contrary to what was envisaged in 2003 by the hon.
Leader of the Opposition who was then Prime Minister whereby the Attorney General would be
giving instructions and guidelines to the DPP in his functions, my Government is respectful of
institutions and has the firm intention of creating an independent Prosecution Commission. The
Executive will not have any influence on the workings of the proposed Prosecution Commission,
and hence on the DPP.
Mr Bérenger: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has quoted what was
reported in the Press before 2005. There have been manipulated leaks in the Press recently on
documents prepared by Government before the end of 2005. Will not the Rt. hon. Prime
Minister agree with me – although he said that it’s privileged information – that all those
documents referred to should be made public so that everybody knows in what context in
2003/2004 all this was discussed?
The Prime Minister: Well, I have already answered. We consider them privileged
documents and they cannot be made public.
Mr Bérenger: Will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree with me that this is chose du
passé? In those days, the unanimous opinion was that the DPP had to answer to nobody
including the Judiciary, but in the meantime, in 2006, will he agree with me, there has been the
Mohit case before the Privy Council in London which has ruled that all decisions of the DPP can
be judicially reviewed and have been so and that, therefore, this whole debate now that it is clear
15
that all decisions of the DPP can be judicially reviewed, that these proposals prior to the Mohit
case are redundant?
The Prime Minister: Well, not all decisions that can be impugned. They have been
qualified and it has also been stated that it is really very difficult, in very rare, exceptional cases,
where this can be done.
Mr Bérenger: I am sure we are all aware of the famous Khoyratty case where the Privy
Council in London gave more substance to what democracy is or should be in Mauritius. Now,
are all the members of this Ministerial Committee perfectly conscious that whatever is done
through this Ministerial Committee to amend section 72 of the Constitution will inevitably end
up before the same Privy Council which gave this ruling in the Khoyratty case?
The Prime Minister: Well, if that happens, we will have to wait and see what will be the
decision of the Privy Council.
Mr Bérenger: Being given that the present DPP has a case before the Supreme Court
which is to rule in the near future, as near as possible, does not the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree
that, at least the Government should have the decency of waiting for our Supreme Court to
pronounce on this case, that is, before we go ahead with any amendment to the Constitution
relating to section 72 of the Constitution?
The Prime Minister: Well, this has nothing to do with what case the DPP has in Court
and I must say we are not acting indecently.
Mr Bérenger: Can I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether it is not in panic
that Government is going to act these days, whether it is not in panic that this Ministerial
Committee is being set up and now that we have the Mohit case which has ruled, as I said, that
all decisions of the DPP can be judicially reviewed, Government instead of setting up such a
Ministerial Committee should, in fact, go before the Supreme Court here and eventually before
the Privy Council to challenge any decision of the Director of Public Prosecutions that it feels
needed to be challenged?
The Prime Minister: I do not agree with the hon. Leader of the Opposition. We are not
in the habit of getting paniquer.
16
Mr Bérenger: We have read that supposedly some people in Government are not
satisfied that the DPP did not ask the Police to do its work better. Now, can I ask the Rt. hon.
Prime Minister whether he thinks this is decent - if the Police has not done its work, the Police
should be taken to task - now because the Police has not done its work, we are going to
supposedly amend section 72 of the Constitution? If there is need to enquire into what the Police
has done, we can do it including through a Committee of the House.
The Prime Minister: Well, I don’t know what Police have done or have not done. We
are dealing with a specific matter, irrelevant of what Police have done or have not done.
Mr Bérenger: Can I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he will agree with
me that, in fact, this Government has no mandate to review section 72 of the Constitution? It is
neither in the Electoral Manifesto nor in the Government Programme. It is a fact. Is there any
mention?
(Interruptions)
I know that some people are getting used to acting without a mandate. But will the Rt. hon.
Prime Minister agree with me that the present Government has no mandate to try and amend
section 72 of the Constitution?
The Prime Minister: I do not agree at all with the hon. Leader of the Opposition.
The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ganoo!
Mr Ganoo: Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, in case Government goes forward
with the idea of amending the Constitution and setting up the Prosecution Commission, who will
appoint the members of this Commission?
The Prime Minister: It will come to Parliament. The hon. Member will have all the
information and he can even question.
The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Rutnah!
Mr Rutnah: Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. Is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister aware
that the case of Khoyratty was reported in March 2006 and the case of Mohit was reported in
April 2006 and today in relation to the Prosecution Commission, we are simply implementing
the signal sent by the….
17
The Deputy Speaker: Put your question, hon. Rutnah!
Mr Rutnah:… highest Court of the land? Is it not right that today we are implementing
the signal sent by the highest Court of Mauritius so as to amend this part of the Constitution in
order to empower an independent Commission to review the decision….
The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Rutnah!
Mr Rutnah: …of the DPP?
The Prime Minister: I certainly agree with the hon. Member.
The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ramful!
Mr Ramful: Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. Well, in view of what has been said
in the recent past by hon. Members of this Government with regard to the person of the DPP, and
I am making reference here to one hon. Member of this Government treating the DPP as a
‘constitutional monster’....
(Interruptions)
The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ramful!
(Interruptions)
You know very well that you cannot debate on the conduct or the character of the DPP. I will not
allow that question! Rephrase it!
(Interruptions)
Mr Ramful: I making reference here to the aborted attempt to arrest the DPP. Can we
therefore deduce that this proposition of the Government to set up this Prosecution Commission
is a vendetta against the DPP….
(Interruptions)
The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ramful, please sit down, for a second!
(Interruptions)
You have to rephrase your question! You cannot reflect on the character of the DPP!
18
Mr Ramful: Is this not going to be an interference by this Government in the workings
and the decision of the DPP who is supposed to be independent?
The Prime Minister: It is only unsound mind like his who can think of that.
(Interruptions)
Mr Ramful: This is not acceptable. The Prime Minister cannot treat me ‘unsound
mind’.
The Deputy Speaker: Rt. hon. Prime Minister, I will ask you to withdraw the word.
The Prime Minister: I do.
(Interruptions)
The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mohamed!
Mr Mohamed: Could the Rt. hon. Prime Minister confirm that the first ébauche that is
indeed before this Ministerial Committee chaired by the hon. Deputy Prime Minister has, in fact,
for content that it is the Executive and the hon. Prime Minister who are going to be involved in
the choosing of the Judges or the ex-Judges of the Supreme Court who will be part of that
Commission, and this is precisely what is in the ébauche that is being discussed, that Executive
would have the right to choose who would be in that Commission in order to control the DPP?
The Prime Minister: Well, when the Bill will come before Parliament, then we will
know what are the contents.
The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Uteem!
Mr Uteem: Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir. As the law stands, the DPP who has
constitutional protection, his decision can only be reviewed by Judges who also have
constitutional protection of tenure. May I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether the
members of that proposed Commission will also have a constitutional protection for the tenure to
ensure no interference from the Government of the day?
The Prime Minister: I have said when the Bill will come before the House, the hon.
Member will know.
The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Mrs Selvon!
19
Mrs Selvon: Merci, M. le président. L’honorable Premier ministre est-il au courant
qu’une réforme des poursuites publiques a été faite en 2003 en Grande Bretagne donnant
naissance à un Crown Prosecution Service qui pourrait inspirer la réforme proposée à Maurice?
The Prime Minister: Certainly, the hon. Member is right. It is so in UK.
The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition!
Mr Bérenger: Now, that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is aware that it is our view and, I
believe, that of the country, that now that we have the Mohit 2006 case which has ruled that all
decisions of the DPP can be judicially reviewed, that what Government intends to do is totally
unacceptable. We have Ministers who have said that the law is going to be amended before the
end of the year and the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has not answered to that part of my question. Is
it the intention of Government to rush through amendments to the Constitution before the end of
the year in relation to this section 72 of the Constitution and the powers and the rights of the
DPP?
The Prime Minister: We will do our best to have it soon, as soon as possible.
The Deputy Speaker: Time is over!