LIGHT RAIL PROJECT - IMPLEMENTATION
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Minister
of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the Mauritius Light Rapid
Transit Project/Metro Express Project, he will state –
(a)  if the Singapore Cooperation Enterprise has submitted the final Report thereof
and, if so, if consideration will be given for the rendering public thereof;
(b)  if the tracé thereof and the number of stations therefor have now been finalized;
(c)  the revised cost and the mode of financing thereof;
(d)  if the foreign firms which will be involved in the design, construction and
operation thereof have been selected, and
(e)  if consultations are being held with the employees and the unions, the bus
companies and the small transport operators in relation to the implementation
thereof.
aaaaa
Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the hon. Leader of the Opposition for
putting this Private Notice Question as it relates to the Light Rail project which is, in fact, the
most ambitious infrastructural project undertaken by any Government of Mauritius. The idea
was first put on the table as far back as 1989 under the Prime Ministership of Sir Anerood
Jugnauth. However, it was only as from 2001 that the then MSM/MMM Government decided to
give serious consideration to the project. A National Transport Study was commissioned from
Halcrow Fox Consultants, which recommended a light railway system for the Curepipe-Port
Louis corridor over a distance of 25 km and accommodating 13 stations.
The previous Government initiated action for the implementation of the project as from
2012, after realising its benefit that was canvassed in the 2010 Labour/MSM Manifesto. After
following all the prescribed procedures as laid down under Section 3 of the Public Procurement
Act, the then Government entrusted to Singapore Cooperation Enterprise under a G-to-G
agreement the responsibility for the Project Management and Advisor for the development of the
Light Rail project at Stage 1. The SCE was subsequently engaged as Transaction Manager for
11
Stage 2 which consisted of providing advisory services to Government for the procurement and
potential implementation of the project.
The SCE had successfully completed Stage 1 in 2013 and was subsequently engaged in
Stage 2 in 2014. And in Stage 1, the works consisted of conducting the engineering feasibility
study and selection of a preferred alignment, selection of technological options, reconfiguration
of existing public transport services, strategies to encourage reduction in private car usage and
enhancing land development along the project corridor.
Under Stage 2, Madam Speaker, the SCE had to provide advisory services to
Government for the procurement and potential implementation of the project. Subsequently,
Government gave approval to the award of the contract of the Light Rail project to AFCONS-
CAF-SPCL Consortium on a design and construct model. However, the then Government could
not proceed further with the implementation of this project. The project was frozen by this
Government being given that the project was considered to be too unaffordable.
However, this Government decided to revive the project under the Integrated National
Transport Network with implementation of the Road Decongestion Programme and in the light
of new developments namely -
•  A downward revision of the project cost;
•  the grant obtained from the Indian Government for financing the project, and
•  expected socio-economic impacts on the country, including reduced travel time,
improved road traffic fluidity, less traffic congestion, lower fuel cost and less
pollution due to emissions from vehicles.
In this context, the SCE was approached by Government for the review and revival of the
project and discussions were engaged on the potential restart of the project. Government
requested the SCE Team to undertake an assignment relating to the modification of the reference
design, which covered the following tasks -
(a)  Project set-up;
(b)  Value engineering of the existing main line design;
(c)  Examination of interfaces between the MLRT and the Road Decongestion
Programme, and
(d)  Development of a Reference Design change report.
12
With regard to part (a) of the question, Madam Speaker, I can inform the House that the
Singapore Cooperation Enterprise has worked on the review of its 2013 Report with the aim to
rationalise the costs in order to align its optimum requirements and making it affordable for the
Government.
Accordingly, in August 2016, the Singapore Cooperation Enterprise submitted its revised
Transaction Planning Services - what we call a Reference Design Change and Cost Optimisation
Report - wherein cost optimisation options were proposed for the consideration of Government.
The Report consists of the Reference Design, the Cost Estimate and the Cost Savings options.
This Report will serve as basis for the preparation of the Request for Proposal, which is
currently being undertaken by the Singapore Corporation Enterprise.
In view of the confidential nature of the Report and taking into account that the Bidding
Process requires upmost confidentiality, it is not proposed to render the Report public at this
stage.
The hon. Leader of the Opposition will agree with me that revealing the content would
jeopardise the integrity of the whole tender exercise at present.
As regards part (b) of the question, I wish to inform that the ‘tracé’, the alignment, has
been determined and will start from Ian Palach in Curepipe and will end at Immigration Square
in Port Louis and will comprise 19 stations in all, including five interchanges which will be
called the Urban Terminals.
As regards part (c) of the question, the cost has been revised downwards substantially.
The Project will be financed partly by a grant of US$ 275 million from the Government of India
and the remaining financing will be raised either from local financing institutions and/or line of
credit from India and/or from Development Partners, on the basis of terms and conditions which
are most favourable for the Project.
Madam Speaker, as regards part (c) of the question the Singapore Cooperation Enterprise
has already completed the Reference Design, the detailed design will be made by the Selected
Design and Built Contractor.
Madam Speaker, one of the conditions of the grant from the Government of India is that
it is mandatory that the Design and Built Contractor be selected from Indian Firms.
13
The market sounding and the early engagement exercise with the two nominated
proponents namely AFCONS and Larsen and Toubro including project/tender overview, site
visit and one-on-one sessions to provide early notice to bidders for the forthcoming launch of the
Request For Proposal has been completed.
As regards the operation of the Metro Express preliminary discussions are being held
with the Delhi Metro Railway Cooperation of India.
Madam Speaker, as regards part (e) of the question, I wish to inform the House that the
feasibility study carried out in October 2012 covered, inter alia, the following activities –
•  Transport planning and modelling;
•  review and selection of technological options;
•  economic impact assessment, and
•  costing, economic and business appraisal.
It has taken into account all relevant aspects and elements, including the volume of bus
passenger traffic along the Curepipe-Port Louis corridor, which will be served by the Metro
Express, as well as its impact on the transport demand on the other bus routes.
Recommendations of the study include reorganisation and reengineering of the existing
bus routes, creation of feeder system, which will be integrated with the Light Railway System.
Bus feeder system will, in fact, enlarge the coverage of the Light Railway Transit service by
providing access to the demand that lie on the east and west of the Mauritius Light Railway
Transit lines.
Furthermore, Madam Speaker, my Ministry has, in January 2016, commissioned a study
on Re-Engineering the Public Transport System and the viability of the free travel system in
Mauritius, and this study is expected to be completed in February 2017 by Pricewaterhouse
Coopers Ltd. In the light of the recommendations of this report, the public transport system will
be reengineered with a view to making it more cost effective, reliable and comfortable.
With the implementation of the National Transport Network Project, the metro express,
as one of the major components together with the implementation of the recommendations of the
new public transport study, we believe that the public transport system will undergo a major
transformation, involving, inter alia, reengineering of bus routes and schedules. There is a
14
continued strong political undertaking from both sides of the House that all stakeholders will be
involved for their full participation and contribution in the implementation of this important
project. The hon. Leader of the Opposition, as Prime Minister, had, in fact, given his
undertaking that the workers and the bus companies will be on board. The Rt. hon. Prime
Minister also has said so; the former Prime Minister also. So, there has been a continued strong
political undertaking on this issue. In this process, the NTA, as regulator of the public transport
industry, and my Ministry, will be called upon to carry out further consultations in due course
with bus operators as well as taxi unions and industry workers in order to bring all stakeholders
on board.
Madam Speaker, I wish to reassure the House that, in the whole process of the
implementation of this project, my Ministry will ensure that the interest of all workers and
operators will be at all times safeguarded.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, replying to a PNQ, which I put on the same project on
24 May, the hon. Minister said that the study being carried out, being finalised by Singapore
Cooperation Enterprise, was only an update of their previous feasibility study. If this is so, why
keep supposedly this update of a feasibility study that has been made public, confidential at this
stage?
Mr Bodha: What has been done, Madam Speaker, was we had to see the cost
implications and we had to see what were the different factors which could bring downward
revision of costs, and they were at three levels. They were technical, engineering and
administrative. So, this report, in fact, came with the options to Government, and Government
has decided on certain options. Now, this report has been further developed to be able to
undertake the bidding exercise, which is ongoing now. I think that the publication of this report,
at this stage, would be prejudicial to the bidding exercise, but, at the given point in time, we are
for all transparency. This is a very important project, very ambitious, very important project for
the country. We will come with all the necessary documents and they will be made public.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, I heard the hon. Minister talk of a new public transport
study. Two days ago, I read in the Press - something which is reported to have been stated - that
PricewaterhouseCoopers mène une étude sur le réseau de transport national. Can I know, if that
is the case, whether we can get confirmation that it is PricewaterhouseCoopers that is carrying
15
out this new public transport study and how will it impact on the Light Rail Transport Project in
any way?
Mr Bodha: There was a tender exercise, Madam Speaker, and PricewaterhouseCoopers
won the bid. They are carrying out the study. The study is being financed by l’Agence française
de développement. The study, in fact, was commissioned in order to see how the national
transport system is operating. But the most important thing was whether the Rs1.2 billion, Rs1.3
billion of free travel was implemented in the best manner because there was no accountability as
regards this expenditure, and I have always said so. So, this study relates to all the bus routes,
relates also to the system where we have the National Transport Corporation, the private
companies and the private-owned individual bus owners. So, the study will allow us to
understand how the system is operating now, what are the flows. But there was also a study
which was already carried out by the Singapore Cooperation Enterprise in 2012 about how to
integrate the light rail with the bus route. Now, this study will give us an idea not only of the
corridor, that is, between Curepipe and Port Louis, but also all the feeder systems. At the end of
the day, the light rail, that is, the metro system, is going to provide us with a mass transit system
between Curepipe and Port Louis. It is a conurbation of 600,000 people. But all the other
systems will have to operate. So, we will have to see how to integrate it, and as soon as we are
going to have the report, which is due in a few months, we are going to update all the discussions
that were done in 2012 and see to it how we can integrate the metro express with the
recommendations of the report.
Mr Bérenger: I think I heard that the tracé has not changed and will end up at
Immigration Square, that is, in the north of Port Louis. Can I know what is envisaged from this
side of Port Louis to Immigration Square, how the link will be done?
Mr Bodha: The project in Port Louis will have two components. The Urban Terminal of
Victoria, which is going to be a terminal, will include a bus passenger terminal, the railway
terminal together with the parking, the food court and a number of amenities. From the Urban
Terminal of Victoria, the train will continue to the Urban Terminal of Immigration Square. The
idea, in fact, in a later stage, is to extend it further to the North, maybe to Pamplemousses, from
where we can have all the feeders of Rivière du Rempart, Goodlands and Triolet. We are going
16
to have two terminals in Port Louis: the one at Victoria and the one in Immigration Square, and
we will have two rails at grade. So, it will take part of the motorway that we are using today.
Mr Bérenger: Can I know how does the tracé, as finalised, relate to the existing
Cybercity and to the University of Mauritius?
Mr Bodha: We had requested an extension, a variation of the contract as regards the
alignment, and we had decided that we could see whether we can have an extension between
Rose Hill, Ebène and the University. So, the study has been done, but we are going to do the
project in two stages. You have the main line between Curepipe and Port Louis. This extension
has already been studied. It is up to Government to see whether we can afford it. It is going to be
a feeder line between the University, Ebène, and will end up at the Urban Terminal of Rose Hill.
Mr Bérenger: If the hon. Minister gave a figure, I am sorry if I missed it. As at present,
revised cost of the project in general, under the previous Government, I think the Minister said it
was estimated to cost Rs25 billion. Can I have the figure now? How revised?
Mr Bodha: For the previous Government the project was estimated at USD 850 million
and if we were to compare with today, that is, 2014, and by the time it would have been
implemented, I believe it would have reached $1 billion. As far as we are concerned, the most
important thing for us was to have a substantial lowering in costs and we were given a number of
options. So, what I can say today is not a figure, it is that the options that we have chosen will
lead to a substantial revision downward of costs; this is what I can say today. As soon as the
Singapore Corporation Enterprise will have the two proposals, we will come to a time when we
will have a preferred bidder, then we will be able to put a figure which is going to be the cost of
the project. But, what I can say today in Parliament to the nation, is that we will have a
substantial lowering of costs as regards the estimates of the former Government which was USD
850 million.
Mr Bérenger: We thank India for the huge grant element being extended to Mauritius
for this project and others, but especially for this project, although we don’t know what will be
the final cost, the Minister cannot give us revised estimates, it is clear that we will have a huge
financing gap and the hon. Minister has given us an indication of what the sources for that
financing will be. Will there be, supposedly, any PPP financing for any part of that project?
17
Mr Bodha: From what I understand, in the former project of the former Government
there was no grant at all. In fact, there was a Line of Credit at a low interest rate and the rest of
the money was to be raised locally by a Consortium.
In the financial setup that we have today we have the grant from India which we believe
will reach about Rs9.9 billion. And, as I said in my answer, there has been a special purpose
vehicle which has been set up and it is working on how to finance the complement; it could be a
Line of Credit from India at a low interest rate, it could also be a Consortium of financial
institutions in Mauritius, it could also be international financial institutions. But, as I also
mentioned, the most important thing is, we have to see to it - and I would like to repeat it - that it
should be done on the basis of terms and conditions which are most favourable for the project.
Mr Bérenger: He has confirmed that being given an amount of grant that India is
generously extending to Mauritius, that only Indian companies will be involved in the design,
construction and operation of the project. Can this be confirmed? Did I hear correctly that, at this
stage, two companies are being considered for both design and construction and only one
company is being considered for eventual operation?
Mr Bodha: Let me explain how it is working. In fact, one of the conditions of the
Memorandum of Understanding which was signed between the Government of India and the
Government of Mauritius is as follows: “Government shall undertake implementation of projects
with Indian companies for the preparation, vetting of feasibility report, detailed project report,
appointment of Indian project management consultant, supervision of work, quality control,
settlement of bills and project completion. Selection of Indian contractors and suppliers shall be
the responsibility of the Government of Mauritius. And, the Government of Mauritius shall
ensure the utilisation of assets.”
But what was interesting is that another article also says that: “the Government of
Mauritius shall select Indian companies or joint ventures between Indian and Mauritian firms as
exclusive contractors for executing projects in accordance with the requisites, tendering
procedures of the Government of Mauritius. Any third country involvement in these projects
shall be based on mutual consent.”
So, there is a possibility in case, for example, for the rolling stock - because the rolling
stock is not totally Indian made; it can be made under licence - there are two companies which
18
have been, in fact, after the visit of the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development,
AFCONS and Larsen & Toubro which have been proposed by the Government of India as regard
to the design and the building of the infrastructure. Now, as I said, the Singapore Corporation
Enterprise has done the alignment and the reference design. So, they have already done, comme
on dirait, le trait-carré. So, the reference design is already there and this reference design is
being now proposed to the two proposed bidders. They are going to do the detailed design and
the construction. So, these two companies are going to make their proposals as regard to the
detailed design and the construction.
As regard to the operation of the whole system, in the former project by the former
Government the choice had been Delhi Metro and during the visit of the hon. Minister of
Finance and Economic Development the Indian Government also proposed that Delhi Metro
could help for the operationalisation of the Metro Express in terms of setting up the different
operating systems and training of personnel. It was noted that it would do that within five years
and after five years we should be able to operate the system ourselves.
As regard to the two companies, Larsen & Toubro and AFCONS, the SCE has already, as
I said, had preliminary meetings which were held last week and as regard to Delhi Metro we
have had preliminary meetings, so far.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, I think I heard the hon. Minister say that our agreement
with India provides for supervision of the works in general. India is being very generous as
usual, more than usual, and also we know that the two companies for designing and construction
are state-of-the-art companies. Nevertheless, will the Minister agree with me that Mauritius as a
sovereign nation and, as a Government, we must have separate, from the Indian side - we have
seen what has happened with certain roads and so on and we are still paying for that - whether
the Minister will agree with me that there will need to be supervision from our side, so that we
see to it that we really get value for money even if it is Indian money?
Mr Bodha: I totally agree with the hon. Leader of the Opposition and I appreciate
together with him that what India has done for this dream to come true is a symbol of all that
binds us, India and Mauritius. I also agree with the fact that when it comes to supervision of the
works and when it comes also to the defects liability period we can consider the possibility of
19
having international supervision. We will do that. I am all for it. We have been talking about it as
well. But, we will do it in compliance; we will discuss the matter with the Indian counterparts.
Mr Bérenger: The last part of my question, Madam Speaker, if you allow me, I heard the
Minister say that consultations with the trade unions, the workers, the bus companies, the small
operators and so on will take place in due course. Will he not agree with me that, in fact, the time
has already come? They are entitled to know how things are developing. Is the Minister in a
position to confirm that this project will have no negative impact on employment in the bus
transport industry in general?
Mr Bodha: In fact, Madam Speaker, we had the consultations in 2012 by the Singapore
Corporation Enterprise and those who were steering the project. We are going to have the report
of PricewaterhouseCoopers in February. In fact, in all my dealings with the companies such as
the National Transport Corporation, the United Bus Service, the Rose Hill Bus Transport, and
Triolet Bus Service which also has some routes along this corridor, I have all the time intimated
that we will have to find the best way to integrate the system as it is today.
In fact, the system as it is today, relates to the most important thing which is the
accountability of the Rs1.3 billion that we are spending, so that we can use it and spend it better.
The guarantee that I have always given to the bus companies and to the individual bus owners is
that we want them on board. We want them to be part of the industry, but Mauritius should have
the shop window. The public transport is a reflection of the degree of sophistication of a nation
and Mauritius doesn’t have it today. We must have a Mass Transit System, which reflects the
degree of sophistication of Mauritius. I can assure the hon. Leader of the Opposition that I have
been having informal discussion. But I am giving the assurance to the House - I think the Rt.
hon. Prime Minister, the Government and the Leader of the Opposition when he was Prime
Minister always said that - that we cannot have a Mass Transit System which would be
prejudicial to all the workers and trade unions because we all know that the workers in the bus
industry have been given a lot of themselves over the years to see to it that that industry serves
the nation.
Mr Mahomed: In his reply, the hon. Minister has mentioned that there will be a
substantial reduction in cost. Now, being given that the same protagonists are there - SCE, Daily
Metro and, I think, he mentioned AFCONS as well - and that the alignment will still remain the
20
same, can the hon. Minister, at least, give an indication to the House whether this reduction in
cost would be at the expense of the number of stations as originally envisaged or a change in
technology of the forthcoming system?
Mr Bodha: The report, in fact, gave us the possibility to analyse a number of options.
The change in cost is linked with engineering, is linked with the technical aspects of the stations
and it is also linked at administrative cost. Just to give you an example. There was one line in the
former project which was called preliminaries and Rs4 billion was put there. Rs4 billion were
earmarked as preliminaries.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Mahomed, please don’t engage in any conversation with the hon.
Minister.
Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, when we asked what were the preliminaries? They said it is
a percentage of the project.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order!
Mr Bodha: Now, on these preliminaries, we have saved more than Rs1 billion. What I
can answer to the hon. Member today is that the options which were given, some were
engineering options, some were technical options and some were administrative. In fact, I think
they had asked us to start with the seed money of Rs3 billion to launch the project. These are the
costs; we have been able to have the exercises where we cut the costs and this has given us the
possibility to have this substantial downward revision of costs.
Mr Baloomoody: Madam Speaker, with regard to the trajet, we know that certain
properties along Les Salines and Cassis have been identified for compulsory acquisition. May I
know whether all those which have been identified will be compulsorily acquired, and, if so,
when they will be compensated?
Mr Bodha: The hon. Member is, in fact, referring to the road which was going off the
motorway via the project of the dream bridge. No, this has nothing to do with the Light Rail. In
fact, the Metro Express is going to come from la Rue Moka and will hit the motorway at the
Caudan Roundabout. We have just, in fact, finalised the alignment for the new entry of road
21
traffic at Decaen. The tender document is out because we want to reduce traffic entering Port
Louis at Place D’armes. So, we’ll have the access entering Port Louis at Decaen and the
alignment of the Metro Express will be further to the left. So, it has nothing to do with it. What
it will do, in fact, it will go directly to the stone building today which has become a car park. So,
it will be on the other side of the motorway. We have three properties which are, in fact,
involved in this. You have two agricultural cooperative buildings and one Mauritius Telecom
building. But they are lessees of the Mauritius Ports Authority and we have already talked to the
Mauritius Ports Authority to see to it that these three properties are freed. In fact, when the Rt.
hon. Prime Minister has said on 12 March 2017, we will have the laying of the foundation stone,
we are thinking of starting the works there.
Dr. Sorefan: Regarding the alignment, I am sure the hon. Minister will agree with me
that all the lands have been compulsory acquired and paid. Will the hon. Minister tell us whether
the alignment from Roundabout St Jean to Victoria will be on pilotis or will it be on ground
level, as he said, the cost had been lowered down?
Mr Bodha: Between St Jean and Victoria, it is going to be at grade to ground level.
Mr Bérenger: We just heard that le train a démarré and supposedly the foundation stone
will be laid on 12 March 2017. Things are already happening. It is true that we are early in the
day, but can I ask the hon. Minister whether at this stage we have any target date? By what date,
in how many years do we expect the Light Rail Transit System to be operational?
Mr Bodha: It’s a very interesting question. Here, I would like to thank the Rt. hon. Prime
Minister for one thing, for setting a date. If we hadn’t set a date, we would have always said that
the studies are on, but once we have set the date, we have to work backwards. Everybody is
working backwards for 12 March 2017. What I can say, Madam Speaker, is that by the time the
House will resume next year, most properly in the third or fourth week of March, we would have
already started the works. I would like to say two things. Firstly, the number of stations have not
been reduced, and secondly, as regards the time frame, there are two possibilities of doing it,
either we do it from Port Louis and we go, let’s say, to Rose Hill or we start in Curepipe and in
Port Louis and then we’ll meet up in Rose Hill.
So, this has yet to be done. But I have been given to understand that the project will last four
years.
22
Thank you, Madam Speaker.
Madam Speaker: Time is over!