COIN IDEAL INCIDENT – INQUIRY
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Rt.
hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and
National Development Unit whether, in regard to the incident which occurred on 27 May
2016 in which Mr S. S. was involved, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the
Commissioner of Police, information as to –
(a)  who has been in charge of the inquiry when the incident was initially reported
to the Police and since;
(b)  if the inquiry has now established that Police instructions and procedures in
relation thereto have been flouted;
(c)  if the mobile phone of Mr S. S. was recovered and returned thereto;
(d)  if Mr S. S. made a fresh statement on 26 June 2016;
(e)  why no arrest was effected until 11 July 2016, and
(f)  the charges lodged against the arrested suspects.
aaaaa
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I wish to refer the hon. Leader of the
Opposition to my reply to Parliamentary Question B/714 on 12 July 2016 wherein I stated,
inter alia, that the Rose Hill CID was currently enquiring into the circumstances which led to
the Coin Ideal incident which happened on 27 May 2016. I also stated that I would ask the
Commissioner of Police to look personally into the matter.
In regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police
that the enquiry is under the responsibility of Superintendent of Police, Mr Bansoodeb, in
charge of CID Western Division and under the overall supervision of ACP Ramsurrun,
Divisional Commander, Western Division.
In regard to part (c) of the question, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police
that on the night of the incident, Mr Saven Seerungen verbally reported the loss of his mobile
phone to a Police officer on patrol at Coromandel. On 30 May 2016, one Mr J. M. B. called
at Rose Hill CID and produced a mobile phone make I-Phone S6 colour silver and black.
The Police officer to whom the mobile phone was handed over reported same to SP
8
Bansoodeb. The latter established that the phone belonged to Mr Saven Seerungen to whom
same was returned.
In regard to part (d) of the question, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police
that on 27 May 2016 at 1.53 a.m, Mr Saven Seerungen verbally stated to Coromandel Police
Station that his car had been stolen. Police inserted a Diary Book Entry on the reported loss
and immediately proceeded to patrol the area to trace out the lost car, in company of Mr
Saven Seerungen. The car could not be traced out. As the incident had occurred in Rose
Hill, Mr Saven Seerungen was taken to Rose Hill Police station to report the case. There,
another Diary Book Entry was inserted to the effect Mr Saven Seerungen’s car make BMW
and registration number unknown to him had been stolen by two unknown persons. Mr
Saven Seerungen did not give any statement.
At 3.27 hours on the same morning, another Diary Book Entry was made at
Coromandel Police Station that during the course of a patrol at Morcellement Montreal
Coromandel, car bearing registration number 7824 DC 11 make BMW colour black had been
recovered some 300 metres away from Winner’s supermarket. Upon instructions from the
Rose Hill Divisional Operational Room, the car was brought back to Coromandel Police
Station. The Rose Hill Police Station was informed accordingly. As Mr Saven Seerungen
was still in Rose Hill Police Station, he was also informed that the car had been recovered but
he stated that he did not wish to make any declaration regarding the incident and expressed
the wish to take possession of his car. He was then taken to Coromandel Police Station
where the car was handed over to him. Another Diary Book Entry was inserted at
Coromandel Police Station to the effect that the car had been returned to Mr Saven
Seerungen. The latter stated that he was satisfied with Police action, and did not have any
complaint.
I am further informed by the Commissioner of Police that on 25 June 2016, officers of
Rose Hill CID recorded a statement from Mr Saven Seerungen at his residence at
Morcellement Mewasingh, Solferino, Vacoas. In his statement, he explained in detail the
circumstances which led to the incident which occurred in the vicinity of Notre Dame de
Lourdes Church, Rose Hill on 27 May 2016.
As regards parts (e) and (f) of the question, I am informed by the Commissioner of
Police, that Police enquiry was initiated after the statement was recorded from Mr Saven
Seerungen on 25 June 2016. The enquiry led to the arrest of two suspects on 11 July 2016.
9
On the same day, a provisional charge of larceny with violence was lodged against each one
of them. They appeared before Rose Hill District Court on the same day and were remanded
to Police cell. Subsequently, they were remanded to jail on 18 July 2016.
I am further informed that the enquiry has been completed and the matter has been
referred to the Director of Public Prosecutions for advice on 13 July 2016.
Madam Speaker, in the light of the facts that have been disclosed so far, given the
complexity and certain unclear elements surrounding this case, I have decided, in regard to
part (b) of the question, that a sitting Magistrate be appointed to conduct an independent
enquiry on the whole incident and to determine whether Police instructions and procedures
have been flouted in this case.
Furthermore, pending the completion of the independent enquiry, the Commissioner
of Police has been requested to advise DCP Seerungen to proceed on leave. The
Commissioner of Police will also give instructions to the Police Force so that DCP Seerungen
does not have access to any document nor interferes with any witness in the matter. I have
decided to have an enquiry because there are so many facts that have not been brought
forward and it’s not so far clear how the whole incident took place and in what
circumstances.
Madam Speaker, I wish to assure the House and the population that there will be no
cover up in this matter and if enquiry reveals that there has been any breach on the side of
Police, appropriate action will be taken.
Mr Bérenger: I must say I have to refrain from saying ‘better late than never’ once
more. We have been informed that the file is with the DPP and now I am glad to hear that a
sitting Magistrate will be appointed. So, I won’t put all the questions, but I have to put a few
questions, because I am sure the sitting Magistrate will take notice also. Is the Rt. hon. Prime
Minister aware that the two Police officers whom he said have been in charge of the enquiry
since the incident, one CID Assistant Superintendent, I think, of Rose Hill, and then an ACP -
I will refrain from mentioning his name, at this stage - were involved in the corrupt exercise
right from night one until now and terrorising policemen at Rose Hill?
The Prime Minister: Well, I have no such information that is why I feel there must
be an enquiry to bring to light all the facts in this case.
10
Mr Bérenger: Do we know, at this stage, which Police officer directed unlawfully
that this car, a government car under the responsibility of the Acting Commissioner of Police,
be illegally returned to his son? Have we established which Police officer did that?
The Prime Minister: Well, I can’t say which Police officer; there are so many
names here. Who did it? Well, all this will be enlightened in the enquiry.
Mr Bérenger: My information is precisely that ACP that I referred to the Rt. hon.
Prime Minister. Can we know whether at least the Rose Hill and Coromandel Diary Books
have been seized, by whom and in whose custody they are now?
The Prime Minister: I can’t say whether they have been seized, but I have been told
that they are there and the entries are there; they are with the CCID. I think they are safe,
nobody will interfere on this.
Mr Bérenger: Well, I am glad to have heard that the DCP concerned has been asked
de prendre ses distances for the time being. Has it at least been established that on that night
because last time the Rt. hon. Prime Minister got me wrong completely, he felt that I wanted
to know whether the then Acting DCP had gone to the Police station as if this is what should
have been done. Not at all! My information is that he interfered illegally, he turned up and
this was alleged by a Member of Parliament, not refuted since, and he turned up at both
Police stations to take an active part in the cover-up?
The Prime Minister: Well, I don’t have such information and that is why we must
have an enquiry to enlighten all this.
Mr Bérenger: Now, we have been provided with information, Madam Speaker, that a
mobile phone was seized and then obtained from a person and returned to the owner, that is,
the son of the Acting Commissioner of Police. Returned by a fille de joie, not arrested until
much later! But she returned and the Police took the decision to instead of getting hold of that
and other telephones, instead of examining them as should have been done - has it been
established which Police officer took that decision to return that mobile phone?
The Prime Minister: Which Police officer? I must read the whole thing to find out…
(Interruptions)
It must be one of those who are involved in this matter.
Mr Bérenger: The Rt. hon. Prime Minister is an experienced lawyer he knows that
somebody took the decision. We will know. If I can allow the little paper to fly!
11
The Prime Minister: The one who was enquiring - Bansoodeb.
Mr Bérenger: Good. It is a good thing, you didn’t have to read through the whole
thing. We have been informed that after all this, a month went by without anything happening
until a Press article. Then another month nearly before arrests were made and then a month
after the incident a statement is taken at the residence of the gentleman concerned. Is the Rt.
hon. Prime Minister aware that, in fact, in the Rose Hill Occurrence Book dated 26 June, that
is, a month later and recorded by Police Constable so and so, I will omit his name - can I
read?
“Mr (…) reported (…)”
A month later!
“(…) through DPC so and so to the effect that on 27 June (…)”
In fact, it is 27 May, even that is wrongly recorded!
“(…) on 27 June at around 00.00 hours he was in his car (…)”
His car!
“(…) registered so and so, make BMW, at Celicourt Antelme an unknown woman and
a man, the latter with a cutter threatened him and stole his mobile phone make Apple,
colour grey, sum of Rs1000 (…)”
He was even bargaining!
(Interruptions)
“(…) and a pair of shoes (…)”
Ki shoes! Professionals not like the Police! They took the precaution to get hold of his shoes,
to retain his shoes so that he would not run away!
(Interruptions)
I apologise, Madam Speaker, can I carry on?
(Interruptions)
It is a good thing he did not lose his trousers as well!
(Interruptions)
12
“(…) then after drove away in the said car towards Coromandel and left abandoned
thereat.”
False! The car was not left abandoned, it went.
“The car was recovered together with the purse and the ignition key. The mobile
phone make Apple was recovered.”
As if it was recovered on that day! Which it was not!
“And was returned to him. He has not been injured, he can identify the aggressors,
value and so on.”
Does the Rt. hon. Prime Minister find that acceptable? I am sure no because of his
reply and what is shocking is that Mr Seeruttun goes to the Press…
(Interruptions)
Thousand apologies!
(Interruptions)
Of all people!
(Interruptions)
Of all people! I withdraw unreservedly my tongue because it was the slip of the tongue!
Madam Speaker, yes.
(Interruptions)
So, the Acting Commissioner of Police wakes up and gives for the first time a Press
statement on 02 July in Le Défi –
“Il était traumatisé.”
Il est un petit chef-d’œuvre, Madam Speaker.
« Il était traumatisé. Lorsqu’il s’est senti mieux il a donné sa déclaration. »
A month later! The son of an Acting Commissioner of Police! I hope the Rt. hon. Prime
Minister has taken good note.
The Prime Minister: I am taking good note now!
(Interruptions)
13
Madam Speaker, I must say that from all the circumstances of this case it is clear that there
has been attempt to cover up, that is why I have decided there must be an independent
enquiry.
Mr Bérenger: Well, I think that I will stop there if you will allow me. But, I will end
up, let us not have just a young sitting Magistrate. I insist that it should be a Senior sitting
Magistrate. Can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree to that?
The Prime Minister: Okay, we will try to get one, if available.