CARGO HANDLING CORPORATION LTD - DUBAI PORTS WORLD – INTER-MINISTERIAL TECHNICAL COMMITTEE
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External Communications whether, in
regard to the Cargo Handling Corporation Ltd., he will state –
(a)  the proposals of Dubai Ports World for its shareholding therein and for the
management thereof, indicating if Government has reached a decision in
relation thereto, and
(b)  how the dismissal of Alain Edouard, President of the Port Louis Maritime
Employees Association (PLMEA), relates to the opposition of the Trade
Union to the ‘privatisation’ of the Cargo Handling Corporation Ltd. through
Dubai Ports World, indicating if the latter will be re-instated.
aaaaa
The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, with your permission I shall reply to
the Private Notice Question together with Parliamentary Question B/305.
In regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed that in early June 2015, the Sultan
Ahmed Bin Sulayen, Chairman of DP World, together with a team of experts, effected a visit
to Mauritius and had meetings, inter alia, with the Prime Minister, the Minister of Finance
and Economic Development, the Minister of Housing and Lands and myself to elaborate on
the avenues of co-operation.
In September 2015, a technical team from DP World carried out a prospection visit to
Mauritius to discuss with stakeholders and to collect information. Working sessions were
held with different stakeholders in Government and the private sector. The delegation also
visited the Mauritius Container Terminal and the proposed logistics park.
DP World submitted its preliminary proposals on 30 November, followed by a visit of
its technical team to Mauritius on 10 and 11 February of this year. Subsequently, on 25
February, DP World submitted more detailed proposals on the Special Economic Zone (SEZ)
and Port Operations as a basis for further discussions.
The proposal of DP World comprises three main aspects, namely -
(i)  The development and marketing of a state-of-the-art Special Economic Zone
(SEZ) on 325 acres of Land at Riche Terre, through a Joint Venture with the
9
Government of Mauritius with a 99-year lease based on the Jebel Ali Free
Zone model.
This would involve an initial investment of US$23 million over the first six
years, for the construction of industrial and business units, office premises as
well as serviced plots. Thereafter, an additional investment of US$37 million
is expected bringing the total investment to the tune of US$60 million. The
SEZ will have the potential to attract US$450 million of FDI and generate up
to 8,000 jobs.
Madam Speaker, the second aspect of the proposal comprises a 40% shareholding in
Cargo Handling Corporation Ltd with a Management Agreement whereby DP World would
be responsible for management of Port Operations over a period of 30 years.
DP World is proposing to invest at the initial stage, some US$25 m. in the Mauritius
Container Terminal in terms of improvement of IT infrastructure and purchase of container
handling equipment to enhance operational performance and increase the capacity of the
Terminal to 1.3 million TEUs.
(ii)  The third aspect of the proposal concerns an investment of US$500m. for the
development of the Island Terminal by 2030, when the container traffic is expected
to exceed 1.3 million TEUs.
The proposal of DP World could be interesting and innovative, insofar that, it is not
solely based on increasing Container Transshipment Traffic at Port Louis, but more geared on
increasing captive traffic to be generated from the development of the free port activities.
Madam Speaker, in addition, the port would be in a position to offer a range of other
services to ships, including bunkering, ship chandling and ship repairs.
My Ministry has set up an Inter-Ministerial Technical Committee to examine the
proposals and hold discussions with the DP World. The MPA has retained the services of Mr
Marc Juhel, a retired World Bank Consultant in Port and Transport Advisory Services, to
assist in the discussions.
Furthermore, on 28 March 2016, Messrs BDO Ltd have been appointed, following a
tender exercise, to carry out a financial, legal and technical examination of the proposals.
Their work is ongoing.
10
With a view to safeguarding the interest of the Nation, Government will seek
guaranteed KPIs from DP World over the period of the Port/SEZ concessions, amongst
others, in terms of -
(i)  volume of SEZ traffic generated;
(ii)  investment made by DPW at Riche Terre and amount of FDI/employment
generated;
(iii)  transshipment/Freeport Container throughput;
(iv)  Port productivity and Port connectivity;
(v)  investment in Port operations and equipment;
(vi)  job creation, and
(vii)  other matters as may be determined.
Madam Speaker, there are important and potentially deal-breaking issues that need to
be discussed and agreed before proceeding further. I wish to inform the House, in no
uncertain terms, that as at now there is no decision and agreement. We are awaiting the report
of the Consultants to make counter proposals to DP World which will be the basis for further
discussions.
Madam Speaker, Government will ensure that, should the project go ahead, the
employee’s rights and pension benefits of Port workers will be fully safeguarded. I would
like to reassure the House that the Government cares about the welfare of all employees of
the Port.
Let me once more reassure the House that Government is committed to releasing full
information and providing full disclosure on the project in due course as we are all dealing
with public assets.
DP World is the third largest Port operator in the World with control of approximately
70 Terminals. They have a justified reputation for efficient Port operations and they have
established relations with all the world’s major shipping lines. They also operate
approximately 20 free zones with the much largest being Jebel Ali Free Zone in Dubai.
Madam Speaker, the proposal of DP World, should it go ahead, will have the
following the benefits -
11
•  DP World’s vision for Mauritius is to become a business hub for Southern and
Eastern Africa. Mauritius will be the gateway to Africa;
•  Mauritius will host multinationals companies looking to carry out value added
activities and light manufacturing for export to SADC and Comesa countries;
•  The Riche Terre Free Zone is envisioned to be the largest Free Zone in the
Indian Ocean and will reinforce Mauritius’s position as the investment
Hotspot in the region;
•  DP World through its subsidiary will bring its global experience in zone
development management marketing and branding;
•  SEZ success requires higher port connectivity than currently available;
•  shipping lines require a productive reliable Port to justify a wider range of
services;
•  increased deep sea calls for the main shipping lines on the south–south routes
between south Asian markets and south African markets;
•  improved productivity will reduce the cost of shipping goods, increased trade
and economic growth;
•  DP World requires control of both, the Port and SEZ operations to make the
project a success;
•  international best practices will ensure that the SEZ can compete with
potential other economic free zones that may arise or be constructed in the
future;
•  the Riche Terre Free Zone will be the focal point for local and foreign
investment;
•  the Riche Terre Free Zone will be developed and managed by DP World
which has a unique integrated port and free port zone development capacity;
•  Riche Terre Free Zone present an opportunity to replicate the highly
successful Jebel Ali free zone;
•  DP World has relevant experience in large scale logistics and industrial
infrastructure, and
•  enhanced connectivity linking Mauritius directly with key Southern and
Eastern African markets;
12
Madam Speaker, in regard to part (b) of the question, as I have already indicated,
nothing has yet been decided nor finalized in respect of DP World. Hence, the dismissal of
Mr Alain Edouard is not related whatsoever with the DP World issue.
I wish to inform the House that Mr A. Edouard joined the Cargo Handling
Corporation Ltd (CHCL) on 18 April 1991 as Clerical Assistant and prior to his dismissal, he
was employed with effect from 01 July 2014, as Ship to Shore Gantry Trainer. His
responsibilities as Trainer were to monitor the performance of workers, also known as
“Portiqueurs”.
Madam Speaker, as the House may be aware, we are today evolving in a very
competitive market and competition from other Regional Ports is increasing. Following
requests from Shipping Lines, with regard to the provision of services during the festive and
end of year period, Management made the following working arrangement for 24 December
and 31 December -
(i)  First shift – normal operation will be between 7.00 a.m. to 3.00 p.m., and
(ii)  Second shift – operation will be between 3.00 p.m. to 6.00 p.m..
Madam Speaker, on 17 December all employees at the Mauritius Container Terminal
(MCT), including Mr Edouard, were notified of the working arrangements .
In accordance with the concession agreement signed with the Mauritius Ports
Authority (MPA), the Port provides a round-the-clock service throughout the year, except on
the following dates -
•  01 January;
•  02 January;
•  01 May, and
•  25 December.
On 04 January 2016, the Senior Terminal Manager reported that Mr Edouard had left
his site of work on 31 December 2015 at 12 06 hours without authorisation in spite of having
been detailed to work until 3.00 p.m.
Management viewed the matter with concern and on the same day, Mr Edouard was
notified thereof and was informed that this may be considered as a serious breach of
discipline and gross misconduct. He was requested to submit his written explanation.
13
On 11 January 2016, Management of CHCL received a reply from Mr Edouard. The
explanations submitted by Mr Edouard were not to the satisfaction of Management.
Madam Speaker, on 12 January 2016, the Human Resource Manager informed Mr
Edouard that Management was not satisfied. He was suspended from work and was called
upon to appear and depone before an Independent Disciplinary Committee to show cause as
to why, despite being detailed to work on the 1 st  shift, he had left his site of work without
authorisation.
The Disciplinary Committee received all submissions and completed hearings by 22
March 2016. The Disciplinary Committee submitted its report on 24 March 2016 wherein it
was concluded that, in light of the evidence adduced before it, the charge against Mr Edouard
was proved.
Madam Speaker, accordingly, the Board took note of the findings of the Disciplinary
Committee whereat Mr Edouard had been found guilty of the charge “leaving his site of work
without authorisation”. The Board also noted that Mr Edouard had in the year 2015 been
warned for misbehaviour and misconduct as follows -
• on 02 February 2015, he was warned for misbehavior in connection with an
incident which occurred at the Multi-Purpose Terminal, whereby he had
verbally molested another employee; the Head of Logistics. In respect of the
said case, he was given a warning letter, and
• on 14 May 2015, he was given another warning letter and was warned for
misconduct for failing to attend an operation meeting held on 05 March 2015
without informing or justifying his absence and leaving his place of work
without authorisation on 05 March 2015.
In the light of the findings of the Disciplinary Committee, the Board concluded that
Mr Edouard is guilty of misconduct and resolved that he be dismissed. Mr Edouard was
conveyed of the Board decision on the same day.
Madam Speaker, as regards the reinstatement of Mr Alain Edouard, the Union
representing the employees of Cargo Handling has formally requested a meeting with me to
discuss, among other issues, the reinstatement of Mr Alain Edouard.
I will be meeting them on Thursday next to discuss and see if and when, and under
what conditions the case of Mr Alain Edouard may be reviewed.
14
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, these last days, we have had several statements - in
the absence of the hon. Deputy Prime Minister - from the Cargo Handling Corporation Ltd.
For example, in ‘L’Express’ of 28 March, it was said –
“On a reçu seulement une offre préliminaire.”
Then, the following day, it said -
“Il n’y a même pas un brouillon de contrat.”
And yet, I thank the hon. Deputy Prime Minister, because he has given us a good amount of
details. Therefore, from what I have heard, am I right in saying that, in fact, DP World is
asking for control of both the Cargo Handling Corporation Ltd., that is, the Port, and of a
Special Economic Zone in Mauritius and, therefore, they have proposed a 30-year contract
with the Cargo Handling Corporation to manage the Port and a 99-year lease for land at
Riche Terre, where Jin Fei is at present?
The Deputy Prime Minister: Yes, Madam Speaker, that is the situation. I have
given the full chronology of events. The present situation is that we have more detailed
proposals from DP World. They are not final proposals. We have not made counter
proposals yet because we have appointed a consultant who, within the next few weeks, I
gather, will submit its recommendations. But there is a proposal, and the proposal is a three-
pronged project. The main thing is the Special Economic Zone, which is 325 arpents, and
which will be the basis for investment by DP World and attracting this USD450 m.
investment from other companies in state-of-the-art premises for use as a Logistics and
Industrial Park.
They have asked that they get a 99-year lease, and I can see that is quite reasonable,
because if we want quality infrastructure, people will not build quality expensive
infrastructure over only a short-term lease. That is the first thing; the Special Economic
Zone.
They made the point that they cannot operate a Special Economic Zone of that size
and amplitude without having a properly efficient Port to operate traffic going into that SEZ.
So, their proposal is now a 40%-share in Cargo Handling Ltd. coupled with a Management
Contract. We do not have the details of the Management Contract yet. You can take it to
resemble, maybe, Mauritius Telecom or something like that. We have not got details of that
yet, but that is the second proposal.
15
The third aspect of the agreement is their famous Island Terminal, which will come
online once container activity reaches 1.3 million TEUs per annum. We have 550,000 TEUs
at the moment. So, you can see that it is more than doubling the number of TEUs, that is,
when DP World proposes to invest a large sum, I think, USD 500 m., in the Island Terminal.
Mr Bérenger: It is confirmed, therefore, that they are requesting for the control of
both the harbour and the Jin Fei, Riche Terre Special Economic Zone. At Jin Fei, I heard the
hon. Deputy Prime Minister agree with the request that it will be a 99-year old lease. If I
remember correctly, the land there is already leased to a Chinese company. So, what is going
to happen? Is it going to be taken back from that Chinese company? Has that Chinese
company been warned? What is their reaction? Or, as has been the case with certain others
companies, will there be subleasing?
The Deputy Prime Minister: I will respond, Madam Speaker, but Jin Fei is under the
Ministry of Finance and Economic Development. I will give the information that I have. Jin
Fei was originally much bigger. With the new Government coming into power, it was split
into two; part of it remaining with the Chinese and the other part being taken back by
Government. This is the 325 acres that we are talking about. That is now with Government,
and that is what is being talked about for concession to DP World. We are not talking about
the remainder, which is remaining with the Chinese.
Mr Bérenger: I heard the Deputy Prime Minister say that the Management Contract
has not yet been finalised - the details thereof. But I read an interview which he gave to
‘L’Express’ very recently, on 12 April, where he said, and I quote –
“Il y aura des garde-fous. Si dans trois ans le projet ne progresse pas à notre
satisfaction, nous pourrons revenir en arrière.”
Is it, therefore, intended that this clause will be in the Agreement between Dubai Ports World
and the Government of Mauritius?
The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I did not respond about the 99-year
lease. Obviously, we cannot expect someone, say, to build a 20-floor building without
having sufficient time to recuperate his investment. That is the point of the 99-year lease.
As far as the Management Agreement is concerned, we do not have the details yet,
but what we are interested in doing is inputting in the Agreement sufficient Key Performance
Indicators to ensure that any representations that are made by DP World as to the future - and
I did take that into my main answer - is, in fact, abided to. Now, what will be the penalty, if
16
ever any KPI that is agreed between the two parties is not respected, is also something which
will be set in the Agreement.
Mr Bérenger: I heard the hon. Deputy Prime Minister say that BDO again has been
appointed as consultant, but I think I heard through a tender procedure. Can I know which
other such consultancy firms reacted and how much BDO is going to be paid for that?
The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I answered a specific question. I
understand though that they were the lowest and that they also submitted an excellent
proposal. I think the other main firms also responded, but I can get that information.
The Deputy Prime Minister: I think the other main firms also responded, but I can
get the information.
Mr Bérenger: I think I heard the hon. Deputy Prime Minister say that concerning
BDO, its work is ongoing. Am I not right in saying that, in fact, they submitted their report on
the financial situation of the Cargo Handling Corporation on 15 April, that it is therefore
already available?
The Deputy Prime Minister: Not on 15 April, I think, but they have submitted draft
preliminary, not final, and we are discussing on the draft.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, I did not hear any reference to Singapore. Is
Singapore Port Authority out of the picture completely, because I would wish to remind the
hon. Deputy Prime Minister, if you will allow me, before I put my question, is that on 25
November 2015, the then Minister of Finance stated that the Singapore Port Authority would
be involved. I quote –
« Les Singapouriens veilleront surtout à ce que les développements dans le port soient
dans l’intérêt de Maurice. »
As if Singapore is going to come and watch over Dubai Ports World! Is there any
development there? Is Singapore out of the picture completely?
The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, to respond to the earlier question,
Ernst and Young and PWC were also part of the tender process, submitted their responses to
attend their request. As far as Singapore Port Authority is concerned, I know they are not part
of the discussions and we have, as I have mentioned, other Consultants that we are using.
Mr Bérenger: I can go on to the second part of my question. I heard the hon. Deputy
Prime Minister say that there is no link at all between the dismissal of Mr Alain Edouard and
17
the possible coming into the harbour of Dubai Ports World, but will the hon. Deputy Prime
Minister agree with me that the perception is already there? We know the reputation of Dubai
Ports World across the world. They are very tough on trade unions and it is a strange
coincidence that disciplinary action is taken just before they came, as if to create a mood and,
specially that this trade union and this President have been actively canvassing,
demonstrating against the coming - the privatisation, as they call it - of the harbour through
the coming of the Dubai Ports World.
The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I stated clearly that the dismissal of
Mr Alain Edouard was not in any way related to the Dubai Ports World, and I am not given to
lying in the House and I maintain this. The second thing, Madam Speaker, I think Dubai
Ports World operates in 65 countries; I think 70 ports overall. No point in scaremongering,
Madam Speaker. The idea is to find a better future, more prosperity, better conditions for not
only the existing Port workers, but all potential workers who may be interested in working
either in the Port in the future and the Special Economic Zone and, indeed, in a large number
of the related activities that would be coming up. Mr Edouard’s case has been given to an
Independent Disciplinary Committee, headed by a former Magistrate. I hope the hon. Leader
of the Opposition is not putting into doubt the competence or the independence of that former
Magistrate and this is the conclusion that has been taken. The Board has taken its decision.
On a humanitarian basis, I can consider it again but, obviously, Madam Speaker, I must say
this, Port workers are extremely well paid and that makes me very happy. Nothing more in
life makes me happier than when employees are well paid and Mr Edouard, maybe, earns
Rs170,000 as a Trainer. He should give the right example as a Trainer. You don’t give a
wrong example. And he was the only one having left his work! What would have happened if
all of them had gone, followed the Trainer? That is the first thing. And second thing, Madam
Speaker, with rights come responsibilities. You are well paid, we are all so happy, but, let’s
have decent productivity and decent work standards in the Port. The whole future of this
country depends on our Port working up to the satisfaction. Whether Dubai Ports World
comes or not, we still have to get our Port to work to international standards because there is
competition all over.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, when I am listening to the hon. Deputy Prime
Minister, he gives the impression that the Disciplinary Board, chaired by a former Magistrate,
in fact, I think it is by a Magistrate, but if a former Magistrate or Magistrate, independent, I
agree. I am not challenging the Disciplinary Board. But the hon. Deputy Prime Minister is
18
giving the impression, maybe, without that intention, but the impression that the Disciplinary
Board concluded and recommended the dismissal, which is not the case. They found that he
has been guilty of leaving his site of work without authorisation and did not recommend the
dismissal, and it is the Board, in a very messy way, that decided on the basis of that
independent report to dismiss him, whereas dismissal was not recommended by the
Disciplinary Board.
The Deputy Prime Minister: It is not a question of not recommended or not. The
ambit of the Disciplinary Committee was to find whether the charges are proven. They found
that the charges were proven. The decision as to what the disciplinary action would be taken
was left to the Board and the Board took that decision. Now, Madam Speaker, let’s be clear
on one thing. The Board of Cargo Handling Corporation, if my memory serves me right, has
three members from the Union. One of the few Boards in Mauritius that have three members
from the Union and we have a particular active Union. So, to say it was messy and all that,
that is not true. If you want to make a Board meeting messy, you make it messy. So, it does
not hold water to say that the Board was messy. The decision was taken, and properly taken
and anyway, Madam Speaker, the decision has been taken, as I already mentioned. We can
look at it again and we will look at it again, but we will see what decision has been taken
once we have met with the trade unions, but we are not taking any commitment at this stage.
Mr Bérenger: From what I have heard from the interview of the Rt. hon. Prime
Minister is that they would be given consideration to take him back after so many years of
service in the harbour. Can I remind he hon. Deputy Prime Minister, therefore, that he, in ‘Le
Defi Quotidien’ of 01 April, and I am sure it was not a joke, he himself said: “La question
portant sur sa réintégration n’est pas à écarter. Il y a une bonne volonté. Je suis disposé à
agir sur une base humanitaire.»
Can I ask the hon. Deputy Prime Minister to confirm that he will also take into
consideration expectations raised, because not only him, but the Chairperson of the Cargo
Handling Corporation has also made public statement that the dismissal will be reconsidered
and, therefore, expectations have been created.
The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, it takes two to tango. So, in fact, we
are going to look at the case of Mr Edouard, but let’s hope that everybody comes to his
senses at the same time and, I must say, Madam Speaker, I will never, ever put the interest of
the country and the Port aside. This is my major concern. I don’t know Mr Edouard
19
personally, I have nothing against him, but the interest of the Port, the efficiency of the Port,
the interest of all the workers of the Port, the interest of Mauritius is paramount to this
Government, Madam Speaker.
Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, the hon. Deputy Prime Minister mentioned for Cargo
Handling it would be 40% shareholding of Dubai. But with respect to the Special Economic
Zone, where there would be a joint venture, I understand, between Dubai Ports World and a
Mauritius agency - I don’t know whether it would be Cargo Handling or anyone else - may I
know from the hon. Deputy Prime Minister what would be the shareholding of that Mauritius
Government entity in that special purpose vehicle and what would be the commitment given,
financial or otherwise, by the Government to that special purpose vehicle?
The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, there would be a joint venture in
practice because you cannot run a Special Economic Zone without the permits, without the
business facilitation, etc. So, in practice there is a joint venture. Whether there will be a joint
venture in terms of shareholding - this is what the hon. Member has asked - is another issue
and is under discussion. It could be; some people think there ought to be some percentage of
Government invested – because you have to invest to get shares – in the company, maybe
part of the lease payments can be capitalised; future lease payments can be capitalised into a
shareholding for the joint venture is still under discussion.
Mr Jhuboo: Still concerning the Special Economic Zone, being given that
Government is introducing the BOT concept, why not consider for the Port, which is of
strategic importance, a rather Build and Operate Transfer than a straight 99-year old lease?
The Deputy Prime Minister: For the 99-year lease it is not for the Port, it is for the
SEZ. It is a straight lease for a concession. There is no need for a BOT. It is like everybody
leases land everywhere for hotels or whatever. It is just a lease, but the lease could be turned
into a concession because we need to put KPIs so that, in fact, penalties arise if the KPIs are
not met. So, that is for the SEZ. I don’t know, but maybe something in terms of BOT can be
incorporated in there, but it is not as complicated as that because we are talking about a piece
of land which happens every day in Mauritius when you lease land.
As far as the Board is concerned, that is another issue. We are talking about the DP
World entering into the share capital of Cargo Handling Corporation Ltd.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Lesjongard!
20
Mr Lesjongard: Madam Speaker, with regard to the SEZ, especially when the hon.
Deputy Prime Minister mentioned the creation of serviced plots, do we understand that the
present Government is adopting the same policy as the previous Government, that is,
allowing DP World to sublease land to third parties on terms and conditions to be decided by
them?
The Deputy Prime Minister: Yes, to the first part of the question, definitely, they
will sublease because, in fact, we are talking about investment of US$450 m. in SEZ,
whereas in fact I mentioned, I think, that the DP World investment over the whole time
would not amount to more than US$60 m. So, definitely it is a sublease, but the question is as
to what the terms and conditions are. This is the whole issue, there will be different
incentives, maybe DP World may wish to have the highest rate, maybe we don’t want to have
the highest land rate because what is interesting to Government is the activity rather than a
lease premium. So, this is something that we need to discuss with them and agree, but yes and
no, to the hon. Member’s question.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed!
Mr Mohamed: Madam Speaker, I have listened with much interest to the
forthcoming answers from the hon. Deputy Prime Minister. There have been some serious
allegations made against the company known as DP World on the world arena, and if we are
to limit ourselves let alone the United States of America where there are serious allegations
for corruption and fraud against DP World, there are also serious allegations on the African
Continent. Let us start with Senegal where recently in the Panama Papers, the son of the
former President of Senegal has been accused of secret contracts of several millions of US
Dollars that have been exchanged following a contract with DP World and also in Djibouti
recently. So, in the light of all those scandals for corruption and in light of all those
Ministerial visits to Dubai very, very recently - not the hon. Deputy Prime Minister - what
does the Government propose to do to play the game of transparency since we have not at all
seen any document whatsoever that establishes clearly in a transparent manner what exactly
is going to be given away?
The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, the hon. Member, himself, said I was
quite transparent at the start of his question. But, I must say, Madam Speaker, that firstly I am
not aware of the USA, but I understand that as far as Djibouti is concerned, the High Court in
London, in fact, was in favour of DP World.
21
As far as Senegal is concerned, I am told that with the World Bank involved, things
have been sorted out. This is what I am told. Now, that may be what it is, we are here in
Mauritius, we have the laws in Mauritius and DP World does not only operate in these
countries, DP World operates in Australia, UK, France, etc. We, Madam Speaker, have taken
the commitment - I have taken here formally - that everything will be disclosed, there will be
full disclosure, including the contracts will be disclosed. Obviously, you cannot disclose once
you are now discussing with the potential agreement, but everything will be done
transparently and, Madam Speaker, I would like to assure the House that as far as I am
concerned, also for my colleagues, nothing illegal, nothing untoward, nothing underhand will
be done. What we have in mind if and when we deal with DP World is the utmost interest of
the nation.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition!
Mr Bérenger: My last question; I think I heard the hon. Deputy Prime Minister say
that he will be meeting - and it is a very good thing - the Trade Union next Thursday. I take it
that it is two days from…
The Deputy Prime Minister: Next Thursday.
Mr Bérenger: …then if it is after 01 May, I was going to appeal to the hon. Deputy
Prime Minister, I think in the spirit of 01 May something should be done even before 01
May, but can I request from him that special consideration be given to the reintegration of
that President of the Trade Union on the occasion of 01 May?
The Deputy Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, on a lighter note, as the hon. Leader
of the Opposition is not holding his own meeting on 01 May, he may wish to come to Vacoas
and maybe there we will make some announcement.
Madam Speaker: Time is over! Hon. Members, the Table has been advised that PQ
No. B/286 in regard to Cannabis will now be replied by the hon. Minister of Health and
Quality of Life. Hon. Dr. Sorefan!