BREXIT - MAURITIAN ECONOMY - ASSESSMENT
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Rt.
hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and
National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Brexit and the risk of a deterioration in
our relations with the United Kingdom and United States of America, he will state -
(a)  what measures are now being taken to deal with the impact on Mauritius of
Brexit, and
(b)  how we intend to handle our relationship with the United Kingdom, with
which we will now have to deal with in lieu of the European Union and with
the United States of America on the eve of elections thereat.
aaaaa
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, in reply to the Private Notice Question on
14 June 2016, I stated that an exit of Britain from the EU will surely have consequences, not
only for Mauritius but for the whole world, especially those countries which have direct
cooperation arrangements with the EU including the UK.
I also stated that informal consultations have been held with the Private Sector on the
possible fall-out of Brexit. These discussions are still ongoing and this issue is on the agenda
of the next Joint Public-Private Sector Committee which I chair.
Madam Speaker, at the meeting of Cabinet held on Friday last, it was decided to set
up a Ministerial Committee chaired by the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic
Development to look into the whole Brexit issue.
Immediately after the referendum results were announced, the hon. Minister of
Finance and Economic Development called a meeting with representatives of the Public and
the Private Sectors to assess the likely impact of the exit.
During the meeting, the possible consequences of Brexit on various sectors of the
Mauritian economy were discussed at which the Technical Committee made an initial
assessment of the sector-wise implications of Brexit. The Committee is expected to come up
with proposals to deal with any negative impact of Brexit on the Mauritian economy.
The Technical Committee is also examining the five principal options of Economic
Partnership which UK may choose as a model for negotiation during the two-year transition
period.
10
These five options are as follows -
First, the Norway Model which would imply that the UK will join the
European Economic Area;
Second, the Swiss Model where the UK would be expected to negotiate a
bilateral agreement with the EU States;
Third, the Turkey Model under which the UK may negotiate a bilateral
Customs Union with the EU;
Fourth, the World Trade Organisation Model under which the UK would rely
on the WTO rules for access, and
The fifth option would be for the UK to negotiate a special deal that would
retain free trade with the EU.
Madam Speaker, however, I wish to highlight that the effective date of UK’s exit from
the EU does not start until -
(a)  the UK notifies the EU of its intention to withdraw, and
(b)  a two-year period from such notification lapses.
So far, the UK has not notified the EU of such intention and that the UK’s Prime
Minister is reported to have stated that UK is in no rush to trigger the withdrawal process.
Madam Speaker, so far no policymaker in the UK or the EU has given any indication
as to which option is the preferred one among the five options I have referred to.
Moreover, the outgoing UK Prime Minister has stated that no negotiations proper will
start until his successor has been appointed.
The Technical Committee will continue to monitor and assess the impact of Brexit on
various sectors of our economy and the macroeconomic fundamentals.
Madam Speaker, notwithstanding the scenario that will govern the EU/UK trade
relations, Mauritius will need to have a bilateral trade agreement with the UK to safeguard its
trade interests. In the event UK decides to maintain the EU commitments towards the
Member States which have signed the Interim Economic Partnership Agreement, namely
Madagascar, Mauritius, Seychelles, Zimbabwe, there may not be any need for a fresh trade
agreement.
11
In the eventuality that the UK would wish a change from the current Interim Economic
Partnership Agreement model, Mauritius would have to enter into consultations with the UK
over a new agreement safeguarding our trade interests.
Madam Speaker, in the meantime, we will continue with the diversification of our
export and export markets. Our aim is to move further from being a Euro-centric exporter to
a more diversified export and tourism-based economy.
This diversification strategy was initiated by the present Minister of Finance and
Economic Development in 2010 in the wake of the Euro crisis while he was occupying the
same portfolio. At that point in time, it had become necessary to come up with bold and
farsighted decisions.
Madam Speaker, as I stated in the reply to the PNQ on 14 June last, my Government
is putting a lot of emphasis on the development of an air corridor between Africa and Asia
using Mauritius and Singapore as hub. This strategy will broaden our market base and
provide new exciting opportunities for trade and business.
Madam Speaker, in regard to part (b) of the question, relations between countries are
of a permanent nature regardless of elections. Our relations with the UK and the United
States of America remain strong despite the communiqué issued by both sides on the Chagos
Archipelago.
Let me reiterate that we have always had friendly relations with both the UK and the
US. When I met Mr Patrick F. Kennedy, Under Secretary for Management at the US
Department of State, and Mr Neil Wigan, Africa Director at the UK Foreign and
Commonwealth Office, on 23 June 2016, I again underscored that Mauritius enjoys excellent
relations with both the UK and the US. I stressed that the Chagos Archipelago should not be
used as a trade-off for cooperation between Mauritius and the UK and the US for assistance
from the UK and the US to Mauritius.
I also mentioned that the intention of Mauritius to seek an Advisory Opinion from the
International Court of Justice should not be viewed as an unfriendly act since Mauritius is
fighting for a legitimate cause.
I further made it clear to Mr Kennedy and Mr Wigan that Mauritius considered the
threat from the UK and the US that the request for an Advisory Opinion from the
International Court of Justice would cause lasting damage to the bilateral relations of
12
Mauritius with both the UK and the US to be hostile and totally unacceptable and in breach
of their obligations under international law.
Since Independence, the conduct of our foreign relations with the United Kingdom
has always been on a country-to-country basis, namely at bilateral level and not simply
through the European Union.
Our relations with the UK will not, therefore, be in lieu of our relations with the EU.
In fact, we intend to consolidate our relations both with the UK and the EU. Our trade
relations with the EU will still be governed by the Interim Economic Partnership Agreement
with the Eastern and Southern African countries (ESA). However, since the UK will no
longer be part of the EU, but may have a different relationship, we will need to have a
separate trade agreement with the UK as I have already indicated.
Similarly, Madam Speaker, we have always shared very good relations with the
United States which is this year celebrating its 240 th Independence Day. I intend to be
present at the US Embassy Celebrations this week. I have also written to the President
Obama to congratulate him on this occasion.
Our trade with the United States is principally governed by the Africa Growth and
Opportunity Act (AGOA).
I wish to inform the House that I have asked for a meeting with both the Prime
Minister of the United Kingdom and the President of the USA as I firmly believe that it is
only through a frank and constructive dialogue that we may find meaningful solutions. In the
meantime, our High Commission in the United Kingdom, our Embassy in Washington and
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade will continue to
work towards the consolidation of our relationship with these two countries, whether at
economic, cultural or political levels.
Thank you, Madam Speaker.
Mr Bérenger: I thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for the answer. If I can start with
Brexit, Madam. From what I’ve heard, we now, therefore, will have three different
institutions, different bodies where the whole Brexit issue will be discussed. One in the Joint
Public-Private Sector Steering Committee chaired by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister; secondly, a
Ministerial Committee chaired by the Finance Minister and we had, last Friday, this meeting,
which the Rt. hon. Prime Minister referred to with the private sector, chaired again by the
Minister of Finance and Economic Development. Can I know from the Rt. hon. Prime
13
Minister when the next joint meeting that he chairs is meeting and whether the Minutes will
be made available to the House?
The Prime Minister: Well, the meeting has not yet been fixed, but it will be very
soon. Insofar as the Minutes are concerned, well, I have no difficulty in having it deposited in
the House.
Mr Bérenger: Thank you. As far as the Ministerial Committeee chaired by the
Minister of Finance and Economic Development is concerned, I read that the terms of
reference are to look into and make recommendations on the repercussion of the exit of the
United Kingdom from the European Union. Can we know the composition of that Ministerial
Committee, the members thereof, and whether those recommendations also will be made
public?
The Prime Minister: We appointed it, but I can’t remember all the names. Well, we
will circulate the list. But, insofar as the recommendations are concerned, it all depends, there
may be matters which we can’t make public at this juncture and, therefore, I can’t give the
assurance that this will be communicated.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, I listened to the hon. Minister of Finance and
Economic Development presently, his very cool attitude as if we had plenty of time and even
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, today, gave the impression: ‘Okay, the UK Prime Minister said
this and this is the rule!’ Apparently, no! Is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister aware that only
yesterday the President of France, the Head of Germany, the Chancellor and the Prime
Minister of Italy put the pressure and all the Leaders of the European Union have been
putting the pressure that there is no question of informal discussions before notification under
Section 50, is formally given, and that all of them have requested that, that issue, that is, the
pulling out - there are two different things, pulling out and then negotiating a new deal with
the European Union, but the pulling out, they have all said that nothing will start until
formally they are informed by the UK. Therefore, will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree with
me that we must not continue with this attitude. There is urgency because, right now, if UK
refuses to go that way, things can become very difficult between the European Union and the
UK. So, there is urgency. Will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree with me?
The Prime Minister: Well, I can’t totally agree with the hon. Leader of the
Opposition. On the side of the European Union, they may bring pressure, but the Prime
14
Minister of UK has made it very clear that they are not in a rush and any discussions will
only start after notification that they are withdrawing. So, I don’t see this urgency.
(Interruptions)
Well, the Leader of the Opposition is trying to let us believe that he is the only one to care…
(Interruptions)
for Mauritius…
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order! Order!
(Interruptions)
Order, please!
(Interruptions)
Order!
The Prime Minister: We are a serious Government and...
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan, please!
The Prime Minister: We will take our responsibilities.
Mr Bérenger: You should do some penmanship as well!
Okay! You finished!
The Prime Minister: Yes.
Mr Bérenger: Take your time! I am sure Madam Speaker will give us time! As the
Rt. hon. Prime Minister has just said, we will now have to deal with both the UK, which is
going out of the European Union, and the European Union without the UK, plus a new UK
Prime Minister derrière la porte and most probably general elections in the UK, plus, as far
as France and Germany are concerned, elections fixed for next year. Can I ask the Rt. hon.
Prime Minister whether our missions, not only in London and Paris, but also in Germany,
will be put to full use - because we are in a complicated situation - not only to deal with the
political parties in Government, but also with the Opposition parties preparing for the future,
including Germany? In the case of Germany, two allies will be fighting each other in the
15
election next year, that is, the SPD and Mrs Merkel’s party. Therefore, will the Prime
Minister agree with me that our three missions, including Germany, which we stand to
underestimate and which is now going to take all its importance, will have to be put to full
use?
The Prime Minister: Well, we will do everything that is necessary. They will
closely follow up with all parties which we consider will be necessary.
Mr Bérenger: If I can have one last question on the Brexit issue. In the past,
Mauritius used to play a role of avant-garde in the ACP group in Brussels. Can I know
whether Government has discussed what initiatives, we, Mauritius, should take in Brussels,
being given the situation we are in, motivating the ACP group and playing that role of avant-
garde which we played in the past?
The Prime Minister: Well, we will certainly do that. But, of course, everything will
be done step by step when the time is opportune. I do not think we should rush. It is true
there has been a referendum in UK, but UK is not yet out of the European Union.
Mr Bérenger: If I can move on the Chagos issue and our relations with the UK and
US. I listened correctly, of course, to what the Rt. hon. Prime Minister had to say, but on 17
May, replying to my PNQ, he insisted that his intention is to bring a Resolution before the
General Assembly this year – he insisted. That is in a few weeks’ time, in September.
Therefore, being given that we are two days away from the deadline which the Rt. hon. Prime
Minister has himself set for the US and the UK to give us certain guarantees, can I know
whether the procédures have been enclenchées at the United Nations, and whether we are in
contact with the new General Assembly President from Fidji who will be chairing as from
September? Can I also know whether we have started the lobbying of all our friendly
countries, if we are going to have a Resolution in a few weeks’ time, or is Government
prepared to consider going back to the 2001 initiative that we developed when the Rt. hon.
Prime Minister was Prime Minister and I was Deputy Prime Minister and which he and I, as
Prime Minister, discussed right up to the level of the White House with President Bush?
The Prime Minister: Well, I would like to know what was the outcome of the
discussion. We were nowhere insofar as Chagos is concerned. From my discussions with the
representatives of the British Government lately, it is very clear that the Britishers have no
intention of giving back Chagos. Therefore, we have to take all measures. We have to
struggle and fight hard insofar as Chagos is concerned because we are fighting for a
16
legitimate cause, and this should not affect our relationship with the US and the UK. That is
my opinion. We are not going to bow down before these people who pretend to support
justice, human rights, rule of law, but are behaving in the most dictatorial way, giving me the
impression that their philosophy is: “might is right.” Therefore, I am not going to capitulate
myself. We are going forward. Our representative in the United States is doing the needful,
and we are not going to bow down.
Mr Bérenger: We are - I am sure the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is already aware -
already dans l’ère post Cameron and post Obama. Mr Cameron is on his way out in a few
weeks’ time; for Mr Obama, there will be new elections next year. When the Rt. hon. Prime
Minister replied to my PNQ of 17 May, he said that he had written to Mr Obama on 14 April
2015. Can I know whether this letter has been replied to and whether, in this case also, he
will agree with me that our missions in Washington and in London will have to be put to full
use on this issue of Chagos?
The Prime Minister: There has been no reply. Certainly, we are going to make full
use by all our representatives, with all efforts that will be possible.
Mr Bérenger: It is very disturbing to hear that. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister rightly
said in his communiqué of last Friday afternoon that the comments by UK and US are hostile
and totally unacceptable. We, on the MMM side, have agreed with that totally. Being given
the tone adopted in that communiqué by the US and the UK, can I know, in the case of the
US, whether there has been any hint of a threat that US might use the African Growth and
Opportunity Act (AGOA) to get what they want at this stage?
The Prime Minister: No, they have not given any details. The threat has been made
public, and it is just this threat and nothing more.
Mr Bérenger: My last question before the final, final one on the Chagos. I am sure
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister must be aware that tomorrow the new Supreme Court of the UK -
because there is no longer the House of Lords, Law Lords - will be ruling on the 2008 ruling
that was three to two - the Rt. hon. Prime Minister will remember - and which was in favour
of Government; three against two. Can I know whether our mission has kept watching brief
and reported to headquarters here, and have we prepared ourselves to react, whatever the
ruling?
17
The Prime Minister: Well, naturally, our representative has been following. I have
been told that it is very likely that Chagossians are going to lose this case. But, then, we have
to wait for the verdict, and it is only then that we can think of what stand we must take.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah!
Mr Rutnah: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agreeable
with me that, further to the referendum in relation to Brexit, the House of Commons will,
firstly, have to either repeal or amend the European Economic Communities Act 1972 and,
thereafter, activate Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty 2009, in order to start exit, and according
to many Constitutional and European Union Law experts, like Professor Micheal Dougan, it
might take at least 10 years to realise that ...
Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah, can you be very brief, please!
(Interruptions)
Mr Rutnah: ...and that we will have enough and ample time to negotiate, renegotiate
and negotiate further our position with the EU, with the British and with all other countries
that are affected with this issue?
The Prime Minister: Well, I have not looked upon the laws and all that is being said,
but if the hon. Member is correct, then, of course, there will be plenty of time and I hope that
it is so. But I must say, from what I am reading, in UK, very enlightened lawyers with great
experience have stated that in their law there is no Referendum and that whatever decision
had been taken under the Referendum, it’s not binding and that it will have to be approved or
rejected by the House of Commons in UK and it is only then that the decision will be
binding; we know also that several million of English people have made a petition for a new
Referendum and, apparently, from the laws in force in UK, being given what proportion has
made this application of a new Referendum, then the Government is bound to have a new
Referendum.
Mr Mohamed: I am happy to note that the Rt. hon. Minister is getting his
information on Facebook regularly. With regard to the European Parliament and the Brexit
issue, European Parliament is meeting on next Tuesday in an emergency session to debate the
fallout from Brexit and there will be a special Motion urging immediate activation of Article
50, and what we have heard, Prime Minister Cameron will also next Tuesday be briefing the
European leaders with regard to the after-Referendum.
18
(Interruptions)
Tuesday, today! So, in the light of this and that the hon. Prime Minister of Great Britain has
decided to leave it to the next Prime Minister to activate Article 50 and Article 50, therefore,
could be activated anytime as from the month of October of this year, doesn’t the Rt. hon.
Prime Minister consider that it is necessary, therefore, to call for a special meeting of the
ACP countries not simply to meet in Windhoek, as the hon. Minister of Agro-Industry and
Food Security most probably would have met, as said two weeks ago by the Rt. hon. Prime
Minister or by any other Minister, but the Heads of State of ACP countries...
Madam Speaker: Be brief, please!
Mr Mohamed: ....to meet in order to discuss the urgency facing the new agreements
that have to be negotiated, possibly as from the month of October and maybe, if the scenario
is very favourable to Mauritius in 10 years’ time, but the possibility is that the emergency
situation is as from October?
Madam Speaker: Please, be brief, hon. Shakeel Mohamed! Others also want to ask
questions.
The Prime Minister: Well, we will certainly consider that and if we have to meet, we
will be meeting.
Madam Speaker: The last question is for the hon. Leader of the Opposition.
Mr Bérenger: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am not playing politics, but I will ask
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, at a time when the country is facing two huge challenges, the
fallouts from Brexit and, secondly, the risk - I use the word ‘risk’ - of a deterioration in our
relations with the UK and US at such a crucial moment, does not the Rt. hon. Prime Minister
agree with me that the Foreign Minister of Mauritius must be very much more present, heard
than lately?
The Prime Minister: Well, the Foreign Minister will certainly do what is necessary.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order! Hon. Baloomoody! We can’t hear what the Rt. hon. Prime
Minister is saying.
The Prime Minister: I think he knows what are his responsibilities.
Madam Speaker: Time is over! Hon. Uteem!