RODRIGUES - FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE - OUTBREAK
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Minister of
Agro-Industry and Food Security whether, in regard to the current outbreak of the Foot and
Mouth disease, he will state –
(a)  the date of the first detected case of the disease in Rodrigues, indicating the
number of cases thereof detected as at to date thereat and in mainland
Mauritius respectively;
(b)  the containment measures taken as at to date;
(c)  if the causes thereof have been identified;
(d)  the expected impact thereof on our –
(i)  imports from Rodrigues, and
(ii)  exports to the European Union and elsewhere, and
(e)  if compensation to the cattle breeders and a “Plan de Relance” for cattle
breeding will be forthcoming.
aaaaa
Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, let me at the very outset thank the hon. Leader of
the Opposition for raising this issue, which is of national importance.
Madam Speaker, Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD) is a severe, highly contagious viral
disease of livestock with significant economic impact. The disease affects cattle and swine as
well as sheep, goats, and other cloven-hoofed ruminants. All species of deer are susceptible to
FMD.
In a susceptible population, morbidity approaches 100%. Intensively reared animals
are more susceptible to the disease than traditional breeds. The disease is rarely fatal in adult
animals but there is often high mortality in young animals due to myocarditis or by lack of
milk when the dam is infected by the disease.
FMD is characterised by fever and blister-like sores on the tongue and lips, in the
mouth, on the teats and between the hooves. The disease causes severe production losses and
while the majority of affected animals recover, the disease often leaves them weakened and
debilitated.
8
The organism which causes FMD is an aphthovirus. There are seven strains, each one
requiring a specific vaccine strain to provide immunity to a vaccinated animal.
The FMD virus may spread through any or all of the following -
?  new animals carrying the virus may introduce the disease to a herd;
?  contaminated pens, buildings or vehicles used to house and move susceptible
animals;
?  contaminated materials such as hay, feed, water, milk or biologics;
?  people wearing contaminated clothes or footwear, or using contaminated
equipment;
?  meat or other products, raw or improperly cooked food infected with the virus
and fed to susceptible animals, and
?  aerosol spread of virus from an infected property via air currents.
Contingency planning for potential outbreaks includes the following -
?  humane destruction of all infected, recovered and FMD-susceptible contact
animals;
?  appropriate disposal of carcasses and all animal products;
?  surveillance and tracing of potentially infected or exposed livestock;
?  strict quarantine and controls on movement of livestock, equipment, vehicles,
and
?  thorough disinfection of premises and all infected materials (including cars
and clothes)
Measures that are recommended at the farm level include -
? control over access to livestock by people and equipment;
? control the introduction of new animals to existing stock;
? maintain sanitation of livestock pens, buildings, vehicles and equipment;
? monitor and report illnesses, and
? appropriate disposal of manure and dead carcasses.
Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, the Division of Veterinary
Services of my Ministry was first informed of the suspected cases of the disease by the
Veterinary Officers of Rodrigues on 19 July 2016. According to that report, a first suspected
9
case was detected on 07 July which was treated as an isolated case, followed by 18 cases on
17 July, rising to 32 cases on 19 July. As at date, 500 cases have been reported in Rodrigues.
With regard to Mauritius, 6 cases of FMD have been detected in the consignment
imported from Rodrigues on 01 August and kept at the Richelieu Quarantine Station. 6 other
cases have been detected on one farm at Vallée des Prêtres from a consignment imported on
15 July 2016.
Madam Speaker, with regard to part (b) of the question, my Ministry has initiated the
following containment measures to control the spread of the diseases in Mauritius -
(i)  a complete ban is being imposed on the importation of live animals and meat
from Rodrigues;
(ii)  all animals imported from Rodrigues in the last consignment of 01 August
have been culled at Richelieu Quarantine Station;
(iii)  82 animals on a private farm at Vallée des Prêtres, including animals imported
from Rodrigues on 15 July have been culled;
(iv)  strict control is being exercised at the airport for the seizure of any raw meat
carried by passengers coming from Rodrigues;
(v)  a vaccination of all animals found in a radius of 3 kms of the localities where
imported animals from Rodrigues are being kept will be effected and 10,000
doses of vaccines are being imported from Botswana Vaccine Institute for that
purpose. These doses of vaccines will also be utilised in Rodrigues;
(vi)  a recommendation has been made to the Rodrigues Regional Assembly not to
cull all animals and to resort to the vaccination of uninfected animals;
(vii)  the different farms on which suspected animals are kept are being closely
monitored to prevent the movement of animals to other places on the island;
(viii) breeders have been advised to report all suspected cases to the DVS for
appropriate follow-up action.
Madam Speaker, as regards part (c) of the question, the exact cause of transmission of
the disease in Rodrigues is not known at this stage. It is suspected that the disease might have
occurred through the introduction of infected meat on the island by passengers traveling on
10
yachts. The results of the molecular diagnosis for phylogenetic analysis expected from France
and South Africa will enlighten us on the source of the infectious agent of the disease.
Madam Speaker, FMD is the first disease for which the Office Internationale
d’Epizooties (OIE) has established an official list of free countries and zones. Mauritius will
take all the measures to be declared a FMD free country by the OIE. As such, import of live
animals and meat from Rodrigues will have to be prohibited to prevent this source of virus to
continue entering the country.
As regards part (d)(i), a total of 7,470 animals was imported from Rodrigues in 2015
and 3,460 for the period January to July in 2016. With the proposed ban on importation,
farmers in Rodrigues will definitely suffer economic losses.
As regards part (d)(ii), Mauritius does not export live animals or meat for
consumption to Europe but does re-export around 100 horses annually to the European
Market after going a quarantine period of three months in Mauritius. There is a risk that such
exports may be banned, but the economic loss may not be very significant.
Madam Speaker, with regard to part (e) of the question, a compensation will, in
principle, be paid to importers/breeders whose animals have been culled. This is a current
practice recommended by the OIE in the event that the Foot and Mouth disease has occurred
in a country. The modalities for the payment are being worked out and the approval of
Government obtained before payment could be effected.
As regards the “Plan de Relance”, a number of measures have been announced in the
2016/2017 Budget to boost up the livestock sector. Furthermore, if a successful vaccination
campaign is carried out both in Mauritius and Rodrigues, lesser animals will be culled and the
present vaccinated animals will be preserved.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, in his statement yesterday, which I read carefully
and the hon. Minister repeated that today, can I quote –
“On 19 July 2016, the Division of the Veterinary Services of my Ministry was
notified by the Veterinary Officer of Rodrigues of an increasing number of sick cattle
in the regions of (…)”
And today, we are being provided with the additional information that the first detected case
was on 07 July. It is only 12 days later that the alarm was raised by the Veterinary Officer of
Rodrigues and I understand that here also, in Mauritius, when the first case was detected, it
11
was treated as an isolated case. So, can I ask the hon. Minister, is he satisfied that we have
not wasted time, especially in Rodrigues between, as I said, 07 July and 19 July 2016, still
later on that measures were taken? Is the hon. Minister satisfied that no time was unduly
wasted both in Rodrigues and in Mauritius?
Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, as I mentioned in my reply, it is only on 19 July that
the Veterinary Officers of my Ministry were informed of the cases of sick cattle in Rodrigues
and straightaway blood samples were taken and tests were carried out on 21, 22 and 23 July
to see the source of the problem. I must say from the results obtained to the tests carried out
on the three days, the tests were negative for the Foot and Mouth Disease. Following the
spread of the diseases in other regions of Rodrigues, two Veterinary Officers from Mauritius
were sent to Rodrigues and other prélèvements were taken to carry out further tests. The tests
that were carried on 29 July showed that the disease was really the one that we suspected and
then we sent another sample to South Africa to confirm whether the Foot and Mouth Disease
did exist in Rodrigues. But from clinical – what was being shown on the farm in terms of the
spread being all over the places and also the fact that not only cattle, but also pigs and sheep
were being affected, the Veterinary Officers confirmed that this disease was really the Foot
and Mouth Disease, but, the hon. Leader of the Opposition said, the case that was first
notified dates to 07 July, but, at that time, no one in Rodrigues suspected that it could have
been the Foot and Mouth Disease and that’s why they did not inform the Veterinary Officers
in my Ministry.
Mr Bérenger: The question was more direct. The Minister has just repeated a number
of facts. My question was whether he and his advisers here, his officers, are satisfied that no
time was wasted in Rodrigues or in Mauritius. But let us move on to what is really disturbing,
more disturbing still, is in his reply what followed later on and how those infected cattle came
to Mauritius. In his Statement yesterday, I see that the hon. Minister – and I think this is very
serious – I quote at page 2 –
“In the meantime, on 29 July 2016, the DVS – the Veterinary Services here, the
officer concerned - informed the Commission of Agriculture in Rodrigues that, in
view of the continuous increase in the number of infected cattle, a restriction should
be imposed on the exportation of cattle to Mauritius and the embarkation of the
consignment of cattle aboard the vessel MV ANNA expected to depart for Mauritius
on 30 July 2016 should not be authorised. The Commission replied that the request
12
for the ban on the export of the animals would be considered by the authorities in
Rodrigues.”
Next paragraph –
“On 01 August 2016, despite the request made by the DVS – Veterinary Officers here
- not to ship any consignment of animals in Mauritius, the MV ANNA berthed in Port
Louis with 13 containers of animals comprising 91 heads of cattle, 69 sheep and 75
goats.”
Can I ask the hon. Minister – this is very, very serious – has an enquiry been carried out to
find out how this could happen, threatening mainland Mauritius after the trouble had got that
far in Rodrigues?
Mr Seeruttun: Again, Madam Speaker, as I said, at the moment that we were aware
of that problem, we have acted promptly and we have made a request to the Rodriguan
authorities not to embark any cattle from Rodrigues to be sent over to Mauritius. Despite that,
there was a consignment that arrived in Mauritius on 01 August; in fact, that was already
here. So, we took the decision to straightaway quarantine the animals.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Will the Minister please answer the question which has been
asked!
Mr Seeruttun: We have been asking the authorities in Rodrigues: ‘why did they
allow the consignment to go ahead?’ But, so far, we have not had any reply from them as to
who took the decision to allow the embarkation of those cattle to Mauritius?
Mr Bérenger: Can I know the names of the officers here, whether it is the Minister
himself – because this is the most serious matter – or his officers, which officer that directed
Rodrigues to apply that ban and who replied on behalf of the Rodrigues Commission that it
will be considered?
Mr Seeruttun: The Chief Veterinary of my Ministry is the one who sent that
instruction to the Commissioner, Mr Félicité in Rodrigues.
(Interruptions)
Mr Bérenger: Who signed that correspondence from their side, the Rodrigues’ side?
Mr Seeruttun: That same Mr Félicité.
13
Mr Bérenger: Because this is a very serious matter! Can the exchange of
correspondence from your officer to Rodrigues and from Rodrigues be tabled?
Mr Seeruttun: I will do that, Madam Speaker.
Mr Bérenger: But, nevertheless, à la décharge de Rodrigues Commission, if I can
say so, are you satisfied, hon. Minister, that the staffing in Rodrigues was and is adequate,
because I understand that there is only one Veterinary Officer? Has there been a request in the
recent past from the Rodrigues’ side for an increase in staff?
Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, I am not aware whether there has been a request
from Rodrigues’ side in the past, but I know that there are two qualified Veterinary Officers in
Rodrigues, a couple, Mr and Mrs Samoisi. As soon as I have been made aware of that
problem, I have asked that we sent our team from here to support and give them a helping
hand to, at least, address the problem as promptly as possible.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, I don’t want to pass judgment before we have all the
facts, but I am sure the Rt. hon. Prime Minister himself must be aware - the Minister is - how
serious what has happened is. So, will consideration be given to enquiring fully into that?
With due respect to the Rodrigues Assembly, to autonomy and so on, but this has been a very
serious breach of security as far as cattle is concerned. Therefore, a full-fledged, either Fact-
Finding Committee by somebody or people credible or even a Select Committee of the House
to look into this whole matter and establish, as I said earlier on, whether we have wasted time
dangerously in Rodrigues and in Mauritius, whether what happened in the case of that ban
that was simply ignored and whether there have been requests for extra staffing in Rodrigues
recently.
Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, I am as much concerned as the Leader of the
Opposition with regard to this problem and we will do everything to look into the matter what
happened and who were those responsible for that particular consignment that was sent to
Mauritius.
Mr Bérenger: If I can move on, Madam Speaker, to the containment measures,
especially abattage, killing of these animals. Can we know in Rodrigues, what is the total
number of cattle that can be expected at this stage, unfortunately, to be culled?
Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, as it is today, the whole island is infected with this
problem of Foot and Mouth Disease. If we want to go through the culling of the animals,
we’ll have to cull all the animals, but the culling exercise is done when you can contain it,
14
when it is localised, when it is in a specific area. But the fact that it is now island-wide, so the
best option, according to the experts, those who are in that field, they are proposing that we
only go and cull those who are really infected ones and the others be vaccinated so that we
don’t have to go for a mass killing and the vaccination will have to be carried out over a
period of time, up to three years, and then we will be able to assess whether we have done
away with that particular disease.
Mr Bérenger: I am sure the hon. Minister has read - we are still talking about culling,
abattage - carefully the shocking conditions apparently, according to Press reports, that this
culling, this abattage is taking place in Rodrigues specifically. Shocking! Has the Minister
had time to look into that and has he discussed that with the Rodrigues Commission
Authorities?
Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, again, I too was very shocked by what I have read in
the Press with regard to the way they are supposedly carrying out the culling exercise. I have
talked to my colleague, the PPS from Rodrigues and I am also trying to get in touch with the
authorities in Rodrigues. We have not had any confirmation yet as to whether this is really
being carried out in that particular way.
Mr Bérenger: Shocking! Madam Speaker, we know that there is a lot of abattage
illégal in Mauritius I suppose, in Rodrigues I hope not but, I think there is. How is that
interfering with our problem now in Rodrigues especially, but even in Mauritius? This
abattage illégal that has been going on for quite a while, how does it make our job here and
in Rodrigues even more difficult?
Mr Seeruttun: With regard to the abattage illégal, Madam Speaker, for some months
now we have, at the level of the Mauritius Meat Authority, set up a squad to go and check
whether this kind of exercise is being done by some people in a very inhumane way. So, we
have already in place a squad that goes and ensures that this kind of practice be stopped the
more so now that we have this problem in hand. In all the localities where we have a number
of animals that have come from Rodrigues where there could be the possibility of that
disease, we have asked for the Police to assist us to make sure that these breeders do not go
and cull the animals on their own.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, if I can move on to vaccination. Only this morning I
read the statement from the Minister saying that we have not yet identified the specific cases
that we have. Apparently, Madam Speaker, I tried to find out, the virus is genetically highly
15
variable, that is, you have all sorts of varieties, if I can call that, which limits the effectiveness
of vaccination. This means that foot-and-mouth disease vaccines must be highly specific to
the strain involved. Vaccination only provides temporary immunity. So, can I know from the
Minister how does that tally? Apparently, we have placed orders for vaccines and yet this
morning the Minister says we have not yet identified the strain involved.
Mr Seeruttun: In fact, Madam Speaker, there are seven strains with regard to that
particular virus and, according to the information that I have been given, there is not one
vaccine that can address all the different strains that are available. So, from the test carried
out in South Africa and the vaccine that we have in Africa, it can address only three types of
viruses SAT-1, SAT-2 and SAT-3. That is why we have also been sending samples to France
to make sure that we know specifically which strain is the one which is affecting our cattle
here so that the vaccine that we are going to inject is going to be effective. But, from the
advice that I received from the Vet officers, we still need those vaccines, the ones that we
have ordered, some 10,000 doses, to, at least, do some preliminary precautionary measures.
Mr Bérenger: I understand from what I heard, Madam Speaker, that we have not yet
identified the causes of why this outbreak has taken place and reference has been made to the
possibility that it is travellers that went through Rodrigues. Have we identified the countries
in the region where foot-and-mouth disease prevails at present and, therefore, to find out
whether there have been visitors from overseas, from those countries?
Mr Seeruttun: Usually, Madam Speaker, our zone, the Indian Ocean Zone, is free
from foot-and-mouth disease. The only country which is close and is affected by the disease
is South Africa and it is in certain regions of South Africa where we have this disease. As I
mentioned earlier in my reply, the way that this disease could be introduced is either through
direct contact or airborne or even through meat and meat products that are not well cooked.
And, we have a very strict system of control here that prevents any introduction of live or
meat and meat products from places where we have this type of disease.
Now we know that in Rodrigues we have direct flights from Reunion Island, we have
also yachts visiting Rodrigues. These are the other ways and means how this could be
introduced. That is why we are trying to locate and identify the source of the disease and one
way to determine that is through that strain that we are going to detect of the disease so as to
know from which part of the world this disease comes from and probably through the visitors
also. We will have an idea of knowing the source of that disease.
16
Mr Bérenger: The last part of my question relates to compensation and a “Plan de
Relance”. I congratulate the Rodrigues Regional Assembly because, from what I understand,
they have already decided to compensate, as much as they can with their limited means, the
breeders. Will the Minister take on board that this is not just Rodrigues problem, it is a
national problem. From what I understand, the whole breeding community is going to be
devastated in Rodrigues.
Apart from what the Rodrigues Regional Assembly has rightly decided to do in terms
of compensation, will the Minister agree with me that there must be a special exceptional
financial help from Mauritius as a Republic, from the State, Budget? Therefore, has he
discussed with the Rt. hon. Prime Minister already what special effort, what gesture
Mauritius, through the Budget, will make to add to whatever compensation the Rodrigues
Regional Assembly decides upon; that Mauritius as a Republic makes a special effort in that
case?
Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, as I said, we are working on the modalities and we
have to look at the ampleur of the problem. Definitely, I will be going to Cabinet on Friday to
seek the approval of the Government with regard to the form of compensation that could be
provided to all those affected by that problem.
Mr Bérenger: I think, Madam Speaker, I heard the Minister say that not all cattle -
goats and so on - is going to be culled in Rodrigues as apparently it was considered or even
decided at one point in time. Nevertheless, can I ask: has there been an assessment by us in
Mauritius, by the Rodrigues Regional Assembly on what impact all this is likely to have on
this sector, on cattle breeding in Rodrigues, whether it will be completely devastated or not
that badly damaged? Has there been that assessment and also in Mauritius? I think in
Mauritius it will be very much more limited but, especially in Rodrigues, whether that
assessment because whatever “Plan de Relance” we talk about is in the light of the damage
done.
Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, definitely there is going to be a financial impact on
the breeders of Rodrigues because, as I said in my reply, last year itself there were some
7,470 animals that were exported to Mauritius. So, definitely the fact that we are going to put
a ban on the importation of animals from Rodrigues, that is going to affect their revenue.
Now, with regard to the cheptel itself, the fact that we are not proposing to go for the
mass culling of the animals, from the information that we have, those animals that are
17
infected, especially the ones that are old enough do not die from that disease. It is only the
young ones that are affected. Even those that are affected get recovered over time, after the
incubation period. So, that is why we are saying that even if the whole island is now
infected, it is not wise to go for mass culling and vaccination is the best option. That is where
we feel also that it is going to limit the number of cases where we will have to go for culling.
So, therefore, the number of animals that we have to put down will be less than what we
thought at the beginning.
Mr Leopold: Unfortunately, Madam Speaker, viruses are one of the most dangerous
micro-organisms which exist on earth. As the hon. Leader of the Opposition has earlier said,
viruses mutate as well and that makes treatment difficult. I would like to ask the hon.
Minister what his Ministry is doing for the ethical killing of the affected animals? In
Rodrigues, after everything is under control, from that time, when is he going to lift the ban
of exportation on Rodrigues? I would like to say as well that with viruses, it may take 21
days to know from the time the animals get affected to the time they show the signs and
symptoms, that is why it makes it difficult as well to manage.
Mr Seeruttun: According to work carried out it says that it takes about three years to
have this infected zone free from that particular disease. So, we will have to go through that
vaccination exercise first. It has to be carried out on a scheduled period and from there on,
we will carry out analysis to see whether this disease is gone or not and it is then that we can
only lift the ban.
Madam Speaker: Last question, hon. Leader of the Opposition!
Mr Bérenger: Well, Madam Speaker, I would like to, through the Minister, put it
across to the Government and to our Rodrigues friend that cattle breeding in Rodrigues is
widely practised and it has a vital importance in the social life of Rodrigues. Can
Government keep that in mind urgently because there is a lot of religious, social and
educational activities that will be impacted and here, in Mauritius, we know that we have
imported live cattle for religious occasions like for the forthcoming Qurbani festivity?
Therefore, can I appeal to Government to take into consideration the importance of cattle
breeding for Rodriguan society in general and to see to it that it does not impact negatively on
our religious activities here in Mauritius?
Mr Seeruttun: With regard to whether there is going to be a shortage or not of cattle
for the forthcoming festivities, I don’t think so because from the stock that we have already in
18
place here, I have got confirmation that we have sufficient to make sure that there won’t be
any shortage for the forthcoming Eid al-Adha festival.
With regard to the social problems that could arise in Rodrigues, we are well aware of
the specificity of Rodrigues and we will do our utmost to provide all the support necessary to
the Rodriguans and especially to the breeders in Rodrigues for them to be back again in
business, in their daily activities of breeding and selling their cattle.
Madam Speaker: Time is over! The Table has been advised the PQ B/825 will now
be replied by hon. Minister of Local Government. Hon. Ganoo!