UNITED KINGDOM – EU MEMBERSHIP
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Rt.
hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and
National Development Unit whether, in regard to the diplomatic, commercial and economic
fall-outs of a United Kingdom exit from the European Union, he will state -
(a)  if he has chaired any inter-ministerial committee in relation thereto and
indicate what Government-Private Sector consultations there have been;
(b)  the eventual impact thereof on our -
(i)  exports of sugar, textile products, canned tuna and fruits, and
(ii)  tourism sector;
(c)  if Mauritius has discussed same with our African, Caribbean and Pacific
Group of States (ACP) partners, and
(d)  who represented Mauritius at the -
(i)  8 th ACP Summit of Heads of State and Heads of Government held in
June 2016, and
(ii)  ACP 40 th Anniversary Symposium held in June 2015.
aaaaa
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, first of all, I should like to make a remark that
all this is still premature because UK is not out of the European Union.
Let me, at the outset, recall the long standing and friendly relations that bind
Mauritius to the UK. We have, since the time of our independence, had strong diplomatic
and trade relations with the UK, even prior to the UK acceding to the European Community.
Our exports to the UK stood at MUR 11 billion and imports at MUR 4 billion in 2015. Our
total sugar exports to the UK for the 2015 crop amounted to 52,000 tons. Textile and
clothing exports stood at MRU 6 billion, while processed tuna exports amounted to MRU 2.8
billion. Some 130,000 tourists visited Mauritius last year from the UK and the UK stands
third in term of tourist arrivals.
Our cooperation also extends to the fields of education, health and various other
sectors. I am confident that our relations with the UK will stand the test of time beyond any
eventual BREXIT.
9
Madam Speaker, an exit of the UK from the EU will surely have consequences, not
only for Mauritius, but for the whole world, especially those countries which have direct
cooperation arrangements with the EU including UK.
Madam Speaker, let me now address the specific questions raised with regard to part
(a) of the question, no formal inter-ministerial committee has been established on the issue of
BREXIT. However, informal consultations have been held with the private sector on the
possible fall-out of BREXIT. These discussions are still ongoing and this issue is on the
agenda of the next Joint Public-Private Sector Steering Committee which I chair.
Regarding part (b) (i), I am informed that our exports on the UK Market may be
affected if the benefits of the Interim Economic Partnership Agreement which provides duty
and quota free market access to Mauritius on the UK Market, by virtue of its membership in
the EU, are removed.
However, we do not believe that this is likely to happen, given that even if the UK
were to exit the EU, there would be a transitional period of two years during which the UK
would be expected to respect its obligations. During that transitional period, we would seek
to transpose the commitments of the UK under the Interim Economic Partnership Agreement
into a new arrangement.
Madam Speaker, regarding part (b)(ii) of the question, insofar as tourism is
concerned, we are now targeting new markets in tourism through the new Air Corridor and
expanding existing markets, mainly in Asia. This will offset any shortfall in the arrival of
European tourists which has already dropped from 67% of tourist arrival in the year 2000 to
54% last year, while at the same time, total tourists arrival has increased significantly from
657,000 in year 2000 to 1.15 million in 2015.
This is tangible proof that Mauritius is proactively diversifying its tourism industry.
In fact, we are expecting around 55,000 new tourist arrivals from Asia during this calendar
year, thanks to the Africa-Mauritius-Singapore-Asia Air Corridor and other measures
initiated in this context.
However, we will be proactively monitoring any impact that a potential devaluation
of the Euro or potential strengthening of the Pound Sterling may have thereon.
Regarding paragraph (c), Mauritius will raise this matter at the joint ACP - EU
Parliamentary Assembly currently being held in Windhoek. Informal discussions have taken
place between the ACP Group in Brussels and the EU and will continue.
10
Madam Speaker, with regard to part (d) of the question, I wish to inform the House
that -
(i)  the hon. Mahen Seeruttun, Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security led
the Mauritius delegation which comprised Ambassador H. Dillum and Mr V.
Gondeea, Permanent Secretary to the 8 th ACP Summit of Heads of State and
Heads of Government held in June 2016 in Papua New Guinea, and
(ii)  Mauritius was represented by Ambassador J. Koonjul and the staff of the
Mauritius Embassy in Brussels at the ACP 40 th Anniversary Symposium
which was held at the ACP House in Brussels in June 2015. The ACP
countries were largely represented at Ambassadorial or Chargé d’Affaires
level at the symposium.
Madam Speaker, there is no clarity on the exact economic impact of BREXIT and
views vary as to whether there would, for instance, be a permanent loss for the UK economy
with a potential reduction of the UK GDP by 2.25% or whether this could lead to a more
prosperous Britain.
Should there be an exit of the UK, the latter would have not only to renegotiate all its
obligations undertaken as a member of the European Union but it would also in all likelihood
have to establish a new partnership with other WTO Member States. However, this is a
complex procedure and will entail multiple negotiations. Article 50 of the treaty of the
European Union stipulates and I quote -
“The Treaties shall cease to apply to the State in question from the date of entry into
force of the withdrawal agreement or, failing that, two years after the notification,
unless the European Council in agreement with the member state concerned,
unanimously decides to extend this period”.
Since the issue raised today by the Leader of the Opposition is of national interest, we all
need to come up with constructive proposals on the way forward to safeguard the interests of
Mauritius and chart a new strategy for our future economic relationships with the United
Kingdom. To be precise, as at now the UK cannot enter into any bilateral agreement with
Mauritius without the approval of the European Union. Upon BREXIT, the UK would be
able to straightaway enter into such bilateral agreements. We need to capitalise on such
possibilities and this is where the contributions of one and all will be essential.
11
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, I heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister say that
supposedly that question is premature. Now, that the risk of BREXIT of UK opting out of the
European Union has become unfortunately very real and being given that, in nine days’ time,
the referendum will take place on BREXIT in the UK, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister will
understand that I am quite surprised that there has been no formal Inter-Ministerial
Committee chaired by him and that there have been only informal consultations with the
private sector. Now that we have reached this point in time, does the Rt. hon. Prime Minister
not feel that this is required, a formal Inter-Ministerial Committee, to look at all these points
and those which I am going to raise now and to consult on a formal manner with the private
sector?
The Prime Minister: Well, we don’t know what is going to happen really. For the
time being, it looks like that, but we cannot have funeral before death.
(Interruptions)
Mr Bérenger: There is something which says ‘gouverner c’est prévoir’, now we have
reached nine days from the referendum and we have this kind of attitude! Now, the Rt. hon.
Prime Minister has made reference to Article 50 of the European Union Treaty where if there
is a BREXIT vote in the forthcoming referendum, the UK would have formally to give
notification of its wishing to exit the European Union. But the Rt. hon. Prime Minister said
that there would be a period of two years, is he aware that that period of two years is a
maximum, it can be extended if all the Members of the European Union agree, but the period
of two years is not a minimum, it is a maximum, anything can happen during that period of
two years? Is he aware of that?
The Prime Minister: Well, there is a transitional period of two years, whether it is a
minimum or a maximum, that it is there is a fact. So, we can have so many negotiations
during two years.
Mr Bérenger: I am quite surprised that there has been no formal Inter-Ministerial
Committee to look into all the different possibilities because ‘gouverner c’est prévoir’. Has
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister or Government as a whole looked at the alternatives should the
UK leave the European Union? What are the alternatives especially the one that UK seems to
have in mind, that is, following the Norway route to become a Member of the Free Trade
Area?
12
The Prime Minister: We will have to negotiate with UK definitely and this does not
bar us from negotiating with other European countries that will continue to form part of EU.
Mr Bérenger: As I just said, if the UK opts out of the European Union as such the
intention apparently is for them to join the Free Trade Area which already has as Members
Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway mainly. Is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister aware that, if that
takes place, then there will be impact on our exports because the rules of origin in that
organisation are not at all the same as the rules of origin between the European Union and the
ACP countries?
The Prime Minister: Well, since the Euro Crisis in 2011, we have initiated actions to
diversify our market. We have a meeting with the EFTA on this matter and where this matter
will be raised.
(Interruptions)
I see EFTA here!
Mr Bérenger: Well, if the UK opts out of the European Union, as I said, their first
choice would be, it is clear, to join the Free Trade Area which would raise rules of origin
problems, another problem for Mauritius. Now, if that does not work out then, probably, it
will be purely Free Trade Area without all the rest. Again, will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister
agree with me that it is the duty of Government - it is not premature - to prepare for
alternatives and how each of these alternatives would impact on our export and on our
tourism sector?
The Prime Minister: Well, we will have also not to forget that we will be turning
towards other countries like Middle East, Africa, Asia, trade and investment and all that, we
will have to find alternatives.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, indeed, the top destination for our export of textiles,
fish, sugar, and the second largest source in terms of earnings as far as tourism is concerned,
is the UK after France; can I know whether, at least, Government has sought the opinion of
the private sector on what an eventual BREXIT would mean for those sectors of the
economy?
The Prime Minister: Well, we have had some discussions on this, but we cannot take
definite decisions until the thing happens. I have just been told also that we will have the
option to negotiate a free-trade agreement with the UK and rules of origin will be looked into.
13
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, if I can move on to the next part of my question. I
heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister make a comment on the eventual impact of BREXIT on the
economic partnership agreements, full or partial, as signed between ACP countries and the
European Union. Can I know whether that has been discussed with hon. Seeruttun who
represented Mauritius in a recent Summit - only a few days ago - of ACP countries? Has
there been any consultation at the level of the ACP Heads of State or Government on what
would happen to the economic partnership agreements if there is BREXIT?
The Prime Minister: I don’t know whether they discussed this matter fully but, as I
say, right now it is premature for us to take any definite stand.
Mr Bérenger: Au-delà de the European Union and ACP relationship and how it
would be affected by an eventual BREXIT, is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister aware that to
complete matters further, the Cotonou Agreement itself is coming to an end in 2020, that is,
four short years from where we stand now? How this – if there is BREXIT again - would
impact on the European Union and ACP relationship and how it would impact on the
Cotonou Agreement which, I am reminding the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, is ending in 2020?
That is derrière la porte! Has this been discussed at the level of the ACP Heads of State and
Government?
The Prime Minister: Well, this question should have been put to the Minister
concerned. But then, if Cotonou Agreement is coming to an end, we will have to re-
negotiate. What other solution is there?
Mr Bérenger: But, of course, the question cannot be put to any individual Minister.
The Minister of Agro-Industry is for agriculture, the Minister of Commerce is for commerce
and so on. That is why I insisted that there should have been – gouverner c’est prévoir – an
Inter-Ministerial Committee chaired by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to look at all this and put
heads together, Madam Speaker.
Can I move to the next question? We have been informed that the Minister of Agro-
Industry and Food Security represented Mauritius at the recent Summit. I am given to
understand that, reports from the ACP Council of Ministers and from an eminent person’s
group chaired by Former President of Nigeria, Obasanjo, and those two reports were received
on the future perspectives of the ACP group. I am sure the possibility of BREXIT also must
have been taken into consideration. Now, can I put the request that these two reports be
tabled?
14
The Prime Minister: Well, these are questions that should be asked to the Minister
concerned. The hon. Leader of the Opposition is so prévoyant - he is talking ‘gouverner c’est
prévoir’ - that he is sitting on that side today.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Okay, no other questions!
(Interruptions)
We move on to the next question, hon. Osman Mahomed!