ELECTORAL REFORMS
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Rt.
hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and
National Development Unit whether, in regard to electoral reforms in mainland Mauritius and
in Rodrigues, he will state –
(a) if the United Nations Human Rights Committee has been informed of the
stand of Government in relation thereto, and
(b) when the Ministerial Committee chaired by the Honourable Deputy Prime
Minister, Minister of Tourism and External Communications, is expected to
publish the recommendations thereof on the –
(i) introduction of a dose of proportional representation in the National
Assembly, and
(ii) proposed amendments to the electoral system in Rodrigues, indicating
if the State Law Office has already prepared a draft Bill in relation
thereto.
aaaaa
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, as I explained in my reply to the Private
Notice Question on 20 October 2015, prior to the last general election, every candidate at any
general election was required to declare his community pursuant to section 3(1) of the First
Schedule to the Constitution.
In 2007, the political party Rezistans ek Alternativ challenged the above requirement
before the United Nations Human Rights Committee (UNHRC). The Committee concluded
that the requirement of mandatory classification of a candidate for a general election
constituted a violation of Article 25 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights. The UNHRC also reminded that Mauritius was under an obligation to provide the
complainants with an effective and enforceable remedy and avoid similar violations in the
future.
In December 2011, following a judgment of the Judicial Committee of the Privy
Council, Rezistans Ek Alternativ entered two constitutional plaints which are still pending
before the Supreme Court.
9
In July 2014, Parliament passed the Constitution (Declaration of Community)
(Temporary Provisions) Bill, which removed the mandatory requirement for a candidate to
declare his community.
However, that piece of Legislation was applicable only to the first general election
held after the commencement of the Act. For subsequent general elections, candidates will
still have to declare their community if no change is brought to the Law. For this reason,
Rezistans Ek Alternativ has maintained its constitutional plaints.
The case was last called before Supreme Court on 07 April 2016 and Counsel for
Plaintiff stated that his client had taken note that the Ministerial Committee on Electoral
Reform has submitted a first Report on the financing of political parties, but argued that the
issue of mandatory declaration of community has still not been addressed by the Committee.
The case has now been fixed for trial on 03 November 2016.
Madam Speaker, in regard to part (a) of the question, I wish to inform the House that
in the same reply of 20 October 2015, I underlined the fact that Mauritius can only report new
developments to the Human Rights Committee once the matter has been resolved at the level
of the Supreme Court.
Nevertheless, in our Fifth Periodic Report on the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights, which was submitted to the Human Rights Committee in April 2016, we
did inform the latter that in the light of its findings, Government is pursuing its discussions
and consultations to work towards an electoral reform that will suit the long term interest of
the country and that would be based on the following five criteria -
(i)  stability;
(ii)  fairness;
(iii)  inclusiveness to ensure representation of all components of the Mauritian
rainbow nation;
(iv)  gender representation, and
(v)  transparency and accountability.
We also informed the Human Rights Committee that Government stands committed
to reform the electoral system so as to introduce a dose of proportional representation in the
National Assembly and guarantee better women’s representation. The issue of mandatory
declaration of community will be addressed in the wider context of the electoral reform. In
this context, a Ministerial Committee has been set up to examine the various implications of
10
the proposed changes and make recommendations. Thereafter, appropriate consultations will
be held with all the stakeholders prior to implementation.
Madam Speaker, in regard to part b(i) of the question, the introduction of proportional
representation in our electoral system does form part of the Terms of Reference of the
Ministerial Committee chaired by the Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and
External Communications.
As the House is aware, the Ministerial Committee has already submitted its
recommendations on the financing of political parties. The State Law Office has already
been requested to prepare the draft Bill. In fact, the Deputy Prime Minister made a statement
in the National Assembly in this context on 05 April 2016.
I also understand that the Ministerial Committee has already started to examine
other issues in the Terms of Reference, including the electoral system in Rodrigues, women’s
representation and the powers of the Electoral Supervisory Commission. The Committee has
not yet considered the issue of proportional representation, mandatory declaration of
community and anti-defection measures.
Madam Speaker, with regard to part (b)(ii) of the question, at the time the Rodrigues
Regional Assembly Act was being passed in 2001, a new electoral system was introduced for
electing Members of the Rodrigues Regional Assembly (RRA), so as to address the
disproportionate differences that are often observed between the percentage of votes and the
percentage of seats obtained by the Party in the First Past the Post System.
Thus, a new Mixed Member Proportional System was accordingly introduced in
Rodrigues whereby out of a total number of seats, 12 seats are returned through the First Past
the Post System in the 6 local regions, with each region returning 2 elected Members. On the
day of the Poll in Rodrigues, a voter has to complete two ballots, one to indicate his or her
choice of two candidates in the local region and one for the island region vote.
All parties that poll 10% or more of the total votes cast are eligible for a total of 6
Proportional Representation (PR) seats. The allocation of the 6 PR seats is supposed to take
into account any disproportionality which builds up between the percentage of votes polled
and the number of seats obtained in the First Past the Post System.
Since the introduction of this new system, three elections have been held in
Rodrigues in 2002, 2006 and 2012, respectively.
11
In 2002, the OPR obtained 8 seats and the MR 4 seats from the First Past the Post
vote. The OPR, the winning Party, was allocated 2 PR seats and the MR, the losing Party,
was allocated 4 PR seats. This had the effect of shrinking the difference between the initial
number of seats obtained by the OPR and the MR from 4 seats to only 2 seats.
In 2006, the MR and the OPR obtained 6 seats each under the First Past the Post
System. With the allocation of the PR seats the MR obtained a total of 10 seats and the OPR a
total of 8 seats. Here, due to the PR system the difference in the number of seats between the
two parties has been increased by 2, making one Party the Winner and the other one the
Loser.
In 2012, under the First Past the Post System, the Front Patriotique Rodriguais
(FPR) won no seat, the MR 4 seats and the OPR 8 seats. With the allocation of the PR seats,
the FPR was allocated 2 seats, the MR 4 seats and the OPR 3 seats, thereby again shrinking
the difference of seats between the winning party and the two losing parties this time from 4
to 1.
Madam Speaker, it is, therefore, clear that this system has some important flaws
which are not conducive to political stability and prosperity of any country or region. It is not
acceptable that a Winning Party which has won a comfortable majority of seats through an
election system which has stood the test of time in both Mauritius and elsewhere is unjustly
penalised due to the existing system.
Madam Speaker, no electoral system is perfect, but one cannot continue with a system
which, on one hand, addresses the percentage issue, but on the other hand, makes an
allocation of seats which jeopardizes, the stability, confidence and thrust of a Party to conduct
the affairs of the region under its jurisdiction, in this case the Rodrigues Regional Assembly.
This is why my Government will soon introduce a Bill to bring a new election
system to Rodrigues which will do away with the shortcomings of the PR system.
Madam Speaker, however, I am fully conscious that no system is perfect. But I have
taken note that the two main Parties in Rodrigues, namely, the OPR and the MR are in favour
of the new amendments. However, this is not enough. The inhabitants of Rodrigues should
also be made aware of the amendments before they go to vote for the next Regional
Elections.
12
I am informed that the services of Sir Victor Glover were retained for the drafting of
the Bill. I am further informed that he had consultations with the leaders of the main political
parties in Rodrigues during the drafting of the Bill.
The first draft which has been submitted to my Office is not it its final form.
There is still some fine tuning and consultations to be made, including with the
Ministerial Committee under the chairmanship of the Deputy Prime Minister.
I am also given to understand that the Electoral Supervisory Commission has been
apprised by the Electoral Commissioner of the amendments which are proposed to be brought
to the Rodrigues Regional Assembly Act, notwithstanding the fact that such consultation is
not mandatory under the Constitution.
Madam Speaker, let me reassure everybody that I will make it a point to take the
necessary steps, through my Office, to ensure that the Rodriguans are informed of the
amendments prior to the Bill being introduced to the National Assembly.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, if I can start with the first part of my question that
refers to the United Nations Human Rights Committee in Geneva, can I have the date? It was
difficult to catch when the Rt. hon. Prime Minister was saying the date on which we
communicated Government of Mauritius stand to the United Nations Committee. The date!
The Prime Minister: Well, I don’t have the date with me.
(Interruptions)
I don’t have the exact date, but it was in April 2016.
Mr Bérenger: April 2016! Can a copy of that communication to the United Nations
Human Rights Committee be laid?
The Prime Minister: Sorry!
Mr Bérenger: I repeat my question. My question is whether a copy of that
communication on behalf of Mauritius to the UN Human Rights Committee - we don’t have
the exact date, I hope it is not 01 April, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister said ‘April’ – be laid in
the Assembly?
The Prime Minister: Yes. I am laying, on the Table of the Assembly, a copy.
13
Mr Bérenger: Thank you. Can I know whether there has been any reaction from the
UN Human Rights Committee in Geneva, any communication from the Committee after we
have sent the document?
The Prime Minister: There has been no reaction, so far.
Mr Bérenger: The Rt. hon. Prime Minister himself reminded us that Rezistans ek
Alternativ case before the Supreme Court is coming for merits on 03 November 2016. Can
we know what stand Government is going to take before the Supreme Court on that day?
The Prime Minister: There is no stand to be taken by us. We are waiting for the
decision of the Supreme Court.
Mr Bérenger: If I can move on to the second point of my question, that is, the dose of
proportional representation to be introduced in our Electoral System for the National
Assembly here. The idea of introducing a dose of proportional representation was in the
present Government’s Electoral Programme, in the Government Programme; it has therefore
been referred to at the United Nations and forms part of the very first Terms of Reference of
the Ministerial Committee chaired by the Deputy Prime Minister, the introduction of a dose
of proportional representation, and yet, these recent times, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has
made statements that gave a different impression. Can I, therefore, have it from the Rt. hon.
Prime Minister that indeed the introduction of a dose of proportional representation in our
Electoral System in Mauritius, Government still stands committed to that?
The Prime Minister: Yes, we are committed and there will be a dose of proportional
representation, but I cannot say more because the Committee is still working on that.
Mr Bérenger: Still on the same subject, when I put a PNQ to which the Rt. hon.
Prime Minister has referred to on 20 October 2015, right at the end of my questions and with
the replies from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, I said –
“A lot of work was done at the Attorney General’s Office until the eve of the last
general elections. I am not saying that the work was completed, but a lot of progress
was made. Has the Rt. hon. Prime Minister been able to get help from the Attorney
General to trace the latest drafts that had been ready at the level of the Attorney
General’s and Solicitor General’s Office?”
And the reply from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister was –
“We will certainly consult all these. We will certainly do that.”
14
Has it been possible to trace, at the Attorney General’s Office, the latest draft and
has this been communicated to the Committee chaired by the Deputy Prime Minister?
The Prime Minister: The Attorney General forms part of the Committee and what
he is doing there, what has been done there, so far I cannot say. We will have to wait until
they conclude.
Mr Bérenger: If I can move on to Rodrigues. I have pointed out that the sixth Term
of Reference of the Ministerial Committee chaired by hon. Xavier-Luc Duval, the Deputy
Prime Minister, is ‘Amendments to the Electoral System of Rodrigues’. Can I know, whilst
this Committee is supposed to work on Amendments to the Electoral System in Rodrigues,
why in parallel have discussions taken place, and even from what I heard, a draft of Electoral
Reforms to be brought about in Rodrigues, why has this taken place, including the
involvement of the Attorney General’s Office in parallel with the Duval Committee whose
Terms of Reference include precisely that?
The Prime Minister: They proceeded in that way, I have been told, because the
Regional Elections are due in Rodrigues early next year.
Mr Bérenger: Does the Rt. hon. Prime Minister think that it is healthy for such
amendments to be brought on the eve of elections to be carried out in Rodrigues? And can I
ask whether - because I heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister say that the Electoral Commission
has reacted to the first draft of that piece of legislation – the Electoral Commission has
objected in any way to such amendments being brought to the Electoral law of Rodrigues on
the eve of elections there?
The Prime Minister: Well, the draft Bill will be submitted to the Committee after
consultation by my Office.
I am being told that discussions are being held with the Electoral Commission. But
insofar as the eve of elections is concerned, I don’t think it will be on the eve, but it won’t be
a long time before; but I say it is better late than never.
Mr Bérenger: Can I make two requests: firstly, has the Electoral Commissioner
reacted in writing to that proposal? I understand that it is not the Prime Minister’s Office or
the Attorney General’s Office which communicated a copy of that first draft to the Electoral
Commission. It was communicated to the Electoral Commission by somebody else, that is,
the Solicitor General’s Office which is not a normal procedure. Has the Electoral
Commissioner reacted in writing, and, if yes, can we have a copy of their reaction?
15
Secondly, being given that, on directives of Government, the Attorney General’s
Office has prepared a first draft - what I heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister say – of the law to
come, is there any harm in circulating that first draft right from now?
The Prime Minister: Meetings with the Electoral Commission is still going on, and,
insofar as other information is concerned, once the Bill is ready, it will be circulated and
thereafter Rodriguan organisations, including NGOs, will be consulted. We will request Sir
Victor Glover to undertake the consultancy exercise, as late Justice Robert Ahnee did in
2001. At this moment, I don’t think it is advisable to circulate the draft as it is.
Mr Bérenger: These recent days, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has been widely
reported as saying that what pertains in Rodrigues and by extension what could, with the
introduction of a dose of proportional representation, pertain in Mauritius, is that minorité
vine majorité. From what the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, himself, has said, the systems set up in
Rodrigues on the recommendation of feu former Judge Ahnee, would he agree with me – he
said it on three occasions - it reduced the difference in seat, but will he agree that, including
the last elections, in no case, has it faire minorité vine majorité? At least, will he
acknowledge that?
The Prime Minister: Well, we have seen how unstable it has been in Rodrigues and
with the shifting of one Member from one side, the majority went to the other side. Don’t try
to fool us!
Mr Bérenger: Precisely, will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree with me that the
majority changed not because of the electoral system, but because two elected Members
changed sides. Therefore, come with an anti-transfuge legislation! Can I ask him…
(Interruptions)
Shut up! You don’t understand anything!
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order!
Mr Bérenger: Will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree, in fact, he is confirming that, in
no case, did the majorité vinn minorité? Will he agree with that?
The Prime Minister: Well, one thing is certain, that the system has shrunk the
difference of six.
16
(Interruptions)
The new system proposed has received the concurrence of the two major parties.
Mr Bérenger: Wrong! Wrong, as usual from your advisers! But, in due course, you
will hear the detail! Not the OPR, but the other party I mentioned, you will hear further
development! But, anyway, will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree with me that there is
agreement on one thing, that 12 is very tight. And I think, today, there is agreement that 12
elected Members, instead of being 12, should be 18. Has he got that? Will the Rt. hon. Prime
Minister agree with me, on that, there is unanimity, in fact, for 12 elected Members to
become 18? But, supposedly, what is contained in the first draft is that, apart from these 18,
after the results are out, the winner will appoint 2 additional elected Members and the losers
will appoint 2. Being given at regional level, elections were very tight, that proposal, does the
Rt. hon. Prime Minister realise, if results are divided in 2 at the level of constituencies,
regions, and when you allot 2, it is total deadlock? Has this been pointed out to the Rt. hon.
Prime Minister, the possibility of a complete deadlock?
The Prime Minister: I don’t agree with the hon. Leader of the Opposition. His
information is wrong. In any case, I said I am not going to discuss about the draft. They are
still working on it. When the whole thing will be finalised, then I will be prepared to bring it
to the National Assembly. In any case, we have to. So, the hon. Leader of the Opposition will
know what are the contents.
Mr Bérenger: Well, the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister made speeches in Rodrigues,
spelling out the details of what is proposed to be amended. That is why I am reacting; the Rt.
Hon. Prime Minister has gone in public with the idea of 4 appointed Members. Is he aware of
what has just taken place in Tobago? As we know, hon. feu Judge Ahnee went there, Trinidad
and Tobago, with Serge Clair and so on. And there, they have 12 elected Members and 4
appointed Members, three by the winning party and one by the loser party. Is he aware that,
that went wrong completely at the last regional elections in Tobago in 2013? Why? Because
they have got their 12-0! Therefore, there was no one to appoint from the Opposition side.
So, it is very possible that this will happen with what is being proposed at this stage, with the
result that in Tobago, the new Chief Minister has had to appeal to the President of the
Republic of Trinidad and Tobago to appoint 2 independent people to represent the
Opposition. Can I point out that in Tobago, the Opposition did not get a single elected
17
Member and the whole system is stuck although they have got 36% of the vote? Has the
present situation and the problem in Tobago been pointed out to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister?
The Prime Minister: Well, what has happened in Tobago did not necessarily happen
in Rodrigues. In any case, the allocation of seats is still to be finalised. Therefore, as I said, I
am not prepared to discuss that now.
Mr Bérenger: Well, I have the following question. In 2001, the Government sent
hon. Serge Clair, feu juge Ahnee and feu Prudence, all the way to Tobago, to learn from their
difficulties and their experience. Will the Government in Mauritius as Prime Minister, Sir
Anerood Jugnauth, agree with me that, at least, what we can do is to go and find out what
went wrong there with this system of appointing 4 after results and that is apparently being
proposed these days, contained in the first draft?
The Prime Minister: Well, so far, there has not been a request for that and personally
I don’t think it’s necessary. If they have gone wrong in Tobago, we are not prepared to go
and learn from them again.
(Interruptions)
The hon. Leader of the Opposition is wrong!
Madam Speaker: Time is over! Hon. Jhugroo!