RODRIGUES REGIONAL ASSEMBLY (AMENDMENT) BILL – INTRODUCTION
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Rt.
hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and
National Development Unit whether, in regard to the Rodrigues Regional Assembly
(Amendment) Bill and the revised version thereof respectively which have been referred to
the Rodrigues Regional Assembly, he will state why same have not been communicated to
the National Assembly as at to date, indicating –
(a)  if the introduction of a proposed amendment to the Constitution in the
National Assembly in relation thereto is being envisaged;
(b)  if the Rodrigues Regional Assembly has adopted a Motion of Concurrence
thereof;
(c)  if consideration is being given or not for the imposition of a two thirds
majority vote for the adoption of the Rodrigues Regional Assembly
(Amendment) Bill on the introduction thereof in the National Assembly, and
(d)  when elections are expected to be held in Rodrigues.
aaaaa
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, in my reply to the Private Notice Question of
19 July 2016, I explained that amendments are being proposed to the Rodrigues Regional
Assembly Act to address the important flaws which were observed during the last 15 years
that the existing electoral system in Rodrigues has been in operation. These weaknesses in
the electoral system penalise the winning party and frustrate the will of the electorate. They
are also not conducive to the political stability and prosperity of any country.
Madam Speaker, subsequently, Sir Victor Glover was designated to prepare a first
draft of the Rodrigues Regional Assembly (Amendment) Bill after wide consultations with
different stakeholders, including the Chief Commissioner. The proposals made by Sir Victor
Glover were thereafter referred to the Ministerial Committee on Electoral Reforms chaired by
the Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External Communications. The draft
proposals of Sir Victor Glover had the following implications -
(i)  it would eliminate the Proportional Representation System and replace it
by a system where there would be no perfect voting formula;
8
(ii)  only the most successful and the second most successful parties that win
First Past the Post seats would share the additional seats;
(iii)  if only one party won all the 18 seats, it would be allocated one additional
seat, and no additional seat would be allocated to the losing party, leading
to a situation of 19-0;
(iv)  the allocation of the additional seats would be based on the number of
elected members of the two most successful parties and not on the
percentage of votes polled by them;
(v)  other parties which might win First Past the Post seats would be
disqualified for the allocation of additional seats;
(vi)  the party vote would be eliminated and electors would have to vote for
candidates only, and
(vii)  there would be no threshold for additional seats.
The Ministerial Committee reviewed the recommendations made by Sir Victor
Glover, and came up with a new set of proposals pertaining to the reform of the electoral
system in Rodrigues including -
(i)  Maintaining Proportional Representation;
(ii)  Gender Neutral Quota of at least one third candidates of the same sex for all
parties, both for local and island region elections;
(iii)  Maintenance of two sets of votes, namely for -
(a) Two candidates for the First Past the Post seats, and
(b) One party vote for the Proportional Representation seats;
(iv)  Maintenance of threshold of ten percent for entitlement of parties to
Proportional Representation seats, and
(v)  Introduction of anti-defection measures to enhance stability.
A revised draft of the Rodrigues Regional Assembly (Amendment) Bill was thereafter
prepared by the Attorney-General’s Office.
Subsequently, a team led by the Chairperson of the Ministerial Committee on
Electoral Reforms proceeded to Rodrigues to hold further consultations on the proposals
made in the revised draft. They had meetings with all the Rodriguan stakeholders, including
the Forces Vives.
9
With the approval of Cabinet, the proposed Rodrigues Regional Assembly
(Amendment) Bill was forwarded to the Rodrigues Regional Assembly on 07 November
2016 for its concurrence. On 18 November 2016, the Chief Commissioner informed my
Office that a special meeting of the Rodrigues Regional Assembly had been convened on 16
November 2016 to examine the Bill.
However, no consensus was reached on some of the proposals contained in the Bill
and the Motion was not concurred to by the Rodrigues Regional Assembly. The Rodrigues
Regional Assembly, by way of a Resolution, made certain counter-proposals and the Chief
Commissioner requested that Cabinet be apprised of the deliberations of the Rodrigues
Regional Assembly.
Subsequently, the counter-proposals made by the Rodrigues Regional Assembly were
examined by my Office, in consultation with all stakeholders, including the Chairperson of
the Ministerial Committee on Electoral Reforms, and a revised Bill has been prepared and
referred to the Rodrigues Regional Assembly on 25 November 2016, following Cabinet’s
approval.
It is noteworthy that following objections from the Rodrigues Regional Assembly, the
proposal on double candidacy has been dropped and the anti-defection clause has been
deferred for further legal advice and consultation.
Madam Speaker, in regard to the question as to why the Rodrigues Regional
Assembly (Amendment) Bill has so far not been communicated to the National Assembly, I
wish to refer the House to the provisions of section 75E of the Constitution which provides, I
quote -
“subject to the provisions of the Constitution, any law giving effect to this
Chapter (VI A) and to any matters incidental thereto shall not be altered without the
concurrence of the Rodrigues Regional Assembly unless such alteration is supported
at the final voting in the National Assembly by the votes of not less than two thirds of
the Members.”
Madam Speaker, I wish to emphasise the fact that Government is mindful of the wish
of the people of Rodrigues, especially in regard to an issue of such importance. Any
amendment to the electoral system will be done with the concurrence of the Rodrigues
Regional Assembly and we do not intend to impose our own views in this matter on the
10
people in Rodrigues by using the powers conferred on the National Assembly under section
75E of the Constitution and passing the Bill by a majority of two thirds of the Members.
In this context, the concurrence of the Rodrigues Regional Assembly has been sought
and is awaited. Once the concurrence is obtained, the Rodrigues Regional Assembly
(Amendment) Bill will be presented in the National Assembly.
Madam Speaker, in regard to part (a) of the Private Notice Question, amendment to
section 16 of the Constitution regarding Protection from Discrimination is envisaged so as to
provide for a minimum number of candidates for election to the Rodrigues Regional
Assembly to be of a particular sex with a view to ensuring adequate representation of each
sex in the Rodrigues Regional Assembly.
Madam Speaker, as for part (b) of the Private Notice Question, I am informed that a
special meeting of the Rodrigues Regional Assembly has been convened today to debate on
the revised Rodrigues Regional Assembly (Amendment) Bill. I understand that the Chief
Commissioner will be moving for a Motion for concurrence therewith during that meeting.
Madam Speaker, in regard to part (c) of the Private Notice Question, we believe in the
autonomy of Rodrigues as provided in the Rodrigues Regional Assembly Act and I reiterate
that we do not intend to impose anything on them.
Any reasonable view should be given due consideration. Therefore, if the
concurrence of the Rodrigues Regional Assembly is not obtained this time again, it is not
proposed to go ahead with the amendments.
Madam Speaker, as for part (d) of the Private Notice Question, section 3(5) of the
Rodrigues Regional Assembly Act provides that the Regional Assembly shall continue for
five years from the date of the first sitting after any ordinary election unless sooner dissolved.
The last election was held on 05 February 2012 and the first sitting of the Regional Assembly
was on 24 February 2012. Pursuant to section 3(5) of the Rodrigues Regional Assembly Act,
the Regional Assembly can sit up to 23 February 2017. Elections will be held within the
delay prescribed by law.
Mr Bérenger: Of course, we know that the Constitution says we cannot change the
laws, pertaining to Rodrigues unless the Regional Assembly has expressed its concurrence.
Of course, we know that! That is not my point. My point is, just like the Government has
circulated this new piece of legislation for consultation on the Police evidence and so on,
what I am saying is that the Bill, the amendment, then the amended amendment was
11
circulated in Rodrigues, well, out of due respect for this House which will be called upon to
vote later on, it is because, with due respect, it should have been communicated to Members
of this House, not to vote upon, but to take cognizance and see how things have evolved. Will
not the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree with me that there was no intention to say: “Well, we
must vote”? Of course, not! The Constitution does not allow, but I have had to wait until this
morning to have a copy through friends in Rodrigues of what is public there. Therefore, can I
ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to let us have the first amended version, then the amended
amendment version, but also why not provide us with the Minutes of proceedings of the
debate there? We are not imposing anything. We are interested, we want to see how it goes in
preparation for the time when we will have a vote here.
The Prime Minister: Well, insofar as we are concerned, we are acting under the
provisions of the Constitution. When the Bill will be ready finally to be brought to the House,
it will be circulated to the Members of the House.
Mr Bérenger: I did not understand what the Rt. hon. Prime Minister said. My
question was whether the Constitution of Mauritius is going to be amended to provide for this
new system in Rodrigues. Why I put this question, it is because hon. Duval said so in
yesterday’s paper. I quote, he said –
“Si la motion est votée ce mercredi, le projet de loi sera présenté à
l’Assemblée nationale avec à la clé les modifications à apporter à la Constitution .”
Therefore, my question is whether we are preparing to amend the Constitution of
Mauritius in the context of that electoral reform in Rodrigues.
The Prime Minister: Yes, insofar as gender, it has to be done.
(Interruptions)
Yes, it has!
Mr Bérenger: Good! Now, as far as the Motion of Concurrence is concerned, Madam
Speaker, I understand, therefore, that there was a debate in the Rodrigues Regional Assembly
and that in a way if I can call it that, a conditional Motion of Concurrence was voted there,
which is not a real Motion of Concurrence, but, supposedly. Can we have therefore the text of
all this, all that took place and the text of that conditional, if I can call it, Motion of
Concurrence? This afternoon, there is going to be a debate there. Can I know – whether the
hon. Prime Minister can tell me - when was the final version that is before the Rodrigues
12
Regional Assembly - the amended amendment - communicated to Members of the Rodrigues
Regional Assembly and how much notice was given for this afternoon? Because I understand
that Air Mauritius apparently fait des émules. I understand that it is only last few hours that
notice and the amended amendment were circulated to hon. Members.
The Prime Minister: Well, the final draft of the amendment was communicated to
the Regional Assembly of Rodrigues on 25 November 2016.
Mr Bérenger: Notice of this afternoon’s meeting.
(Interruptions)
It is no secret, what is the point. I just want to know - because we are interested,
because there are brothers and sisters - when was the notice of the meeting of this afternoon
given to Members of the Rodrigues Regional Assembly. What is the secret about that?
The Prime Minister: Well, that is the responsibility of the Regional Assembly over
there. It is none of my business.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order, please!
(Interruptions)
Order!
(Interruptions)
We cannot hear what the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is saying! Please!
The Prime Minister: Well, I made it very clear that we communicated it to the
Rodrigues Regional Assembly. It is their business to communicate to their Members and
none of our business.
Mr Bérenger: I am interested to know how much notice the Members, including your
position, in the Rodrigues Regional Assembly – if we cannot be provided with that
information, fair enough! We respect fully. We voted the laws for autonomy, we respect fully
autonomy. Since that kind of reply is coming, let me say the following, Madam Speaker.
This afternoon a vote is being asked from the Rodrigues Regional Assembly. Can I
ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he is aware that there is a lot of colère in Rodrigues.
Everybody is en colère. Everybody!
13
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order, please!
(Interruptions)
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker…
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order!
(Interruptions)
Order, please!
Mr Bérenger: The two Opposition parties are boycotting this afternoon’s meeting.
One of the Opposition parties has three of its four Members suspended. I am not saying
wrongly or rightly. I am stating facts. And the OPR itself, Rt. hon. Prime Minister, I am sure
you have read their press! Very interesting! They talk of totalitarisme in imposing on
Rodrigues what has been proposed, they talk of nouveau colonialisme and we all know that
the basic request from OPR has not been granted, that is, abolition of a dose de
proportionnelle. Therefore, can I appeal to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to keep in mind the
mood even if that is approved this afternoon and we respect it, but it will be with the
Opposition boycotting and with the OPR itself had objected to this first draft because it did
not provide for elimination of proportionnelle. Is the hon. Prime Minister aware of the
situation there, la colère, la frustration in Rodrigues?
The Prime Minister: I am not aware of the frustration or colère. The Members there
have to take their responsibility and if there is no unanimity, well, it is not my business. We
do not expect unanimity. Even here, when we bring a Bill in this House, it is not always
voted unanimously. So, why do we expect it to be so in Rodrigues?
Mr Bérenger: As far as the next elections are concerned, we know what the law
provides. Does the Rt. hon. Prime Minister feel that we have time, if the motion of
concurrence is approved in Rodrigues, here to amend the Rodrigues Regional Assembly to do
the required for elections and the new conditions to be carried out or whether it would be
better to have elections within the legal delay under existing provisions and then after the
elections, à tête reposée, re-examine the whole question including giving OPR the chance to
say why they were and they still are in favour of doing away with a dose de proportionnelle,
allowing everybody à tête reposée after elections to come forward again with their proposals?
14
The Prime Minister: Anyway, if they vote for this amendment which has been
already presented to the Regional Assembly I see no problem, no discussion and no
clarification to be given on that. Government has done what had to be done. If the Rodrigues
Regional Assembly approves the proposal today, then the Bill can still be introduced in the
National Assembly, otherwise, it would be too late. Well, this is exactly what I was saying
that if it is approved, election will be held in due time and under the new amendments to the
electoral system of Rodrigues.
Mr Bérenger: Will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister allow me to say that I am in full
agreement with the idea that if the Regional Assembly does not approve it, we will not use
what the Constitution provides, that is, a two-third majority here in the National Assembly to
impose the reform on Rodrigues because I won’t come back on certain statements that have
been made recently, but that impression was given à la lumière d’un statement in the Press.
Therefore, can I ask to get it very clear that there is no intention even if the vote goes against
in Rodrigues, especially if the vote goes against the revised amendments, to bulldoze the
autonomy in Rodrigues through this Assembly here with a two-third majority?
The Prime Minister: We never had the intention to do that. I have made it very clear,
even to the Committee that was looking after this matter, that if there is no approval by the
Regional Assembly of Rodrigues then all this will be set aside and election will be held under
the law as it exists.
Madam Speaker: Hon Leopold!
Mr Leopold: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to reassure the House that
everything is under control in Rodrigues.
(Interruptions)
We are a very peaceful nation, but if people come to stand on our feet, we will let
them know.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: What is the question of the hon. Member?
Mr Leopold: I would like to ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister if due consideration will
be given for future amendments as it is in Trinidad and Tobago to have a Conflict and
Mediation Committee in-between the two Parliaments just to harmonise laws so as to prevent
any ambiguity and to invite the Chief Commissioner into Cabinet as the law states.
15
The Prime Minister: Well, I can’t say what is going to happen after this law is
adopted; election takes place, then we will consider whether there is need in due course, in
the future, for further amendments, we will consider it.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody!
Mr Baloomoody: Madam Speaker, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister just informed the
House that at its sitting on 16 November there was no concurrence and there was a
counterproposal sent to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister. Can I know from the Rt. hon. Prime
Minister whether there have been consultations with all the parties in Rodrigues on the
counterproposal and, if so, how were the consultations done?
The Prime Minister: Well, all consultations were done first by Sir Victor Glover and
then by the Members of the Committee. Yes! The hon. Member shakes head!
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody, no crosstalking! You have asked your question,
fair enough! Allow the Prime Minister to answer!
The Prime Minister: The members of the Committee went there, OPR Members
came here and we had consultations. There is only one fellow who has stood away and it is
Mr Roussety. So, I am not going to beg from Mr Roussety!
Madam Speaker: Hon. Mrs Selvon!
Mrs Selvon: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister state, in
the light of amendments being made by the Rodrigues Regional Assembly because of the
anti-constitutional aspects of the recommendations, un rapport défectueux, pitoyable by
Mauritius to Rodrigues, if he trusts this same Committee to provide a report for electoral
reform in a more complex country like Mauritius?
(Interruptions)
The Prime Minister: Well, I hope she will do better if ever she becomes Prime
Minister of Mauritius!
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem!
Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister mentioned that
if the law is consented to in Rodrigues, he intends coming forward with appropriate
16
amendments to the Constitution to make it constitutional to have, at least, one-third of the
candidates from the same sex. May I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether this
amendment to the Constitution will also be applicable to general elections that are held?
The Prime Minister: No, because this is for Rodrigues. We will come with reform
for Mauritius in due course.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, no question? Okay! Hon.
Baloomoody, do you want to have a last question?
Mr Baloomoody: If I can, I will ask a question. The main Opposition party in
Rodrigues did propose five amendments and the amendments apparently have not been
accepted. Can I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether they have been informed as
to why their amendments have not been accepted because unfortunately it leaves a very bad
taste. I think there has been a collusion between the Government of Mauritius and the OPR
on this issue. So, can I know whether they have been informed? They have made
propositions…
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: No statement, but questions!
(Interruptions)
Mr Baloomoody: Can I know whether they have been informed?
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: No statement and no unfounded allegations, please!
(Interruptions)
The Prime Minister: Well, as a matter of fact, what OPR wanted was mostly in the
report of Sir Victor Glover and we did not agree with that and this is why we came with a
new text. As the matter stands, I can’t see anybody telling that as if it is OPR that has dictated
everything and that we are pleasing. In fact, what the other parties wanted was beyond the
electoral reform, other reforms with which we were not concerned in this particular case
because what was asked for from the very beginning is the reform of the electoral system.
Madam Speaker: No other questions! Time is over!