BAI – ASSETS & LIABILITIES
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the
Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms whether, in
regard to the post-BAI, he will state –
(a)  the total insurance liabilities of the National Insurance Company Limited;
(b)  the annual sums payable to the policy holders of the Super Cash Back Gold
Scheme and of Bramer Asset Management, indicating the cash to be received
therefor from the sale of shares in the National Insurance Company Limited
and in Maubank Ltd.;
(c)  where matters stand concerning the –
(i)  Rs3.5 billion loan from the Bank of Mauritius;
(ii)  sale of the –
A. Britam (Kenya) Ltd. shares;
B. Apollo Bramwell Hospital Mauritius, and
C. British American Exchange Co. Ltd., the representative of Western
Union money transfer, and
(d)  the sums received from the sale of Iframac Ltd. and Courts Ltd.
The Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms
aaaaa
(Mr S. Bhadain): Madam Speaker, on 04 April 2015, the hon. Leader of the Opposition
rightly qualified the BAI Scandal as a “tremblement de terre financier” and stated that “les
signes avant-coureurs étaient visibles depuis déjà quelque temps”.
Madam Speaker, the hon. Leader of the Opposition rang the alarm bells during his
PNQ on 21 November 2013, referring to a Ponzi Pyramid Scheme and reiterated the concerns
of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) with regard to BAI. He quoted paragraph 55 of the
IMF report and stated, and I quote -
“(...) it suggested that the Bank of Mauritius and the FSC should carry out what it
called ‘war games’ in a prevision of a possible financial crisis.”
9
Madam Speaker, BAI was a huge fraud. The KPMG, its own auditors, not only
identified and detected the issues as far back as 2009 and 2010, but also reported to its Board
of Directors and to its Audit Committee that it was insolvent and it had involved in major
fraudulent transactions involving, including others, the round tripping transaction of Rs3.6
billion from Banque des Mascareignes in order to window dress and to give an appearance of
solvency. The ultimate holding company KLAD Investment, based in the Bahamas, was also
audited by KPMG Mauritius, who reported that the Group had excess liabilities over assets of
USD302 million as far back as 31 December 2012. These audited accounts stated and I quote
–
“The existence of a material uncertainty which may cast significant doubt on the
subsidiaries ability to continue as a going concern.”
Amazingly, Madam Speaker, they did not qualify those accounts.
The NTan Report, which was prepared by NTan Corporate Advisory PTA Ltd. and
dated 20 December 2015, states at paragraph 2, and I quote –
“The introduction to the BAI Group website reads: “Profits with integrity, through
marketing of innovative products and services using the best employment practices,
for the benefit of all stakeholders”. As this report will show, the very first word,
“profits”, was not true and that negates the whole phrase “Profits with integrity … for
the benefit of all stakeholders”.
It goes on to say, Madam Speaker, -
“While the BAI Group was presented as a successful conglomerate and was ranked as
one of the top groups in Mauritius, the BAI Group incurred massive losses year after
year.
In the four-year period ended 31 December 2013, according to the BAI Group
records, the BAI Group lost some Rs14.7 billion. Even the best capitalised companies
in Mauritius would stagger under such losses (and the BAI Group was not one of the
best capitalised companies in Mauritius).”
They also state that the BAI Group was insolvent in terms of its balance sheet. According to
the BAI Group’s records as at 31 December 2013, the BAI Group had accumulated losses
that exceeded its share capital by some Rs12 billion.
10
And lastly, Madam Speaker, in terms of the reports on the BAI issue, I will refer to
the IMF Report of 2015, Article IV, Consultation with Mauritius, which states at Annex I –
Mauritius: The Failure of British American Investment Co. (BAI) -
“The BAI Group, a mixed international financial conglomerate and one of the largest
conglomerates in Mauritius, comprised a number of entities operating in insurance,
banking, asset management, retail and commercial services, with cross border
operations in other SSA countries. The Insurance Company had substantial
proportion of its assets invested in related companies. In addition, it issued single
policy premium products promising relatively high returns, but suffering from high
lapse rates, that were only sustainable as long as fresh cash was injected into the
scheme from new policies, from the investment proceeds from old policies (mostly in
related companies), or from other entities in the group. The BAI Group is now being
resolved.”
Then, they went on to say, Madam Speaker, that the episode also highlighted …
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, on a point of order. We have heard all this many
times. It is a thing of the past. Is this being adopted as a strategy not to reply to the
questions, in fact?
Madam Speaker: Hon. Minister, I have given you the leeway to give some
background information, but you should not take the time of the House regarding PNQs to
give all your background information. You can now come with replies to the questions with
have been asked.
Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, if I may be allowed just to finish those two lines. This
is the latest IMF Report which has never been quoted before. It is 2015. It goes on to say –
“This episode also highlighted issues of regulatory forbearance, political leaning and
coordination problems among financial regulators. The consultation discussions noted
the systemic importance of mixed conglomerates, of which several banks are part,
highlighting the importance to upgrade consolidated supervision and cooperation
among regulatory agencies - in particular between the BOM and the Financial
Services Commission (FSC). The authorities have already taken steps to improve
supervisory cooperation.”
11
Madam Speaker, before answering the specific parts, if I may be allowed to state that
this whole thing started with the Bank of Mauritius revoking the licence of Bramer Bank on
02 April 2015.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Minister, please sit down. I have just drawn your attention
to the fact that I have given you sufficient leeway to give background information. I think it
is fair that you must allow sufficient time for supplementary questions as well. So, could you
please come back to your question?
Mr Bhadain: With regard to part (a) of the question, Madam Speaker, I am informed
by the Financial Services Commission that the Special Administrators had made a request for
the transfer of assets and liabilities, which also include insurance liabilities, from BAI Co
(Mtius) Ltd and its related companies to the then newly created National Insurance Co. Ltd
and NIC General Insurance Co. Ltd, in line with section 110B of the Insurance Act, as
amended, which provides that –
“A Special Administrator shall, after consultation with the Commission, transfer, in
whole or in part, the undertaking of an insurer and any of its related companies to
such insurer and any of its related companies as the Minister may approve”.
For this transfer of assets and liabilities, the Special Administrators had performed an
independent  actuarial  valuation,  which  also  involved  the  Actuarial  team  of
PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) in South Africa.
I am informed that the Board of the Financial Services Commission (FSC) considered
the recommendations of the Special Administrators and recommended the approval of the
transfer by my Ministry on 04 August 2015. On 07 August 2015, after that I apprised
Cabinet of the FSC’s recommendation, Cabinet agreed “to the transfer of part of the
undertaking of BAI Co. (Mtius) Ltd and its related companies to the National Insurance Co.
Ltd, the NIC General Insurance Co. Ltd and their related entities.”
As at 07 August 2015, that is, the date of the transfer of undertaking, the total
insurance liabilities for the long-term insurance segment, which was transferred to the
National Insurance Co. Ltd, was Rs6,273,619,665, while for the general insurance segment,
total insurance liabilities of Rs336,142,121 were transferred to NIC General Insurance Co.
Ltd.
These insurance liabilities were backed by assets valued by the Special
Administrators and independent property valuers [Vincent d’Unienville] and were approved
12
for transfer by the Financial Services Commission (FSC). For National Insurance Co. Ltd,
total assets amounted to Rs6,520,408,991 while for NIC General Insurance Co. Ltd, total
assets amounted to Rs351,339,304.
Madam Speaker, I am informed by the NIC that, since the transfer of undertaking and
the launch of their operations, the National Insurance Co. Ltd and NIC General Insurance Co.
Ltd have been servicing the policyholders’ obligations and have to date effected total
payment of Rs606,066,966 for some 18,752 claims. The latest unaudited position of NICL’s
insurance liabilities as at 31 March 2016 amounted to Rs5,940,290,230 (as compared to
Rs6,273,619,665 in August 2015), while for the general insurance segment, the latest
unaudited position of NICG’s insurance liabilities as at 31st March 2016 amounted to
Rs264,442,362 (as compared to Rs336,142,121).
Madam Speaker, with regard to part (b) of the question, there were 16,341 victims
regarding those notorious Super Cash Back Gold policies, out of which 223 were not eligible
for repayment, that is, 168 did not register and 55 were corporate bodies. The total number of
policyholders eligible for repayment was 16,118 policyholders.
Madam Speaker, to date, 10,211 policy holders have been repaid in full and final
settlement out of the 16,118. Thus, the remaining 5,907 policyholders are awaiting payment
of their capital amount or the remaining balance thereof.
Madam Speaker, out of the remaining 5,907 policyholders, 536 cases have been
identified as being suspicious and those include both foreigners and Mauritian citizens. These
cases are being looked into by the Financial Intelligence Unit.
Therefore, Madam Speaker, the remaining number of Super Cash Back Gold policy
holders to date is 5,371 only and the total amount repayable is Rs5,391,957,383. The annual
sum payable over 5 years is Rs1,078,391,477.
Madam Speaker, with regard to Bramer Asset Management Limited, 3,021 investors
registered for payment, 979 have been fully repaid; and 153 cases have been referred to the
Financial Intelligence Unit because they are suspicious cases. The remaining amount of
investors to be repaid is 1,889 amounting to Rs1,601,952,799. The annual sum payable is,
therefore, Rs320,390,560.
This gives a total annual sum payable of Rs1,398,782,037 for both Super Cash Back
Gold and Bramer Asset Management Ltd.
13
Madam Speaker, the maximum amount payable as at date to the holders of Super
Cash Back Gold and investors over a five-year period which will be repaid from the
following sources.
14
#  Item  Rs billion
1  Bank balances of NPFL  0.7
2  Disposal of shares in Britam Kenya  2.6
3  Securitisation of HP Book  0.2
4  Disposal of BA Exchange  0.2
5  Disposal of Kapu Kai Complex  0.2
Total available  3.9
These are the figures provided to me by the Special Administrators and out of that
figure of Rs3.9 billion what we have to pay by 30 June 2016 is the figure I have stated just
before, which is Rs1.4 billion and Rs3.9 billion is coming in.
Regarding part (c)(i) of the question, the credit facility of Rs3.5 billion bearing an
interest rate of 3.75% per annum extended by the Bank of Mauritius to the National Property
Fund Ltd. is repayable by 30 June 2016. The credit facility was duly approved by the Board
of the Bank of Mauritius at its meeting of 11 June 2015. I am informed that the Bank of
Mauritius has no objection for an extension of the credit facility to 30 June 2017 on the same
terms and conditions. I must say, Madam Speaker, that the Bank of Mauritius does not fall
under me, but I have gathered the information for the purposes of answering the PNQ of the
hon. Leader of the Opposition.
Madam Speaker, with regard to part (c)(ii)(A) of the question, I am informed by the
Special Administrators that an MOU has already been signed with the existing shareholders
of Britam Kenya on 11 March 2016 for an amount of Rs2.9 billion of which Rs2.6 billion
will be paid by 15 May 2016.
The signing of the escrow agreement was delayed by virtue of the different law firms
involved in different jurisdictions. The agreement was finally signed on the night of 29 April
2016.
As yesterday was a bank holiday in Kenya, Madam Speaker, funds are expected to
flow in the escrow account as from today and I am pleased to announce that, as at this
15
morning, we have already received a first swift transfer. Since this is a consortium of
investors, I am made to understand by the special administrators that the remaining swift
transfers will flow within the next two weeks, that is, by 15 May 2016.
Madam Speaker, with regard to part (c)(ii)(B) of the question, the House may wish to
note that on 28 August 2015, Cabinet took note that Apollo Bramwell Hospital has been
transferred to NIC Healthcare and agreed to issues to Apollo Bramwell Hospital being dealt
with under the responsibility of the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development. At the
material time, the proposal was to create a Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU), however,
I am informed that the Sale and Purchase Agreement (SPA) is being finalised with Omega
Ark Healthcare Investment Ltd, the preferred bidder at an agreed price of USD 60 million. A
legal team from Omega Ark is expected to come this week and the signature of the SPA is
scheduled before the end of this month. Again, Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the hon.
Leader of the Opposition that Apollo Bramwell Hospital does not fall within the purview of
my Ministry, but I have gathered the information for the purposes of answering his PNQ.
Madam Speaker, with regard to part (c) (ii)(C) of the question, I am informed that two
offers were received and the transaction adviser did an evaluation exercise of bids received.
On 20 November 2015, it submitted a report recommending Capital Sterling Investment Ltd.
as the preferred bidder with a cash offer of Rs255 m. The other offer was from Change
Express, an existing operator.
The application of the Preferred Bidder was made to the Bank of Mauritius on 17
February 2016. The Bank of Mauritius rejected the preferred bidder on 25 March 2016
because the findings of an apparent due diligence were “revealing”. This contradicts the due
diligence done by the Special Administrator as none of the shareholders have criminal
records, they have clean records with World Check and Passport Check and shareholders are
not acting in nominee capacity. The source of funds has been disclosed in complete
transparency and had been transacted through international bank of repute regulated by the
Central Bank, by the Bank of Mauritius for the last 15 years. A revised submission was made
and the Bank of Mauritius on 06 April 2016 maintained that the shareholders are not fit and
proper persons.
I am informed that negotiations are now being conducted with the second bidder,
Change Express, with a view to completing the transaction within a reasonable timeframe
16
before 30 June 2016. But, again, Madam Speaker, that will depend on the Bank of Mauritius
giving its green light.
Madam Speaker, with regard to part (d) of the question, there is no Courts Ltd. Both
Courts and Iframac were operating under the legal entity Iframac Ltd. The proceeds from the
sale received were Rs360 m. and Rs229 m. were paid to banks within which Rs44 m. were
paid to the SMEs. 189 employees were paid Ex Gratia payment of Rs13 m. This transaction
has saved the jobs in Mauritius of 622 families, Madam Speaker.
Iframac Motors, the brands were lost with BAI directors appointing an administrator.
Cars and spare parts were sold for Rs89 m., Rs44 m. were applied for Ex Gratia payment of
138 employees and 125 jobs were saved through redeployment to Leal and to IMC.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, if I can start with the first part of my question, with
the 135,000 poor people who had pension policies with BAI and now with NIC or the sister
company. I am sure the hon. Minister is aware that on 07 April, the former Minister of
Finance and Economic Development said that the long-term liabilities, pension liabilities
were Rs4.2 billion. Today, if I heard correctly, it has gone up to Rs6.6 billion. Can I ask the
hon. Minister whether the FSC has satisfied, is satisfied and has certified that the National
Insurance Company and its sister company can face that kind of liability in the future? Is the
FSC satisfied that the solvency ratio requirements under the Insurance Act are being abided
by the NIC, and not like the BAI not being abided by?
Mr Bhadain: Yes, Madam Speaker. The FSC has, of course, conducted all the due
diligence that it should conduct according to law and also based themselves on the evaluation
of the then Special Administrators, PricewaterhouseCoopers who are assisted by a team from
South Africa. The liabilities in NIC are backed up by assets and, if I recall correctly, I stated
that the liabilities were Rs6.3 billion and the assets were Rs6.5 billion on the balance sheet.
Then, Rs600 m. has been repaid to policyholders whose policies have matured.
Mr Bérenger: He repeated and again. Can I ask the hon. Minister whether he is
telling us that the FSC has certified that they are satisfied?
Mr Bhadain: Absolutely, Madam Speaker, because the FSC would never give a
certificate to an insurance company if it is not satisfied.
Mr Bérenger: That is what it did in the past; the hon. Minister has just said it. Not the
same FSC. Now, it is worse.
17
(Interruptions)
If I can move on to the second part of my question because we are running out time; is the
hon. Minister – because of so many figures quoted, we have to digest that – saying that, as far
as the payment of 30 June to the Bramer Bank Asset Management and Super Cash Back Gold
policyowners, the money is available and can I have the figures every 30 June over the
following four years, how much will be paid annually?
Mr Bhadain: I have already given those figures, Madam Speaker. It is Rs1.4 billion,
if I am not mistaken, in terms of the annual sums when you cumulate both Super Cash Back
Gold and Bramer Assets. I have also given the figures, as I am informed, by the Special
Administrators that by 30 June 2016, an amount of Rs3.9 billion will be in the account of
NPFL. As at to date, there is Rs700 m. which is in the account of NPFL. The deal with
Britam has already been signed. Money has been received today and will flow through
according to the agreement which has been signed. That is that Rs2.6 billion. So, for the 30
June 2016, commitment of paying 20% debentures to those policyholders and investors, I
think there is no reason as to why we should be worried.
Mr Bérenger: Can I know from the hon. Minister the sum injected to date by
Government and special funds, whatever, linked to Government, into NIC to bring us to that
financial situation?
Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, I must say, if I may be allowed to explain on this one,
when this whole scandal came up to light following the revocation of the licence by the
Central Bank, the insurance company was also hit. Now, as the then hon. Minister of Finance
and Economic Development stated to Parliament on 07 April 2015, the long-term insurance
policies were being safeguarded; 135,000 policies that were the recurring policies because the
maturity dates were all over to 2030 and beyond.
Mr Bérenger: My question is how much funds, if the hon. Minister has the figure,
have been injected by Government?
Mr Bhadain: I am coming to that.
Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Minister, can I just ask you to reply to questions which
have been asked? Don’t go back again into the history of what happened. Reply to the
question which had been asked because you have already taken a long time to reply to your
question!
18
Mr Bhadain: I fully agree, Madam Speaker, but I must give some context to how
much we are talking about or else it will be a figure in a vacuum.
(Interruptions)
I will give the figure! Then, don’t tell me that you don’t understand!
(Interruptions)
The figure for NIC, no public funds have been used for repaying Super Cash Back Gold and
Bramer Asset Management Limited. This is a commitment that was given to the Rt. hon.
Prime Minister that we will not take public funds.
(Interruptions)
However…
Madam Speaker: Please, sit down, hon. Minister!
Mr Bérenger: The question is not whether public funds have been used. My
question is: how much public funds have been injected by Government and other bodies
linked to Government into NIC, not into the pockets of the others?
Mr Bhadain: I have just stated, Madam Speaker, as regards NIC, no public funds
have been injected for the repayment of Super Cash Back Gold and Bramer Asset
Management Limited. However, when a company is formed…
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea, you will have the opportunity to ask questions!
(Interruptions)
Now, don’t make comments! I have told you that you will have the opportunity to ask
question.
Mr Bhadain: However, Madam Speaker, when a new company is formed and you
need to grant a licence to an insurance company, it must have a minimum capital. That
minimum capital was injected for the company to be formed, but no money has been used,
public funds injected for repayment of Super Cash Back Gold or Bramer Asset.
Mr Bérenger: Can I know when the debentures - that have to be paid over five years,
if I understood correctly – will be issued and when they are issued, will it be for the whole of
19
the debentures, and can we know whether, if that is the case, that goes straight into the public
debt?
Mr Bhadain: The first thing, Madam Speaker, is that the commitment which has
been given by Government to all these people suffering is that they have already been paid
Rs6 billion. Now, the debentures will start as from 30 June 2016. That’s the date. I don’t
know why everybody is getting worried before 30 June 2016. They will be issued prior to
that date. Now, as I have explained, money is flowing into the account of NPFL and we have
a commitment of Rs1.4 billion, together Super Cash Back Gold and Bramer Asset. But if we
are getting in Rs3.9 billion, we are also looking into alleviating the suffering of people with
hardship cases. When we look at the table, I can tell you, Madam Speaker, that if, out of the
Rs3.9 billion which is going to flow in, we repay another Rs250 m. for people who have
invested under Rs1 m. into Super Cash Back Gold, that would take care of 1,141 families.
So, we will do that. We will not only repay the 20% as committed, but as the funds flow in,
we will try to do better than that. That is what we are working towards, day in day out.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, as far as the Bank of Mauritius is concerned, we
have been told that it is not their role - I don’t think it is legal - but they have extended that
Rs3.5 billion. Can I know the date on which the Bank of Mauritius confirmed that?
Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, I must say, if I may be allowed to give some
background, on 30 June 2015 we repaid Rs3.5 billion to the policyholders. Now, at that time,
it could have been the case that the shares of Britam could have been sold. But the then hon.
Minister of Finance and Economic Development decided that those shares would go into a
Legacy Sovereign Fund and instead to get a Rs3.5 billion loan from the Bank of Mauritius.
Now, the Bank of Mauritius approved that on 11 June 2015, if I am not mistaken, Madam
Speaker.
Mr Bérenger: The extension, I want to know about, not the loan in 2015! The
extension which the hon. Minister has mentioned.
Mr Bhadain: There is no need to shout! Ask nicely!
Mr Bérenger: You don’t understand.
Mr Bhadain: I’ll tell you.
(Interruptions)
It was at the beginning of May 2016, only a few days back, Madam Speaker.
20
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, I think I heard the hon. Minister say that we are
supposed to get money for the BAI shares in Kenya worth Rs2.9 billion. He will remember
that on 20 October, he said here, it is on record –
“We would obtain much more than Rs3.5 billion”.
Can I know what has happened in the meantime? Why now we are accepting Rs2.9 billion?
Mr Bhadain: Absolutely, Madam Speaker. We had an offer from MMI which was
negotiated with the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development under the then hon.
Minister of Finance and Economic Development. That offer was, if I am not mistaken, Rs4.3
billion. MMI went ahead with their lawyers to conclude the deal with the existing
shareholders of Britam in Kenya and, of course, according to law, we have pre-emption
rights. Their consent is necessary, but they decided not to give that consent and also the
regulatory requirements in Kenya had to be met with the Central Bank, so MMI could not
finalise that transaction. The existing shareholders of Kenya came to Mauritius, but the
Special Administrators had a meeting with me at the Ministry and all the team and they
basically came up with that proposal of Rs2.9 billion. In view of the fact that, after having
worked the figures, we could accept that figure; we went ahead and the Special
Administrators accepted that by signing a MoU and now it is a done deal.
Mr Bérenger: Regarding Apollo Hospital, initially it was expected to get more than
Rs5 billion. Now, from what I heard, it keeps on going down and the deal is being finalised
according to the hon. Minister because I heard what kind of due diligence BDO have done in
other cases a few minutes ago. Can we know whether the due diligence has been carried out
to know who is behind that offer by Omega Ark?
Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, as I have stated before, Apollo Bramwell Hospital
does not fall under the purview of my Ministry because a decision has been taken by Cabinet
that it should be under the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development when it was
decided that it would become a CHU which is a Centre Hospitalière Universitaire and the
model was a different model. Now, that did not go ahead and I don’t have all the details
regarding Apollo Bramwell Hospital because it is not within the purview of my Ministry.
However, what I do know is that Omega Ark has made that bid and that figure which I
mentioned of USD60 m. As to who is behind Omega Ark, I, personally, have not conducted
any due diligence neither has my Ministry. Question could be put to the hon. Minister of
Finance and Economic Development. I believe they are people from England.
21
Mr Bérenger: The last part of my question. As far as this offer for BA Exchange
Western Union, I listened carefully to the tone of the hon. Minister - although he has
requested the Bank of Mauritius or rather Government to extend this Rs3.5 billion - but the
tone is very negative as far as the Bank of Mauritius is concerned. Can I know whether, in
spite of all the negative comments and the facts that we are obtaining concerning BDO, the
Minister will keep on defending BDO where it cannot be defended?
Mr Bhadain: Well, I am not defending BDO, Madam Speaker. I know in what
situation they are working because it is very complex in terms of how they have to raise those
assets to recover to be able to repay those people. I know they are putting a lot of hard work
into it and I have no reason to come and say that they are not working hard. On the other
hand, there are commercial realities. We all know how it happens when you are disposing of
a property and, especially, when you are in a distressed sale condition because you have a
deadline and you have people suffering out there and you want to get the money to be able to
pay them. This is not a normal sale. If BDO had all the time in the world, they would have, of
course, looked for even better offers.
Now, with regard to BOM, the hon. Leader of the Opposition mentioned my tone
when I was answering the question. I must say that I was not very pleased of the fact that BA
Exchange, the licence should have been granted by BOM for money to be raised through the
sale to be able to pay the Super Cash Back Gold people. The Bank of Mauritius took an
enormous amount of time and then decided not to go ahead with it. Now, I do hope that they
are going to go ahead with the second bidder very quickly so that money is raised.
Secondly, in terms of another case for the transfer of Rs390 m. which had to do with
the hire purchase book of Courts which was transferred to Bramer Bank, the Bank of
Mauritius decided to go to Court to prevent that money coming into the Special
Administrators’ Funds to be paid to the special - we had to go to Court and fight, we lost
time. Then, hon. Shakeel Mohamed came up with another application for his client, Mrs
Laina Rawat, and attached the BOM application to his application and then, at the end of the
day, we had to go to Court for a few weeks. All this prevented us from moving quickly.
Dr. Sorefan: Madam Speaker, may we know from the hon. Minister where matters
stand regarding certain floors of Bramer House at Ebène, whether they have been sold?
Mr Bhadain: No, these are still assets to be recovered because there are long lists of
assets to be recovered, Madam Speaker. When I mentioned that figure of Rs3.9 billion, this is
22
as at 30 June 2016. Diplomat Gardens, for instance, there are many properties which are
there, which is in the process of being sold by the Special Administrator, the same thing
about the floors of Bramer Asset, there is land at Plaine Lauzun, there is land at Montebello
and there are other assets which are going to be recovered. As you know, selling properties
and recovering takes more time, Madam Speaker. This is why, at one point in time, I stated to
the hon. Leader of the Opposition that the two biggest assets are National Insurance Co. Ltd
asset, the insurance company and MauBank. So, we can open up the share capital of NIC and
MauBank to raise money coming in as and when required to meet those commitments and to
repay people quickly. That is why we have made those offers.
Mr Ameer Meea: Madam Speaker, finally, this week we got the figures in relation to
liabilities and assets of the NIC which is Rs6.3 billion to liabilities and Rs6.5 billion to assets.
Clearly, the net assets value is Rs200 m. well below the Rs5.6 billion that the hon. Minister
wanted to sell the shares to SICOM and NPF. My question to the hon. Minister is that last
week, answering to the same question, he stated that –
“An offer from Prudential plc UK has been received on 24 February 2016.”
May I know how much this offer is for the NIC?
Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, if I may be allowed to explain because there are so
many issues which are being raised by the hon. Member which are not correct. Firstly, I
never stated that the current liabilities are R6.3 billion. I said Rs5.9 billion. I said Rs600 m.
has already been repaid between August and now. So, the hon. Member is talking about
assets of Rs6.5 billion and about liabilities to date of Rs5.9 billion. That’s the first correction.
The second correction is in relation to Prudential. I stated, Madam Speaker…
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo, please!
(Interruptions)
Mr Bhadain: I am answering. The second correction, Madam Speaker - correcting
the hon. Member, not correction by me – is in relation to Prudential. I stated last week that an
offer has, indeed, been received by Prudential UK for the acquisition of National Insurance
Co. Ltd, the life insurance part and the hon. Member asked me to disclose the figure. Now,
that offer is still valid for 180 days until August this year and a non-disclosure Agreement has
been signed. I am sure everybody in this House understands that we cannot, even though I
23
want to be transparent, I want to go and give you the figure, I am bound by law not to do so
and, if I do so, then you will have lawsuit from Prudential UK. That has to be understood.
Thirdly, in relation to whether the valuation of Rs5.6 billion which has been
mentioned by the hon. Member offered to SICOM and SBM Holdings and he is talking about
liabilities of Rs5.9 and assets of Rs6.5, this is not how you value an insurance company.
These are the assets and the Balance Sheet which is basically the Balance Sheet value. An
insurance company, Madam Speaker, is based on the NAV value. There is a different
actuarial methodology to calculate the value of an insurance company and it is also based on
the cash flow forecast of the company. The hon. Member should know that. They should not
mislead the population.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order please! Hon. Uteem!
Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The hon. Minister mentioned that when
Courts and Iframac were sold, the money was repaid to the lenders, the bank of Iframac and
Courts. So, may I know from the hon. Minister why was that money not paid to policyholders
and whether the Special Administrators will apply the same logic whenever they sell other
assets with the BAI Group, meaning that the secured lenders are paid first before all the
policyholders?
Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, in all honesty, what happened with Iframac and
Courts and the banks was a meeting which was conducted by the then Minister of Finance
and Economic Development with those banks to ask them to allow the sale to go ahead, even
though they had charges on certain assets, and it was agreed that the banks would be repaid a
certain amount and the priority of Government was to safeguard employment. With regard to
Courts and Iframac, because of the number of people working in Courts and the number of
people working in Iframac, it was not a priority to recover the maximum amount possible to
repay Super Cash Back Gold policyholders and to risk losing 700/800 jobs in Mauritius. So,
we prioritise on that and this is not what is going to happen in other cases. However, I have
also had meetings with the banks, Barclays in particular, with regard to certain charges which
are on Phoenix Les Halles and we are working an arrangement. We are working with the
banks, but we are telling them: ‘Look, this is a national issue and you have to basically help
us as well! You have kids who walk on the street too.’
24
Mr Bérenger: My last question is and it will go on record. I am asking the hon.
Minister whether he is giving the guarantee in the House today that those 135,000 poor
people who had pension policy with the BAI, their long-term pension rights are guaranteed,
are safe and the FSC is watching that carefully and that as far as the 30,000 policyholders of
Super Cash Back Gold and Bramer Asset Management are concerned, they will be paid on
time?
Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, with regard to the recurring premiums, the 135,283
policies at the time when this whole scandal broke out, Government gave a commitment that
these people will not lose the premiums they have been paying and at maturity they will all
be paid. True it is that the then Minister of Finance and Economic Development mentioned a
figure of Rs4.2 billion, I have stated the figures as at date and Government will honour that
commitment. NIC is working very well. I gave all the figures last week, I am not going to
repeat for the sake of being stopped by the Opposition. But, all the indications are that NIC is
a flourishing company, it is doing very well. It is opening up its capital and I very much
believe that there is no reason as to why these policies are at any risk. However, on the Super
Cash Back Gold and Bramer Asset Management I have given the figures, Rs1.4 billion will
have to be repaid on 30 June 2016. And, yes, Madam Speaker, I am giving the guarantee, we
will honour that commitment.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Time is over! Hon. Sesungkur!