HERITAGE CITY PROJECT
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the
Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms whether, in
regard to the Heritage City Project, he will, for the benefit of the House, obtain from the State
Land Development Company Limited and Heritage City Company Limited, information as to
–
(a)  if a consultant has been appointed to prepare a Master Plan for the Highlands
Project, including the Heritage City;
(b)  if a feasibility study is available therefor;
(c)  if an EIA has been obtained therefor;
(d)  if Stree Consulting of Dubai has been appointed for the design thereof without
any tender procedure and, if so, indicate the terms of appointment thereof;
(e)  if the contractors therefor have been pre-qualified, and
(f)  the latest funding proposals therefor.
aaaaa
The Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms
(Mr S. Bhadain): Madam Speaker, the House will be aware that the Highlands Project dates
9
back to 2003 when Halcrow prepared a concept Master Plan for the whole site of 2,179
Arpents (920 Hectares) at Highlands.
With the change in Government in 2005, the project was re-actualised and CRISIL was
commissioned to prepare a pre-feasibility study report on the Highlands Project. Based on the
findings of CRISIL report, a transaction advisor was recruited and a tender was launched for
the selection of a master developer. In 2008, 2 master developers were shortlisted, namely
BLOOM and MAHINDRA.
From 2008 to 2014, nothing much happened, Madam Speaker, probably because the
then government decided to go for the NeoTown Project, for reasons which are best known to
themselves. In 2015, this Government reconsidered the Highlands Project and the realisation
of the whole Highlands City Project would have spanned over a period of 10 years in a
phased manner.
On 09 October 2015, Government decided that my Ministry would be responsible for
the development of the Heritage City Project on a plot of land of 336 Arpents which is 141
Hectares situated opposite Ebene Cybercity, at Minissy, on the left of Bagatelle Dam. In this
context, on 18 December 2015, Government approved the setting up of Heritage City Co.
Ltd., a wholly State-owned company, for the implementation of the Heritage City Project
within a time frame of three years as from 2016.
The Heritage City will be an ‘ellipse shape’ symbolising the unity of public and
private dimensions, with an International Convention Centre placed at the fulcrum of the
ellipse, joining the public buildings and the commercial half. The objective of Government is
to create an integrated development for the current and future working generations in a
‘work, live and play’ environment, that serve a range of people including: students, young
professionals, families with children, retired persons and high net worth investors in
Mauritius.
The Heritage City represents the synthesis of the civic world and the commercial
domain, public spirit and local community. It will unify a complex mix of uses, people and
institutions and involve the construction of a new iconic Parliament Building; Prime
Minister’s Office; six Government office buildings with high-end ICT and E-Governance
infrastructure and data centres; a new international convention centre; mixed-use retail and
commercial centres; and affordable mid-scale, upper-scale apartments, town-homes and
villas.
10
Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) of the question, I am informed that the State
Land Development Company Ltd. (SLDC) invited proposals on 02 October 2015 for
consultancy services for the development of the Highlands Smart City Project comprising of
2,179 Arpents, including the 336 Arpents for the ‘Administrative City’ which was later
renamed as the ‘Heritage City Project’’. In the Request for Proposals, it was clearly indicated
that the ‘Administrative City’ can either be located near the Côte d’Or Roundabout or
downstream of the Bagatelle dam. At close of the deadline for submission of proposals,
eleven (11) bids were received from local and international consortiums. A Bid Evaluation
Committee was set up by the SLDC and independent evaluators from the Professional
Architect Council and the Institution of Engineers Mauritius were enlisted to form part of the
Committee.
Based on the recommendations of the Bid Evaluation Committee, I am informed that
the SLDC has retained the services of Luxconsult (Mtius) Ltd. for the preparation of the
Master Plan of the Highlands Project. In respect of the Heritage City, the Heritage City Co.
Ltd. will retain the same consultant as part of the same contract and in line with the advice
received from the Solicitor General.
The Master Plan for the Heritage City has been entrusted to Stree Consulting, a Dubai
based consulting firm on the basis of a Government to Government agreement with the
Government of Dubai in accordance with section 3 of the Public Procurement Act.
With regard to part (b) of the question, a feasibility study for the Heritage City Project
which consists of the list of requirements from all relevant Ministries, the concept Master
Plan, cash flow and financial forecasts, including impact on GDP growth and national debt,
the legal due diligence report, the value-for-money assessment, the proposed scope of works
and the arrangements for funding were submitted to the High-Powered Committee as
required by the provisions of Section 3 of the Public Procurement Act.
The innovative financial modelling is one which involves minimal public funding and
maximal equity participation through redeemable shares. It is a project that is going to create
value, the benefits of which will accrue to the Government.
With regard to part (c) of the question, Madam Speaker, the EIA forms part of the
terms of reference of the consultancy services and I am informed that Luxconsult (Mtius) Ltd
has been selected by SLDC, as I stated before, to conduct this exercise.
11
With regard to part (d) of the question, following the G2G Agreement which was
entered into by the Government of Mauritius and the Emirate of Dubai, the statutory
procedures set out under Section 3 of the Public Procurement Act have been followed. After
examination of the reports, the High-Powered Committee has, on 23 February 2016,
submitted its report to Cabinet for the procurement of professional services of Stree in the
context of the proposed G2G arrangement with Heritage City Co. Ltd. for an amount not
exceeding USD 4.3 m. for the detailed Master Plan; engineering design of the Government
offices; the schematic design including infrastructure design, ICT infrastructure, renewable
energy component of the six government buildings.
Following the formulation of the detailed Master Plan and the schematic design, local
and international tenders will be launched for construction works to start.
With regard to part (e) of the question, I am informed that Heritage City Co. Ltd.
invited application for pre-qualification of contractors for the project. The notice was
published in the Press as from 10 March 2016. The deadline for submissions of applications
was 28 March 2016.
Twenty-eight applicants, Madam Speaker, collected the pre-qualification documents
from Heritage City Co. Ltd. and 18 of them have submitted applications for pre-qualification.
The evaluation of these applications is ongoing.
Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that the services of local consultants,
contractors, sub-contractors and labour will be a priority. This, Madam Speaker, will bring
the much awaited impetus to boost our local construction sector and create jobs.
With regard to part (f) of the question, the project value for the construction of a new
Parliament Building, Prime Minister’s Office, the Government buildings; Civic and Cultural
facilities; the Pedestrian Spine and infrastructure for the whole site is estimated at USD 375
m. which is approximately Rs13 billion.
With regard to the private residential and commercial phase of the project, this will be
under the “Vente en Etat Futur d’Achèvement” (VEFA) model and will include mid-scale
apartments; upper scale apartments; town-homes; villas; two hotels; and mix-use retail
facilities. The cost for this part is also estimated at USD375 m.
The New International Convention Centre will in addition cost around USD50 m.
12
The total project value is therefore estimated at USD800 m., i.e. USD375 m.: for the
public buildings and infrastructure; USD375 m.: for the private residences and commercial
buildings; and USD50 m.: for the International Convention Centre.
Madam Speaker, the Government buildings and infrastructure will require financing
of up to USD375 m., which will be raised by Heritage City Co. Ltd as follows –
(i)  a syndicated loan of around Rs2.9 billion which is USD 83 m. from a
consortium of leading local banks on terms and conditions which Heritage City Co.
Ltd is currently finalising with these banks. Three banks have already confirmed their
participation of up to Rs2 billion and the fourth bank will be concluding shortly. I
must say, Madam Speaker, that this is in line with Government’s objective of
mopping up the existing liquidity which is also available with banks in Mauritius;
(ii) the issue of Cumulative Redeemable Preference Shares with a defined Coupon
rate for a total amount of Rs10 billion which is USD292 m. Two foreign States
namely Saudi Arabia and India have been presented with the financial model,
agreements in principle have been obtained, the terms of which are being finalised
and of course, for confidentiality purposes, Madam Speaker, cannot be disclosed at
this stage.
Madam Speaker, with regard to the private residences and commercial buildings,
these will be pre-sold under the VEFA model. I also wish to inform the House that the
implementation of this project will contribute positively to an increase in GDP growth by an
estimated: 0.2% in 2016; 0.8% in 2017; 0.9% in 2018; 0.4% in 2019 and 0.3% in 2020. This
will have the benefit of reducing the ratio of public sector debt to GDP, which is in line with
our mandatory obligations under the Public Debt Management Act, as well as the
commitments that have been given to the IMF.
I wish to emphasise the fact that the previous Government has heavily burdened the
State finances to such an extent that today, it is almost impossible to borrow more for
executing public sector projects. There is therefore, no alternative, but to come up with
innovative mode of financing which will enable us to bring the much required capital
projects, more so that these projects are required at this stage to bring an impetus to our
economy. This project will boost the construction industry without taking public funds for
raising the capital. Residential units will be self-financing. Rental of the Government
buildings will be paid to Heritage City Co. Ltd. which is a State-owned enterprise and after a
13
defined period of time, Government will be the owner of these buildings and will not have to
pay rent going forward. This will also, Madam Speaker, create a new environment for the
public sector which is conducive to the advancement in new technology and e-governance
which will significantly reduce the cost of inefficiencies in the public sector and deliver better
quality service by public sector organisations. It will also create data centres for necessary
backups and new methodologies for the public sector to operate in line with the principles of
e-governance.
It is an intelligent way of financing a project that will allow us to do what we have set
out to do, which is going towards the second economic miracle.
Mr Bérenger: I heard the hon. Minister say that Luxconsult has finally been
appointed as a consultant for the Highlands projects including the Heritage City Project. Can
I know the date when SLDC appointed Luxconsult?
Mr Bhadain: The selection process has been ongoing over a period of time and I
believe that SLDC has communicated its decision to Luxconsult. I don’t know the exact date,
but it was recently.
Mr Bérenger: As far as the feasibility study is concerned, can I know, at least
pending the studies now going to start, who has estimated the total project to be worth
USD800 m., that is, Rs3 billion roughly? Who has made that estimate? Is it based on at least
pre-feasibility study?
Mr Bhadain: Yes, there has been a whole team working, Madam Speaker. An
independent financial consultancy firm was also retained, that was BDO, to have a look at all
the figures and to validate the figures. International construction rates have been used in the
estimates for the construction of the project and I can also say that it is only USD375 m.
which is required for the Government buildings, the new Parliament, the Prime Minister’s
Office and the infrastructural works. The other USD375 m., as I have stated before, will be
financed through the VEFA model which is pre-selling those residential and commercial
apartments.
Mr Bérenger: As far as the EIA is concerned, I understand from what I have heard
that it is again Luxconsult that will be in charge of preparing the EIA, but already we have
been presented with models, with the outlines of the Heritage City. Can I know who has
advised Government as to where exactly to place that development being given security
14
problems with the Bagatelle Dam not far away? Who has advised Government in that choice
that has already been put forward?
Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, the EIA process will follow its course as per the law
and it is in the terms of reference of the consultant to do a number of things and the whole
procedures for the EIA part is listed in the terms of reference which will be conducted by
Luxconsult, appointed by SLDC and for which the State Law Office has advised us that
Heritage City Co. Ltd. does not have to repeat this exercise and waste time and we can go
with that terms of reference of Luxconsult.
With regard to the site, as I have explained in the earlier part of my answer, the survey
and a pre-feasibility study were already done for the Highlands Project and that dates back
from 2003 up to 2008. Bagatelle Dam being where it is, the project in itself was going to be
both on the left-hand side and the right-hand side of Bagatelle Dam on a total plot of 2179
Arpents.
The Heritage City Project will be based on the left-hand side between the motorway
and Bagatelle Dam. 336 Arpents which was initially for the overall project was earmarked for
the Police Academy. So, it has been changed to the Heritage City Project on those 336
Arpents.
Mr Bérenger: It is not the same site that is being used as in the 2000-2005
Government. Not at all! Both the Dam, in fact, has moved and the project has moved.
Therefore, I would wish to know, at this stage, what specialised advice Government has
received that there is no problem with the site chosen as at now?
Mr Bhadain: I must say, Madam Speaker, that, at this stage, as we speak, there are
geotechnical tests which are being performed on the land and Heritage City Co. Ltd. has
already appointed the relevant people to do those tests and the topographic design of the site
is being looked at. At this stage, we are awaiting the conclusions of those geotechnical tests
and also looking at the whole topography of the land. But, as I said before, I don’t think there
is any specific reason as to why this land would not be appropriate for such development at
this stage. But, we are moving fast. We are working quickly.
Mr Bérenger: If I can move to Stree Consulting, which I understand has been
appointed without tender procedures because it is a Government to Government project.
15
Which Government are we talking about? The Government of Mauritius is one thing. Is it
the Government of Dubai or the United Arab Emirates?
Mr Bhadain: It is Dubai, Madam Speaker, following the Prime Minister’s delegation
visiting Dubai. I was, myself, part of the delegation and also hon. Vice-Prime Minister. We
had meetings with the representatives of the Government there and they decided that they
were going to provide the assistance of somebody who is very well qualified into this field.
On that basis, a due diligence report has been conducted on the company, on the person, and
has been submitted to the High-Powered Committee. I must say that there was a legal due
diligence which has been done by a law firm in Dubai also, AC&H Legal Consultants,
together with all the relevant documents, as required by law, have been presented to the
High-Powered Committee. I must also say, Madam Speaker, that the High-Powered
Committee took two days to scrutinise everything and examine all the documents which have
been submitted. They had additional questions, explanations have been provided and at the
end of the process, the High-Powered Committee, being satisfied, has actually sent its report
to Cabinet which has been duly approved.
Mr Bérenger: I hear with surprise the hon. Minister saying that Stree Consulting is
well-known, is equipped and so on. Is he aware – I am sure that he is – that it is nowhere to
be found on the Internet and not one architect in Mauritius or outside Mauritius knows of that
very – according to the hon. Minister – qualified consulting firm?
Mr Bhadain: Well, it is the person, Mr Saeed Ahmed Saeed, who is the
representative of Stree Consulting. He has been working with one of the largest developers
in Dubai, Nakheel, I believe, he was in the Executive Management Team, if not, the Chief
Executive himself, for a number of years and has been working on so many projects
according to the due diligence report and also according to what the High-Powered
Committee has scrutinised and approved. He worked on the Palm Island Development in
Dubai. He worked on Jumeirah Islands. His team worked on Petronas Towers in Malaysia
and also in terms of the New World Trading Centre in US. He has a wealth of expertise in
this field. I believe that based on the concept Master Plan, which has been designed, he is
creating something fabulous for Mauritius.
Mr Bérenger: Can I know whether the hon. Minister has been made aware of
forceful protests by the architects of Mauritius who feel insulted by this whole saga and is he
prepared to table copy of the letters that have been sent to others?
16
Mr Bhadain: I am sorry, Madam Speaker, which letters are we referring to?
Mr Bérenger: I have, in my hands, a letter from the Mauritius Association of
Architects dated 25 March, which says in one paragraph, and I quote –
“Despite our protest that the tender requirements are totally unreasonable (…)
the start of the project.”
They’ve protested that the consultant has been chosen without proper procedures and that
they have had no chance as local architects to participate.
Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, with great respect to the hon. Leader of the
Opposition, we cannot say without proper procedures being followed because we have
followed section 3 of the Public Procurement Act, which details a process and this whole
process has been followed, stringent due diligence has been conducted, not only by my
Ministry, by other professional firms, the High-Powered Committee has scrutinised
everything, Cabinet has looked at everything. This is where we are and we are moving very
fast on this project. So, proper procedures have been followed. Also, I can reassure the hon.
Leader of the Opposition and also through him the local architects that they will be involved
in the project.
Mr Bérenger: We have been informed that this Stree Consulting will be paid for – if
I heard correctly – USD4.3 m. which is not cheap money. Can I know how this figure has
been arrived at? It is a percentage of what? How has it been arrived at?
Mr Bhadain: It is based on the proposals which have been submitted and the relevant
letters of engagement which were attached to the proposals and submitted to the High-
Powered Committee. Part of the assessment of the High-Powered Committee is to establish
whether there is value for money. This value for money assessment has been conducted by
the Secretary to Cabinet, the Financial Secretary, the Solicitor General and they have
concluded that this is definitely value for money especially bearing in mind the type of
development, what is being brought in this project, Madam Speaker. I must say that this is
going to be one development which is going to be conducted in Mauritius after many years
because in the last ten years, we have not seen anything like that. It is going to be done in a
way whereby this is going to be a jewel not only for Mauritius, but for the whole of Africa. I
must also correct one thing, Madam Speaker, if I may. The Architect’s problem which was
17
referred to and the letter referred to by the hon. Leader of the Opposition was with SLDC and
not Heritage City Co. Ltd.
Mr Bérenger: A copy has been sent to you, as Minister responsible for Financial
Services, to the hon. Prime Minister, to the hon. Minister of Finance and to everybody
including the Leader of the Opposition. Regarding the issue of pre-qualification, I heard that
18 firms have taken out the required documents. Can I know how many local firms are found
therein?
Mr Bhadain: I very much believe, Madam Speaker, that we are talking about local
firms. These are local firms and the advertisement was placed in the local newspapers, unless
I am mistaken on this issue. I will probably get the answer in a few minutes. But these are
local firms. Yes, the majority are local firms out of the 18, three are foreign and the rest are
all local firms.
Mr Bérenger: Can we have the names of those foreign firms?
Mr Bhadain: Well, I can certainly table the names of the local firms as well as the
foreign firms to the National Assembly in all transparency, Madam Speaker.
Mr Bérenger: Can I know from the hon. Minister whether it is still scheduled that
work will start as stated by both Cabinet and the Minister concerned in August this year?
Mr Bhadain: This is the challenge that we have undertaken to achieve and I have no
doubt whatsoever that we will be able to start construction works in August, unless there is a
major problem. This is the objective. This is what we are going to work for and this is what
we shall do.
Mr Mahomed: The hon. Minister mentioned about mopping up excess liquidity as
the one of the windfall advantages of the Heritage City Project. Now, there is one domain
where there is excess is floor space in Port Louis and in Ebene and where prices have
dropped dramatically to Rs20 in Port Louis and Rs30 approximately in Ebene, fully-fitted.
May I know from the hon. Minister what is the estimated rental that we are expected to pay
for governmental buildings on land that belongs to us until such time the building will
become ours?
Mr Bhadain: Madam Speaker, firstly let me say that if we get Rs20 and Rs30, I
mean, we would go and take that deal straightaway. I do not know where the hon. Member is
18
getting those figures from. My Ministry is in Ebene and we are paying rent and we know
what price we are paying. It is certainly not Rs30. Having said that, Madam Speaker, I
believe what is important to understand is why is it that the whole project is an innovative
way of financing? One thing we know is that we cannot use debt finance in terms of
increasing the national debt too much because we have already given commitment to the IMF
and we are already bound by the provision of the Public Debt Management Act. So,
therefore, we are coming with an alternative way of raising finance where Heritage City Co.
Ltd. will issue cumulative preference shares which will basically bring in the finance together
with the syndicated loan of the local banks to start the project and then, at the end of the
process, when the project is completed, those buildings will be rented by Ministries, the
Prime Minister’s Office. The rental income of Heritage City Co. Ltd. will be the rental
expenditure of Government on the other side. So, it is going from one Government pocket to
another Government pocket. Now, in terms, of the pre-selling on the VEFA model, all the
commercial and residential units, the VEFA profits will also accrue to Heritage City Co. Ltd,
which is 100% Government owned. Now, with that money, those redeemable preference
shares will be redeemed over time. So, it is a very intelligent way of financing a project in a
situation where the previous Government have left us with so much debt that we cannot even
contemplate borrowing to do projects in Mauritius.
At the end of the process, when those shares will be redeemed, then those buildings
will be freehold, meaning that the Government of Mauritius will not have to pay any rent
after 15 years or so and will enjoy the rental of those buildings for free.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Don’t interrupt, hon. Shakeel Mohamed!
Mr Bhadain: If I may finish on this, Madam Speaker, we must also consider that this
project is going to provide the public sector with the much awaited progress and development
in the field of technology - because when we look at the Government buildings today and
where public officials are working, whether it is Emmanuel Anquetil or NPF or all these
other buildings, now you will have a conducive environment - create that ecosystem for the
young generation who are going to come and work for the public sector, in this environment
where you will have all the principles of e-governance, all the technology which is there and
also the data centres.
19
Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Leader of the Opposition, last question!
(Interruptions)
No comment, please! Order!
(Interruptions)
Order, please!
(Interruptions)
No comment, I have said! Hon. Ameer Meea, please!
(Interruptions)
Please! Hon. Ameer Meea! Yes, hon. Leader of the Opposition!
Mr Bérenger: I have to sit down, then you sit down, then I stand up!
(Interruptions)
It’s tiring!
This concerns the last part of my question. We have heard a lot about public debt and
so on, that this is a very imaginative way of getting round it. What is going to be guaranteed
by Government and that, therefore, will go into the public debt? Can we have a straight
answer? What will be guaranteed? The money borrowed from local banks? The shares that
will be issued? The money that will be obtained - from what we have heard - from Saudi
Arabia and India? Secondly, this is spéculation immobilière. Who is going to take the risk if
the residential part thereof ends up like we have seen at St Jean and in other places? Who will
bear the risk? Government, finally? How will all this go into the public debt?
Mr Bhadain: This appears to be another Private Notice Question, Madam Speaker.
There are so many questions in one question. Well, first and foremost, what has happened in
Saint Jean, Le Meritt and all of that was bad planning, and it was done in the wrong model.
Here, we are talking about an innovative model where Government is going to be renting and
Government is paying to Government, and the money is being used to repay the redeemable
preference shares. With regard to who is going to buy, I must say that we have a number of
initiatives that we are putting in place, including the FSC creating the concept of overseas
20
family corporation, which is going to allow people to come and buy property in this area, plus
you have all the public officials. I stated in my answer! We are talking about students, we are
talking about people with children and families, we are talking about young professionals and
public officials.
(Interruptions)
With regard to the other issue raised by the hon. Leader of the Opposition as to the
risk, but this is risk free! I can’t see where the risk is. What is the risk?
(Interruptions)
He is talking about Government guarantee. Government is not giving any guarantee. That is
why I believe that the model has not been understood, because it is the rental agreements
from Government, Government paying to Government, which is the guarantee. There is no
Government guarantee being given! On top of that, if we look at the Public Debt
Management Act, cumulative preference shares is classified as equity not as debt…
(Interruptions)
But this is in the law! I can also reassure the hon. Leader of the Opposition that we have
talked to the IMF about this and the IMF approves that this is equity. There is no need to
make any speculation.
Madam Speaker: Time is over! Hon. Members, the Table has been advised that
Parliamentary Question No. B/203, in regard to the speed cameras, will now be replied by the
hon. Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport, Parliamentary Question No.
B/204, in regard to the sale by levy, will now be replied by the hon. Minister of Social
Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions. Hon. Dr. Sorefan!