APOLLO BRAMWELL HOSPITAL – SALE DEED
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the
Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the Apollo Bramwell
Hospital, he will state -
(a)  if the deed of sale of the assets thereof has been signed and if US $ 11
m. has been paid in respect thereof;
(b)  the value of the outstanding pension contributions, bank loans, suppliers
and other commitments to be paid by NIC Health Care Ltd.;
(c)  who decided to sell only the business, excluding the land and the
building, indicating the conditions of the sale of the business, and
(d)  the results of his inquiry into the circumstances in which Omega Ark
was registered and into the identity of the shareholders/directors thereof.
aaaaa
The Minister of Finance and Economic Development (Mr P. Jugnauth): Madam
Speaker, in the wake of the BAI collapse, the Apollo Bramwell Hospital was one of the assets
of the Group which were put under administration. On 07 August 2015, the Special
Administrators of BAI Co. (Mtius) Ltd, Messrs Oosman and Basgeet of Price Waterhouse
Coopers transferred the land and buildings of Apollo Bramwell Hospital to National
Insurance Co. Ltd (‘NICL’), whilst the operations of Apollo Bramwell Hospital were
transferred to NIC Healthcare Ltd (‘NICHL’), a wholly-owned subsidiary of NICL. The land
and buildings were transferred from BAI to NIC at a book value of Rs2.5 billion.
On 08 September 2015, NIC Healthcare Ltd appointed BDO & Co. as Transaction
Advisor to identify a preferred bidder for the acquisition of the Apollo Bramwell Hospital.
The objective was to obtain the maximum price for the policy holders, while protecting the
employment of the hospital employees.
On 11 September 2015, an Expression of Interest (“EOI”) was published in local
newspapers with a deadline for submission of application by 18 September 2015.
On 02 October 2015, a ‘Request for Proposal’ was issued to all parties having
responded to the EOI. Interested parties had the possibility to bid on the following six
options, namely -
9
The deadline for submission of proposals was 19 October 2015 and 12 proposals were
received. After carrying out an evaluation of the technical and financial soundness of the
proposals received, the Transaction Advisor shortlisted 3 applicants, as follows -
1. Omega Ark Group PLC
2. Lenmed Health Africa Ltd
3. CIEL East Africa Healthcare Ltd
Option 1 Management contract AND
Outright acquisition of land & building
Option 2 Equity participation of <100% in the operations AND
Management contract AND
Outright acquisition of land & building
Option 3 Equity participation of 100% in the operations AND
Outright acquisition of land & building
Option 4 Management contract AND
Rental of land and building
Option 5 Equity participation of less than 100% in the
operations AND
Management contract AND
Rental of land and building
Option 6 Equity participation of 100% in the operations AND
Rental of land and building
10
Omega Ark Group PLC had proposed the outright acquisition of operations and land
and buildings subject to carrying out a detailed due diligence exercise.
LENMED Health Africa Ltd had proposed to acquire 75% of the operations for
Rs230 m. and to rent the land and building at a rental to be agreed subject to the company
being granted a right of first refusal to acquire the land and buildings in the event of a future
sale. Furthermore, the company had proposed to retain only 400 employees.
As regards CIEL East Africa Healthcare Ltd, the company had proposed to acquire
100% of the operations for Rs275 m. and to rent the land and buildings at a rental to be
agreed subject to the company being granted an option to buy the land and buildings between
Year 5 and Year 10. It is to be pointed out that the price of Rs275 m. will be reduced by Rs80
m. representing leased assets and is inclusive of stock valued at Rs25 m., bringing the net
price to Rs170 m. Furthermore, that amount is payable conditional upon the future
performance of the hospital. In addition, the company had proposed to retain only 500
employees.
Of these three shortlisted candidates, Omega Ark Group PLC was the only one to
propose an outright purchase of the operations and the land and buildings. BDO
recommended NIC Healthcare Ltd to, inter alia, proceed in the following order -
First, to negotiate with Omega Ark on its employment strategy and to seek evidence
of financial means;
Second, if negotiations with Omega Ark are not conclusive, to then negotiate with
Lenmed Health Africa Ltd for an increase of its offer to 100% for the operations and to
improve its employment proposal, and
Third, if the above fails to negotiate with CIEL East Africa Healthcare Ltd with
regard to the quantum of the deferred consideration which should be paid upfront.
The Board of NIC Healthcare Ltd endorsed the recommendations of BDO and
mandated the latter to proceed according to its recommendations.
Consequently, NIC Healthcare Ltd granted Omega Ark Group PLC the status of
preferred bidder to allow BDO to start negotiations with the company. After obtaining
clarification on the employment strategy and the proof of funds, Omega Ark Group was
given access to the hospital premises and records to enable it to carry out its due diligence
exercise. After the exercise, Omega Ark Group Plc. submitted its final offer of USD 60
million (equivalent to about Rs2.2 billion).
11
Madam Speaker, as regards part (c) of the question, Government, on the 08 July 2016,
took note that the outright sale of Apollo Bramwell would impact negatively on the accounts
of the NIC and agreed to the land and buildings being leased instead.
Following that decision, NIC Healthcare Ltd negotiated with Omega Ark for the sale
of the hospital business together with the leasing of the land and buildings.
There were still issues with regard to how the settlement of charges and
encumbrances would be effected which remained outstanding.
Concerning part (b) of the question, the value of the outstanding pension
contributions, bank loans, suppliers and other commitments to be paid by NIC Healthcare Ltd
is Rs638 m.
Madam Speaker, regarding part (a) of the question, I am informed that Omega Ark
has agreed to acquire the movable assets for a sum of USD 18 million, that is, about Rs650
m. of which USD 11 million is payable on the date of signature of the deed of transfer of the
movable assets and the balance annually over a maximum period of 5 years or the date of sale
of immovable properties, whichever is the earlier.
Moreover, Omega Ark will pay annual rent of USD 1.35 million to NIC Healthcare
Ltd. for use of the immovable properties.
The deed of sale will be signed after all the conditions for the completion of the
transaction have been fulfilled. Now, these conditions pertain to –
•  Omega Ark receiving all the licences and permits to operate the hospital;
•  New contracts of employment be signed by the employees;
•  Tax losses be transferred in the name of Omega Ark Healthcare Investments
Ltd, and
•  Finalisation of the Lease Agreement and Notarial Deed for transfer of
movable assets.
I am informed that the above conditions will be achieved shortly. In the meantime,
Omega Ark has advanced an amount of USD 225,000 (about Rs8 m.) to NIC Healthcare Ltd
for the payment of salaries.
Madam Speaker, concerning part (d) of the question, I am informed as follows -
1.  Omega Ark Healthcare Investments Ltd was incorporated on 29 October 2015
in Mauritius by Omega Ark Group Plc. to acquire Apollo Bramwell Hospital;
12
2.  According to the records at the Registry of Companies, the shareholder is Mr
Guy Anthony Rees;
3.  The Director is Mr Gooroodeo Sookun;
4.  I am informed that Mr Vikram Katral is its ultimate beneficial owner;
5.  Omega Ark Group Plc. UK was incorporated in the United Kingdom on 22
June 2015, its shareholder is Omega Ark (HK) Limited;
6.  The current Directors are Mr Vikram Katral (Chairperson) and Mr Guy
Anthony Rees;
7.  Omega Ark (HK) Limited, the ultimate holding company, was incorporated in
Hong Kong on 02 February 2012;
8.  The name of the company on incorporation was Jaganmyee Brothers Trading
Private Limited and on 06 February 2014, it was renamed Aasure Holding
Limited and then on 02 February 2015, the name was changed to Omega Ark
(HK) Limited, and
9.  The current shareholders and Directors of Omega Ark (HK) Ltd are Mr Rohit
Kumar and Mr Vikram Katral.
Mr Bérenger: At one point, the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development
told us that Omega Ark was granted access so that it could prepare its due diligence, but the
deed of sale and so on, when signed, then they would pay USD 11million. Am I not right in
saying that, in fact, not access has been granted, Omega Ark has taken over the hospital? It
has changed the sign. It is interviewing the staff. It is running the show. Can I know who
authorised Omega Ark - before the deed of sale is signed, before the USD 11 million is paid
to the Government of Mauritius, to the Government’s company concerned - to take over the
hospital?
Mr Jugnauth: Well, I am not sure whether they have taken over the hospital, but
what I know is that there are discussions that are being held with the employees; that
contracts are being drawn. I have, in fact, replied to a PQ and also to a point that was raised at
Adjournment to say that the employees have been proposed contracts of employment and,
therefore, those contracts of employment are being discussed and are being signed. In fact, if
they had taken over, there would have been no need for them to make an advance to NIC
Healthcare Ltd. for payment of salaries. They would have paid outrightly.
13
Mr Bérenger: This is adding insult to injury. I am sure the hon. Minister is aware
that, in fact, the hon. Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional
Reforms, on 03 May 2016, said: “A deal had been done with Omega Ark for USD 60 million
and that it would be finalised by the end of May”. Now, what has happened in the meantime,
even USD 11 million have not been paid to date. The hon. Minister has said his information -
can we know by what date supposedly the deed of sale and the money will come in?
Mr Jugnauth: Well, I have said in my answer that there are a number of conditions
that have to be fulfilled. How can they operate without, for example, receiving all the licences
and permits to operate their hospital in their own name and new contracts have to be signed
with the employees, and there are a few other issues that have to be finalised! Let those
conditions be fulfilled and then I have said that shortly the deed of sale will be signed.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, the BDO was appointed transaction adviser. They
carried out an evaluation of the three offers and I am sure the hon. Minister is aware - I am
going to table a letter from BDO addressed on 09 August to the Board of NIC Healthcare Ltd.
where they come with the evaluation that they place: our evaluation gives the following
points –
(1)  85% is Ciel East Africa Healthcare Ltd.
(2)  Lenmed Health Africa Ltd.
(3)  Omega Ark
This was their evaluation. And then, they add: the reason Omega Ark fell short was it did not
give any employment plan as a starter, which gave points to Lenmed Health Africa Ltd and
Ciel East Africa Healthcare Ltd. However, Omega Ark was the only one who bid outright for
land and building for Rs2.2 billion which the hon. Minister of Financial Services, Good
Governance and Institutional Reforms referred to months before that. Ciel East Africa
Healthcare Ltd was for 100%, it goes on to say. Therefore their evaluation is clear. NIC goes
for Omega Ark only before - they are the only one who offered Rs2.2 billion. Now, the fraud
is that after this is decided upon, this is why Omega Ark becomes the preferred bidder,
because they are the only one who have come with Rs2.2 billion. In the meantime, the
Minister had said: ‘We decided’. On change les règles du jeu as the tender goes along. It’s a
shame! It’s a fraud!
(Interruptions)
14
And the only offer….
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Don’t make comments!
Mr Bérenger: The only offer…
Madam Speaker: Don’t make comments!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Leader of Opposition, please!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Leader of the Opposition, please! Don’t make comments as you go along! Allow the
hon. Minister of Finance to give his reply and then you may make your argument, please!
Mr Bérenger: My point is that the evaluation from the transaction adviser BDO gives
Omega Ark third in their evaluation and they are appointed for third bidder on that basis of
that evaluation because they are the only one who have offered Rs2.2 billion. And then, as we
go along the rules of the game are changed and that same Omega Ark is offered the same
conditions that the other two had offered. If that is not a fraud, can the hon. Minister tell me
what to call it?
Mr Jugnauth: The hon. Leader of the Opposition is referring to what the
recommendations of BDO, according to him, was made, to NIC Healthcare Ltd. I have the
document with me. They are recommendations stating to renegotiate with Omega Ark with
regard to the following –
• Clarification on employment strategy;
• Evidence of financial means…
(Interruptions)
Let me answer!
(Interruptions)
You’ve asked a question, you don’t want me to answer!
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: No!
15
(Interruptions)
Mr Jugnauth: You have asked a question!
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Yes. Please!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Leader of the Opposition!
(Interruptions)
Order, please!
(Interruptions)
Order, I said!
(Interruptions)
Let me give my ruling on this matter!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Leader of the Opposition, I have drawn attention …
(Interruptions)
Order, I said! When I am on my feet, there should be silence in the House! Hon. Leader of
the Opposition, you’ve asked your question, you should give the hon. Minister the
opportunity to reply and as you go along you come with more arguments and you ask again
questions to the hon. Minister of Finance. You are a seasoned politician, you know that, I
believe!
(Interruptions)
Let all the debates be carried out very calmly! The hon. Minister of Finance is prepared to
reply, so, allow him to reply and, please, don’t interrupt him while he is replying!
Mr Bérenger: On a point of order! I have referred to the document. I am tabling the
document dated 03 August and the hon. Minister is referring to another document.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, this is not a point of order. My
ruling is that when you ask a question, you should give the opportunity to the hon. Minister to
16
give his reply. Whether he is referring to another document is another matter, which is not
under the control of the Speaker. But this is his reply and the House should accept his reply.
Please, proceed!
Mr Jugnauth: This point of order! The letter that has been tabled by the hon. Leader
of the Opposition, I have it. He is talking about the recommendations of BDO and that is
what I am saying, the recommendations of BDO - there it is - saying after analysing the three
bids. And where the Leader of the Opposition is getting….
(Interruptions)
Eta aller do ta! To nek zet labou lor dimoune! Eta aller do couyon!
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order!
(Interruptions)
Order, I said!
(Interruptions)
If that continues, I will have to suspend the sitting!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Jhugroo, please!
(Interruptions)
I have said that when I am on my feet, there should be silence in the House. We won’t be able
to carry out the debates calmly if that goes on. Then, I will have to suspend the sitting. Hon.
Leader of the Opposition, once again, I draw your attention to the fact that when you ask your
question, you should not interrupt the hon. Minister when he is giving his reply. You may
agree or you may disagree with what he is saying, yet you should give him the opportunity to
give his reply.
Mr Jugnauth: So, I was saying - let me repeat again - I have the copy of the letter
that was tabled by the hon. Leader of the Opposition. He is talking about the
recommendations made by BDO. I also have the recommendations that have been made by
BDO. After they have analysed the three deals, they have come to the conclusion and they
17
have recommended the NIC Healthcare Ltd. to renegotiate with Omega Ark with regard to
the following –
•  Clarification on employment strategy;
•  Evidence of financial means for Rs2.2 billion;
•  Deposit of 10% to be made in an escrow account;
•  One month time frame for due diligence;
•  Binding offer 01 December 2015;
•  Completion date 31 December 2015, and
•  Omega Ark to be given one week to confirm if agreeable to counter-proposal.
And this is how the discussions have been ongoing.
Mr Bérenger: Yes, we are not quoting the same document anyway, Madam Speaker.
That was my point. But, my point is, they were chosen as preferred bidder on the basis of
bringing in Rs2.2 billion and then, as I said, the rules of the game were changed. This falls
and they are allowed to come in with the same offer that the two others had made, but have
been eliminated. At a point in time, the Minister said: “We decided.” Today, I hear
‘Government’. Therefore, can I clarify the point: is it a Cabinet decision that the rules of the
game were changed as we went along, the way they were changed?
Mr Jugnauth: The rules of the game have not been changed.
(Interruptions)
Not been changed!
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order!
Mr Jugnauth: And if I can ask the Leader of the Opposition to…
(Interruptions)
Alle lire do couyon!
(Interruptions)
Alle lire document!
Madam Speaker: I have said once again, order, please!
(Interruptions)
18
Order! Allow the hon. Minister to proceed! Yes!
Mr Jugnauth: I will ask him to go and read the Request for Proposal that was issued
by BDO whereby there have been requests for six options. All the options are there. And
furthermore, it is BDO itself who said that they have the right to review or to discuss further
with regard to anyone of the six options. So, the rules of the game have not changed. If it was
only for the acquisition of the whole of the business and nothing else and if Government had
decided to go otherwise, then it would have been different, but it is for all of these options.
And I have stated also why. It is Cabinet decision by the way, not one person or anybody
else. Cabinet had decided. Cabinet was fully briefed about this and Cabinet decided because
it would have impacted negatively on the accounts of the NIC Ltd, therefore, we decided to
go for the leasing of the land and building.
Mr Bérenger: We are not being provided any serious information about the…
(Interruptions)
…about the Directors and shareholders of Omega Ark, especially on one gentleman Vikram
Katral, who is he? No information at all on that! But, at least, now we know, and this
gentleman gave an interview in ‘Business Magazine’ of the 24 th , and he said - it is a lie - I am
quoting –
“Omega Ark was set up a few years back in 2012.”
A lie! Now, the Minister has given us information which is available; we did our enquiry. In
fact, it starts in 2012 under a company called Jaganmyee Brothers in Hong Kong…
(Interruptions)
Exactly!
(Interruptions)
But not Omega Ark! Omega Ark surfaces…
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order, please! Order!
(Interruptions)
Order, I said!
(Interruptions)
19
Order!
Mr Bérenger: That company that we know nothing about, the shareholders, the
directors, nothing about!
(Interruptions)
We are not provided with any information! Then it changes its name in 2014 and it becomes
Aasure Holdings Limited in Hong Kong. Then it changes its name again and becomes Omega
Ark (HK)! No sign of UK company, or what have you, in February 2015 and it is only in
October 2015 that Omega Ark Mauritius surfaces! It is a lie what that gentleman said! Why
are we not provided with all the information required? And the same gentleman in the same
interview said –
“Our holding company is based in Singapore.”
According to all the research I have done, another lie! Another lie! Has the Minister
enquired? Has Government enquired? Supposedly, their holding company is in Singapore! A
lie again! Why are we not told who is the final beneficiary? Who is behind this?
Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Leader of the Opposition, there I have a comment to
make. We can’t say that the Minister of Finance and Economic Development is lying! We
cannot say that he is lying.
(Interruptions)
He is giving information, but you said…
(Interruptions)
…the Minister of Finance…
(Interruptions)
Hon. Leader of the Opposition…
(Interruptions)
Let me give my ruling!
(Interruptions)
The hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development has given all the details of the
names of the company and how the names have been changed. I have heard that. Now, you
are saying that this is a lie, that the names have been changed…
20
(Interruptions)
So, what did you say?
(Interruptions)
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, I said that this gentleman in his interview is lying.
That is what I have said, you hear…
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Fair enough! Fair enough, if you said that, allow…
(Interruptions)
Don’t disturb him!
Mr Jugnauth: Madam Speaker, I can’t answer for other people, what they have
stated. What I can answer is for myself and for this Government and it seems that this is the
first time that the Leader of the Opposition is being aware that a company is changing its
name!
(Interruptions)
Mr Bérenger: Not at all, Madam Speaker. Is the hon. Minister aware that in the same
interview that gentleman said –
“We came here last year on invitation, we were invited to come here by the
Government.”
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order!
Mr Bérenger: Can I know whether this is correct because he even goes to the extent
of saying –
“We received an invitation from the Government of Mauritius.’’
And he even said that –
“Whilst being here we had meetings with different Ministries and were proposed by
the Health Minister…”
(Interruptions)
“…to look into Apollo Bramwell Hospital.”
21
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order, please! Order!
(Interruptions)
Order!
(Interruptions)
Mr Jugnauth: Madam Speaker, I can only answer for questions that are in the
purview of what the Government knows about and what we have been dealing with. I can’t
answer for what X, Y and Z have been publishing in interviews and what has been said
elsewhere.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Yes, last question, hon. Leader of the Opposition!
Mr Bérenger: If you rule that this is the last question, Madam Speaker, my point is
that this is another MedPoint affair!
(Interruptions)
This is another MedPoint affair!
(Interruptions)
The whole thing…
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order!
(Interruptions)
Mr Bérenger: The whole thing stinks, it is a fraud! Therefore, can I put the request to
Government to stop it, not to go ahead with what is being discussed now? Not the Rs2.2
billion, but the new proposal that is being discussed and to have a full-fledged enquiry,
Commission of Enquiry, chaired by a retired Judge with two Assessors? Can I put that
request to Government so that we don’t carry on with another MedPoint affair?
(Interruptions)
Mr Jugnauth: Madam Speaker, I will have, at a different opportunity, to give a lot
more details about this case. Suffice for me to say today that what we are comparing, Omega
22
Ark has made an offer to buy the business, operations of Apollo Bramwell Hospital
excluding land and building for Rs648 m. The other interested party, and I won’t make any
comment, CIEL…
(Interruptions)
… has made an offer, when we remove the amount of stock and the lease of equipment, it is
Rs170 m.
(Interruptions)
Right! That is one!
(Interruptions)
Second, Omega Ark is actually negotiating and I have asked them that they should retain, and
they have agreed that they will retain, all the employees working at the hospital.
(Interruptions)
686 employees! CIEL was only ready to employ 500 employees. I can understand also,
Madam Speaker, that the Supreme Court in the MedPoint case has given a smack to the
Leader of the Opposition…
(Interruptions)
A smack!
(Interruptions)
And he dares in the House, and he is saying it outside, that it is another Med Point! You will
wait and see…
(Interruptions)
...what the Supreme Court has said. Now, you can say ‘asté vendé’! But time will tell! We
will go to the Privy Council and time will tell about this kind of campaign!
(Interruptions)
This kind of mudslinging campaign that is being conducted by the Leader of the Opposition!
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Time is over! But I wish to make a comment here. I see that there
are some Members of the Opposition who are showing their discontent because they have not
23
been given the opportunity to ask further questions. Let me remind hon. Members that the
Private Notice Question is the privilege of the hon. Leader of the Opposition and that unless
and until the Leader of the Opposition has exhausted all his questions, I cannot allow other
Members to intervene. Time is over!