TRADE IN SERVICES AGREEMENT (TiSA) – WTO MEMBERS - NEGOTIATIONS
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the
Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade whether, in regard
to the Trade in Services Agreement (TiSA), involving the European Union, the United States
of America, the Republic of Mauritius and 20 other countries/Parties, he will state –
(a)  the reasons for the exclusion of the People’s Republic of China, the Republic
of India and the Republic of South Africa therefrom;
(b)  if same will be signed shortly;
(c)  if the core text and annexes thereof and the Mauritius Market access offer
have been discussed with all the stakeholders involved therein, and
(d)  if the European Union has given assurances that same will not weaken the
public services or allow for the privatization thereof.
aaaaa
The Minister of Health and Quality of Life (Mr A. Gayan): Madam Speaker, the
substantive Minister of Foreign Affairs being away, with your permission, I am going to
reply to this PNQ.
Madam Speaker, in view of the unending negotiations of the Doha Round since 2000,
a number of WTO members with export interest in the services sectors, decided in 2013 to
start negotiations on Trade in Services with a view to improving rules on trade in services and
opening up market opportunities in the services sector. Mauritius joined the negotiations in
October 2015. It should be recalled that the TiSA market represents a services market with
nearly 1.6 billion people and a combined GDP of more than $50 trillion in 2015, that is, two
thirds of the world economy in terms of GDP. The TiSA market also represents some 70% of
world trade in services. The TiSA negotiations bring together some 23 WTO members
spanning some 50 countries and territories.
Madam Speaker, as regards part (a) of the question, I wish to point out that the Trade
in Services Agreement (TiSA) is a plurilateral negotiation outside the ambit of the WTO.
Countries may join the TiSA negotiation on a voluntary basis subject to the concurrence of
other participants in the negotiations.
We have been informed that the only country that had sought admission to the TiSA
negotiations was China. Admission of any country to the negotiations has to be accepted by
all the parties to the negotiations. Therefore, it is not known which of the parties did not
10
accept China joining the negotiations. The other two countries namely the Republic of India
and the Republic of South Africa did not request to join the TiSA negotiations.
With regard to part (b) of the question, Madam Speaker, TiSA negotiations follow a
two-pronged approach mainly text based approach and market access offers. Text based
negotiations have 16 annexes attached to the Core text of the Agreement. In market access
offers, TiSA Member States negotiate the removal of barriers to the export of services. Both
processes, namely the negotiations of the Core text and the annexes and the market access
offers are being conducted in parallel.
It should be noted that neither the Core text nor any of the annexes has been finalised
yet. Attempts are ongoing to stabilise the various parts of the Core text and the Annexes.
The sixteen annexes to the Core text cover, inter alia, professional services,
transparency, movement of natural persons and financial services.
Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that negotiations on TiSA are still
ongoing. It is not expected, therefore, that there will be a signature in the short-term.
TiSA Negotiators are currently in Geneva from 06 to 08 December to take stock of
the progress of negotiations to date and to agree on the way forward.
The TiSA Ministerial meeting which was scheduled for 05 and 06 December 2016,
has been postponed until further notice due to various political variables.
Madam Speaker, with regard to part (c) of the question, the Core Text, the Mauritius
Market Access Offer and the sixteen annexes have been extensively discussed with sectoral
stakeholders. In fact, more than 60 meetings have been held with sectoral stakeholders in the
services sector at domestic level in the course of the TISA negotiations including for the
establishment of the Mauritius Draft access offer. After each round of negotiations, a
debriefing session was held with these stakeholders and the position of Mauritius adjusted in
the light of the outcome of the negotiations in Geneva.
In the case of Health and Social Services, for example, the Sectoral representatives
were the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life, the Ministry of Social Security, National
Solidarity and Reform Institutions, the Medical Council, and the Pharmacy Board amongst
others. For Education Services, they were the Ministry of Education and Human Resources,
Tertiary Education and Scientific Research, the Mauritius Qualification Authority, the
University of Mauritius. For the ICT sector, the Prime Minister’s Office, the Ministry of
11
Technology, Communication and Innovation, the Information Communication and
Technology Authority, the Mauritius Post, the National Computer Board, the Data Protection
Office, the Outsourcing and Telecommunication Association of Mauritius (OTAM), the
MCCI are involved among other stakeholders.
Madam Speaker, it is understood that these sectoral stakeholders also held
consultations at their own level.
The Ministry also recently organised a workshop on TiSA. During the workshop, 2
sessions were held. Firstly, there was an informative session followed by questions.
Secondly, there was a panel discussion on the economic and social impact of TiSA.
Following the workshop, an explanatory brief and questions in the Frequently Asked
Questions format have been posted on the website of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
Regional Integration and International Trade. In addition, a dedicated email address for a
focal point for addressing any questions or seeking any clarifications in relation to TiSA has
been provided.
Madam Speaker, the Ministry received a letter from Mr Radakrishna Sadien on 08
November 2016 expressing concern about TiSA and requesting a meeting with the
substantive Minister of Foreign Affairs. A second letter was received on 28 November 2016
whereby Mr N. Gopee also wrote to the substantive Minister to request for a meeting to seek
documents following the holding of the workshop.
The substantive Minister has responded to both letters (on 02 December 2016)
drawing attention that the documents have been posted on the Ministry’s website since 22
November 2016 and indicating that they could seek clarifications from the focal point. He
encouraged them to seek clarifications from the focal point on TiSA as required and indicated
that he would meet with them at a mutually convenient date after they had clarified any
concerns with the focal point.
Madam Speaker, as I have indicated earlier, TiSA is a plurilateral negotiation
involving 50 countries and territories. There is common agreement that all services that fall
under the authority of Government will remain excluded from TiSA.
In the draft Market Access offer of Mauritius, all services that fall under the authority
of Government will remain excluded from TiSA. Mauritius reserves the right to take any
measure in regard to services established for a public purpose, including Public Health,
Public Housing, Public Education, Public Training, Public Transport, Postal Services, Social
12
Security, Public Utilities, Public Law Enforcement, Environmental Services provided by
Government owned entities, distribution of energy-related products by the CEB or any other
Government controlled entity, income Security, procurement of petroleum and petroleum
products. This is what is called, at the level of the TiSA negotiations, a policy space
reservation which Parties are allowed to take.
The draft market access offer of Mauritius also indicates that services provided at the
Port, in particular, cargo handling services, as well as cabotage and air traffic rights, are
excluded from the scope of the Agreement.
Further, Mauritius has also, in its draft offer, reserved the right to provide more
favourable treatment to insurance services with respect to Government controlled entities as
this is important for entities like the Sugar Insurance Fund Board and the Mauritius Housing
Company Ltd.
Madam Speaker, Mauritius has taken all necessary steps to ensure that public services
established for a public purpose are not subject to domestic liberalisation commitments.
Further, Mauritius has, in the headnote of its market access offer, indicated that it
reserves the right to -
• not take commitments in air access rights;
• take measures necessary to build the capacity of local small scale service providers;
• provide preferential treatment to small scale local service providers in relation to
procurement;
• regulate new sectors of activities or new subsectors;
• take measures, fiscal or otherwise to promote the development of local service
suppliers;
• impose a requirement for professional undertaking employment in Mauritius and
build skills of our Mauritian counterparts, and
• exercise the principle of reciprocity and a fair balance of market openness relative to
its offers.
Finally, Madam Speaker I wish to say that privatisation is a matter of domestic policy
and is outside the scope of TiSA.
13
Thank you, Madam Speaker.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, can I ask the hon. Minister replacing the substantive
Minister whether it is not a fact that when China expressed the wish to join, the European
Union was in favour, but it is the United States that prevented China from joining?
Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, I am advised and informed that there was a request
made from China, but I do not have any information which country opposed the involvement
of China in the TiSA negotiation, but there was a decision not to involve China.
Mr Bérenger: Since we have been informed that India did not express the wish to
join, has Mauritius compared notes with India because we work closely together, to know
why this attitude of theirs whereas we have rushed in?
Mr Gayan: Well, I am not aware whether there has been any contact with the Indian
Government, but I am informed that there has been none.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, can I know how Mauritius got involved in 2015? The
negotiations started in 2013, Mauritius got involved, from my information, in March 2015 -
the date says 2015 - it is very late, it is after the general elections. Can the Minister inform us
how Mauritius got involved in that group because it is the only African country?
Mr Gayan: While it is true that Mauritius is the only African country forming part of
the TiSA negotiations, there had been a lot of discussion that had gone on before. The
decision was made. There was a balancing of interests before the final decision and it was
found that Mauritius being so much involved in the services sector, it was preferable to be
part of the negotiations at the beginning of the negotiations to be a rule maker rather than be a
rule taker, should we decide to join at a later stage.
Mr Bérenger: Can I know whether the private sector of Mauritius was in favour of
Mauritius being the only country to join the group?
Mr Gayan: As far as I am informed, the private sector is fully on board with regard to
the TiSA negotiations and they are also very keen on developing the services sector because
this TiSA agreement is going to open up new opportunities for the services sector of
Mauritius and the services sector, Madam Speaker, employs many more people than, for
example, the agricultural sector. So, the future will be in the services sector. I am also
14
informed that the African countries especially the Least Developed Countries (LDCs) are
able to benefit from advantage of TiSA without having to participate in the negotiations.
Mr Bérenger: In the document which was circulated on 17 November by the
Ministry concerned entitled ‘Trade in Services Agreement’ - as I said, Mauritius is the only
African country - and, in the last paragraph on page one, we find the following –
“There is, in parallel, a regional impetus to liberalisation of the services sector. The
negotiations on the TiSA are a vital complement to the negotiations already taking
place in the services sector at the level of COMESA, SADC and also at the broader
continental level.”
Can we have some clarification on that? Mauritius is the only African country taking part in
those negotiations. Can I have any detail and information on the parallel discussions that are
supposed to be taking place at the level of SADC, COMESA and the African Union?
Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, I am informed that SADC is already working on a
protocol on trade in services and so is COMESA. I am also informed that at the level of the
African Union there are two sets of negotiations; one is an agreement on goods and another
one in services. So, there are lots of things happening at the level of the continent of Africa
and there is discussion going on with regard to services, but Mauritius is very much ahead of
the other African countries in terms of services. So, this is why, I believe, that we are the only
African country, but I must also say that recently there was a Minister from Botswana who
was in Mauritius and the substantive Minister asked why Botswana was not part of the TiSA
agreement because Botswana is also very much involved in the services sector. But it appears
that there is a lack of information with regard to TiSA and I am sure that if it is made more
widely available many African countries would wish to be part of the TiSA agreement.
Mr Bérenger: It is very arrogant, this attitude! Madam Speaker, I heard the hon.
Minister say that discussions are ongoing and that it is not expected that the agreement itself,
its annexes and the Mauritius Market Access Agreement will not be finalised and signed in
the short-term. Is it not a fact that, in fact, the United States and other countries, before the
Trump episode, were pushing for agreement to be reached before the end of the year?
Mr Gayan: Well, it is a fact, Madam Speaker, that there was a wish on the part of the
TiSA negotiators that the agreement would be reached by the end of December this year, but
the negotiations are very complex and they are still ongoing. So, it was not possible to meet
that target of the end of December and, of course, I did mention in my reply that there are
15
some political variables that have come as part to the negotiations. We have Donald Trump
now in the White House as from January next year. We do not know what will be the attitude
of the new administration in the United States with regard to TiSA. All this is something that
we have to wait until we know when and if the agreement will be signed.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, in the same document, as I said, on 17 November
laid on the Table of the Assembly, there is a very drastic sentence. I find the document
terribly biased and there is this paragraph 3 at page 2 -
“Mauritius, being already an open economy will not be negatively impacted upon by
our commitments under the TiSA as these do not exceed the access that already
exists.”
It is a drastic, covering statement. Can I know whether the private sector of Mauritius shares
this assessment?
Mr Gayan: Well, in fact, Madam Speaker, I also asked the question when we were
preparing a reply to this PNQ. I am informed that we have liberalised a lot of the services in
Mauritius and whatever we have taken to the TiSA Agreement is already part of our
legislative framework. So, there is nothing new in the TiSA Agreement that we have put
forward before the other negotiators. This is what I am informed, that there is a lot of liberal
attitudes with regard to the services sector and this is exactly what is happening. So, there
will be no dramatic change in what already exists with regard to our services sector.
Mr Bérenger: I call this assessment, the replies being given and that document
circulated very, very dangerously biased. Can I know whether we have agreed, as at to date,
that foreign service providers will receive the same treatment as national service providers?
Have we agreed to that? Is it in the agreements to be signed? Are our local service providers
satisfied that foreign service providers receive the same treatment as national service
providers?
Mr Gayan: Madam Speaker, I made it clear that the negotiations are still ongoing.
When we deal with multilateral negotiations, nothing is agreed until everything is agreed.
So, I think it is premature to say what is going to happen, but right now nothing is agreed and
negotiations are still ongoing.
Mr Bérenger: I note, Madam Speaker, that the Minister didn’t reply to the last part of
my question which was whether the European Union has given assurances, since 2013, that
the TiSA Agreement will not weaken the public services or allow for the privatisation
16
thereof. This is my information. I wanted to know whether the Ministry is in presence of
documents to that effect, containing, therefore, these so-called assurances from the European
Union.
Mr Gayan: Well, Madam Speaker, I am advised that the EU is dead against the
liberalisation of public services and this has been the stand of the EU. So, I do not think there
can be any risk of that happening. But the EU is just a member participating in the TiSA
negotiations and it cannot give any assurances. But that has been the stand adopted by the
EU, that with regard to their public services, they are not prepared to accept any
liberalisation. This is why we have also reserved a lot of policy space for all the public health
sectors of Mauritius.
Mr Bérenger: Can I know from the hon. Minister whether the Government or the
private sector of Mauritius have carried out any form of impact assessment of our
commitments, what we are going to sign, any form of impact assessment that these
agreements are likely to have?
Mr Gayan: Well, there was a workshop that was organised to address that issue, but I
know that there are other workshops that are being prepared. I am advised that there was an
initial study done and it seems that that study showed that there was merit in Mauritius being
part of these negotiations because Mauritius would have new opportunities to develop its
services sector.
Mr Bérenger: I think I heard the Minister said that there was, at some point in time,
an initial assessment. Can I know who carried out this initial assessment and whether the
House can be provided with a copy thereof?
Mr Gayan: The information is not available in the House, but I undertake to have it
laid on the Table of the Assembly.
Mr Mahomed: Madam Speaker, in his first reply to the question, the hon. Minister
has made mention of two letters having been received at the level of the Ministry. Can the
hon. Minister enlighten the House as to the nature of the qualms and apprehensions having
been raised and although they have been referred to the focal point, to give an indication of
how we are going to address these qualms and apprehensions?
Mr Gayan: Well, I have no difficulty in having the letters laid on the Table of the
Assembly, but I must say that the substantive Minister responded to them and he has also
undertaken to meet with them if they have any further qualms after they have contacted the
17
focal point. I am informed that the major concern of Mr Gopee and Mr Sadien was whether
public services will be privatised. I have indicated in my reply that privatisation is not part of
this agreement. Just to give some more information about the study which I mentioned
earlier, I am informed that the Commonwealth Secretariat helped in the preparation of the
drafting of the offers which were made to the TiSA, but it will be tabled.
Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, despite what the hon. Minister has said, there are legal
barriers to foreigners operating in Mauritius, namely, in the architecture and the
telecommunication sector. Looking at the list of countries negotiating with the TiSA, would
the hon. Minister - I understand he is not the substantive Minister - agree that looking at those
countries, it is clear that as far as services are concerned, once this agreement is signed,
Mauritius will be a net importer of services rather than a net exporter? I do not see Mauritians
going to Panama, to Mexico or to other countries, so, we would be a net importer of services
from those other countries who negotiated with TiSA.
Mr Gayan: Well, that may very well be the case, but the intention behind the TiSA
Agreement is to expose our local people to the opportunities existing in all the TiSA member
countries. So, I think we have to seize the opportunities and we may have to educate our
people to tell them that Mauritius is not the only place in the world. There is a big wide
world outside where we can get our people to work and gain experience and also to generate
revenue for the country. Let me also say, Madam Speaker, that Mauritius has been an open
market and is already an importer of services, but what we are trying is now to join the league
of exporters of services. I hope it happens and I am sure that the young people who might be
listening to this, will be interested in looking at the opportunities worldwide and see what
they can do to promote the country in terms of services. We keep talking about exporting our
brain. Let us say we will be gaining a lot by exporting the brains of Mauritians to many
countries. Already, the export of services accounts for 26% of our services sector. So, I think
there is room to grow, room to expand in this area.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhuboo!
Mr Jhuboo: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The hon. Minister mentioned the
opportunities for Mauritius signing this agreement. Can we know whether the unintended
consequences of Mauritius signing this agreement have been clearly identified?
Mr Gayan: Well, this is a work in progress, Madam Speaker. I did say earlier on
that whatever is happening at one stage of the negotiations is brought back to Mauritius.
18
There are consultations with all the stakeholders. Everything is assessed and analysed. And
it is only after a consensus is reached at the domestic level that we can move ahead. So, I
think all the concerns will be taken on board.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo, but please be brief!
Mr Ganoo: The hon. Minister said in his answer that the African countries,
especially the LDC, have chosen not to participate in the TiSA negotiations and it is clear
they have reasons for not having joined the TiSA negotiations. Can I ask the hon. Minister
whether Mauritius can play a role in helping our African neighbours, the African economies
especially in the role that we are already playing in the SADC and the African Union; in what
way can we help the African economies?
Mr Gayan: Let me say that, first of all, we have different categories of States. We
have the LDCs, the least developed States. These countries would be able to benefit from the
advantages of TiSA without having to participate in the negotiations. But we have another
category. Of course, we are talking to the other members. I think it is good that more
African countries join this services agreement because the future is in services. And as I said
also, the AU already has embarked on negotiations in services at the continental level. So, if
we can bring the region towards the continental level, it is going to be in the interest of Africa
at large. We have already done so in Botswana. We are talking to Botswana to see if they
can bring them on board on these negotiations.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition!
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, in the document which was tabled on the 17
November and from what I have heard today, the Government side is insisting that all
stakeholders have been fully consulted and so on. Can I put it to the hon. Minister that it is
clear that the trade unions were not properly consulted, that is, why it is at a very late hour
that they started protesting. Therefore, they are a vital stakeholder. Stakeholders are not just
in the private sector, but the trade unions also. As far as the private sector is concerned, I
would be very keen to know whether Business Mauritius especially is satisfied with the
consultations that have taken place so far. Being given that we are now told that signing
agreement is not foreseen in the short-term, can I put it to Government that there is need for
further consultations especially with the trade unions, but even with Business Mauritius and
the private sector of Mauritius in general?
19
Mr Gayan: Well, I agree that all stakeholders including the trade unions, civil
society and the public at large need to know how these negotiations are proceeding and I will
certainly be in favour of having as wide consultations as possible with as many people as
possible including the trade unions. I think they are important stakeholders in this.
Madam Speaker: Time is over! The Table has been advised that PQ B/1098 in
regard to the proposed introduction of the Police and Criminal Evidence Bill in the National
Assembly will be replied by the hon. Attorney General. PQ No. B/1127 in regard to the
purchase of motor vehicles for use by hon. Ministers will be replied by the Rt. hon. Prime
Minister, time permitting. Hon. Osman Mahomed!