CHAGOS ARCHIPELAGO & TROMELIN ISLAND - MAURITIUS SOVEREIGNTY
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Rt.
hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance and Economic
Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to
the sovereignty of Mauritius over the Chagos Archipelago and over the Tromelin Island
respectively, he will state –
(a) the exchanges, if any, between Mauritius, the United Kingdom and the United
States of America since the Ruling delivered by the United Nations Arbitral
Tribunal in March 2015 on the so-called Chagos Archipelago Marine
Protected Area and the beginning of this turning-point year 2016, and
(b) if Government has had time to take up the issue of the sovereignty over the
Tromelin Island with the President of the Republic of France since February
last.
aaaaa
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, it has always been the unequivocal stand of
Mauritius that the Chagos Archipelago, including Diego Garcia, and the Island of Tromelin
form an integral part of the territory of Mauritius.
Mauritius does not recognise the so-called “British Indian Ocean Territory” which the
United Kingdom purported to create by illegally excising the Chagos Archipelago from the
territory of Mauritius prior to its accession to independence, in violation of international law
and United Nations General Assembly Resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, 2066
(XX) of 16 December 1965, 2232 (XXI) of 20 December 1966 and 2357 (XXII) of 19
December 1967.
Pursuant to its commitment to ensure that the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Mauritius are fully respected and safeguarded, my Government is sparing no efforts so that
Mauritius can effectively exercise its sovereignty on the Chagos Archipelago and the Island
of Tromelin.
Madam Speaker, in reply to part (a) of the question, as the House is aware, the
Arbitral Tribunal in the case brought by Mauritius against the United Kingdom to challenge
9
the legality of the ‘marine protected area’ which the United Kingdom purported to establish
around the Chagos Archipelago delivered its Award on 18 March 2015.
The Tribunal unanimously held that the ‘marine protected area’ which the United
Kingdom purported to establish around the Chagos Archipelago in April 2010 violates
international law. It ruled that the United Kingdom had breached its obligations under
Articles 2(3), 56(2) and 194(4) of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS).
In reaching these conclusions, the Tribunal made a number of important findings.
Having considered in detail the undertakings given by the United Kingdom to Mauritian
Ministers at the Lancaster House in September 1965, the Tribunal found that the United
Kingdom’s commitments towards Mauritius in relation to fishing rights and oil and mineral
rights in the Chagos Archipelago and its surrounding waters are legally binding. Moreover,
the Tribunal found that the United Kingdom’s undertaking to return the Chagos Archipelago
to Mauritius when no longer needed for defence purposes is legally binding. The Tribunal
went on to hold that the United Kingdom had not respected Mauritius’ binding legal rights
over the Chagos Archipelago.
In its Final Observations, the Arbitral Tribunal stated that, I quote -
“It is now open to the Parties to enter into the negotiations that the Tribunal would
have expected prior to the proclamation of the MPA, with a view to achieving a
mutually satisfactory arrangement for protecting the marine environment, to the extent
necessary under a “sovereignty umbrella.”
Following the delivery of the Award, I wrote to the British Prime Minister on 14 April
and 14 May 2015 to indicate that Mauritius stands ready to enter into negotiations with the
United Kingdom, on the understanding that the latter shall fully respect the rights of
Mauritius under UNCLOS and international law.
I also drew the attention of the British Prime Minister to the ruling of the Arbitral
Tribunal at paragraph 298 of its Award that, I quote -
“the United Kingdom’s undertaking to return the Chagos Archipelago to Mauritius
gives Mauritius an interest in significant decisions that bear upon the possible future
uses of the Archipelago. Mauritius’ interest is not simply in the eventual return of the
Chagos Archipelago, but also in the condition in which the Archipelago will be
returned.”
10
In view of this ruling of the Tribunal, I have impressed on the British Prime Minister
that the United Kingdom cannot take any action in connection with the defence uses of the
Chagos Archipelago, including the UK-US agreement in respect of the Chagos Archipelago,
without the full prior involvement and consent of Mauritius.
The British Prime Minister replied to me on 09 June 2015, proposing that Mauritius
and the United Kingdom engage in discussions on marine conservation matters. He also
indicated that the United Kingdom does not accept that Mauritius has any right to be
consulted or to join in negotiations between the United Kingdom and the United States about
the defence uses of the Chagos Archipelago.
In a letter which I subsequently addressed to the British Prime Minister on 06 July
2015, I pointed out that a constructive engagement on the Chagos Archipelago issue would
not be possible with discussions limited only to marine conservation. I stressed that the issue
of marine conservation should be addressed in the framework of a broader discussion on the
Chagos Archipelago, having regard to the obligations of the United Kingdom under
international law, including UNCLOS, as recognised by the Award of the Arbitral Tribunal.
I reiterated the stand of Mauritius that any action taken by the United Kingdom in connection
with the defence uses of the Chagos Archipelago, including the UK-US agreement in respect
of the Chagos Archipelago should be with the full prior involvement and consent of
Mauritius. Mauritius has urged that its rights should be expressly recognised in any
continuation of the present agreement between the UK and the US in respect of the Chagos
Archipelago. I also underscored that the meeting proposed by the UK should be held without
prejudice to either country’s position on sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago.
Following a further exchange of correspondence between Mauritius and the United
Kingdom, the latter agreed to the holding of a meeting of senior officials from the two
countries on 09 November 2015 in London. Another meeting was held on 11 May 2016 in
Mauritius. During these meetings, the following issues were discussed -
(a)  interpretation and implementation of the Award delivered by the Arbitral
Tribunal in the case of Mauritius v United Kingdom;
(b)  protection of the marine environment of the Chagos Archipelago;
(c)  fishing rights of Mauritius;
(d)  oil and mineral rights of Mauritius;
11
(e)  resettlement;
(f)  UK-US agreement in respect of the Chagos Archipelago;
(g)  submission to be made by Mauritius to the Commission on the Limits of the
Continental Shelf in respect of the Chagos Archipelago Region;
(h)  maritime delimitation with the Maldives, and
(i)  the United Kingdom’s proposal for the establishment of a bilateral consultative
mechanism on marine conservation in the Chagos Archipelago.
Hardly any progress has been made in these two rounds of discussions in view of the
differing interpretations of the Award by Mauritius and the United Kingdom. Mauritius
considers that the ‘marine protected area’ purportedly established by the United Kingdom
around the Chagos Archipelago is without legal effect under international law and cannot be
enforced; this view is not shared by the United Kingdom. Further, the United Kingdom’s
interpretation of the Award is very, very narrow.
These two rounds of discussions have been held without prejudice to the position of
Mauritius and the United Kingdom on the issue of sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago,
including UN General Assembly Resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, and to all the
rights of either country under international law, including under the UN Charter.
I also wish to point out that prior to the first round of discussions, we made it very
clear to the UK side that since Mauritius does not recognise the so-called “BIOT”, it could
not have any discussions with any representative of the so-called “BIOT”. However, there
could be discussions with officials from the UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office. Hence,
the UK delegation at the two rounds of discussions was led by Dr. Peter Hayes in his capacity
of Director for Overseas Territories.
Madam Speaker, immediately before the meeting of senior officials held last
Wednesday in Mauritius, I saw Dr. Peter Hayes, Director for Overseas Territories at the UK
Foreign and Commonwealth Office and Head of the UK delegation, in my Office.
During that meeting, I pointed out that the United Kingdom had illegally excised the
Chagos Archipelago from the territory of Mauritius prior to its accession to independence. I
also referred to the undertaking which the United Kingdom had given to Mauritius on several
occasions, including during meetings which I have had with my British counterparts in the
past, that the Chagos Archipelago would be returned to Mauritius when it would no longer be
12
needed for the defence of the West. I mentioned that since the Cold War was over and the
Soviet Union no longer existed, the UK had to honour its undertaking and could not now
contend that the Chagos Archipelago was needed to fight terrorism and piracy as they
pretend. I stated that it is totally unacceptable for the UK to keep coming up with new
excuses in order not to return the Chagos Archipelago to the effective control of Mauritius. I
underscored that if the UK were to honour its promise by returning the Chagos Archipelago
to the effective control of Mauritius, this would contribute to completing the decolonisation
process of Mauritius and would be a win-win situation for both countries.
In this regard, I requested that the Chagos Archipelago be returned by the United
Kingdom to the effective control of Mauritius by a precise date to be agreed upon and
proposed that consideration could be given to the joint management of the Chagos
Archipelago pending its return to Mauritius. I asked for a reply to be given to my request by
the end of June 2016, otherwise Mauritius would take appropriate action at the international
level, including at the United Nations. The need for a precise date to be set for the return of
the Chagos Archipelago to the effective control of Mauritius was also stressed during the
bilateral talks last week.
I wish to point out that during the meeting which I had with Dr. Hayes, I made it very,
very clear that Mauritius does not have any objection to the continued use of Diego Garcia as
a military base by the United States in the context of an agreement providing for the return of
the Chagos Archipelago to the effective control of Mauritius by an agreed date. I indicated to
Dr. Hayes that Mauritius was even prepared to grant a sixty-year lease to the United States in
respect of Diego Garcia, subject to the payment of a rent.
As regards the resettlement of the Chagos Archipelago, I reiterated to Dr. Hayes our
stand that it is only with the Government of Mauritius that the Government of the United
Kingdom can discuss that issue since it is the resettlement of Mauritian citizens which is at
stake.
Mauritius has conveyed to the United Kingdom that it cannot, on the basis of the
ruling of the Arbitral Tribunal at paragraph 298 of its Award, take any internationally lawful
decision relating to resettlement without the prior involvement and consent of Mauritius.
Mauritius has also made it clear that it cannot participate in a unilaterally determined
consultation exercise that imposes consultation under domestic law. The consultation
exercise purportedly carried out by the UK Government also envisaged resettlement under
13
conditions amounting, again, to a gross violation of the most basic human rights of Mauritian
citizens of Chagossian origin.
Madam Speaker, following the Award delivered by the Arbitral Tribunal in the case
brought by Mauritius against the United Kingdom under UNCLOS, I have also written on 14
April 2015 to the President of the United States to inform him of the Award and to urge him
to contribute actively to a rapid settlement of the dispute between Mauritius and the United
Kingdom over the Chagos Archipelago and an early return to full legality in accordance with
international law. I also expressed the expectation of Mauritius that it should be involved in
any negotiations regarding the continued use of Diego Garcia for defence purposes beyond
2016 in view of the Award of the Arbitral Tribunal.
In the bilateral talks between Mauritius and the United Kingdom, Mauritius has asked
the United Kingdom to invite the United States to participate in trilateral discussions with
Mauritius and the United Kingdom.
Moreover, I urged the United States, in my statement to the United Nations General
Assembly last October, to engage in discussions with Mauritius regarding the long term
interest of Mauritius in respect of the Chagos Archipelago. When Dr. Shannon Smith,
Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs called on the Secretary to Cabinet and
Head of the Civil Service last November, the latter reiterated the invitation of Mauritius to the
US to engage in discussions with Mauritius.
When Hon. Linda Thomas-Greenfield, US Assistant Secretary of State for African
Affairs, called on me last January during her visit to Mauritius, I conveyed to her that
Mauritius does not oppose the existence of a military base in Diego Garcia in the context of
an agreement that settles once and for all the issue of sovereignty over the Chagos
Archipelago.
Madam Speaker, as the House will see, Government has not remained inactive since the
first meeting of the Committee on Chagos Archipelago held under my chairmanship on 13
April 2015. During that meeting, views were exchanged with a view to contributing to the
development of a strategy by Government for concrete action to be taken at the earliest
opportunity.
Madam Speaker, in reply to part (b) of the question, I wish to inform the House that
Government will continue to press for the early resolution of the dispute between Mauritius
14
and France over the Island of Tromelin, in the spirit of friendship and trust which has always
characterised the relationship between our two countries.
As the House is aware, pending the settlement of the sovereignty dispute between
Mauritius and France over the Island of Tromelin, the two countries reached an agreement in
2010 on the co-management of the Island of Tromelin, without prejudice to the sovereignty
of Mauritius over the island.
I propose to take up the issue of sovereignty over the Island of Tromelin with the
French President when I next meet him.
However, in the meantime, I have had the opportunity to raise the issue of the
sovereignty over the Island of Tromelin with the French Ambassador and other French
dignitaries.
When the President of the French National Assembly called on me last month, I urged
for the early resolution of the issue of sovereignty over the Island of Tromelin. I also
informed the President of the French National Assembly that Mauritius might have to
reconsider its position if the French authorities do not show greater interest in moving
forward the ratification process of the agreement on co-management of the Island of
Tromelin in the French Parliament.
Madam Speaker, I would like to reaffirm the commitment of my Government to ensure
that the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Mauritius are fully respected and safeguarded.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, I hope you will give us some time to put our questions.
Before I move to the part of the question relating to the UN General Assembly to leave the
issue of the arbitration pronouncement behind us, has Government, with its lawyers here and
overseas from UK or elsewhere, looked at the possibility or advisability of going back to the
Tribunal being given the way the UK is interpreting the pronouncement?
The Prime Minister: Well frankly, we have not discussed that because I don’t see the
need of going back to UNCLOS. The award is there. It is very clear. UK is trying to play
hide and seek with us and that is no reason for us to go to back to UNCLOS.
Mr Bérenger: If I can move on. Can I know whether the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has
had the occasion of raising personally with Prime Minister Cameron and President Obama
the whole issue of the Chagos, of our sovereignty and so on, especially at last year’s
15
Commonwealth Summit in Malta at the retreat, whether the Rt. hon. Prime Minister had a
chance to take that up one to one with Prime Minister Cameron?
The Prime Minister: In fact, I tried, but Cameron evaded all the time and I got the
signal that he was unwilling to meet me and discuss this matter.
Mr Bérenger: The Rt. hon. Prime Minister has informed us that he is given dates and
if we don’t have agreement by that date, by the end of June, if I heard correctly, the decision
is to go to the General Assembly of the UN and then on to the International Court of Justice.
Can I know - for the record especially because now we have moved further - why since the
last elections there has been no attempt - it’s already more than a year back - to re-launch the
2001 initiative which we took when the Prime Minister was Prime Minister, which I took
with Foreign Minister Jack Straw, which he took with President Bush, and which I took again
a year later with President Bush? Why since the elections there has been no attempt to re-
launch that initiative?
The Prime Minister: Well, we didn’t re-launch that initiative because, in the light of
the Award, we have tried to start negotiations with the findings of the Award. I can’t say how
I could have taken other initiatives and other discussions with the Prime Minister or with the
President of the United States. The President of the United States in the past, when I met him
and I discussed the matter, all the time their excuse was: “Look, we have an agreement with
UK. We can’t deal with you, you must deal with UK!” That has always been their stand.
Mr Bérenger: Now, we have been told that if agreement is not reached -and I hope it
is reached - by a given date, we are going to the General Assembly and on to the International
Court of Justice. This needs a lot of preparation and planning. Can I know whether
Government is targeting the General Assembly of this year or the General Assembly of next
year?
The Prime Minister: Of this year!
Mr Bérenger: This year!
The Prime Minister: That’s why I have given time limit - end of June.
Mr Bérenger: Yes, but the problem is that at the level of the United Nations, to get it
on the agenda of the United Nations General Assembly is not that easy. Can I know,
therefore, whether - if the target is the General Assembly of this year – we have approached
the present Chairperson of the General Assembly, because this is essential?
16
The Prime Minister: Our representative there is doing the needful and I also raised
the matter with the Secretary-General of the United Nations when he was visiting us here.
Mr Bérenger: There was reference made to the Committee set up on 20 March 2015
with Parliamentarians of all the parties. We met twice and now we hear no more. We did not
achieve anything and now we hear absolutely nothing. The Committee has not met for many,
many months. Can I know what is the intention of the hon. Prime Minister?
The Prime Minister: Well, we are taking the necessary steps. I have explained in my
answer and I see no need for such a meeting at this stage. When the need will require, we will
certainly meet?
Mr Bérenger: Does the hon. Prime Minister plan, whilst this process is taking place
at the United Nations, to meet personally with both the UK Prime Minister and the outgoing
President, President Obama of the United States?
The Prime Minister: Well, I have not made any attempt insofar as the President of
the United States is concerned, but the Prime Minister of UK, I have said, he does not want to
meet me and discuss this matter. So, how can I?
Mr Bérenger: If I can move on to the Tromelin issue. I was a bit surprised to hear
and I want to clarify that point because the previous Government had signed an Agreement
with France for cogestion of Tromelin, but the previous Government withdrew and as the
Prime Minister is aware, asked President Hollande to forget about that, now, we are going for
sovereignty. Now, when I listened to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, I have the impression that
the issue of cogestion is again on. I think I heard the hon. Prime Minister say that he will
insist that the procedures be done for the ratification of that Agreement which has already
been ratified by Mauritius, but which is before the French Assembly. So, is that idea of
cogestion still on in spite of the fact that the previous Government had turned a page on that?
The Prime Minister: Well, I have said when I answered the PNQ. Being given our
friendly relations with France, we are trying by all means to have a friendly settlement of this
matter. Since this question of cogestion has been ratified by Mauritius, it has to be ratified by
the Assembly in France which they have not done and I have made it very clear that if they
don’t do it within a certain time, then we will consider that this cogestion is no longer on and
we will take other steps that will be necessary.
Mr Bérenger: I am sure the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is aware that, in fact, the
previous Government told the French side not to move ahead with ratification of that
17
Agreement by the National Assembly of France. Can I have confirmation that we have gone
back on that, now we are canvassing again for cogestion although we gave notice to France
that this is behind us?
The Prime Minister: Well, if that were so, when I talked to the French people they
would have told us that: “Your Government does not want us to go forward.” But they did
not tell me that. They have said that they had certain problems, that is why it had been
delayed and they are trying to get it through. But, I have pointed out to them that we can’t
wait indefinitely.
Mr Bérenger: The hon. Prime Minister will allow me to point out that it seems we
have been misled because of the Président of the French Assembly, Mr Bartolomé, who
called on the Prime Minister, as he informed us. But it seems he is not aware that the former
Prime Minister of Mauritius informed President Hollande that we are no longer requesting for
- it is on record and the hon. Prime Minister referred to that when he replied to my PNQ. This
is on record and, therefore, why are we going back with the issue?
The Prime Minister: Well, I am not aware that the previous Government has taken
such a step.
Mr Bérenger: In reference to the Prime Minister’s reply to my PNQ, we better
double-check. If I can ask a last question, last but one as usual; when we discussed Tromelin
here, on 26 February 2005, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister said that, yes, he will discuss that
with the President of Madagascar, the issue of Mauritius claiming sovereignty over Tromelin
and Madagascar claiming sovereignty over the four other so-called îles Éparses. Now, can I
know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he has discussed that with the President of
Madagascar, especially being given that he was in Mauritius the 12 March last year?
The Prime Minister: Well, no. I didn’t discuss that.
Mr Mohamed: Madam Speaker, may I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, since we
have heard that the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom is giving him the runaround and
does not want to meet and since we have also clearly heard from all Prime Ministers in
history that Mauritius clearly does not recognise the BIOT, why is it, therefore, that the Rt.
hon. Prime Minister, in spite of Mauritius not recognising the BIOT, has decided to receive
and meet with Dr. Peter Hayes, whom if I am not mistaken, is a Commissioner of the BIOT?
Would this not, therefore, in itself implicitly recognise the BIOT by giving audience to the
Commissioner of the BIOT?
18
The Prime Minister: I made it clear that we made it very clear, we don’t recognise
BIOT, we are not going to discuss with BIOT. This person is from the Foreign Office and he
has come with a delegation of the British Government.
Mr Ganoo: Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, with regard to the announcement
that he has just made of the eventuality of going before the International Court of Justice,
whether we have already sought advice from our lawyers and are they agreeable to this
course?
The Prime Minister: Yes, definitely. We are all along consulting our lawyers here
and one who is in UK.
Mr Bérenger: I am sure there have been consultations. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister is
aware that if we do reach the International Court of Justice, we will have only an advisory
ruling. I don’t know if the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has looked at the number of advisory
rulings that have piled up in the past, Palestine, Sahara, name it, to no effect. Therefore, can I
ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whilst he will prepare for that action - it must be well
prepared - will he agree with me that urgently he should write anew to both of them to
explain what we are doing and also seek appointments with both the Prime Minister and the
President on that issue?
The Prime Minister: Well, that is the only course that is opened to us. I would like to
know from the hon. Leader of the Opposition what other course there is. I know that the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice will not be binding. But, it will have a
moral effect on UK and in the United Nations, other countries also will make use of that and
we, in every other forum, wherever we will go, we will raise this matter and we will do
British bashing on this. They pretend to be freedom lovers, fighters of democracy and justice,
but to me it seems, their philosophy is: Might Is Right!
Madam Speaker: No other question, hon. Leader of the Opposition? Time is over!
Questions addressed to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister! Hon. Members, the Table has been
advised that Parliamentary Question No. B/409 with regard to the construction of the market
of Central Flacq will now be replied by the hon. Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land
Transport. Hon. Sesungkur!