CHAGOS ARCHIPELAGO – MAURITIUS SOVEREIGNTY
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Rt.
hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and
National Development Unit whether, in regard to our sovereignty over the Chagos
Archipelago, he will state –
(a)  if he is aware of the positive comments made by Mr Louis Olivier Bancoult in
relation thereto last Wednesday, indicating if he will meet the latter on his
return;
(b)  if our mission in London is keeping a watching brief on the appeal lodged by
the Chagossians before the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom on the
fishing rights within the so-called “Chagos Marine Protected Area”, and
(c)  the measures taken as at to date concerning an eventual resolution in relation
thereto at the forthcoming United Nations General Assembly.
10
aaaaa
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, as I have always maintained, the Chagos
Archipelago, including Diego Garcia, forms and has always formed an integral part of the
territory of Mauritius.
Mauritius does not recognise the so-called “British Indian Ocean Territory” which the
United Kingdom purported to create by illegally excising the Chagos Archipelago from the
territory of Mauritius prior to its accession to independence, in violation of international law
and the United Nations General Assembly Resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
2066 (XX) of 16 December 1965, 2232 (XXI) of 20 December 1966 and 2357 (XXII) of 19
December 1967.
My Government is strongly committed to ensuring that the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Mauritius are fully respected and safeguarded. In this regard, no efforts are
being spared by my Government so that Mauritius can effectively exercise its sovereignty
over the Chagos Archipelago.
I wish to reiterate that the long-standing struggle of Mauritius to effectively exercise
its sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago and the right of Mauritian citizens, including
those of Chagossian origin, to return to and resettle in the Chagos Archipelago are
indissociable.
Madam Speaker, in reply to part (a) of the question, as the House is aware, the UK
Supreme Court delivered its judgment on 29 June 2016 in the case brought by Mr Olivier
Bancoult challenging the judgment given by the House of Lords on 22 October 2008. The
UK Supreme Court dismissed Mr Bancoult’s application for the 2008 judgment of the House
of Lords to be set aside and also ruled against a re-hearing of the appeal he had lodged before
the House of Lords in the Bancoult No. 2 case.
Madam Speaker, in my reply to Parliamentary Question B/369 which I had tabled, I
had indicated that Government will maintain close contact and collaboration with the
Chagossian community to ensure that we continue to be on the same wavelength as regards
the plight of our Mauritian citizens of Chagossian origin who were forcibly removed from the
Chagos Archipelago by the United Kingdom in the wake of the illegal excision of the Chagos
Archipelago from the territory of Mauritius and the effective exercise of our sovereignty over
the Chagos Archipelago. In this regard, I met Mr Bancoult last year and I propose to meet
him again shortly if he so wishes.
11
Madam Speaker, I have noted that Mr Bancoult has made several comments in the
press following the UK Supreme Court judgment. In one of his statements, he is reported to
have said that the ruling is not the end of the road.
In another statement, Mr Bancoult has said that he will solicit a meeting with the
outgoing UK Prime Minister, David Cameron and he believes that the latter will give him a
positive hearing.
In yet another statement, on a private radio on 29 June, Mr Bancoult said that he noted
that, I quote –
« La communauté chagossienne sort gagnante après ce jugement de la Cour suprême
britannique »
and added, I quote –
« Je note aussi que nous avons gagné sur la Marine Protected Area ».
No doubt several other comments may have been made and I cannot make out which
specific positive comments the Leader of the Opposition is referring to. Be it as it may, when
I meet Mr Bancoult on his return I will hear from him directly if, as I said, he so wishes to
meet me.
Madam Speaker, our sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago is of national interest
and I have, therefore, always favoured a concerted approach on this issue. In this context, I
will consider the advisability of convening another meeting of the Committee which I have
set up under my chairmanship following the Award delivered on 18 March 2015 in the case
brought by Mauritius against the UK under UNCLOS.
Madam Speaker, with regard to part (b) of the question, in an article in the Daily Mail
dated 29 June 2016, it is briefly mentioned and I quote –
“A further legal challenge by Chagos Islanders about their fishing rights is expected to
reach the Supreme Court next year. This should be in 2017.”
An article of The Guardian, dated 29 June 2016 repeats verbatim the same thing.
As far as I am aware, there is no such case currently pending before the UK Supreme
Court.
12
Should such a case come up for the hearing before the UK Supreme Court, our High
Commission in London, as per the practice for previous cases, will certainly keep a watching
brief.
Madam Speaker, I wish to recall that, in its Award of 18 March 2015, the Arbitral
Tribunal in the case of Mauritius v/s United Kingdom, inter alia, stated that the United
Kingdom was bound to ensure that fishing rights in the Chagos Archipelago would remain
available to Mauritius as far as practicable, and that this is a legally binding obligation in
relation to the territorial sea.
Madam Speaker, in regard to part (c) of the question, I wish to reiterate what I stated
in my reply to a Private Notice Question on 17 May 2016. The Chagos Archipelago should
be returned by the United Kingdom to the effective control of Mauritius by a precise date to
be agreed upon and proposed that consideration could be given to the joint management of
the Chagos Archipelago pending its return to Mauritius. I had asked for a response to my
request by the end of June 2016, otherwise Mauritius would take appropriate action at the
international level including at the United Nations. Further, at the request of the British High
Commissioner, I have agreed to extend the deadline by another week.
It would, therefore, be inappropriate at this precise juncture to go into the specifics of
the course of action to be taken.
I wish further to assure the Leader of the Opposition that all necessary steps are being
taken to enlist the support of the UN Member States in favour of such action.
Mr Bérenger: I am referring to the statement from Mr Bancoult, which I heard with
my own ears and watched on ION News amongst others. I heard him say - this is why I say
positive comments -
« Souveraineté d’accord, mais comme dans cas Rodrigues bizin banne representants
de bannes Chagossiens partie prenante. »
Which, I believe, is positive because he says, and I repeat –
« Souveraineté d’accord, mais comme dans cas Rodrigues bizin banne representants
de bannes Chagossiens partie prenante. »
Now, will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree with me that, in fact, there are several
dangers after this ruling by the Court?
13
(i)  The Supreme Court of the UK has invited Mr Bancoult and his group to go
again to the Supreme Court to appeal against the 2004 Order which banned
anybody from being present anywhere on the Chagos Archipelago, including
the Ilois. That is the first thing which I think is very dangerous; I think it is a
piège.
(ii)  The lawyer representing Mr Bancoult has himself referred to the Gibraltar
possibility, which we know what that means, Madam Speaker.
(iii)  It is clear that London is going to propose resettlement to the Ilois.
Therefore, can I appeal to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to take the first step and invite Mr
Bancoult so that this is a national patriotic effort and we do not allow London to divide us?
The Prime Minister: Well, certainly, if this is the intention of Mr Bancoult,
definitely, on his return, he will approach me, and I never refused receiving anybody.
Depending on what discussion we will have, he may be invited to join me in the Committee.
As regards the piège in the invitation of the UK Supreme Court made to the
Chagossians to lodge a fresh application for judicial review, I am sure that the Chagossian
community and their lawyers will pay careful attention to the risk, if it exists, before lodging
a fresh case.
Mr Bérenger: On the same part of my question, Madam Speaker, I think I heard the
Rt. hon. Prime Minister say that there is no such case before the Supreme Court. My
information is that there was legal action entered by the Ilois Group in August 2010
challenging the lawfulness of the so-called Marine Protected Area - what is contained in the
legislation setting up this. My information is that Mr Bancoult and his group lost in the lower
courts and that next year the appeal by the same group will be before the Supreme Court. So,
can I request the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to double check and see to it that if there is such a
case we must have a watching brief?
The Prime Minister: Well, it is always the practice when there is a case where
Mauritians and Mauritius have an interest, the mission in UK always keeps a watching brief.
I said so in my answer, and it is going to be the same thing again.
14
Mr Bérenger: On the last and third part of my question, will the Rt. hon. Prime
Minister agree with me - because I asked what measures, what actions have been taken to
date concerning the eventual Resolution before the UN General Assembly - that three things
need to be done urgently?
(i)  to have the final draft of the Resolution cleared here and with the President of
the General Assembly;
(ii)  to get the help of the President of the forthcoming General Assembly to put it
on the agenda, and
(iii)  to lobby our friends internationally actively, especially India, China, Russia,
Japan, the Non-Aligned Movement, the African Union, the European Union,
the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation and Arab League and the
Organization of American States.
Are we actively doing that?
The Prime Minister: Since the Prime Minister of UK has asked for an extension,
which I have agreed upon, it all depends what stand he is going to take, and very soon we
will be aware of this. We know our responsibilities, we know what we have to do, we know
what route we have taken. I am not doing fausse route, as some believe. Therefore, at this
stage, to enter into what we are doing, what we will be doing and all that, I don’t think it is
right to do that at this juncture. But we are very conscious of the timing, of our
responsibilities. We are working towards what end we want to achieve.
Mr Bérenger: The Rt. hon. Prime Minister has insisted that he would wish to see the
Resolution before the General Assembly this year, that is, as from September. Will he agree
with me that, pending the UK Prime Minister making another offer or another proposal or
what have you, we should be in touch with the freshly elected Chairperson/President of the
next General Assembly of the UN who happens to be from Fiji? The Ambassador of Fiji has
just been elected to the United Nations. Have we made contact with him already?
The Prime Minister: I have said it is no use discussing all this right now. I have said
we know our responsibilities, what has to be done is being done, and I don’t want to go into
details.
Mr Bérenger: It is already nearly a week since the Rt. hon. Prime Minister
supposedly extended an extension of one week. We will see and I will come back, of course.
Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he is aware - because I started by saying that
15
the first country that we must get assistance from is India, as usual - of a very tough statement
made by the US Deputy Secretary of State on Political Affairs, the number 4 in the State
Department, in India, a week ago - very forceful - where he said, if I can quote his statement
as reported in The Hindu on 30 June, in unusually strong comments –
“China’s motives to secure the South China Sea are “madness” and intended towards
the Indian Ocean (…).
The U.S. will work to ensure India remains the “natural power” in the Indian Ocean
(…).
As China works to secure the South China Sea as an area of strategic importance for
it, it does so not with the intention of going into the blue Pacific, but with going into
the Indian Ocean and broadening its presence in the Indian Ocean….[] So it is
certainly our intention to work with India to have a strong and comprehensive
presence there (…).”
So, is Government perfectly aware of the lobbying that is being done by the United
States on India - and there is the Nuclear Group to bargain with? Are we in touch not only
with Delhi but with all those who are concerned by this kind of statement, very strong
statement made on Wednesday 29 June after that gentleman had met the Foreign Secretary of
India, Mr Jaishankar?
The Prime Minister: Well, what do we expect from the United States? This is their
stand. When we have started taking our decision to recuperate the Chagos, we knew the
strong reaction of the United States and the United Kingdom. I have come to the conclusion
that we have no other alternative than to follow the course that I am following simply because
United Kingdom has no intention whatsoever – I repeat it, whatsoever – to return Chagos to
Mauritius. Therefore, we must have recourse to whatever means and if we get a guidance
from the International Court of Law, we will use that afterwards in every forum to bash
against the United Kingdom and that will hurt them a lot, I am sure. That is why, Mr
Cameron, who avoided discussing with me over the Chagos, today, has asked for an
extension of one week. I have been good enough to accept it. He says: ‘There will be a
compromise in which we will be in a win-win situation.’ Let’s see what compromise he is
going to suggest, but we are not sleeping. As I have said, we are doing our job because I do
not trust these people. These people speak so much about democracy, rule of law, justice, but
16
when it comes to their interest, they forget all these. Their philosophy which prevails is
‘might is right’. This is my conviction.
Mr Bérenger: Amongst the groups, organisations that I suggested we need to actively
lobby in the Non-Aligned Movement, which I mentioned. I am sure the Rt. hon. Prime
Minister is aware that the Non-Aligned Movement is in a terrible mess. In fact, we can
consider that the Non-Aligned Movement these days is non-existent, if I can call it the next
best. Is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister aware that, on the other hand, at the UN, there is the
group of 77, and China, which is very powerful and which represents the same Constituency
as the Non-Aligned Movement, but actively in New York. So, are we in touch with them and
are we lobbying them also? Is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister aware that a few days ago, a new
Chairman of the group of 77 and China in the UN has been elected and it happens to be the
representative of Thailand, whereas, I am sure the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is aware, Thailand
is a major non-NATO ally as designated by the US. Therefore, can I know whether, as in the
case of the recently elected President of the next General Assembly, we have been in touch
with the freshly elected President of the group of 77 and China at the UN?
The Prime Minister: The hon. Leader of the Opposition spoke of India. Well, if we
cannot rely on the support of India then it is better we stop in our struggle, because I do not
believe that India is one of the countries which we have to lobby. I take it for granted that
India will be, as they have always been in the past, in support of the sovereignty of Mauritius
over the Chagos Archipelago. There are many other countries also. The hon. Leader of the
Opposition wants to know by all means what are actions we are taking, we are doing and all
that. I just ask him to be patient. We know what we have to do. We know that we must try to
get the support of all the nations who are in the United Nations and we are doing our job.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, I hope that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister realises it is
because he has said, and has insisted, that the Resolution must be before the General
Assembly next September of this year. He has insisted on that. That is why I want to know
because September is derrière la porte, in a few weeks’ time. So, can I ask the Rt. hon.
Prime Minister – he has extended one week to outgoing Prime Minister Cameron – whether
he is satisfied, at this stage, that we will be ready with the drafting of the Resolution, that we
will get the green light from the President of the next General Assembly and that our
lobbying will be completed for us to get a big majority, if indeed we go to the General
17
Assembly in a few weeks’ time in September? Is he satisfied that we are on target to be there
in September as he has insisted?
The Prime Minister: It all depends on what the UK Prime Minister is going to
propose, but whatever be it, in the meantime we are continuing to take our responsibility and
to do what we have to do. If we can come to an agreement with the UK in the meantime,
then, of course, we can withdraw whatever we are doing and whatever Resolution will be
before the United Nations. We are fully aware of the timing and that the United Nations
sitting will be in September. So, I do not want to give more particulars about what is being
done, what we are doing and what not. We do our job. If, in the meantime, UK comes to an
agreement, then we will not proceed further, even if there is a Resolution before the United
Nation, we will withdraw it.
Mr Ganoo: Madam Speaker, I heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister saying that he will
call the Inter-Parliamentary Committee on the Chagos issue; I commend him for that because
there are so many issues which have cropped up recently. With regard to the recent ruling,
which was delivered last week as a result of the case which was dismissed in 2008, when he
meets Mr Bancoult, in view of the fact that the hon. Leader of the Opposition has said we
must be careful lest des pièges be opened to the Mauritian side, can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime
Minister to keep in mind that, in fact, the ruling in 2008 went the way it went because the
British Authorities have concealed documents, have not allowed the Court to be apprised of
the documents which they should have been given? This is why the ruling went as it went
last week because, as we know, at the end of the ruling it is said that it will now be opened
to challenge the failure to abrogate the 2000 Order. This was said by Lord Clarke, who was
one of the majority Judges: ‘It was opened to any Chagossian to challenge the failure to
abrogate the 2004 Orders in the light of all the information which is now available, because
there is a new report, KPMG Report, which says that there was no problem about
resettlement’.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo, please ask your question!
Mr Ganoo: Therefore, can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, when he meets Mr
Bancoult, to keep in mind that Lord Clarke said that it was opened for Mr Bancoult to
institute judicial review proceedings to challenge any future…
18
Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo, I am sorry I have to interrupt you. Don’t dilly-dally
on your question. I should give the opportunity to other hon. Members also to ask their
questions.
Mr Ganoo: … refusal of Government. This is what Lord Clarke said: ‘ (…) is
irrational, unreasonable and disproportionate’. This is what the majority Judge said. The
British Authorities are behaved in such a way.
The Prime Minister: What does the hon. Member want me to do? Let’s wait! Let’s
see whether Mr Bancoult and his group will take the proper action. But, as I said a moment
ago, they have to be careful lest it is a piège.
So, we have to be very careful about all this. And insofar as Chagos Sovereignty is
concerned, if Mr Bancoult wants to see me, I have said, I am prepared to receive him and
resettlement, of course, we are concerned with it. I said in my answer to the hon. Leader of
the Opposition, it is indissociable, sovereignty and resettlement.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed!
Mr Mohamed: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, there is an
international jurisprudence that states that whenever a country stops a people from circulating
freely and going to work in the country where they come from, this international
jurisprudence has described a state of affairs as this as apartheid, as in the case of South
Africa and in the case of Palestine. In this particular case of the Chagossian people, could the
Rt. hon. Prime Minister not, therefore, consider the possibility of consulting the legal advisers
of the Republic of Mauritius on this issue as to whether we could not take the fight to the
United States of America and the United Kingdom on a new front altogether which would be
a simple violation of human rights because by stopping Chagossians to go and circulate freely
on the Chagossian islands and work from the country where they come from, they are, in fact,
those two super powers practising nothing else but apartheid?
The Prime Minister: I must make one thing clear, that the Chagossians originally
were Mauritians, of course, and then, when they were there, the number continued to grow.
But we can’t separate the question of sovereignty. It is a question of all Mauritians who are
being deprived. So, that is how I look at it.
19
I have a note here as regards Mauritius. Government will throughout, as it has been
doing hitherto, act in consultation with its foreign and local legal advisers as well as take into
account the views of other stakeholders. And certainly, we’ll take care of the proposal made
just now by the hon. Member.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah!
Mr Rutnah: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Other than asking for a week’s extension,
the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, David Cameron, has also said that he is going to
make a full statement in the House of Commons in relation to the whole issue surrounding
Chagos Island. In this circumstance, will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree with me that
insofar as discussions, negotiations and lobbying are concerned that we should be at this
stage, optimistically, cautiously approach such discussions and to wait until the statement of
David Cameron in the House of Commons come public, then, we take further action?
The Prime Minister: Well, there is a question of timing. As you know, the United
Nations General Assembly will be meeting and our resolution must be ready to be presented
there. So, we can’t wait indefinitely Mr Cameron making a statement in the Parliament there
and then writing to us. He said, in a week, he is going to write to us, making certain
proposals. But we just can’t sit down and wait for proposals. If proposals come and if we can
agree, of course, then we will put a stop to everything.
Madam Speaker: Last question, hon. Leader of the Opposition!
Mr Bérenger: I am cautiously optimistic, but I agree fully with the Rt. hon. Prime
Minister, we should be very careful and mobiliser de plus en plus. Now, can I know whether
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister remembers that he himself and I, in the past, not that distant
past,...
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order!
Mr Bérenger: Can I know whether he remembers what he and I, in the not so distant
past, what we proposed apart from action at the UN General Assembly other initiatives, other
actions? So, whilst I do hope that there is a positive settlement and that we don’t have to go to
the United Nations General Assembly, is he prepared even now, to consider other initiatives -
which I will not mention here but I am sure he remembers - not in lieu of going to the UN
20
General Assembly, but to support our move and bring the attention of the whole world to the
injustice that has been done to Mauritius and to the Chagossians?
The Prime Minister: Well, the past is the past. There has been no positive result and
the Britishers will very much like that we follow what the hon. Member is suggesting because
it will be in their interest. I think I have taken the right path and if we have to succeed, it is
this, what we are doing, will make us succeed, otherwise the Britishers will never voluntarily
amicably settle this question of sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago.
Madam Speaker: Yes, last.
Mr Bérenger: I think the Rt. hon. Prime Minister misunderstood me completely. I am
saying that there are other non-legal non-United Nations resolution ways of bringing the
attention of the whole world to what we are doing and rightly at the UN General Assembly. I
think he does not remember what he proposed in the past at one point and which I proposed,
if I can request him to exercise his memory so that we can possibly take those initiatives.
The Prime Minister: Well, after considering all these, we have come to the
conclusion that the initiative we have taken is the best and the right one.
Madam Speaker: Time is over!