FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE – OUTBREAK
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the
Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security whether, in regard to the recent outbreak of the
Foot and Mouth Disease, he will state the population of cattle, sheep, goats and pigs in
Rodrigues and in mainland Mauritius respectively, as at June 2016, indicating –
(a) the number thereof culled as at to date;
(b) if the breeders thereof in Rodrigues and in mainland Mauritius will receive the
same compensation;
(c) if the ban on imports thereof from Rodrigues will be effective for three years and
the breeders thereof will receive assistance in relation thereto, and
(d) if the responsibilities have now been established on the manner in which the ban
issued on 29 July 2016 was handled and the imports thereof from Rodrigues were
disembarked on 01 August, 2016.
aaaaa
Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, I would, first of all, wish to inform the House that
the Division of Veterinary Services of my Ministry normally exercises a very strict control to
ensure that live animals and meat imported in Mauritius originate from countries where there
are no contagious diseases.
In fact, before issuing import permits for live animals and meat, an Import Permit
Committee thoroughly examines all applications and pays special attention to conditions
prevailing in the exporting countries, particularly in regard to prevalence of diseases.
In view of this surveillance, Mauritius has been, except for the outbreak of African
Swine Fever in 2007, spared from serious infectious animal diseases over a long period of
time. It has been brought to my notice, today itself, that there was an outbreak of the Foot
and Mouth Disease in Mauritius in l916, 100 years ago.
10
We were, therefore, taken aback by the occurrence of the Foot and Mouth Disease in
Rodrigues and eventually in Mauritius. The Fact-Finding Committee which the Government
has agreed to set up will surely shed light on the possible causes of the entry of this disease in
Rodrigues. My Ministry is presently finalising the terms of reference for the Fact-Finding
Committee which will also be called upon to situate responsibility regarding the importation
of the consignment of the infected cattle from Rodrigues on 01 August 2016.
Madam Speaker, my Ministry has been very quick to react to ensure that the disease
does not spread over the whole island, which would have been a major tragedy for our
livestock sector.
The consignment of infected animals which reached Mauritius in cattle containers on
01 August 2016 was immediately transferred to the Richelieu Quarantine Station where the
animals were kept under observation.
Farm harbouring animals imported in a previous consignment from Rodrigues on 15
July 2016 were regularly monitored to detect any signs of the disease.
As soon as symptoms of the disease were detected and analysis of blood samples at
the Animal Health Laboratory in Réduit has established the presence of the disease, decision
was taken to cull all the animals at Richelieu Quarantine Station and in some farms at Vallée
des Prêtres and Cité La Cure.
This week, culling has been done in infected farms at Highlands and Notre Dame. An
infected animal at Camp La Boue, Terre Rouge was culled yesterday.
In all, some 681 animals have been culled so far in Mauritius.
Blood samples as well as sera and epithelial tissue samples have been sent for analysis
in laboratories in South Africa and France which are reference laboratories approved by the
Office International des Epizooties, an international organisation responsible for animal
welfare. According to the latest reports, both laboratories have now confirmed that the
serotype of the virus is of type <0>.
Results of analysis of samples taken from Rodrigues on Monday last will be received
from Botswana Vaccine Institute by this evening. The vaccination campaign will start on
Monday after receipt of the 20,000 available doses of vaccines during the weekend and
10,000 of these vaccines will be sent to Rodrigues.
11
My Ministry has made a request for assistance to the FAO to help us cope with the
current situation. The FAO has agreed to provide necessary assistance. A formal application
under the Technical Cooperation Programme is being prepared, as per established procedures
and will be submitted to the FAO shortly.
The Indian Ocean Commission has also agreed to extend assistance to us to deal with
this problem. I had a meeting today with the Health and Surveillance Unit of the IOC
whereby technical assistance had been obtained for a team of foreign veterinary officers to
help us in the implementation of the vaccination campaign.
Madam Speaker, it is also relevant for me to mention that I had a meeting with the
President and representatives of the Jummah Mosque yesterday in the context of the
forthcoming Eid-Ul-Adha festival. A number of issues have been discussed and decisions
taken to ensure that the festival takes place in the best conditions.
Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a) (i) of the question, I am informed that as at
June 2016, the overall population of cattle, sheep/goats and pigs is as follows -
(i) In Rodrigues -
Cattle: 11,000,
Sheep and goats: 29,000
Pigs: 10,000
(ii) In Mauritius -
Cattle: 6,447
Sheep/goats: 28,804
Pigs: 21,235
Regarding part (a) (ii) of the question, I am informed that 2,216 animals have been
culled in Rodrigues as at to date. As regards Mauritius, 681 animals have been culled as at
yesterday.
With regard to part (b) (ii) of the question, the quantum of compensation payable for
Mauritius takes into consideration several parameters, namely –
12
(i)  the market value of the local animals;
(ii)  freight charges incurred for import;
(iii)  the cost of feed incurred by breeders, and
(iv)  age, sex and species of the animals.
I am tabling the different rates worked out to compensate breeders and importers in
Mauritius.
With regard to Rodrigues, I understand from the Rodriguan Authorities that the
Rodrigues Regional Assembly has, at its meeting held today, decided to align the
compensation payable to Rodriguan breeders with those approved for Mauritius.
Madam Speaker, the proposed ban of 3 years to be imposed on all imports from
Rodrigues is in line with norms prescribed by the World Organisation for Animal Health
(OIE) and is a mandatory requirement for a country to regain its disease freedom status.
The vaccination programme to be undertaken shortly in Mauritius and in Rodrigues
will have to be effected over a total period of 30 months approximately, and in 4 phases
including: a primary dose, followed by a booster dose after 21 days, a second booster dose
after 4 months and lastly 3 additional doses at 6 months’ intervals. During the vaccination
programme, the disease status both in Mauritius and in Rodrigues will be closely monitored
and if found to be under control and free from the disease, a decision may be taken to lift the
ban imposed on Rodrigues earlier than the 3 years’ period.
As regards compensation payable to breeders in the wake of the disease, I wish to
point out that the Rodrigues Regional Assembly is an autonomous body which has its own
Commission of Agriculture and its own Veterinary Services. As such, although we do
provide assistance to Rodrigues as and when required, we do not per se have a ‘droit de
regard’ on the internal policies of Rodrigues.
However, Madam Speaker, Cabinet, has, at its meeting today, decided to set up a
Ministerial Committee under the chairmanship of the Minister of Finance and Economic
Development, for the relaunching of the livestock sector in Mauritius and Rodrigues. The
Committee will comprise the following Ministers -
(i) Minister of Youth and Sports;
13
(ii)  Minister of Local Government;
(iii) Minister of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment;
(iv) Minister of Agro-industry and Food Security;
(v)  Minister of Business, Enterprise and Cooperatives, and
(vi) Minister of Environment.
As regards the last part of the question, it is relevant to mention that the shipment of
the animals was authorised by the Veterinary Officer of Rodrigues. The cattle-containers
were off-loaded in the Port once health clearance was obtained. The clearance of the
Veterinary Services in Mauritius was required for the importers to take delivery of the
animals in the Port area. This clearance was not given as it was suspected that the animals
might have been affected by the disease, hence, the instructions issued by the DVS to
Rodrigues on 29 July not to embark the animals on the MV Anna. As a precautionary
measure, all the animals had to be transported to Richelieu Quarantine Station to be placed
under observation. I cannot, at this stage, say whether I am satisfied or not regarding the
manner in which the importation was made. The Fact-Finding Committee will, as I indicated
earlier, shed light on this matter.
Mr Bérenger: The hon. Minister provided us with figures that I will look at carefully.
I have heard again a reference to the number of animals culled to date in Rodrigues and
Mauritius and not a breakdown. Is this because we do not have at this stage the breakdown in
terms of the different animals concerned?
Mr Seeruttun: In fact, the breakdown is as follows –
•  for Rodrigues - 699 cattle, 1,272 sheep and goats and 245 pigs, and
•  for Mauritius - 257 cattle, 275 sheep and goats and 149 pigs.
Mr Bérenger: Has the Ministry worked out an estimate at this stage of how many
different animals will have to be culled before the problem is under control?
Mr Seeruttun: In fact, as and when animals are showing signs of this disease - we are
going through a selective mode of culling - we are culling the animals. We hope now, with
the coming of the vaccines, that we are going to start the campaign as from Monday. Then,
we will be able to save all those who have been in contact with those animals that were
14
infected. So, hopefully, this will reduce the number of animals that have to be culled once
the vaccines are being injected.
Mr Bérenger: In reply to my PNQ on 09 August 2016, Madam Speaker, the hon.
Minister said that he too was shocked when reading in the Press of the conditions in which
the animals in Rodrigues were culled. Do we know more? Is it confirmed that these terrible
things happen and has this stopped, that is, culling by cutting throats?
Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, rightly said, from what we read on the paper, the
way things were being apparently carried out in Rodrigues looked to be inhumane. I was
there in Rodrigues last Saturday. I had meetings with all those concerned. I did put the
question to those concerned and the reply that I got was: “That’s the way the cattle are
slaughtered in Rodrigues.” That is what they do every Saturday when they go for the sale of
meat. At the time when that disease was detected and with the limited resources that they had,
they had recourse to that way of doing the culling. That is why we provided them with two
additional Veterinarians from Mauritius. And since, they have also obtained all the injections
to endormir the cattle. The day I was there, they confirmed to me that this is no more the
practice. They are doing the same that we do here, that is, endormir les animaux before they
are culled.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, if you will allow me to congratulate the Rodrigues
Regional Assembly which has decided, if I heard the hon. Minister correctly, today to align
the compensation because I am sure the hon. Minister will agree with me that this was a very
unhealthy situation; creating a lot of frustration in Rodrigues. I congratulate the Rodrigues
Regional Assembly. Of course, we respect the autonomy of the Rodrigues, the Regional
Assembly and so on, but I am reading the Cabinet communiqué of 12 August, I quote
“Cabinet has agreed to the payment of a compensation to breeders (…)”.
Does that include an additional effort because we respect the autonomy of Rodrigues, but this
is an exceptional matter; or do we expect the Rodrigues Regional Assembly to use only its
normal funds to align the compensation; or does this Cabinet decision in mainland Mauritius
include a sum to help the Rodrigues Regional Assembly align the compensation?
Mr Seeruttun: With regard to the compensation that has been announced, for the
time being, it is being paid out of the fund from their own budget. But as I have mentioned in
my reply earlier on we have set up a Ministerial Committee to look at all the issues with
15
regard to that problem and it has been chaired by the Minister of Finance and Economic
Development. We will probably also look at other issues in terms of assistance that can be
provided to the Rodriguans as well.
Mr Bérenger: I think I heard the hon. Minister say that every effort will be carried
out to reduce that period of three years, which was announced in reply to my PNQ: ‘we have
for scientific reasons to have a period of three years’. Now, I understand that it could be
reduced. Can I have a precision on what the Ministry, or the specialist concerned, is going to
base itself, if ever, to come to a decision to reduce that period of three years?
Mr Seeruttun: In fact, during that period that we are going to vaccinate the animals,
we will have to carry out tests periodically to see whether they still give signs of the presence
of that disease in the bodies of those animals so if the results show that there is no sign of that
particular disease then we can declare the island being free from the FMD.
Mr Bérenger: Different from compensation is - during that period of three years,
less than three years or whatever period - assistance to the breeders in Rodrigues because
there will be a ban for a given period on import of animals from Rodrigues. We respect fully
the autonomy of the Rodrigues Regional Assembly, but is there any proposal from their end
because again this is a national issue, to set up any scheme for assistance to those breeders?
Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, that is where this Committee will look into all those
issues and come up with some recommendations.
Mr Bérenger: In the last part of my question, Madam Speaker, I think I heard the
hon. Minister say that the authorities in Rodrigues directed not to embark those animals that
landed on 01 of August. I am quoting from memory. Now, what disturbed me is that the hon.
Minister did place on the Table of the Assembly the exchanges of correspondence. Has it
been pointed out to the officers, hon. Minister, that they only recommended? They did not
direct! The hon. Minister mentioned ‘directions’. I am disturbed by the fact that they were
not directed not to embark. They said: “it is recommended”, and that took place from our end
at 10 in the morning. I must say the Rodrigues Officer was very quick. At 12.43 p.m. he
replied and, rightly so, being a civil servant, he said: “I am seeking approval from higher
quarters.” Does not the hon. Minister think that there has been a lapse there? There has been
no follow up within hours that could have stopped that embarkation. Does the hon. Minister
have the date and time on which finally those animals were embarked?
16
Mr Seeruttun: The date and the time, I don’t have it with me now, but I can find it
out. The thing that I have gathered from the Chief Veterinary of the Ministry is that the mail
clearly stated out that we are banning any importation of animals from Rodrigues and they
should not embark any animal from thereon.
Mr Bérenger: There has been opinion by professionals, one retired official from the
Veterinary Services, saying that those animals should have been kept on board and should not
have been disembarked. Do your officers advise you in the same manner or are you satisfied
that what took place had to take place, that is, sending them to Richelieu?
Mr Seeruttun: At the time that the consignment arrived in Mauritius on 01 of
August, tests that were carried out to confirm or not the existence of the disease showed
negative results. Secondly, what I am told is that the animals arrived in containers because it
is not a cattle carrier. Apart from animals, there are also other stuff that are embarked on that
ship. If we had to send back the ship, we should have waited for the disembarkment of all the
other items which were on board of that ship. It would have taken probably up to 9 days. As
the animals had already stayed for 48 hours in the containers, it would have been inhumane to
let them in that container for so long. So, that is why the decision was taken that the
containers were lifted and sent to the Quarantine Station at Richelieu. They were not
disembarked, put on vehicles and transferred to the Quarantine Station. They were
transferred as they were on the ship, that is, in the containers themselves. So, there was no
contact at the Port area up until they got to the Quarantine Station.
Mr Bérenger: I am puzzled, Madam Speaker - before I leave the floor to others - by
this reference to containers. Is it the normal practice for animals to be exported from
Rodrigues to Mauritius in containers? I must say I have never heard of that.
Mr Seeruttun: It is in containers, but with some openings.
(Interruptions)
I am told it is as per IATA requirements.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem!
Mr Uteem: The hon. Minister mentioned in his reply that he had meetings with
representatives of Jummah Mosque in view of the incoming Eid-Ul-Adha festival. So, may I
just seek two clarifications? First, will all the cattle have to be slaughtered in the
17
slaughterhouse and to the extent that they can be slaughtered at home, will the Veterinary
Services issue a certificate to all purchasers to certify that this is clean and it can be
slaughtered at home?
Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, we did have a long discussion yesterday with
representatives of the Jummah Mosque and one of the proposals that we made was that in the
region of Vallée des Prêtres and Cité La Cure, given that the area is mostly affected by this
disease, those people who are going to practice the Qurbani, we are recommending that,
instead of doing the slaughtering at their own place, they do it at the Mauritius Meat
Authority. The MMA is trying to come up with some kind of proposals to finalise with the
representatives of Jummah Mosque shortly to see how we can go about because they won’t
be able to cater for the whole island. In other areas where there is no problem, slaughtering
will be done as usual, but under strict surveillance. We have proposed that all those breeders
who are going to sell their animals for that particular event, they have to, first, be registered
with the Veterinary Services of my Ministry, have a certificate of health of the animals to
make sure that all animals that are going to be used for that particular event are free from the
disease.
Mr Mahomed: My question pertains to the 21,000 doses of vaccination that is going
to reach our shore this weekend. Now that it is confirmed that it is of type ‘O’, but we also
read that the viruses contain several strains. Now, the vaccination that is going to reach the
country this weekend, is it of a spectrum that is wide enough to cater for all those possible
strains because the first time the vaccination was not appropriate.
Mr Seeruttun: In fact, Madam Speaker, we have confirmation that the strain is the
type ‘O’ strain and we have also been able to identity from which region. The origin is from
the Middle East and South Asia. That’s the test that we just obtained this afternoon from the
France laboratory. The vaccines that we have ordered is going to address the ‘O’ strain. So,
that’s why we have ordered that particular vaccine. The one that we ordered last week was…
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order! Order!
Mr Seeruttun: The one that we ordered previously was supposed to address the SAT
1, SAT 2 based on the result that we got from the Lab in South Africa. These are being dealt
with to have them sent back.
18
Dr. Sorefan: The best way to prevent the propagation of such a disease is how we
dispose of those culled animals. May we know from the hon. Minister how those animals are
being disposed of and whether incinerators have been sought from friendly countries, because
to my scientific knowledge, the best way is to incinerate all the animals, to get on a free basis
incinerators to get rid of the animals?
Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, there are different ways of disposing of the carcasses
of those animals and one is what we are doing, that is, bury the carcasses. The other could
have been to burn the carcasses. But we are in an island where the farms are found in
residential areas and we have been told that it would not be environmentally correct to go for
that way of disposing of the carcasses, it is not the right way because we are surrounded by
residential premises. Looking at whether we have contacted friendly countries to resort to
incinerator facilities, well, this would have taken, you would imagine, some time. Time is
against us!
Mr Baloomoody: The hon. Minister just mentioned that we are on a campaign of
vaccination, and the earliest we finished that campaign, the better. We have a shortage of
veterinarians in the services, this is why we are calling assistance from outside. Can I ask the
hon. Minister whether he is prepared to call for the Mauritian Veterinarians in the private
practice to come and assist so that we get on quickly with the vaccination?
Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, I did mention last time that we have also already
contacted the private vets. I have talked myself personally to the Chairperson of the Vet
Council and I know my Ministry has already established contact with them and they are
willing to give a helping hand. I have also mentioned that the COI is willing to provide us
with Vets from Madagascar. They are willing to come as soon as possible. This also is
another venue we are looking at and whether to explore that venue as well to get additional
resources to help us in that campaign.
Mr Ganoo: Madam Speaker, mention is made in the last Cabinet decision which was
published last week that assistance has been sought from the FAO. Can I ask the hon.
Minister what is the nature of the assistance which has been sought and whether it is
forthcoming?
Mr Seeruttun: In terms of assistance, we have asked for technical and financial.
Already, we have obtained a reply and I mentioned earlier on that a Technical Cooporation
Programme is being worked out and we will send to the FAO to get that assistance.
19
Concerning the IRC, they are also willing to provide in terms of vaccines freely to us in that
programme to combat that disease.
Madam Speaker: Yes, last question, hon. Leader of the Opposition.
Mr Bérenger: I heard the hon. Minister say that the Terms of Reference of the Fact-
Finding Committee to be chaired by a sitting Magistrate are being worked out. Can I know
from the hon. Minister whether the green light of the Chief Justice, of the required
authorities, whether the Magistrate will be appointed as soon as the Terms of Reference are
ready or whether we are going to wait for the current crisis to cool down before the Fact-
Finding Committee is appointed, which I don’t think would be a good thing?
Mr Seeruttun: Madam Speaker, we will do it at the earliest.
Madam Speaker: Time is over!