CHAGOS ARCHIPELAGO – MAURITIUS SOVEREIGNTY
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Rt.
hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and
National Development Unit whether, in regard to the sovereignty of Mauritius over the
Chagos Archipelago, he will state –
(a) if he will render public the letter dated 07 or 08 July 2016 he had received
from the out-going Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, Mr David
Cameron;
(b) where matters stand regarding the –
(i) resolution Mauritius is proposing to present to the forthcoming United
Nations General Assembly, and
(ii) implementation of the Ruling delivered on 18 March 2015 by the
United Nations Arbitral Tribunal under the United Nations Convention
of the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), and
(c) if he has received replies to the letters he wrote to the President of the United
States of America, Mr Barack Obama, and to the Prime Minister of the United
Kingdom, Mrs Theresa May.
aaaaa
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, it remains an undisputable fact that the
Chagos Archipelago, including Diego Garcia, forms and has always formed an integral part
of the territory of Mauritius.
Mauritius does not recognise the so-called “British Indian Ocean Territory” which the
United Kingdom purported to create by illegally excising the Chagos Archipelago from the
territory of Mauritius prior to its accession to independence. This excision was carried out in
blatant and shameful violation of international law and United Nations General Assembly
Resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, 2066 (XX) of 16 December 1965, 2232 (XXI)
of 20 December 1966 and 2357 (XXII) of 19 December 1967.
8
It is a matter of deep concern that forty-eight years after its independence, Mauritius
is still being denied the right to effectively exercise its sovereignty over part of its own
territory. As long as the Chagos Archipelago remains under the unlawful control of the
former colonial power, the process of decolonisation of Mauritius and by extension that of
Africa will remain incomplete.
Madam Speaker, in reply to part (a) of the question, I had informed the House on 17
May 2016 in my reply to a Private Notice Question that I had requested the United Kingdom
to return the Chagos Archipelago to the effective control of Mauritius by a precise date to be
agreed upon. I had asked for a reply to be given to my request by the end of June 2016,
otherwise Mauritius would take appropriate action at the international level, including at the
United Nations. My request was followed by a letter which I addressed to the former UK
Prime Minister on 27 June 2016. At the request of the British High Commissioner, I had
agreed to extend the deadline by another week.
On 07 July 2016, I received a letter from the then UK Prime Minister. In that letter,
the then UK Prime Minister has expressed the view that it would be appropriate for
discussions on the Chagos Archipelago to take place with the next
UK Government and that he would advise his successor to make necessary arrangements
accordingly. He also requested that Mauritius does not refer the Chagos Archipelago issue to
the International Court of Justice.
I am tabling a copy of the letter from the former UK Prime Minister.
Madam Speaker, in reply to part (b) (i) of the question, our Permanent Representative
to the United Nations in New York wrote on 14 July 2016 to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations to request, in accordance with Rule 13 of the Rules of Procedure of the
United Nations General Assembly, the inclusion in the provisional agenda of the next session
of the General Assembly of an item entitled “Request for an Advisory Opinion of the
International Court of Justice on the legal consequences of the separation of the Chagos
Archipelago from Mauritius in 1965”.
This now appears as item 88 under section F of the provisional agenda of the seventy
first regular session of the General Assembly. I am tabling a copy of the provisional Agenda.
The General Committee of the next session of the United Nations General Assembly is
expected to convene on 14 September 2016 to consider the provisional agenda. The General
9
Assembly plenary will then meet on 16 September 2016 to review the recommendations of
the General Committee and adopt the agenda for the next session of the General Assembly.
We are fully confident that the proposal will gain the favour of the General Assembly.
We have already prepared the draft Resolution relating to the request for an Advisory
Opinion. Once the item relating to the request for an Advisory Opinion has been included on
the agenda of the next session of the General Assembly, we will submit the draft Resolution
at the appropriate time on the advice of our Permanent Representative to the United Nations
in New York.
Madam Speaker, as the House is aware, the African Union and the Non-Aligned
Movement have consistently expressed support for Mauritius on the Chagos Archipelago
issue, as evidenced by the various Declarations and Resolutions which they have adopted,
including at the African Union Summit held in June 2015 and the Non-Aligned Movement
Ministerial Meeting held in May 2014. At the last Ministerial Meeting of the Group of 77
and China held on the occasion of UNCTAD XIV, support was also expressed to Mauritius
on the Chagos Archipelago issue.
Mauritius is actively canvassing the support of other members of the United Nations
for the request for an Advisory Opinion of the International Court of Justice in respect of the
Chagos Archipelago. I have already written to all the Heads of State/Government of other
UN Member States to seek their support. In the margins of the forthcoming TICAD VI
Summit, I propose to meet leaders of the African countries and sub-regions to ask for their
support. The Ministerial Delegation which will participate in the forthcoming Non-Aligned
Movement Summit next month will also be lobbying for support for Mauritius.
Our Permanent Representative to the United Nations in New York is also actively
seeking the support of other UN Member States at various levels.
Madam Speaker, in reply to part (b) (ii) of the question, as the House is aware, the
Arbitral Tribunal in the case brought by Mauritius against the United Kingdom to challenge
the legality of the ‘marine protected area’ which the United Kingdom purported to establish
around the Chagos Archipelago delivered its Award on 18 March 2015. The Tribunal
unanimously held that the purported ‘marine protected area’ violates international law. It
ruled that the United Kingdom had breached its obligations under Articles 2(3), 56(2) and
194(4) of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
10
The Arbitral Tribunal also found that the United Kingdom’s commitments towards
Mauritius in relation to fishing rights and oil and mineral rights in the Chagos Archipelago
and its surrounding waters are legally binding. Moreover, the Tribunal found that the United
Kingdom’s undertaking to return the Chagos Archipelago to Mauritius when no longer
needed for defence purposes is legally binding. The Tribunal went on to hold that the United
Kingdom had not respected Mauritius’ binding legal rights over the Chagos Archipelago.
In its Final Observations, the Arbitral Tribunal stated that, I quote -
“It is now open to the Parties to enter into the negotiations that the Tribunal would
have expected prior to the proclamation of the MPA, with a view to achieving a
mutually satisfactory arrangement for protecting the marine environment, to the
extent necessary under a ‘sovereignty umbrella’.”
Following the delivery of the Award, three meetings of senior officials from Mauritius and
the United Kingdom have been held on 09 November 2015 in London, 11 May 2016 in
Mauritius and 03 August 2016 back in London again.
Hardly any progress has been made in these three rounds of discussions in view of the
differing interpretations of the Award by Mauritius and the United Kingdom. Mauritius
considers that the ‘marine protected area’ purportedly established by the United Kingdom
around the Chagos Archipelago is without legal effect under international law and cannot be
enforced; this view is not shared by the United Kingdom. As I had informed the House on 17
May 2016, the United Kingdom’s interpretation of the Award is very narrow.
We believe that the rights of Mauritius, as declared by the Award, are more extensive
than that which United Kingdom says we have. Our broader interpretation of the Award is
based on, inter alia, paragraph 298 of the Award under reference and I quote -
“The United Kingdom’s remaining undertakings, however, are evidently broader. In
the Tribunal’s view, the United Kingdom’s undertaking to return the Chagos
Archipelago to Mauritius gives Mauritius an interest in significant decisions that bear
upon the possible future uses of the Archipelago. Mauritius’ interest is not simply in
the eventual return of the Chagos Archipelago, but also in the condition in which the
Archipelago will be returned. In this respect, the question of whether the Archipelago
will or will not be covered by an MPA in the potentially extended period prior to its
return significantly affects the nature of what Mauritius will eventually receive and
11
the uses Mauritius will be able to make of it. The Tribunal does not accept the United
Kingdom’s argument that the MPA is irrelevant to the return of the Archipelago
merely because the applicable regulations could potentially be undone. As the record
of diplomatic correspondence in these proceedings amply demonstrates, the creation
of the MPA was a significant political decision. If it were to remain and be developed
over the course of many years, it could well become impractical or impolitic for
Mauritius to adopt a radically different course. In short, the MPA’s very existence
bears upon the choices that Mauritius will have open to it when the Archipelago is
eventually returned. In a like manner, the Tribunal considers that the benefit of the
minerals and oil in the surrounding waters, which Mauritius will receive when the
Archipelago is returned, may be significantly affected by the MPA, in particular in
light of the expansive objective of environmental protection declared by the United
Kingdom.”
We have in the different rounds of talks been submitting to the United Kingdom that -
(a)  the declaration of the ‘marine protected area’ in its current form should
be rescinded;
(b)  any future regime of marine protection of the Chagos Archipelago
should be the subject of an agreement between Mauritius and the
United Kingdom in the light of the outcome of a scientific study jointly
carried out by Mauritius and the United Kingdom. We have also
submitted that pending the outcome of the study, no impediment,
whatsoever, should be placed by the United Kingdom on the fishing
rights and oil and mineral rights of Mauritius, and
(c)  in view of the nature of our rights, as described in the paragraph I have
just quoted, any future use of the Chagos Archipelago, whether by the
United States or the United Kingdom, must be subject to the
concurrence of Mauritius, as the way in which the Chagos Archipelago
is used may adversely and irreparably damage the condition in which
the Chagos Archipelago may fall when it is physically returned to the
effective control of Mauritius. Again, the United Kingdom disagrees
with this submission.
12
However, at the last meeting, the United Kingdom said that it was prepared to have a
joint study regarding the form of protection of the marine environment of the Chagos
Archipelago, but is maintaining that in the meantime the current unilaterally declared ‘marine
protected area’ should be maintained. It cannot also commit itself at this stage to a jointly
agreed regime of protection for the future.
A further round of talks is scheduled for end of October in Mauritius in relation to the
implementation of the Award.
Madam Speaker, in reply to part (c) of the question, I received on 08 August 2016 a
reply from Mr Antony Blinken, Deputy Secretary of State, to the letter which I had written
last June to President Obama.
In his reply, Mr Blinken, inter alia, urged Mauritius not to take the issue of the
Chagos Archipelago to the UN General Assembly and the International Court of Justice. He
indicated that the issue can best be addressed during meetings at the lower levels of our
respective Governments than at the level of the US President and the Mauritian Prime
Minister. He also stressed that the US recognises UK’s sovereignty over the Chagos
Archipelago and that the Chagos Archipelago was essential for the security that the US and
the UK provide around the world.
We, of course, disagree that the whole of Chagos Archipelago is required for such
security purposes, the more so as we have confirmed our willingness to both US and the UK
to grant a long-term lease for the continued use of Diego Garcia for defence purposes.
We are disappointed that notwithstanding the assurances given to US, it remains
stubbornly opposed to Mauritius exercising its sovereign rights over the Chagos Archipelago
whilst Diego Garcia continues to be used for defence purposes.
As regards the United Kingdom, we are equally very disappointed of its objection to
trilateral talks being henceforth held between Mauritius, UK and US. More so, both UK and
US have sent a joint Note Verbale to Mauritius, issued a joint communiqué, and paid a joint
visit to me and to our representative in New York, to express their opposition to the
initiatives of Mauritius at the level of the United Nations.
As for the letter which I have addressed to UK Prime Minister, Theresa May, I have
not yet received a reply.
13
I am tabling a copy of the letters to President Obama and Prime Minister Theresa
May.
Madam Speaker, I wish to reiterate that the sovereignty of Mauritius over the Chagos
Archipelago is non-negotiable. Pursuant to its commitment to ensuring that the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Mauritius are fully respected and safeguarded, my Government
will relentlessly pursue all efforts in accordance with international law for the effective
exercise by Mauritius of its sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago.
In this regard, I wish to appeal to all our citizens, including those of Chagossian
origin, to act with unity of purpose, so that we can attain our legitimate objective of
completing the decolonisation process of Mauritius and ensuring that the independence of
Mauritius is complete.
I am pleased to inform the House that, at the meeting we had at the level of the
Committee of Parliamentarians on 15 July 2016, there was unanimity regarding our
initiatives at the level of the UN General Assembly.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, can I be allowed to thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister
for tabling a copy of the letter from the outgoing, former Prime Minister of the UK. I shall
read that letter very carefully. But, in the meantime, can I tell the Rt. hon. Prime Minister the
following. The UK, of course, are actively canvassing their case, and they say that this letter
represents a breakthrough insofar as, from their point of view, it is the first time that a
proposal for a meeting from London, from the Prime Minister of UK is made without
excluding the issue of sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago from that meeting.
The Prime Minister: Well, if the question of sovereignty is excluded, I see no
purpose in my meeting with the Prime Minister of UK. What am I going to discuss with
him? Insofar as the Award is concerned, discussions are already taking place at official level.
Mr Bérenger: We have been informed, Madam Speaker, that the issue of the Chagos
Archipelago, being referred to the International Court of Justice, has been placed on the
provisional agenda and will be considered at the General Committee of the UN General
Assembly and will be considered at the next meeting, and then be either included in the
agenda or not included in the agenda. Can I know, at this stage, whether the UK and the US
have raised objections in the General Committee of the UN General Assembly against putting
that issue on the agenda?
14
The Prime Minister: What has been done so far is according to the procedure of the
United Nations, and there has been no objection from any quarters.
Mr Bérenger: I heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister rightly make reference to the Non-
Aligned Movement. Now that we know that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister will be in New York
for the General Assembly, can I know whether he has received information to the effect that
Venezuela - as I said, the Non-Aligned Movement is in a mess; Venezuela is supposed to
take over the Chair from Iran and cannot call a meeting in Venezuela for obvious reasons - is
trying to have the Non-Aligned Movement Summit organised in New York on the occasion
of the forthcoming General Assembly? Do we have information to that effect?
The Prime Minister: Well, I don’t have information to that effect.
Mr Bérenger: I raised the issue before; that, whilst the Non-Aligned Movement is in
a mess, the Group of 77 and China at the United Nations is very active. Can I know whether
we have managed to have the issue taken up at the Group of 77 and China, and if yes, to what
result?
The Prime Minister: From the information that I have, they were favourable and
willing to support our claim on the Chagos.
Mr Bérenger: At this point in time, Madam Speaker, can I know from the Rt. hon.
Prime Minister whether our representatives in New York and elsewhere are confident, at this
stage, that if the issue is put on the agenda – not the provisional agenda, but the final agenda
– of the United Nations Assembly, we will reach two-third of the General Assembly; that we
will have positive votes from at least two-third of the General Assembly?
The Prime Minister: From the information that I have, the answer is yes.
Mr Bérenger: If I can move on to the next part of my question, that is,
implementation of the UNCLOS Arbitral Award, Madam Speaker. Is the Rt. hon. Minister
aware that, replying to a Parliamentary Question in the House of Lords on 03 July, Baroness
Anelay, speaking on behalf of the Government, said, “UK and Mauritius are already engaged
in talks that aim to implement the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea”? And
we have been provided with a lot of information on what has been taking place until now at
that meeting of the two sides. So, do I take it that the Government of Mauritius is not
satisfied at all with progress at the three meetings that have taken place so far?
15
The Prime Minister: Certainly, we are not satisfied at all because the attitude of the
Britishers is entirely contrary to what we are trying to discuss with them.
Mr Bérenger: Being given that we are dealing with the Indian Ocean in that part of
the world, and with the application of the UNCLOS Arbitral Ruling, can I ask the Rt. hon.
Prime Minister whether he has been made aware of a very serious issue of coral bleaching in
the Chagos Archipelago, and has it been raised at those meetings? If I can provide the
information: coral bleaching, these days, is worse than ever in the history of mankind. If I
can quote –
“The coral bleaching event sweeping the globe and destroying vast tracts of valuable
coral reef is now officially the most widespread in recorded history, and is likely to
continue for an unprecedented third year (…)”,
according to scientists and quoted by The Guardian. And in the case of the Chagos
Archipelago, I am sure the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is aware that bleaching is literally
devastating the Chagos Marine Reserve. If I can quote from the BBC Science correspondent
–
“Up to 85% of the corals in the Chagos Marine Reserve - so called; according to us,
rightly - of the British Indian Ocean Territory are estimated to have been damaged or
killed in the event.”
Are we aware of that? Have we raised it and had we proposed to do anything about
it?
The Prime Minister: Well, yes, that is true. It’s not only Chagos, many countries are
suffering from that. But what can we do? We have no access.
Mr Bérenger: Other questions? Otherwise, I’ll put my last question.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo!
Mr Ganoo: Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister one question with regard to the
rounds of discussions that the two sides have been having after the Arbitral Tribunal has
given its ruling? The Rt. hon. Prime Minister expressed to the House his dissatisfaction with
the attitude of the officials of the UK side, interpreting that it was a too narrow interpretation.
What remedy do we have then? Because the Tribunal, in its ruling, was very forceful to the
effect that the UK had been violating the International Law, has been in breach of its
16
obligation under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS); the
Tribunal has given its ruling in our favour and now they are being difficult. Has the Rt. hon.
Prime Minister taken any advice as to what remedy do we have now?
The Prime Minister: We have no other remedy. The only solution is to go to the
International Court of Justice and this is what I have done.
Mrs Selvon: As the International Tribunal of the Law of the Sea has, in its recent
Judgment, inserted into International Law the 1965 UK-Mauritius arrangements, recognising
the rights of Mauritius on the resources of the sea around the Chagos, will the Rt. hon. Prime
Minister send an expedition by sea to the Chagos in the near future, as suggested by the hon.
Leader of the Opposition?
The Prime Minister: If there is a delegation that is ready to go, we will put the hon.
Member at the head and she will go with them.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Last question, hon. Leader of the Opposition!
Mr Bérenger: I must say that proposal that I made, if I may say, en passant, is not at
all a laughing matter, but it would all be in a question of timing. So, I think we should
consider that action. It is a question of timing, but it is no laughing matter from my end.
Can I, Madam Speaker, as a final question. We are on the eve of the UN General
Assembly and we have learnt today that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister will be present at the UN
General Assembly in New York. Now, the key moment is when the General Committee of
the UN General Assembly will decide to put or not to put on the agenda of the General
Assembly this issue, this resolution from Mauritius. That would be the key moment. Can I
request the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to keep us informed, keep the House informed, of what
goes on at the level of that General Committee of the United Nations General Assembly,
between now and the General Assembly?
The Prime Minister: Well, I don’t know whether they will tell us what discussion
they are having inside in order to take a decision. We will only know when the decision is
taken and, of course, certainly I will inform the House.
Madam Speaker: Time is over!