CHAGOS ARCHIPELAGO - MAURITIUS SOVEREIGNTY
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Rt. hon.
Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and National
Development Unit whether, in regard to the Chagos Archipelago, he will state –
(a) what agreement was reached in New York in September 2016 in relation
thereto;
(b)  if Mauritius reacted to the content of the debate held during a sitting of the UK
House of Commons on 25 October 2016 in relation thereto;
(c) if the meeting between officials of his Office and those of the United Kingdom
Foreign and Commonwealth Office held on 09 November 2016 in relation
thereto ended in a deadlock;
(d) where matters stand regarding the 1966 United Kingdom/United States of
America Agreement on Diego Garcia, and
(e) if a letter has been sent to the President of the United Nations General
Assembly concerning the resolution of Mauritius in relation thereto.
aaaaa
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I welcome this Private Notice Question from
the hon. Leader of the Opposition, as it gives me an opportunity to apprise the House, and the
population at large, on matters relating to our sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago. I
would like to reiterate, most emphatically, that the Chagos Archipelago, including Diego
Garcia, has always formed and continues to form an integral part of the territory of the
Republic of Mauritius.
Mauritius does not recognise the so-called “British Indian Ocean Territory”, which
the United Kingdom purported to create by illegally excising the Chagos Archipelago from
the territory of Mauritius prior to its accession to independence, in breach of international law
and of the United Nations General Assembly Resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
2066 (XX) of 16 December 1965, 2232 (XXI) of 20 December 1966 and 2357 (XXII) of 19
December 1967.
Madam Speaker, in reply to part (a) of the question, as the House is aware, Mauritius
asked in July last for the inclusion in the agenda of the current session of the UN General
Assembly of an item entitled: “Request for an advisory opinion of the International Court of
10
Justice on the legal consequences of the separation of the Chagos Archipelago from
Mauritius in 1965.”
At its meeting held on 14 September 2016, the General Committee of the UN General
Assembly agreed to recommend the inclusion of this item in the agenda of the General
Assembly on the understanding that there would be no consideration of the item before June
2017 and that thereafter it may be considered upon notification by a Member State.
The UK was initially opposed to the inclusion of this item in the agenda of the
General Assembly. However, in view of the wide support which Mauritius had obtained on
the matter, the UK asked, as a compromise, that consideration of this item be deferred to June
2017 to give time to Mauritius and the UK to engage in discussions with a view to arriving at
a satisfactory resolution of the matter. At the meeting of the General Committee held on 14
September 2016, the President of the UN General Assembly encouraged Mauritius and the
UK to engage meaningfully and constructively to reach a solution on this matter and to keep
him updated on progress on a regular basis. He added that his Office would remain at the
disposal of Mauritius and the UK for any assistance.
Subsequently, the UN General Assembly decided, at its meeting held on 16
September 2016, to include the item relating to the request for an Advisory Opinion of the
International Court of Justice in respect of the Chagos Archipelago on its agenda on the
understanding that the item would not be considered by the General Assembly before June
2017 and that thereafter it may be considered upon notification by a Member State. It was
also agreed that this item would be considered by the plenary of the General Assembly, as
requested by Mauritius, and not by any Committee or Sub-Committee of the General
Assembly. I am tabling a copy of the agenda of the current session of the UN General
Assembly.
Madam Speaker, while I was in New York to attend the general debate of the UN
General Assembly, I had, at the request of the UK, a meeting on 22 September 2016 with the
Rt. hon. Boris Johnson, Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs.
During the meeting, I underscored that the decolonisation process and independence
of Mauritius would not be complete until and unless the Chagos Archipelago is returned by
the UK to the effective control of Mauritius. I also made it clear that Mauritius had no
objection to the continued use of Diego Garcia as a military base. Mauritius was even
prepared to grant a long term lease to the United States of America for its continued use as a
11
military base. I further stated that the issue of sovereignty and the return of Mauritian citizens
of Chagossian origin to the Chagos Archipelago are indissociable.
The UK Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs urged Mauritius to
refrain from having recourse to the International Court of Justice and said that Mauritius and
the UK should engage in discussions with a view to reaching an amicable settlement. I made
it clear that the talks should focus on the completion of the decolonisation of Mauritius and
the exercise of full sovereignty by Mauritius over the Chagos Archipelago at a specific date
to be agreed upon.
I proposed to the UK that a meeting of senior officials be held in Mauritius during the
last week of October 2016. I also insisted that the meeting should be productive and result-
oriented, unlike the discussion on the implementation of the Award in the case brought by
Mauritius against the UK under the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea, where the UK had
not brought any concrete proposal on the table, but was just going round and round with the
discussion. The UK Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs told me, I
quote -
“We will make it work this time.”
Madam Speaker, in reply to part (b) of the question, I understand that there was a
debate on 25 October 2016 in the UK House of Commons on the Chagos Archipelago on a
motion by Hon. Andrew Rosindell.
We did not react to the contents of the debate in the House of Commons as we
normally react to official communications or stand taken by the UK Government on issues
related to the Chagos Archipelago. Moreover, it was a debate about British citizens and the
so-called “BIOT”. We do not recognise the so-called “BIOT”. More importantly, formal
discussions with the UK at officials’ level had already been fixed for 09 November 2016 and
our position was intended to be expressed during those discussions.
Madam Speaker, in reply to part (c) of the question, a meeting of senior officials from
Mauritius and the United Kingdom was held on 09 November 2016 in Mauritius.
The Mauritius delegation was led by the Secretary to Cabinet and Head of the Civil
Service and comprised the Solicitor General, our Permanent Representative to the UN in New
York and other officials from my Office and the Attorney General’s Office.
12
The UK delegation was led by Dr. Peter Hayes in his capacity of Director for
Overseas Territories at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and not that of Commissioner
for the so-called “British Indian Ocean Territory”, as mentioned in some newspapers. Since
Mauritius does not recognise the so-called “BIOT”, we have made it clear to the UK side that
we cannot have any discussions with any official acting in the capacity of a representative of
the so-called “BIOT”.
The discussions at the meeting focused all day on the issue of whether the talks
should be held under a sovereignty umbrella, as contended by the UK.
Mauritius took the stand that since the talks, in line with the understanding reached in
New York, were about the completion of the decolonisation of Mauritius and the exercise of
full sovereignty by Mauritius over the Chagos Archipelago, they could not be held under a
sovereignty umbrella as was the case for previous talks between the two countries, including
those held on the implementation of the Award delivered in the case brought by Mauritius
against the UK under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
Mauritius, instead, proposed that nothing discussed during the talks would affect the
position of either party under international law unless and until anything is formally agreed
between the parties and that this should constitute adequate protection for the UK. Mauritius
also suggested two alternative forms of wording to address the concerns of both Mauritius
and the UK.
However, the UK remained firm on its position that the talks should be held under a
sovereignty umbrella and in spite of extensive discussions, the meeting ended without any
agreement on the premises on which the talks should be held.
Both sides, however, agreed to give further consideration to the matter and try to
reach an agreement ahead of the next meeting which could be held either in December 2016
or early January 2017. In this respect, we are engaging through written communication with
the UK. It is, therefore, premature to state that we are already in a deadlock situation.
If no progress is made in the talks, Mauritius will ask for agenda item 87 relating to
the request for an Advisory Opinion of the International Court of Justice in respect of the
Chagos Archipelago to be considered forthwith.
In regard to part (d) of the question, there has been a statement made on 16 November
2016 by the UK Government in the House of Commons to the effect that the 1966 US-UK
13
agreement concerning the availability for defence purposes of the Chagos Archipelago will
continue as it stands for another term of 20 years, that is, until 30 December 2036.
On the same day as the statement was being made in the House of Commons, the
British High Commissioner handed over a letter dated 15 November 2016 to the Deputy
Prime Minister acting as Prime Minister in my absence, from the Right Honourable Boris
Johnson informing me of the content of the statement that was being made on that day in the
House of Commons by the UK Government.
In a Communiqué issued by my Office on 17 November 2016, Government stated that
the UK had acted in blatant breach of the letter and spirit of the Award delivered on 18 March
2015 in the case brought by Mauritius against the UK under the UN Convention on the Law
of the Sea, inasmuch as the UK failed to fully involve Mauritius, as required by the Award, in
the renewed use, until 2036, of the Chagos Archipelago for the purposes for which it is
currently being used.
In regard to part (e) of the question, no letter has been sent to date to the President of
the UN General Assembly, concerning the resolution of Mauritius.
Such a letter will indeed be addressed to the President of the UN General
Assembly, requesting that debates on the agenda item be held at the earliest possible, before
June 2017, should the UK continue to insist that the talks between the officials from
Mauritius and the UK be held under a sovereignty umbrella, as they did during the meeting
on 09 November in Mauritius. The appropriate letter will be issued in consultation with our
legal advisers.
Madam Speaker, I seize this opportunity to reiterate that I am confident that we would
rally a majority of Member States at the United Nations in our favour. I wish to add that the
Secretary General of the ‘Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie’, Mrs Michaelle
Jean, whom I met yesterday in Antananarivo was very supportive of our initiative to correct
the injustice done to Mauritius prior to its independence and promised to rally support in
favour of Mauritius within the OIF.
Madam Speaker, I also raised the issue of the Chagos Archipelago with all the Heads
of State and Government whom I met during the Francophone Summit and all of them were
sympathetic to our case and promised their support.
I wish to tell the nation that my resolve to fight this battle for the completion of the
decolonisation of Mauritius and the exercise of full sovereignty by Mauritius over the Chagos
14
Archipelago is a sacred mission I am undertaking for my Motherland. I will do whatever is
needed in the interests of the Republic of Mauritius to reach our objective. Only God can
stop me in this endeavour.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, on the first part of my question: what agreement was
reached in New York in September 2016, I have listened, of course, carefully to what the Rt.
hon. Prime Minister has said. I take it that ‘by agreement’, he means what he reported
Minister Boris Johnson as having said: “We will make it work”.
Can I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether there was an undertaking by
Boris Johnson or anybody from the UK side that sovereignty would be discussed? The last
time we met, the Prime Minister was adamant that zot pas pe garde parole? Therefore, my
point is: was there an undertaking, a clear undertaking from Boris Johnson or anybody from
the UK side, that sovereignty would be discussed?
The Prime Minister: Yes. Even at the level of the United Nations, the President told
me that the questions of decolonisation and sovereignty must be discussed before June 2017
between the two parties, that is, UK and Mauritius and reach an amicable settlement, if that is
possible. He talked to me personally; he urged me to agree to this, and afterwards, Boris
Johnson, when I talked to him, I made it very clear that we want sovereignty, we want our
territory back and discussions will be on this and nothing else. If discussions can’t be on this,
I am waiting for the next meeting, if the Britishers insist, then we are going forward, we will
write to the UN and we will take the matter at the level of the General Assembly.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, on 15 October, there was a meeting in the House of
Commons which discussed so-called BIOT and the fate of the Chagossians. I have heard the
Rt. hon. Prime Minister say that Mauritius did not react because we felt we did not have to
react, but will he agree with me that, in fact, we should have seen trouble coming ahead
because, on that day, the UK Government sent only a junior Minister to state the UK
Government’s position and there was no reference at all to our resolution, to any discussions
with Mauritius on sovereignty, absolutely nothing, as if our resolution never existed, as if the
UK side ignored completely all this?
The Prime Minister: Well, there are people concerned in the present British
Government, I call them ‘hypocrites’. They do not keep their word, their promise and, to me,
it has always been clear that they have no intention whatsoever, amicably, to return Chagos to
Mauritius. I never trusted them, but I did not want to displease the President of the UN and
15
when Boris Johnson assured me that we are going to discuss on sovereignty and that it is
going to have positive results, I agreed, I said: ‘Okay, we won’t take it before next June’. But
I also made it clear to Mr Boris Johnson that the discussions, insofar as we are concerned, are
to complete the independence of Mauritius and that can only be completed by the return of
Chagos Archipelago to Mauritius and the discussions should be about that.
Mr Bérenger: The last part of my question, Madam Speaker, although the Rt. hon.
Prime Minister says that there is no deadlock, but he will agree with me that, in fact, there is
deadlock because the UK side is saying there will be no discussions on sovereignty or
anything else unless we agree to do that under a so-called sovereignty umbrella and we are
saying no. Now this so-called sovereignty umbrella, can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister
whether a definition thereof was offered from the UK side? Was reference specifically made
to the so-called sovereignty umbrella agreed years back between the UK and Argentina? Was
that the reference point? Is it clear what the UK means by a sovereignty umbrella?
The Prime Minister: I don’t know; I have no idea. But, to me, the discussions cannot
be under a sovereignty umbrella because the issue is a question of sovereignty and we must
go straight to that and discuss that.
Mr Bérenger: Was that meeting, therefore, on 09 November that we are talking
about, from my point of view, from my reading, ended in deadlock because we are stuck
under an umbrella, as we have just heard? At this point in time, is there another meeting, a
follow-up meeting to take place in London?
The Prime Minister: Yes. They have agreed to have another meeting, either it will be
in December or early January next year. They have not fixed the date yet, but it is clear that
they were not keeping their promise to which we agreed and to which discussions should
have taken place. We have given them another chance because the way they asked that we
meet again and try to see whether we can resolve this problem of sovereignty umbrella, we
have agreed. If this time when they meet, they take the same stand, then for me, I have told
my officers who are meeting these officers of the UK that it is going to be an end of the
discussions and we will move towards the UN.
Mr Bérenger: The last but one part of my question, that is, the 1966 UK/US
Agreement on the use of Diego Garcia, can I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether
we have been – because, in fact, it is on 16 November that a junior Minister again issued a
statement on behalf of the UK Government where they simply informed that although the
16
Agreement in question goes to the end of December with automatic renewal, if there is no
sign from either side, US or UK, but the UK side made a point to say that it has already been
decided that it will be extended. Now it has already been decided, I take it, by the US and
UK, that it would be extended for another 20 years. Can I know whether we have been
informed officially of that, by either side, US or UK?
The Prime Minister: Well, I understand there is a letter and it has been made very
clear on that. Well, there was a letter sent, I mentioned it. In that letter, they had enclosed the
statement that was made in the House of Commons.
Mr Bérenger: And nothing from the American side?
The Prime Minister: Nothing from the American side.
Mr Bérenger: Well, if the impression which that junior Minister Baroness Anelay of
St Johns, the impression she gives is that the US and the UK have agreed already that it will
be extended for 20 years, they are not waiting until the end of the year. If that is the case,
have we tried to find out whether the Obama administration has agreed to that on the eve of
the new team, the Trump team, taking over in Washington?
The Prime Minister: Insofar as the base is concerned, we have made it clear that we
are not against the base. The Americans, even if we get full sovereignty and the Chagos is
returned to Mauritius, we will allow the Americans to use the base, but on new conditions of
the lease. And I made it also clear that they will have to pay to us in the form of rent, an
amount on which we will have to agree upon, but they don’t talk of lease, they talk of
agreement between UK and US, and they renew it automatically. Well, we can’t do anything
about their acts, but there is one evidence, further evidence, of their dishonest intention
because if they were to respect the award that is already there, before doing this, there should
have been discussions with Mauritius which they did not do. That shows again the bad faith
of these Britishers whom I don’t trust at all.
Mr Bérenger: Therefore, there was this statement by the Junior Minister on behalf of
the UK Government that it has already been decided that it will be extended for a further 20
years as from the end of December. Can I know from our side, from the Mauritian side - we
have, as I said, an outgoing Obama administration, we have an incoming Trump
administration and we have one month before us before the US/UK Agreement of 1966 is
automatically renewed - whether we are taking any initiative on that score between now and
the end of December?
17
The Prime Minister: I think we have made it very clear that this move is contrary to
the spirit of the award according to which there should have been discussions between
Mauritius and UK. Insofar as America is concerned, of course, the extension is in their favour
and I don’t think that the Americans are so goodhearted that they would come and talk to us
because they have always made it clear in the past, when I talked to the President, they
always said that: “Look, we have not dealt with you, we have dealt with UK. You go and
discuss with UK.” But it is shameful that when we started talking with UK, one
representative of the United States sent by the Government of the United States and another
one by the UK came in my office. In fact, they came in as if they were talking to a slave! The
mood in which they were, threatening that if we go ahead, forget all trade, forget all help
from both sides! I found it very strange because always Americans told us: “You discuss with
UK” and they never interfered. But now, when we are taking steps, we are discussing with
the UK, the Americans also came together with the UK as if they were supporting UK. I
called it shameful and I told them: “You people, you pretend to be preaching the world
human rights, democracy, rule of law and today, when we are claiming our legitimate right,
you come here, you threaten me. It seems that this good philosophy of human rights and all
this, you believe in them and you use them only for your interest and insofar as others
interests are concerned, your philosophy is - this is what I told them - “Might is right!” And I
told them: “Get away from here!”
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Osman Mahomed!
Mr Mahomed: Madam Speaker, can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister state how many UN
Member States have pledged support for the Mauritian resolution following the lobbying
campaign which he himself has conducted over the last three months?
The Prime Minister: Our representative in US is doing the job and wherever I have
been, I have met leaders either Presidents or Prime Ministers and so far everybody has been
sympathetic to us. Now, I hope that this sympathy is genuine, it is not hypocrisy and when
this matter will come to the United Nations - this very United Nations, on the eve of our
Independence passed a resolution saying that no part of Mauritian territory should be excised
before its independence. Now, if they come and they don’t honour at least this resolution,
then I better not say what I will call them!
(Interruptions)
18
It will be shameful on their part!
Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed!
Mr Mohamed: Madam Speaker, has the Rt. hon. Prime Minister considered the
possibility that the United States of America as well as the other squatter and illegal occupier,
the United Kingdom, may decide to use some delaying tactics in order to defeat the Mauritian
resolution, and in the circumstances could the Rt. hon. Prime Minister consider other avenues
to bring to the attention of the international community this illegal occupation and this
continued colonisation by the United States of America and the United Kingdom such as a
joint extension of the mandate of the Parliamentary group, the Opposition and Government,
acting as one and bringing this state of affairs to the attention of the people of the world, be it
in Europe and in America, that we have to raise public opinion in order to force their …
Madam Speaker: Okay, your question is too long, hon. Shakeel Mohamed. We have
understood.
Mr Mohamed: … political masters to decide in our favour?
The Prime Minister: We certainly have considered this and I have even given
instructions to our fellow who is responsible for UN Affairs to start organising and here also I
have asked the Cabinet Secretary to start organising in order to lobby at the level of the
population, organisations and any institutions that will be necessary so that we get their
sympathy and they can speak out in our favour.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo!
Mr Ganoo: Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether in case the negotiations
between our officials and those of the UK come to term for whatever reason, for example, if
the British outrageously maintain their position, is there any possibility for the item which is
already on the agenda be debated before June 2017 and what are the risks of the British
attempting to prevent the matter being taken up before the Plenary Session?
The Prime Minister: Well, we only agreed to discuss on matters that were very clear
and I made it very clear here, on the question of sovereignty, return of Chagos, to be agreed
upon by a certain date. In the meantime, I even suggested that before that specific date we
can have a joint management. Now, if next time when the UK officials meet, they keep their
stand, then I have told my officers to put an end to that discussion and we are going to take
all steps to have this on the agenda to be discussed at the level of UN and I had made it very
19
clear to the President all through that if the UK people are going to be adamant and not
discuss sovereignty and return of Chagos, then we are coming back. We are going then to
write to him and ask him to see to it that it is brought for discussions at the UN.
Madam Speaker: Last question, hon. Leader of the Opposition!
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, I refer to the last part of my question. Last time that
the Committee of Parliamentarians from all parties met, that was on 23 November, clearly
there was misunderstanding. We were informed that a letter had already been sent. Today,
we are informed that letter has not yet been sent. Therefore, in view of all that we have
discussed and this misunderstanding – I’ll call it like that – at the last meeting of
Parliamentarians on 23 November, would the Rt. hon. Prime Minister be agreeable to call
urgently a fresh, a new meeting of the same Committee of Parliamentarians to review matters
where we stand now?
The Prime Minister: Well, as far as I remember, we never said at the meeting of the
Committee that took place that we have already written to the UN. No! Letter has been
written to UK, warning them that if they take the same stand, then discussions can’t be
continued! Not to UN, but to UK!
Madam Speaker: Time is over! The Table has been advised that PQ B/1024 has
been withdrawn. PQ B/1025 in regard to the representations made by the Regrupma Travayer
Socyal on the continuous hammering of a deep underground compacter, will now be replied
by the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Energy and Public Utilities. Hon. Osman
Mahomed!