ROAD ACCIDENT - HON. T. HENRY - INQUIRY
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Rt.
hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance and Economic
Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to
the road accident which has cost Mr S. A. his life, on Saturday last, he will -
(a) for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police,
information as to -
(i) the time at which -
A. the accident was reported, indicating the names of the Police
Officers involved in relation thereto;
B. Mrs V. H. was arrested;
C. Mrs V. H. confessed that she had not been driving, and
D. Mrs V. H. was transferred to a clinic;
(ii) why hon. Joseph Hugo Thierry Henry, MP, Parliamentary Private
Secretary, was not arrested, indicating if he refused to undergo an alco
test, and
(iii) if there has been any political interference in the inquiry being carried out
thereinto, and
(b) state if hon. Joseph Hugo Thierry Henry has stepped down as Parliamentary
Private Secretary.
aaaaa
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I would like first of all to present my sincere
condolences to the bereaved family of Mr Stephane André who lost his life in the road
accident at Bois Marchand on Saturday last.
Madam Speaker, in regard to part (a)(i)A of the Private Notice Question, I am
informed by the Commissioner of Police that on Sunday 03 April 2016, at about 00 15 hours,
Mrs V. H. called the Police Information and Operation Room and informed that the car she
was driving had met with an accident along the New Trunk Road, near the entrance of
Arsenal.
9
Police Inspector Mootia along with Police Constables Jeewon, Emambux and
Gokhool of Terre Rouge Police Station attended the case. The accident had occurred near the
flyover along the new Trunk Road, Bois Marchand involving Government vehicle bearing
Registration No. T1219, make BMW, allocated to hon. Thierry Henry, Parliamentary Private
Secretary. Mrs V. H. stated that she was the driver of car T1219 and she was driving towards
the North when suddenly an unknown male person crossed the road in front of her from the
left side. At that time she was driving along the fast lane of the road when she knocked
against the pedestrian. SAMU was called on the accident spot and the Medical Officer
certified the death of the victim on the spot. The body was removed to SSR National
Hospital.
In regard to part (a)(i)B of the question, Mrs V. H. was arrested at 02 24 hours on 03
April 2016.
In regard to part (a)(i)C of the question, Mrs V. H. confessed at 12 10 hours on 04
April 2016 that she had not been driving the car.
As for part (a)(i)D of the question, according to the Police, Mrs V. H. declared that
she was not feeling well and was about to faint. She was consequently taken to SSRN
Hospital at 03 00 hours on 03 April 2016. At her request, she was transferred to Clinique du
Nord at 03 44 hours.
Madam Speaker, with regard to part (a)(ii) of the question, hon. Henry was not
arrested because Mrs V. H. confessed to the Police that she was driving the car at the time of
the accident.
However, given there was suspicion that hon. Henry could have been the driver,
Police requested him to undergo an alcohol test which he refused on the ground that Mrs
V.H. was driving the car.
At the material time, Police warned hon. Henry of the offence of refusing to undergo
an alcohol test.
Madam Speaker, in regard to part (a)(iii) of the question, I have been told that there
has been absolutely no political interference in the inquiry nor will I allow any.
Madam Speaker, in regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed by the
Commissioner of Police that a provisional charge of “obstructing a Police Officer in the
10
performance of his duties” has been lodged against Mrs V. H. Section 3(1)(a) of the Public
Officers Protection Act reads as follows -
I quote -
“(1) Any person who, by force or violence, resists, opposes, molests,
hinders or obstructs a -
(a)  public officer in the performance of his duty;
shall commit an offence and shall, on conviction, be liable to a
fine not exceeding 10,000 rupees and to imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 3 months.”
Hon. Henry called at the Terre Rouge Police Station on Sunday 03 April 2016 at 16
10 hours accompanied by his lawyer and he confessed being the driver of car T1219 at the
time of the accident. Hon. Henry was then detained at Pointe aux Cannoniers Police Station
on a charge of “involuntary homicide by imprudence”.
He appeared before Pamplemousses District Court the following day and he was
provisionally charged for “involuntary homicide by imprudence”. He was released on bail
upon furnishing a surety of Rs50,000 and recognizance of Rs100,000.
Section 239 of the Criminal Code provides as follows -
I quote -
“(1) Any person who, by unskillfulness, imprudence, want of caution,
negligence or non-observance of regulations, involuntarily commits
homicide, or is the unwilling cause of homicide shall be punished by
imprisonment and by a fine not exceeding 150,000 rupees.
(2) Where wounds or blows only have ensued, the punishment shall be a
fine not exceeding 100,000 rupees and imprisonment for a term not
exceeding one year.”
Since the inquiry is still on-going and besides the fact that the pedestrian crossed the
road in front of the car, there is no other evidence to the contrary, therefore the issue of
requesting hon. Henry to step down does not arise.
11
I wish to state that an enquiry has been initiated by the Police which will establish all
the relevant facts and it will be for the DPP and, eventually, the Court, in case of prosecution,
to determine whether any criminal offence has been committed.
Madam Speaker, I reiterate that whoever errs, will be dealt with by the appropriate
independent institutions so that justice and truth prevails. I wish to reassure the House that
there will be no political interference and that the Police will carry out the inquiry in all
independence, as it should be.
Mr Bérenger: Of course, I renew the expression of my sympathy to the family of the
young deceased. If I can start with the Police, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister gave the names of
those who turned up on the spot. Can I know who is in charge of the enquiry as a whole?
The Prime Minister: Well, I don’t have the information here. I have the names of all
the Police Officers who went there and no mention is made as who is in charge of the
enquiry.
Mr Bérenger: As far as the coming of the Police on the spot, can I know, because I
did not hear the Rt. hon. Prime Minister say at what time the Police was on the spot, how
much time went by? How long did it take the Police as from the phone call to be on the spot?
The Prime Minister: I understand as soon as the phone call was made, instructions
were given to the Police to go on the spot and to enquire.
Mr Bérenger: How long it took?
The Prime Minister: I don’t have the exact time, how many minutes elapsed.
Mr Bérenger: We heard how the PPS - I would wish I could say former PPS - Henry
refused to undergo an alco test and what took place; we have just heard. Can I know the name
of the Police Officer who decided not to arrest him, the Officer-in-Charge who decided not to
arrest him?
The Prime Minister: Well, from what I have been given to understand is that
Temporary Inspector Mootia, who was at the Head of the team that went there, naturally must
have decided not to arrest hon. Henry because he refused to allow alcohol test to be effected
and I can’t see why he should be blamed, because if he was not driving, whether he was
under influence of drink or not, it does not matter.
Mr Bérenger: I suppose that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister - I suppose - will agree with
me that the whole purpose of that lying criminally to the Police, lying to say that it is his
12
spouse who was driving, getting away with it, not being arrested, allowed him to go away de
cuver son vin for more than 20 hours and to come back later when he would have cuvé son
vin, will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree with me that this is what took place?
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order, please!
The Prime Minister: Well, the hon. Leader of the Opposition has misconceived
things, what really happened. I have been told that as soon as the Police arrived there, it was
the wife of hon. Henry who came forward herself, voluntarily and she said: “I was driving the
car.” Therefore, there was no question of hon. Henry telling the Police, at that time, that his
wife was driving the car.
Mr Bérenger: May I remind the Rt. hon. Prime Minister that he, himself, said that
the Police had strong suspicion that PPS Henry was lying and, therefore, it was when there
was a suspicion, that they asked him to undergo an alco test. He has just said that!
The Prime Minister: Yes.
Mr Bérenger: Now, since there was suspicion, I would wish to know whether the
Police took the trouble to check whether she was allowed, because this is a Government car
under the responsibility of a PPS, as per regulations - because they had suspicion - to drive
that car.
The Prime Minister: Whether she was allowed or not, that is another matter. But
suspicion, is it enough to allow Police to arrest a person? Well, I say no!
(Interruptions)
Mr Bérenger: I am not surprised that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister said: “No”. For
some, if the provisional charge - hon. Lutchmeenaraidoo, he would ask him to step down, but
he has three provisional charges and he congratulates him! Can I know, Madam Speaker,
how this went on; who came forward to say: “No, in fact, I was driving”, meaning the spouse
of the PPS? Do we have the time? I didn’t hear the Rt. hon. Prime Minister give us the time,
but how did this take place and who was the Police Officer in charge when that episode took
place?
The Prime Minister: I have said that there was Inspector Mootia. I suppose he was
the person to whom she must have come forward and said voluntarily that she was driving the
car.
13
Mr Bérenger: Till the time when the spouse confessed that she had not been driving
and the time when PPS Henry turned up at the Police station, what did the Police do? Did
they try to find out where he was? Did they try to arrest him? What took place?
The Prime Minister: Well, I can’t see the reasoning. Why should the Police try to
arrest him? Unless they had evidence that he was driving and when there was evidence that
he was driving, Police took action. So, what more do we want?
Mr Bérenger: No, the point in time when the spouse confessed and the point in time
when he turned up at the Police, what happened during that period?
The Prime Minister: Well, the wife confessed some time in the morning and in the
afternoon, he turned up and he confessed that he was driving.
Mr Bérenger: Shame! The Rt. hon. Prime Minister has told us that there has been no
political interference. Can I know whether he checked whether any VVIPs, Ministers called
on PPS Henry when he was under arrest?
The Prime Minister: I am not an enquiring officer.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order!
(Interruptions)
I am on my feet!
(Interruptions)
I am on my feet! Hon. Members, please!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Members, please don’t get excited! The hon. Leader of the Opposition has asked a
question, that’s his right; the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is replying and that’s his right too.
Allow him to reply!
(Interruptions)
The Prime Minister: I know only what the Commissioner of Police has told me.
Mr Bérenger: I pointed out when hon. Dayal was asked to step down, that leaders
from the MSM Party expressed their solidarité with him. Does he find it proper that in
14
Court, on Monday, some of his Ministers turned up in Court to show solidarity with that kind
of behaviour?
(Interruptions)
The Prime Minister: I was not present there. I don’t know who was there, who
turned up, who turned out….
(Interruptions)
…who turned down! I don’t know!
Mr Bérenger: You don’t want to know. That is the truth! We heard what provisional
charges have been laid against PPS Henry. Can we know why minor charges have been laid,
but, in fact, PPS Henry and his spouse conspired to pervert the course of justice?
Conspiracy! The Police is very strong at finding everybody guilty of conspiracy all over the
place and arrest and in this case, it is so clear that there was a conspiracy between those two.
Firstly, the spouse said she was driving. The other one refuses the alco test, then he goes
away for long hours, then the story changes. Why not the charge of conspiracy to pervert the
course of justice?
The Prime Minister: The hon. Leader of the Opposition should have been the Chief
Justice of this country.
(Interruptions)
For there to be conspiracy, there must be proof of an agreement between the two parties…
(Interruptions)
Where was the agreement? Where was the evidence that there was…
(Interruptions)
When Police arrived, the wife came forward and she said she was driving. Where is the
evidence of a conspiracy in this case?
(Interruptions)
Mr Bérenger: Question is being put, it is so obvious for anybody who wants to see
that there was a conspiracy between PPS Henry and his wife; what she would say at first and
what would be said later on and so on. It is absolutely clear, since you have asked! I find it
shameful that we should get this kind of reply today.
15
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Gayan, please!
Mr Bérenger: Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he has checked, and, if
yes, if we can have the details of any previous conviction by PPS Henry?
The Prime Minister: Well, at this juncture, what has previous conviction to do! It is
only when there is a case, when there is a conviction, it is only then that the previous
conviction comes into play. So, why should I worry myself in finding whether there has been
previous conviction or not?
(Interruptions)
Mr Bérenger: The question is not only what charge will finally be put by the DPP.
The Police clearly are messing up the case by putting very minor charges. But as a Prime
Minister - a case like that, Government property is damaged by the PPS who lies criminally,
his spouse and himself, so it is not just a question of what charge will be put, how the case
will go – doesn’t he feel that he should be asked to step down? He is going to drive another
car and kill somebody else! He should be asked to step down as PPS, pending the enquiry
being completed and the case in Court.
The Prime Minister: I am really ashamed of the attitude of the hon. Leader of the
Opposition.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order, please!
The Prime Minister: Because there is a car belonging to Government damaged,
therefore, he should have been locked up. What nonsense!
(Interruptions)
What nonsense!
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order, please!
(Interruptions)
Order!
(Interruptions)
16
Order! Yes. Hon. Sorefan!
Dr. Sorefan: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As per my information, there were two
other persons in the car. Will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister confirm same? I would also like to
know whether these two persons were called to give a statement.
The Prime Minister: I know there were other persons in the car. I think there were
about four in all, but whether the Police has so far taken any statement from the others or not,
it is still inquiring into the case.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem!
Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Speaker. After coming into power, this Government
went at great length to prosecute the former Prime Minister for Roches Noires because there
was agreement to pervert the course of justice. Today, we hear in this House that one PPS
lied to the Police, his wife lied to the Police about the death of a person. So, will the Rt. hon.
Prime Minister inform the House why this deux poids deux mesures, when it comes to one of
their midst, there is no conspiracy charges, they are minor offences, and when it comes to the
former Prime Minister, then there is a conspiracy charge?
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order!
(Interruptions)
Order, please!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Bhadain!
(Interruptions)
The Prime Minister: I have been passed on…
Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, please!
(Interruptions)
Please! The Rt. hon. Prime Minister is standing to reply to the question, please allow him to
reply.
17
The Prime Minister: I have been given a list of the persons who were present. There
were hon. Thierry Henry, Mrs Henry, Jacques Didier John Duval, Mrs Fiona Caroline
Sinapen, Mrs Vicky Caroline Henry and also one Jean-François Moutia.
Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Ganoo!
Mr Ganoo: Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, since he has said himself that the
inquiry is still on, why is it that the hon. PPS has been released only the next day since the
inquiry is till on, especially in view of the fact - I wish to draw the attention of the Rt. hon.
Prime Minister to that - that the Police, since the beginning of this year, has taken a policy
decision of keeping in detention those who are suspected of having committed voluntary
homicide? I know of a case where a lady driver had been detained for 10 days when she was
suspected of having committed the case of involuntary homicide. This is the practice of the
policy of the Police now, why in such a case, compared to the lady who was detained for 10
days, who was not under the influence of alcohol and released before Bambous District Court
- I have the cause number and I can give it to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister - hon. Henry was
released only the next day when the inquiry was not over yet?
The Prime Minister: I don’t know the circumstances in which the lady driver,
mentioned by the hon. Member, was kept for 10 days. If she didn’t do the needful, she didn’t
ask to be bailed out, it’s not my problem. But, in this case, I see no justification why the
person should have been kept in jail or in custody, and after all, bail was granted by the
Court.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition!
Mr Bérenger: Without the Police objecting to bail, now he has the cheek to come and
hide behind the Police! Madam Speaker, I’ll conclude with one last question. It’s clear what
took place. It’s clear that both PPS Henry and his wife lied so that he would not be arrested,
he refused to undergo an alcotest, disappeared for long hours to cuver son vin and then came
back himself and his spouse to say that they had lied and to break the truth. The same PPS is
on bail now even if the charges are minor compared to what we are talking about. Therefore,
will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister tell the country whether he will reconsider and have the PPS,
at least, step down, now that he is on bail, after having admitted to have lied criminally about
this death of a young person in that road accident?
The Prime Minister: That they both lied, there is no doubt. But, is that enough,
would that warrant the Police Officer to keep them in custody. I don’t think so.
18
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem!
The Prime Minister: But so far as I am concerned, asking the PPS to step down, I
have said it, I am waiting for the inquiry. When there is a case, then I will ask him to step
down, but so far, from what I know, from the evidence that there is, what I have been told by
the Police is that the person negligently crossed the road in front of the car. So, if that is true
and if that is established, I can’t see how, for the homicide, hon. Henry can be blamed.
Madam Speaker: If there is no other question, hon. Members, since there is a
question on the Order Paper concerning me personally, I would request the Deputy Speaker
to take the Chair.
At this stage, the Deputy Speaker took the Chair.
The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Members, the Table has been advised that Parliamentary
Question B/136 with regard to Ms Y. C., Director of the Independent Broadcasting Authority
and addressed to the hon. Minister of Technology, Communication and Innovation will now
be replied by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, time permitting. Parliamentary Question B/90 with
regard to the Land Research and Mediation Unit and addressed to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister
will now be replied by the hon. Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Tourism and External
Communications. Hon. Jhugroo!