YIHAI PAILLES GARDEN SMART CITY PROJECT
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Rt.
hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance and Economic
Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to
the Yihai Pailles Garden Smart City Project, he will –
(a)  for the benefit of the House, obtain from the State Investment Corporation (SIC),
information as to –
(i)  the changes that have occurred in the composition of the Board and in the
top management of the SIC since December 2014 and who represented the
Board thereof during the discussions held with the Yihai International
Investment Management Ltd.;
(ii)  the value of the 97 acres and property involved therein;
(iii) who took the decision for the SIC to be a minority shareholder therein, and
(iv) if copies of the Letter of Comfort issued by the Board of Investment, the
Memorandum of Understanding and the Shareholders Agreement will be
made public, and
(b)  state if Cabinet has referred same to the Independent Commission against
Corruption.
aaaaa
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, the process of selling the Domaine Les Pailles
(DLP) properties dates as far back as 2012. In fact, in that context, State Investment
Corporation (SIC) appointed KPMG as Transaction Adviser.
KPMG launched an Expression of Interest on 11 April 2012 to dispose of 78 Arpents of
land including the five restaurants in an extent of 9 Arpents owned by Domaine Les Pailles
and 69 Arpents Guibies Properties Ltd., both subsidiaries of the SIC. Consequently, Yihai
International Investment Management Ltd (Yihai), represented by Mr Li Hai from China was
selected as the preferred bidder. The offered price was Rs486 m. for acquisition of the 78
Arpents.
I am informed that the sale transaction did not materialise as Yihai refused to employ
the existing 160 staff of Domaine Les Pailles.
12
In June 2013, SIC launched a Request for Proposals for rental of the restaurants at
Domaine Les Pailles. Given that the offers received were not commercially attractive, this
also did not materialise.
In October 2013, SIC management restarted negotiations with Yihai on its offer made
in 2012. Yihai then accepted to maintain the employment of the 160 staff for a minimum
period of two years against a reduction of Rs45 m. in the sale price bringing the net offer to
Rs441 m.
In March 2014, a MoU between SIC and Yihai was signed and a 5% deposit
amounting to Rs22 m. was paid by Yihai to SIC.
With regard to part (a) (i) of the question, the Board of SIC was reconstituted in
February 2015, as follows -
?  Mr Ayub Nakhuda, Chairperson;
?  Miss How Cheey Lan How Fok Cheung, the then Permanent Secretary of the
Ministry of Finance and Economic Development;
?  Mr Visvanaden Soondram, Lead Analyst, Ministry of Finance and Economic
Development;
?  Mr Premode Neerunjun, Deputy Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Finance
and Economic Development, and
?  Mrs Banoomatee Veerasamy, Acting Managing Director
?  In April 2015, two new Directors were appointed on the Board, namely –
?  Mr Vidianand Lutchmeeparsad, Permanent Secretary, in replacement of Miss
How Cheey Lan How Fok Cheung who has been posted to the Ministry of
Health and Quality of Life.
?  Mr Kritananda Naghee Reddy, Acting Principal State Counsel, Attorney
General’s Office.
Following the resignation of Mr Iqbal Mallam Hassam on 18 December 2014, Mrs
Banoomatee Veerasamy was assigned duties as Acting Managing Director as from 26
December 2014.
The current Chairperson and the Acting Managing Director represented the Board
during the discussions with Yihai International Group as from March 2015.
13
With regard to part (a) (ii) of the question, I am informed that the value of 78 Arpents was
Rs486 m. I must add that after the survey exercise carried out by a Land Surveyor in May
2014, it was found that the actual land area to be disposed was, in fact, 96 Arpents instead of
78 Arpents, that is, larger by 18 Arpents.
In October 2014, the additional land was valued by a Chartered Valuation Surveyor at
Rs55.74 m. An offer was made in November 2014 to Yihai to acquire the surplus of 18
Arpents for an additional sum of Rs55.74 m. However, Yihai considered the additional plot
of land to be marginal and made a counter offer of Rs1.86 m., that is, Rs100,000 per Arpent.
The sale did not materialise.
Regarding part (a) (iii) of the question, it must be pointed out that at the beginning, the
decision was for an outright sale. Subsequently, in January 2015, the new Board decided not
to proceed with the sale and the signature of the deed of sale.
Yihai Investment Group, subsequently made representations and in March 2015,
following consultations with Yihai, the Board took the decision to enter into a Joint Venture
whereby SIC will bring the total land area as equity contribution with Yihai contributing in
form of cash and building materials.
There was no issue of majority or minority shareholding. The whole matter is presently
being investigated by ICAC.
From the outset, the shareholding was fixed at 30% for the SIC and 70% for Yihai.
This shareholding percentage has been included in the Shareholders Agreement signed
between SIC and Yihai.
The company has been incorporated on 15 September 2015 with a notional capital of
Rs100,000 with a proposed contribution of Rs70,000 from Yihai and Rs30,000 from SIC.
The SIC land has not yet been transferred nor the cash from Yihai.
In the course of the implementation of the project, Yihai will bring an additional equity in
the form of cash, equipment and building materials. This will result in Yihai shareholding
reaching 70% as per the Shareholders Agreement.
As regards part (a) (iv) of the question, I understand that ICAC has already taken
possession of these documents and when ICAC completes its investigation, I personally do
not have any issue in making the documents public.
14
Madam Speaker, in regard to part (b) of the question, the reply is in the affirmative. The
case was referred to ICAC on 02 March 2016.
Mr Bérenger: On the first part of the question, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has
confirmed that Mrs Veerasamy, that is, the former Minister of Finance’s sister, was appointed
Acting Chief Executive Officer and member of the Board only a few days after the last
general elections. Will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister confirm whether I am right when I say
that, although advertisement for that post of Chief Executive was called for in December
2014, interviews were carried out, but to this date, that lady, the former Minister’s sister, is
still Acting Chief Executive and no Chief Executive has been recruited?
The Prime Minister: Yes, she is still acting.
Mr Bérenger: Can I take it that ICAC will be looking into that also?
The Prime Minister: Well, I hope so!
Mr Bérenger: I think I heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister say that the Acting Chief
Executive and somebody else I missed, took part in the discussions with Yihai. Can I ask the
Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he would be agreeable to place in the Library copies of the
Minutes of discussions when the issue was discussed between Yihai and SIC?
The Prime Minister: Well, I hope there are Minutes of Proceedings. If somebody is
there, he can tell me. Normally, there should be, but whether I should produce that, because
there is an inquiry going on by ICAC, I think there are certain information, according to law,
I am not allowed to disclose at this juncture. Well, a note says after inquiry of ICAC, yes, it
will be done.
Mr Bérenger: Good, thank you! I don’t know how long the inquiry will take, but we
will be waiting for a copy of those Minutes of Proceedings. Madam Speaker, if I can move to
the next question. Is it 98 or 97 acres exactly?
(Interruptions)
The Prime Minister: Well, arpents, acres…
(Interruptions)
Mr Bérenger: Well, anyway, can I know whether the Centre de Conférence and the
Casino buildings are included in the property?
(Interruptions)
15
Mr Bérenger: Whether the buildings, the Centre de Conférence and the Casino of
Pailles are involved in the project.
The Prime Minister: Well, the answer is no.
Mr Bérenger: Good! Can I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he has
put himself the question and asked why since general elections, no re-evaluation of those
assets, surely that land, has been carried out by the new Government?
The Prime Minister: Well, it has not been done. I don’t know why. But, if need be, I
can have it done.
Mr Bérenger: Very Good! Will you agree with me that, in fact, there has been gross
under valuation? I hope ICAC is looking into that carefully. There has been gross under
valuation of the value of that property being acquired and, therefore, there is an urgent need
to review the whole thing. Will the Rt. hon. Prime Minister agree with me that this is where
the problem starts? On the one hand, there is under evaluation of the assets, of the property
concerned which belongs to SIC and, probably, there will be massive over valuation of the
building material and so on that the Chinese partner is supposed to bring in and the design is
for, therefore, SIC. And the Rt. hon. Prime Minister told us it’s in the Shareholders
Agreement that SIC, as a result, would be a minority shareholder with only 30%.
The Prime Minister: Well, I, myself - we were discussing to get the answers through
the PNQ - expressed doubts whether the value that will be put in the future on building, etc.,
that is going to be brought in by Yihai, whether we can have proper supervision and we can
evaluate these things to make sure that there is no over valuation by the other party. In fact,
they may bring in much less than 70% and still be the majority shareholder. My attention is
being drawn to the fact that the valuation was done under the previous Government.
(Interruptions)
Yes, but the valuation was done on behalf of SIC by Government and they have been acting
on that. Well, as I said, I feel it is needed that we should have another valuation. I am ready
and willing to do it.
Mr Bérenger: But, in the meantime, can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he
will agree to give the guarantee to the country - because we are talking about patrimoine
national, property of the people of the country - that, whatever happens, whether SIC re-
16
evaluates the property that they bring in and so on or bring in cash also, in no circumstances,
will the SIC has less than 51% of the shareholding?
The Prime Minister: Well, I can’t give any guarantee as to that because they have
already signed an agreement which may be binding between the parties. So, it is difficult for
me to pronounce on that.
Mr Bérenger: Betamax and so on, we had plenty of agreements which have been
reviewed. So, is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister telling me that this agreement between SIC and
Yihai is even more solid than the Betamax or whatever other agreement that cannot be
reviewed?
The Prime Minister: We will look into the matter after inquiry.
Mr Bérenger: On the issue of who decided exactly, whether it is through the
Shareholders Agreement, whether it is through over evaluation on one side, under evaluation
and so on, but, finally, the decision was taken that the SIC would be a minority shareholder
that has been included in the shareholding agreement, as we have just heard. Finally, who
decided? Was it the Board or was it the then Minister of Finance and Economic Development
who decided on that specific point?
The Prime Minister: From the information that I have been given, it’s the Board that
decided.
Mr Bérenger: Well, if it’s the Board, what were the directives, if any, from the then
Minister of Finance and Economic Development to his representatives on that Board.
The Prime Minister: We should ask the former Minister of Finance and Economic
Development. He may be knowing. I am not aware.
Mr Bérenger: Well, you are the Prime Minister and now Minister of Finance and
Economic Development. You have to reply to the questions. I heard the Rt. hon. Prime
Minister say: yes, there is an inquiry by ICAC ongoing. Just to clarify things, is the inquiry
by ICAC on both legs, that is, the famous Rs44 m. euro loan and this Domaine Les Pailles-
Yihai Project?
The Prime Minister: Well, the matter has been referred to ICAC to have a general
inquiry. That is all I can say for the time being.
Mr Bérenger: Good! Can I know whether - as things stand with the inquiry going on
by ICAC - this project stands frozen or has it been abandoned as it stands now?
17
The Prime Minister: Well, I suppose for the time being it is frozen.
Mr Bérenger: For the time being it is frozen?
The Prime Minister: Yes.
Mr Bérenger: I hope it is a long time! Can I know whether the Rt. hon. Prime
Minister has communicated to ICAC or whether anybody has communicated to ICAC,
including any of his Ministers, information to the effect that there has been transfer of money
in that case? Two sums are mentioned, supposedly 3 million US dollars and another one, 1
million US dollars. In the case of the 3 million US dollars, it is supposed to have been
transferred to a bank in Hong Kong and, as the Rt. hon. Prime Minister knows, the accusation
from his former Minister of Finance against the present Minister for Financial Affairs is that
he has been spreading that information around. Therefore, has the Minister for Financial
Services been questioned or is going to be questioned by ICAC on that score?
The Prime Minister: Well, I must say that there were rumours around and that is
why I insisted that the matter should be referred for inquiry by ICAC.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo!
Mr Ganoo: Can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister confirm to the House whether when the
negotiations started, at one time it was agreed between both parties that the Shareholders
Agreement would be 55 per cent in favour of State Investment Corporation and 45 per cent in
favour of the other partner, the Yihai Company?
The Prime Minister: Well, I am not aware of this. I can only say what information
has been passed on to me and I have just said it is 30:70 per cent.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea!
Mr Ameer Meea: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister just
informed the House that the shareholding structure would be 30:70 per cent and that the 70
per cent of Yihai would represent cash, building materials and equipment. But has there been
a value, a sum representing this 70 per cent that has been agreed in the Shareholders
Agreement?
The Prime Minister: Well, since they signed the agreement, I suppose they must
have had some materials to justify what they have been doing. Apparently, the other side is to
bring in Rs1.2 billion. Well, this is on paper. I don’t know whether, as a matter of fact, this is
going to materialise.
18
Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem!
Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister mentioned that
a deposit of Rs22 m. was made in this transaction. May I know from the Rt. hon. Prime
Minister who was the public notary involved and what happened to that Rs22 m.?
The Prime Minister: It is notary Maigrot.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan!
(Interruptions)
The Prime Minister: Famous!
Mr Uteem: What happened to the money?
Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan!
(Interruptions)
The Prime Minister: The money is in the bank.
Madam Speaker: Your question, hon. Bhagwan!
Mr Bhagwan: Yes, Madam Speaker. Can I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister
whether he has inquired, since he has taken over the responsibility of the Ministry of Finance
and Economic Development, firstly, to have this lady replaced at the State Investment
Corporation as acting Director, and also inquired whether there have been meetings in
Singapore or elsewhere between officers of the State Investment Corporation, the Ministry of
Finance and Economic Development and the local representatives of Yihai to that effect,
where everything was concocted?
The Prime Minister: Well, I am waiting for the result of the inquiry before I take
action.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed!
Mr Mohamed: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I note with pleasure that the Rt. hon.
Prime Minister has been very transparent, and I thank him for that. Would he consider the
possibility, after having referred the matter to ICAC, of referring the matter also to the
Financial Intelligence Unit in light of what information the hon. Leader of the Opposition has
given concerning the alleged transfer of funds to an account in Hong Kong and also referring
the matter to the Central CID - since clearly it is a matter of truth and lies, we have to know
19
which is which - following the very serious averments in an affidavit made by the former
hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development against the sitting Minister of Financial
Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms, somewhere, some place? Maybe the
Rt. hon. Prime Minister could consider the Financial Intelligence Unit as well as the CID to
complete the investigation.
The Prime Minister: We have already referred it to the FIU. The FIU is inquiring.
But I don’t see the necessity, when ICAC is inquiring, at the same time for the CID to
inquire.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition!
Mr Bérenger: I have a last question. We have heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister say
that ICAC, at the request of Cabinet, is carrying out a double-barrelled inquiry into both
issues, the so-called euro loan of Rs44 m. taken by the former Minister of Finance and
Economic Development with the State Bank of Mauritius and this Yihai. Therefore, it is
confirmed that ICAC is inquiring, at the request of Cabinet, on both issues. Being given that
situation, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has always taken the stand that once ICAC comes in,
the Minister concerned should step down, and if he is cleared, he resumes his place in
Government, as has taken place in the past. Am I right in saying that with this as background
and with the fact that ICAC is carrying out this double-barrelled inquiry - very serious
inquiry - that last week, he had decided to ask the former Minister of Finance and Economic
Development to step down, but was prevented from doing that?
The Prime Minister: I neither asked nor did prevent. Madam Speaker, I want to
make one thing very clear. The Members of the Opposition have been campaigning outside
that the Police is doing injustice by simply on an accusation, on allegation, arresting people,
bringing provisional and bailout. They consider it most improper and unjust. Because of that,
in the two cases of hon. Dayal and hon. Lutchmeenaraidoo, I asked the Commissioner of
Police not to take upon himself a decision to bring anyone of them before the Court of law
and have a provisional. I asked him to have the inquiry completed, not to take decision by
him, but refer it to the DPP. Let the DPP decide whether there is a case and, if there is a case,
under what section of the law and what offence. This is exactly what has been done in the
case of hon. Dayal. But why did I ask hon. Dayal to step down? I am sorry, I am not trying to
cause any prejudice, but insofar as I am concerned, as a Barrister, having read the transcript
of the registration, I have come to the conclusion that if this is admissible in Court, then there
20
is strong evidence against the suspect. That is why, in his case, I asked him to step down.
But, in the case of hon. Vishnu Lutchmeenaraidoo, there are legal implications. I did not
want, at this stage, to ask him to step down. I am waiting for the inquiry. Let the matter be
sent to the DPP. Let the DPP decide, if there is a case. In that case, I will certainly ask the
Minister to step down. So, this is my stand. This is how I look at things.
Madam Speaker: The Table has been advised that PQ B/144 regarding the SIC has
been withdrawn. The Table has also been advised that PQ B/184 in regard to the Heritage
City Project will now be replied by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, time permitting.