CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY FOUNDATION – SETTING UP
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the
Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to the Corporate Social
Responsibility, he will state -
(a) the obligations of the companies in 2015 in respect thereof and, for the benefit
of the House, obtain from the Mauritius Revenue Authority, information as to
the amount of unspent money thereof available thereat as at to date, indicating
if some companies are presently in arrears thereof;
(b) the total amount of money thereof granted to the Non-Governmental
Organisations in the years 2014 and 2015 respectively and to the Lovebridge
Company Limited as at to date, and
(c) how and when the proposed National Corporate Social Responsibility
Foundation will be set up, indicating –
(i) the proposed composition of the Board thereof;
(ii) the proposed percentage of Corporate Social Responsibility
money of the companies that will be remitted thereto;
(iii) if the draft guidelines thereof are available, and
(iv) what will be the role of the Mauritius Revenue Authority in
relation thereto.
aaaaa
The Minister of Finance and Economic Development (Mr P. Jugnauth): Madam
Speaker, the Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) system was introduced in the Income
Tax Act in 2009, whereby companies were required to devote 2% of their profits for carrying
out CSR activities under approved programmes as per published guidelines. In my Budget
Speech of November 2010 at paragraph 333, I stated the following, and I quote -
“To this end, we are reviewing the utilisation of CSR. Our aim is to focus on the most
urgent problems so as to maximise the social benefits and ensure national coverage.
We will, therefore, use 50 per cent of the CSR resources to focus on the three
National Programmes. Government will add to the CSR resources to implement these
three programmes which are -
8
•  Social Housing
•  Welfare of Children from Vulnerable Groups
•  Eradication of Absolute Poverty.”
In July 2015 all CSR guidelines were removed and companies were allowed to use their CSR
funds according to their own CSR framework.
Madam Speaker, during the pre-budget consultations, numerous representations were
received from civil society organisations concerning the operation of the CSR system. The
main criticisms levelled were as follows -
•  lack of focus on poverty alleviation and assistance to vulnerable groups
(diversion from the original objectives);
•  arbitrariness and lack of transparency in the allocation of CSR funds by
companies;
•  difficulty in accessing funds by some deserving NGOs and other civil society
organisations;
•  in the absence of guidelines, there had been a proliferation of all types of
organisations and clubs just to benefit from the CSR funds, and
•  lack of proper monitoring and evaluation of CSR programmes and activities.
There have been many instances where the CSR funds were not directed to the support of
vulnerable groups. After giving careful consideration of the representations received and after
assessing the current system, I announced a new CSR Framework in the Budget 2016/17 with
a view to ensuring greater transparency and better outcomes in the implementation of CSR
programmes.
Madam Speaker, concerning part (a) of the question, according to provisions in the
law, the CSR obligations of companies in 2015 were as follows -
•  every company shall in every year set up a CSR Fund equivalent to 2 per cent
of its chargeable income of the preceding year to implement a CSR
Programme in accordance with its own CSR framework;
•  ‘CSR programme’ means a programme having as its objects the alleviation of
poverty, the relief of sickness or disability, the advancement of education of
vulnerable persons or the promotion of any other public object beneficial to
the Mauritian community;
9
•  a company shall submit to the Mauritius Revenue Authority (MRA) as an
annex to its return of income a statement showing the amount of CSR spent
and the details of the CSR projects implemented by the company during the
income year, and
•  the unspent balance has to be remitted to the MRA.
The unspent Corporate Social Responsibility money collected by MRA is transferred to the
Consolidated Fund within one week of collection. Thus, MRA does not hold any such funds
at its level. The unspent CSR money collected by MRA and remitted to the Consolidated
Fund to date is as follows -
•  fiscal Year 2014 - Rs166.5 m.;
•  from January 2015 to June 2015 – Rs55.8 m., and
•  fiscal year 2015/16 – Rs147.5 m.
Regarding the question of whether there are some companies which are in arrears, I
am informed by the MRA that there are some companies which are in arrears and the detailed
figures are, in fact, being compiled. Anyway, MRA has all the statutory powers for
enforcement and recovery of unpaid tax including CSR money.
With regard to part (b) of the question, for the year 2014 under the previous CSR
guidelines, companies and Foundations with a CSR Fund of Rs500,000 and above, must seek
prior approval of their Corporate Programme/projects from the CSR Committee, including
the NGOs involved.
I am informed that in 2014, out of a total amount of Rs336 m. of approved CSR
programmes, an amount of Rs124 m. was meant for NGOs. It must be stressed that these
relate only to big companies with a CSR Fund above Rs500,000. However, there is no
information available as regards projects and grants to NGOs by companies with CSR Fund
of less than Rs500,000.
Concerning 2015, since removal of the guidelines, the CSR Committee has no
information with regard to funds made available to NGOs. However, the Income Tax Act was
amended to provide for companies to submit as an annex to its return of income tax a
statement showing the amount of CSR spent and the details of the CSR projects implemented
by the company during the income year.
10
The information for the income year 2015/16 will be available only after all
companies would have submitted their returns by 31 December this year.
As has been explained in reply to PQ B/522 of 07 June 2016, a one-off amount of
Rs100 m. has been paid as seed capital to Lovebridge Ltd. in January 2016 from the
Consolidated Fund.
In addition, Government is providing direct financial support to NGOs yearly from
the Consolidated Fund as follows -
•  Fiscal Year 2014 – Rs235 m.
•  6 months budget (January 2015– June 2015) – Rs106.5 m.
•  Fiscal Year 2015/16 – Rs245 m.
•  Fiscal Year 2016/17 – Rs293 m.
With regard to part (c) (i) of the question, the new National CSR Foundation will be
under the aegis of the Ministry of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment. It will be
managed by a Board of Directors, comprising a Chairperson, members from the private
sector, public sector and civil society. It will be set up after the Finance Bill has been passed
and it will be fully operational before January 2017.
With regard to part (c) (ii) of the question, businesses will be required to contribute,
through MRA, at least 50% of their CSR money to the new National CSR Foundation at the
start of their next accounting year, for example, for companies with accounting period ending
31 December 2016, the new CSR framework will be applicable as from 01 January 2017. The
rate of contribution will be changed to at least 75% in the following year.
With regard to part (c) (iii) of the question, the guidelines will include the six priority
areas of intervention as stated in the Budget Speech and are as follows -
•  Poverty Alleviation – targeting families in the Social Register of Mauritius
(SRM);
•  Educational Support – targeting families in the SRM;
•  Social Housing – targeting families in the SRM;
•  Supporting persons with severe disabilities;
•  Dealing with health problems resulting from substance abuse and poor
sanitation, and
•  Family protection, that is, protection to victims of domestic violence.
11
The detailed guidelines will be finalised by the National CSR Foundation after
undertaking consultations with stakeholders concerned. With regard to part (c) (iv) of the
question, the MRA will act as an agent for collection of the CSR money and its recovery on
behalf of the National CSR Foundation.
Any unspent balance of CSR money should be remitted at the time of submission of
annual income tax return to MRA as per the current practice. The money collected by the
MRA will be channelled to the National CSR Foundation and no longer to the Consolidated
Fund.
There will be a possibility for a company or its foundation to continue using its CSR
money on an existing or a new CSR Programme, provided it fits within the six priority areas,
and is approved by the National CSR Foundation.
Mr Bérenger: Maybe, I missed that part of the reply from the hon. Prime Minister…
(Interruptions)
If only that was true for the present!
On 29 September 2015, we were provided with the figure for total amount of CSR
money collected from all companies. I did not hear the hon. Minister give us a figure. Is
there any reason why?
Mr Jugnauth: The total amount of CSR, I have for calendar year. I can give for
2014. It is Rs842 m. and for 2015, it is Rs756 m. Now, there are part of that money that
forms part of the expenditure by companies and part of the money are collected by the MRA;
those that are not spent on programmes and projects.
Mr Bérenger: The total amount of money collected by the MRA from all the
companies under the CSR legislation had kept on increasing year after year. Has the hon.
Minister looked why in 2015 it has gone down as compared to 2014?
Mr Jugnauth: The amount that has been collected by the MRA was more in 2010
and it was less afterwards, and slightly more and then less, and it has increased also. From
2014, I have figure for the calendar year, Rs166 m. and for 2015, Rs126 m.
(Interruptions)
Yes, unspent!
12
Mr Bérenger: No, I am asking about the total amount. The figure which the hon.
Minister has just given means that less CSR money was collected by the MRA in 2015 as
compared to 2014. My question is whether you have looked into to have an explanation?
Mr Jugnauth: It has varied, Madam Speaker. Well, of course, the difference, we
have not looked into as to why at certain times there has been an increase and at other times
there has been a decrease. I believe it is mainly due to the fact that there are certain years
where more money has been used in allocating to certain programmes and more money has
been used to allocate to certain NGOs. That is why the amount which has been handed over
to MRA has also varied.
Mr Bérenger: I think this is wrong. The total amount of money collected by the
MRA is before it is used for this or that purpose. It collects all the money. Well, never mind!
On the second part of my question, I have heard that unspent CSR money is more or less
automatically transferred to the Consolidated Fund. Can I ask the hon. Minister - if he does
not have the figure, he can tell us later - in 2014 and 2015, the total amount of unspent CSR
funds that was transferred from the MRA to the Consolidated Fund?
Mr Jugnauth: For fiscal year 2014, it was Rs166.5 m., and then we had this six-
month period for the Budget January 2015 to June 2015, Rs55.8 m. and then for fiscal year
01 July 2015 to 30 June 2016, Rs147.5 m.
Mr Bérenger: Can I move on to the next question? I take it from what I heard that
Rs100 m. has been transferred to Lovebridge Co. Ltd. - paid from what I heard. If that is
confirmed, can I ask the hon. Minister – because heavy pressure was put by the former
Minister of Finance on all companies to join Lovebridge and to pay into Lovebridge -
whether the Ministry has looked into the amount of money that the companies paying CSR
money in general have indeed paid into Lovebridge? Because my information is that it is less
than 5%.
Mr Jugnauth: Well, Madam Speaker, I can recall that at one time when the question
was put by an hon. Member and the Rt. hon. Prime Minister had answered, it was, in fact,
really very little money. I can’t recall the amount, but it was very little money. But what I
have been informed is that, in fact, there is commitment from a list of a number of
companies. I know that the former Minister of Finance had tabled in the past, a list of those
companies. I have the list. As to how much each one of them has, as at to date, contributed, I
will need to find the information and to furnish to the House later on.
13
Mr Bérenger: Can I move on to the National Corporate Social Responsibility
Foundation? Can I take it that, in fact, that will be set up by way of an Act of Parliament and,
if yes, whether the required legislation will be before the House before the end of the session
or, at least, before the end of the year?
Mr Jugnauth: I have stated in my answer that we are going to include it in the
Finance Bill so that the required legislation will be amended and after which, therefore, the
Foundation will be set up.
Mr Bérenger: As far as the Foundation itself is concerned, of course, there will be a
Chairperson and there will be a Board. Can I know whether the Board thereof will be chaired
by Government side, by public sector side or by the private sector side and whether the public
sector side or the private sector side will have a majority on the Board?
Mr Jugnauth: I am open to any suggestions, Madam Speaker, because I must say the
whole purpose of reviewing this CSR framework is because through consultations and
through a number of written representations and also we have checked, we found out that a
lot of money was being channelled to objects which are far from the CSR guidelines.
Therefore, I have been in consultation with both the private sector and the NGOs – not all of
them, of course, but with some and very serious ones. We had discussions with my
colleague, the Minister of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment, and we are open.
We will listen and see what is best in the interest of fighting poverty and whatever we have
stated in the guidelines.
Mr Bérenger: I congratulate the Minister on this frame of mind and I take it that
NGOs will be fully consulted as he has just said before decisions are taken concerning the
Chairperson and the composition of the Board, the majority.
The key issue which I would like to raise, Madam Speaker, is to ask the following to
the hon. Minister. He made the Budget Speech, the choice of words are his. When we say
that first year, at least 50% of CSR money will go to that Foundation and the second year, at
least 75% - this can mean anything – can mean a 100%. So, why this choice of word and
what does the Minister have in mind at least 50%, but especially at least 75%, does it mean
that we can have a situation where the whole of CSR money goes to the Foundation?
Mr Jugnauth: Let me say that it is not the intention of Government to have the whole
of the CSR to be managed by the Foundation, but, as I said, again because what we have seen
when the guidelines were removed, the amount of money that has been spent, left, right and
14
centre I would say, I think it is appropriate to have – it is going to be 50% for the year and for
the next financial year, as I have stated, 75%. But we would wish that the companies also
play their role. They have, at least, the liberty of deciding on how they are going to spend
this 25% that will remain.
Let me also add why is it that we have required 50% and we are moving up to 75%?
There is one sector in order to be able to provide social housing for the very poor,
unfortunately, there are very few companies which are involved in that and I do understand
also because it requires resources in order to be able to build houses. That is why we need to
pool all available resources in order to, at least, alleviate the burden of the very poor for
social housing.
Mr Bérenger: I am sure the hon. Minister is aware of the dramatic situation that has
developed since that statement that at least 50% first year will go to the Foundation to be set
up and at least 75% the dramatic situation that has arisen is that a lot of companies are
withholding all actions, are not contributing any more to NGOs and are pending because they
don’t know what is going to happen and that puts NGOs and other sectors in a terrible
situation. So, is the hon. Minister prepared to ask the companies concerned that they should
apply some form of moratoire, that is, in the meantime until the Foundation legislation comes
up, that they should stick to the status quo until we see clearer in the situation, but that
everything should not be put on hold and put the NGOs and the others in a very difficult
situation?
Mr Jugnauth: Yes, indeed, Madam Speaker, I have taken note of that concern by the
NGOs and a number of companies also. I have been discussing with the private sector. That
is why yesterday, we publicised on the website of the Ministry of Finance and Economic
Development and we have also given information to the media so that they can at least
inform the public about the different steps that we are taking in order to establish this new
system. I can reassure the companies and the NGOs also, civil society, that as I have stated,
for the accounting period which is going to end on 31 December 2016, the new framework
will apply as from next year. Therefore, from now till the end of this year, they will still be
able to operate their funds. I will also add that those NGOs – because I have had
representations that what will happen also after that - which are, of course, bona fide, which
are serious, will be able to accede funds afterwards from the Foundation also.
15
Mr Bérenger: My last question before I leave the floor to others because they have a
great interest in that subject, rightly so. Can I ask the hon. Prime Minister…
(Interruptions)
I apologise! This is again wishful thinking for the present only.
Before you had CSR guidelines and a CSR Committee set up by law to apply those
guidelines, last year, the then Minister of Finance did away with all this, d’un trait de plume,
but, in the meantime, the MRA had to collect money and abide by the law. Therefore, is the
hon. Minister aware that MRA rightly discussed with the private sector and came to an
agreement on a text corporate CSR framework to act as guidelines being given those
guidelines had been thrown overboard? Is that agreement between the MRA and the private
sector on corporate CSR framework going also to be taken on board?
Mr Jugnauth: I haven’t had a look at this document, but I believe it is the document
which normally the MRA issues so that it facilitates the companies to put all the information
whenever they are going to do their returns so that the MRA has all the facts and figures,
whether they are complying with the law. So, I believe this is the document.
Mr Uteem: Madam Speaker, in his Budget Speech, the hon. Minister of Finance and
Economic Development stated that the money endowed to the Foundation will be allocated to
support civil society actions in six priority areas which are listed in his Budget Speech. So,
may I know from the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether this
Foundation will only allocate money to existing NGOs or would carry out projects on its own
and whether this priority will be amended to at least include sports?
Mr Jugnauth: Well, I thank the hon. Member for that question because let me say
what is going to be the key roles and the functions of the National CSR Foundation. They
will undertake programmes and projects for the benefit of the vulnerable groups. They will
also allocate CSR funds in light with the specific guidelines that I have mentioned. They will
be monitoring and evaluating the CSR programmes that are being proposed by the different
companies or NGOs and they will also serve as a platform for coordination and
communication amongst all the stakeholders.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea!
Mr Ameer Meea: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In a past Parliamentary Question that
the then Finance Minister stated to the House, apart from having transferred Rs100 m. in
16
Lovebridge, Lovebridge also recruited some 25 staff and also that Lovebridge would submit
the annual progress report on its activities and programmes. Therefore, can I ask the hon.
Finance Minister what has happened to these Rs100 m. which has been transferred from the
Consolidated Fund, how much has been spent, what will happen to the staff and whether
there are any report which has been prepared and tabled by the Lovebridge company?
Mr Jugnauth: The information that I have is that 30 professional social workers have
been recruited in May 2016. All these social workers have been trained on the Lovebridge
methods during the months of June and July and surveys also are being carried out in the
different regions of the country. I understand that 200 eligible families have been identified,
that is, around 1000 persons and that some 45 presentations in companies and the general
public have been made to inform of the potential accompagnateurs on the project details. By
March 2017, some 200 cellules will be in place and an accompagnement programme of the
beneficiary families will be launched.
Now, I must say that this is an ongoing programme. The Rs100 m. has been given as
seed money, but there is the Lovebridge Board which has come up with all the guidelines and
the ways of how it is going to move forward. It is a long-term process. So, it is not as if it is
for one year, it is ongoing and they will be receiving money, as I have said, from the number
of companies which have committed to give financing to this project.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Lepoigneur!
Mr Lepoigneur: Madam Speaker, on the same line of hon. Uteem, I notice that, in
the Budget Speech 2016, regarding the CSR Foundation, no mention was made in object for
sports, education, scientific research and environment. May I suggest respectfully that these
be included in the objects for the CSR Foundation when it is set up?
Mr Jugnauth: Well, for these objects, Madam Speaker, it is not that we are not
taking care of these issues. They are going to be taken care of, but under different items. For
example, we have the Loto Fund which we are going to set up to cater for sports activities
and other activities. So, we want to be focused on the fight against poverty and that is why we
believe that together with the private sector, in the years to come, I am convinced that we will
be able to do a lot together. For the other objects there are other funds that have been
earmarked.
Madam Speaker: Yes. Last question, hon. Leader of the Opposition!
17
Mr Bérenger: Thank you. To a final question to the hon. Minister, in the past
matters relating to the CSR were lost somewhere in the Finance Bill and circulated at the last
minute as amendments to section 50 of the Income Tax Act. If we want to do a good job, can
I make the request to the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development that the
Finance Bill in general, but especially that part, should be circulated as early as possible,
because we have to look at the fine print, it is a very complicated issue. Therefore, for
everybody to have a chance before the Finance Bill is voted in a rush as usual that this be
circulated early so that we have time to do our work also and take into consideration all the
points that have been raised today.
Mr Jugnauth: Yes, of course, I believe that Cabinet would be deciding on the
Finance Bill pretty soon and that ample time will be given for all Members to look at the
different provisions so that we have an interesting debate in the House.
Madam Speaker: Time is over!