POLICE OFFICERS - DRUG OFFENCES
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Rt.
hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister for Rodrigues and
National Development Unit whether, in regard to drug related offences, he will, for the
benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police, information as to –
(a)  the Police Officers who have been involved therein in 2014, 2015 and 2016
respectively, indicating if any were Officers attached to the Very Important
Persons Security Unit or to the Anti–Drug and Smuggling Unit, and
(b)  where matters stand as to the inquiry initiated into the –
(i) Arvind Hurreechurn case, indicating –
(A)  the number of cells of the Moka Detention Centre in which the
cameras of the CCTV Surveillance System were in good
working order, and
(B)  if a link has been established between this case and a gaming
house operating in Rivière du Rempart, and
(ii)  case of the recent seizure of drugs at St Rose, in Reunion Island.
aaaaa
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, with your permission, I shall reply to the
Private Notice Question and to Parliamentary Question B/951 together as they relate to the
same subject matter.
Let me at the outset reaffirm that my Government is fully committed to tackle the
drug issue in the Republic of Mauritius.
I have to emphasize that this problem was left to deteriorate under the previous
Government and that the former Prime Minister refused systematically to set up a
Commission of Inquiry despite several appeals from the population and the then Opposition.
This is why, in the Government Programme 2015/2019, the setting up of a Commission of
Inquiry on drug trafficking was considered as a matter of high priority.
My Government is determined to pursue a relentless fight against drug traffickers and
in so doing we are ensuring that our seaport and airport are equipped with state-of-the-art
equipment and technology to counter any attempt to introduce drugs in Mauritius. The recent
9
acquisition of fast interceptor boats and patrol vessels for the National Coast Guard goes in
this direction.
As the House is aware, the Commission of Inquiry on drugs has already been set up
under the Chairpersonship of former Judge Paul Lam Shang Leen with wide terms of
reference, ranging from the scale and extent of illicit drug trade and consumption in the
Republic of Mauritius and their economic and social consequences, to the tracking of funds
in order to identify illicit activities, as well as any evidence of political influence in the drug
trafficking trade.
I am informed that the hearings of the Commission are still ongoing with stakeholders
from all quarters deponing before the Commission.
Madam Speaker, in regard to part (a) of the Private Notice Question and
Parliamentary Question B/951, I am informed by the Commissioner of Police that for the
years 2014 to 2016, 21 Police Officers have been arrested in connection with drug related
offences, namely 10 in 2014, 04 in 2015 and 07 as at 18 November 2016.
I am also informed that out of these 21 Police Officers, one was posted at the Very
Important Persons Security Unit and none of them was posted at the Anti-Drug and
Smuggling Unit.
Out of the 21 cases, 06 are under trial in Court, 13 are still under inquiry, one has
been referred to the Director of Public Prosecutions for advice and in one case, the Director
of Public Prosecutions has advised no further action.
Madam Speaker, in regard to part (b) of the Private Notice Question, I wish to refer
the hon. Leader of the Opposition to the reply to Parliamentary Question B/888 made by the
Acting Prime Minister on 15 November 2016. As stated by the Acting Prime Minister, a
Police enquiry under the responsibility of the Major Crime Investigation Team has been
initiated to determine the exact circumstances which led to the death of Mr Hurreechurn on
30 October 2016.
I am informed that a preliminary report was referred to the Director of Public
Prosecutions on 04 November 2016 for the holding of a judicial enquiry. The Director of
Public Prosecutions has asked for additional information regarding certain aspects of the case
before tendering his advice. Consequently, Police is enquiring further into the matter.
10
As for part (b)(i)(A), I am informed by the Commissioner of Police that the Moka
Detention Centre is equipped with 43 cameras which, amongst others, cover the premises, the
recording rooms, corridors and the cells. There are 18 cells, 14 for male and 4 for female,
which are equipped with 17 CCTV cameras. One camera covers 2 cells, namely cells
number 8 and 9, while the other cells have one camera each. All the 43 cameras are non-
functional as far as recording is concerned. As far as cells are concerned, live viewing is
possible only by 5 CCTV cameras in 6 cells, namely cells number 5, 8, 9, 10 and 11 for male
and cell number 2 for female. The camera in cell number 14 in which Mr Hurreechurn was
detained is non-functional.
Madam Speaker, I reiterate that the system dates back to 2003 and has been found to
be outdated and beyond economic repairs. Since 2014, two successive tender exercises for
the replacement of the Camera Surveillance System have not been successful. Police has
thus had to work out the project anew and a fresh tender exercise will be launched shortly.
Madam Speaker, in regard to part (b)(i)(B) of the Private Notice Question, I am
informed by the Commissioner of Police that the enquiry into the case of drug seizure
involving Mr Hurreechurn is ongoing at the level of ADSU. At this stage, no link has been
established between this case and any gaming house in Rivière du Rempart or any other part
of the island.
I wish to point out that according to information obtained from the Gambling
Regulatory Authority, there is no licenced gaming house in the village of Rivière du Rempart,
although there are 5 coin-operated amusement outlets which have a trade licence with the
District Council.
As for part (b)(ii) of the Private Notice Question relating to the case of the recent
seizure of drugs at Sainte Rose in Reunion Island, I am informed by the Commissioner of
Police that based on available information, ADSU has started collecting intelligence on the
persons arrested in Reunion Island with a view to identifying any known network connected
in this case.
I am further informed that on 16 November 2016, a request has been made to the
French Authorities for a team of Police Officers to proceed to Reunion Island to exchange
intelligence on the case with a view to shedding light on the Madagascar, Reunion and
Mauritius drug ramifications. A reply is currently awaited.
11
I am also informed that the Police is initiating procedures in consultation with the
Attorney General’s Office for mutual legal assistance in this matter.
Madam Speaker, in connection with this case, a meeting was held on Friday 18
November 2016 between the Commissioner of Police and the Director-General of ICAC with
a view to enhancing cooperation between Police and ICAC in drug and other cases.
Following the meeting, ICAC has also started an enquiry into alleged money laundering cases
linked to drugs. So far, ICAC investigators have secured two pleasure crafts belonging to
one Mr Mike Brasse and one Mr Jacquelin Seerungon. Mr Mike Brasse is one of the persons
arrested in Reunion Island and is the owner of the pleasure craft “Sweet Love Mama” seized
in the Reunion Island case.
Police are also taking measures to increase collaboration with other concerned
agencies, namely the Mauritius Revenue Authority and the Financial Intelligence Unit.
Madam Speaker, the nation knows that in the eighties, I did not hesitate to put my life
at stake to fight the drug barons. Once again, I am as determined to clean the country from
the drug scourge for the benefit of our youth and future generations.
Mr Bérenger: I have been informed, Madam Speaker, that amongst the 21 Police
Officers suspended, arrested or before Court, at this stage, for involvement in some or other
drug related offences, one was from the VIPSU. Am I correct in saying that that Police
Officer attached to VIPSU was, in fact, attached to the Prime Minister’s residence? Can I
know for how long he held that post and how could something like that happen?
The Prime Minister: I said in my answer that one belonged to VIPSU. It is a fact
that he was posted at my residence, but I do not use the people. I do not ask for X, Y and Z
to be posted there. I have no control over that. I, myself, found it very strange how this
fellow was posted at VIPSU and posted at my residence. In fact, it is to assure security, but
being a drug trafficker, I think he is the last person who should have been posted in VIPSU
and posted at my residence.
Mr Bérenger: Can I ask the Rt. Prime Minister if he can take the trouble to check
whether that gentleman was not in VIPSU under the previous regime, removed and put back
to ADSU under his Government since the last general elections?
The Prime Minister: Well, I don’t have this information. I will find out. I won’t be
surprised; it could be so.
12
Mr Bérenger: It seems that the Commissioner of Police doesn’t inform you of
anything! Two days after policeman Hureechurn was found dead in his cell, the CP later
made quite a fantastic appeal to the population in l’Express of 31 October, and I quote –
« D’ailleurs, il lance un appel à la population pour dénoncer les pratiques liées au
trafic de drogue impliquant des policiers. Cela, afin de pouvoir démanteler un
possible réseau de trafiquants au sein de la police. »
It seems that the Commissioner of Police knows a lot of things and then appeals to the
population! Has the Rt. hon. Prime Minister had the occasion of discussing this appeal to the
public, over the head of the Police and ADSU, with the Commissioner of Police?
The Prime Minister: I am aware that the Commissioner of Police made an appeal.
Well, I suppose his intention was good. There may be people knowing other Police Officers
who are involved in drug trafficking and he appealed to the population to denounce such
persons.
Mr Bérenger: Can I move on to the next part of my question. On 15 November, the
Ag. Prime Minister, hon. X. L. Duval, did say that, in some cells, the cameras are not
functioning. Supposedly, the file has already been sent to the DPP. What kind of Police
enquiry there has been? Has the Rt. Prime Minister tried to find out who took the decision to
put that gentleman, whose life was clearly at risk, in a cell where there was no functioning
camera, whereas in other cells there were functioning cameras?
The Prime Minister: Well, I, myself, had put the same question to the Commissioner
of Police, but the answer was that this was especially made for VIP people, with higher
security and equipped with bathroom, toilet and all the rest.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon Rutnah, no interruption!
Mr Bérenger: Can I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister how many arrests there
have been to date in that Hureechurn case, being given that I understand there was a control
delivery and, in that control delivery, two additional policemen were arrested therein? Can I
know how many have been arrested?
The Prime Minister: I understand there is another one who has been arrested in
connection with this case.
13
Mr Bérenger: Can I know whether the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has tried to find out
how many times that policeman Hureechurn travelled overseas? On sick leave, s’il vous
plait! Who authorised that? The Commissioner of Police does not know anything that he
needs to know. Has the Rt. hon. Prime Minister tried to find out how many times he has
travelled to Dubai, to Madagascar back and forth, and who authorised all this under sick
leave?
The Prime Minister: The information is not available. I’ll ask the Commissioner of
Police to find out how many times he travelled.
Mr Bérenger: On this gaming house - which is not a gaming house - which is a
gaming house in Rivière du Rempart, has the Rt. hon. Prime Minister tried to find out –
because all that he should know, the Commissioner of Police does not – that the gentleman
who runs that place, and at that place is he aware that feu Hureechurn used to come and go,
has been sentenced for drug trafficking, bail paid by whom we know, and he is on bail for
another offence of drug trafficking? He is on bail! Can we know how many times the Police
have authorised him to travel overseas?
The Prime Minister: Well, if some sort of gambling and all that was taking place
over there, I suppose public had access; if this Police Officer also was going there, unless he
is known to the owner that he is a drug trafficker!
Mr Bérenger: It seems that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is not interested in knowing
what took place in that place and what was plotted there. There is a gang, including dead
policeman Hureechurn and so on, but it seems it is not only the Commissioner of Police who
doesn’t want to know...
The Prime Minister: I’ll ask the Commissioner of Police to find out. I am not the
enquiring officer!
Mr Bérenger: Yes, but everything which the Commissioner of Police should know
these days, he doesn’t know!
So, I’ll move to the last part of my question, that is, Reunion Island. Everybody knew
over the recent past, the recent months, the recent years that the west coast had become a
passoire for drug trafficking in the direction of Madagascar and Reunion Island. Can I ask
the Rt. hon. Prime whether he has tried to find out how this was allowed to take place? And
today, there must have been this catch in Reunion Island for something to start here! Has the
14
Rt. hon. Prime Minister tried to find out with the Commissioner of Police how this has been
possible?
The Prime Minister: I don’t follow very well. What has been possible? As if it has
been allowed by the Commissioner of Police to become possible!
Mr Bérenger: My point is that we all know that - everybody wants to know - la côte
ouest had become for quite a while une véritable passoire for drug trafficking. How was this
allowed? No action was taken. No coast guard real surveillance was done. Nothing was done
until these two boats or more were caught in Reunion Island. To our shame! I would have
thought that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister would be interested to know how this took place
over a number of years!
The Prime Minister: Well, I must confess that I was not aware that it was a passoire,
but if it was a passoire, the Commissioner of Police, the Police should have known and they
should have taken action. I agree to eliminate this passoire.
Mr Bérenger: Can I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he is aware that the
Commissioner of Police has made a statement – it is in the Press anyway – that “those who
have been caught to date are des hommes de paille”? It seems he knows who are the big
bosses, the real bosses who put in millions of rupees to organise that kind of drug trafficking.
Can I know, therefore, from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he has taken that up with the
Commissioner of Police, as what may seem to say “those who have been caught to date - in
Reunion Island, s’il vous plaît, never here! – are hommes de paille”, and how does he know
who is it that are not hommes de paille, but the real bosses?
The Prime Minister: Yes, even if he knew, he must get evidence to act against
anybody. Well, if he has not acted, I suppose he didn’t have evidence.
Mr Bérenger: On the last part of my question, there has been report that ICAC is
now in charge, more or less, of the enquiry and that there has been a deal between Police and
ICAC, that ICAC will take the lead and so on. Is that confirmed? And also is it right - I am
putting the question - because information has come through that the French Reunion
Authorities are not very eager at all, for obvious reasons, to collaborate with the local Police,
local ADSU? Is that the case?
The Prime Minister: I don’t know whether that is correct, but if the Reunion Island
Authorities don’t want to collaborate, well, we can’t force them. I have just been informed
15
that insofar as Hurreechurn is concerned, the offence committed, is not one of trafficking. He
is a dealer dealing in drug, not a drug trafficker. Under the law, he does not fall!
Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Uteem!
Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, everybody has been
shocked by the amount of drug that was seized at the airport. Would the Rt. hon. Prime
Minister agree that there is a serious problem at the level of intelligence collection in
Mauritius, and would he consider installing a Police des Polices to ensure that policemen are
not drug traffickers?
The Prime Minister: Well, I will ask the Commissioner of Police to look into that.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed!
Mr Mohamed: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Following the questions put
by the hon. Leader of the Opposition, it seems quite clearly that there is a growing lack of
confidence in the Commissioner of Police and there are strong suspicions, as explained by Mr
Lassémillante in his report, that the death of Constable Hurreechurn is very suspect. In the
circumstances, could the hon. Rt. Prime Minister consider doing two things -
(1)  removing the enquiry from the MCIT, so that it is not the Police who goes to
enquire into possible responsibility in that death by Police Officers
themselves, and giving this enquiry to an independent person such as a sitting
Judge, and
(2)  whether he would also consider the possibility of asking the Commissioner of
Police, whom day after day, hour after hour, minute after minute, confidence
in him has totally eroded, and thereby public confidence in the Police Force?
Could he consider, urgently, demanding the Commissioner of Police to step down, if
not resign, from his post?
The Prime Minister: I don’t think it is reasonable to ask the Commissioner of Police
to step down or to resign. Insofar as the other part of the question is concerned, I will ask the
Commissioner of Police to consider it. But I must tell the hon. Member one thing, the Judges
of the Supreme Court are so taken up, they are so busy that none of them want to take any
other responsibilities outside.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody!
16
Mr Baloomoody: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Now, this ex-Police Officer, Arvind
Hurreechurn, died in Police custody whilst being under the custody of the Police. The
Human Rights Commission is entitled on its own to enquire in cases of death in Police
custody. The Deputy Chairperson has made a report and has said that the death is suspect.
Can I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister why is it that, as from the day that he has
published his report, the file has been removed from the Deputy Chairperson, and now, it is
the Police themselves who are enquiring at the level of the Human Rights Commission? It is
not independent persons, but the Police themselves have taken the file and they are enquiring
on behalf of the Human Rights Commission and they have removed the file from the Deputy
Chairperson.
The Prime Minister: Well, if the Human Rights Commission has the power to
enquire, it is their duty to do it. They should have refused to send back the file to the
Commissioner of Police. They are to be blamed. They have not been up to their
responsibilities.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan!
Mr Bhagwan: Madam Speaker, I will come back to the NSS. We all politicians
know how things are run, the question of increase in drugs in certain regions, especially the
synthetic drug. Can I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether he has discussed with
the Director of NSS because from what we see, the NSS has failed as far as intelligence
gathering is concerned, especially with the tracking of all these brebis galeuses, non
seulement de la force policière, but within all the regions of Mauritius? Instead of harassing
politicians, the NSS should go and harass all these drug traffickers and send reports to the
authorities!
(Interruptions)
The Prime Minister: The one responsible in the NSS has always told me that all the
information he gets, he passes them on to the Commissioner of Police.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Osman Mahomed!
Mr Mahomed: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister has
mentioned about the Commission of Enquiry. In view of the growing number of Police
Officers being involved in drug trafficking and also now young people and people from all
walks of life, can consideration be given for the establishment of a specialised Court, by that I
17
mean a Drug Court, which has been the case in other countries and which are doing well
these days?
The Prime Minister: Well, a special Court will be there to try cases. Is the Court
going to enquire also and then try? I can’t see the reasoning behind it!
Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea!
Mr Ameer Meea: In the past, there was a Unit which was specialised in the combat
of drug trafficking. This Unit was call the Flying Squad and it has been proven to yield very
good results. Therefore, can I appeal to Government, to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister whether
this Unit may be reinstated in order to combat this crime?
The Prime Minister: Since when the Unit does not exist?
(Interruptions)
As if it has flown away!
(Interruptions)
Since I am Prime Minister from 2015, I have not heard of it!
(Interruptions)
But, I will pass on the information to the Commissioner of Police, asking to see why
this was done away with and whether it should not be re-established.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo!
Mr Ganoo: In line with what has been asked before – my question is related to the
death of the Police Constable in the cell. In view of the fact that the victim is a Police
Officer, there are two Police Officers who have been denounced and implicated by the victim
himself. According to the report of Mr Lassémillante, 30 minutes before the death was
discovered, a Police Inspector had visited the cell. In view of all these circumstances, cannot
the DPP as can be done according to our law - the District Intermediate Criminal Jurisdiction
- enquire into such a case of violent or suspicious death? The DPP may order the District
Magistrate of the area, like in the case of Mr Iqbal Toofany to take over the enquiry. The
District Magistrate of Bambous was requested by the DPP to enquire into the case. Cannot
the Attorney General use his good offices to ask the DPP to enquire into that matter?
The Prime Minister: Yes, this is done normally and finally it will be done because
this is what we call a Judicial Enquiry.
18
Mr Ganoo: To ask that a full report is sent to him!
Madam Speaker: Hon. Ganoo, last question for the hon. Leader of the Opposition!
Mr Bérenger: I don’t think the Rt. hon. Prime Minister will agree with me, but it
seems clear to all of us that there has been a very bad failure of intelligence gathering and
using intelligence in the cases concerning Mauritius, for Arvind Hurreechurn case, in the
Reunion case. It is clear that there has been failure in intelligence. Secondly, I don’t know if
the Rt. hon. Prime Minister will agree with me, there must be a high degree de complicité in
the Police, a high degree for what took place at Moka Detention Centre. Also in the case of
Rivière du Rempart issue, there must be complicité at a high level in the Police. So, can I
appeal to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, what we need now is action, both in terms of
intelligence gathering and in terms of complicité in the Police? So, can I know from the Rt.
hon. Prime Minister what action is going to be taken apart from referring everything to the
Commissioner of Police who does not know anything and he appeals to the public?
The Prime Minister: Well, there is a Commission of Enquiry going on. It will make
recommendations and its recommendations will be implemented.
Madam Speaker: Time is over! Hon. Bhagwan!