BASIC INVALID’S PENSION – ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the
Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions whether, in regard to
the children with disabilities, she will state –
(a)  the number thereof below the age of 15 who will henceforth benefit from the
Basic Invalid’s Pension, indicating –
(i)  if the eligibility criteria to benefit thereunder will be the same as
presently obtained;
(ii)  how the autistic children will be included thereunder, and
(iii) the sums provided in the Budget 2016-2017 for the implementation
thereof;
(b)  the Non-Governmental Organisations that will benefit from the 50% grant-in-
aid increase, and
(c)  how the Strategic Paper purporting to review the Special Education Needs
sector will be prepared.
aaaaa
The Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions
(Mrs F. Jeewa-Daureeawoo): Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that the payment
of the Basic Invalid’s Pension is governed by the provisions of section 8 of the National
Pensions Act and is in accordance with the Sixth Schedule of the Act. As a matter of fact,
section 8 provides for a person to receive a Basic Invalid’s Pension where the person is likely
to be so disabled for a period of at least 12 months. As the law stands presently, eligibility to
that pension is tied with an age criterion, that is, the person should have reached the age of 15
and should be under the age of 60.
It is worth highlighting that for the purpose, “disabled” means “suffering from a
disablement of not less than 60% and resulting from loss of mental or physical faculty.”
Thus, as announced in the Budget Speech, at paragraph 327, henceforth an applicant below
the age of 15 qualifies for the Basic Invalid’s Pension provided he is medically assessed as
suffering from a disability of not less than 60% and which disability is likely to last for a
period of 12 months.
8
In reply to part (a) of the question, I have to inform the House that presently there are
3,130 children below 15 who are drawing the Carer’s Allowance under the Social Aid Act.
These children would, without the age criterion, normally have qualified for the Basic
Invalid’s Pension. It must, however, be pointed out that payment of Carer’s Allowance under
the Social Aid Act is income-tested, that is, the aggregate income of the parents must not
exceed Rs350,000 annually. A beneficiary under that scheme may qualify for a benefit
ranging between Rs2,972 and Rs3,872, depending on whether the beneficiary is also drawing
either an Incontinence Allowance or is bedridden.
Madam Speaker, it is a fact, that quite a number of applications have not been
favourably determined although the medical assessment revealed more than 60% disability
over a period of at least 12 months, just because the parents did not satisfy the income
requirement. With the modification of the parameters of eligibility for Basic Invalid’s
Pension, those cases now become candidates for consideration for the benefit.
From records available, it has been found that there are some 500 such cases. I
personally consider that, as a caring Government, such a discrimination should not be
allowed. As a logical conclusion, these cases will now be reviewed while ensuring that the
necessary administrative procedures are followed.
With this major change that is being operated under the Basic Invalid’s Pension, all
those children will, henceforth, qualify for the Basic Invalid’s Pension at the present rate of
Rs5,250 monthly. The Ministry of Social Security is making immediate arrangements for all
these cases to be duly processed. I am assuring the House that I shall ensure that this is done
within the shortest possible time frame, so that no undue hardship is caused to these
beneficiaries.
Regarding part (a) (i) of the question, as I have explained, the eligibility criterion has
been changed; more precisely, in terms of removal of the restricting age factor and the
income-test.
As for part (a) (ii) of the question, I am informed that diagnosis of autism is a very
complex exercise. It involves a multi-disciplinary team of medical specialists, namely
Psychiatrist, Psychologist, Speech and Language Pathologist, and Speech Therapist. The
system currently in place already provides for applicants who suffer from autistic spectrum
disorder to be entertained by my Ministry.
9
The nature and extent of the pathology are usually certified by either the Ministry of
Health and Quality of Life or Specialists from the private sector. I am further informed that,
previously, autism was classified under mental retardation, but in the recent past, the medical
certification is more precise and it indicates that the person is suffering from autism.
Madam Speaker, it will be good for me to inform the House that, on 21 September,
last year, the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life had diagnosed 51 patients suffering from
autism, with 37 out of them being between 0 to 10 years, 13 between 10 to 20 years, and 1
above 20 years. These cases are examined by the Medical Unit of my Ministry to assess any
specific needs such as Carer’s Allowance, Incontinence Allowance, severity of disability, and
whether the persons are bedridden. A Basic Invalid’s Pension is payable to those who are
above 15 and who have a 60% degree of disability, and a Carer’s Allowance is payable to
those below 15 years of age. Over and above, on a felt-need basis, they are paid Rs450 for
being bedridden, Rs450 for being incontinent and Rs450 for being severely disabled.
Besides, bus fare is refunded to the parents accompanying their autistic children to schools
and Day Care centres.
With the revision of the Basic Invalid’s Pension Scheme, to cater for children below
15 years, children suffering from autistic disorders will be duly taken care of. After
consultation with the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life, autistic disorders have been
included in the medical guidelines whereby such disorders carry a more than 60% disability.
Thus, children with autistic disorders will, henceforth, qualify for the Basic Invalid’s Pension
and any additional support will be paid out on a felt-need basis as may be recommended by
the Medical Board.
With regard to part (a)(iii) of the question, necessary budgetary provisions have been
made for payment of Basic Invalid’s Pension for children below 15 years, who qualify for
such a benefit. In this connection, Rs130 m. have been transferred from the Social Aid vote
from where Carer’s Allowance was being paid to Item 22-103 Basic Invalid’s Pension.
Additionally, Rs70 m. have been provided under that said vote item bringing the total
provision to Rs200 m., which should, in principle, be sufficient.
Insofar as part (b) of the question is concerned, Madam Speaker, I have to inform the
House that grants are paid to NGOs from two sources, namely, from the Ministry of
Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific Research which have
been provided with Rs90 m. for 2016-2017 and the NGO Trust Fund of the Ministry of
10
Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions which have been provided with
Rs20.6 m. for 2016-2017, out of which the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development
has provided for Rs1 m. to Autisme Maurice as a grant. The grant payable to the NGO Trust
Fund is meant primarily for NGOs to meet partly their operational costs and sustain services
whereas the Ministry of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific
Research supports financially the NGOs which are operating as Special Education Needs
Schools. Details regarding NGOs which benefit from the grant may be laid in the Library of
the National Assembly if the hon. Leader of the Opposition so wishes.
Coming to part (c), the last part of the question, I am informed that, in the context of
the Nine-Year Schooling project, the concerns of children with special needs will be taken on
board, especially since this major programme is meant to be both inclusive and
comprehensive; and that means catering for the needs of all children, without any distinction.
There will be wide consultations with Civil Society Organisations engaged in the
sector, so that the new scheme can draw from the broad experience of these bodies to uphold
the Nine-Year Schooling project, especially the component which promotes inclusive
education.
I am given to understand that the Ministry of Education and Human Resources,
Tertiary Education and Scientific Research intends to leverage on our bilateral and
multilateral linkages to tap some of the best practices currently undertaken in different parts
of the world.
However, while we will solicit foreign expertise, we will ensure that the strategy is
properly developed and is in line with the local conditions and considerations to make it
meaningful.
In the final reckoning, such a strategy will be directly aligned considerations with the
Sustainable Development Goal 4 on Education.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, I wish to thank the hon. Minister for the details
provided in her answer. On the number of children below 15 who will now benefit from the
Basic Invalid’s Pension, in his speech, the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic
Development said ‘around 3,130’. So, is the hon. Minister confirming that there are records
that show that there are 3,130 children who fall in that category, and that those who fall now,
will not be losing any benefits enjoyed so far as, unfortunately, is the case for the old age
pensioners when they reach 60, they lose their Basic Invalid’s Pension?
11
Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Well, let me first of all thank the hon. Leader of the
Opposition for having put this PNQ. We are, today, discussing in an amicable manner the
welfare of children with disabilities which is the concern not only of the Government, but the
Opposition too. Let me assure the House that our Government is very concerned about the
welfare of children with disabilities and their protection should outweigh any other factor.
However, the House should appreciate that the Government is doing its level best. We are
deploying all efforts to enhance the quality of life of children with disabilities. We have
records regarding actual beneficiaries. New applications will be considered against the new
provisions of the scheme as is spelt out in the Budget.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister has made reference to this 60%
‘guillotine’, that is, they must at least be 60% invalid to benefit from the Basic Invalid’s
Pension. Will the hon. Minister agree with me that it is quite arbitrary, why 60% and not
55% or 50%? It is quite arbitrary! And I am given to understand that it is always assessed by
Medical Boards. Can the hon. Minister enlighten us why 60% and not 50% and will she look
at anomalies, like, for example, if to get Basic Invalid’s Pension, somebody must be invalid
at least 60% from both ears; if you do not qualify with one ear, you lose the Basic Invalid’s
Pension completely? So, is this arbitrary criterion of 60% being re-examined?
Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Well, in any scheme which provides for payment of Basic
Invalid’s Pension, the hon. Leader of the Opposition will agree with me that there should be a
percentage of disability which qualifies a claimant to benefit from such an invalidity pension.
In all modesty, I would say that everywhere, all around the world, this is the principle which
governs the benefit of payment of Basic Invalidity Pension. Ce 60% d’incapacité a toujours
été là. Cela existe depuis belle lurette. So, I think we need to have a range. We need to have
checks and balances because the Basic Invalid’s Pension, as we all know, is meant to cater
for those who are severely handicapped and for those who need financial assistance. Less
that 60% will fall under the Social Aids Scheme.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, I am particularly concerned about autistic children,
children with autism. As the hon. Minister knows, autism was much neglected by all of us,
the world over, until recently and we are progressing. But, the additional problem is that it is
very difficult to place a figure on autism. There are all sorts of individual cases of autistic
children and so on. So, that is why I am particularly concerned about children with autism.
12
Now, I am surprised - I hope pleasantly surprised - if it is confirmed, that there
already exists a Board that examines autistic children and that there are already autistic
children benefitting from the Disability Pension. Is the hon. Minister sure of that and, if yes,
can I know how many autistic children benefit from the Basic Invalid’s Pension today?
Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Autistic disorders have been included in the Medical
Guidelines whereby such disorders carry a more than 60% disability. If I can explain, the
medical guidelines have now been updated. The ‘Medical Guidelines’ is a document which
has been prepared by specialists from the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life. We have,
most recently, updated the medical guidelines and autistic disorders are indeed mentioned in
the medical guidelines. For instance, if a claimant makes an application accompanying by a
medical certificate, whether from the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life or a private
doctor, he will be assessed by the Medical Board. If the medical certificate certifies that the
claimant, be it a child or an adult, is suffering from autistic disorders, the Medical Board will
not question the disability mentioned therein.
Mr Bérenger: Can we, therefore, have the figure of autistic children at present
benefitting from the Basic Invalid’s Pension?
Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Well, hon. Leader of the Opposition, let me check with my
officers because I, myself, don’t have the figure. So, let’s see if my officers can be of some
help.
(Interruptions)
Unfortunately, we do not presently have the details regarding the number of beneficiaries as
all these beneficiaries are classified, I understand, under the Basic Invalid’s Pension.
If I may add, Madam Speaker, in the last PNQ that the hon. Leader of the Opposition
put to me, I did mention that a survey will be carried out to know about the exact number of
persons suffering from disabilities. With the survey, I hope we will be getting the percentage
of children and adults suffering from autistic disorders because this will be one of the reasons
why the Ministry of Social Security, National Solidarity and Reform Institutions will ask for
a survey to be carried out.
Mr Bérenger: Well, on autism, again, I hope and I am sure that the hon. Minister
must be aware of the letter recently, 05 July 2016, written to the hon. Minister of Finance and
Economic Development, on the eve of Budget presentation, on precisely Screening an
Assessment of Autism in Mauritius, where they said that they have a Board ‘Autisme
13
Maurice’, which is very professional, very dedicated; they have a Board. Are they involved,
in any way, in assessing the autistic children who deserve this, who are entitled to this
disability allowance?
Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: I don’t think they are involved.
Mr Bérenger: I think I’ll move on to the next part of my question because I would
have thought that the Minister would have discussed with the Minister of Finance and
Economic Development the contents of that letter, but, never mind, we will come back on
that.
Can I move on to the 50% increase in the grant-in-aid to the NGOs involved in
Special Education Needs? Of course, I wish to have the list if the hon. Minister will place a
copy because they all or nearly all deserve that increase. Now, Autisme Maurice, I heard the
Minister said, has benefitted from a grant. Is it a one-off grant or is it an ongoing grant?
Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: An ongoing grant.
Mr Bérenger: Thank you, hon. Minister! There is another NGO that is of urgent
interest to me, it is the Bureau de l’Éducation Catholique. For nearly two years now, it has
been agreed by the previous Government and by this Government, that Le Bureau de
l’Éducation Catholique would take over the running of 9 schools at present run by ABEIM
that involves 254 children. So, can I know whether the hon. Minister has taken the
opportunity - because this is urgent, they are going to close down, they cannot go on anymore
– to discuss it with both the Minister of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education
and Scientific Research and the Minister of Finance and Economic Development?
Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: If my memory serves me right, I did say in my last PNQ
that I have had consultation with my colleague, hon. Mrs Dookun-Luchoomun. I understand
that it will be so.
Mr Bérenger: The hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Development has been
good enough to increase by 50% the grant to these NGOs. Can I know whether the grant-in-
aid formula for Special Needs School will also be reviewed upwards?
Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Yes. Indeed, it will be reviewed.
Mr Bérenger: Thank you, Madam. The last part of my question! Thank you for the
information on how the Special Education Needs Sector will get a strategic paper reviewing
14
the whole sector. Can I know whether it will be by a Committee, by a Commission and, if
yes, chaired by whom and the composition thereof?
Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Well, I have been given to understand that it will be done
by a Committee.
Mr Bérenger: Therefore, has the hon. Minister had the opportunity of discussing with
her colleague, about the Chairperson eventually, and the composition?
Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Yes, the discussion is ongoing.
Mr Bérenger: Through the Minister, can I put the fundamental question? I am sure
she is aware since reading the United Nations Report on disabled people in Mauritius, which
I referred to recently, that the key issue that will have to be considered by this Special
Education Needs Sector Strategic Partner Team, will be that we are stuck now, because for
years we have been giving money, not enough, but money to NGOs, not enough as the
United Nations says, but, at the same time, we have been not giving money this time to make
our schools inclusive, that is, ordinary schools will need to be funded so that they can admit
handicapped children as well. Now, we are stuck in a way, in a vicious circle because the
NGOs rightly asked for more money. The more money we give here, the less money we have
to put into making our schools inclusive. Can I ask the hon. Minister whether she has
discussed with her colleague? This is the crucial issue! How are we going to move from the
present situation where everything is done with NGOs without enough money to a situation
where all our schools will eventually become inclusive? How are we going to succeed in that
transition?
Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: I have been given to understand that gradually disabled
children are being included in the mainstream education and special Integrated Units are
being created in primary schools, all over the island.
Mr Bérenger: Reference has been made to special units. Is the hon. Minister aware
that this is precisely what the United Nations asked us not to do, that is, not to set up special
units that are being set up, but to adapt the schools, generally without special units to admit
those kids?
Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Well, as far as possible, children are being canalised
through the mainstream education, but where we can’t, then the Special Integrated Units are
being created to provide education for those children.
15
Madam Speaker: Hon. Osman Mahomed!
Mr Mahomed: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My question pertains to the last part,
special education needs and training. There is a legal requirement for companies to employ,
at least, 3% of their workforce from children with disabilities. Then, on the other hand, there
is the Training and Employment of Disabled Board within the Ministry of Social Security,
National Solidarity and Reform Institutions, the remit of which is to train persons with
disability to completely integrate the mainstream society and with a view to securing
employment eventually. Companies are not charitable institutions, the bottom line is
profitability. Would the hon. Minister be able to clarify us on the following: how is the
training, the TEDPB reinventing itself or shaking up itself with a view to providing the
appropriate training that is geared to these companies for them to be able to employ them
because often times those children once they finish their training they don’t get a job, they
stay at home and they feel depressed?
Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: I don’t want to be nasty, but the UN Convention…
(Interruptions)
The UN Convention has been signed in 2007 and ratified in 2010. Mauritius submitted its
Initial Report in 2012. Can you tell me what has been done between 2010 to 2014?
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order!
(Interruptions)
Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Let me finish! The hon. Member will be saying that I am
Minister for nearly two years now. Do you know that we don’t even have a proper database?
The database was not a reliable one. We are setting up a new database. The Hearing
Committee was not functioning as it should be. Members were often absent. We are
revisiting the composition of the Hearing Committee, the Committee of Employers and
creating a new reliable database. All this, Madam Speaker, can’t be done overnight. The hon.
Member should be patient.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody!
(Interruptions)
16
Order!
Mr Baloomoody: There is one issue which is not clear. Can I ask the hon. Minister
whether those children, who are below 15 and henceforth will get the Basic Invalid’s
Pension, will still benefit from the Carer’s Allowance?
Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Of course, they will! Indeed, this is a landmark measure.
We are a caring Government. Sadly, no Government has bothered to address this lingering
concern. I, myself, was receiving complaints from parents all over the island. Parents come
to see us saying that they can’t understand why their disabled children could not benefit from
the Basic Invalid’s Pension. The measure, I must admit, was very unfair. So, we have taken
the decision to remove the age limit discrimination. As I have said at the beginning of the
discussion, we mean business, we have at heart the interest and well-being of those disabled
children. We are on the right track. Be patient and I do hope that if need be, we will come up
with additional measures to better protect and promote rights of persons with disabilities.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Last question, hon. Leader of the Opposition!
Mr Bérenger: To conclude, I would like to, through the Minister, ask Government
whether the time has come to better coordinate action in favour of handicapped people,
people with disabilities, children with disabilities to better coordinate action of Government
because, apart from her Ministry, there are the Ministry of Finance and Economic
Development, everything depends finally on the Ministry of Finance and Economic
Development, also the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life, the Ministry of Education and
Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific Research of course, and the Ministry of
Gender Equality, Child Development and Family Welfare. So, there are five Ministries and
there is an urgent need to coordinate much better how Government performs as a team.
Mrs Jeewa-Daureeawoo: Rightly said, there is an urgent need to coordinate all the
sectors concerned, Ministries and Departments if we really want to better the system. We
will be working on this particular recommendation. I thank the hon. Leader of the Opposition
for his suggestion.
Madam Speaker: Time is over!