MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENT, SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT AND DISASTER AND BEACH MANAGEMENT (FORMER) - RESIGNATION
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr P. Bérenger) (by Private Notice) asked the Rt.
hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Defence, Home Affairs, Minister of Finance and Economic
Development, Minister for Rodrigues and National Development Unit whether, in regard to
the former Minister of Environment, Sustainable Development and Disaster and Beach
Management, hon. Jayeshwur Raj Dayal, CSK, PDSM QPM, he will –
(a)  state the reasons why he has asked him to step down, indicating if he has been
made aware of the threats and pressures being exerted on the businessman and
on the journalist involved in the radio broadcast of 23 March last following
which the former Minister was asked to step down and, if so, indicate if he
will take measures to prevent any cover-up, and
(b)  for the benefit of the House, obtain from the Commissioner of Police,
information as to if the latter has turned down a request from the Independent
Commission against Corruption for the arrest of the former Minister and, if so,
indicate the reasons therefor.
aaaaa
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, in regard to part (a) of the question, on 22
March 2016, I took cognizance, through the media, of the broadcast of a recorded
conversation presumably between the former Minister of Environment, Sustainable
Development and Disaster and Beach Management and one Mr Saheed Nawab Soobhany,
alias Patrick Soobhany. From the conversation, it appeared that the former Minister of
Environment, Sustainable Development and Disaster and Beach Management asked for a
gratification from Mr Soobhany.
I was also made aware that Mr Soobhany had reported an alleged act of corruption
against hon. Dayal to ICAC.
In view of the seriousness of the allegations, I convened hon. Dayal and the Senior
Chief Executive of the Ministry of Environment, Sustainable Development and Disaster and
Beach Management to my Office on 23 March 2016, and I requested the former to
temporarily step down as Minister pending the completion of the enquiry by ICAC, so as to
ensure that ICAC has full latitude to conduct its enquiry.
19
I am not aware of any threat or pressure being exerted on Mr Soobhany or any
journalist involved in the radio broadcast, and the Commissioner of Police has confirmed that
no declaration has been made to the Police in this regard.
Madam Speaker, I have all times been insisting on good governance, ethical practices,
transparency and integrity. In this context, I would like to restate emphatically what I said
publicly last week. I want Mauritius to develop a culture of integrity and honesty. To that
end, I will not condone or tolerate anybody or any act that puts at stake the reputation of the
country and of its institutions. Whoever errs will be dealt with by the appropriate
independent institutions so that justice and truth prevail. I wish to emphasise that there will
be no cover-up, as had been the case under the previous Government for long years, leading
to a culture of fraud and corruption.
I think the population knows me enough to gauge the seriousness and firmness of my
commitment in this respect.
Madam Speaker, in regard to part (b) of the question, I am informed by the
Commissioner of Police that, on Friday 25 March 2016, at around 11 30 hours, two
investigators from the ICAC called upon him in connection with a request for assistance for
arrest and lodging of provisional charge against former Minister Dayal.
The Commissioner of Police took cognizance of the request of ICAC and at the same
time was made aware of the fact that former Minister Dayal was still at the office of the
ICAC where he was giving his statement.
Based on the fact that the former Minister had not yet completed his statement to
ICAC, the Commissioner of Police requested the investigators to come back when the former
Minister would have given his full statement and to provide further information to sustain the
arrest, as is the normal practice.
I am further informed by the Commissioner of Police that, as at to date, the ICAC has
not reverted back to him on this matter.
In the circumstances, the request of ICAC for assistance for arrest and lodging of
provisional charge against former Minister Dayal could not be entertained by the
Commissioner of Police at that point in time.
20
Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that, at no point in time, did the
Commissioner of Police turn down the request of ICAC for arrest and lodging of provisional
charge against former Minister Dayal.
I also wish to inform the House that there are a number of cases where ICAC made
requests to the Commissioner of Police for the arrest and lodging of provisional charges in
respect of persons against whom ICAC was investigating, but the requests were not acceded
to. Such cases go as far back as 2009.
Further, section 71 (4) of the Constitution provides that the Commissioner of Police
shall not, in the exercise of his responsibilities and powers with respect to the use and
operational control of the Force, be subject to the direction or control of any person or
authority. In this case, the Commissioner of Police exercised his powers based on facts
available to him at that time.
Madam Speaker, I want our institutions to function independently according to law. I
expect the ICAC to take action in accordance with the provisions of the Prevention of
Corruption Act. The Act defines an “act of corruption” as follows -
(i)  any conduct whereby, in return for a gratification, a person does or neglects
from doing an act in contravention of his public duties;
(ii)  the offer, promise, soliciting or receipt of a gratification as an inducement or
reward to a person to do or not to do any act, with a corrupt intention;
(iii)  the abuse of a public or private office for private gain;
(iv)  an agreement between two or more persons to act or refrain from acting in
violation of a person’s duties in the private or public sector for profit or gain;
(v)  any conduct whereby a person accepts or obtains, or agrees to accept or
attempts to obtain, from any person, for himself or for any other person, any
gratification for inducing a public official, by corrupt or illegal means, or by
the exercise of personal influence, to do or abstain from doing an act in the
exercise of his duties to show favour or disfavour to any person.
Madam Speaker, we have a mandate from the people to clean up the country wherever
there is any act of fraud and corruption.
(Interruptions)
I solemnly say that this is my…
21
(Interruptions)
You can laugh, you!
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order, please! Order!
(Interruptions)
The Prime Minister: People have had enough of you!
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order, please! Can you allow the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to reply!
The Prime Minister: We have a mandate, Madam Speaker, from the people to clean
up the country wherever there is any act of fraud and corruption. I solemnly say that this is
my mission and I will fulfil it with all the determination it requires.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Please, do not interrupt the hon. Prime Minister!
The Prime Minister: And in that mission the institutions have to play their roles fully
and in total independence and without fear and favour. And I will see to it that this is done.
Thank you, Madam Speaker.
Mr Bérenger: I did not hear the Rt. hon. Prime Minister say whether he listened to
this shocking radio broadcast that really shocked the whole nation. Did he listen to that and
is it on the basis of what he heard with his ears that he took action against the then Minister?
The Prime Minister: I did not listen to that, but I read the transcript which was
passed on to me.
Mr Bérenger: Well, I think that’s very unfortunate that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister
has not listened to it because he would have realised that the whole country…
(Interruptions)
He said, if I heard correctly, that he did not listen; that he read a transcript. Is that correct?
Yes! Well, that is why I am saying that it is very unfortunate because otherwise he would
have been shocked like the rest of the country and do I take it that it is on the basis of that
transcript and not as it should have been listening to that shocking broadcast itself that he
found that there was a prima facie case to ask the then Minister to step down?
22
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, by reading the transcript itself, I was shocked,
and that is the reason why I asked the Minister to step down.
Mr Bérenger: I agree fully with that part of the Prime Minister’s answer.
(Interruptions)
The whole country was literally shocked that morning, Madam Speaker.
Is it a fact that the then Minister, who has resigned, has, in the meantime, been
questioned by ICAC under warning?
The Prime Minister: Of course, I have been told that statement will be taken and
completed from him and afterwards all the documents will be presented to the Commissioner
of Police when he will have to take action.
Mr Bérenger: I have heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister say that there will be no
cover-up but also that there has been no report of any threats or pressure put on that
businessman and on that radio reporter according to the Commissioner of Police. Is the Rt.
hon. Prime Minister satisfied with the very VVIP treatment granted to the Minister when he
had the cheek to go to the Police to put a charge on those who had come with courage to
denounce what had taken place?
The Prime Minister: The hon. Leader of the Opposition really makes me laugh.
(Interruptions)
Because…
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Please, you have asked a question, hon. Leader of the Opposition,
allow the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to reply!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Jhugroo, please allow the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to reply! There has been a
question! Hon. Jhugroo!
(Interruptions)
Would you allow the hon. Prime Minister to reply!
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, first of all, those who have complained
against hon. Dayal, they are protected by the law, by PoCA. But, hon. Dayal, as any other
23
citizen, has got a right to go and complain if he thinks that some offence has been committed
against him. So, what is wrong in that? Why blame the Police?
Mr Bérenger: Can I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister at the CCID who is
handling that case supposedly brought in by the then Minister? Is it Mr Jangi, if not, who is in
charge of that part of the enquiry?
The Prime Minister: I cannot answer that, because I have not been told who is
enquiring. I did not ask who is enquiring.
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, as far as the second part of my question is concerned,
is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister aware that there is the very strong feeling outside that the
Police practices deux poids deux mesures when it is opponents of the present Government or
any Government for that effect, past also, or people who use Facebook supposedly against the
law, they are arrested immediately, but in that case, the Commissioner of Police admits that
he did not grant permission to go and arrest the former Minister?
(Interruptions)
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I am really surprised by the hon. Leader of the
Opposition. They have been complaining outside, they have been canvassing people, telling
them that this law allowing provisional charges, arresting people, is very unfair, that it should
be changed and that people should not be arrested and provisionally charged before…
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order, please! Hon. Mohamed!
The Prime Minister: … a prima facie case is established.
(Interruptions)
They are saying it, but in the case of hon. Dayal, if the Commissioner of Police has taken
precautions not to do what they are complaining about and to make sure that decision is taken
at the right time when he is satisfied that there is a prima facie case and that he should act, I
say the Commissioner of Police is 100% right.
(Interruptions)
Mr Bérenger: Can I just ask the hon. Prime Minister, therefore, he finds it right that
the Commissioner of Police should refuse to ICAC - I am sure they took legal advice before
asking the Commissioner of Police to arrest the former Minister? Is he telling me, therefore,
24
that ICAC was completely wrong, acted in a wrong way and that the Commissioner of Police
was right?
The Prime Minister: Well, according to the Opposition, he should not have acted the
way that they are now saying he should have acted.
Mr Bérenger: Can I know - we had the pretext, the excuse from the Commissioner of
Police that he was still at ICAC, giving the impression that the Police would be waiting and
as soon as he comes out - since then and now that he is under questioning by ICAC under
warning, why has there been no action by the Commissioner of Police since then?
The Prime Minister: Well, the answer is very simple; as yet, the ICAC has not come
back to the Commissioner of Police and, therefore, the Commissioner of Police cannot act in
vagueness.
Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Baloomoody!
(Interruptions)
Mr Baloomoody: Thank you. Can the Rt. hon. Prime Minister tell us for what reasons
- forget about the enquiry, we know as experienced barristers that many people have been
arrested by ICAC before they even start giving their defence, section 53 of PoCA refers to the
Powers of arrest and it says -
“(1) Where the Director-General is satisfied that a person who may assist him in
his investigation -
(a) is about to leave Mauritius;
(b) has interfered with a potential witness; or
(c) intends to destroy documentary evidence which is in his possession
and which he has refused to give to the Commission (…)”.
He may ask for powers of arrest.
Madam Speaker: Yes. What is the hon. Member’s question?
Mr Baloomoody: May I ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister on which ground – forget
about the statement part, but on the other one - did the Director ask for hon. Dayal to be
arrested?
The Prime Minister: All this is irrelevant to the case!
25
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan!
Mr Bhagwan: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Can I know from the Rt. hon. Prime
Minister who is NSS, whether he has been made aware that Mr Rakesh Gooljaury has been
acting as an agwa to ask the businessman to take money and then remove the case and this in
the enquiry in ICAC? Will the hon. Prime Minister ask the Police to enquire and take
possession of the cell phone of Mr Gooljaury and see whether it is true?
The Prime Minister: I am not aware of it.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed!
Mr Mohamed: Thank you, Madam Speaker.
(Interruptions)
Could the Rt. hon. Prime Minister ask the Commissioner of Police the following: on what
basis and what standard does he use for Members of the Opposition or opponents of
Government when it comes time for him to exercise this discretion that he so properly uses of
arresting or of not arresting, and why is it that when it comes to Members of Government, he
decides not to arrest until the enquiry is over as opposed to when it comes to opponents of the
Government, he decides to arrest them even before the enquiry has started?
(Interruptions)
The Prime Minister: As far as I am aware from what…
(Interruptions)
Shut up!
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed!
(Interruptions)
Order, please!
(Interruptions)
Order!
26
(Interruptions)
Sit down!
(Interruptions)
Order!
(Interruptions)
Order, please!
(Interruptions)
Order!
(Interruptions)
Can I ask hon. Members to have some order in the House, please!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Mohamed! You have asked the question!
(Interruptions)
You expect a reply! Okay!
(Interruptions)
Order, please!
(Interruptions)
Order!
(Interruptions)
Order in the House, please!
(Interruptions)
Can we have some order!
(Interruptions)
Then I sit down!
(Interruptions)
27
Do you want me to suspend the proceedings? I will, but you are losing the time of the House
and I think that we have to ensure that Question Time is used to the best effect. We are
losing the time of the House with trivial comments.
Mr Bérenger: Do I take it, Madam Speaker, on a point of order that you did not hear
what the Rt. hon. Prime Minister said, meaning that you find what he said parliamentary?
Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, I have to say that I didn’t hear.
(Interruptions)
I promise that I will listen to the proceedings.
(Interruptions)
I will listen to the proceedings!
(Interruptions)
Right, I didn’t!
(Interruptions)
I didn’t. I will listen to the proceedings and I will come back to the House.
(Interruptions)
I have the right to come back to the House ….
(Interruptions)
…and I will come back to the House after I have listened.
(Interruptions)
The hon. Member believes or not, he doesn’t have the right to challenge the Chair!
(Interruptions)
Okay. He believes or not, he doesn’t have the right to challenge the Chair!
(Interruptions)
Let me remind the hon. Members that I had in the past promised to listen to proceedings and I
have come with appropriate rulings, and I will do so.
(Interruptions)
I will do so! And I will remind you also, hon. Mohamed, that you cannot challenge the Chair.
28
(Interruptions)
You have asked the question, you have to listen to the reply.
(Interruptions)
Hon. Prime Minister, do you want to reply to the question which has been asked by hon.
Mohamed?
(Interruptions)
The Prime Minister: Yes. As far as I am aware, the same standard is being used
towards everybody.
(Interruptions)
I am aware!
Madam Speaker: Hon. Mohamed, if you have a question, you stand up and ask it!
(Interruptions)
Order, please!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Soodhun, order!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Soodhun, I am addressing you!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Soodhun, please don’t get overexcited! We have got important business to do in the
House. Please, don’t get overexcited, both sides of the House!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Uteem!
Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have just heard the Rt. hon. Prime
Minister say how he was shocked reading the transcript. Being given that we have at least
one case where a witness has had the courage to come forward, would the Rt. hon. Prime
Minister now consider to get an independent review of every single decision taken by the
hon. Minister at the EIA to ensure that there is no cover-up and everything has been done
transparently?
29
The Prime Minister: Well, I am not concerned with what is being asked. We are
concerned with the present case.
Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Ameer Meea!
Mr Ameer Meea: Can I ask the hon. Prime Minister whether the ICAC, as soon as
the businessman has made his statement against former Minister Dayal, has seized all the
documents; has secured all the papers so as not to allow any tampering of the document and
of the enquiry? Did they do it on the same day and, if not, when did they do that?
The Prime Minister: I have not enquired into this. The ICAC has been doing its
work. If I had poked my nose, they would say I should not have poked my nose.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition!
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, the former Minister has been asked by the Rt. hon.
Prime Minister to step down and the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has told us because he, as a
Prime Minister, was shocked when he read the transcript. He would have been even more
shocked if he had listened to the broadcast and the former Minister is being questioned by
ICAC under warning. Does he find it proper that some leaders from the MSM should express
their solidarité with the former Minister while this is going on thus putting indirect pressure
on both the Police and the Judiciary?
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order, please! Order! Hon. Jhugroo, please!
(Interruptions)
The Prime Minister: Well, everyone has got his own feelings and he expresses his
feelings. Why should I be against that?
Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of Opposition, you have got other questions? You
don’t have. Questions addressed to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister. Hon. Members, the Table
had been advised that Parliamentary Question B/9 with regard to the agreement signed
between the Government of the Republic of Mauritius and the Republic of South Korea
regarding the study and implementation of major road projects and Parliamentary Question
B/12 with regard to the re-development of the Port Louis project addressed to the Rt. hon.
Prime Minister will now be replied by the hon. Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land
30
Transport. Parliamentary Question B/23 with regard to the overseas missions undertaken by
the hon. Minister of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms and
Parliamentary Question B/25 in regard to overseas mission undertaken by the hon. Vice
Prime Minister, Minister of Housing and Lands, addressed to the hon. Ministers respectively,
will now be replied by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, time permitting.
Dr. Sorefan: Madam Speaker, if you would allow me, the question that relates to the
Agreement, I sent that question to be answered by the Minister of Public Infrastructure and
Land Transport. I don’t know why this has gone to the Prime Minister. I seek your advice
that the question be answered within the time that I set my question. My question was set in
January to the Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport and not to the Prime
Minister. Now, I see that my question will be answered very late, if not, not answered at all.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Dr. Sorefan, if you refer to the Standing Orders, you will find
that the Chair does not have any control on the transfer of questions to Ministers. This does
not lie with me. I don’t have any control on this.
(Interruptions)
It’s according to the Standing Orders, if I may.