METRO EXPRESS PROJECT
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr X. L. Duval) (by Private Notice) asked the hon.
Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport whether, in regard to the Metro Express
Project, he will –
(a) state the estimated cost thereof, indicating the estimates of –
(i) ridership, and
(ii) fares per passenger;
(b) state how same will be funded, indicating the annual State subsidies required
therefor;
(c) state the travel time between Curepipe and the Immigration Square;
(d) state why it is being exempted from the requirement of an Environment
Impact Assessment licence;
(e) state how the employment of existing transport workers will be guaranteed;
(f) state the public amenities which will be destroyed/relocated, and
(g) guarantee that no fiscal measures will be imposed to discourage car ridership.
aaaaa
The Minister of Public Infrastructure and Land Transport (Mr Bodha): Madam
Speaker, I would like to thank the hon. Leader of the Opposition for asking this question
because there has been a lot of commentaries about this project. We had said that we would
give all the figures and all the details once the contract has been awarded but, as the question
has been put by hon. Leader of the Opposition, I will do my best to answer to the different
parts of the question.
Madam Speaker, the Metro Express project has been revived by this Government on
the basis of a review exercise that has been conducted by the Singapore Cooperation
Enterprise at the request of Government to cost optimise the project that was approved by the
previous Labour/PMSD Government for a total cost of 850 m. US Dollar which converted in
Mauritian Rupees represent as at now about Rs31 billion.
In 2014, in fact, the consultants had concluded that the project could be implemented
for a capital cost of 850 m. US Dollar broken down as follows -
•  Domestic loans  - 250 million USD;
•  Foreign loans - 400 million USD, and
•  Equity - 200 million USD.
27
Madam Speaker, I wish to stress that at that cost of 850 m. USD, the then
Government found that the project was economically, technically and financially viable, as
indicated by the reply of the then Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Public Infrastructure,
National Development Unit, Land Transport and Shipping, hon. Anil Bachoo to a PNQ of the
then Leader of Opposition, hon. Paul Bérenger.
When this Government assumed office, Madam Speaker, it decided that the project as
approved by the previous Government was not affordable for the country. However, taking
into consideration certain elements of this project, Government decided to request the
Singapore Cooperation Enterprise (SCE) to review the whole project with a view to making it
more realistic and with an affordable budget.
Madam Speaker, thus, at the request of the Government, the Singapore Cooperation
Enterprise submitted a cost optimised report with a new reference design on 26 October
2016. On the basis of that report, Government decided to move ahead with the project.
Madam Speaker, in regard to part (a) of the question, the estimated project cost is
Rs17.7 billion. The final cost will, of course, be announced at the end of the current RFP
exercise.
The financial model for this project is based on an average daily ridership of 80,000
passengers in each direction.
According to the feasibility study, the proposed fares will be aligned on the prevailing
bus fares.
Madam Speaker, it has already been decided by the Government that the train fare
will be the same as that of the prevailing bus fare.
Concerning part (b) of the question, the House is aware that the Government of India
has provided a grant of 275 m. USD which if converted to Mauritian rupees stands at Rs9.9
billion.
For the remaining part of the funding, Government is in the presence of several
options, including amongst others -
(i)  a loan from a consortium of local commercial banks;
(ii)  a line of credit from the Government of India;
(iii)  loans from international and financial institutions, and
28
(iv)  a combination of these three options or other financing options.
Madam Speaker, I would like here to stress that it is totally false to say that local
banks which have been contacted, have refused to finance the implementation of this project.
On the contrary, they are eagerly awaiting for Government proposal once the contract has
been awarded.
As regards the subsidy, it will, therefore, be premature to talk about subsidy at this
point in time because the outcome of the current bidding exercise for the selection of a
Design and Construct Contractor is not yet known.
However, Madam Speaker, the Price Waterhouse study which was commissioned by
the NTA on the Public Transport System will submit its report in the coming weeks. In its
Terms of Reference, one of the main issues is the reengineering of the travel system where
Government has already earmarked a subsidy of Rs2 billion for free travel.
The recommendations of this report will help us provide a more integrated cost
effective national transport system with the bus and Metro Express services
Madam Speaker, regarding part (c) of the question, the estimated travel time is 43
minutes, assuming that the train stops at each of the 19 stations. Express services linking the
main terminals will also be offered reducing the standard journey.
In regard to part (d) of the question, the hon. Leader of Opposition is surely aware that
the former Mauritius Light Rail Transit project was also exempted from the EIA.
The project has been delisted from the requirements of an EIA licence for reasons of
celerity and effectiveness. However, Madam Speaker, I would like to reassure the House that
all the standards, criteria and provisions of the law relating to the environment shall be
adhered to. With the exception of the procedures, all other EIA requirements will be followed
as the project will need to be environmentally friendly. In this context, the Design and
Construct Contractor will be required to submit an Environmental Management Plan which
will be monitored closely by the Authorities. Such procedures were followed for the Airports
of Mauritius project, for the Bagatelle Dam, the Terre Rouge-Verdun project and some other
projects.
In reply to part (e) of the question, with the exception of the United Bus Service
(UBS), the National Transport Corporation (NTC) and the Rose Hill Transport, no other bus
29
companies will be concerned with the introduction of the Metro Express. In fact, all of these
companies are modernising their bus fleet and will be perfectly integrated in the new
transport network, meaning that the transport workers of these bus operators will not be
adversely affected and their employment will not be at stake.
As regards part (f) of the question, public amenities to be affected are as follows -
•  Part of the taxi stand in Vacoas;
•  Parking space opposite Vacoas market;
I will explain later how we are going to find solutions for that.
•  Promenade Gerard Bruneau at Quatre Bornes
•  Boulodrome, Avenue Victoria, Quatre Bornes
•  Market Fair at Ave Ollier, Quatre Bornes
•  Arab Town at Rose Hill
•  Promenade Roland Armand (Vandermeersh), Beau Bassin
•  Jardin Bijoux, Beau Bassin
•  Basket Ball /Volley Ball pitch at Barkly
Measures will be taken to provide alternative facilities and appropriate sites are being
identified. Later, I will give some details about this.
Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude by saying very firmly that this Government
is totally committed to implement this project and no undue pressure will deter us in this
endeavour.
This Government is giving the same comfort to the employees of the transport sector.
As regards part (g) of the question, Government does not envisage to impose any
fiscal measure to discourage car ridership.
Mr X. L. Duval: Thank you. My first question, Madam Speaker, regards
Parliamentary scrutiny. This project is going to be implemented by a private limited
company called Metro Express Limited of which there are various Government mandaring on
the Board. Will the hon. Minister commit himself to responding to every question in
Parliament regarding this limited company and will he also state why this limited company is
not being included under the Public Procurement Act?
30
Mr Bodha: We know, Madam Speaker, why we revived this project. The project
was revived on three bases. First of all, a project which was costing Rs31 billion was brought
in to around Rs18 billion.
(Interruptions)
Secondly, yes, we have the line of credit, the grant from the Government of India and thirdly,
we firmly believe in this project. As regards the Metro Express Limited…
(Interruptions)
Yes, I am going to reply! We will give all the information that is to be needed. Let me
explain something. The subsidy that we have already, we have already spent Rs2 billion.
And when it comes as to why it is a private company and not listed, but it is still a private
company.
(Interruptions)
Mr X. L. Duval: Madam Speaker, I don’t want biscuit business to become Metro
business! What we are saying here is whether, firstly, the hon. Minister will answer
Parliamentary questions? The question is very specific. Will he commit to respond to PQs
although this is a limited company? Secondly, I didn’t talk about listed companies. The hon.
Minister should be aware that companies that are private do not come under the Public
Procurement Act unless they are specifically included under the Public Procurement Act.
There is a question just after the PNQ on this. I am asking both questions to the hon.
Minister. Firstly, is he going to respond to PQs on all matters relating to Metro Express and
secondly, is it going to be included under the Public Procurement Act because tens of billions
of rupees of public money belonging to the Indian taxpayers and to the Mauritian taxpayers
are going to be spent on that project?
Mr Bodha: As regards the implementation of the project, yes it is …
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order, please!
(Interruptions)
Order!
31
(Interruptions)
Mr Bodha: Yes.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order, please!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Leader of the Opposition, you have already asked your question! Allow the hon.
Minister to reply!
Mr Bodha: I am giving the solemn undertaking of this Government to make
everything transparent and to answer to all questions here.
(Interruptions)
Mr X. L. Duval: Will the hon. Minister now commit to put in Metro Express
Limited under the Public Procurement Act?
Mr Bodha: The implementation of the project itself, everything is going to be
decided now.
(Interruptions)
Later….
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order!
(Interruptions)
Order, please!
Mr Bodha: We have almost…
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order, please!
(Interruptions)
32
Order!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Leader of the Opposition, once you have asked your question, from a sitting position,
you should not continue to ask questions! Allow the hon. Minister to reply! Please, proceed
hon. Minister!
Mr Bodha: So, I said I have given my solemn undertaking.
(Interruptions)
Mr X. L. Duval: There must be a problem of English, Madam Speaker, because I am
asking whether it is going to be put under part IV of the Public Procurement Act so that
everything that is done, is done with good governance. I repeat, we are talking about money
that is being spent on behalf of the Indian taxpayers - and God knows that they need money –
and on behalf of the Mauritian taxpayers - and God knows that we need that money - and we
want transparency all the way.
Mr Bodha: You will have transparency all the way, Madam Speaker.
Mr X. L. Duval: There has been no commitment to put on…
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Rutnah, please!
Mr X. L. Duval: Madam, I am going to ask…
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order, please! We won’t be able to listen to the question!
Mr X. L. Duval: We are going to, I understand, have also Metro business now that
we have biscuit business. Madam Speaker, I would like to ask the hon. Minister whether he
has not accepted to release any documents yet regarding the tender that is happening at the
moment. Firstly, is he willing to table the request for proposal that has been issued? Surely,
there cannot be any issue now. Secondly, since I do not have it, can he tell me whether this is
going to be a fixed price contract or a variable price contract?
33
Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, the project had been estimated at Rs31 billion. The
Singaporean Corporation Enterprise came with a project with a tight budget of around…
(Interruptions)
No, listen!
(Interruptions)
Let me answer!
Madam Speaker: Order, please!
(Interruptions)
Order!
(Interruptions)
Order!
Mr Bodha: What we did is that we requested them to see whether this project could
be implemented at a certain level of budget funding. When the Singaporeans told us that this
can be done technically and financially and the grant came from India, we launched the
request for proposal which is a very tight jacket within the technical specifications and within
the financial specifications. So, when the request for proposal was made, the question was put
to the two companies, Larsen & Toubro and Afcons whether the project could be
implemented within that tight jacket. This is what has been requested from the two
companies. Now, the companies have been working on the request for proposal. They came
here, they had the clarifications and then on 14 April, they will come forward with their
proposal within that tight jacket.
Mr X. L. Duval: Madam Speaker, we are on live television. Everybody will
understand that the Minister is running away from the question.
(Interruptions)
I have asked a simple question.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker, if I wanted to be nasty I would say that the Minister is urinating on public
opinion, but I will not say that. Madam Speaker, what I am saying is this: I am asking the
Minister for a specific reason whether this is going to be a fixed price contract or a variable
34
price contract. I understand from his answer that it is going to be a variable price contract.
This is what I have understood from the answer. I am going to table, Madam Speaker, a study
by Aalborg University which shows quite clearly the tremendous amount of cost overrun that
exists in virtually all projects of urban rail and that is my question: whether we know where
we are going or we don’t know where we are going. We are being promised a dream, we
don’t want it to turn into a cauchemar.
Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, let me say that it is going to be a fixed price contract
because the hon. Leader of the Opposition is saying that we are irresponsible and I would like
to say that he was Minister of Finance. When the Terre Rouge-Verdun at 2 billion started at 4
billion, where was he?
(Interruptions)
Where was he? Now, he is asking for accountability!
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order, please!
(Interruptions)
He is asking for accountability!
(Interruptions)
I have said order!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Members, I have said order in the House! Hon. Leader of the Opposition, please sit
down! Hon. Members, I wish to draw your attention to the fact that when I am on my feet and
I am calling for order, there should be silence in the House, otherwise you are obstructing the
business of the House. So, I am giving a warning to both sides of the House, please be silent
when I am on my feet and I am calling for order. Thank you.
Mr X. L. Duval: Madam Speaker, for 12 years I have answered questions, now it is
my turn to ask questions and the questions are not due to me, Xavier Duval, it is due to the
people of Mauritius and I am not going to be brought into other debates. What I want to know
is how this Minister who does not seem to understand the difference between good
governance and not good governance, is going to make sure that this project does not bear the
35
same type of cost overrun that is indicated here, in this Aalborg University Study, and
whether he is aware of the study and if he is not aware, I am tabling it for him?
Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, I have been the Minister of Public Infrastructure for two
and a half years, there has been not one cent of overrun in all the projects.
(Interruptions)
Listen!
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order again! Order, please!
(Interruptions)
Order!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Baloomoody!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Baloomoody, please! Please! Order, I said. Hon. Members, do you realise that you are
losing the time of the House because time is running? Hon. Leader of the Opposition, please!
Mr X. L. Duval: Madam…
Madam Speaker: The Minister has not finished. Please, allow the Minister to
answer!
Mr Bodha: The Terre Rouge/Verdun on the other side cost 880 million.
(Interruptions)
But I implemented the project.
(Interruptions)
I implemented the project at no further cost, Madam Speaker.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order, please! Hon. Shakeel Mohamed, order!
(Interruptions)
We cannot even hear what the hon. Minister is saying!
36
(Interruptions)
Allow him to reply! He was quiet when the hon. Leader of the Opposition was asking his
questions. So, Members have to be quiet when he is replying!
Mr Bodha: Yes, Madam. The project in Omnicane is costing 600 million and it is
implemented. There is no cost overrun. Madam Speaker, I have said it many times in this
House, there are three things that we want to do…
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan!
Mr Bodha: …no cost overrun…
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan, sorry!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Bhagwan, I am addressing myself to you! Please, allow the Minister, he is
replying. From a sitting position, you can’t make comments. Please!
Mr Bodha: We are committed to three things, Madam: no cost overrun, quality of
works and we meet the deadlines.
Mr X. L. Duval: I am such a happy man! We have achieved consensus in the
Opposition as regards the fact that this Minister has done nothing for two years. Madam
Speaker, let me ask the hon. Minister who has not answered so far hardly any of my
questions and I hope I will get some satisfaction this time. Surely, he must know what is the
estimated amount of subsidy that is planned; surely, he does not go in a project knowing that
the price is going to be the same, the fare is going to be the same as the bus fare, knowing the
cost, although it can be highly underestimated, without the subsidy element or is he hiding it
from the House and from the people of Mauritius?
Mr Bodha: The final subsidy element will be re-engineered when we take into
account how we are spending the 2 billion now. The 2 billion which are being spent now on
free travel has been a question on the table for long and we have been asking ourselves
whether this money was accountably spent the way it has to be spent. So, the amount of
subsidy will be added on that 2 billion, but once we know how to engineer the 2 billion, we
37
will engineer a bigger sum. What we are saying is that the fare is going to be what it is today
as regards the bus fare.
Mr X. L. Duval: Madam, I put it to the Minister that he is running away again from
the question. It is inconceivable that Government does not know what is the subsidy, but the
issue, of course, is that he has promised to extend the Metro to all the rural areas - God knows
when - whereas the subsidy will have to be paid by all Mauritians right now when it starts. Is
that the reason why he does not want to give the amount of estimated subsidy?
Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, in 2006, when the free travel was launched…
(Interruptions)
… did they mention the subsidy?
(Interruptions)
Did they mention the subsidy then?
(Interruptions)
When they said they were going to implement the free travel, did they say it was going to
cost Rs600 m. or Rs800 m., and there was no accountability as regards how it was spent?
They never said so!
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker, we are saying that we have Rs2 billion already. We are going to reengineer
the Rs2 billion, and then, if there are additional costs, we will add onto it. We are taking the
undertaking that the fare is going to be what it is today.
(Interruptions)
Mr X. L. Duval: Can you believe this, Madam Speaker? If there are going to be
additional costs! The hon. Minister lives in a cloud cuckoo land! If there is going to be
additional cost, a project that is going to cost billions additionally will have to be financed
somehow. My hon. friend should know! Madam Speaker, the hon. Prime Minister himself,
and I presume the hon. Minister himself, has also said previously that this is the best option
for Mauritius - that the métro léger is the best option - and when he replied to my
predecessor, the hon. Minister mentioned the Halcrow Report. He failed though to mention
38
that, after the Halcrow Report, there was a World Bank consultant who came and virtually
destroyed the arguments of Halcrow and instead of the métro léger was opting for the Bus
Rapid Transit. My first question is: why did he omit that second report from the PNQ of
December?
Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, do you know what the hon. Minister of Finance said in
the Budget in 2013? I am reading his Budget –
“Under a Government to Government arrangement (…)”
The hon. Leader of the Opposition said so! He read it here in Parliament –
“Under a Government to Government arrangement, the Singapore Cooperation
Enterprise is providing advisory services to prepare the project. An Expression of
Interest exercise has already been carried out. Out of 11 proponents, 6 have been pre-
selected and will be invited to submit their detailed proposals.”
He read this here in his Budget Speech!
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order!
(Interruptions)
Order, please!
(Interruptions)
Order!
(Interruptions)
I have said order!
(Interruptions)
No crosstalking, I said!
(Interruptions)
No crosstalking and no talking from a sitting position!
39
(Interruptions)
Mr X. L. Duval: Madam Speaker, I am so happy that this is being televised because
the Minister is mistaken. He is not answering to Xavier Duval. He is answering to the people
of Mauritius and it is his duty to reveal, when he is answering, all the facts to this House. And
he is withholding from the House the fact that there was a subsequent report to the Halcrow
Report. Whatever else this explanation unless, as I mentioned - I will not repeat the word,
that he is doing to the public opinion - ‘urinating’, I repeated it; he has to provide the
information.
(Interruptions)
Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, on 14 April, the two companies are going to submit
their offer. It may happen that we will give them a few weeks of extension. Once the contract
is…
(Interruptions)
Extension! It’s because they have requested about four weeks of extension to submit their
offer.
(Interruptions)
Once the contract has been awarded…
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan!
Mr Bodha: Once the contract has been awarded…
(Interruptions)
… and we know exactly how the project is going to be implemented - and this is a question
of weeks - I will come here to give, together with the hon. Prime Minister, all the details that
have to be given. This project, Madam Speaker…
(Interruptions)
… they were building…
40
(Interruptions)
We will come to explain why this project is a paradigm shift for three reasons. First of all,
the budget has been brought in to an affordable amount. Second, we have had the
extraordinary generous offer of India. Third, we have the two most important building
companies of India, Larsen & Toubro and Afcons, coming to Mauritius. Fourth, the trains
which are going to be offered, either the Bombardier or the…
(Interruptions)
The hon. Member wants to know?
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order, please! Order!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Shakeel Mohamed…
(Interruptions)
…please! Hon. Henry, please! I have said that you should not interrupt when the Minister is
talking!
Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, it is not what was approved by the Government
formerly, that is, a railway with a number of stations. We are changing the whole face of
Mauritius, Madam Speaker. We are going to have six urban terminals to address all the issues
which have been…
(Interruptions)
That is what I am saying…
Mr X. L. Duval: On a point of order! This Minister is wasting time! It is evident to
everyone that nobody asked him about the urban terminals. Why is he going on about the
urban terminals? Everybody knows about it.
Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, the question is very simple. Once the contract has been
awarded, we will come with all the figures and lay on the Table of the National Assembly all
documents which are needed.
41
Mr X. L. Duval: Madam Speaker, the contract has not been awarded, we agree on
that. The design phase will take eight months to a year, we agree on that, I am sure. Madam
Speaker, the launch ceremony cost, I think, Rs7 m., and that is also a fact. It is probably a
waste of money. Now, Madam Speaker, I am going to ask the hon. Minister. This is going to
take so much time. Then, why have eviction notices been sent to the poor people of Mauritius
- this is La Butte - asking them to move out of their houses, Madam Speaker? “You are given
one month delay as from date of this letter to quit, leave and vacate the premises.” One month
delay! He does not even know what is the cost, what is the subsidy. Someone here, and I can
table it, a Senior Adviser to his own Ministry…
(Interruptions)
The Senior Adviser to his own Ministry said only this morning that if the cost is too high,
they will not go ahead with it. Yet, in the meantime, Madam, tens of Mauritian families are
having to vacate! In Rose Hill, they are thinking of moving the stadium. There is a whole
brouhaha everywhere and the whole thing, Madam Speaker, smacks of incompetence!
Mr Bodha: Madam Speaker, the notice that the land has been acquired dates back to
2014. So, all these people were aware. But I agree with the hon. Leader of the Opposition on
this point: that we should not have given this letter to quit, leave and vacate within a month.
And I am correcting it. With the hon. Vice-Prime Minister, myself, Valuation…
(Interruptions)
I totally agree with the hon. Leader of the Opposition on this point. So, what we are doing is -
in fact, we are meeting on Thursday - we are setting up a unit with the Valuation Office, the
Finance Ministry, the Prime Minister’s Office, Social Security, Social Integration, Housing
and myself. We will sit down to view the case on a case to case basis.
Madam Speaker, out of about 90 plots, there are only 20 plots where the
compensation has not been paid, for several reasons. Sometimes, they don’t agree with it;
sometimes they don’t want to leave, and other people are saying that they will leave when
they know that the project is going to be implemented. I totally agree about this human side
of it. I am going to take care of it with the hon. Vice-Prime Minister. We are going to have a
case to case basis and see for each family because when you disrupt the life of a family, it is
also children going to school, going to the workplace, commuting, and all these factors
become very important in the life of everybody. So, we are going to address this.
42
Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, I think we have run out of time
already, but I will allow you your last question.
Mr X. L. Duval: Yes, Madam Speaker. We will no doubt be coming back with more
questions, and I hope the Minister will be better prepared next time.
(Interruptions)
What I want to…
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Members!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Members, no interruptions! We have already run out of time, and I have allowed
additional time for this last question. So, please don’t waste time again!
(Interruptions)
Mr X. L. Duval: God bless you, Madam Speaker. Now, I want to ask the hon.
Minister, given all the uncertainty, given this is not a fixed price contract, given also the
problems of defining properly ridership because also, Madam Speaker, there has been a lot of
experience as to ridership being overestimated, given that there is a probability - I don’t say
possibility, I say probability - that this project becomes a burden on the taxpayers in
Mauritius with little benefit except for the people who actually want to use that, and we are
not sure who and we have not been able to go to all the other questions, I would like to ask
the…
Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, please don’t be long, ask your
question!
(Interruptions)
Mr X. L. Duval: Madam Speaker, I would like to ask the hon. Minister whether, to
put light onto this whole project, he will not ask assistance from the World Bank or the
African Development Bank who have consultants and who can assist us in case we are just
going into a pitfall. So, I will ask the hon. Minister to consider – it is going to be a little bit of
additional costs – to have help from these institutions.
43
Madam Speaker: We have understood your question.
Mr Bodha: Cela a été un plaisir, Madame la présidente, de repondre à cette question
parce qu’il a parlé de R 7 millions. Le ‘C’est un plaisir’ c’était R 25 millions!
Madam Speaker, I would like to give the assurance that we want every cent to be
spent the way it has to be spent. At the same time, we have respected what has been
requested by the Prime Minister of India and the Government of India because we are
implementing the project together. We want to get the best and, if need be, we need to have
an international verifier. For every claim, we will do that. I can give this assurance to the
House, Madam Speaker. This is going to be the most important project which will change the
whole face of Mauritius for the third millenium, Madam Speaker. Thank you.
Madam Speaker: Time is over! Hon. Members, the Table has been advised that PQ
B/10 in regard to the number and rate of unemployed as at December 2016 will be replied by
the hon. Minister of Labour, Industrial Relations, Employment and Training. PQ B/11 in
regard to Stock Markets will be replied by the hon. Minister of Financial Services, Good
Governance and Institutional Reforms. PQ B/60 in regard to the covering of sidewalks and
drains at Bonnefin Road, Pailles and PQ B/62 in regard to Ms N.H., Chief Executive Officer
of Landscope (Mauritius) Ltd. will be replied by the hon. Prime Minister, time permitting. PQ
B/26 which was addressed to the Rt. hon. Minister Mentor, Minister of Defence, Minister for
Rodrigues and which would have been replied by the hon. Prime Minister, time permitting,
has been withdrawn. Hon. Rughoobur!