SOBRINHO, MR ALVARO – COMPANIES - FUNDS
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr X. L. Duval) (by Private Notice) asked the hon.
Prime Minister, Minister of Home Affairs, External Communication and National
Development Unit, Minister of Finance and Economic Development whether, in regard to Mr
Alvaro Sobrinho and his group of companies, he will –
(a) state if an inquiry has been carried out into the sources of funds thereof;
(b)  state why responsibility for Investment Banking was transferred from the
Bank of Mauritius to the Financial Services Commission;
(c) for the benefit of the House, obtain information, as to the licences and permits
issued thereto by the Board of Investment, including under the Hotel
Investment Scheme, Real Estate Scheme, Integrated Resort Scheme and
Property Development Scheme, and by other regulatory financial institutions,
if any;
(d) state the permits issued thereto under the Non-Citizens Property Restrictions
Act;
(e) state if VIP facilities have been extended thereto, and
(f) state if a Commission of Enquiry will be set up to inquire thereinto.
aaaaa
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, I thank the hon. Leader of the Opposition for
his PNQ which gives me an opportunity to shed light on some of the various aspects of the
Sobrinho case.
In fact, this PNQ is welcomed as so many perceptions and misperceptions, as against
value judgments, so many innuendoes, and so much information and disinformation have
been echoed in the media and by politicians desperate to discredit the Government.
Madam Speaker, concerning part (a) of the question, I am informed that the Financial
Intelligence Unit, the Financial Services Commission and the Bank of Mauritius have carried
out various enquiries into the sources of funds of Mr Alvaro Sobrinho and his group of
companies. It is also the duty and responsibility of Commercial Banks to conduct a due
diligence exercise on their customers before any funds are credited.
9
Concerning the FSC, the Commission processed and scrutinised the applications as
per its established procedures and practices. The applications were supported by all
necessary documents including constitutive documents, customer due diligence on promoters,
beneficial owners, shareholders and directors, prospectus, and administration agreement,
amongst others.
The scrutiny revealed that, I quote -
“In June 2011, Alvaro Sobrinho, President of the Banco Espirito Santo (BES)
de Angola, was suspected in the Portuguese investigation to 48 million
illegally transferred from Banco Nacional de Angola (BNA) to the main
national banks through the BES. Three Portuguese businessmen are also
being investigated by the Judicial Police (Policia Judiciara).”
The Commission requested the Management Company, NWT (Mauritius) Ltd, for an
enhanced due diligence to be conducted on Mr Sobrinho and requested the applicants to
provide their comments with respect to an allegation that Mr Sobrinho was the subject of an
investigation into money laundering involving transfer of USD 4.5 m. by Mr Sobrinho.
The following documents were submitted -
(a)  Summary of criminal proceedings dated 23 May 2013 carried out against
Mr Sobrinho both in Angola and Portugal, and
(b)  Notice of Clearance from the Public Prosecution Service Attorney
General’s Office of Angola dated 08 November 2011 declaring that the
State of Angola had no wish to pursue any legal action against Mr
Sobrinho.
The 9 th Criminal Division of the Lisbon Court of Appeal, on 07 July 2017, allowed
the appeal lodged by Mr Sobrinho against the seizure of his assets in Portugal, which assets
were seized on suspicion that they were the product of various financial crimes, including
misappropriations of money, embezzlement, money laundering, breach of trust etc. There
was a fresh application by the Public Prosecutor’s Office of Portugal to quash the above
decision and it was again rejected on 29 September 2016.
Based on the submissions and on being satisfied that the applications were in order,
the Commission granted the following licences -
10
(a)  Category 1 Global Business Licence and Collective Investment Scheme
Manager Licence on 28 August 2015 and an Investment Adviser
(Unrestricted) Licence on 22 March 2016 to AS African Asset Management
Ltd;
(b)  Category 1 Global Business Licence and authorisation to operate as a
Collective Investment Scheme on 28 August 2015 and an authorisation to be
converted into a Closed-End Fund on 23 March 2016 to Alvaro Sobrinho
Africa (ASA) Fund;
(c)  Category 1 Global Business Licence and authorisation to operate as a
Collective Investment Scheme on 28 August 2015 and an authorisation to be
converted into a Closed-End Fund on 23 March 2016 to PASET Fund, and
(d)  Investment Banking Licence on 25 November 2016 to Alvaro Sobrinho Africa
Ltd.
It was only in February 2017 that fresh information came to light namely, that, I quote
-
“The ongoing investigation by the Portuguese Criminal Investigation and
Penal Action Department (DCIAP) has reportedly uncovered a pattern of
unsecured loans by BESA (Banco Espirito Santo de Angola) […] and the
recipients of these loans without collaterals belonged to the Espirito Santo
Group, to companies linked to Alvaro Sobrinho [...].”
“Former DCIAP prosecutor, Orlando Figueira, was [...] arrested by PJ (Policia
Judiciara) Police on suspicion that he “received bribes up to a million euros”
to ensure lawsuits involving on high-ranking figures in Angola was archived.
According to reports, Figueira is believed to have ordered the closure of as
many as 10 cases – including that of former president of BES Angola, Alvaro
Sobrinho […].”
In view of the foregoing, the licensees have been requested not to start operations without the
prior clearance of the Chief Executive. So far none of the licensees belonging to the group of
companies of Mr Sobrinho have commenced operations.
Furthermore...
(Interruptions)
11
Madam Speaker: Hon. Shakeel Mohamed, please do not interrupt! Please proceed,
hon. Prime Minister!
The Prime Minister: Furthermore, the Prime Minister’s Office was informed by the
Board of Investment that Mr Alvaro De Oliveira Madaleno Sobrinho had previously been
involved in the following litigations/controversies -
(i)  the Portuguese authorities had investigated on Mr Alvaro De Oliveira…
Mr X. L. Duval: Madam Speaker, may I, on a point of order, stand up! We have
half an hour. Last time, the same thing happened. We had long replies and we were unable,
Madam Speaker, on a matter of national importance, to ask questions. I would ask, Madam
Speaker, to ask the hon. Prime Minister not to say things that have already been published by
the FSC because that is public knowledge firstly …
(Interruptions)
…and to limit his intervention so that the Opposition can raise this matter of extreme
importance to the country.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, let me say that since this is a
matter of national importance, I will give additional time to the Opposition so that they can
raise their points.
The Prime Minister: Well, and then the question itself is at 6 parts. So, the hon.
Leader of the Opposition must allow me to answer the question, otherwise he will be saying
all the time that we are not answering questions!
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Prime Minister, sorry!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Prime Minister, please!
(Interruptions)
I have already given my ruling!
(Interruptions)
No interruptions, please!
(Interruptions)
12
Allow me to make my point!
(Interruptions)
When I am on my feet, I have said several times that the House should be silent. Hon. Prime
Minister, you may proceed with your reply, but I will give additional time, as I have said to
the Opposition, so that they can raise their questions.
The Prime Minister: I was saying that the Prime Minister’s Office was informed by
the Board of Investment that Mr Alvaro De Oliveira Madaleno Sobrinho had previously been
involved in the following litigations/controversies -
(i)  the Portuguese authorities had investigated on Mr Alvaro for suspicion of
money laundering when he was the Chairman of Banes Spirits Santo Angola
(BESA). But Mr Alvaro De Oliveira Sobrinho was later cleared by the Court
of Appeal, and
(ii)  Mr Sobrinho was also a shareholder of Akoya Asset Management, a Swiss
wealth management company that was subjected to a judicial investigation by
the Swiss authorities which cleared Mr Alvaro Sobrinho.
(Interruptions)
World check carried out by the Board of Investment has revealed nothing adverse
against Mr Sobrinho. Following a counter verification made by the Prime Minister’s Office,
the latter was informed by the Counter Terrorism Unit, on 24 October 2016, that Mr Sobrinho
is not borne on its records.
As regards part (b) of the question, during the preparation of the Budget 2016-2017,
the Ministry of Financial Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms made a series
of proposals for inclusion in the Budget Speech, one of which was the introduction of an
Investment Banking and Corporate Advisory Licence to be issued and regulated by the
Financial Services Commission.
The Bank of Mauritius was consulted and besides providing its input, was fully
supportive of this measure. In order to avoid regulatory arbitrage between the Bank of
Mauritius and the FSC, the Central Bank proposed that an amendment be made to the
definition of ‘bank’ in the Banking Act by deleting ‘Investment Banking Business’ from the
activities of commercial banks licenced by the Central Bank.
13
Consequently, the Bank of Mauritius and the Ministry of Financial Services, Good
Governance and Institutional Reforms proposed draft legislative amendments to the Banking
Act and the Financial Services Act, respectively, which were then forwarded to the State Law
Office for appropriate vetting and for inclusion in the Finance (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Bill 2016.
Under the new section 79A of the Financial Services Act 2007, an entity holding an
Investment Banking Licence may conduct the following activities -
•  Investment Dealer (Full Service Dealer including underwriting);
•  Investment Adviser;
•  Investment Adviser (Corporate Finance Advisory);
•  Asset Management, and
•  Distribution of Financial Services.
The following legal provisions already existed in the Financial Services Act,
Securities Act and appropriate FSC Rules and therefore the activities falling under the
investment banking and corporate advisory licence were by and large already covered by
different licences which the FSC was already empowered to issue, namely -
•  “investment dealer” means the holder of a licence issued under section 29 of
the Securities Act and as categorised under Rule 4 of the Securities
(Licensing) Rules.
•  “investment adviser (unrestricted)” means the holder of a licence issued under
section 30 of the Securities Act and as categorised under Rule 5 of the
Securities (Licensing) Rules;
•  “investment adviser (corporate finance advisory)” means the holder of a
licence issued under section 30 of the Securities Act and as categorised under
Rule 5 of the Securities (Licensing) Rules;
•  “asset management” means the holder of a licence issued under section 14 of
the Financial Services Act, and
•  “distribution of financial services/products” means the holder of a licence
issued under section 14 of the Financial Services Act to carry out this activity;
It is to be noted that Rule 6(2) of the Financial Services (Investment Banking) Rules
2016, specifically provides that, and I quote -
14
‘No person holding an Investment Banking Licence shall conduct Banking Business
as defined in the Banking Act unless that person holds a banking licence issued under
the Banking Act’.
Banking business is defined as per section 2 of the Banking Act 2004. A holder of an
Investment Banking Licence ….
Madam Speaker: Hon. Prime Minister, can I just interrupt you to tell you not to go
into too much detail because we are already nearing half an hour for the PNQ and that I will
allow additional time, but I will not allow half an hour additional time to the Opposition.
The Prime Minister: Therefore, a holder of an investment banking licence cannot
accept deposits and carry out banking business such as issuing of cheques.
As regards part (c) of the question, I am informed that Mr Sobrinho has been issued
with an occupation permit, under section 9A of the Immigration Act, as investor with “Alvaro
Sobrinho African Asset Management Ltd” for a period of 3 years, starting 06 October 2015 to
06 October 2018.
With regard to his investments in the property schemes, Mr and Mrs Sobrinho have
acquired a residential property under the Real Estate Scheme (RES) from Hydre Properties
Ltd, a development within Royal Park Balaclava. The said property was acquired on 16
November 2016 for an amount of R52 m.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Can I ask the Opposition not to interrupt the hon. Prime Minister,
please! We are losing time if we do. Allow him to give his reply!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Bhagwan, please!
(Interruptions)
The Prime Minister: Requin pas fer tapaz!
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Be patient!
(Interruptions)
Just be patient!
15
(Interruptions)
Hon. Members, if we interrupt, interruptions can only come…
(Interruptions)
Hon. Members!
(Interruptions)
Order, I said!
(Interruptions)
Order!
(Interruptions)
Order, please! Now, we are already half an hour. Usually, we allow half an hour for PNQ.
Now, the reply has not been completed yet and if you continue to interrupt, we will have to
give additional time. How much time can we take on the PNQ! Hon. Prime Minister, please
proceed! I would appeal to the Opposition Members to be calm, not to interrupt, they will
have time to ask questions. Please, proceed!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Rutnah, no comments!
(Interruptions)
The Prime Minister: Mo pas ene rekin mwa selmen!
So, the said property was acquired on 16 November 2016 for an amount of Rs52 m.
No other applications from Mr Sobrinho for acquisition of property under the Hotel
Investment Scheme, Real Estate Scheme, Integrated Resort Scheme and Property
Development Scheme have been received.
As regards licences from the Financial Services Commission, I have already provided
the information in my reply to part (a) of the question.
Madam Speaker, as regards part (d) of the question, I am informed that the Board of
Investment had on 28 September 2016 recommended an application in respect of Vango
Properties Ltd, a non-citizen, under section 3(3)(c)(iv) of the Non-Citizens (Property
Restriction) Act, for the acquisition of two plots of freehold land being Lot No. B450 and Lot
16
No. B451 of an extent of 1,916 m 2 and 1,922 m 2 respectively at Ebène at a price of USD
1,240,000 (approx. Rs43,586,000).
Vango Properties Ltd is a private company limited by shares and incorporated on 20
June 2016 and is the real estate arm of the Alvaro Sobrinho Africa Group (ASA Group). The
sole shareholder of Vango Properties Ltd is Mr Alvaro De Oliveira Madaleno Sobrinho, who
is holder of a Portuguese passport delivered by the Portuguese Republic on 01 June 2015.
In Mauritius, Mr Alvaro De Oliveira Madaleno Sobrinho is holder of an Occupation
Permit, delivered by the Passport Immigration Office on 08 October 2015 and valid until
08 October 2018.
According to the promoter, the purpose of the acquisition of the property is to develop
a Science Technology and Innovation (STI) Park and will cater for the expansion of the
current asset management activities of the Alvaro Sobrinho Africa Group (ASA Group) in
Mauritius through the construction of a 7-storey building (ASA Tower) at Ebène.
Madam Speaker, in regard to part (e) of the question, Mr Sobrinho was granted access
to the Arrival and Departure VIP Lounges at Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam International
Airport, following requests made by the Secretary to the President, on 31 occasions during
the period 01 October 2015 to 21 February 2017. Mr Sobrinho was accompanied by his
family members or close collaborators on 21 occasions. I wish to point out that it has so far
been the practice to extend such facilities to special guests of some personalities.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order!
(Interruptions)
Order!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Bhagwan!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Bhagwan, please!
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, in regard to part (f) of the question, given that
there are already various investigations being carried out by the Financial Services
Commission and other bodies, including the CCID on alleged false and misleading
17
statements made to the FSC in connection with a licence application by one of the companies
of the Group, and also given the fact that local Commercial Banks are satisfied with the
sources of funds, I consider that the setting up of a Commission of Enquiry is not justified.
Madam Speaker, let me assure the hon. Leader of Opposition and the House that no
stone is being left unturned or shall be left unturned to establish the facts and the truth in the
Alvaro Sobrinho case.
And this is why and how, for example, the contents of an article which appeared in
the ‘L’Express’ newspaper of yesterday, Monday 03 April 2017, on yet another case of
alleged financial malpractices are also being investigated by the Ministry of Financial
Services, Good Governance and Institutional Reforms.
Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Leader of the Opposition!
Mr X. L. Duval: Madam Speaker, to start I will say that I am aware that I am not
allowed to raise any matter concerning Her Excellency the President and I shall not do so. I
will also draw your attention, Madam Speaker, that we are nearly 30 minutes into the PNQ.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, I have already said that I will give
additional time to this. I don’t think there is any need for you to come on that matter again. I
know that the hon. Prime Minister has already taken half an hour to reply. I will give equal
time to the Opposition to reply. You don’t have to come back on this issue.
Mr X. L. Duval: We are grateful. Madam Speaker, we are dealing with Mr Alvaro
Sobrinho. We suspected and said to be involved in international money laundering, fraud on a
giant scale, running down a bank which eventually cost the Portuguese taxpayers 5 billion
Euros, involved in money laundering in Portugal through the investment in property and
involved in hiding his money….
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker, you are not going to have 30 minutes…
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order!
(Interruptions)
Order, please! Hon. Leader of the Opposition, please, sit down! Please, sit down! I’ll give a
ruling.
18
(Interruptions)
Order, please!
(Interruptions)
Order! I have said that usually I give the leeway, especially to the Leader of the Opposition.
Hon. Members must have observed that on a PNQ, I give the leeway to the hon. Leader of the
Opposition to explain so that his question can become more intelligible. I give you that
leeway, hon. Leader of the Opposition, but please, don’t make an abuse of it!
Mr X. L. Duval: I am not abusing of it, Madam Speaker, and I’ll explain why
because the hon. Prime Minister has said everything, except what he ought to have said, that
is, under section 18 and section 20 of the Financial Services Act and the hon. Prime Minister
should be aware of that. It is not a question of being convicted, it is only a question of
reputation. You have to be a fit and proper person. It says and I can read it, Madam Speaker:
‘in considering whether a person is fit and proper’. And this is why I am talking about
reputation. It says here you will have regard to the reputation, character, financial integrity,
banks going bankrupt and reliability, Madam Speaker. This is why I have taken the time and
this why I am asking the hon. Prime Minister: why is it that despite this person has such a
terrible reputation of being an international crook - and I have taken the trouble of
downloading from the Internet, from Google, it is free of charge; I download from Google
files post- 2014, 2015, 2016. I have taken the trouble and I am tabling this. I am asking the
hon. Prime Minister why is it that the usual due diligence, the usual safeguards which protect
our Financial Services Centre, which protect the 20,000 people who have worked there, have
been bypassed and overlooked?
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, the Authorities, I am informed, have not
bypassed any procedure. According to the law and according to their own practical
guidelines, they have entertained these applications, they have been in touch with institutions
in other countries to have a world-check. I have just answered and I am not going to repeat
everything. Of course, as and when, at that time, information was available, the information
has been looked into and nothing adverse has been found against this gentleman.
(Interruptions)
I have also replied that whenever there has been other information - leave aside whether it is
from institutions in those countries -, even when there is information that has been circulated
in terms of allegations, this is also being investigated.
19
Therefore, as I say, at the time when the permits were being given, there was nothing
adverse against him, and we will continue. As I have said, the FSC has taken the decision to
ask the licensees not to start operation pending, of course, the other investigations that are
being carried out. In fact, the FSC is also awaiting certain response from other institutions.
Mr X. L. Duval: Madame Speaker, après la mort la tisane. Here we are, we have this
person…
(Interruptions)
… of very bad reputation who has overridden all the safeguards that exist in this country!
Why we are asking for a Commission of Enquiry is because we want to know, the people of
Mauritius want to know who has interfered with the FSC, who has put pressure on the Board
of Investment to get these permits delivered to these people illico presto. That is the reason
why we want an enquiry.
The Prime Minister: The Leader of the Opposition is putting a question as if - if he
knows, he should tell us!
(Interruptions)
Who has interfered?
(Interruptions)
There is no information of any interference from any politician so far!
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Thierry Henry, please!
The Prime Minister: There is no information of any interference whatsoever from
any politician! Unless, because he is having new friends now…
(Interruptions)
…probably he would be having information. Then, he should tell us!
(Interruptions)
Mr X. L. Duval: … in a moment, Madam Speaker. The Deputy Prime Minister made
a statement a few days ago to say that he had looked into the eyes of Mr Sobrinho…
(Interruptions)
20
… and he had completely whitewashed him, he has no money laundering, he has inherited
money from several generations of people whilst, Madam Speaker, there is an ongoing
enquiry just now - the Prime Minister has just said - on this very person! My question is: is it
not obvious - there, it is obvious - who is putting pressure on the FSC and on the FIU? It is
quite obvious, public knowledge, that whitewashing has already been done by the
Government!
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, the hon. Leader of the Opposition is saying
‘looking into the eyes’. How many times he has been looking into the eyes of so many
people? I don’t know what the Deputy Prime Minister has stated after having met Mr
Alvaro. But, even whatever he has stated, he is fully entitled to his own opinion! That is his
business! But…
(Interruptions)
… that is not…
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Please! Order!
(Interruptions)
Order, please!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Uteem! Please!
(Interruptions)
If there is no order, we won’t be able to conduct the business of the House! I draw Members’
attention once more to this. We will be running out of time and they won’t have time to ask
their questions!
(Interruptions)
The Prime Minister: No, I have not finished! Wait! Now, whoever is meeting with
Mr Alvaro, even be it a politician, a Minister from Government side, that has no effect on the
institutions. That has nothing to do. The allegation that the hon. Leader of the Opposition is
trying to make is as if this has put pressure on institutions. Not at all! I can reassure the public
that all the inquiries are being looked into, they are going to be conducted and, of course, the
outcome will tell us and will dictate what action the institutions will take.
21
Mr X. L. Duval: Madam Speaker, the hon. Prime Minister défend l’indéfendable.
Yesterday only, hon. Collendavelloo, at the end of his bureau politique said: “I am not going
to make any comment on the Sumputh issue, it will affect the investigation.” The Sumputh
issue is going to affect the investigation, but…
Madam Speaker: No, hon. Leader of the Opposition!
(Interruptions)
Mr X. L. Duval: But, on something like this, where is….
Madam Speaker: No, hon. Leader of the Opposition, please….
(Interruptions)
Please!
(Interruptions)
Order, please!
(Interruptions)
Order!
(Interruptions)
Order! Hon. Rutnah, please! I am on my feet!
(Interruptions)
Now, hon. Leader of the Opposition, you have…
(Interruptions)
Hon. Leader of the Opposition, please, I am addressing myself to you! You have asked your
question. You should ask supplementary questions based on your main question and you
should not drag other issues in that question, please!
(Interruptions)
Mr X. L. Duval: Madam Speaker, I don’t know what is wrong with you! Here, I have
to illustrate the fact that …
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order, please!
22
Mr X. L. Duval:… he is adopting two measures…
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Deputy Prime Minister, please!
Mr X. L. Duval: One measure is for…
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Deputy Prime Minister, please!
Mr X. L. Duval: … lovely Ms Sumputh, the other measure is for lovely Mr Alvaro
Sobrinho! Mr Alvaro Sobrinho, billions of rupees have gone missing, have been stolen, have
been money laundered! One Deputy Prime Minister comes after an hour and says he is clean,
he has got nothing! He can invest billions of rupees even in this country!
Madam Speaker: Yes, ask your question!
Mr X. L. Duval: Let me ask a question.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Ask your question!
Mr X. L. Duval: Madam Speaker, if you are going to interrupt, you should have
interrupted him when he went on for 30 minutes!
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: No, hon. Leader of the Opposition…
(Interruptions)
Please!
(Interruptions)
No! I will not allow this!
(Interruptions)
Please, sit down!
(Interruptions)
Please, sit down!
(Interruptions)
23
I am on my feet!
(Interruptions)
I am on my feet!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Leader of the Opposition…
(Interruptions)
Order, please!
(Interruptions)
Order!
(Interruptions)
Order! Hon. Mrs Perraud…
(Interruptions)
Hon. Soodhun! Order, I have said!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Jhugroo! Hon. Jhugroo, have you seen that I am on my feet?
(Interruptions)
Hon. Mrs Perraud, please! Calm down!
(Interruptions)
I know that you are very passionate about these questions, but hon. Leader of the Opposition,
I will not allow you to question my prerogatives! I have said several times that I will give you
additional time. Now, you are running out of your additional time if you come up with things
which are not related to your main question. I will ask you to proceed with your question!
Mr X. L. Duval: In almost every question, you are interrupting me. That also,
Madam Speaker, is going to be clear. Madam Speaker…
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: No interruptions…
(Interruptions)
24
Mr X. L. Duval: I am going to ask this question…
(Interruptions)
… because at the same meeting…
Madam Speaker: Would there be interruptions again?
(Interruptions)
Mr X. L. Duval: At the same declaration to the press, the Deputy Prime Minister,
hon. Collendavelloo, has welcomed billions of rupees - billions of rupees s’il vous plait - of
investment in the energy sector. Billions of rupees have probably been laundered elsewhere.
Also, Madam Speaker, I am surprised that the hon. Prime Minister has not mentioned huge
investments being made by the Alvaro Sobrinho Group in Royal Park in the north of
Mauritius! No!
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order, please!
(Interruptions)
Order, hon. Rutnah!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Thierry Henry, please! I have said time and again and I will repeat myself. I have given
only half an hour additional time for questions. Members are losing the time of the House and
they are losing their opportunity to ask questions!
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, this is my information. Of course, if the hon.
Leader of the Opposition has more than what I have replied, then he should say. Let me
repeat, Madam Speaker.
(Interruptions)
It is good for me to repeat. My information is that Mr and Mrs Sobrinho have acquired one
residential property.
(Interruptions)
A residential property!
(Interruptions)
25
Madam Speaker: Now, you continue to interrupt?
(Interruptions)
I have said…
(Interruptions)
Hon. Ms Sewocksingh, please, you have to behave as well!
(Interruptions)
The Prime Minister: And then that was under the Real Estate Scheme from Hydre
Properties Limited which is, of course, a development within the Royal Park, Balaclava.
Now, the said property was acquired on 16 November 2016 for an amount of Rs52 m. And I
can say, my office has confirmed to me that no other applications from Mr Sobrinho for
acquisition of a property under any other schemes have been received at the Prime Minister’s
Office.
Mr X. L. Duval: Madam Speaker, the Prime Minister should be aware that the same
Mr Sobrinho is purchasing 131 villas and apartments at Royal Park. It is common knowledge
under the VEFA. It is common knowledge! This investment is going to be above Rs1 billion.
I can tell you also which senior Member of Government accompanied Mr Sobrinho.
(Interruptions)
I can tell you also!
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order, please! We won’t be able to finish the business of the
House like this. Hon. Leader of the Opposition, if you say...
(Interruptions)
Hon. Soodhun, please! Hon. Leader of the Opposition, if you have got evidence, you lay it on
the Table of the Assembly and you take your responsibility for this, but please, be careful,
you should not impute motives and make allegations.
Mr X. L. Duval: Madam Speaker, the 131 villas, it is common knowledge. I would
ask the hon. Prime Minister to be very careful not to mislead the House because everything
will come out in the end. You may have been misled. I accept that, but you should be careful.
The precise information is that there is a huge investment going on by this group to Royal
26
Park, adding on to the huge investment that hon. Collendavelloo has mentioned in the energy
sector; add on to the open door policy, VIP treatment that he is receiving; adds only to the
fact that this gentleman has seen Mauritius as a soft target, and has used the subterfuge of a
charity to enter into the highest echelons of the State to launder his money and ruin the
reputation of Mauritius, which is already being done at the moment as we speak.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, ask your question! Is that your
question?
Mr X. L. Duval: This is my question.
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, for that matter, any investor who intends to
either invest in a project or acquire property - and, in fact, acquiring so many - the normal
procedure will have to apply, that is, they will have to either apply to the Board of Investment
and ultimately if there is anything to do with Non-Citizens (Property Restriction) Act, they
will need to get the authorisation of the Prime Minister’s Office. This is what I can say
generally.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Ameer Meea, your comment is unwarranted! Please!
The Prime Minister: I am informed that there is no such investment at the moment.
(Interruptions)
There is no such investment. Well, Madam Speaker, I can only confirm what...
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Now, I am on my feet again just to tell you, hon. Leader of the
Opposition, that you are not allowed crosstalking. You ask your question officially. The
question is being answered officially, but no comment and no crosstalking.
Mr X. L. Duval: I think your ears are playing games with you. I did not say anything
at all. Madam Speaker, I would now like to ask the hon. Prime Minister whether he is aware
of G.N. 15. G.N. 15 is a very weird piece of Regulation issued by Financial Services
Commission. G.N. 15 says that from now on all investments into any financial services
company in Mauritius whoever, whatever, money launderer, crook, whatever, no longer
requires FSC approval only if it is in a non-voting share. So, you can buy the whole of the
financial services sector in Mauritius, as long as you do not vote, you do not require at all any
27
permission from anyone. I am going to ask the hon. Prime Minister whether this is at all
related to the Alvaro Sobrinho affair and this is G.N. 15.
The Prime Minister: Well, I am not aware of the contents.
(Interruptions)
Yes, I will look into it, when was it gazetted, who made it and what is the purport of it also.
We should know and then I will come back to the House with regard to this law.
Mr X. L. Duval: Madam Speaker, the final responsibility for the Budget for the
Finance Act comes to him. This decision - and I think he mentioned it at the end of his
speech just now - to transfer the investment banking responsibility from the Bank of
Mauritius to Financial Services Commission has proved to be a disaster. Both licences that
have been given appeared to have been given to international crooks. Therefore, I would ask
the hon. Prime Minister another reason why we need a full-fledged enquiry into the FSC.
(Interruptions)
The Prime Minister: The Leader of the Opposition is saying anything. I just replied.
The way he is saying it is that the disaster is behind him.
(Interruptions)
The former Minister of Financial Services came with proposals to allow the FSC, in order to
expand the number of instruments and activities and to reinforce the financial sector...
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhadain!
The Prime Minister: And that proposal, in fact, came from the Minister himself. The
former Minister! Of course, as Minister of Finance, what I did? Because it was under the
purview of the Bank of Mauritius, the Bank of Mauritius was consulted and I have replied
that the Bank of Mauritius was agreeable to this. In fact, the Bank of Mauritius has issued a
communiqué to say that this was the proposal to which they had agreed and that the
investment banking licence would be more appropriate to be licensed by the FSC. I have said
that.
Now, the hon. Leader of the Opposition, the way he is asking the question is as if I
was the one behind all this, amending the law. Of course, as Minister of Finance, I have to
present the Budget. Of course, I have to include whatever proposals are made by different
28
Ministers. It did not come out of my own head; it came out because I consulted all my
Ministers at that time and whatever proposals...
(Interruptions)
The Prime Minister: …are made…
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order!
The Prime Minister: … and after discussing ...
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhugroo!
The Prime Minister: ... with the stakeholders, then, of course, it is my responsibility.
I am not shying away from my responsibility as Minister of Finance. I included it in the
Budget. This is how it happened.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Bérenger, do you have any question?
(Interruptions)
Hon. Soodhun, please!
(Interruptions)
Order! Order!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Soodhun!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Soodhun, I am calling you several times!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Bhadain, please! Hon. Soodhun!
(Interruptions)
29
Hon. Soodhun, please, don’t make provocative remarks! I am saying that we are running out
of time. Please, don’t make provocative remarks! I have said several times that making
remarks from a sitting position is not allowed.
Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Bérenger!
Mr Bérenger: Madam Speaker, the Prime Minister has quoted at length from a
communiqué dated 02 March from the FSC. At length! Is he aware that in that communiqué,
the FSC stated that as at the 02 March -
“So far none of the licensees have commenced business operations.”
Is that true when compared to all the information we have been provided with today? And
secondly, it has been requested not to start operations without the prior clearance of the Chief
Executive. What they said was it exact in facts? Since then, has there been a change? Has
the FSC allowed the entities concerned to operate?
The Prime Minister: It was the FSC who informed those companies not to start
operating their business. It is still the case today. So, whenever there is going to be any other
information, that will be looked at by the FSC, they will act in consequence of those
investigations and the outcome of those enquiries.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Ramful!
Mr Ramful: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The hon. Prime Minister just said that he
will leave no stone unturned as regards the various enquiries that are being conducted by the
authorities. Now, will the hon. Prime Minister be prepared to request two persons: the Deputy
Prime Minister, who seems to be aware of the source of funds of Mr Alvaro, as well as the
President of the Republic to waive her immunity and collaborate with the investigations that
are being carried out?
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, these are mere allegations again. This is why
I started my answer to say that they are just saying anything. The Deputy Prime Minister has
got nothing to do with this matter.
(Interruptions)
He has got nothing to do!
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan, please!
30
(Interruptions)
Hon. Bhagwan, please!
(Interruptions)
The Prime Minister: And with regard to…
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Rutnah!
The Prime Minister: And with regard to the President of the Republic….
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Rutnah!
The Prime Minister: I think it is a shame to bring her name down at this level to this
issue.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan!
Mr Bhagwan: In fact, we have heard during the past weeks the various comments
made by the hon. Deputy Prime Minister in the Press and also the proximité of the officials of
the Muvman Liberater with Mr Sobrinho. Has the hon. Prime Minister enquired as to why Mr
Sobrinho has been protected, given 31 times VIP treatment instead of a VDP treatment
because he was one of the principaux bailleurs de fonds of the Muvman Liberater and the
MSM?
(Interruptions)
The Prime Minister: Well, again, these are cheap allegations, Madam Speaker.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Jhuboo!
(Interruptions)
Order, please!
31
(Interruptions)
Order! Order, please!
(Interruptions)
Order, please! Yes, hon. Jhuboo!
Mr Jhuboo: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Well, the Swiss authorities are actually
investigating on Mr Alvaro Sobrinho case. Can we know from the hon. Prime Minister
whether there has been a formal request of mutual assistance between the Swiss authorities
and the Financial Services Commission?
The Prime Minister: As I have said, in the light of what we have been informed,
there has been a request to furnish us with information from the Swiss authorities.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Uteem!
Mr Uteem: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The hon. Prime Minister mentioned there
are various Police enquiries. One of the Police enquiries is to be conducted as to whether
names have allegedly been included improperly in application file with the FSC for the
permits to be issued, that is, the communiqué of the FSC. So, may I know from the hon.
Prime Minister whether he has enquired with the FSC why is it that when this information
was already public, when the people names had already gone public to say they did not
authorise their names to be used and when it is a criminal offence punishable by five years’
imprisonment, the FSC waited for Mr Alvaro Sobrinho to leave Mauritius to refer the matter
to the Police for enquiry, when this is an arrestable offence?
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, as soon as the FSC gathered information
about this issue, in fact, the FSC made a declaration to the Police. The Police is enquiring.
So, we will allow the Police to conclude these enquiries and the matter will be referred to the
DPP should there be any action to be taken.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Mrs Selvon!
Mrs Selvon: Merci, Madame la présidente. Étant donné que l’Article 3(5) du Good
Governance and Integrity Act 2015 stipule –
“(…)the onus shall lie on the respondent to establish, on a balance of
probabilities, that any property is not unexplained wealth.”
32
Est-ce que l’honorable Premier ministre pense que c’est A. S. qui doit prouver qu’il n’y a pas
d’enquête sur lui pour unexplained of hundreds millions of dollars?
The Prime Minister: well, Madam Speaker, the hon. Member is now talking about
unexplained wealth, but somebody can take a case before the appropriate institution and the
institution will enquire on that issue.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Baloomoody and then last question for the hon. Leader of
the Opposition!
Mr Baloomoody: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The hon. Prime Minister just
mentioned that Mr Alvaro travelled through the VIP lounge 21 times. May I know whether
all these were approved by the Prime Minister’s Office, that he transits in the VIP lounge 21
times?
The Prime Minister: Not 21 times, more than 21, I said!
(Interruptions)
On 31 occasions!
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Thierry Henry!
(Interruptions)
Order, please!
(Interruptions)
Order, hon. Baloomoody! Order!
(Interruptions)
Order! Yes!
The Prime Minister: What I said maybe that confused the Opposition! On 21
occasions, he was accompanied by his family members and close collaborators. And the 31
times, yes these were approved by the Office of the Prime Minister.
Madam Speaker: Yes. Last question, hon. Leader of the Opposition!
Mr X. L. Duval: Madam Speaker, it is clear, in fact, there is going to be a big cover-
up. I will tell you why. It is because here the FSC clairement ine fané, has really not done its
work because sections 18 and 20 of the Financial Services Act impose conditions on the issue
33
of a licence. Given that concerning the Financial Services Commission, the Chairman is the
Prime Minister’s own Financial Secretary, I am going to ask the hon. Prime Minister that it is
not adequate, it is not acceptable that the FSC enquires on the FSC. It is not acceptable
because it is FSC here mainly which has gone wrong, and BOI also. That is why, Madam
Speaker, we, in Opposition, want an independent enquiry, not the same people enquiring on
themselves, and we want to know exactly who and who has put pressure and menaces against
these institutions for them to deliver these permits in double quick time?
The Prime Minister: Madam Speaker, the FSC is not enquiring on FSC. I can
assure the House that no one has interfered, put pressure or been involved in the process of
granting the licences to Mr Alvaro. FSC has done its job in total independence. In fact, let me
point out, the hon. Leader of the Opposition should know for having been a former Finance
Minister, that the Board of FSC does not deal with applications for licences. There is a
technical committee that looks into that.
(Interruptions)
Those applications do not come to the level of the Board. So, he should not say that it
is Financial Secretary who, in one way or the other, is involved in this matter.
Madam Speaker: Time is over!
(Interruptions)
Order, please!
(Interruptions)
Order!
(Interruptions)
Order, please!
(Interruptions)
Can I ask hon. Members of both sides of the House not to continue with this discussion! It is
over. I have said “Time is over!” Hon. Members the Table has been advised that PQ No.
B/93 in regard to former Chief Executive Officer of the Information and Communication
Technologies Authority will be replied by the hon. Minister of Technology, Communication
and Innovation. PQ No. B/138 in regard to the Independent Police Complaints Commission
34
will be replied by the hon. Prime Minister, time permitting. PQ No. B/101 has been
withdrawn. Hon. Bhagwan!