POVERTY ERADICATION
qqqqq
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr X. L. Duval) (by Private Notice) asked the hon.
Minister of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment whether, in regard to the
eradication of poverty in mainland Mauritius, he will -
(a) for the benefit of the House, obtain from the -
(i) National Corporate Social Responsibility Foundation, information as to
the amount of Corporate Social Responsibility money expected to be
collected for the year 2017;
(ii) National Empowerment Foundation, information as to the number and
type of houses constructed since 01 January 2016 to date;
(b) state whether the Marshall Plan for Poverty Alleviation is being applied;
(c) state the number of families -
(i) on monthly subsistence allowance;
(ii) who have failed the Social Register of Mauritius test, and
(d) state why has the distribution of school materials been abandoned.
aaaaa
Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Madam Speaker, the eradication of poverty remains one of
the top priorities of this Government.
It is relevant for me to refer the hon. Leader of the Opposition to the reply to the
Private Notice Question made by the then Minister of Social Integration and Economic
Empowerment to the then hon. Leader of the Opposition on 05 August 2016.
Allow me to quote from this pertinent reply which lay the foundation for the
definition of poverty in the Mauritian context, and I quote –
“The monthly household threshold of Rs6,200 which was determined in 2012, is no
longer adequate and has already served its purpose. In our bid to find a fairer and
more equitable threshold, we have reviewed it taking into consideration international
prevailing methodologies for the determination of an appropriate poverty threshold
for Mauritius including Rodrigues. As per international poverty line of USD 1.25 a
day per person, it would have been lesser than what we are providing. At that level,
the proportion of households as per Statistics Mauritius (SM), in absolute poverty, is
less than 1000.
10
However, we have calculated the new poverty threshold taking into
consideration all incomes derived by the poor households which stands at Rs2,720 per
adult per month. This is 40 % higher than the World Bank threshold of US Dollar
3.10 Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) equivalent to Rs1,938 per person per month for
developing countries. For obvious reasons, children under the age of 16 have been
considered half of that amount.”
Mr X. L. Duval: Madam Speaker, on a point of order. The question is nothing at all
like what the hon. Minister is answering. Has he got the wrong question?
Madam Speaker: Yes, I agree on that point. I will give the hon. Minister some
leeway, some few minutes to make an introduction before he replies to the main question.
But, hon. Minister, you should not be lengthy in the introduction to your reply.
Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have finished anyway. The
hon. Leader of the Opposition who was himself from 2010 to 2011 Minister of Social
Integration and Economic Empowerment must inevitably be aware of the difficulties and
obstacles faced by our fellow citizens who are living in the throes of poverty and who deserve
our due care and attention especially from a non-stop caring Government.
I also trust that the hon. Leader of the Opposition who had been an active Member of
this Government is fully aware of the efforts made at various levels to eradicate poverty in
the Republic of Mauritius. I also trust that he is satisfied with his own contributions as the
then Minister of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment to eradicate if not to
alleviate poverty.
In regard to part (a) (i) of the question, I wish to inform the House that in the Budget
Speech 2016-2017, it was announced that a National CSR Foundation would be set up and
would be managed jointly by the public and private sector.
Businesses would be required to contribute at least 50% of their CSR funds to that
Foundation in 2017 and at least 75% in 2018.
The remaining balance would be used by the businesses to implement their CSR
programme in accordance with their existing framework.
NGOs would thus continue to benefit from contributions from the private sector.
Any unspent balance from the 50% would be channelled to the Foundation. 
11
The National CSR Foundation was set up and registered as a Foundation with the
Registrar of Foundations under the Foundations Act 2012 on 30 December 2016. The
Foundation is governed by a Charter which was finalised on 29 December 2016.
(Interruptions)
Mr X. L. Duval: Madam Speaker, on a point of order. We are 10 minutes into the
question and the hon. Minister has not yet answered anything.
Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, allow me just to tell you that he is
given leeway to make introduction to his reply. Now, he has already mentioned that he is on
(a)(i). So, I will give him some leeway, if I find that he exceeds the time which should be
allocated, automatically I will give you additional time for questions. I will try to see how it
goes on.
Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Madam Speaker, the House would recall that in the Budget
Speech 2016-2017, it was stated that the six priority areas of intervention would be as follows
–
• Poverty Alleviation - targeting families in the Social Register of Mauritius
(SRM);
• Educational Support - targeting families in the SRM;
• Social Housing – targeting families in the SRM;
• Supporting persons with severed disabilities;
Madam Speaker: I am sorry, hon. Minister! Can I ask you whether you are on (a) (i),
because you just mentioned (a) (i)? Are you on (a) (i)? Which part of the question?
(Interruptions)
Mr Wong Yen Cheong: I am still on (a)(i), Madam Speaker.
Madam Speaker: Okay!
Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Thank you.
• Dealing with health problems resulting from substance abuse and poor
sanitation, and
• Family protection, that is, protection to victims of domestic violence.
12
Following representations received from various quarters, it has been decided, after
consultation with the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development, that the priority areas
of intervention should be enlarged to include the following –
• Leisure and sports;
• Environment and sustainable development;
• Peace and nation-building, and
• Road Safety and Security.
These proposed areas of intervention have been included in the Charter.
The National CSR Foundation will provide support in all ten priority areas to eligible
families under the Social Register of Mauritius, as well as individuals and families considered
or recognised as vulnerable groups.
One of the priorities of the Foundation has been the preparation of the new detailed
guidelines so as to enable the Foundation to provide support to NGOs …
Madam Speaker: Hon. Minister, please!
(Interruptions)
I am sorry! I think you are going too much into the details. Could you please restrict
yourself to coming to the contents of the question, please!
Mr Wong Yen Cheong: No disbursements have been made from the CSR
Foundation so far being given that the new detailed guidelines were not yet ready.
However, the guidelines have now been finalised and the Foundation would issue a
Communiqué to invite NGOs to call for proposals.
The National CSR Foundation expects to disburse funds to eligible NGOs within the
approved priority areas of intervention before the end of the current financial year.
Madam Speaker, I am informed that as at February 2017 the amount collected by the
MRA for the period January to February 2017 stood at Rs13,399,674 and has been
transferred to the account of the National CSR Foundation by the Accountant General on 13
March 2017.
The expected amount to be transferred to the National CSR Foundation for the year
2017 is around Rs407 m.
13
In regard to part (a) (ii) of the question, I am informed that since 2015 a policy
decision has been taken to phase out the construction of Concrete Cum Corrugated Iron Sheet
(CCIS) Housing Scheme and to entrust the NHDC to allocate 10% of the number of concrete
houses constructed by the NHDC for those under the SRM.
I am informed that NHDC is now constructing a total of 1,200 houses, which means
that 120 of these concrete houses would be allocated to the beneficiaries under the SRM.
Furthermore, a new policy for the construction of fully concrete housing unit was
initiated in March 2016.
Accordingly, a survey had to be carried out in all districts to convert CCIS
applications into Fully Concrete Housing unit.
A tender exercise was launched in May 2016 for conventional housing unit, but the
price quoted was well above the budgeted provision.
A second tender exercise was carried out in October 2016 for the construction of 118
pre-cast housing units. No bid was received.
A third tender exercise was launched in October 2016. Eleven bids were received.
Letters of award are being issued to the successful bidders for six districts for a total of 61
housing units. Bids for the three other districts could not be accepted for non-compliance.
Another tender exercise will be launched for the three remaining districts before the
end of this month.
In regard to part (b) of the question, the Marshall Plan Against Poverty contains a
series of actionable programmes to be implemented over the short, medium and long-term by
several Ministries including, amongst others, Education, Housing, Labour, Environment,
Social Security, Gender, Youth and Sports, Health.
As the House is aware, 15 of these programmes have already been initiated in the
Budget 2016/2017 for those eligible under the SRM. Other measures of the Marshall Plan
are being considered for implementation during the course of the next Budget.
Madam Speaker, in regard to part (c) (i) of the question, as the House is aware a new
Poverty threshold was introduced in the Budget Speech 2016/2017. The eligibility per adult
per month is Rs2,720 while, depending on the family size, the maximum threshold for a
household is Rs9,520 per month.
14
Currently, 8,214 eligible families under the Social Register Mauritius benefit from the
monthly subsistence allowance. For the month of April 2017, a total amount of
Rs15,270,077 has been disbursed.
In regard to part (c) (ii) of the question, I am informed that following the registration
exercise carried out last year during the months of August to September 2016, 14,462
families were found not eligible under the Social Register Mauritius. The main reasons being
the assessed income which is based on the living conditions of the families were higher than
the new poverty threshold and also the total declared income and the verified income, which
includes any social benefits paid to the applicant, exceed the poverty threshold.
Madam Speaker, I believe that the greatest care and caution need to be exercised so
that the middle class is not itself impoverished, as the middle class caters for the expenses of
its own, while social aid uplifts and empowers the poor. We so need to learn from the
examples of other countries wherein social aid has created social imbalances and increased
instead of decreasing poverty.
Madam Speaker, in regard to part (d) of the question, I wish to reassure the House that
the scheme has not been abandoned and has been modified into a Cash Grant Scheme in
order to empower the families concerned and give them flexibility in their choice and trust in
their sense of responsibilities.
Thus, a cash grant for the purchase of school materials has been provided to eligible
households under the new Social Register of Mauritius whose children are attending preprimary,
primary, pre-vocational and secondary schools for the academic year 2017.
Beneficiaries have been provided with a cash grant of Rs1,500 for children in pre-primary
and primary schools, and Rs2,000 for those in pre-vocational and secondary schools.
Following a request made by my Ministry in December last, the Ministry of Finance
and Economic Development agreed that the cash grant be also extended to beneficiaries who
were eligible under the previous Social Register, but are no longer eligible under the new
Social Register for a transitional period of one year, that is, for academic year 2017.
I am informed that a total of 26,335 children of pre-primary, primary, pre-vocational
and secondary schools have benefitted from the cash grant in Mauritius and Rodrigues. A
total amount of Rs44,992,500 has been disbursed so far.
The cash grant is being credited to the bank account of the eligible households and
those who do not have a bank account are being paid through the Mauritius Post.
15
I am also informed that, for academic year 2016, a cash grant in lieu of school
materials was paid to eligible beneficiaries in Rodrigues. In the light of the successful
implementation of the scheme in Rodrigues, it was decided that the same arrangement be
made in Mauritius for academic year 2017.
Madam Speaker, representations have been received to the effect that the decision for
the payment of a cash grant should be reviewed and that the previous arrangement for the
distribution of school materials should be resorted to. The whole question of distribution of
school materials for academic year 2018 is being reviewed in the light of feedback being
obtained from field officers of the National Empowerment Foundation. I will inform the
House once a decision is taken on this matter.
Mr X. L. Duval: Madam Speaker, there are, as mentioned in the Marshall Plan,
123,000 people living in poverty in Mauritius. This is a very important matter, for all of us
here, in this House. I would like to start with housing. Can the hon. Minister tell us how many
people are there on the waiting list of the National Empowerment Foundation, at the moment,
waiting for a house?
Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Madam Speaker, I have been informed that all those who
have been waiting are being taken care of. As per investigation, there are 118 that are
waiting.
Mr X. L. Duval: Only 118 people! Madam, this is Alice in Wonderland. Only 118
people waiting for a house at the NEF at the moment. The poor will take note of that. Madam
Speaker, this is absolutely untrue. There are thousands of people waiting. Have I understood
correctly that not one single house has been built by the NEF since 01 January 2016? Did I
get it right?
Mr Wong Yen Cheong: As I said in my reply to the question, decision has been
taken that it would be the Ministry of Housing which would construct the houses. But ten per
cent of all the houses being built by the Ministry of Housing would be allocated to the NEF.
That’s the reason why, so as not to have duplication in different Ministries and we don’t build
on both sides.
Mr X. L. Duval: Madam Speaker, maybe the hon. Minister has not read what the
then hon. Minister of Finance said in his last Budget, which is that a decent shelter is the next
most important step to lift families out of poverty and he was providing for billions of rupees,
including 800 housing units in the Marshall Plan for the next three years. What has happened 
16
to the 800 units? Are there any houses at all under construction or planned to be constructed
by the NEF?
Mr Wong Yen Cheong: As far as I have been informed, we are in the process. By
the end of this month, we are getting all the bids and we should be starting construction.
Mr X. L. Duval: Madam Speaker, is the Minister aware that the National
Empowerment Foundation has just accepted a tender for 141 houses in rural constituencies?
He is not aware?
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan, not from a sitting position!
Mr Wong Yen Cheong: If the hon. Leader of the Opposition is in presence of some
answers, he knows it better than me. Then, he is confirming that we received the bid…
Madam Speaker: No, hon. Minister, please address the Chair! Don’t address the
Leader of the Opposition directly. You have to address the Chair.
Mr Wong Yen Cheong: 800 units over the next three years, Madam, and around 150
housing units are to be constructed at Longere Tole, Tombeau Bay, under the Decent Shelter
Programme. Tenders for 140 fully concrete housing units have been received.
Mr X. L. Duval: The tender for 141 houses has already been approved by the NEF. I
am going to table a copy of the Board Minutes, Madam Speaker. I just wanted to ask the hon.
Minister whether he knows what is the price of these houses and where they will be
constructed. Has he cared to find out where these houses will be constructed? Because none
of these houses is going to be constructed in any pockets of poverty, as we know them, from
Constituency No.1, his own Constituency, up to Constituency No. 6, and from Constituency
No. 15 up to 20, where there is the majority of the poor. This is a scandal in itself, Madam
Speaker.
Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Madam Speaker, I have just answered that it is Longere
Tole in Baie du Tombeau, where the hon. Leader of the Opposition himself went several
times. We are already in front of all the plans of the houses that are to be constructed. We are
in the process of building all these. In Constituency No. 1, in December, as far as I know,
there were about 81 persons who benefited from houses that have been constructed. Still, I
personally went, Madam Speaker, two weeks ago, to make an assessment, and we are looking 
17
with different Ministries about the way forward, so that we can accommodate all these people
with houses.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Bhagwan, please!
Mr X. L. Duval: All that has been done so far is delivering houses that were
contracted by the previous Government, and that is a shame, Madam Speaker. I wanted to
come to the price of the houses. Eventually, when I was Minister of Social Integration, we
were building a house of 31 square metres for Rs465,000, Madam Speaker. Today, this
house, a little bit bigger, 40 or 50 square metres, is costing more than Rs800,000. I will have
to show, Madam Speaker, that the houses were being sold at Rs500 per month and now they
are being sold at Rs240,000. Is that correct for the poor?
Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Madam Speaker, the hon. Leader of the Opposition has
figures, but he must consider that price has gone up. And secondly, all these houses are not in
CCIS now. They are fully concrete. If we compare 30 metres to nearly 60 metres, this is
double. The price has risen from Rs350,000 to Rs700,000. But, sometimes, this price, which
is up to Rs900,000, includes the infrastructures around, because we do cater for
infrastructures. I, myself, asked for these infrastructures to be built around the houses.
Mr X. L. Duval: The result is that no house is being constructed. I will table this
Board paper, where you will see that they are not 60 metres, but 40 square metres or 50
square metres. So, the hon. Minister, here, is misleading the House, Madam Speaker. Now, if
I may, I will move on to the Marshall Plan.
Madam Speaker: No, hon. Leader of the Opposition, you just said that the hon.
Minister has misled the House. Are you saying that he has misled the House? Otherwise, you
take your responsibility and you will have to table papers to show that he has misled the
House.
Mr X. L. Duval: I am tabling the paper. Here it is! This is the brief for tender
construction. Number of housing units concerned: 141. 136 houses of 50 square metres and
five of 40 square metres. This is going to be tabled, Madam Speaker. You have to come and
be accurate in the House, especially when you are dealing with the poor who are suffering.
It’s very well to take Mr Alvaro to visit Royal Park, but this is also important, Madam
Speaker.
18
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: No! Hon. Leader of the Opposition!
(Interruptions)
Order! Order, please!
Hon. Leader of the Opposition, please ask your questions, but don’t bring in
unwarranted remarks and comments.
Mr X. L. Duval: Do I take it that Mr Alvaro is unparliamentary now? No! Thank
you.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: I am sorry, I did not get what you said. I did not get what you said.
I said that you should not bring in the contents of your questions, remarks or unwarranted
things.
Mr X. L. Duval: Madam Speaker, the truth, no doubt, hurts. Madam Speaker, I am
going now to come to the Marshall Plan. The Marshall Plan was delivered to Government…
(Interruptions)
We can laugh! It’s not a laughing matter. The Marshall Plan was delivered to the
Government on 04 December 2015, nearly 18 months ago. I am going to ask now, why the
Marshall Plan has not been published, and when it will be published. Simple question!
Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Madam Speaker, I know that the Marshall Plan is on the
way to be finalised with all the guidelines. We will consider to table it as soon as possible. I
wish to come back to the answer that I gave about the 60 square metres. What I tried to say is
that 30 metres to 50 metres is closer to more than half of what is was. In fact, it is true; it is
50 metres. But, sometimes, when contractors build houses, it is not exactly that. We have
been measuring the houses and most of the time they are over 50 square metres.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order! Do you have anything else to say, hon. Minister?
Mr Wong Yen Cheong: As I said, concerning the Marshall Plan, I shall take up the
matter with the Prime Minister so that the Marshall Plan must be made public.
19
Mr X. L. Duval: At least, we have got that. But I am going to table the Marshall
Plan. So, the hon. Minister does not have to bother. Why has Government made 123,000
people - and all the NGOs and all the companies interested in combating poverty - wait for
one and a half years for this PNQ to say that they will be aware now of what there is in the
Marshall Plan and that is going to be public? What is the reason for having held on to it?
Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Madam Speaker, there is one thing which I want to take one
minute to explain. There is a very thin layer between assisting poverty and l’assistanat. That
is the reason why the Government has to be very careful in all the decisions that are being
taken. In the last part of my reply earlier also I said that we must take the example of other
countries which have backpedalled when it comes to providing assistance to people in
poverty. That is why we take time for this, but we make sure that we do the right thing.
Mr X. L. Duval: Madam Speaker, I want to come to this. The Marshall Plan does not
only deal with absolute poverty, I am sure the Minister knows. It deals with poverty in
general - 123,000 people. I would like to ask the hon. Minister what has happened to, for
instance, the Housing Rental Subsidy Programme? What has happened to the Public Works
Programme which is aimed at providing employment to the very poor? What has happened to
the Enterprise Incubator, to the decentralised offices of the NEF? For the last one and a half
years, this has been on the table, in a drawer probably because people have been perhaps busy
doing other things. What has happened to the Social Contract Scheme? What has happened to
all these?
Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, ask him one question at a time!
(Interruptions)
One question at a time!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Bhagwan!
Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Madam Speaker, I have been trying to catch up all the
different questions in one and all these measures are being taken care of and they are
underway. I can assure the House that the NEF is working on all these items and we are
doing what is needed to be done.
Mr X. L. Duval: Madam Speaker, the truth is, I am sure everybody and people
watching at home will know that there are no houses being constructed and hardly anything 
20
from the Marshall Plan has been put in practice. I want to ask the hon. Minister whether he is
aware that the Marshall Plan recommends the abolition of the Social Aid Scheme on which
there are at the moment 18,000 families. Is the Minister aware of that and does the Minister
subscribe to that part of the Marshall Plan?
Mr Wong Yen Cheong: In the Marshall Plan, it is true that there are new venues that
are to be explored and it is true that we found out, like I have said, there are many families
who come because there are grants to be obtained from Government, so they all come. There
are many families who do not find themselves in the Social Register, to be poor, in fact. We
have found so many cases. Even people who receive…
(Interruptions)
Of course, I have to get the answers!
(Interruptions)
All this will be phased out gradually. That is what I have to say, Madam Speaker.
Mr X. L. Duval: Is he saying that the social aid will be phased out? Is that what the
hon. Minister is saying?
(Interruptions)
Be ki line dire alors?
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order! Order!
Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Madam Speaker,…
Madam Speaker: Yes, please explain!
(Interruptions)
Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Let me explain again.
(Interruptions)
There is a number of families who are waiting as the Leader of the Opposition is
saying. But the Marshall Plan itself is not taking out the poor people from the social plan. It is
not! I don’t know where it is written. What we are doing is that we are streamlining to know
who are poor people and who are not poor people.
21
Mr X. L. Duval: Madam Speaker, page 10 of the Marshall Plan: ‘progressingly
phasing out social aid’. So, the hon. Minister should read it! For three months, you have had
to read it. The Minister mentioned assistanat - it is a genuine advice - he should take some
time and read it.
Now, Madam Speaker, so far as assistanat and empowerment are concerned, we
mean two different things. Empowerment is people to become self-sufficient and assistanat is
the other way. We have 8,000 people on this new social monthly subsistence. Is the Minister
aware that in the last Budget - I will get the page if he wants - it mentions 13,260 people who
have already been included on the SRM with a threshold per family of Rs6,400 only. How is
it that you increase the threshold to Rs9,520 and you get less people than there was in the
2016/2017 Budget? I will get the page for him.
Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Madam Speaker, all these families are just getting additional
allowance to what they have already after the enquiry has been carried out. Coming back
again to the phasing out of the social aid, it is normal because this is what we are aiming at so
that we empower people. So, when people are empowered why should they be on social aid?
The aim is to phase out completely. This is normal!
Mr X. L. Duval: So, you are going to phase out 18,000 people because 8,000 people
are on. Thank you, Minister! He has made it very clear, thank you very much!
Now, talking about page 257 of the Budget, “registration of 13,267 households with a
monthly income of less than Rs6,200 under the Social Register of Mauritius”, this is what the
previous Minister had as his main achievements in 2015-2016. My question is simple: what
happened to the 5,000 families who had disappeared from that same Social Register?
(Interruptions)
Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Madam Speaker, 13,267 eligible households under the
previous SRM were with poverty threshold of Rs6,200 only.
(Interruptions)
The new SRM database…
Madam Speaker: Hon. Roopun, please!
(Interruptions)
22
Mr Wong Yen Cheong: The new SRM database of eligible households takes also
into account the social benefits derived from those applicants which was not the case before.
Registration of applicants under the SRM is ongoing.
Mr X. L. Duval: Okay, at least that is an answer, thank you. The first answer I got
today! Now, I am going to ask about assistanat and empowerment. We know that everybody
who is getting the monthly amount is signing a social contract. What does that social contract
entail? What empowerment programme is he doing at the moment? My information is that
there is not a single programme that is being given to these 8,000 people to empower them
and to get them to be self-sufficient, not a single one at this present moment!
Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Madam Speaker, as rightly known, all the beneficiaries have
to sign a social contract and the case management personnel are all on the field and they are
doing the job to try to empower these people. I can not understand where it is said that we are
not doing the job. We are receiving every day and the case management personnel are on the
field every day.
Mr X. L. Duval: Maybe I should explain, Madam Speaker. I am sorry. There is
education, there is training for people who are not trained…
Mr Wong Yen Cheong: But this is done!
Mr X. L. Duval: No, it is not. No, it is not true. Give me one single programme, even
your little paper! Madam Speaker, there are people who cannot read or write, there are people
who do not have houses, we know that; people who do not have water. This is all in the social
contract, Madam Speaker, to enable them to be empowered. And, at the moment, we are just
paying people for the last five months, but not a single - I am maybe exaggerating - but no
empowerment programme has been put in place!
Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Madam Speaker, empowerment programme is being
undertaken by line Ministries of different agencies. The task of the NEF is to refer the
beneficiaries to the different agencies.
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, I will allow you your last question
because time would be over!
Mr X. L. Duval: I don’t know whether my colleagues want a chance. Madam
Speaker, I wanted to take two cases because it is all about people at the end of the day. One 
23
case here is about Mrs Verlog, a very sad case. I want to give the Minister a chance here. She
was sent a letter by the National Empowerment Foundation to come and pick up Rs25,000.
She lives in Dilo Pouri, Le Morne…
Madam Speaker: Yes, hon. Leader of the Opposition…
Mr X. L. Duval: I won’t be long!
Madam Speaker: Please, don’t make a long statement, ask your question because in
one minute time will be over!
Mr X. L. Duval: But this is what it is all about, Madam Speaker. People, this is what
it is all about! She came to Port Louis and she got nothing; she was told to go back home
because she would not get the money. Another one, living in his own Constituency, Mrs Rose
was given a letter to pick up Rs3,000…
Madam Speaker: No…
Mr X. L. Duval: I am finishing, Madam Speaker.
Madam Speaker: Hon Leader of the Opposition, let me tell you that I don’t think the
hon. Minister will have information on a case-to-case basis. So, he will not be able to reply
to you on each case. If you could put your question generally on that issue, he may be able to
reply, so as not to lose time because we are already ahead of time.
Mr X. L. Duval: I would like to ask the Minister to look personally into these cases
which are real hardships and to say that this is not symptomatic of the disaster that there is
now at the National Empowerment Foundation. That was the question.
Mr Wong Yen Cheong: Madam Speaker, if it is the opinion of the Leader of the
Opposition, I cannot stop opinion, but the fact is there is a reality, that there are so many
people.
(Interruptions)
We are all politicians in this House. Everywhere we go, we know people ask for a
house, for grants and all that, but there is a way of doing it. The Leader of the Opposition
knows how to do it because an inquiry must be carried out. The last time I was in Baie du
Tombeau, there was a house that took fire, Madam Speaker, and I was asked to go and do the
necessary. Madam Speaker, allow me! We found out that in one of these families, when we 
24
calculate the amount of money, it’s more than hundred thousand rupees that they receive.
Madam Speaker, I am given to understand…
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Order please! Order! Order! He is not taking a case-to-case basis.
As I said, generally speaking, the Leader of the Opposition puts his question on a general
nature and he is replying on a general nature. Please finish up because time…
Mr A. Wong Yen Cheong: Madam Speaker, I am given to understand that only 58
houses were constructed during 2011 when the Leader of the Opposition was Minister of
Social Integration as compared…
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: Please sit down!
Mr X. L. Duval: On a point of order, Madam Speaker!
Madam Speaker: Yes, what is the point of order?
Mr X. L. Duval: The Minister is misleading the House! We have built 1,400 houses
in that year. Go and check!
(Interruptions)
Madam Speaker: As I said, Leader of Opposition, if you are saying that he is
misleading the House, this is very serious and you will have to put evidence in front of the
House that he has, in fact, misled the House. Time is over!
(Interruptions)
Hon. Members, the Table has been advised that PQ B/198 in regard to work permits
granted to foreign professionals, PQ B/203 in regard to improvement of the drainage network
at La Flora and PQ B/209 in regard to the Commissioner of the Competition Commission
will be replied by the hon. Prime Minister, time-permitting.
(Interruptions)
Hon. Ameer Meea!